DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
S¨oren Auer1,3, Christian Bizer2, Georgi Kobilarov2, Jens Lehmann1,
Richard Cyganiak2, and Zachary Ives3
1 Universit¨at Leipzig, Department of Computer Science, Johannisgasse 26,
D-04103 Leipzig, Germany
{auer,lehmann}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
2 Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Web-based Systems Group, Garystr. 21,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany
chris@bizer.de, georgi.kobilarov@gmx.de richard@cyganiak.de
3 University of Pennsylvania, Department of Computer and Information Science
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
auer@seas.upenn.edu, zives@cis.upenn.edu
Abstract. DBpedia is a community eﬀort to extract structured informa-
tion from Wikipedia and to make this information available on the Web.
DBpedia allows you to ask sophisticated queries against datasets derived
from Wikipedia and to link other datasets on the Web to Wikipedia data.
We describe the extraction of the DBpedia datasets, and how the resulting
informationispublishedontheWebforhuman-andmachine-consumption.
We describe some emerging applications from the DBpedia community and
show how website authors can facilitate DBpedia content within their sites.
Finally, we present the current status of interlinking DBpedia with other
open datasets on the Web and outline how DBpedia could serve as a nu-
cleus for an emerging Web of open data.
1
Introduction
It is now almost universally acknowledged that stitching together the world’s
structured information and knowledge to answer semantically rich queries is
one of the key challenges of computer science, and one that is likely to have
tremendous impact on the world as a whole. This has led to almost 30 years
of research into information integration [15,19] and ultimately to the Semantic
Web and related technologies [1,11,13]. Such eﬀorts have generally only gained
traction in relatively small and specialized domains, where a closed ontology,
vocabulary, or schema could be agreed upon. However, the broader Semantic
Web vision has not yet been realized, and one of the biggest challenges facing such
eﬀorts has been how to get enough “interesting” and broadly useful information
into the system to make it useful and accessible to a general audience.
A challenge is that the traditional “top-down” model of designing an ontology
or schema before developing the data breaks down at the scale of the Web: both
data and metadata must constantly evolve, and they must serve many diﬀerent
communities. Hence, there has been a recent movement to build the Seman-
tic Web grass-roots-style, using incremental and Web 2.0-inspired collaborative
K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 722–735, 2007.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
723
approaches [10,12,13]. Such a collaborative, grass-roots Semantic Web requires
a new model of structured information representation and management: ﬁrst
and foremost, it must handle inconsistency, ambiguity, uncertainty, data prove-
nance [3,6,8,7], and implicit knowledge in a uniform way.
Perhaps the most eﬀective way of spurring synergistic research along these
directions is to provide a rich corpus of diverse data. This would enable re-
searchers to develop, compare, and evaluate diﬀerent extraction, reasoning, and
uncertainty management techniques, and to deploy operational systems on the
Web.
The DBpedia project has derived such a data corpus from the Wikipedia
encyclopedia. Wikipedia is heavily visited and under constant revision (e.g.,
according to alexa.com, Wikipedia was the 9th most visited website in the third
quarter of 2007). Wikipedia editions are available in over 250 languages, with
the English one accounting for more than 1.95 million articles. Like many other
web applications, Wikipedia has the problem that its search capabilities are
limited to full-text search, which only allows very limited access to this valuable
knowledge base. As has been highly publicized, Wikipedia also exhibits many
of the challenging properties of collaboratively edited data: it has contradictory
data, inconsistent taxonomical conventions, errors, and even spam.
The DBpedia project focuses on the task of converting Wikipedia content
into structured knowledge, such that Semantic Web techniques can be employed
against it — asking sophisticated queries against Wikipedia, linking it to other
datasets on the Web, or creating new applications or mashups. We make the
following contributions:
– We develop an information extraction framework, which converts Wikipedia
content to RDF. The basic components form a foundation upon which fur-
ther research into information extraction, clustering, uncertainty manage-
ment, and query processing may be conducted.
– We provide Wikipedia content as a large, multi-domain RDF dataset, which
can be used in a variety of Semantic Web applications. The DBpedia dataset
consists of 103 million RDF triples.
– We interlink the DBpedia dataset with other open datasets. This results in
a large Web of data containing altogether around 2 billion RDF triples.
– We develop a series of interfaces and access modules, such that the dataset
can be accessed via Web services and linked to other sites.
The DBpedia datasets can be either imported into third party applications
or can be accessed online using a variety of DBpedia user interfaces. Figure 1
gives an overview about the DBpedia information extraction process and shows
how extracted data is published on the Web. These main DBpedia interfaces
currently use Virtuoso [9] and MySQL as storage back-ends.
The paper is structured as follows: We give an overview about the DBpedia
information extraction techniques in Section 2. The resulting datasets are de-
scribed in Section 3. We exhibit methods for programmatic access to the DBpedia
dataset in Section 4. In Sections 5 we present our vision of how the DBpedia

724
S. Auer et al.
Wikipedia Dumps
Article texts
DB tables
Infobox
Articles
Categories
…
DBpedia datasets
SPARQL
Endpoint
Query
Builder
SNORQL
Browser
Traditional
Web Browser
Web 2.0 
Mashups
Virtuoso
MySQL
Extraction
loaded into
published via
…
Linked
Data
…
Semantic Web 
Browsers
Fig. 1. Overview of the DBpedia components
datasets can be a nucleus for a Web of open data. We showcase several user
interfaces for accessing DBpedia in Section 6 and ﬁnally review related work in
Section 7.
2
Extracting Structured Information from Wikipedia
Wikipedia articles consist mostly of free text, but also contain diﬀerent types of
structured information, such as infobox templates, categorisation information,
images, geo-coordinates, links to external Web pages and links across diﬀerent
language editions of Wikipedia.
Mediawiki1 is the software used to run Wikipedia. Due to the nature of this
Wiki system, basically all editing, linking, annotating with meta-data is done
inside article texts by adding special syntactic constructs. Hence, structured in-
formation can be obtained by parsing article texts for these syntactic constructs.
Since MediaWiki exploits some of this information itself for rendering the user
interface, some information is cached in relational database tables. Dumps of the
crucial relational database tables (including the ones containing the article texts)
for diﬀerent Wikipedia language versions are published on the Web on a regular
basis2. Based on these database dumps, we currently use two diﬀerent methods of
extracting semantic relationships: (1) We map the relationships that are already
stored in relational database tables onto RDF and (2) we extract additional
information directly from the article texts and infobox templates within the
articles.
We illustrate the extraction of semantics from article texts with an Wikipedia
infobox template example. Figure 2 shows the infobox template (encoded within
a Wikipedia article) and the rendered output of the South-Korean town
1 http://www.mediawiki.org
2 http://download.wikimedia.org/

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
725
Fig. 2. Example of a Wikipedia template and rendered output (excerpt)
Busan. The infobox extraction algorithm detects such templates and recognizes
their structure using pattern matching techniques. It selects signiﬁcant tem-
plates, which are then parsed and transformed to RDF triples. The algorithm
uses post-processing techniques to increase the quality of the extraction. Me-
diaWiki links are recognized and transformed to suitable URIs, common units
are detected and transformed to data types. Furthermore, the algorithm can
detect lists of objects, which are transformed to RDF lists. Details about the in-
fobox extraction algorithm (including issues like data type recognition, cleansing
heuristics and identiﬁer generation) can be found in [2]. All extraction algorithms
are implemented using PHP and are available under an open-source license3.
3
The DBpedia Dataset
The DBpedia dataset currently provides information about more than 1.95 mil-
lion ”things”, including at least 80,000 persons, 70,000 places, 35,000 music
albums, 12,000 ﬁlms. It contains 657,000 links to images, 1,600,000 links to
relevant external web pages, 180,000 external links into other RDF datasets,
207,000 Wikipedia categories and 75,000 YAGO categories [16].
DBpedia concepts are described by short and long abstracts in 13 diﬀer-
ent languages. These abstracts have been extracted from the English, German,
3 http://sf.net/projects/dbpedia

726
S. Auer et al.
French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Polish, Swedish, Dutch, Japanese, Chinese,
Russian, Finnish and Norwegian versions of Wikipedia.
Altogether the DBpedia dataset consists of around 103 million RDF triples.
The dataset is provided for download as a set of smaller RDF ﬁles. Table 1 gives
an overview over these ﬁles.
Table 1. The DBpedia datasets
Dataset
Description
Triples
Articles
Descriptions of all 1.95 million concepts within the English
Wikipedia including titles, short abstracts, thumbnails and
links to the corresponding articles.
7.6M
Ext. Abstracts
Additional, extended English abstracts.
2.1M
Languages
Additional titles, short abstracts and Wikipedia article
links in German, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Pol-
ish, Swedish, Dutch, Japanese, Chinese, Russian, Finnish
and Norwegian.
5.7M
Lang. Abstracts
Extended abstracts in 13 languages.
1.9M
Infoboxes
Data attributes for concepts that have been extracted from
Wikipedia infoboxes.
15.5M
External Links
Links to external web pages about a concept.
1.6M
Article Categories Links from concepts to categories using SKOS.
5.2M
Categories
Information which concept is a category and how categories
are related.
1M
Yago Types
Dataset containing rdf:type Statements for all DBpedia in-
stances using classiﬁcation from YAGO [16].
1.9 M
Persons
Information about 80,000 persons (date and place of birth
etc.) represented using the FOAF vocabulary.
0.5M
Page Links
Internal links between DBpedia instances derived from the
internal pagelinks between Wikipedia articles.
62M
RDF Links
Links between DBpedia and Geonames, US Census, Mu-
sicbrainz, Project Gutenberg, the DBLP bibliography and
the RDF Book Mashup.
180K
Some datasets (such as the Persons or Infoboxes datasets) are semantically
rich in the sense that they contain very speciﬁc information. Others (such as
the PageLinks dataset) contain meta-data (such as links between articles) with-
out a speciﬁc semantics. However, the latter can be beneﬁcial, e.g. for deriving
measures of closeness between concepts or relevance in search results.
Each of the 1.95 million resources described in the DBpedia dataset is iden-
tiﬁed by a URI reference of the form http://dbpedia.org/resource/Name,
where Name is taken from the URL of the source Wikipedia article, which has
the form http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Name. Thus, each resource is tied
directly to an English-language Wikipedia article. This yields certain beneﬁcial
properties to DBpedia identiﬁers:
– They cover a wide range of encyclopedic topics,
– They are deﬁned by community consensus,

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
727
– There are clear policies in place for their management,
– And an extensive textual deﬁnition of the concept is available at a well-
known web location (the Wikipedia page).
4
Accessing the DBpedia Dataset on the Web
We provide three access mechanisms to the DBpedia dataset: Linked Data, the
SPARQL protocol, and downloadable RDF dumps. Royalty-free access to these
interfaces is granted under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.
Linked Data. Linked Data is a method of publishing RDF data on the Web
that relies on http:// URIs as resource identiﬁers and the HTTP protocol to
retrieve resource descriptions [4,5]. The URIs are conﬁgured to return mean-
ingful information about the resource—typically, an RDF description contain-
ing everything that is known about it. Such a description usually mentions re-
lated resources by URI, which in turn can be accessed to yield their descrip-
tions. This forms a dense mesh of web-accessible resource descriptions that can
span server and organization boundaries. DBpedia resource identiﬁers, such as
http://dbpedia.org/resource/Busan, are set up to return RDF descriptions
when accessed by Semantic Web agents, and a simple HTML view of the same in-
formation to traditional web browsers (see Figure 3). HTTP content negotiation
is used to deliver the appropriate format.
Web agents that can access Linked Data include: 1. Semantic Web browsers
like Disco4, Tabulator[17] (see Figure 3), or the OpenLink Data Web Browser5;
2. Semantic Web crawlers like SWSE6 and Swoogle7; 3. Semantic Web query
agents like the Semantic Web Client Library8 and the SemWeb client for SWI
prolog9.
SPARQL Endpoint. We provide a SPARQL endpoint for querying the DBpedia
dataset. Client applications can send queries over the SPARQL protocol to this
endpoint at http://dbpedia.org/sparql. This interface is appropriate when
the client application developer knows in advance exactly what information is
needed. In addition to standard SPARQL, the endpoint supports several exten-
sions of the query language that have proved useful for developing user interfaces:
full text search over selected RDF predicates, and aggregate functions, notably
COUNT. To protect the service from overload, limits on query cost and result size
are in place. For example, a query that asks for the store’s entire contents is
rejected as too costly. SELECT results are truncated at 1000 rows. The SPARQL
endpoint is hosted using Virtuoso Universal Server10.
4 http://sites.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/suhl/bizer/ng4j/disco/
5 http://demo.openlinksw.com/DAV/JS/rdfbrowser/index.html
6 http://swse.org
7 http://swoogle.umbc.edu/
8 http://sites.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/suhl/bizer/ng4j/semwebclient/
9 http://moustaki.org/swic/
10 http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com

728
S. Auer et al.
Fig. 3. http://dbpedia.org/resource/Busan viewed in a web browser (left) and in
Tabulator (right)
RDF Dumps. N-Triple serializations of the datasets are available for download
at the DBpedia website and can be used by sites that are interested in larger
parts of the dataset.
5
Interlinking DBpedia with Other Open Datasets
In order to enable DBpedia users to discover further information, the DBpedia
dataset is interlinked with various other data sources on the Web using RDF
links. RDF links enable web surfers to navigate from data within one data source
to related data within other sources using a Semantic Web browser. RDF links
can also be followed by the crawlers of Semantic Web search engines, which may
provide sophisticated search and query capabilities over crawled data.
The DBpedia interlinking eﬀort is part of the Linking Open Data community
project 11of the W3C Semantic Web Education and Outreach (SWEO) inter-
est group. This community project is committed to make massive datasets and
ontologies, such as the US Census, Geonames, MusicBrainz, the DBLP bibliog-
raphy, WordNet, Cyc and many others, interoperable on the Semantic Web. DB-
pedia, with its broad topic coverage, intersects with practically all these datasets
and therefore makes an excellent “linking hub” for such eﬀorts.
Figure 4 gives an overview about the datasets that are currently interlinked
with DBpedia. Altogether this Web-of-Data amounts to approximately 2 billion
RDF triples. Using these RDF links, surfers can for instance navigate from a
computer scientist in DBpedia to her publications in the DBLP database, from
a DBpedia book to reviews and sales oﬀers for this book provided by the RDF
Book Mashup, or from a band in DBpedia to a list of their songs provided by
Musicbrainz or dbtune.
11 http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/Linking
OpenData

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
729
Fig. 4. Datsets that are interlinked with DBpedia
The example RDF link shown below connects the DBpedia URI identifying
Busan with further data about the city provided by Geonames:
<http://dbpedia.org/resource/Busan>
owl:sameAs <http://sws.geonames.org/1838524/> .
Agents can follow this link, retrieve RDF from the Geonames URI, and
thereby get hold of additional information about Busan as published by the
Geonames server, which again contains further links deeper into the Geonames
data. DBpedia URIs can also be used to express personal interests, places of
residence, and similar facts within personal FOAF proﬁles:
<http://richard.cyganiak.de/foaf.rdf#cygri>
foaf:topic_interest <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Semantic_Web> ;
foaf:based_near <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Berlin> .
Another use case is categorization of blog posts, news stories and other doc-
uments. The advantage of this approach is that all DBpedia URIs are backed
with data and thus allow clients to retrieve more information about a topic:
<http://news.cnn.com/item1143>
dc:subject <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Iraq_War> .
6
User Interfaces
User interfaces for DBpedia can range from a simple table within a classic web
page, over browsing interfaces to diﬀerent types of query interfaces. This section
gives an overview about the diﬀerent user interfaces that have been implemented
so far.

730
S. Auer et al.
6.1
Simple Integration of DBpedia Data Into Web Pages
DBpedia is a valuable source of general-purpose data that can be used within
web pages. Therefore, if you want a table containing German state capitals,
African musicians, Amiga computer games or whatever on your website, you
can generate this table using a SPARQL query against the DBpedia endpoint.
Wikipedia is kept up-to-date by a large community and a nice feature of such
tables is that they will also stay up-to-date as Wikipedia, and thus also DBpedia,
changes. Such tables can either be implemented using Javascript on the client
or with a scripting language like PHP on the server. Two examples of Javascript
generated tables are found on the DBpedia website12.
6.2
Search DBpedia.org
Search DBpedia.org is a sample application that allows users to explore the
DBpedia dataset together with information from interlinked datasets such as
Geonames, the RDF Book Mashup or the DBLP bibliography. In contrast to
the keyword-based full-text search commonly found on the Web, search over
structured data oﬀers the opportunity to make productive use of the relations in
the data, enabling stepwise narrowing of search results in diﬀerent dimensions.
This adds a browsing component to the search task and may reduce the common
“keyword-hit-or-not-hit” problem.
A Search DBpedia.org session starts with a keyword search. A ﬁrst set of
results is computed by direct keyword matches. Related matches are added,
using the relations between entities up to a depth of two nodes. Thus, a search
for the keyword “Scorsese” will include the director Martin Scorsese, as well as
all of his ﬁlms, and the actors of these ﬁlms.
The next step is result ranking. Our experiments showed that important arti-
cles receive more incoming page links from other articles. We use a combination
of incoming link count, relevance of the link’s source, and relation depth to
calculate a relevance ranking.
After entering a search term, the user is presented with a list of ranked re-
sults, and with a tag cloud built from the classes found in the results, using a
combination of the DBpedia and YAGO [16] classiﬁcations. Each class weight
is calculated from the sum of associated result weights and the frequency of oc-
currence. The tag cloud enables the user to narrow the results to a speciﬁc type
of entities, such as “Actor”, even though a simple keyword search may not have
brought up any actors.
When a resource from the results is selected, the user is presented with a
detailed view of all data that is known about the resource. Label, image and de-
scription are shown on top. Single-valued and multi-valued properties are shown
separately. Data from interlinked datasets is automatically retrieved by follow-
ing RDF links within the dataset and retrieved data from interlinked datasets
is shown together with the DBpedia data.
12 http://dbpedia.org

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
731
Fig. 5. Search results and details view for Busan
6.3
Querying DBpedia Data
Compared to most of the other Semantic Web knowledge bases currently avail-
able, for the RDF extracted from Wikipedia we have to deal with a diﬀerent
type of knowledge structure – we have a very large information schema and a
considerable amount of data adhering to this schema. Existing tools unfortu-
nately mostly focus on either one of both parts of a knowledge base being large,
schema or data.
If we have a large data set and large data schema, elaborated RDF stores
with integrated query engines alone are not very helpful. Due to the large data
schema, users can hardly know which properties and identiﬁers are used in the
knowledge base and hence can be used for querying. Consequently, users have to
be guided when building queries and reasonable alternatives should be suggested.
We speciﬁcally developed a graph pattern builder for querying the extracted
Wikipedia content. Users query the knowledge base by means of a graph pattern
consisting of multiple triple patterns. For each triple pattern three form ﬁelds
capture variables, identiﬁers or ﬁlters for subject, predicate and object of a triple.
While users type identiﬁer names into one of the form ﬁelds, a look-ahead search
proposes suitable options. These are obtained not just by looking for matching
identiﬁers but by executing the currently built query using a variable for the
currently edited identiﬁer and ﬁltering the results returned for this variable for
matches starting with the search string the user supplied. This method ensures,
that the identiﬁer proposed is really used in conjunction with the graph pattern
under construction and that the query actually returns results. In addition, the
identiﬁer search results are ordered by usage number, showing commonly used
identiﬁers ﬁrst. All this is executed in the background, using the Web 2.0 AJAX
technology and hence completely transparent for the user. Figure 6 shows a
screenshot of the graph pattern builder.

732
S. Auer et al.
Fig. 6. Form based query builder
6.4
Third Party User Interfaces
The DBpedia project aims at providing a hotbed for applications and mashups
based on information from Wikipedia. Although DBpedia was just recently
launched, there is already a number of third party applications using the dataset.
Examples include:
– A SemanticMediaWiki [14,18] installation run by the University of Karl-
sruhe, which has imported the DBpedia dataset together with the English
edition of Wikipedia.
– WikiStory (see Figure 7) which enables users to browse Wikipedia articles
about people on a large timeline.
– The Objectsheet JavaScript visual data environment,which allows spread-
sheet calculations based on DBpedia data13.
7
Related Work
A second project that also works on extracting structured information from
Wikipedia is the YAGO project [16]. YAGO extracts only 14 relationship types,
such as subClassOf, type, familyNameOf, locatedIn from diﬀerent sources of in-
formation in Wikipedia. One source is the Wikipedia category system (for sub-
ClassOf, locatedIn, diedInYear, bornInYear), and another one are Wikipedia
redirects. YAGO does not perform an infobox extraction as in our approach. For
determining (sub-)class relationships, YAGO does not use the full Wikipedia
category hierarchy, but links leaf categories to the WordNet hierarchy.
13 http://richk.net/objectsheet/osc.html?file=sparql query1.os

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
733
Fig. 7. WikiStory allows timeline browsing of biographies in Wikipedia
The Semantic MediaWiki project [14,18] also aims at enabling the reuse of
information within Wikis as well as at enhancing search and browse facilities.
Semantic MediaWiki is an extension of the MediaWiki software, which allows
you to add structured data into Wikis using a speciﬁc syntax. Ultimately, the
DBpedia and Semantic MediaWiki have similar goals. Both want to deliver the
beneﬁts of structured information in Wikipedia to the users, but use diﬀerent
approaches to achieve this aim. Semantic MediaWiki requires authors to deal
with a new syntax and covering all structured information within Wikipedia
would require to convert all information into this syntax. DBpedia exploits the
structure that already exists within Wikipedia and hence does not require deep
technical or methodological changes. However, DBpedia is not as tightly inte-
grated into Wikipedia as is planned for Semantic MediaWiki and thus is limited
in constraining Wikipedia authors towards syntactical and structural consistency
and homogeneity.
Another interesting approach is followed by Freebase 14. The project aims
at building a huge online database which users can edit in a similar fashion as
they edit Wikipedia articles today. The DBpedia community cooperates with
Metaweb and we will interlink data from both sources once Freebase is public.
8
Future Work and Conclusions
As future work, we will ﬁrst concentrate on improving the quality of the DB-
pedia dataset. We will further automate the data extraction process in order to
increase the currency of the DBpedia dataset and synchronize it with changes
in Wikipedia. In parallel, we will keep on exploring diﬀerent types of user inter-
faces and use cases for the DBpedia datasets. Within the W3C Linking Open
14 http://www.freebase.com

734
S. Auer et al.
Data community project 15 we will interlink the DBpedia dataset with further
datasets as they get published as Linked Data on the Web. We also plan to
exploit synergies between Wikipedia versions in diﬀerent languages in order to
further increase DBpedia coverage and provide quality assurance tools to the
Wikipedia community. Such a tool could for instance notify a Wikipedia author
about contradictions between the content of infoboxes contained in the diﬀer-
ent language versions of an article. Interlinking DBpedia with other knowledge
bases such as Cyc (and their use as back-ground knowledge) could lead to further
methods for (semi-) automatic consistency checks for Wikipedia content.
DBpedia is a major source of open, royalty-free data on the Web. We hope that
by interlinking DBpedia with further data sources, it could serve as a nucleus
for the emerging Web of Data.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the members of the growing DBpedia community, who are
actively contributing to the project. In particular we would like to thank J¨org
Sch¨uppel and the OpenLink team around Kingsley Idehen and Orri Erling.
References
1. Aberer, K., Cudr´e-Mauroux, P., Hauswirth, M.: The chatty web: Emergent seman-
tics through gossiping. In: 12th World Wide Web Conference (2003)
2. Auer, S., Lehmann, J.: What have innsbruck and leipzig in common? extracting
semantics from wiki content. In: Franconi, E., Kifer, M., May, W. (eds.) ESWC
2007. LNCS, vol. 4519, pp. 503–517. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)
3. Benjelloun, O., Sarma, A., Halevy, A., Widom, J.: Uldbs: Databases with uncer-
tainty and lineage. In: VLDB 2006 (2006)
4. Tim Berners-Lee. Linked data (2006),
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
5. Bizer, C., Cyganiak, R., Heath, T.: How to publish linked data on the web (2007),
http://sites.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/suhl/bizer/pub/LinkedDataTutorial/
6. Buneman, P., Khanna, S., Tan, W.C.: Why and where: A characterization of data
provenance. In: Van den Bussche, J., Vianu, V. (eds.) ICDT 2001. LNCS, vol. 1973,
Springer, Heidelberg (2000)
7. Bizer, C.: Quality-Driven Information Filtering in the Context of Web-Based In-
formation Systems. PhD thesis, Freie Universit¨at Berlin (2007)
8. Cui, Y.: Lineage Tracing in Data Warehouses. PhD thesis, Stanford University
(2001)
9. Erling, O., Mikhailov, I.: RDF support in the Virtuoso DBMS. volume P-113 of
GI-Edition - Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Bonner K¨ollen Verlag (September
2007) (ISSN 1617-5468)
10. Halevy, A., Etzioni, O., Doan, A., Ives, Z., Madhavan, J., McDowell, L.: Crossing
the structure chasm. In: CIDR 2003 (2003)
15 http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/Linking
OpenData

DBpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data
735
11. Halevy, A.Y., Ives, Z.G., Suciu, D., Tatarinov, I.: Schema mediation in peer data
management systems. In: ICDE 2003 (2003)
12. Ives, Z., Khandelwal, N., Kapur, A., Cakir, M.: Orchestra: Rapid, collaborative
sharing of dynamic data. In: CIDR 2005 (January 2005)
13. Kementsietsidis, A., Arenas, M., Miller, R.J.: Mapping data in peer-to-peer sys-
tems: Semantics and algorithmic issues. In: SIGMOD 2003 (June 2003)
14. Kr¨otzsch, M., Vrandecic, D., V¨olkel, M.: Wikipedia and the Semantic Web - The
Missing Links. In: Voss, J., Lih, A. (eds.) Proceedings of Wikimania 2005, Frank-
furt, Germany (2005)
15. Smith, J.M., Bernstein, P.A., Dayal, U., Goodman, N., Landers, T., Lin, K.W.T.,
Wong, E.: MULTIBASE – integrating heterogeneous distributed database systems.
In: Proceedings of 1981 National Computer Conference (1981)
16. Suchanek, F.M., Kasneci, G., Weikum, G.: Yago: A Core of Semantic Knowledge.
In: WWW 2007. 16th international World Wide Web conference, ACM Press,
New York
17. Berners-Lee, T., et al.: Tabulator: Exploring and analyzing linked data on the
semantic web. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Semantic Web User Inter-
action Workshop (2006),
http://swui.semanticweb.org/swui06/papers/Berners-Lee/Berners-Lee.pdf
18. V¨olkel, M., Kr¨otzsch, M., Vrandecic, D., Haller, H., Studer, R.: Semantic wikipedia.
In: Carr, L., De Roure, D., Iyengar, A., Goble, C.A., Dahlin, M. (eds.) WWW 2006.
Proceedings of the 15th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 585–594.
ACM Press, New York (2006)
19. Wiederhold, G.: Intelligent integration of information. In: SIGMOD (1993)
