ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSICS
APRIL I 2000, PAGE 9
SUPPLEMENT SERIES
Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 143, 9–22 (2000)
The SIMBAD astronomical database
The CDS reference database for astronomical objects
M. Wenger, F. Ochsenbein, D. Egret, P. Dubois, F. Bonnarel, S. Borde⋆, F. Genova, G. Jasniewicz⋆⋆, S. Lalo¨e,
S. Lesteven, and R. Monier
CDS, Observatoire astronomique de Strasbourg, UMR 7550, 11 rue de l’Universit´e, F-67000 Strasbourg, France
Received December 1, 1999; accepted January 17, 2000
Abstract. Simbad is the reference database for iden-
tiﬁcation and bibliography of astronomical objects. It
contains identiﬁcations, “basic data”, bibliography, and
selected observational measurements for several million
astronomical objects.
Simbad
is
developed
and
maintained
by
CDS,
Strasbourg. Building the database contents is achieved
with the help of several contributing institutes. Scanning
the bibliography is the result of the collaboration of CDS
with bibliographers in Observatoire de Paris (DASGAL),
Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, and Observatoire de
Bordeaux.
When selecting catalogues and tables for inclusion, pri-
ority is given to optimal multi-wavelength coverage of the
database, and to support of research developments linked
to large projects. In parallel, the systematic scanning of
the bibliography reﬂects the diversity and general trends
of astronomical research.
A WWW interface to Simbad is available at:
http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Simbad.
Key words: astronomical data bases: miscellaneous —
catalogs
1. Introduction
1.1. The CDS
The Centre de Donn´ees astronomiques de Strasbourg
(CDS) deﬁnes, develops, and maintains services to help
the astronomers ﬁnd the information they need from the
Send oﬀprint requests to: D. Egret,
e-mail: question@simbad.u-strasbg.fr
⋆DASGAL, Observatoire de Paris.
⋆⋆Groupe de Recherche en Astronomie et Astrophysique du
Languedoc (GRAAL), Montpellier.
very rapidly increasing wealth of astronomical informa-
tion, and particularly of on-line information.
CDS is operated at the Strasbourg astronomical
Observatory, under an agreement between French Institut
National des Sciences de l’Univers (INSU) and Universit´e
Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg (ULP). CDS personnel created
and implemented the Simbad data bank and maintain
its data and software system.
A detailed description of the CDS on-line services can
be found, e.g., in Egret et al. (1995) and in Genova et al.
(1996, 1998, 2000), or at the CDS web site1. Questions or
comments about the CDS services can be sent to the hot
line question@simbad.u-strasbg.fr.
1.2. SIMBAD
The Simbad database contains identiﬁcations, “basic
data”,
bibliographical
references,
and
selected
ob-
servational measurements for more than 2.7 million
astronomical objects (November 1999). Data and in-
formation published in Simbad come from selected
catalogues and tables and from the whole astronomical
literature.
The speciﬁcity of the Simbad database is to organize
the information per astronomical object, thus oﬀering a
unique perspective on astronomical data. This is done
through a careful cross-identiﬁcation of objects from cat-
alogues, lists, and journal articles. The ability to gather
together any sort of published observational data related
to stars or galaxies has made Simbad a key tool used
worldwide for all kinds of astronomical studies.
Simbad is the acronym for Set of Identiﬁcations,
Measurements and Bibliography for Astronomical Data.
The main access point to Simbad is the WWW home
page2; there is a mirror copy at SAO, Harvard3.
1 Internet address: http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/
2 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/Simbad
3 http://simbad.harvard.edu/Simbad

10
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
1.3. Historical background
Building a reference database for stars – and, later, for
extragalactic objects and all astronomical objects outside
the Solar System – has been the ﬁrst goal of the CDS:
Simbad is the result of an on-going eﬀort which started
soon after the creation of CDS in 1972. Simbad was cre-
ated by merging the catalog of Stellar Identiﬁcations (CSI,
Ochsenbein et al. 1981) and the Bibliographic Star Index
(Ochsenbein 1982) as they existed until 1979. The result-
ing data base (at that time, about 400 000 objects, mainly
stars) was then expanded by the addition of source data
from the catalogs and tables, and by new literature refer-
ences. The database was extended to galaxies and other
non-stellar objects in 1983 (Dubois et al. 1983). For de-
tails about the early developments of Simbad see Egret
(1983).
The
ﬁrst
on-line
interactive
version
of
Simbad
was released in 1981, and operated at the Strasbourg
Cronenbourg computer center until
December 1984,
when it was moved to Universit´e Paris-Sud at Orsay, and
operated there until June 30, 1990. The database is now
hosted on a Unix server, at the Strasbourg Observatory.
The original command line interface has been comple-
mented by an interactive X-Window interface (XSimbad)
in 1994, and by a World-Wide Web interface in 1996.
There is also a client/server mode, providing quick re-
sponses to simple queries, essentially for the name resolu-
tion in archives and information systems (see Sect. 5).
For descriptions of earlier stages of the database, see
Heck & Egret (1986), and Egret et al. (1991).
2. SIMBAD main features
Simbad is, in the ﬁrst place, a database of identiﬁcations,
aliases and names of astronomical objects: in principle any
name found in the literature – provided it is given as a
syntactically correct character string – can be submitted
to Simbad in order to retrieve basic information known
for this object, as well as pointers to complementary data
and bibliography. This implies a continuous careful cross-
identiﬁcation of objects from catalogues, lists, and journal
articles. This ability to gather together any sort of pub-
lished observational data related to stars or galaxies is the
ﬁrst key feature of Simbad.
Another unique feature is the complete and up-to-date
bibliographic survey of the astronomical literature: objects
are associated with the references of all papers in which
they are mentioned, independently of the aliases used to
name the object.
In addition, the Dictionary of Nomenclature (Sect. 8)
is an essential tool for managing the very complex nomen-
clature of objects found in the literature, and for matching
naming variations with those adopted or simply accepted
by Simbad. It also includes hints for helping to solve am-
biguities, according to the type of object, or to the for-
mat. This is complemented by the sesame module within
Simbad, for the management of possible variations in the
naming of astronomical objects.
The database management system of Simbad (Sect. 4)
has been developed in-house at CDS, using the concepts
of object-oriented programming.
Simbad is kept up-to-date (Sect. 7) on a daily basis,
as the result of the collaboration of CDS with bibliogra-
phers in Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris and the Paris
and Bordeaux observatories.
The statistical contents of the database (Sect. 3) can be
summarized in a few ﬁgures as follows (the ﬁgures quoted
are statistics of November 1999):
– entries for about 2.7 million astronomical objects
(stars, galaxies and all astronomical objects outside
the solar system);
– a cross-index of 7.5 million identiﬁers related to 4500
astronomical catalogues and tables, lists, and observa-
tion logs of space missions;
– observational data from some 25 diﬀerent types of data
catalogues and compilations;
– a bibliographic survey covering the astronomical litera-
ture since 1950 for stars, and since 1983 for extragalac-
tic objects: more than 3 million citations from 110 000
diﬀerent papers.
3. SIMBAD astronomical contents
3.1. The objects
The Simbad data base presently contains information for
about:
– 1 500 000 stars;
– 450 000 galaxies;
– 100 000 other non-stellar objects (planetary nebulae,
clusters, H ii regions, etc.);
– and some 650 000 additional objects observed at vari-
ous wavelengths (Radio, IR, X), and for which classi-
ﬁcation is not yet assigned.
The only astronomical objects speciﬁcally excluded from
Simbad are the Sun and Solar System bodies.
The Simbad database is primarily organized per
astronomical object. The aim is to provide, as much as
possible, the user with all published information (identi-
ﬁcations, observational data, bibliographical references,
and pointers towards external archives) concerning any
given object, or list of objects.
The two main channels for feeding the database are
the following:
– the daily scanning of papers published in the astro-
nomical literature provides new references and new
identiﬁers for existing objects, as well as opportunities

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
11
to create new objects, using the basic data possibly
given in the article;
– the complete (or partial) folding of selected catalogues
into the database serves as a basis for improving the
completeness and multi-wavelength coverage of the
database.
Catalogues are selected for integration with priority given
to those which can help provide an optimal support for the
large projects conducted within the astronomical commu-
nity. A large eﬀort was, for instance, devoted in recent
years to stellar catalogues (PPM, HIC, CCDM), in the
context of the Hipparcos project, and to multi-wavelength
identiﬁcations (IRAS PSC, Einstein 1E and 2E catalogues,
older X–ray catalogues, the IUE Merged Log, etc.). The
Hipparcos and Tycho catalogues (ESA 1997) have been
recently included, and inclusion of the ROSAT All Sky
Survey is planned in the near future.
In parallel, the systematic scanning of the bibliogra-
phy reﬂects the diversity and general trends of research
in astronomy, and takes into account shorter lists. The
published lists from the microlensing surveys, or e.g. the
EUVE catalogues, were folded into the database as a re-
sult of this scanning.
When an object is found in the literature or in a cata-
logue, its possible cross-identiﬁcation with objects already
in Simbad is systematically studied, before entering the
reference and the new object name in the database. About
4500 diﬀerent names of catalogues or object lists from pub-
lished papers can currently be found in Simbad, covering
all the wavelength domains from high energy astrophysics
to radio.
When no proper name is suggested by the authors, or
when the acronym generates an ambiguity with already
existing ones, the current practice, shared with the NED
database, is to create an acronym within brackets using
the initials of the last names of the ﬁrst three authors,
and the year of publication. For example, [HFE83] 366 is
the 366th entry in the main table of a paper by Helmer,
Fabricius, Einicke and colleagues published in 1983. From
the year 2000 on, the year will be noted with four digits
(e.g., [ABC2000]).
Many objects have more than one name, since the
database contains more than 7.5 million object names for
2.7 million objects. Examples of objects with more than
50 identiﬁers, are the galaxy M 87 in Virgo, the bright
stars Procyon and Capella, the quasar 3C 273, the Crab
Nebula.
To help the users with the complex nomenclature
of astronomical objects, the CDS now maintains and
distributes on–line the Dictionary of Nomenclature of
Celestial Objects (ﬁrst developed by Lortet et al. 1994;
see Sect. 8).
3.2. The data
In the following, the word object will be used to desig-
nate a star, non stellar object, or collection of objects such
as a cluster, which corresponds to an individual entry in
Simbad. For each object, the following data are included
when available:
– Basic data:
stars: object type, coordinates, proper motion, B and
V magnitudes, spectral type, parallax, radial ve-
locity;
galaxies: object type, coordinates, blue and visual in-
tegrated magnitudes, morphological type, dimen-
sion, radial velocity or redshift.
other: object type, position, B and V magnitudes.
– Cross-identiﬁcations from some 4500 catalogues and
tables, either completely or partially included in the
data base.
– Observational data (also called measurements), for
some 25 data types. A list of these types is given in
the Table 2.
– General bibliography, including references to all pub-
lished papers since 1983 citing the object under any of
its designations. For stars, the bibliography starts as
early as 1950, but with a smaller coverage of the liter-
ature. Simbad also includes a few hundred references
before 1950, but without any systematic trend. The
bibliography gives access to abstracts and electronic
articles when available (either directly from publish-
ers, or through ADS). Currently about 100 journals
covering the complete astronomical literature are reg-
ularly scanned. A complete list is available on line4.
In the following, a more detailed description of some of
these elements is given.
3.2.1. Object type
The object type refers to a hierarchical classiﬁcation of the
objects in Simbad, derived by the CDS team on the basis
of the catalogue identiﬁers (as proposed by Ochsenbein
& Dubois 1992). From Star to Maser source, or Cluster
of Galaxies, some 70 diﬀerent categories, general, or very
speciﬁc, are proposed (see examples in Table 1). A com-
plete list is available on line5.
This classiﬁcation is intended to help the user select
objects out of the database (e.g. through the ﬁlter pro-
cedure, see Sect. 4.5). It is also a powerful tool for data
cross–checking and quality control. It has been designed
to be practical and useful, and complements other features
also available in Simbad (morphological type or spectral
type information, catalogues, and measurements). It can
4 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/guide/chH.htx
5 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/guide/chF.htx

12
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
follow the evolution of astronomy, with the introduction
of new categories recently appeared in the literature (e.g.,
in the last years, Low-Mass or High-Mass X-Ray binary,
Microlensing event, or Void).
Each class has normally a standard designation, a con-
densed one (used in tables) and an extended explanation.
The classiﬁcation uses a hierarchy with four levels, reﬂect-
ing our knowledge of the characteristics of the astronom-
ical object. For instance, an object can be classiﬁed as a
“Star” (this is level 1). If photometric observations have
shown variability of the object, it can be classiﬁed as a
“Variable star” (this is level 2). Examples of level 3 and 4
are “Pulsating variable”, and “Cepheid”.
This hierarchy of object types (and their possible syn-
onyms) is managed in the database in such a way that
selecting variable stars (V*) is understood as selecting ob-
jects classiﬁed as V*, and all subdivisions (e.g. PulsV*,
Mira, Cepheid, etc.). If the user is only interested in RR
Lyrae type stars, he/she will use the RRLyr type, leaving
aside all other variable stars for which the variability mode
is diﬀerent, or not known.
The classiﬁcation emphasizes the physical nature of
the object rather than a peculiar emission in some region
of the electromagnetic spectrum or the location in peculiar
clusters or external galaxies. Therefore objects are classi-
ﬁed as peculiar emitters in a given wavelength (such as
UV or IR source) only if nothing more about the nature
of the object is known, i.e. it cannot be decided on the
sole basis of the basic data whether the object is a star,
a multiple system, a nebula, or a galaxy. For instance, if
an object appears only in the IRAS catalogue, it is auto-
matically classiﬁed as IR object: it is left to the user to
decide to go further and to derive, e.g. on the basis of the
IRAS colors, the probability for the source to be stellar or
extragalactic.
Because there is at most one object type per object,
this classiﬁcation should be used with caution when ex-
tracting samples out of the database. This is typically the
case for the wavelength types: using IR or X as a crite-
rion cannot generate a sample of all IRAS sources, or all
X-ray emitting objects, since a number of them are in fact
classiﬁed as stars, galaxies, etc.
3.2.2. Coordinates, proper motion, parallax, and radial
velocity or redshift
The coordinates were originally stored in the database in
the FK4 system for equinox and epoch 1950.0. A major
change was undergone in 1999, when they were moved
to the International Celestial Reference System (ICRS,
see Feissel & Mignard 1998) at epoch 2000.0, after the
publication of the Hipparcos and Tycho catalogues. The
position data frame has become more complex, grouping
together all data needed for computing the coordinates
into any reference frame, at any epoch and equinox: the
Table 1. Object type classiﬁcation: extracts from the object
type table illustrating examples of the four levels of the classi-
ﬁcation scheme
Level
Standard
Short
Extended Explanation
name
name
. . .
1
Star
*
Star
2
*inCl
*iC
Star in Cluster
2
*inNeb
*iN
Star in Nebula
2
*inAssoc
*iA
Star in Association
2
*in**
*i*
Star in double system
2
V*?
V*?
Star suspected of Variability
2
Pec*
Pe*
Peculiar Star
3
HB*
HB*
Horizontal Branch Star
3
YSO
Y*O
Young Stellar Object
3
Em*
Em*
Emission-line Star
4
Be*
Be*
Be Star
. . .
1
Galaxy
G
Galaxy
2
PartofG
PoG
Part of a Galaxy
2
GinCl
GiC
Galaxy
in
Cluster
of
Galaxies
2
GinGroup
GiG
Galaxy in Group of Galaxies
2
GinPair
GiP
Galaxy in Pair of Galaxies
2
High z G
HzG
Galaxy with high redshift
. . .
2
AGN
AGN
Active Galaxy Nucleus
3
LINER
LIN
LINER-type Active Galaxy
Nucleus
3
Seyfert
SyG
Seyfert Galaxy
4
Seyfert 1
Sy1
Seyfert 1 Galaxy
4
Seyfert 2
Sy2
Seyfert 2 Galaxy
3
Blazar
Bla
Blazar
4
BLLac
BLL
BL Lac - type object
4
OVV
OVV
Optically Violently Variable
3
QSO
QSO
Quasar
coordinates themselves, the proper motion, the parallax
and the radial velocity or redshift.
All these data contain the same subﬁelds: the original
data, displayed with a number of digits consistent with
the announced precision of the data; a quality code from
“A” (reference data) to “E” (unreliable origin); an error
box (either a standard error, or an ellipse), and the bibli-
ographic reference of the data.
In earlier versions of Simbad, the determination of the
position for another equinox used to take only precession
into account. In the current version, a change of equinox
takes into account not only the precession but also the
proper motion, the reference frame (FK4, FK5, ICRS),
and, when they are known, the parallax and radial veloc-
ity. When no epoch is speciﬁed, the year of the equinox is
used by default.
Data come from various sources. When astrometric
data are available, the most accurate one has been se-
lected for the “basic data”. Other values may be available
as measurements (in the pos type). The Hipparcos and

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
13
Tycho catalogues (ESA 1997) constitute the major source
of positions for stars.
The coordinates precision may vary from 1◦to 1/10
mas. The default display format provides equatorial coor-
dinates in the ICRS system at epoch 2000.0, and in the
FK5 system at equinoxes 2000 and 1950, as well as galactic
coordinates. Coordinates in the FK4 system, and ecliptic
or super-galactic coordinates can be computed on request.
The
proper
motions
(µα cos δ, µδ)
are
given
in
mas/year,
together
with
their
standard
errors
(in
mas/year). The primary source of proper motions is the
Hipparcos and Tycho catalogues (ESA 1997).
The errors for positions or proper motions are ex-
pressed as error ellipses, made of three numbers, within
brackets: the major axis, the minor axis, and the position
angle of the major axis (measured from North to East).
Major and minor axes are expressed in mas for the posi-
tion, and mas/yr for the proper motion; the position angle
is expressed in degrees, in the range [0◦, 180◦[.
When available, the stellar parallax is given in mas, to-
gether with the associated error within brackets. The pri-
mary source is the Hipparcos and Tycho catalogues (ESA
1997).
Radial velocity (in km s−1), or redshift (for extra-
galactic objects) are currently available for some 160 000
objects. They are stored in their original type (either red-
shift, or radial velocity in km s−1), associated with the
standard error. Display can be done in the original type
or forced to be one of the two types, using the correspond-
ing translation formula.
Stellar radial velocity data have been compiled with
the collaboration of Observatoire de Marseille.
For extragalactic objects, up-to-date redshift informa-
tion has recently been imported from the NASA/IPAC
Extragalactic Database (NED, Helou et al. 1991) as a re-
sult of the ongoing exchange agreement: the Simbad team
is providing NED with bibliographic coverage of extra-
galactic objects for all astronomical journals, and is being
given access, in return, to extragalactic data collected by
NED.
Tables from individual articles constitute the other
major source of information.
3.2.3. Magnitudes
B and V magnitudes are given, when possible, in the
Johnson’s UBV system. Both magnitudes may be followed
by a semicolon meaning they cannot be made homoge-
neous to the UBV system. In addition the following ﬂags
may appear:
– a “D” ﬂags a joint magnitude in a double or multiple
system;
– a “V” indicates a variable magnitude and is followed
by a coded index giving a rough estimate of the am-
plitude:
code
deﬁnition
1
1/100 mag
2
1/10 mag
3
1 mag
4
more than 1 mag
?
suspected variable
When possible the magnitudes have been taken from the
Tycho Reference Catalogue (Høg et al. 1998) where B
and V magnitudes are derived from the original BT and
VT. Another major source is the UBV compilation of
Mermilliod (1987). Otherwise the data would come from
one of the published papers associated to the object.
3.2.4. Stellar spectral type
The spectral types of stars have been selected preferably
in the Michigan Catalogues of Two-Dimensional Spectral
Types for the HD stars (Houk 1975, and seq.), or in
the bibliographical surveys of MK classiﬁcations (Jaschek
1978). In the absence of a full MK classiﬁcation, the HD
spectral type is recorded.
Most of the spectral types need less than 5 characters,
but this ﬁeld can be as long as 36 characters.
3.2.5. Morphological type and dimension of galaxy
The morphological types of galaxies have been selected
primarily from the Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies
(UGC, Nilson 1973), the Morphological Catalogue of
Galaxies (MCG, Vorontsov-Velyaminov 1962), and other
catalogues (see Dubois et al. 1983).
In complement, the following data, primarily from
UGC, are given, when available, for galaxies:
log D25
logarithm of the major axis a expressed
in tenths of arc minutes;
log R25
logarithm of the ratio a/b where a and
b are the major and minor axis;
orientation
orientation angle (in degrees);
(inclination)
inclination (in units of 15◦from 0 to 7).
3.3. Cross–identiﬁcations
3.3.1. Aliases
Cross–identiﬁcations of stars and galaxies have been
searched for Simbad entries from (currently) about 4500
source catalogues and tables, included, either completely
or partially, in the data base. The index of 7.5 million
aliases, thus constituted, is one of the unique features of
the Simbad database.

14
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
Aliases may serve as entry points for related catalogues
and tables (e.g. in VizieR). Cross-fertilization of a given
research with previous studies of the same object pub-
lished in the astronomical literature is made directly pos-
sible from the alias list.
The index of names and aliases constitutes the basis
for the Simbad name resolver which provides, in response
to any object name, the set of coordinates corresponding
to the object position on the celestial sphere, or the list
of papers citing the object. The name resolving power
of Simbad is used by many archives and information
systems (such as the archives of Hubble Space Telescope
or European Southern Observatory, the High Energy
Astrophysics Science Archive Center, the Astrophysics
Data System, servers of the Digitized Sky Surveys, etc.).
There is no Simbad preferred name for objects6: all
aliases can be equally used. A short list of major cata-
logues is used internally to put at the top of the list the
most common name according to the object type (e.g.,
Messier or NGC identiﬁer for galaxies and nebulae). All
other identiﬁers are presented in alphabetical order.
A command of the Simbad native node (“selectid”),
and an option in the sampling form of the WWW inter-
face, allow the user to impose a list of identiﬁers to be
used when displaying object lists.
3.3.2. Multiple systems
It is to be noted that for a double system in which the com-
ponents can be observed separately, Simbad frequently
includes three entries: A and B components, and an ad-
ditional entry for the joint system (AB), the latter entry
carrying the observational data and references related to
the system as a whole. This has to be taken into account
in statistical studies such as stellar counts.
3.4. Observational data
Observational data are presently given for the measure-
ment types listed in Table 2.
For each data type, one can retrieve individual data
with their bibliographical references, and, when available,
weighted means computed from existing observed values
by specialists in the related ﬁeld.
When measurements are listed as a result of a Simbad
query, they are normally preceded by a header providing
a very short title to each listed parameter.
The important rˆole now played by the VizieR
database of catalogues (Ochsenbein et al. 2000), coming
with easier interoperability of services, is changing the
strategy for inclusion of observational measurements
6 In the early times of the Catalog of Stellar Identiﬁcations
(Ochsenbein et al. 1981), the Durchmusterung number had
been used as a preferred name for stars.
Table 2. List of measurement types currently included in
Simbad, together with the number of entries (October 1999)
Name
Observational data
#
CEL
Ultraviolet photometry from Celescope
5230
Cl.G
Clusters of Galaxies (Abell & Corwin
1989)
5345
Einstein
Einstein
Observatory
Soft
X-ray
Source List
5668
GEN
UBV B1B2V1G Geneva photometry
3650
GJ
Absolute magnitudes and spatial veloc-
ities of nearby stars
2368
Hbet
Hβ index
32278
HGAM
Hγ equivalent width
723
IRAS
IRAS Point Source Catalog
245784
IRC
KI photometry from Two Micron Sky
4880
Survey
IUE
International
Ultraviolet
Explorer
(Merged Observation Log)
66805
JP11
UBV RIJKLMNH 11-colour Johnson
photometry
5892
MK
Stellar
spectral
classiﬁcation
in
Morgan-Keenan system
190231
oRV
Stellar Radial velocities (also under
GCRV)
68783
PLX
Trigonometric parallaxes
16329
pm
Proper motions (from various astro-
metric catalogues)
243065
pos
Positions
(from
various
astrometric
catalogues)
668953
ROT
Rotational velocities (V sin i)
7181
RVEL
Radial velocities of extragalactic ob-
jects
36552
SAO
Positions and proper motions from
SAO catalogue
252384
TD1
Ultraviolet
magnitudes
from
TD1
satellite
25972
UBV
Johnson UBV photometry
141215
uvby
Str¨omgren uvby photometry
37986
V*
Data related to variable stars
25764
z
Redshifts
(of
distant
galaxies
and
quasars)
88888
into Simbad. Let us take the example of the Hipparcos
and Tycho catalogues (ESA 1997): once the HIP or
TYC identiﬁer is available from Simbad it appears
convenient enough to provide the user with a WWW
link to the corresponding data in VizieR rather than
overloading the Simbad database with the full Hipparcos
and Tycho catalogues. This functionality is currently
being implemented for important catalogues which have
already been cross-identiﬁed.
As a complement, the WWW interface includes point-
ers to external archives, currently: the INES database of
the IUE project (Rodriguez-Pascual et al. 1999); the high-
energy observational archives at heasarc (HEASARC
team 1995).

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
15
3.5. Bibliographical references
One of the key features of the Simbad astronomical
database is the unique coverage of bibliographical refer-
ences to objects. The bibliographic index contains refer-
ences to stars from 1950 onwards, and to galaxies and all
other objects outside the solar system from 1983 onwards.
Presently (November 1999) there are about 3 million ref-
erences taken from 110 000 papers published in the 100
most important astronomical periodical publications.
3.5.1. Bibliographical data
Articles are scanned in their entirety, and references to
all objects mentioned in the title, in the abstract, in the
text, in the ﬁgures, or in the tables are included in the
bibliography. Tables larger than 1000 objects are usually
considered as catalogues and processed separately.
No assessment is made of the relevance of the cita-
tion in terms of astronomical contents: the paper can be
entirely devoted to the object, or simply give a side men-
tion of it – in both cases this gives a reference in Simbad.
Note that, for instance, the NED team (Helou et al. 1991)
applies a diﬀerent strategy when covering bibliography of
extragalactic objects, and tends to select only those pa-
pers that appear most relevant. Clearly, Simbad approach
favours exhaustivity, at the cost of increased information
noise.
A code (nicknamed bibcode) is assigned to each con-
sidered paper: this 19-digit bibcode contains in principle
enough information to locate the article (including year of
publication, journal, volume, page, etc.).
When one retrieves the bibliography of a Simbad ob-
ject, a list of codes is usually given, and – according to
the options used – these codes are automatically matched
against a bibliographic ﬁle which provides the full refer-
ence, title and list of authors for each citation, together
with an anchor pointing to the electronic version of the
article.
Currently, in Simbad, about 50% of the objects have
no bibliographic reference. Among the most cited objects
(more than 2000 references) are the Large Magellanic
Cloud, M 31, 3C 273, and the supernova SN 1987A.
3.5.2. Bibliographic reference coding convention
The structure of the 19-digit bibcode has been deﬁned in
close collaboration with the NED group at NASA/IPAC
so that both databases share the same coding system
(Schmitz et al. 1995). It is also used, with some adjust-
ments, by the Abstract Service of the Astrophysics Data
System (ADS, Kurtz et al. 2000), and by the electronic
journals (see e.g., Boyce & Dalterio 1996). Reference codes
have the following general structure:
YYYYJJJJJVVVVMPPPPA
YYYY Year of the publication.
JJJJJ Standard abbreviation for the periodical.
VVVV Volume number (for a journal) or, in the second
character of this ﬁeld, one of the following abbrevia-
tions for another publication: B (book), C (catalogue),
P (preprint), R (report), S (symposium), T (thesis), U
(unpublished).
M Speciﬁc qualiﬁer for a paper:
L
letter
p
pink page (in MNRAS)
a-z
issue number within a volume
A-K
issue designation used by publisher
Q-Z
to distinguish articles on the same page.
PPPP Page number.
A First letter of the ﬁrst author’s last name (or “:” if the
ﬁrst author cannot be identiﬁed).
Example:
1991A&A...246L..24M
for
Astron.
Astrophys. 246, L24, 1991, a Letter to the Editor of
Astronomy & Astrophysics, by Motch et al.
For a complete description see Schmitz et al. (1995),
or the WWW server7.
3.5.3. Comments in the references
Several types of comments are associated with the
references in Simbad and normally displayed after the
reference:
– General comments: they are often comments added by
the bibliographers, about the problems encountered
while cross-identifying the objects mentioned in the
paper, typos in object names, etc.
– Notes about the existence of associated electronic ta-
bles, or abstracts in the CDS server. Papers including
no object are also ﬂagged.
– Information on how the quoted objects are named
in Simbad (comments related to the Dictionary of
Nomenclature of Celestial Objects).
3.6. Statistical aspects of the Data Contents
The astronomical content of Simbad results from the com-
plex process of folding into the database a selection of
important catalogues, and of surveying the complete as-
tronomical literature.
This can be illustrated by the histogram in V magni-
tudes of Fig. 1. The coverage is reasonably complete up to
beyond magnitude 10 for stars, after the inclusion of the
Tycho catalogue. Many objects in the range 12 to 26th
mag come from extensive studies of objects in selected
sky areas: deep ﬁelds, external galaxies, etc.
7 http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/simbad/refcode.html

16
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
Fig. 1. Histogram of the number of objects in Simbad per mag-
nitude interval (V magnitude; logarithmic scale)
Some well-known very large catalogues are not part
of Simbad: for instance the Hubble Telescope Guide Star
Catalogue (GSC, Lasker et al. 1990) is not systematically
included (even if GSC identiﬁers have been added for all
Tycho stars present in Simbad). This results from a com-
promise aiming to save database load as well as man-
power for cross-identiﬁcation and quality control. Note
that VizieR and Aladin give access to the full GSC cat-
alogue (and to even larger catalogues and databases such
as USNO-A, DENIS, 2MASS).
Figure 2 illustrates the increase of the data contents of
the database in the years 1990 to 1999.
4. SIMBAD structure and query management
Simbad query mechanism can be summarized by the fol-
lowing key features:
– Database queries can be made mainly through:
– identiﬁers (names of astronomical objects) and lists
of identiﬁers;
– sets of coordinates (retrieving one object by its po-
sition on the sky, or extracting all objects lying in
a given direction), and;
– sampling criteria (or ﬁlters);
– Data output is driven by formats. The user may deﬁne
his/her own formats or modify existing ones. Output
ﬁles can be saved and mailed to the user;
– The user interface is adaptable to user preferences.
The database management system of Simbad has been de-
veloped by the CDS, using the concepts of object-oriented
programming.
4.1. Object-oriented concepts
The command language is using the concepts of objects (or
agents). Typical object classes are: astronomical object,
Fig. 2. Histograms of diﬀerent types of database entries for the
years 1990 to 1999: number of objects (top left), number of
identiﬁers (top right), number of references (bottom left), num-
ber of citations (bottom right). The numbers given are the total
numbers of entries present in the database at the end of the
corresponding year
object list, database, session, reference list, ﬁlter, format.
Examples of methods are: display, describe, bye (quit).
This structure is only visible for the user of the com-
mand line interface. The WWW interface is rendered quite
independent of the database structure.
4.2. Indexing
Simbad is organized for optimized access by identiﬁer
(through an index table of object names) and by position,
through an index of small regions.
Identiﬁers: A B-tree ﬁle contains all identiﬁers allowing a
fast access to any of them. For each identiﬁer, a record
contains a pointer to the astronomical object itself in
the main database.
Position: Indexing by coordinates is done in two steps: the
coordinates are mapped into a set of boxes. Simbad
uses the spherical-cubic projection – a technique
also used, e.g., for the Cosmic Background Explorer
(COBE) data: the celestial sphere is projected onto
the six faces of a cube, giving six boxes at the ﬁrst
level. By dividing each face into four parts, one
obtains a partition at level two. Further levels are
obtained by further divisions of each box into four
sub-boxes. Through this mechanism one obtains 6144
boxes at the level 5 with an average size of 6 square
degrees and an average number of objects of 500. Box
#6145 contains all objects without recorded position.

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
17
In order to optimize access to objects in a coordinate
box, all objects belonging to a box should be physically
grouped in a common place in the database. This is
done through a clustering mechanism placing objects
from the same box in data blocks linked together in
the database ﬁles.
When a set of criteria includes some limitations in co-
ordinates, this generates the deﬁnition of a list of boxes
including the requested area: all entries from these boxes
are read and checked against the whole set of criteria.
When a set of criteria includes no limits in sky posi-
tion, the complete database must be scanned – a long and
somewhat expensive operation, which takes typically 15
minutes in the current hardware conﬁguration.
4.3. Query by identiﬁer
In principle any name found in the literature – provided it
is given as a syntactically correct character string – can be
submitted to the database in order to retrieve information
known for this object.
The general syntax of an identiﬁer is the abbreviated
catalogue name (or acronym: generally one to four charac-
ters), followed by a number or a name (character string)
within the catalogue.
Object names such as Vega and Altair, but also
Barnard’s star, Crab Nebula, Sgr A, HDFN, or HDFS
are stored in the database in a speciﬁc catalog called
“name”, while star names in constellations, such as α
Lyrae, are stored in the catalogue “*”, and variable stars
(such as RR Lyrae) in the catalogue “var” (also called
“V*”).
The user can generally type Vega, Altair, alf
Lyrae (or alf Lyr): the sesame name resolving module
(Sect. 8.2) is used for guessing the catalogue and making
the internal conversion. There are however some diﬃcult
cases in which the name keyword remains necessary, such
as in name sgr 1900+14 where sgr stands for Soft
Gamma Repeater.
In addition the following hints can help the user un-
derstand the best way to submit an identiﬁer to Simbad:
Case sensitivity: Simbad is not case-sensitive at this
level: ALF AQL or alf Aql are, for instance, both
valid. There are some exceptions to the rule, such
as the cases of the star cluster RMC 136a, or the
star in a multiple system VdBH 25a A, for which
case-sensitivity may be necessary for solving format
ambiguities.
Greek letters: should be abbreviated as three letters: alf,
bet, for α and β, but also mu. nu. and pi. (with a
dot), for µ, ν and π.
Constellations: constellation names should be abbrevi-
ated with the usual three letters: alf Boo, del Sct, FG
Sge, NOVA Her 1991. The full list is available on-line8.
8 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/guide/chB.htx
Multiple systems: Identiﬁers of a multiple system may
generate a list of the objects of the system. For in-
stance, ADS 5423 calls for the four components, A to
D, of the stellar system around Sirius. This is true only
for some speciﬁc identiﬁers.
Stellar clusters: Clusters which have no NGC or IC
number are named under the generic appellation
Cl followed by the cluster name and number: e.g.,
Cl Blanco 1 is the 1st stellar cluster named by Blanco.
Stars in clusters may belong to a “main” designation
list, or to subsequent lists. NGC 5272 692 is star 692
in the list by Von Zeipel, considered as the main list.
Subsequent lists have designations starting with Cl*.
Examples: Cl* NGC 5272 AC 968 (list by Auriere &
Cordoni); Cl* Melotte 25 VA 13 (13th star in the list
by Van Altena for Melotte 25 – the Hyades cluster);
Cl* Collinder 110 DI 1101 (list by Dawson & Ianna –
there is no “main” list for this cluster). More details
are available in the on-line description9.
Unknown name ?: If the object name seems unknown to
Simbad, the user is advised to enter the coordinates
of the object: the object may actually exist in the
database under a diﬀerent designation. Submitting the
identiﬁer, or the name of the ﬁrst author of the cat-
alogue, to the Dictionary of Nomenclature may also
give useful clues.
Figure 3 illustrates the response received from the
database after submitting the identiﬁer “M 81”. In the
identiﬁer list, the meaning of acronyms, such as [VDD93],
is explained through a link to the on-line Dictionary of
Nomenclature.
The user interface provides an option for querying
around objects, with a radius set by default at 10′. This
is equivalent to a query by position using the object coor-
dinates.
It is also possible to generate the list of 10 or 25 next
objects following a given identiﬁer, or to submit a list of
object names, stored in a ﬁle with one identiﬁer per line.
4.4. Query by coordinates
Query by coordinates can be used to retrieve all objects
in a circular ﬁeld deﬁned by the coordinates of the center
and a radius.
The coordinates can be replaced by the name of an
object lying at the center of the ﬁeld, in which case the co-
ordinates are found through an internal query to Simbad.
The radius can have any size (default value is 10′). Queries
with a radius smaller than 1 −2◦are answered quite
instantaneously.
9 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/guide/chC.htx

18
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
Fig. 3. Example of Simbad response page for a query concerning
M 81 (only the ﬁrst part of the response is visible here)
4.5. Sampling
The sampling mode (also named ﬁlter) allows users to de-
ﬁne criteria for selecting objects in Simbad.
The user may extract objects which satisfy one set
of coordinate criteria, several physical criteria (using a
simple syntax), objects which have speciﬁed identiﬁers or
measurements, and, ﬁnally, objects having citations within
a range of years.
The WWW interface provides an interactive form
which presents all possible sampling options.
The resulting list may be ordered according to sort
criteria and, furthermore, it is possible, through the com-
mand line mode, to deﬁne precisely the output format.
Note that reading the whole database for extracting
a sample spread on the whole celestial sphere is possible,
but quite time-consuming (as mentioned above). The user
is thus encouraged to test the ﬁlter on a limited region of
the sky, before applying it to the whole database.
4.6. Charts and sky maps
After a sampling by position the user can ask for the cor-
responding sky plot. This feature is only available through
the WWW interface and is generally optimized for a ra-
dius range of 10 −60 minutes.
Simbad clickable Map
Coord = 09 55 33.22 +69 03 55.1
FK5 2000.0 2000.0
Radius = 10 arcmin
CDS · Simbad · VizieR · Aladin · Catalogues · Nomenclature · Biblio · StarPages · AstroWeb 
Click on an object to display its data from Simbad
(Using the middle button of your mouse will display the result in a new window)
©ULP/CNRS - Centre de Données astronomiques de Strasbourg
Fig. 4. Example of ﬁnding chart around M 81 (radius of the
circular ﬁeld: 10′)
The maps display the objects with diﬀerent symbols
according to object type; symbol size for stars varies with
object magnitude (see Fig. 4). The maps are clickable
and return the object in Simbad corresponding to cursor
position.
The WWW interface provides also direct access to the
Aladin interactive digitized atlas (Bonnarel et al. 2000)
as illustrated in Fig. 5.
4.7. Batch mode
Simbad can be queried in batch mode, by submitting a
mail to the special address
smbmail@simbad.u-strasbg.fr.
This is especially useful in case of poor interactive
connectivity, or for submitting time-consuming queries or
lists. A WWW form10 helps to prepare the submission.
10 http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/simbad/batch.html

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
19
Fig. 5. Use of Aladin for displaying Simbad entries (red dia-
monds) on top of a DSS-I/STScI image around M 81 (width
of the ﬁeld: 14.1′)
4.8. Resolving a bibliographical reference code
It is possible to obtain a complete bibliographical refer-
ence, by entering the corresponding reference code (bib-
code).
A reference code can be supplied without indicating
all the ﬁelds: the ﬁrst reference corresponding to the trun-
cated code will be displayed. An ampersand (&) should be
added at the end of the truncated bibcode.
4.9. Additional tools
Additional tools include special commands for querying
auxiliary databases, on-line help, log ﬁles, etc. More de-
tails can be found in the Simbad User’s Guide or on the
Web pages.
5. User interfaces to SIMBAD
There are several user interfaces to Simbad. New users
are advised to go directly to the WWW interface, unless
they have very speciﬁc needs.
– The Web interface is currently the easiest access mode
to Simbad. This interface takes beneﬁt of the WWW
features to provide the user with additional links to
internal documentation, associated services (Aladin,
VizieR), and external archives (currently: the INES
database of the IUE project; the high-energy obser-
vational archives at heasarc). Some features, such
as the ﬁnding chart, have been speciﬁcally designed
for the Web and are not available through the other
modes.
– The command line interface is the basic underlying in-
terface to the database, which serves as a basis for the
other more user-friendly interfaces. During many years
it was the sole access mode to the database, and many
users who are accustomed to the commands may ﬁnd
it quicker and more versatile. It implies a remote login
(through telnet) on the simbad machine in Strasbourg,
and the user needs to have a user name and password
(see Sect. 6.1).
– A graphical interactive user interface to Simbad,
XSimbad, taking beneﬁt of the X Window environ-
ment has been developed in 1993-94 for distribution
to users working in a Unix environment. It is now
obsolete, because all the functionalities, and additional
ones, are more easily available through the Web.
– A client/server package is distributed on request to
data managers of archives and information systems,
when they need to organize the most eﬃcient access
to Simbad for the resolution of object names into the
corresponding position, or the retrieval of other infor-
mation provided by the database, such as the reference
list for a given object. Written currently in C language,
it can easily be plugged into any application able
to access C routines. Distribution is subject to CDS
approval.
6. SIMBAD usage
6.1. Charging policy
Simbad is a charged service. The telnet access is pro-
tected by userid/password, and the WWW access is pro-
tected either by IP address or by password.
Users have to register, and get a userid/password from
the CDS staﬀ(or from the U.S. agent for American users).
In the U.S. there is no invoicing for the end-user be-
cause the charges are covered globally by NASA for all
U.S. users.
In Europe, the same situation is also true for users from
ESO and ESA member states, thanks to an agreement
signed with European Southern Observatory and ESA
Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (since
January 1995).
Special arrangements also exist or are currently be-
ing negotiated with other countries, including Canada,
Australia, and Japan.
6.2. Usage statistics
There are currently (November 1999) some 7000 user ac-
counts from 64 diﬀerent countries. The development of
the WWW access makes diﬃcult to keep precise track

20
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
of the individual usage statistics, but the global statis-
tics show that the world wide interest for accessing the
Simbad database continues to increase regularly over the
years.
The number of Simbad queries evolved from about
30 000 per month in 1997 to about 100 000 per month
in 1999. About 50% of the queries come through the
client/server mode.
A mirror copy of Simbad has been established at CfA
(Harvard) for convenience of US users, and about one
third of the queries are currently processed on the mirror
site (including name resolving activities for the ADS and
major US NASA archives). The mirror copy is managed
by CDS and updated every night.
7. SIMBAD updates and quality control
7.1. Updating SIMBAD
Simbad is kept up-to-date on a daily basis, as the re-
sult of the collaboration of the CDS team, in Strasbourg,
with bibliographers in Observatoire de Paris (DASGAL),
Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, and Observatoire de
Bordeaux (Lalo¨e et al. 1993; Lalo¨e 1995) who systemat-
ically scan the articles published in some 100 astronomy
journals.
The references are updated very soon after reception
of the journal issues, and in some cases directly from the
journal table of contents, through agreements with the
Editors. New data concerning the objects (identiﬁers, ba-
sic data), and new acronyms for catalogs or tables are
being entered when appropriate.
The inclusion of a large catalogue in the database is of-
ten a long-term task which may span over several months
or years; the collaboration of specialists in the diﬀerent
ﬁelds is systematically sought.
The improvement of the Simbad astronomical con-
tents relies on a network of collaborations: a list of the
main current contributors is given in Table 3. More gener-
ally, help of other contributing institutes and authors, too
numerous to be cited here, is gratefully acknowledged.
7.2. Quality control
The data contained in Simbad are also permanently up-
dated, as a result of errata, remarks from the bibliogra-
phers (during the scanning of the literature), integration
of lists and catalogues, quality controls, or special eﬀorts
initiated by the CDS team to better cover some speciﬁc
domains (e.g., multi-wavelength emitters and complex
objects).
Requests for corrections, errata, or suggestions are reg-
ularly received from Simbad users through a dedicated hot
line, at e-mail address question@simbad.u-strasbg.fr.
A few dozens of messages are usually received every week,
Table 3. Main institutes associated to the CDS for improving
the data contents of Simbad
Bibliography
Observatoire de Paris,
Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris,
and Observatoire de Bordeaux
Astron. contents
GRAAL, Montpellier
Galaxies
Observatoire Midi-Pyr´en´ees and
NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database
Photometry
Observatoire de Gen`eve and Institut
d’Astronomie de Lausanne
Astrometry
Astronomisches Rechen Institut,
Heidelberg
Binary stars
Observatoire de Besan¸con
High-energy
Observatoire de Strasbourg
and processed on a daily basis by the member of the team
who is on duty for that week, or transmitted to the key
person in case of specialized questions. Remarks received
from the users by this way are especially welcome, as
they help the CDS team to improve the database contents
through the scrutiny of specialists’ eyes.
Developing new tools for quality control of the
database is a major challenge for the future, and CDS is
exploring possible solutions. Multivariate analysis applied
to bibliographic information retrieval has been proven a
possible tool for developing quality control in a database
such as Simbad (Lesteven 1995).
7.3. Towards automation of updating procedures
The advent of electronic publishing brings new perspec-
tives for improvement and automation of the updating
procedures.
In a ﬁrst place, tables of contents of the major jour-
nals are now received electronically through the network,
thanks to journal Editors and Publishers, thus reduc-
ing the risk of errors. Regularly, a number of electronic
lists of objects are also folded into Simbad through semi-
automatic procedures. The next step will be the automatic
ﬂagging of object names in the text of the articles: this has
now become a very interesting medium-term goal.
Two ways of achieving this ﬂagging are currently being
considered:
– the ﬁrst one is to ask the authors, with the help
of the Editors of electronic journals, to ﬂag astro-
nomical object names in their text; this can be
done, for instance, by the use of a \object{ }
command within the TEX or LATEX source, which
will be eventually used to build an anchor pointing
towards Simbad, or another database, in the on-line
version made available on the network. This approach
has been adopted by the Editors of Astronomy &
Astrophysics;

M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
21
– another approach is the use of intelligent search tools
for identifying object names within the electronic ver-
sion of the paper, using a set of syntactic and semantic
rules, and the Dictionary of Nomenclature as a refer-
ence database for already known objects.
The ﬁrst approach seems safer, provided the authors un-
derstand what exactly they are being required, and accept
this (minor) additional work load. The latter implies a lot
of ﬁne tuning from the system developers. The current ex-
perience with the handling of publications (Lesteven et al.
1998) suggests that both approaches may be needed, and
that a careful quality control, including ﬁnal check by an
expert, will probably remain necessary to avoid errors or
misinterpretations, and to ensure appropriate complete-
ness.
8. Nomenclature
8.1. The dictionary of nomenclature
Designations of astronomical objects are often confusing.
A complete list of astronomical designations has been
collected and published by Lortet et al. (1994) in the
Dictionary of Nomenclature of Celestial Objects outside
the Solar System.
This information is available on-line through the info
command, or on the WWW11. This service is the elec-
tronic look-up version of the Dictionary which is now un-
der the responsibility of CDS. It is kept up-to-date on
a weekly basis; about 15 new acronyms are incorporated
every week.
The Dictionary currently provides full references and
usages about some 5000 diﬀerent acronyms. It is used by
the International Astronomical Union as a reference for
its recommendations related to nomenclature.
8.2. The sesame module
The sesame module is used inside Simbad for the manage-
ment of possible variations in the naming of astronomical
objects. It is based on a list of rules, written as regular
expressions, allowing translation of the submitted name
into its Simbad canonical form; it is only made visible to
the user when a message mentions the submitted syntax
and its translation.
There are cases where ambiguities cannot be solved.
This is actually speciﬁc to the broad context of Simbad.
Let us give an example: in the context of extragalactic ob-
jects “N” is a possible abbreviation for “NGC” (accepted
by NED); but people studying Novae would frequently use
“N” as an abbreviation for Nova, people studying H ii re-
gions would use it for naming nebulae in the Magellanic
Clouds (LHA 120-N or LHA 115-N), and “N” has also
11 http://vizier.u-strasbg.fr/cgi-bin/Dic-Simbad
been found in the literature for cluster stars studied by
Nordlund in NGC 2099 (Cl* NGC 2099 N), for stars stud-
ied by Neckel ([N78]), or even for “New” parts of the
galaxy NGC 1275 ([NJS93] in Simbad). When a name
like “N 1992” is submitted to Simbad the ambiguity can-
not be solved without requesting additional information
from the user.
9. Integration of SIMBAD into the CDS hub
While the CDS databases have followed diﬀerent develop-
ment paths, the need to build a transparent access to the
whole set of CDS services has become more and more obvi-
ous with the easy navigation permitted by hypertext tools
(Genova et al. 2000). Aladin has become the prototype of
such a development, by giving comprehensive simultane-
ous access to Simbad, the VizieR Catalogue service, and
to external databases such as NED, using a client/server
approach and, when possible, standardized query syntax
and formats.
In order to be able to go further, the CDS has built a
general data exchange model, taking into account all types
of information available at the Data Center, known under
the acronym of GLU for G´en´erateur de Liens Uniformes
– Uniform Link Generator (Fernique et al. 1998).
In the current stage of development, the WWW in-
terface to Simbad provides access to Aladin previewer
(reference image around one object), and to the Aladin
interactive Java program (see Bonnarel et al. 2000). There
are also links between Simbad and the bibliographic ser-
vices developed or mirrored at CDS, and more generally
to the ADS and the electronic journals.
While this article is written stronger links between
Simbad and VizieR are just being created allowing even
easier transfers of data and information between both ser-
vices. This will also make easier to build new links pointing
to distributed data archives, beyond those already existing
(currently: IUE/INES and HEASARC).
10. Future developments
In the near future, the CDS team expects to go on enrich-
ing the database contents and system functionality. The
users play an important role in that respect, by giving
feedback on the desired features, on the user-friendliness
of the interfaces, etc.
In the context of interoperability of distributed ser-
vices, as currently discussed within the ISAIA project
(Interoperable Systems for Archival Information Access;
Hanisch 2000), Simbad is prepared to deliver resource
proﬁles and to format the query outputs in a standard
way, for instance XML (Ochsenbein et al. 2000).
As larger and larger astronomical datasets are being
produced, the CDS is studying the concepts of a new gen-
eration database of several billion objects, instead of the

22
M. Wenger et al.: The SIMBAD astronomical database
current several million objects. We expect Simbad to re-
main an essential tool for astronomical research in the
years to come.
Acknowledgements. CDS acknowledges the support of INSU-
CNRS, the Centre National d’´Etudes Spatiales (CNES), and
Universit´e Louis Pasteur (ULP, Strasbourg). Many of the cur-
rent developments of Simbad have been made possible by long-
term support from NASA, ESA, and ESO. We thank more
speciﬁcally J. Mead and G. Riegler (NASA), P. Benvenuti
(ESA/ST-ECF), and P. Quinn (ESO) for their help in setting
up the current agreements.
Developing and maintaining the database is a collective
undertaking to which many contributors – too numerous to be
listed here – are associated. A special mention shall be made
of M.-J. Wagner, F. Woelfel, J. Marcout (Strasbourg), A.
Beyneix, G. Chassagnard (IAP, Paris), N. Ralite, S. Pasquier
(Bordeaux), E. Davoust (Toulouse), and B. Skiﬀ(Lowell
Observatory), who are watching with great care over the
Simbad contents.
We want ﬁnally to thank Jean Delhaye, Jean Jung, Carlos
Jaschek and Michel Cr´ez´e for their leadership and their vision
in the consecutive early phases of the Simbad project.
References
Abell G.O., Corwin H.G. Jr., Olowin R.P., 1989, ApJS 70, 1
(ABCG)
Bonnarel F., Fernique P., Bienaym´e O., et al., 2000, A&AS
143, 33 (Aladin)
Boyce P., Dalterio H., 1996, Phys. Today 49, 42
Dubois P., Ochsenbein F., Paturel G., 1983, Bull. Inform. CDS
24, 125
Egret D., 1983, Bull. Inform. CDS 24, 109 (SIMBAD Story)
Egret D., Cr´ez´e M., Bonnarel F., et al., 1995, in Information
& On-line Data in Astronomy, Egret & Albrecht (eds.).
Kluwer Academic Publ., p. 163
Egret D., Wenger M., Dubois P., 1991, in Databases and On–
line Data in Astronomy, Albrecht M.A. & Egret D. (eds.).
Kluwer Academic Publishers, p. 79
ESA, 1997, The Hipparcos and Tycho Catalogues, ESA SP–
1200
Feissel M., Mignard F., 1998, A&A 331, L33 (ICRS)
Fernique
P.,
Ochsenbein
F.,
Wenger
M.,
1998,
in
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems VII,
ASP Conf. Ser. 145, 466 (GLU)
Genova F., Bartlett J.G., Bienaym´e O., et al., 1996, Vistas
Astron. 40, 429
Genova F., Bartlett J.G., Bonnarel F., et al., 1998, in
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems VII,
ASP Conf. Ser. 145, 470
Genova F., Egret D., Bienaym´e O., et al., 2000, A&AS 143, 1
(CDS)
Hanisch R., 2000, Computer Physics Communications (in
press)
Heck A., Egret D., 1987, Messenger 48, 22-24
HEASARC team, 1995, in Information & On-line Data in
Astronomy, Egret & Albrecht (eds.). Kluwer Academic
Publ., p. 139
Helou G., Madore B.F., Schmitz M., et al., 1991, in Databases
& On-line Data in Astronomy, Albrecht & Egret (eds.).
Kluwer Acad. Publ., p. 89
Høg E., Kuzmin A., Bastian U., et al., 1998, A&A 335, 65
(TRC)
Houk N., Cowley A.P., 1975, Michigan Catalogue of Two-
Dimensional Spectral Types for the HD Stars, Vol. 1 (MK)
Jaschek M., 1978, Bull. Inf. CDS 15, 121
Kurtz M., Eichhorn G., Accomazzi A., et al., 2000, A&AS 143,
41 (ADS)
Lalo¨e S., 1995, in Proceedings of the LISA-II Conference,
Vistas Astron. 39, 179
Lalo¨e S., Beyneix A., Borde S., et al., 1993, CDS Inform. Bull.
43, 57
Lasker B.M., Sturch C.R., McLean B.J., et al., 1990, AJ 99,
2019 (GSC)
Lesteven S., 1995, Vistas Astron. 39, 187
Lesteven S., Bonnarel F., Dubois P., 1998, in Proceedings LISA
III Conference, Grothkpof U., et al. (eds.), ASP Conf. Ser.
153, 61
Lortet M.C., Borde S., Ochsenbein F., 1994, A&AS 107, 193
Mermilliod J.-C., 1987, A&AS 71, 413 (UBV )
Nilson P., 1973, Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies (UGC)
Ochsenbein
F.,
1982,
in
Automated
Data
Retrieval
in
Astronomy, Jaschek
C.
&
Heintz W.D. (eds.),
IAU
Coll. 64. Dordrecht, D. Reidel Publishing Company, p. 171
(BSI)
Ochsenbein F., Albrecht M., Brighton A., et al., 2000, in
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IX,
ASP Conf. Ser. (in press) (XML)
Ochsenbein F., Bauer P., Marcout J., 2000, A&AS 143, 23
(VizieR)
Ochsenbein F., BischoﬀM., Egret D., 1981, A&AS 43, 259
(CSI)
Ochsenbein F., Dubois P., 1992, in Astronomy from Large
Databases, II, Heck A. & Murtagh F. (eds.), p. 405
Rodriguez-Pascual P.M., Gonz´alez-Riestra R., Schartel N.,
Wamsteker W., 1999, A&AS 139, 183 (INES)
Schmitz M., Helou G., Dubois P., et al., 1995, in Information
& On–line Data in Astronomy, Egret & Albrecht (eds.).
Kluwer Acad. Publ., p. 259
Vorontsov-Velyaminov
B.,
et
al.,
1962,
Morphological
Catalogue of Galaxies, in 5 parts, Moscow State University,
Moscow (MCG)
