Cent. Eur. J. Phys. • 10(1) • 2012 • 181-188
DOI: 10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2
Central
European
Journal
of
Physi s
Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data
analysis
Resear h
Arti le
David Neˇcas1,2∗, Petr Klapetek3,4†
1 CEITEC - Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University
Kamenice 753/5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic
2 Department of Physical Electronics, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University
Kotláˇrská 2, 61137 Brno, Czech Republic
3 Department of Nanometrology, Czech Metrology Institute
Okružní 31, 638 00 Brno, Czech Republic
4 CEITEC - Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology
Technická 3058/10, 616 00 Brno, Czech Republic
Re eived
08
July
2011;
a  epted
13
O tober
2011
Abstra t:
In this article, we review special features of Gwyddiona modular, multiplatform, open-source software
for scanning probe microscopy data processing, which is available at http://gwyddion.net/. We describe
its architecture with emphasis on modularity and easy integration of the provided algorithms into other
software. Special functionalities, such as data processing from non-rectangular areas, grain and particle
analysis, and metrology support are discussed as well. It is shown that on the basis of open-source software
development, a fully functional software package can be created that covers the needs of a large part of
the scanning probe microscopy user community.
PACS
(2008): 68.37.-d
Keywords:
scanning probe microscopy • data processing
© Versita Sp. z o.o.
1.
Introduction
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a well established
experimental method for determining the surface morphol-
ogy and other local physical quantities with very high
resolution. The range of SPM experiments found in the
∗E-mail: yeti@gwyddion.net
†E-mail: pklapetek@cmi.cz
present-day literature extends from atomically resolved
imaging of surface reconstructions [1, 2] to long-range
measurements of critical dimensions in the semiconduc-
tor industry [3, 4]. Many particular variants of SPM are
known, including possibilities of local morphological mea-
surements and local force mapping (AFM - atomic force
microscopy), magnetic measurements (MFM - magnetic
force microscopy), thermal measurements (SThM - scan-
ning thermal microscopy), optical measurements (SNOM
- scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy), as well as a
number of other techniques.
181

Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis
Substantial eﬀorts and costs are expended by researchers
and instrument manufacturers for the development of novel
and better SPM instruments. Many commercial instru-
ments can reach noise levels far in the sub-atomic range
in all three motion axes. The inﬂuence of data processing
in SPM measurements is, however, often underestimated,
and data processing is not considered when discussing
SPM measurement accuracy.
SPM data represent only an approximation of the local
surface morphology or local physical properties.
Even
during the measurement, SPM data are regularly sam-
pled, which can be understood as a spatial ﬁltering tech-
nique. Moreover, SPM only rarely provides information
that can be evaluated without any further data processing.
Usually, at least basic leveling routines need to be applied
to remove the tilt between the axes of the microscope and
the mean sample plane. SPM data can also be heavily
inﬂuenced by the probing model, e.g., the tip–sample con-
volution in AFM measurements [5]. These eﬀects need to
be taken into consideration at the data-processing stage.
Finally, high sensitivity does not necessarily mean high
precision, and proper calibration routines need to be ap-
plied as well [6].
Unfortunately, SPM data processing is a much weaker
part of SPM data-acquisition process than the measure-
ment itself. Algorithms used for data processing are typ-
ically part of the built-in software provided by the in-
strument manufacturer and are therefore often unknown.
Many algorithms are based on user input only, relying
solely on user experience. Data-processing repeatability
can therefore be quite poor. Thus, it is important to employ
reliable data-processing software and to select algorithms
minimizing user inﬂuence.
There are several projects aimed at developing a universal,
SPM manufacturer independent software for SPM data
analysis on a commercial1, a non-commercial [7], or an
open-source basis [8]. In this article, we review the open-
source SPM data-processing software Gwyddion, which
is available free of charge at2. We show that it provides a
number of special tools for quantitative data processing in
SPM. Since Gwyddion is available for various platforms,
it can reach a large part of the SPM user community.
Moreover, Gwyddion software libraries can easily be in-
tegrated into any other program, such as data-acquisition
software.
This can substantially simplify both data ac-
quisition and processing in many other situations, e.g., by
writing custom software for SPM instrument control.
1 http://www.imagemet.com/
2 http://gwyddion.net/
2.
Gwyddion description
Gwyddion is a modular multiplatform software for SPM
data analysis. Its main task is to provide fast and repro-
ducible data-processing routines for SPM users. It allows
users to perform all basic operations necessary for a suc-
cessful evaluation of the data obtained using an SPM.
The extensive list of features (see3) contains, for example,
these basic and most commonly used ones:
• Basic visualization of SPM data: false-color rep-
resentation, including shading, edge detection, and
similar visualization tools.
• OpenGL 3D data display:
false-color or mate-
rial representation, easily editable color maps, and
OpenGL materials.
• Multiple-channel treatment: data arithmetic and
selection of multiple channels.
• Instrument
tilt
or
non-planarity compensation:
plane leveling, proﬁles leveling, three-point level-
ing, facet leveling, polynomial background removal,
leveling along user-deﬁned lines.
• Extraction and treatment of proﬁles:
proﬁle for
arbitrary thickness extraction, distances in proﬁle
graph, proﬁle export and simple graph-function ﬁt-
ting, critical-dimension determination.
• Data ﬁltering: mean, median, conservative denoise,
Kuwahara, minimum, maximum, checker pattern re-
moval, general convolution ﬁlter with user-deﬁned
kernel.
• Basic statistical functions and quantities: rough-
ness parameters, 1D and 2D correlation functions,
power spectral-density function, angular distribu-
tions.
• ISO roughness parameter evaluation.
• Special statistical functions:
fractal-dimension
analysis, 2D slope and facet analysis, Minkowski
functionals.
• Integral transforms:
1D and 2D FFT ﬁltering,
wavelet ﬁltering.
• Correction of image defects:
spot removal, out-
lier marking, scar (stroke) marking, line correction
3 http://gwyddion.net/features.php
182

David Neˇcas, Petr Klapetek
methods, removal of data under an arbitrary mask
using Laplace or fractal interpolation, fast scan axis
drift correction.
• Support for tiled imaging: merging and immersion
of images.
• Basic probe-sample interaction modeling using a
geometrical approach: tip modeling, blind estima-
tion, dilation, and erosion.
Besides the basic functionality listed above, there are sev-
eral special features that should help spreading Gwyddion
among SPM users:
• Gwyddion is available for all common operating
systems.
• Gwyddion can read over 80 ﬁle formats, which rep-
resents the absolute majority of all ﬁles formats
produced by SPMs in the world.
• Most of the basic functionality is in libraries with
stable API and modules that can be used for the
construction of other SPM data-acquisition or pro-
cessing software.
• All features, including API for all library functions,
are documented on-line.
• Being open source and having a clear library and
data-processing modules structure, anyone can in-
spect or improve the Gwyddion code.
In this article, we primarily describe the main attributes
that set Gwyddion apart from other SPM data-processing
software.
2.1.
Modularity
Gwyddion itself is an extremely small application. The
binary representation of the Gwyddion executable occu-
pies less than 2 percent of the full installation, while the
rest are Gwyddion libraries and data-treatment modules.
Gwyddion is written in C and builds on Gtk+ and GLib
libraries. It relies on the GLib utility library for portabil-
ity and uses the GLib object system GObject for its own
objects. The graphical user interface is implemented with
the Gtk+ toolkit with a fair amount of Gwyddion-speciﬁc
extension widgets. The program can be divided into the
following main components:
• libraries
providing
basic
and
advanced
data-
processing routines, graphical user interface ele-
ments, and other utility functions and objects,
• the quite small and simple actual application serv-
ing primarily as a glue connecting the other com-
ponents in a common graphical interface, and
• modules (technically:
run-time loaded libraries)
that provide most of the actual functionality and
present it to the user; in many situations, they ex-
tensively use library methods.
Libraries are the key part of the provided software, and
these are also components that can easily be integrated
into any other software.
The basic Gwyddion library
structure is as follows:
• The libgwyddion library deﬁnes some core inter-
faces, like serialization (GwySerializable) for data-
like objects; general classes not directly related to
data processing or GUI (hash-table-like data con-
tainer GwyContainer, general unit representation
GwySIUnit); and various string, mathematical, ﬁle,
and miscellaneous utilities and macros.
• The libprocess library deﬁnes two basic objects:
GwyDataField representing two-dimensional data,
and GwyDataLine representing one-dimensional
data. These objects encapsulate raw ﬂoating-point
arrays together with basic metadataphysical di-
mensions and their units.
It provides fundamen-
tal one- and two-dimensional data-processing func-
tions used subsequently as basic building blocks for
speciﬁc functions in modules.
• The libdraw library is a small library that pro-
vides a few color-handling and elementary data-
rendering functions.
It deﬁnes false-color map
objects (GwyGradients), OpenGL material objects
(GwyGLMaterials), and the abstract selection class
GwySelection.
• The libgwydgets library is essentially a collection
of Gwyddion-speciﬁc Gtk+ widgets. There are sev-
eral notable groups of widgets, namely 1D, 2D, and
pseudo 3D data-representation views.
• The libgwymodule library deals with module load-
ing and other administrative tasks, and it acts as a
proxy for the usage of module functions. It deﬁnes
functions for the registration of modules and their
functions, and it also implements some more conve-
nient wrappers around primitive module functions.
• The libgwyapp library contains functions related to
the main application, namely application-level data
management.
Some of the functions could have
183

Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis
probably been equally well put into the main appli-
cation. Nevertheless, many can be useful also out-
side Gwyddion itselfin a Gwyddion related pro-
gram. As it is not always clear which are which,
the library contains everything that may be of any
interest to the outside world.
While the libraries contain the basic algorithms and data
structures, Gwyddion modules provide most of the soft-
ware interaction with the user (even if they can be run
also in non-interactive mode). Modules can provide dif-
ferent types of functionality; from the viewpoint of user
interaction, the following types are important:
• Data processing methodsfunctions that carry out
some operation on given data.
• File loading and savingdata ﬁle type detection,
loading, and saving functions that get a ﬁle name
to load or detect, or a ﬁle name and data to save.
• Interactive toolsobjects representing interactive
tools that are selected from a tool palette and used
in data windows, similar to how tools in some draw-
ing programs operate.
• Graph methodsfunctions operating (allowing the
user to operate interactively) on a given graph.
Everything besides the executable binary can be em-
ployed for any other purposes than running Gwyddion,
e.g., for the development of other SPM data-acquisition
or analysis software that ﬁts user needs. Since the Gwyd-
dion libraries have been developed with their possible use
in other software in mind and support pkg-conﬁg 4 (which
is the standard mechanism for obtaining information on
how to compile and link programs with an external li-
brary), their use in custom software is straightforward.
There is a large variety of software that can be created
using Gwyddion libraries. Examples (some of them avail-
able to the public free of charge) are:
• Gwyiewa simple SPM data viewer, which also
serves as an example of how to develop Gwyddion-
based programs. Thanks to the use of Gwyddion
loading and visualization functions, it can display
any SPM ﬁle that can be opened in Gwyddion.
• GrapherADa data-visualization component of a
custom software for ﬁtting ellipsometric and spec-
trophotometric data developed by newAD and
4 http://pkgconﬁg.freedesktop.org/
used by the Department of Physical Electron-
ics, Masaryk University. It employs primarily the
Gwyddion graph widgets and also some infrastruc-
ture functions.
• GwyScana software using all Gwyddion libraries
and some hardware (National Instruments cards,
Atmel AtXmega microprocessors) for driving the
metrology scanning probe microscope [9] and a
long-range scanning probe microscope at the Czech
Metrology Institute.
Here Gwyddion is used for
both data treatment and visualization, and the ac-
quisition code for the entire microscope is limited
to a few hundred lines.
• GSvitsoftware using the libprocess library for data
handling in graphics card based on Finite Diﬀer-
ence in Time Domain solver (see5). Here Gwyddion
is used for platform-independent 1D and 2D data
loading and saving.
2.2.
Statistical data processing using masks
Statistical analysis is used frequently in SPM, for ex-
ample when evaluating parameters of surface roughness.
There are many statistical functions and quantities im-
plemented in Gwyddion, which (from a quantitative point
of view) do not diﬀer from other SPM data-processing
software. What does make a diﬀerence is the possibility
of calculating statistical parameters from arbitrary non-
rectangular selections that can be chosen by the user or
by some segmentation algorithm.
Arbitrarily shaped subsets of pixels, marked by so called
masks, are used as a universal mechanism for marking
speciﬁc regions in the data, regardless of whether they
represent grains, defects or regions of interest marked by
the user. Subsequent operations can then take the mask
into account and focus on the marked area. The sepa-
ration of marking and processing provides great freedom
and permits the user to combine these steps in new and
unforeseen ways.
The mask creation and modiﬁcation operations include:
• marking of grains, facets of a given slope, or defects,
such as outliers or scars/strokes on the basis of the
watershed algorithm [10];
• manual mask-creation editing with a mask editor
that permits the user to draw rectangles, ellipses,
or free-form shapes;
5 http://gsvit.net/
184

David Neˇcas, Petr Klapetek
Figure 1. Gwyddion screenshot with the AFM image of a microchip
surface and statistical quantities evaluated from masked
rough aluminum parts.
• global operations, such as inversion, shrinking, or
growing; and
• marking of data based on the values of some other
data.
Masks can also be created as an auxiliary output of some
operations to distinguish data with certain properties, e.g.,
surface reconstruction using a tip model marks areas with
possible multiple tip touches or cross-correlation marks
areas with low correlation score.
Operations with masked data can be divided into two main
groups: grain or particle operations characterizing indi-
vidual parts of the maskthese are discussed in Sec. 2.4
and application of the mask to include or exclude the cor-
responding data. The second group includes the calcu-
lation of statistical quantities (minimum, maximum, mean,
rms, surface area, global curvature, …), leveling (plane,
facet, or polynomial), and interpolation and arithmetic
operations with data.
An example for the latter is the
possibility to combine the pixels of two images 1 and 2
based on the mask on a third image 3 using the expression
d1*m3+d2*(1-m3) in the data arithmetic module.
As an illustration, the mask created on AFM data rep-
resenting a microchip surface is shown in Fig. 1 together
with the evaluated statistical roughness results. The mask,
selecting aluminum interconnections in the microchip, was
obtained using a combination of thresholding and manual
selection. Similarly, additional data, e.g., representing the
local thermal conductivity could be used for creating this
selection.
2.3.
Data synthesis
SPM measurements are often highly aﬀected by the SPM
probing mechanism referred to as tip–sample interaction.
For morphological measurements using rigid bodies (both
tip and sample), this eﬀect is often described as tip–sample
convolution, and we can simulate, evaluate, or correct tip–
Figure 2. Examples of synthetic surfaces: (a) randomly patterned
pyramidal surface similar to the top surfaces of crystalline
silicon solar cells (b) randomly rough Gaussian surface
(c) regular hole pattern with artiﬁcial line noise (d) sim-
ulated agglomerated nanoparticles on rough substrate,
convolved with an AFM tip.
sample artifacts in such cases [5]. For the treatment of
non-rigid bodies or measurements of other physical quan-
tities, the situation is much worsethe tip–sample point-
spread function is dependent on many variables and much
deeper physical knowledge is needed to eliminate tip–
sample artifacts. Simulating surfaces with given proper-
ties, performing some virtual measurements on it (e.g., by
a dilation algorithm in the simplest case), and analyzing
simulated data can yield a better understanding of real
SPM images [15].
Gwyddion includes many algorithms for the simulation
of both typical surfaces and instrumental defects, namely
noise, that include:
• Random roughness with Gaussian or power-law
autocorrelation functions can be generated using
spectral synthesis.
• Nanoparticles on a surface can be simulated using
a simple model similar to molecular-dynamics cal-
culations. The aim of the model is to simulate the
process of nanoparticle deposition and agglomera-
tion often observed in real measurements.
• Common regular structures, such as steps, ridges,
or hole patterns, can be generated, possibly with
lateral deformations and variations of dimensional
parameters, such as height or distance.
185

Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis
• Randomly patterned surfaces formed by randomly
distributed surface features of a speciﬁc shape, e.g.,
pyramid, half-sphere, tetrahedron, or Gaussian, can
be modeled using an object-placement algorithm.
• Finally, uncorrelated point noise and line noise can
be generated with several one-sided and two-sided
distributions, namely Gaussian, exponential, trian-
gular, and uniform, to simulate noisy data.
All methods can not only be used to generate a purely
artiﬁcial surface but also for modiﬁcations of existing sur-
faces. An illustration is presented in Fig. 2 showing just
a few of the large number of possible combinations of dif-
ferent synthesis module results.
2.4.
Particle and grain analysis
Particle analysis is an important challenge in present-
day nanoscale metrology. Micro- and nanoparticles are
used in many ﬁelds of research and technology. They can
be characterized using diﬀerent methods including opti-
cal [11] and x-ray scattering [12] or using diﬀerent mi-
croscopies [13].
Nanoparticles are also often measured
using AFM [14]. For isolated nanoparticles on ﬂat sub-
strates, this is a relatively easy task. However, in practice
it is often necessary to analyze nanoparticles on rough
substrates or nanoparticles that are not isolated.
Us-
ing Gwyddion’s data synthesis modules, we can simulate
these eﬀects, as shown in the previous section.
For particle and grain analyses, there are a number of al-
gorithms available in Gwyddion. Both particles and grains
are handled using a mask that marks areas that belong to
individual grains or particles. Data processing therefore
involves usually two steps:
1. Particles or grains are marked, i.e., a mask is cre-
ated using some of the aforementioned algorithms.
2. Grain/particle statistical functions are used for
mask analysis including the possibility of measur-
ing many diﬀerent quantities associated with the
particle’s projected size, boundary, volume, or ori-
entation. High aspect-ratio nanoparticles can be
analyzed as well. Results can be evaluated for both
individual particles selected by the user or the en-
tire ensemble of particles marked by a mask.
As an example, the statistical processing of agglomerated
polymer nanoparticles on silicon is illustrated in Fig. 3.
In this case, the watershed algorithm was used to mark
the nanoparticles, and the resulting mask was evaluated
using a particle equivalent projection algorithm to obtain
the distribution of nanoparticle radii.
Figure 3. Gwyddion screenshot showing AFM measurements of
a layer of agglomerated polystyrene nanoparticles on a
silicon surface, masked by the watershed algorithm and
evaluated using a particle-equivalent projection method
(graph). An individual particle’s properties for the particle
marked by the mouse pointer are displayed as well.
2.5.
Metrology support
Gwyddion also features basic support for metrology in
SPM. The key objective is to provide not only the values
of direct or statistical results, but also their uncertainties.
This process is not straightforward if we use an SPM [6].
First, all the uncertainty sources have to be determined or
estimated. Second, uncertainties have to be propagated
to the results using uncertainty propagation laws.
The basic idea for uncertainty propagation in Gwyddion
is to determine positioning-system errors (positioner-error
function) and successively extract the local uncertainties
in the full volume that can be reached by the position-
ing system (including also other uncertainty sources that
are not necessarily of a local nature) [16]. In this way,
we obtain volume-calibration data. This is in contrast to
the more traditional method of measuring separate errors
for each axis complemented by further cross-talk measure-
ments and combining them to obtain an overall uncertainty
leading to a possible overestimation of the uncertainties.
After obtaining volume-calibration data, each pixel of the
SPM image or proﬁle is connected to the known measure-
ment uncertainty in all directions. The volume-calibration
data are then used for uncertainty propagation in the
data-evaluation algorithms, and results are amended by
their uncertainty. Moreover, the volume-uncertainty data
processing system in Gwyddion can be used also to com-
pare diﬀerent microscopes or their parts, like the position-
ing stages.
186

David Neˇcas, Petr Klapetek
Figure 4. Gwyddion downloads from SourceForge per month (data
source: sourceforge.net).
3.
Results and future plans
Even though we do not collect statistical data concerning
Gwyddion use and spread, some basic information about
its use can be deduced from the monthly number of down-
loads over the years of Gwyddion’s development, as shown
in Fig. 4. Although an individual download does not nec-
essarily imply an installation or the use of Gwyddion, it
can be seen from the graph that there is a clear need for
such a software in the community of SPM users.
There are many open questions and tasks for future Gwyd-
dion versions. Besides architectural improvements, there
are certain key data-processing tasks that we would like
to address in the near future:
• Support for non-equidistantly sampled data in
SPM. Increased sampling density in the vicinity
of speciﬁc surface features (e.g., sharp edges) al-
lows the user to improve surface characterization
while keeping the measurement time and amount
of data reasonable. Instruments measuring at arbi-
trary points instead of a regular grid have already
been built [9].
However, the data obtained from
such instruments cannot be processed by the cur-
rent generation of SPM software.
• Uncertainty propagation into all results using
Monte Carlo propagation mechanisms.
• Extending the set of operations that support mask-
ing. Especially the calculation of one-dimensional
statistical characteristics, such as the autocorrela-
tion function and the power-spectrum density func-
tion of arbitrarily shaped areas would be useful.
• Development of faster statistical-analysis methods
based on frequency analysis.
4.
Conclusion
Over the course of several years of development, a fully
functional software for SPM data analysis has been cre-
ated featuring a unique modular structure and cross-
platform availability.
Due to its architecture, it can be
used as a standalone software, or its libraries can be
employed for other custom software in the contexts of
data processing, visualization, or acquisition. Gwyddion
reaches a large part of the worldwide community of SPM
users.
We have experienced that the open-source structure and
the detailed documentation of all the functions lead to
fast bug detection and many suggestions for improvements
from users. Even though feed-back usually focuses on a
speciﬁc feature, and even though surface physicists are of-
ten unexperienced programmers, many improvements have
been brought to our attention by users. This user feed-
back ranges from minor bug reports, feature requests, and
documentation improvements to the testing of ﬁle-loading
modules and complex data-processing functions.
This can also be understood as one part of the quality-
assessment process, which is in this form lacking for pro-
prietary software.
The open-source approach, together
with tight coding and testing rules can therefore partly
substitute costs that would be necessary for monitoring
the quality of such complex software.
Acknowledgments
This
work
is
supported
by
the
project
“CEITEC
Central
European
Institute
of
Technology”
(CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068)
from
the
European
Regional
Development Fund, by the Grant Agency of the Academy
of
Sciences
of
the
Czech
Republic
under
contract
KAN311610701, and by the Czech Ministry of Education
research plan MSM 0021622411.
The authors would like to thank also all Gwyddion con-
tributors that joined its development team in the last ten
years, translators that provided adaptions to other lan-
guages, and users for their feedback.
References
[1] Y. Gan, Surf. Sci. Rep. 64, 99 (2009)
[2] Y. Sugawara et al., App. Surf. Sci. 113/114, 364 (1997)
[3] E. Manske et al., Meas. Sci. Technol. 18, 520 (2007)
187

Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis
[4] B. J. Eves, Meas. Sci. Technol. 20, 084003 (2009)
[5] J. Villarubia, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stan. 102, 425 (2007)
[6] T. Dziomba, Towards a guideline for SPM calibration
in nanoscale calibration standards and methods (Ed
Wilkening and Koenders, Wiley, 2005)
[7] I. Horcas et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78, 013705 (2007)
[8] P. Zahl, M. Bierkandt, S. Schröder,A. Klust, Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 74, 1222 (2003)
[9] J. Lazar, P. Klapetek, O. ˇCíp, M. ˇCížek, V. Šerý, Meas.
Sci. Technol. 20, 084007 (2009)
[10] P. Klapetek et al., Acta Phys. Slovaca 53, 223 (2003)
[11] B. G. Zanetti-Ramos et al., Mat. Sci. Eng. C-Bio. S
29, 638 (2009)
[12] J. M. Ramallo-Lopez et al., Physica B 389, 150 (2007)
[13] A.
Maurya,
P.
Chauhan,
Mater.
Charact.
62,
382 (2011)
[14] L. J. Lee et al., Compos. Sci. Technol. 65, 2344 (2005)
[15] P. Klapetek, I. Ohlídal, Ultramicroscopy 94, 19 (2003)
[16] P. Klapetek, D. Neˇcas, A. Campbellová, A. Yacoot,
L. Koenders, Meas. Sci. Technol. 22, 025501 (2011)
188
