SPECIAL SECTION ON RECENT ADVANCES IN SOFTWARE DEFINED
NETWORKING FOR 5G NETWORKS
Received July 11, 2015, accepted July 22, 2015, date of publication July 28, 2015, date of current version August 7, 2015.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2461602
A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and
Emerging Technologies
AKHIL GUPTA, (Student Member, IEEE), AND RAKESH KUMAR JHA, (Senior Member, IEEE)
School of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Katra 182320, India
Corresponding author: A. Gupta (akhilgupta112001@gmail.com)
ABSTRACT In the near future, i.e., beyond 4G, some of the prime objectives or demands that need to
be addressed are increased capacity, improved data rate, decreased latency, and better quality of service.
To meet these demands, drastic improvements need to be made in cellular network architecture. This paper
presents the results of a detailed survey on the ﬁfth generation (5G) cellular network architecture and some
of the key emerging technologies that are helpful in improving the architecture and meeting the demands of
users. In this detailed survey, the prime focus is on the 5G cellular network architecture, massive multiple
input multiple output technology, and device-to-device communication (D2D). Along with this, some of the
emerging technologies that are addressed in this paper include interference management, spectrum sharing
with cognitive radio, ultra-dense networks, multi-radio access technology association, full duplex radios,
millimeter wave solutions for 5G cellular networks, and cloud technologies for 5G radio access networks
and software deﬁned networks. In this paper, a general probable 5G cellular network architecture is proposed,
which shows that D2D, small cell access points, network cloud, and the Internet of Things can be a part of
5G cellular network architecture. A detailed survey is included regarding current research projects being
conducted in different countries by research groups and institutions that are working on 5G technologies.
INDEX TERMS 5G, cloud, D2D, massive MIMO, mm-wave, relay, small-cell.
I. INTRODUCTION
Today and in the recent future, to fulﬁll the presumptions
and challenges of the near future, the wireless based net-
works of today will have to advance in various ways. Recent
technology constituent like high-speed packet access (HSPA)
and long-term evolution (LTE) will be launched as a
segment of the advancement of current wireless based
technologies. Nevertheless, auxiliary components may also
constitute future new wireless based technologies, which
may adjunct the evolved technologies. Specimen of these
new technology components are different ways of accessing
spectrum and considerably higher frequency ranges, the
instigation of massive antenna conﬁgurations, direct device-
to-device communication, and ultra-dense deployments [1].
Since its initiation in the late 1970s, mobile wireless
communication has come across from analog voice calls to
current modern technologies adept of providing high qual-
ity mobile broadband services with end-user data rates of
several megabits per second over wide areas and tens, or
even hundreds, of megabits per second locally. The extensive
improvements in terms of potentiality of mobile communica-
tion networks, along with the initiation of new types of mobile
devices such as smart phones and tablets, have produced an
eruption of new applications which will be used in cases for
mobile connectivity and a resultant exponential growth in
network trafﬁc. This paper presents our view on the future of
wireless communication for 2020 and beyond. In this paper,
we describe the key challenges that will be encountered by
future wireless communication while enabling the networked
society. Along with this, some technology routes that may be
taken to fulﬁll these challenges [1].
The imagination of our future is a networked society with
unbounded access to information and sharing of data which
is accessible everywhere and every time for everyone and
everything. To realize this imagination, new technology com-
ponents need to be examined for the evolution of existing
wireless based technologies. Present wireless based tech-
nologies, like the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)
LTE technology, HSPA and Wi-Fi, will be incorporating new
technology components that will be helping to meet the needs
of the future. Nevertheless, there may be certain scenarios that
cannot be adequately addressed along with the evolution of
ongoing existing technologies. The instigation of completely
new wireless based technologies will complement the current
technologies which are needed for the long term realization
of the networked society [2].
1206
2169-3536 
 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
In Section II, we present the evolution of wireless
technologies. Section III gives the detailed description of
the proposed general 5G cellular network architecture.
Section IV comprises of the detailed explanation of the
emerging technologies for 5G wireless networks. We con-
clude our paper in Section V. A list of current research
projects based on 5G technologies is shown in the appendix.
II. EVOLUTION OF WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
G. Marconi, an Italian inventor, unlocks the path of
recent day wireless communications by communicating the
letter ‘S’ along a distance of 3Km in the form of three dot
Morse code with the help of electromagnetic waves. After
this inception, wireless communications have become an
important part of present day society. Since satellite com-
munication, television and radio transmission has advanced
to pervasive mobile telephone, wireless communications has
transformed the style in which society runs. The evolution
of wireless begins here [2] and is shown in Fig. 1. It shows
the evolving generations of wireless technologies in terms of
data rate, mobility, coverage and spectral efﬁciency. As the
wireless technologies are growing, the data rate, mobility,
coverage and spectral efﬁciency increases. It also shows
that the 1G and 2G technologies use circuit switching while
2.5G and 3G uses both circuit and packet switching and
the next generations from 3.5G to now i.e. 5G are using
packet switching. Along with these factors, it also differ-
entiate between licensed spectrum and unlicensed spectrum.
All the evolving generations use the licensed spectrum while
the WiFi, Bluetooth and WiMAX are using the unlicensed
spectrum.
An
overview
about
the
evolving
wireless
technologies is below:
FIGURE 1. Evolution of wireless technologies.
A. 1G
The 1st generation was announced in initial 1980’s.
It has a data rate up to 2.4kbps. Major subscribers were
Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS), Nordic Mobile
Telephone
(NMT),
and
Total
Access
Communication
System (TACS). It has a lot of disadvantages like below
par capacity, reckless handoff, inferior voice associations,
and with no security, since voice calls were stored and played
in radio towers due to which vulnerability of these calls from
unwanted eavesdropping by third party increases [7].
B. 2G
The
2nd
generation
was
introduced
in
late
1990’s.
Digital technology is used in 2nd generation mobile tele-
phones. Global Systems for Mobile communications (GSM)
was the ﬁrst 2nd generation system, chieﬂy used for voice
communication and having a data rate up to 64kbps.
2G mobile handset battery lasts longer because of the radio
signals having low power. It also provides services like Short
Message Service (SMS) and e-mail. Vital eminent technolo-
gies were GSM, Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA),
and IS-95 [3], [7].
C. 2.5G
It generally subscribes a 2nd generation cellular system
merged with General Packet Radio Services (GPRS) and
other amenities doesn’t commonly endow in 2G or 1G
networks. A 2.5G system generally uses 2G system
frameworks, but it applies packet switching along with
circuit switching. It can assist data rate up to 144kbps. The
main 2.5G technologies were GPRS, Enhanced Data Rate
for GSM Evolution (EDGE), and Code Division Multiple
Access (CDMA) 2000 [3], [7].
D. 3G
The 3rd generation was established in late 2000. It imparts
transmission rate up to 2Mbps. Third generation (3G)
systems merge high speed mobile access to services based
on Internet Protocol (IP). Aside from transmission rate,
unconventional improvement was made for maintaining QoS.
Additional amenities like global roaming and improved voice
quality made 3G as a remarkable generation. The major
disadvantage for 3G handsets is that, they require more
power than most 2G models. Along with this 3G network
plans
are
more
expensive
than
2G
[3],
[7].
Since
3G involves the introduction and utilization of Wideband
Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA), Universal
Mobile Telecommunications Systems (UMTS) and Code
Division Multiple Access (CDMA) 2000 technologies, the
evolving technologies like High Speed Uplink/Downlink
Packet
Access
(HSUPA/HSDPA)
and
Evolution-Data
Optimized (EVDO) has made an intermediate wireless
generation between 3G and 4G named as 3.5G with improved
data rate of 5-30 Mbps [3].
E. 3.75G
Long-Term
Evolution
technology
(LTE)
and
Fixed
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WIMAX)
is the future of mobile data services. LTE and Fixed WIMAX
has the potential to supplement the capacity of the network
and provides a substantial number of users the facility to
access a broad range of high speed services like on demand
video, peer to peer ﬁle sharing and composite Web services.
VOLUME 3, 2015
1207

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
Along with this, a supplementary spectrum is accessible
which accredit operators manage their network very compli-
antly and offers better coverage with improved performance
for less cost [4]–[7].
F. 4G
4G is generally referred as the descendant of the 3G and 2G
standards.
3rd
Generation
Partnership
Project
(3GPP)
is presently standardizing Long Term Evolution (LTE)
Advanced as forthcoming 4G standard along with Mobile
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WIMAX).
A 4G system improves the prevailing communication
networks by imparting a complete and reliable solution based
on IP. Amenities like voice, data and multimedia will be
imparted to subscribers on every time and everywhere basis
and at quite higher data rates as related to earlier generations.
Applications that are being made to use a 4G network are
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), Digital Video
Broadcasting (DVB), and video chat, High Deﬁnition TV
content and mobile TV [2], [4]–[6].
G. 5G
With an exponential increase in the demand of the users,
4G
will
now
be
easily
replaced
with
5G
with
an
advanced access technology named Beam Division Multiple
Access (BDMA) and Non- and quasi-orthogonal or Filter
Bank multi carrier (FBMC) multiple access. The concept
behind BDMA technique is explained by considering the case
of the base station communicating with the mobile stations.
In this communication, an orthogonal beam is allocated to
each mobile station and BDMA technique will divide that
antenna beam according to locations of the mobile stations
for giving multiple accesses to the mobile stations, which
correspondingly increase the capacity of the system [8].
An idea to shift towards 5G is based on current drifts, it is
commonly assumed that 5G cellular networks must address
six challenges that are not effectively addressed by 4G i.e.
higher capacity, higher data rate, lower End to End latency,
massive device connectivity, reduced cost and consistent
Quality of Experience provisioning [22], [23]. These
challenges are concisely shown in Fig. 2 along with
some potential facilitators to address them. An overview
of the challenges, facilitators, and corresponding design
fundamentals for 5G is shown in Fig. 2 [20]. Recently
introduced IEEE 802.11ac, 802.11ad and 802.11af standards
are very helpful and act as a building blocks in the road
towards 5G [9]–[13]. The technical comparison between these
standards is shown in table 1 and the detailed comparison of
wireless generations is shown in table 2.
III. 5G CELLULAR NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
To contemplate 5G network in the market now, it is evident
that the multiple access techniques in the network are
almost at a still and requires sudden improvement. Current
technologies like OFDMA will work at least for next
50 years. Moreover, there is no need to have a change in
the wireless setup which had come about from 1G to 4G.
Alternatively, there could be only the addition of an appli-
cation or amelioration done at the fundamental network to
please user requirements. This will provoke the package
providers to drift for a 5G network as early as 4G is com-
mercially set up [8]. To meet the demands of the user and
to overcome the challenges that has been put forward in the
5G system, a drastic change in the strategy of designing
the 5G wireless cellular architecture is needed. A general
observation of the researchers has shown in [14] that most of
the wireless users stay inside for approximately 80 percent of
time and outside for approximately 20 percent of the time.
In present wireless cellular architecture, for a mobile user
to communicate whether inside or outside, an outside base
station present in the middle of a cell helps in communication.
So for inside users to communicate with the outside base
station, the signals will have to travel through the walls of
the indoors, and this will result in very high penetration loss,
which correspondingly costs with reduced spectral efﬁciency,
data rate, and energy efﬁciency of wireless communications.
To overcome this challenge, a new idea or designing tech-
nique that has come in to existence for scheming the
5G cellular architecture is to distinct outside and inside
setups [8]. With this designing technique, the penetration loss
through the walls of the building will be slightly reduced.
This idea will be supported with the help of massive MIMO
technology [15], in which geographically dispersed array
of antenna’s are deployed which have tens or hundreds of
antenna units. Since present MIMO systems are using either
two or four antennas, but the idea of massive MIMO systems
has come up with the idea of utilizing the advantages of large
array antenna elements in terms of huge capacity gains.
To build or construct a large massive MIMO network,
ﬁrstly the outside base stations will be ﬁtted with large
antenna arrays and among them some are dispersed around
the hexagonal cell and linked to the base station through
optical ﬁber cables, aided with massive MIMO technologies.
The mobile users present outside are usually ﬁtted with a
certain number of antenna units but with cooperation a large
virtual antenna array can be constructed, which together with
antenna arrays of base station form virtual massive MIMO
links. Secondly, every building will be installed with large
antenna arrays from outside, to communicate with outdoor
base stations with the help of line of sight components.
The wireless access points inside the building are connected
with the large antenna arrays through cables for communi-
cating with indoor users. This will signiﬁcantly improves
the energy efﬁciency, cell average throughput, data rate, and
spectral efﬁciency of the cellular system but at the expense
of increased infrastructure cost. With the introduction of
such an architecture, the inside users will only have to
connect or communicate with inside wireless access points
while larger antenna arrays remained installed outside the
buildings [8]. For indoor communication, certain technolo-
gies like WiFi, Small cell, ultra wideband, millimeter wave
communications [16], and visible light communications [17]
1208
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
FIGURE 2. 5G challenge, facilitators, and design fundamental [20].
are useful for small range communications having large data
rates. But technologies like millimeter wave and visible light
communication are utilizing higher frequencies which are not
conventionally used for cellular communications. But it is
not an efﬁcient idea to use these high frequency waves for
outside and long distance applications because these waves
VOLUME 3, 2015
1209

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 1. Technical comparison between recent 802.11 standards.
will not inﬁltrate from dense materials efﬁciently and can
easily be dispersed by rain droplets, gases, and ﬂora. Though,
millimeter waves and visible light communications technolo-
gies can enhance the transmission data rate for indoor setups
because they have come up with large bandwidth. Along
with the introduction of new spectrum, which is not being
conventionally used for wireless communication, there is one
more method to solve the spectrum shortage problem by
improving the spectrum utilization of current radio spectra
through cognitive radio (CR) networks [18].
Since the 5G cellular architecture is heterogeneous, so it
must include macrocells, microcells, small cells, and relays.
A mobile small cell concept is an integral part of 5G wireless
cellular network and partially comprises of mobile relay and
small cell concepts [19]. It is being introduced to put up
high mobility users, which are inside the automobiles and
high speed trains. Mobile small cells are positioned inside the
moving automobiles to communicate with the users inside
the automobile, while the massive MIMO unit consisting
of large antenna arrays is placed outside the automobile to
communicate with the outside base station. According to
user’s opinion, a mobile small cell is realized as a regular
base station and its allied users are all observed as a single
unit to the base station which proves the above idea of
splitting indoor and outdoor setups. Mobile small cell
users [19] have a high data rate for data rate services with
considerably reduced signaling overhead, as shown in [8].
As the 5G wireless cellular network architecture consists
of only two logical layers: a radio network and a network
cloud. Different types of components performing different
functions are constituting the radio network. The network
function virtualization (NFV) cloud consists of a User plane
entity (UPE) and a Control plane entity (CPE) that per-
form higher layer functionalities related to the User and
Control plane, respectively. Special network functionality as
a service (XaaS) will provide service as per need, resource
pooling is one of the examples. XaaS is the connection
between a radio network and a network cloud [20].
The
5G
cellular
network
architecture
is
explained
in [8] and [20]. It has equal importance in terms of front
end and backhaul network respectively. In this paper, a
general 5G cellular network architecture has been proposed
as shown in Fig. 3. It describes the interconnectivity
among the different emerging technologies like Massive
MIMO network, Cognitive Radio network, mobile and
static small-cell networks. This proposed architecture also
explains the role of network function virtualization (NFV)
cloud in the 5G cellular network architecture. The concept
of Device to Device (D2D) communication, small cell access
points and Internet of things (IoT) has also been incorporated
in this proposed 5G cellular network architecture. In general,
this proposed 5G cellular network architecture may provide
a good platform for future 5G standardization network.
But there are several issues that need to be addressed in
order to realize the wireless network architecture in partic-
ular, and 5G networks in general. Some of these issues are
summarized in Table. 3 [20].
IV. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR
5G WIRELESS NETWORKS
It is expected that mobile and wireless trafﬁc volume will
increase a thousand-fold over the next decade which will
be driven by the expected 50 billion connected devices con-
nected to the cloud by 2020 and all need to access and share
data, anywhere and anytime. With a rapid increase in the num-
ber of connected devices, some challenges appear which will
be responded by increasing capacity and by improving energy
efﬁciency, cost and spectrum utilization as well as providing
1210
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 2. Evolution of wireless technologies.
better scalability for handling the increasing number of the
connected devices. For the vision of all-communicating world
relative to today’s network, the overall technical aim is to
provide a system idea that supports [21]:
• 1000 times increased data volume per area
• 10 to 100 times increased number of connected devices
• 10 to 100 times increased typical user data rate
• 10 times extended battery life for low power Massive
Machine Communication (MMC) devices
• 5 times reduced End-to-End (E2E) latency
In this paper, we will cover a wide area of technologies
with a lot of technical challenges arises due to a variety
of applications and requirements of the user. To provide a
common connected platform for a variety of applications and
requirements for 5G, we will research the below technology
components [21]:
• Radio-links, includes the development of new transmis-
sion waveforms and new approaches of multiple access
control and radio resource management.
• Multi-node and multi-antenna transmissions, includes
designing of multi-antenna transmission/reception tech-
nologies based on massive antenna conﬁgurations and
developing advanced inter-node coordination schemes
and multi-hop technologies.
VOLUME 3, 2015
1211

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
FIGURE 3. A general 5G cellular network architecture.
• Network dimension, includes considering the demand,
trafﬁc and mobility management, and novel approaches
for efﬁcient interference management in complex
heterogeneous deployments.
• Spectrum
usage,
includes
considering
extended
spectrum band of operation, as well as operation in new
spectrum regimes to provide a complete system concept
for new spectrum regimes that carefully addresses the
needs of each usage scenario.
Now the topics which will integrate a subset of the
technology components and provides the solution of some of
the goals which are identiﬁed earlier are [21]:
• Device-to-Device (D2D) communications refers to
direct communication between devices allowing local
exchange of user plane trafﬁc without going through a
network infrastructure.
• Massive Machine Communications (MMC) will form
the basis of the Internet of Things with a wide range
of application ﬁelds including the automotive industry,
public
safety,
emergency
services
and
medical
ﬁeld.
• Moving Networks (MN) will enhance and extend
linking together potentially large populations of jointly
moving communication devices.
• Ultra-dense Networks (UDN) will be the main driver
whose goals are to increase capacity, increase energy
efﬁciency of radio links, and enable better exploitation
of under-utilized spectrum.
• Ultra-reliable Networks (URN) will enable high
degrees of availability.
In this section, we identify several technologies, ranked in
perceived importance, which will be crucial in future wireless
standards.
A. MASSIVE MIMO
Massive MIMO is an evolving technology that has been
upgraded from the current MIMO technology. The Massive
MIMO system uses arrays of antenna containing few hundred
antennas which are at the same time in one time, frequency
slot serving many tens of user terminals. The main objective
of Massive MIMO technology is to extract all the beneﬁts
of MIMO but on a larger scale. In general, massive MIMO
is an evolving technology of Next generation networks,
which is energy efﬁcient, robust, and secure and spectrum
efﬁcient [24].
Massive MIMO depends on spatial multiplexing, which
further depends on the base station to have channel state
information, both on the uplink as well as on the downlink.
In case of downlink, it is not easy, but in case of uplink,
it is easy, as the terminals send pilots. On the basis of
pilots, the channel response of each terminal is estimated.
In conventional MIMO systems, the base station sends the
pilot waveforms to the terminals and based on these, the
terminal estimate the channel, quantize it and feedback them
to the base station. This process is not viable for mas-
sive MIMO systems, especially in high mobility conditions
because of two reasons. Firstly the downlink pilots from the
base station must be orthogonal among the antennas, due
to which the requirement of time, frequency slots for the
downlink pilots increases with the increase in the number
1212
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 3. Small cell setup options and concern [20].
of antennas. So Massive MIMO systems would now require
a large number of similar slots as compared to the con-
ventional MIMO system. Secondly, as the number of base
station antennas increases the number of the channel esti-
mates also increases for each terminal which in turn needed
hundred times more uplink slots to feedback the channel
responses to the base station. A general solution to this prob-
lem is to work in Time Division Duplexing (TDD) mode
and depend on the reciprocity amid the uplink and downlink
channels [25].
Massive MIMO technology depends on phase coherent
signals from all the antennas at the base station, but the
computational processing of these signals is simple. Below
are certain positives of a massive MIMO system [24]:
1) MASSIVE MIMO HAS THE CAPABILITY THAT IT CAN
IMPROVE THE RADIATED ENERGY EFFICIENCY BY
100 TIMES AND AT THE SAME TIME, INCREASES
THE CAPACITY OF THE ORDER OF 10 OR MORE
The positive of increase in capacity is because of the
spatial
multiplexing
technique
used
in
Massive
MIMO systems. Regarding the improvement in the radiated
energy efﬁciency, it is because of the increase in the number
of antennas, the energy can now be concentrated in small
regions in the space. It is based on the principle of coherent
superposition of wave fronts. After transmitting the shaped
signals from the antennas, the base station has no role to
play by conﬁrming that all the wave fronts that have been
emitted from the antennas possibly will add constructively at
the intended terminal’s locations and destructively elsewhere.
Zero forcing is used to suppress the remaining interfer-
ence between the terminals, but at the expense of increased
transmitted power [24].
The desirability of maximum ratio combining (MRC) is
more as related to Zero forcing (ZF) because of its com-
putational ease i.e. received signals are multiplied by their
conjugate channel responses and due to the reason that it is
executed in a dispersed mode, autonomously at every antenna
element. Though ZF also works equally well for an orthodox
MIMO system which MRC normally does not. The main
reason behind the efﬁcient use of the MRC with massive
MIMO involving large number of base station antennas, the
channel responses allied with different terminals tend to be
almost orthogonal.
With the use of MRC receiver, we are operating in a
noise restricted system. MRC in Massive MIMO system
will scale down the power to an extent possible deprived of
really upsetting the overall spectral efﬁciency and multiuser
interference, but the effects of hardware deﬁciencies are
likely to be overcome by the thermal noise. But the intention
behind the overall 10 times higher spectral efﬁciency as
compared to conventional MIMO is because 10 times more
terminals are served concurrently in the same time frequency
resource [26].
VOLUME 3, 2015
1213

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
2) MASSIVE MIMO SYSTEMS CAN BE PUT TOGETHER
WITH THE HELP OF LOW POWER AND
LESS COSTLY COMPONENTS
Massive
MIMO
has
come
up
with
a
change
with
respect
to
concept,
schemes
and
execution.
Massive
MIMO systems use hundreds of less expensive ampliﬁers in
respect to expensive ultra-linear 50 Watt ampliﬁers because
earlier are having an output power in the milliwatt range,
which is much better than the latter which are generally
being used in conventional systems. It is dissimilar to con-
ventional array schemes, as it will use only a little antenna’s
that are being fed from high power ampliﬁers but having a
notable impact. The most signiﬁcant improvement is about
the removal of a large number of expensive and massive items
like large coaxial cables [24].
With the use of a large number of antennas in massive
MIMO technology the noise, fading and hardware deﬁcits
will be averaged because signals from a large number of
antennas are combined together in the free space. It condenses
the limits on precision and linearity of every single ampliﬁer
and radio frequency chain and altogether what matters is
their collective action. This will increase the robustness of
massive MIMO against fading and failure of one of the
antenna elements.
A massive MIMO system has degrees of freedom in excess.
For example, with 100 antennas, 10 terminals are showing
presence while the remaining 90 degrees of freedom are
still available. These available degrees of freedom can be
exploited by using them for signal shaping which will be
hardware friendly. Speciﬁcally, each antenna with the use of
very cheap and power proﬁcient radio frequency ampliﬁers
can transmit signals having small peak to average ratio [27]
and constant envelope [28] at a modest price of increased total
radiated power. With the help of constant envelope multiuser
precoding, the signals transmitted from each antenna are
neither being formed in terms of beam nor by weighing of
a symbol. Rather, a wave ﬁeld is created and sampled with
respect to the location of the terminals and they can see
precisely the signals what we intended to make them see.
Massive MIMO has a vital property which makes it possible.
The massive MIMO channel has large null spaces in which
nearly everything can be engaged without disturbing the
terminals. Precisely modules can be placed into this null
space that makes the transmitted waveforms fulﬁll the
preferred envelope restraints. Nevertheless, the operative
channels amid the base station and every terminal, can be
proceeded without the involvement of PSK type modulation
and can take any signal constellation as input [24].
The considerable improvement in the energy efﬁciency
facilitates massive MIMO systems to work two steps of lower
magnitude than with existing technology on the total output
RF power. This is important because the cellular base stations
are consuming a lot of power and it is an area of concern.
In addition, if base stations that consume less power could be
driven by renewable resources like solar or wind and therefore
it is helpful to deploy base stations to the places where
electricity is not available. Along with this, the increased
concerns of electromagnetic exposure will be considerably
less.
3) MASSIVE MIMO PERMITS A SUBSTANTIAL DECREASE
IN LATENCY ON THE AIR INTERFACE
Latency is the prime area of concern in the next generation
networks. In wireless communication, the main cause of
latency is fading. This phenomenon occurs amid the base
station and terminal, i.e. when the signal is transmitted from
the base station, it travels through different multiple paths
because of the phenomenon’s like scattering, reﬂection and
diffraction before it reaches the terminal. When the signal
through these multiple paths reaches the terminal it will inter-
fere either constructively or destructively, and the case when
following waves from these multiple paths interfere destruc-
tively, the received signal strength reduces to a considerable
low point. If the terminal is caught in a fading dip, then it has
to wait for the transmission channel to change until any data
can be received. Massive MIMO, due to a large number of
antennas and with the idea of beam forming can avoid fading
dips and now latency cannot be further decreased [24].
4) MASSIVE MIMO MAKES THE MULTIPLE
ACCESS LAYER SIMPLE
With the arrival of Massive MIMO, the channel strength-
ens and now frequency domain scheduling is not enough.
OFDM provides, each subcarrier in a massive MIMO system
with considerably the same channel gain due to which each
and every terminal can be provided with complete bandwidth,
which reduces most of the physical layer control signaling
terminated [24].
5) MASSIVE MIMO INCREASES THE STRENGTH EQUALLY
AGAINST UNINTENDED MAN MADE INTERFERENCE
AND INTENDED JAMMING
Jamming of the wireless systems of the civilian is a
prime area of concern and poses a serious threat to cyber
security. Owing to limited bandwidth, the distribution of
information over frequency just is not possible. Massive
MIMO offers the methods of improving robustness of
wireless communications with the help of multiple antennas.
It provides with an excess of degrees of freedom that can
be useful for canceling the signals from intended jammers.
If massive MIMO systems use joint channel estimation and
decoding instead of uplink pilots for channel estimation,
then the problem from the intended jammers is considerably
reduced [24].
The advantages of massive MIMO systems can be
reviewed from an information theoretic point of view.
Massive MIMO systems can obtain the promising multi-
plexing gain of massive point to point MIMO systems,
while eliminating problems due to unfavorable propagation
environments [29].
1214
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
Let us study a massive MIMO system having L cells, where
every cell has K attended single antenna users and one base
station with N antennas. hi,k,l,n represent the channel coefﬁ-
cient from the k-th user in the l-th cell to the n-th antenna of
the i-th base station, which is equivalent to a complex small
scale fading factor time an amplitude factor that interprets for
geometric attenuation and large-scale fading:
hi,k,l,n = gi,k,l,n
p
di,k,l
(1)
Where gi,k,l,n and di,k,l represent complex small scale fad-
ing and large scale fading coefﬁcients, respectively. The small
scale fading coefﬁcients are implicit to be diverse for diverse
users or for diverse antennas at every base station though
the large scale fading coefﬁcients are the same for diverse
antennas at the same base station, but are user dependent.
Then, the channel matrix from all K users in the l-th cell to
the i-th base station can be expressed as
Hi,l =


hi,1,l,1
· · ·
hi,K,l,1
...
...
...
hi,1,l,N
· · ·
hi,K,l,N

= Gi,lD1/2
i,l
(2)
Where
Gi,l =


gi,1,l,1
· · ·
gi,K,l,1
...
...
...
gi,1,l,N
· · ·
gi.K,l,N


(3)
Di,c =


di,1,l
· · ·
. . .
...
...
...
. . .
· · ·
di.K,l


(4)
Let us study a single cell (L = 1) massive MIMO system
with K singled antenna users and a base station with
N antennas. For ease, the cell and the base station indices are
plunged when single cell systems are deliberated [29].
a: UPLINK
The received signal vector at a single base station for uplink
signal transmission is denoted as yu ∈CN∗1, can be stated as:
yu = √ρuHxu + nu
(5)
where xu ∈CK∗1 is the signal vector from all users,
H ∈CN∗K is the uplink channel matrix deﬁned in (2) by
reducing the cell and the base station indices, nu ∈CN∗1 is
a zero mean noise vector with complex Gaussian distribution
and identity covariance matrix, and ρu is the uplink transmit
power. The transmitted symbol from the k-th user, xu
k , is the
k-th element of xu = [xu
1, . . . ., xu
K]T with [|xu
k |2] = 1.
The column channel vectors from diverse users are asymp-
totically orthogonal as the number of antennas at the base
station, N, grows to inﬁnity by supposing that the small
scale fading coefﬁcients for diverse users is independent [30].
Then, we have
HHH = D1/2GHGD1/2 ≈ND1/2IKD1/2 = ND
(6)
An exhaustive debate about this result can be seen in [31].
Centered on the result in (6), the overall achievable rate of all
users come to be
C = log2 det(I + ρuHHH)
≈log2 det (I + NρuD)
=
K
X
k=1
log2 (1 + Nρudk)
bits
s
Hz
(7)
Capacity in (7) can be achieved at the base station by
simple MF processing. When MF processing is used, the
base station processes the signal vector by multiplying the
conjugate transpose of the channel, as
HHyu = HH  √ρuHxu + nu

≈N√ρuDxu + HHnu
(8)
where (6) is used. Note that the channel vectors are asymp-
totically orthogonal when the number of antennas at the base
station grows to inﬁnity. So, HH does not shade the noise.
Since D is a diagonal matrix, the MF processing splits the
signals from diverse users into diverse streams and there is
asymptotically no inter user interference. So now the signal
transmission can be treated as a SISO channel transmission
for each user. From (8), the signal to noise ratio (SNR) for the
k-th user is Nρudk. Subsequently, the attainable rate by using
MF is similar as the limit in (7), which indicates that simple
MF processing at the base station is best when the number of
antennas at the base station, N, grows to inﬁnity.
b: DOWNLINK
yd ∈CK∗1 can be denoted as the received signal vector at
all K users. Massive MIMO works properly in time division
duplexing (TDD) mode as discussed in [29], where the down-
link channel is the transpose of the uplink channel matrix.
Then, the received signal vector can be expressed as
yd = √ρdHT xd + nd
(9)
where xd ∈CN∗1 is the signal vector transmitted by the
base station, nd ∈CK∗1 is an additive noise and ρd is the
transmit power of the downlink. Let us assume, E[|xd|2] = 1
for normalizing transmitting power.
As discussed in [29], the base station usually has channel
state information equivalent to all users based on uplink pilot
transmission. So, it is likely for the base station to do power
allocation for maximizing the sum transmission rate. The sum
capacity of the system with power allocation is [32]
C = max
p
log2 det(IN + ρdHPHH)
≈max
p
log2 det (IK + ρdNPD)
bits
s
Hz
(10)
where (6) is used and P is a positive diagonal matrix with
the power allocations (p1, . . . .., pk) as its diagonal elements
and PK
k=1 pk = 1
If the MF precoder is used, the transmitted signal vector is
xd = H ∗D−1/2P1/2sd
(11)
VOLUME 3, 2015
1215

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
where sd ∈CK∗1 is the source information vector. Then,
the received signal vector at all K users is
yd = √ρdHT H∗D−1/2P1/2sd + nd
≈√ρdND1/2P1/2sd + nd
(12)
where the second line of (12) is for the case when the
number of antennas at the base station, N, grows to inﬁnity,
and (6) is used. Since P and D are both diagonal matrices so
the signal transmission from the base station to every user can
be treated as if initiating from a SISO transmission which thus
inhibited the inter user interference. The overall attainable
data rate in (12) can be maximized by proper choice of the
power allocation as in (10), which validates that the capacity
can be attained using the simple MF precoder.
According to the auspicious propagation assumption of (6),
the simple MF precoder or detector can attain the capacity of
a massive MIMO system when the number of antennas at the
base station, N, is much larger than the number of users, K,
and grows to inﬁnity, i.e., N ≫K and N →∞. Another
scenario assumption is that both the number of antennas at
the base station and the number of users grows large while
their ratio is bounded, i.e., N/K = c as N, K →∞, where c
is a constant, are different [35].
The main area of concern in today’s wireless cellular
network is on energy efﬁciency and power optimization.
So a lot of researchers are working on to increase the energy
efﬁciency and optimizing the power. The work done on
power optimization in [33] has been realized and shown
in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4 clearly shows that if we increase the number of
antennas at the base station as well as on the small cell access
point, the total power per subcarrier decreases to 10 fold as
compare to the case of no antenna at small cell access point.
FIGURE 4. Average total power consumption in the scenario containing
small cell access points.
However, there are saturation points where extra hardware
will not decrease the total power anymore.
With the introduction of the concept of small cell access
point, it will fulﬁll the need of self organizing network (SON)
technology for minimizing human intervention in the
networking processes as given in [36] and [37]. While a brief
summary of the work done on the massive MIMO technology
to increase the energy efﬁciency and optimizing the power of
the wireless cellular network is shown in Table 4.
B. INTERFERENCE MANAGEMENT
For efﬁcient utilization of limited resources, reuse is one
of the concept that is being used by many speciﬁcations
of cellular wireless communication systems. Along with
this, for improved trafﬁc capacity and user throughput
TABLE 4. Effect of massive MIMO technology on energy efficiency of the wireless cellular network.
1216
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
densiﬁcation of the network is one of the key aspect. So with
the introduction of reuse and densiﬁcation concept, there
will be an additional enhancement in terms of efﬁcient load
sharing between macro cells and local access networks. But
all these advantages have come up with a problem that the
density and load of the network have increased considerably
and correspondingly receiver terminals in the network suffer
from increased co-channel interference, mainly at the bound-
aries of cells. Thus co-channel interference poses a threat
which is inhibiting the further improvement of 4G cellular
systems.
Hence
the
need
for
efﬁcient
interference
management schemes is vital. Below are the two interference
management techniques [38]:
1) ADVANCED RECEIVER
Modern day and growing cellular system, interference grow
as a big threat, so to mitigate or manage interference, an
appropriate interference management technique is the need of
the hour. Advanced interference management at the receiver,
or an advanced receiver is the technique which will somewhat
help in interference management. It will detect and even
try to decode the symbols of the interference signal within
the modulation constellation, coding scheme, channel, and
resource allocation. Then based on the detector output, the
interference signals can be reconstructed and cancelled from
the received signal so as to improve the anticipated signal
decoding performance [38].
Advanced receivers not only limits to inter cell interference
at the cell boundaries, but also intra cell interference as in
the case of massive MIMO. According to LTE-Advanced
Release 10, every base station transmitter has been equipped
with up to eight antennas which will call for intra cell
interference, as the number of antenna’s increases. [38].
2) JOINT SCHEDULING
In LTE standard, Releases 8 and 9, interference random-
ization through scrambling of transmitting signals is the
only interference management strategies that were con-
sidered and there were no advanced co-channel interfer-
ence management strategies. But in 3GPP LTE-Advanced,
Release 10 and 11, through probability readings, it was
realized that there was a space for additional performance
improvement at the cell edges with the help of synchronized
transmission among multiple transmitters dispersed over
different cell sites [38].
For calibrating the development, some typical coordinated
multipoint
schemes,
like
to
coordinate
scheduling,
coordinated beam forming, dynamic point selection, and joint
transmission, were normally conferred [38].
In the article [38], joint scheduling is broadly used to refer
advanced interference management of cellular systems and
link variation from the network side. But as in coordinated
multipoint schemes, the transmission rates and schemes of
multiple cells are not autonomously determined. In the case
of fast network distribution and interoperability, advanced
interference management schemes by joint scheduling from
the network side need to be stated in detail in the 5G systems,
without separating it entirely as an employment issue. For
attracting maximum coordination, the user equipment and
network side, advanced interference management must be
deliberated instantaneously [38].
C. SPECTRUM SHARING
To apprehend the performance targets of future mobile
broadband systems [22], [39], there is a need of considerably
more spectrum and wider bandwidths as compared to the
current available spectrum for realizing the performance.
So to overcome this difﬁculty, spectrum will be made avail-
able under horizontal or vertical spectrum sharing systems.
The signiﬁcance of spectrum sharing is probable to
increase, dedicated licensed spectrum access is expected to
remain the baseline approach for mobile broadband which
provides reliability and investment certainty for cellular
mobile broadband systems. Network components using joint
spectrum are likely to play a balancing role [40].
There are mainly two spectrum sharing techniques
that enable mobile broadband systems to share spectrum
and
are
classiﬁed
as
distributed
solutions
and
centralized solutions [40]. In a distributed solution the
systems coordinate amid each other on an equal basis while
in a centralized solution each system coordinates discretely
with a central unit and the systems do not directly interact
with each other.
1) DISTRIBUTED SPECTRUM SHARING TECHNIQUES
Distributed spectrum sharing techniques is more efﬁcient as
it can take place in a local framework. Its principle is to
only manage those transmissions that really create interfer-
ence amid systems. Distributed coordination can be entirely
included into standards and thus they can work without the
need for commercial contracts between operators [40].
The
management
of
horizontal
spectrum
sharing
happens through the clear exchange of messages unswerv-
ingly between the sharing systems through a distinct interface
in a peer to peer coexistence protocol. This protocol describes
the performance of the nodes on the receiving of certain
messages or taking place of certain events. An example of
this is explained in [41].
The systems frequently transmit generally understood
signals that will show presence, activity factor and the time
when they will transmit in a coexistence beacon based solu-
tions. The information that is available openly can be used by
the other systems to adjust their spectrum access performance
for providing fair spectrum sharing. Coexistence beacons
are possibly the solution for both, horizontal and vertical
sharing setups. An example of its implementation is the
802.22.1 standard [42].
MAC behavior based schemes uses a MAC protocol which
is designed to allow horizontal spectrum sharing. Bluetooth
using frequency hopping and WLAN systems using request
to send/clear to send functionality are some of the exam-
ples. For an even horizontal coexistence with Wi-Fi systems,
a Wi-Fi coexistence mode is adapted. The MAC protocol may
VOLUME 3, 2015
1217

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
leave silent periods for Wi-Fi systems to operate and use a
listen before talk method which allows Wi-Fi systems to gain
access to the channel.
In Spectrum sensing and dynamic frequency selection,
operating frequency range is dynamically selected on the
basis of measurement results like energy detection or feature
detection. To detect the aforementioned coexistence beacons,
feature detection is highly useful. Due to a hidden node
problem, this method is not considered as a very dependable
method [40].
2) CENTRALIZED SPECTRUM SHARING TECHNIQUES
The Centralized spectrum sharing technique is useful for the
systems that have granularity of spectrum sharing on a higher
level than the actual radio resource allocation granularity.
This technique has some restraints, as it is conservative and
possibly separate users on orthogonal resources without com-
plete information on whether they would actually interfere or
not. While the beneﬁts are in terms of reliability, certainty and
control.
Geo-location database method is an example of a
centralized sharing technique which involves the querying of
a database to obtain information about the resources available
at a particular location [43]. This is the required classical
vertical sharing solution for accessing the locally unused
TV bands [44].
The spectrum broker approach is one of the example of a
centralized sharing technique in which horizontally sharing
systems negotiate with a central resource management unit
for getting short term grants to use spectrum resources on a
limited basis [45].
Both
the
Geo-location
database
and
the
spectrum
broker approach may additionally support horizontal sharing
between unlicensed systems [40].
However, along with the two above spectrum sharing
techniques most easily usable spectrum bands have also been
allocated, but various studies have revealed that these bands
are signiﬁcantly underutilized. These concerns have driven
the researchers to innovate a new radio technology which
will encounter with the upcoming demands both in terms of
spectrum efﬁciency and performance of certain applica-
tions. To encounter the demand of the future, a disruptive
technology revolution that will empower the future wireless
world is Cognitive Radio. Cognitive radios are completely
programmable wireless devices and has an extensive adap-
tation property for achieving better network and application
performance. It can sense the environment and dynamically
performs adaptation in the networking protocols, spectrum
utilization methods, channel access methods and transmis-
sion waveform used. It is expected that cognitive radio tech-
nology will soon arise as a general purpose programmable
radio. Similar to the role of microprocessors in the computa-
tion, cognitive radio will also serve as a universal platform for
wireless system expansion. But the task of successfully build-
ing and large scale deployment of cognitive radio networks
to dynamically improve spectrum use is an intricate task.
It is an area of concern that the academic researchers and the
industry in this area has reached a point of fading returns.
Its future will now depend on the multi institutional research
teams that are working on a new approach with real world
experimental deployments of cognitive radio networks [46].
D. DEVICE TO DEVICE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
Device to Device Communication system can be explained
by visualizing a two level 5G cellular network and named
them as macro cell level and device level. The macro cell level
comprises of the base station to device communications as in
an orthodox cellular system. The device level comprises of
device to device communications. If a device links the cellular
network through a base station, then it will be operating in
the macro cell level and if a device links directly to another
device or apprehends its transmission through the support of
other devices, then it will be on the device level. In these types
of systems, the base stations will persist to attend the devices
as usual. But in the congested areas and at the cell edges, an
ad hoc mesh network is created and devices will be permitted
to communicate with each other [47].
In the insight of device level communications, the base
station either have full or partial control over the resource
allocation amid source, destination, and relaying devices,
or not have any control. Thus, we can describe the
subsequent four main types of device-level communications
(Figs. 5-8) [47]:
FIGURE 5. Device relaying communication with base station controlled
link formation.
1) DEVICE RELAYING WITH BASE STATION
CONTROLLED LINK FORMATION
This type of communication is applicable for a device which
is at the edge of a cell, i.e. in the coverage area which
1218
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
FIGURE 6. Direct device to device communication with base station
controlled link formation.
FIGURE 7. Device relaying communication with device controlled link
formation.
have poor signal strength. In this type of communication, the
devices will communicate with the base station by relaying
their information through other devices.
This type of communication will be helpful for the
device to attain a higher quality of service and respective
increased battery life. For partial or full control link
formation, the base station communicates with the relaying
devices.
FIGURE 8. Direct device to device communication with device controlled
link formation.
2) DIRECT DEVICE TO DEVICE COMMUNICATION WITH
BASE STATION CONTROLLED LINK FORMATION
In this type of communication, the source and destination
devices are exchanging data with each other without the
involvement of a base station, but they are supported by the
base station for link formation.
3) DEVICE RELAYING WITH DEVICE
CONTROLLED LINK FORMATION
In this type of communication, a base station is neither
involved in link formation nor for communication purpose.
So, source and destination devices are totally responsible for
synchronizing communication using relays amid each other.
4) DIRECT DEVICE TO DEVICE COMMUNICATION
WITH DEVICE CONTROLLED LINK FORMATION
In this type of communication, the source and destination
devices have direct communication with each other and the
link formation is controlled itself by the devices without any
assistance from the base station. Hence, the resource should
be utilized by the source and destination devices in a way
to certify limited interference with other devices in the same
level and the macro cell level.
For a substantial advancement in excess of traditional
cellular system architecture, a dualistic cellular system should
be designed. For introducing the concept of device to device
communication, some technical issues needs to be addressed
like security and interference management issues [47].
As in device to device communication, the routing of user
data is through the devices of the other users, so the main
area of concern is about security because the privacy need
to be maintained. Closed access will ensure their security
for the devices that want to operate in the device level.
VOLUME 3, 2015
1219

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
In closed access, a device has a list of certain reliable devices,
like the users in the close vicinity or ofﬁce to whom you are
familiar with, otherwise the users that have been legitimated
through a reliable party like an association, can unswervingly
communicate with each other, sustaining a level of discretion,
whereas the devices not on this list need to use the macro
cell level to communicate with it. Also to prevent divulging
of their information to other devices in a group, one can
set an appropriate encryption amongst one another. Instead
of this, in open access, each device can turn in to relay for
other devices deprived of any limits. Meanwhile, in such
an instance security is an open research problem. Security
problems in device to device communication contain the
empathy of possible attacks, threats, and weakness of the
system. To discourse security problems in open access device
to device, the research on the security problems of machine
to machine communication [48]–[52] can be utilized.
Second technical issue of a dualistic system that need to be
addressed is of interference management. In device relaying
communication with the base station controller and direct
device to device communication with base station controlled,
the base station can execute the resource allocation and call
setup process. So, the base station, to a certain degree can
ease the problem of interference management by using cen-
tralized methods. But in device relaying communication with
device controller and direct device to device communication
with device controller, resource allocation between devices
will not be supervised by the centralized unit. Devices will
unavoidably effect macro cell users because they are working
in the same licensed band. So to conﬁrm the nominal effect
on the performance of prevailing macro cell base stations, a
dualistic network needs to be considered that involves differ-
ent interference management techniques and resource alloca-
tion schemes. In addition to the interference amid the macro
cell and device levels, interference amid users at the device
level is also of prime concern. For performing the resource
allocation in this type of communication, different algorithms
as shown in table 4 and methods like resource pooling [53],
non-cooperative game [54] or bargaining game, admission
control and power allocation [55], cluster partitioning, and
relay selection [56] can be engaged.
In device relaying communication with the base station
controller, as shown in Fig. 5, since the base station is one
of the communicating units, so the aforementioned chal-
lenges can be addressed with the help of the base station
like authenticating the relaying devices through encryption
for maintaining adequate privacy of the information of the
devices [57]. The challenge of spectrum allocation amid the
relaying devices to prevent them from interfering with other
devices will also be managed by the base station.
In direct device to device communication with base station
controlled, shown in Fig. 6, the devices communicate directly
with each other, but the base station controls the formation of
links between them. Precisely, the work of the base station is
to authenticate the access, control the connection formation,
resource allocation, and also deals with ﬁnancial interaction
amid devices. Basically the base station has complete control
over the device to device connections, like connection setup
and maintenance, and resource allocation. Since device to
device connections share the cellular licensed band in the
device level with the regular cellular connections in the macro
cell level. So for assigning resources to every device to device
connection, the network can either assign resources in an
identical manner as a regular cellular connection or in the
form of a dedicated resource pool to all devices to device
connections [47].
In device relaying communication with device controller
and direct device to device communication with device con-
troller, there is no base station to control the communication
amid devices. As shown in Figs. 7 and 8, several devices are
communicating with each other by using supportive or non-
supportive communication by playing the role of relays for
the other devices. Since there is no centralized supervision of
the relaying, so distributed methods will be used for processes
like connection setup, interference management, and resource
allocation. In this type of communication, two devices need
to ﬁnd each other and the neighboring relays ﬁrst by periodi-
cally broadcasting their identity information. This will aware
the other devices of their presence and then they will decide
whether or not to start a device to device direct or device
relaying communication [53].
Now to know the effect of relay’s, let us study a system
model for relay aided device to device communication [58]
as shown in Fig. 9. For studying it, let us consider that
the cellular user equipment eNodeB links are unfavorable
for direct communication and need the assistance of relays.
The device to device user equipment’s are also supported by
the relay nodes due to long distance or poor link condition
between peers.
FIGURE 9. A single cell with multiple relay nodes.
a: NETWORK MODEL
Let us consider a device to device enabled cellular network
with multiple relays as shown in Fig. 9. A relay node in
1220
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
4G (LTE-Advanced) is connected between the radio access
network and both the cellular and devices to the device user
equipment’s through a donor eNodeB with a wireless connec-
tion. Let L = {1, 2, . . . , L} represents the set of ﬁxed location
relays [57] in the network. The system bandwidth is divided
into N resource blocks denoted by N = {1, 2, . . . ., N}. Relay
node can be used for scheduling and resource allocation for
the device to device user equipment’s, when the link condition
between two devices to device user equipment’s is too poor
for direct communication. In addition, the direct communica-
tion between two devices to the device user equipment’s also
requires the aid of a relay node. Both cellular and device to
device user equipment’s assisted by relay ℓare denoted by uℓ.
The set of user equipment’s assisted by relay ℓis Uℓsuch that
Uℓ⊆{C ∪D}, ∀ℓ∈L, S
ℓUℓ= {C ∪D}, and T
ℓUℓ= ∅.
In the second step of communication, there could be mul-
tiple relays communicating to their related device to device
user equipment’s. According to our assumed system model,
relays are useful for scheduling and resource allocation for
the user equipment’s to reduce the computational load at the
eNodeB [58].
b: RADIO PROPAGATION MODEL
For realizing and exhibiting the propagation channel,
distance dependent path loss and shadow fading are consid-
ered and assumed that the channel is experiencing Rayleigh
fading. Particularly, 3GPP propagation environment pre-
sented in [60] is considered. For example, link between user
equipment and relay or between relays and device to device
follows the following path loss equation
PLul,l(l)[dB] = 103.8 + 20.9 log (l) + Lsu + 10 log (ζ)
(13)
Where l is the distance between user equipment and relay
in kilometer, Lsu is interpreted as shadow fading and is
demonstrated as a log normal random variable, and ζ is an
exponentially distributed random variable which denotes the
rayleigh fading channel power gain. In the same way, the path
loss equation for the relay and eNodeB link is expressed as
PLl.eNodeB(l)[dB] = 100.7 + 23.5 log (l) + Lsr + 10 log (ζ)
(14)
Where Lsr is a log normal random variable accounting for
shadow fading. Hence, given the distance l, the link gain
between any pair of network nodes i, j can be calculated
as 10−(PLi,j(l)/10).
c: REALIZABLE DATA RATE
h(n)
i,j can be denoted as the direct link gain between node
i and j over resource block n. The interference link gain
between relay (user equipment) i and a user equipment (relay)
j over resource block n is denoted by g(n)
i,j where user equip-
ment (relay) j is not associated with relay (user equipment) i.
The unit power SINR for the link between user equipment
ul ∈Ul and relay l using resource block n in the ﬁrst hop is
given by
γ (n)
ul,l,1 =
h(n)
ul,l
P
∀uj∈Uj,j̸=l,j∈L P(n)
uj,jg(n)
uj,l + σ 2
(15)
The unit power SINR for the link between relay l and
eNodeB for cellular user equipment ul (i.e.,ul ∈{C ∩Ul)
in the second hop is as follows:
γ (n)
l,ul,2 =
h(n)
l,eNodeB
P
∀uj∈{D∩Uj},j̸=l,j∈L P(n)
j,ujg(n)
j,eNodeB + σ 2
(16)
In the same way, the unit power SINR for the link between
relay l and receiving device to device user equipment for the
device to device user equipment’s ul (i.e., ul∈{D ∩Ul) in the
second hop can be written as
γ (n)
l,ul,2 =
h(n)
l,ul
P
∀uj∈Uj,j̸=l,j∈L P(n)
j,ujg(n)
j,ul + σ 2
(17)
In (15)–(17), P(n)
i,j is the transmit power in the link between
i and j over resource block n, σ 2 = N0BRB, where BRB is
bandwidth of an resource block, and N0 denote thermal noise.
h(n)
l,eNodeB is the gain in the relay and eNodeB link and h(n)
l,ul is
the gain in the link between relay l and receiving device to
device user equipment corresponding to the device to device
transmitter user equipment’s ul.
The attainable data rate for ul in the ﬁrst hop can be
expressed as
r(n)
ul,1 = BRB log2 (1 + P(n)
ul,lγ (n)
ul,l,1)
In the same way, the attainable data rate in the second hop
is given by
r(n)
ul,2 = BRB log2 (1 + P(n)
l,ulγ (n)
l,ul,2)
Since we are considering a two hop communication
approach, the end to end data rate for ul on resource block n
is the half of the minimum attainable data rate over two
hops, i.e.,
R(n)
ul = 1
2min{r(n)
ul,1, r(n)
ul,2
(18)
The ongoing problem in device to device communication
is about Resource allocation. So a lot of researchers are
working on to propose an optimal resource allocation
algorithm. Table 5 will provide a brief summary on the
proposed algorithms.
E. ULTRA DENSE NETWORKS
To meet the increasing trafﬁc demands due to the increased
number of users, densiﬁcation of the infrastructure will be
the prior aspect of 5G communications. But for achieving
ultra-dense, heterogeneous networks will play an important
role. With the introduction of moving networks and ad-hoc
social networks, the heterogeneous networks are becoming
more dynamic. Though dense and dynamic heterogeneous
VOLUME 3, 2015
1221

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 5. Summary of proposed algorithms for optimal resource allocation in device to device communication.
networks will give rise to new challenges in terms of
interference, mobility and backhauling. To overcome these
challenges, there arises a requirement of designing new
network layer functionalities for maximizing the performance
farther from the design of the existing physical layer.
In present networks like Long Term Evolution (LTE),
there exists interference mitigation techniques like enhanced
Inter-Cell Interference Coordination and autonomous com-
ponent carrier selection. But these techniques are applica-
ble only to nomadic and dense small cell deployments and
have limited ﬂexibility. So for 5G networks, the interference
mitigation techniques should be more ﬂexible and open to
the variations as changes in the trafﬁc and deployment are
expected to occur more rapidly than existing networks [66].
With the introduction of smart wireless devices, the
interaction between these devices and with the environment
are destined to increase. To meet the challenges that have
arisen because of the increasing density of nodes and inter-
changing connectivity options, there arises a need of the
user independent algorithms. So future smart devices are
designed in such a way that with the help of the context
information, they will learn and decide how to manage the
connectivity. Contextual information possibly will be the
approaching service proﬁle, battery position of a device or a
complete data acquired through either in built sensors, cloud
servers or serving base station. For example, to enable faster
initialization of direct Device-to-Device communications and
native multicast group making, context information about the
1222
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
social networking will be very helpful as it will decrease the
signaling overhead in the network. Context information can
also provide sustenance for the network to decrease energy
consumption in base stations because of the switching of cells
by
improving
the
mobility
and
trafﬁc
management
procedures and local handover strictures [66].
In short, future smart devices and small cell networks
will be capable of providing the best wireless connectivity
with minimum interference and less power consumption.
Along with this, they should be rapidly adaptable to
the changing requirements of devices and radio access
network.
F. MULTI RADIO ACCESS TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION
As we are heading towards 5G, the networks are becoming
more heterogeneous. The main aspect that has attracted many,
is the integration among different radio access technologies.
A distinctive 5G aided device should be manufactured whose
radios not only support a new 5G standard like millimeter
wave frequencies, but also 3G, various releases of 4G LTE,
numerous types of WiFi, and possibly direct device to device
communication, all across the different spectral bands [67].
So, deﬁning of standards and utilization of spectrum to which
base station or users will be a really intricate job for the
network [68].
Deﬁning of the optimal user association is the prime
area of concern which depends on the signal to interfer-
ence and noise ratio from every single user to every single
base station, the selections of other users in the network,
the load at every single base station, and the prerequisite
to apply the same base station and standard in both uplink
and downlink for simplifying the operation of control
channels for resource allocation and feedback [69], [70].
So, certain procedures must be implemented to overcome
these issues.
To increase edge rates by as much as 500%, a simple,
apparently highly suboptimal association method centered
on aggressive but static biasing towards small cells and
blanking about half of the macrocell transmissions has been
shown in [71]. The combined problem of user association and
resource allocation in two tier heterogeneous networks, with
adaptive tuning of the biasing and blanking in each cell, is
considered in [69], [70], and [72]–[77]. A model of hotspot
trafﬁc shows that the optimal cell association is done by rate
ratio bias, instead of power level bias [73]–[75]. An active
model of cell range extension as shown in [79], the trafﬁc
arrives as a Poisson process in time and at the possible arrival
rates, for which a steadying scheduling policy subsists. With
massive MIMO at the base stations, user association and
load balancing in a heterogeneous networks, is considered
in [79]. An exciting game theoretic approach is used in [80]
for the problem of radio access technology selection, in which
union to Nash equilibria and the Pareto-efﬁciency of these
equilibria are deliberated [67].
In conclusion, there is a vast scope for modeling, exploring
and optimizing base station-user associations in 5G [81].
G. FULL DUPLEX RADIOS
For a long duration of communication period, it is assumed in
the wireless system design that radios have to operate in half
duplex mode. It means that it will not transmit and receive
simultaneously on the same channel. Many scholars, aca-
demics and researchers at different universities and research
groups have tried to undermine this assumption by proposing
many designs to build in-band full-duplex radios.
But the realization to build full duplex radio has a lot of
implications. The cellular networks will have to reduce their
spectrum demands to half as only a single channel is used
for achieving the same performance. As in LTE, for both
uplink and downlink, it uses equal width separate channels
for empowering radios to realize full duplex.
For communicating in the full duplex mode, the self-
interference results from its own transmission to the received
signal has to be completely removed. Let us consider the case
of WiFi signals which are transmitting at 20dBm (100mW)
average power with the noise ﬂoor of around −90dBm.
So the transmit self-interference need to be canceled by
110dB (20dBm-(−90dBm)) to achieve the similar level as of
the noise ﬂoor and reduce it to insigniﬁcant. If any residual
self-interference is not completely canceled, then it will acts
as noise to the received signal, which in turn reduces SNR
and subsequently throughput [82].
H. A MILLIMETER WAVE SOLUTION
FOR 5G CELLULAR NETWORK
The Wireless industry has been growing day by day and in
spite of the efforts by the industrial researchers for creating
the proﬁcient wireless technologies, the wireless industry
continuously facing the overpowering capacity demands from
its current technologies. Recent innovations in computing and
communications and the arrival of smart handsets along with
the need to access the internet poses new anxieties in front
of the wireless industry. These demands and anxieties will
grow in the approaching years for 4G LTE and indicates that
at some point around 2020, there will arise a problem of con-
gestion in wireless networks. It will be must for the research
industry to implement new technologies and architectures for
meeting the increasing demands of the users. The ongoing
work plans a wireless future in which data rates increase to
the multi gigabit per second range. These high data rates
can be attainable with the help of steerable antennas and the
millimeter wave spectrum and at the same time will support
mobile communications and backhaul networks [83].
Recent researches have put forward that mm-wave
frequencies of 2.6 GHz radio spectrum possibly will sup-
plement the presently saturated 700 MHz band for wireless
communications [84]. Feasibility of millimeter wave wireless
communications is supported by the fact that the use of high
gain, steerable antennas at the mobile and base station and
cost effective CMOS technology can now operate well into
the millimeter wave frequency bands [85]–[87]. Additionally,
with the use of millimeter wave carrier frequencies,
VOLUME 3, 2015
1223

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
larger bandwidth allocations will come up with higher data
transfer rates and service providers that are presently using
20 MHz channels for 4G customers will now signiﬁcantly
expand the channel bandwidths [87]. With the increase in
bandwidth, capacity will also get increased, while the latency
will get decreased, which give rise to better internet based
access and applications like real time streaming. Since the
wavelength of millimeter wave frequencies are very small,
so it will utilize polarization and different spatial processing
techniques
like
massive
MIMO
and
adaptive
beam-
forming [15]. With the signiﬁcant increase in bandwidth,
the data links to densely populated areas will now handle
greater capacity than present 4G networks. Likewise the base
stations are constantly reducing the coverage areas of the cell
for spatial reuse, cooperative MIMO, relays and interference
mitigation between base stations. Since the base stations are
abundant and more densely dispersed in urban areas, which
will reduce the cost per base station. Spectrum distributions
of over 1 GHz of bandwidth are currently being utilized in
the 28 GHz and 38 GHz bands.
By far as for the concern of building a prototype, the
antenna is essentially being positioned in very close vicinity
to the 28 GHz Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit and the
front end module because there will be high signal attenua-
tion at 28 GHz. Realizing the antenna array directly on the
printed circuit board of the 5G cellular device will minimize
the insertion loss between the antenna and Radio Frequency
Integrated Circuit. This infers that an employment of the
Radio Frequency blocks in the 5G architecture before the
intermediate frequency stage will be reliant on the placement
of the 28 GHz antenna array in the cellular phone. Taking
this concept into a thought, a minimum set of two 28 GHz
antenna arrays is proposed for millimeter wave 5G cellular
applications in [88], the two antenna arrays are employed
in the top and bottom part of the cellular device. The
28 GHz antenna array conﬁguration for 5G cellular mobile
terminals and its comparison with the 4G standard is given
in table 6.
TABLE 6. 28 GHz antenna array configuration for 5G cellular mobile
terminals and its comparison with the 4G standard.
The millimeter wave spectrum is under-utilized and is left
idle until present years. The main reason behind the under-
utilization is its unsuitability for cellular communications
because of unfriendly channel conditions like path loss effect,
absorption due to atmosphere and rain, small diffraction and
penetration about obstacles and through objects respectively.
There is one more reason of unsuitability is due to strong
phase noise and excessive apparatus costs. But the prevailing
reason is that the large unlicensed band around 60 GHz [89],
were appropriate primarily for very short range transmis-
sion [90]. So, the emphasis had been given to both ﬁxed
wireless applications in the 28, 38, 71–76 and 81–86 GHz
and WiFi with the 802.11ad standard in the 60 GHz band.
Semiconductors are also evolving, as their costs and power
consumption values are decreasing rapidly due to the growth
of the abovementioned short range standards. The main prop-
agation issues regarding millimeter wave propagation for 5G
cellular communication are [67]:
1) PATH LOSS
The free space path loss is dependent on the carrier frequency,
as the size of the antennas is kept constant which is measured
by the wavelength λ = c/fc, where fc is the carrier frequency.
Now as the carrier frequency increases, the size of the anten-
nas got reduced and their effective aperture increases with
the factor of λ2
4π , while the free space path loss between a
transmitter and a receiver antenna grows with f 2
c . So, if we
increase the carrier frequency fc from 3 to 30 GHz, it will
correspondingly add 20 dB of power loss irrespective of the
transmitter-receiver distance. But for increased frequency, if
the antenna aperture at one end of the link is kept constant,
then the free-space path loss remains unchanged. Addition-
ally, if both the transmitter and receiver antenna apertures
are kept constant, then the free space path loss decreases
with f 2
c [67].
2) BLOCKING
Microwave signals are less prone to blockages but it dete-
riorates due to diffraction. In the contrary, millimeter wave
signals suffer less diffraction than the microwave signals and
exhibit specular propagation, which makes them much more
vulnerable to blockages. This will fallout as nearly bimodal
channel subject to the existence or lack of Line of Sight.
Recent studies in [84] and [91] reveals that, with the increase
in the transmitter and receiver distance the path loss increases
to 20 dB/decade under Line of sight propagation, but descents
to 40 dB/decade plus an added blocking loss of 15–40 dB for
non-line of sight [67].
So due to the presence of blockages, the set connection will
promptly shift from usable to unusable which will results in
large scale impediments that cannot be avoided with typical
small scale diversity countermeasures.
3) ATMOSPHERIC AND RAIN ABSORPTION
Within the unlicensed 60-GHz band, the absorption due to
rain and air particularly the 15 dB/km oxygen absorption are
more perceptible. But these absorptions are insigniﬁcant for
the urban cellular deployments, where base station spacing’s
1224
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
might be on the order of 200 m. But actually, these type
of absorptions are useful as it will efﬁciently increase the
segregation of each cell by further attenuating the background
interference from more distant base stations [67].
So from the above explanation, it is inferred that the propa-
gation losses for millimeter wave frequencies are resolvable,
but only by steering the beam energy with the help of large
antenna arrays and then collect it coherently. But for practical
viability, the concept of narrow beam communication is fresh
for cellular communications and poses problems like:
a: LINK ACQUISITION
The main problem that the narrow beams are facing is in
establishing links amid users and base stations for both initial
access and handoff. The user and base stations will have
to locate each other by scanning lots of angular positions
where the possibility of a narrow beam is high. This problem
poses an important research challenge predominantly in the
perspective of high mobility [67].
b: NEED OF NEW TRANSCEIVER ARCHITECTURES
Wireless millimeter wave systems have gone through
signiﬁcant improvement but still there are some hardware
issues which will affect the designing of the communication
systems. The analog to digital and digital to analog con-
verters needed for large bandwidths are the prime cause of
power consumption. A prime reason of power consumption is
because of the use of large antenna arrays. Along with these,
high receiver sensitivities are needed to deal with the path loss
because it is not feasible that each antenna will be provided
with normal fully digital beam formers [67].
I. CLOUD TECHNOLOGIES FOR FLEXIBLE
5G RADIO ACCESS NETWORKS
1) MOBILE CLOUD COMPUTING
In the recent years, mobile cloud computing has earned a
lot of admiration as it is a coalition of many computing
ﬁelds. It offers computing, storage, services, and applications
over the Internet. It also reduces cost, disconnect services
from the existing technology, and offers ﬂexibility in terms
of resource provisioning. So mobile cloud computing can
be deﬁned as an incorporation of cloud computing tech-
nology with mobile devices. This integration will make the
mobile devices resource full in terms of computational power,
memory, storage, energy, and context awareness [92]. Mobile
cloud computing can also be explained with different con-
cepts of the mobile cloud [93].
In the ﬁrst method, let us consider that the other mobile
devices will also act as resource providers as in [95].
So the combined resources of the numerous mobile devices
and other available stationary devices in the local area will
be exploited as shown in Fig. 10. This method supports
user mobility and identiﬁes the potential of mobile clouds to
perform collective sensing.
The cloudlet concept proposed in [96] is the second
method of mobile cloud computing. This method is explained
FIGURE 10. Virtual resource cloud made up of mobile devices in the
vicinity.
FIGURE 11. A cloudlet enabling mobile devices to bypass latency and
bandwidth issues while benefitting from its resources.
FIGURE 12. Flexible functional split [103].
in Fig. 11, where a local cloudlet encompassed by numerous
multi core computers with connectivity to the remote cloud
servers is used by the mobile device to relieve from its work-
load. Plug Computers having form factor, diversity and low
power consumption can be considered as good contenders for
cloudlet servers. But these computers are ideal for small scale
VOLUME 3, 2015
1225

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
FIGURE 13. Characteristics of a radio access network as a service
implementation.
FIGURE 14. Number of Machine to Machine (M2M) connections in
mobile [105].
servers installed in the public organization because they have
the similar general architecture as a normal computer and are
less powerful, smaller, and less costly. Hence, these cloudlets
should be installed in public areas like restaurants so that
mobile devices can connect directly with the cloudlet instead
of a remote cloud server to remove latency and bandwidth
problems [93].
Mobile cloud computing follows the basic concepts of
cloud computing. There are some speciﬁc requirements that
need to be encountered in a cloud like adaptability, scalability,
availability and self-awareness as discussed in [94].
So mobile cloud computing should also fulﬁll these
requirements. For example, a mobile computing cloud
should be cognizant of its availability and dynamically plug
themselves in, depending on the requirements and workload.
An appropriate technique of self pretentious one’s own qual-
ity is desirable for mobile users to proﬁciently take advantage
of the cloud, as the internal status and the external environ-
ment is subject to change. Others facets like mobility, low
connectivity and limited source of power also needed to be
considered [93].
FIGURE 15. Machine to Machine traffic to increase 40-fold from
2010 to 2015.
FIGURE 16. Cell spectral efficiency in 5G networks [105].
FIGURE 17. Demand to delay in control and user planes for
4G/5G networks [105].
2) RADIO ACCESS NETWORK AS A SERVICE
Centralization is the prime objective of 5G mobile networks
because processing and management will need to be ﬂexible
and adapted to the actual service requirements. This will
lead to a compromise between the decentralized today’s net-
work and fully centralized cloud radio access network. This
compromise is addressed by the radio access network as a
1226
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 7. 5G related activities in Europe [109].
service concept, which partly centralizes functionalities of the
radio access network depending on the needs and character-
istics of the network. The Radio access network as a service
is an application of the software as a service paradigm [97],
so every function may be packed and distributed in the
form of a service within a cloud platform. This will cause
increased data storage and processing capabilities, as pro-
vided by a cloud platform accommodated in data centers. The
design of radio access network as a service based on cloud
enables ﬂexibility and adaptability from different percep-
tions. Recent advances in Cloud radio access network is given
in [98]–[102].
There is a ﬂexible functional split of the radio protocol
stacks as shown in Fig. 12 is present in the central element
of radio access network as a service between the central
radio access network as a service platform and the local radio
access points. With the introduction of this functional split,
degrees of freedom increases.
The left side demonstrates a traditional LTE employment
in which all functionalities up to admission/congestion con-
trol are locally employed at the base station. The right side
illustrates the cloud radio access network approach in which
only the radio front-end is locally employed, and all the rest
functionality is centralized. But radio access network as a
service does not fully centralize all radio access network
functionalities [103].
Functional split realization poses a serious challenge for
the radio access network. Theoretically, the functional split
occur on every protocol layer or on the interface amid each
layer. Present architecture involves restraints on the func-
tions between discrete protocol layers. So with a restrained
backhaul, most of the radio protocol stack and radio resource
management will accomplished locally, while functions with
less restrained requirements like bearer management and load
balancing are placed in the radio access network as a service
platform. So when a high capacity backhaul is available,
lower-layer functions like PHY and MAC are shifted for a
higher degree of centralization into the radio access network
as a service platform [103].
The following list as shown in Fig. 13 condenses major
characteristics of a radio access network as a service
implementation similar to the basic characteristics of a cloud
computing platform and is explained in [103].
3) JOINT RADIO ACCESS NETWORK BACKHAUL OPERATION
The main reliability factor of 5G wireless networks is densely
spread small cell layer which necessitates to be connected to
the radio access network as a service platform. Though,
VOLUME 3, 2015
1227

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
TABLE 8. 5G related activities in America [109].
the need of deployment of small cells is in the places where
the line of sight centered microwave solutions are either hard
or too costly to deploy for backhaul. Hence, the need to con-
nect small cells at diverse locations made backhaul network a
critical part of the infrastructure. In particular, there is a need
of ﬂexible centralization for dynamic adaptation of network
routes. The degree of radio access network centralization
depends on available backhaul resources.
1228
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
So there is a need of a reﬁned transport network design
that can convey the data headed towards the central unit free
of the degree of centralization. This is an important necessity
for maximum ﬂexibility when the introduction of the new
functionalities to the network is taking place.
But
the
complications
increases
in
routing
and
classiﬁcation of data packets according to their quality
of service. On the other hand, software deﬁned network
provides quicker reaction to link/node letdowns, higher uti-
lization of the accessible resources, and faster deployment
of new updates with ease. These advantages have come up
with a centralized control example, which streamlines the
arrangement and management, but with increased computa-
tional efforts, as algorithmic complexity increases [103]. Also
for spectrum utilization, software deﬁned radio (SDR) and
software deﬁned networks (SDN) are the optimum solution
and the study in [104] revealed that the co-existence of SDR
and SDN is essential, and the optimal results can be attained
only by co-existence and joint compliments.
J. TRENDS AND QUALITY OF SERVICE
MANAGEMENT IN 5G
5G technologies are likely to appear in the market in 2020.
It is expected to signiﬁcantly improve customers Quality of
Service in the context of increasing growth of data volume
in mobile networks and the growth of wireless devices with
variety of services provided. Some general trends related
to 5G can be explained in terms of machine to machine
trafﬁc and number of machine to machine connections in
mobile [105].
Based on the projections as shown in Fig. 14, in 2018 the
number of machine to machine (M2M) connections in the
networks of mobile operators will surpass 15 billion [108],
which is 2 times more than the present rate, and in 2022
mobile operators will have more than 26 billion machine to
machine connections.
At the same time the stake of machine to machine con-
nections of the total number of connections in the mobile
operator’s networks will rise from the present 5% to 15%
in 2018 and to 22% in 2022 [105].
A key trend relates to mobility, as broadband mobile usage,
with more than 2.4 billion users globally (as of June 2012)
is expected to be dominant over the coming years. For data
trafﬁc and machine to machine communications, an expected
40-fold increase between 2010 and 2015 is shown in Fig. 15
and a 1000 fold increase is predicted over a decade. This
level of growth force the network operators to provide global
broadband access to all types of heterogeneous and modiﬁed
Internet based services and applications [105].
While the Quality of Service management in 5G can be
realized in terms of cell spectral efﬁciency and latency.
Demand to the cell’s spectral efﬁciency in 5G networks for
diverse transmission channels are shown in Fig. 16. Increased
spectral efﬁciency of 5G networks can be attained using
non-orthogonal access methods in radio access networks and
by using non-orthogonal signals [107]. Comparison of these
demands with the same demands to 4G networks shows the
progress of spectral efﬁciency by 3-5 times [105].
Assessment of demands to delay in control and user
planes for signaling trafﬁc and user trafﬁc respectively is
shown in Fig. 17. This ﬁgure depicts that the demands to
5G networks will be twice more ﬁrm for trafﬁc in the
user plane and 10 times more ﬁrm in the subscriber trafﬁc
plane [106].
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a detailed survey has been done on the per-
formance requirements of 5G wireless cellular communica-
tion systems that have been deﬁned in terms of capacity,
data rate, spectral efﬁciency, latency, energy efﬁciency, and
Quality of service. A 5G wireless network architecture has
been explained in this paper with massive MIMO technology,
network function virtualization (NFV) cloud and device to
device communication. Certain short range communication
technologies, like WiFi, Small cell, Visible light communica-
tion, and millimeter wave communication technologies, has
been explained, which provides a promising future in terms
of better quality and increased data rate for inside users and
at the equivalent time reduces the pressure from the outside
base stations. Some key emerging technologies have also
been discussed that can be used in 5G wireless systems to
fulﬁll the probable performance desires, like massive MIMO
and Device to Device communication in particular and inter-
ference management, spectrum sharing with cognitive radio,
ultra dense networks, multi radio access technology, full
duplex radios, millimeter wave communication and Cloud
Technologies in general with radio access networks and soft-
ware deﬁned networks. This paper may be giving a good
platform to motivate the researchers for better outcome of
different types of problems in next generation networks.
APPENDIX
A list of current research projects based on 5G technologies
are given in Table 7, 8 and 9.
TABLE 9. 5G related activities in Asia [109].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Baldemair et al., ‘‘Evolving wireless communications: Addressing the
challenges and expectations of the future,’’ IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 24–30, Mar. 2013.
[2] T. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[3] T. Halonen, J. Romero, and J. Melero, Eds., GSM, GPRS and EDGE
Performance: Evolution Towards 3G/UMTS. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2003.
VOLUME 3, 2015
1229

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
[4] J. G. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of WiMAX.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2007.
[5] B. Furht and S. A. Ahson, Eds., Long Term Evolution: 3GPP LTE Radio
and Cellular Technology. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2009, ch. 12,
pp. 441–443.
[6] S. Sesia, I. Touﬁk, and M. Baker, Eds., LTE: The UMTS Long Term
Evolution. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[7] K. R. Santhi, V. K. Srivastava, G. SenthilKumaran, and A. Butare, ‘‘Goals
of true broad band’s wireless next wave (4G–5G),’’ in Proc. IEEE 58th
Veh. Technol. Conf., vol. 4. Oct. 2003, pp. 2317–2321.
[8] C.-X. Wang et al., ‘‘Cellular architecture and key technologies for 5G
wireless communication networks,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2,
pp. 122–130, Feb. 2014.
[9] E.
Perahia
and
R.
Stacey,
Next
Generation
Wireless
LANs:
Throughput, Robustness, and Reliability in 802.11n. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[10] E. H. Ong, J. Kneckt, O. Alanen, Z. Chang, T. Huovinen, and T. Nihtila,
‘‘IEEE 802.11ac: Enhancements for very high throughput WLANs,’’
in Proc. IEEE 22nd Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2011,
pp. 849–853.
[11] E. Perahia and M. X. Gong, ‘‘Gigabit wireless LANs: An overview
of IEEE 802.11ac and 802.11ad,’’ ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Comput.
Commun. Rev., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 23–33, Jul. 2011.
[12] E. Perahia, C. Cordeiro, M. Park, and L. L. Yang, ‘‘IEEE 802.11ad:
Deﬁning the next generation multi-Gbps Wi-Fi,’’ in Proc. 7th IEEE
Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf., Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[13] A. B. Flores, R. Guerra, E. W. Knightly, P. Ecclesine, and S. Pandey,
‘‘IEEE 802.11af: A standard for TV white space spectrum sharing,’’ IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 92–100, Oct. 2013.
[14] V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews, and A. Gatherer, ‘‘Femtocell networks:
A survey,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 59–67, Sep. 2008.
[15] F. Rusek et al., ‘‘Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and challenges with
very large arrays,’’ IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 40–60,
Jan. 2013.
[16] A. Bleicher, ‘‘Millimeter waves may be the future of 5G phones,’’
Samsung’s millimeter-wave transceiver technology could enable ultrafast
mobile broadband by 2020, Jun. 2013
[17] H. Haas. (Aug. 2011). Wireless Data From Every Light Bulb. [Online].
Available: http://bit.ly/tedvlc
[18] X. Hong, C.-X. Wang, H.-H. Chen, and Y. Zhang, ‘‘Secondary spectrum
access networks,’’ IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 36–43,
Jun. 2009.
[19] F. Haider et al., ‘‘Spectral efﬁciency analysis of mobile Femtocell
based cellular systems,’’ in Proc. IEEE ICCT, Jinan, China, Sep. 2011,
pp. 347–351.
[20] P. Agyapong, M. Iwamura, D. Staehle, W. Kiess, and A. Benjebbour,
‘‘Design considerations for a 5G network architecture,’’ IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 65–75, Nov. 2014.
[21] A. Osseiran et al., ‘‘Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless communica-
tions: The vision of the METIS project,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52,
no. 5, pp. 26–35, May 2014.
[22] M. Fallgren et al., Scenarios, Requirements and KPIs for 5G Mobile and
Wireless System, document ICT-317669-METIS/D1.1, Apr. 2013.
[23] Industry
Proposal
for
a
Public
Private
Partnership
(PPP)
in
Horizon 2020 (Draft Version 2.1), Horizon 2020 Advanced 5G
Network
Infrastructure
for
the
Future
Internet
PPP.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.networks-etp-eu/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/Home/
draft-PPP-proposal.pdf
[24] E. G. Larsson, F. Tufvesson, O. Edfors, and T. L. Marzetta, ‘‘Mas-
sive MIMO for next generation wireless systems,’’ IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 186–195, Feb. 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1304.6690v1.pdf
[25] J. Nam, J.-Y. Ahn, A. Adhikary, and G. Caire, ‘‘Joint spatial division and
multiplexing: Realizing massive MIMO gains with limited channel state
information,’’ in Proc. IEEE 46th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2012,
pp. 1–6.
[26] A. Pitarokoilis, S. K. Mohammed, and E. G. Larsson, ‘‘On the optimal-
ity of single-carrier transmission in large-scale antenna systems,’’ IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 276–279, Aug. 2012.
[27] C. Studer and E. G. Larsson, ‘‘PAR-aware large-scale multi-user MIMO-
OFDM downlink,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 31, no. 2,
pp. 303–313, Feb. 2013.
[28] S. K. Mohammed and E. G. Larsson, ‘‘Per-antenna constant envelope
precoding for large multi-user MIMO systems,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1059–1071, Mar. 2013.
[29] L. Lu, G. Y. Li, A. L. Swindlehurst, A. Ashikhmin, and R. Zhang, ‘‘An
overview of massive MIMO: Beneﬁts and challenges,’’ IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 742–758, Oct. 2014.
[30] T. L. Marzetta, ‘‘Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited num-
bers of base station antennas,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 9,
no. 11, pp. 3590–3600, Nov. 2010.
[31] M. Matthaiou, M. R. McKay, P. J. Smith, and J. A. Nossek, ‘‘On the
condition number distribution of complex Wishart matrices,’’ IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1705–1717, Jun. 2010.
[32] S. Vishwanath, N. Jindal, and A. Goldsmith, ‘‘Duality, achievable rates,
and sum-rate capacity of Gaussian MIMO broadcast channels,’’ IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2658–2668, Oct. 2003.
[33] E. Björnson, M. Kountouris, and M. Debbah, ‘‘Massive MIMO and small
cells: Improving energy efﬁciency by optimal soft-cell coordination,’’ in
Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Telecommun. (ICT), May 2013, pp. 1–5.
[34] E. Björnson, L. Sanguinetti, J. Hoydis, and M. Debbah, ‘‘Optimal design
of energy-efﬁcient multi-user MIMO systems: Is massive MIMO the
answer?’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 3059–3075,
Jun. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1403.6150
[35] Y. Xu, G. Yue, and S. Mao, ‘‘User grouping for massive MIMO in FDD
systems: New design methods and analysis,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 947–959, Sep. 2014.
[36] M. Peng, D. Liang, Y. Wei, J. Li, and H.-H. Chen, ‘‘Self-conﬁguration
and self-optimization in LTE-advanced heterogeneous networks,’’ IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 36–45, May 2013.
[37] M. Peng, C. Wang, J. Li, H. Xiang, and V. Lau, ‘‘Recent advances in
underlay heterogeneous networks: Interference control, resource alloca-
tion, and self-organization,’’ IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 700–729, Secondquarter 2015.
[38] W. Nam, D. Bai, J. Lee, and I. Kang, ‘‘Advanced interference manage-
ment for 5G cellular networks,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 5,
pp. 52–60, May 2014.
[39] 5G Radio Access—Research and Vision, Ericsson, Stockholm, Sweden,
Jun. 2013.
[40] T. Irnich, J. Kronander, Y. Selen, and G. Li, ‘‘Spectrum sharing scenarios
and resulting technical requirements for 5G systems,’’ in Proc. IEEE 24th
PIMRC, London, U.K., Sep. 2013, pp. 127–132.
[41] M.
Goldhammer,
802.16h
Main
Concepts,
document
IEEE
802.19-05/0051r0, 2005.
[42] G. J. Buchwald, S. L. Kuffner, L. M. Ecklund, M. Brown, and
E. H. Callaway, ‘‘The design and operation of the IEEE 802.22.1 dis-
abling beacon for the protection of TV whitespace incumbents,’’ in Proc.
3rd IEEE DySPAN, Oct. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[43] ECC REPORT 159, ‘‘Technical and Operational Requirements for the
Possible Operation of Cognitive Radio Systems in the ‘White Spaces’
of the Frequency Band 470–790 MHz,’’ CEPT, Cardiff, Wales, Tech.
Rep. 159, Jan. 2011.
[44] FCC. FCC12-36 Third Memorandum Opinion and Order in the Matter
of Unlicensed Operation in the TV Broadcast Bands (ET Docket No. 04-
186) and Additional Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below 900 MHz
and in the 3 GHz Band (ET Docket No. 02-380). Washington, DC, USA:
Federal Communications Commission, 2012.
[45] J. Huang, R. A. Berry, and M. L. Honig, ‘‘Auction-based spectrum
sharing,’’ Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 405–418, Jun. 2006.
[46] P. Steenkiste, D. Sicker, G. Minden, and D. Raychaudhuri, ‘‘Future
directions in cognitive radio network research,’’ in Proc. NSF Workshop
Rep., Mar. 2007.
[47] M. N. Tehrani, M. Uysal, and H. Yanikomeroglu, ‘‘Device-to-device
communication in 5G cellular networks: Challenges, solutions, and future
directions,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 86–92, May 2014.
[48] I. Cha, Y. Shah, A. U. Schmidt, A. Leicher, and M. V. Meyerstein,
‘‘Trust in M2M communication,’’ IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 4, no. 3,
pp. 69–75, Sep. 2009.
[49] J. Yue, C. Ma, H. Yu, and W. Zhou, ‘‘Secrecy-based access control for
device-to-device communication underlaying cellular networks,’’ IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2068–2071, Nov. 2013.
[50] A. Perrig, J. Stankovic, and D. Wagner, ‘‘Security in wireless sensor
networks,’’ Commun. ACM, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 53–57, Jun. 2004.
[51] Y. Zhou, Y. Fang, and Y. Zhang, ‘‘Securing wireless sensor networks:
A survey,’’ IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 6–28,
Third Quarter 2008.
1230
VOLUME 3, 2015

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
[52] R. Muraleedharan and L. Osadciw, ‘‘Jamming attack detection and coun-
termeasures in wireless sensor network using ant system,’’ in Proc. Symp.
Defense Secur., Orlando, FL, USA, Apr. 2006.
[53] G. Fodor et al., ‘‘Design aspects of network assisted device-to-device
communications,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 170–177,
Mar. 2012.
[54] E. Hossain, D. Niyato, and Z. Han, Dynamic Spectrum Access
and Management in Cognitive Radio Networks. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[55] D. Feng, L. Lu, Y. Yuan-Wu, G. Y. Li, G. Feng, and S. Li, ‘‘Device-
to-device communications underlaying cellular networks,’’ IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3541–3551, Aug. 2013.
[56] B. Zhou, H. Hu, S.-Q. Huang, and H.-H. Chen, ‘‘Intracluster device-to-
device relay algorithm with optimal resource utilization,’’ IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 2315–2326, Jun. 2013.
[57] L. Lei, Z. Zhong, C. Lin, and X. Shen, ‘‘Operator controlled device-
to-device communications in LTE-advanced networks,’’ IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 96–104, Jun. 2012.
[58] Q. Ye, M. Al-Shalash, C. Caramanis, and J. G. Andrews, ‘‘Distributed
resource allocation in device-to-device enhanced cellular networks,’’
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 441–454, Feb. 2015.
[59] D. I. Kim, W. Choi, H. Seo, and B.-H. Kim, ‘‘Partial information relaying
and relaying in 3GPP LTE,’’ in Cooperative Cellular Wireless Networks.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011.
[60] Y. Yuan, ‘‘LTE-A relay scenarios and evaluation methodology,’’ in
LTE-Advanced Relay Technology and Standardization. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 9–38.
[61] G. Yu, L. Xu, D. Feng, R. Yin, G. Y. Li, and Y. Jiang, ‘‘Joint mode
selection and resource allocation for device-to-device communications,’’
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 3814–3824, Nov. 2014.
[62] L. Wang and H. Wu, ‘‘Fast pairing of device-to-device link underlay
for spectrum sharing with cellular users,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18,
no. 10, pp. 1803–1806, Oct. 2014.
[63] Z. Zhou, M. Dong, K. Ota, J. Wu, and T. Sato. (2014). ‘‘Energy efﬁciency
and spectral efﬁciency tradeoff in device-to-device (D2D) communica-
tions.’’ [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.1556
[64] N. Naderializadeh and A. S. Avestimehr, ‘‘ITLinQ: A new approach for
spectrum sharing in device-to-device communication systems,’’ IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1139–1151, Jun. 2014.
[65] H. Chen, D. Wu, and Y. Cai, ‘‘Coalition formation game for green
resource management in D2D communications,’’ IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1395–1398, Aug. 2014.
[66] T. Ihalainen et al., ‘‘Flexible scalable solutions for dense small cell
networks,’’ in Proc. WWRF, vol. 30.
Oulu, Finland, Apr. 2013.
[67] J. G. Andrews et al., ‘‘What will 5G be?’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1065–1082, Jun. 2014.
[68] O. Galinina et al., ‘‘Capturing spatial randomness of heterogeneous
cellular/WLAN deployments with dynamic trafﬁc,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1083–1099, Jun. 2014.
[69] Q. Ye, B. Rong, Y. Chen, M. Al-Shalash, C. Caramanis, and
J. G. Andrews, ‘‘User association for load balancing in heterogeneous
cellular networks,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 2706–2716, Jun. 2013.
[70] S. Corroy, L. Falconetti, and R. Mathar, ‘‘Cell association in small het-
erogeneous networks: Downlink sum rate and min rate maximization,’’ in
Proc. IEEE Wireless Netw. Commun. Conf., Apr. 2012, pp. 888–892.
[71] S. Singh and J. G. Andrews, ‘‘Joint resource partitioning and ofﬂoading
in heterogeneous cellular networks,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 888–901, Feb. 2014.
[72] Q. Ye, M. Al-Shalash, C. Caramanis, and J. G. Andrews, ‘‘On/off macro-
cells and load balancing in heterogeneous cellular networks,’’ in Proc.
IEEE GLOBECOM, Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 2013, pp. 3814–3819.
[73] D. Fooladivanda and C. Rosenberg, ‘‘Joint resource allocation and user
association for heterogeneous wireless cellular networks,’’ IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 248–257, Jan. 2013.
[74] A. Bedekar and R. Agrawal, ‘‘Optimal muting and load balancing for
eICIC,’’ in Proc. Int. Symp. Modeling Optim. Mobile, Ad Hoc, Wireless
Netw. (WiOpt), May 2013, pp. 280–287.
[75] S. Borst, S. Hanly, and P. Whiting, ‘‘Throughput utility optimization in
HetNets,’’ in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Jun. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[76] S. Borst, S. Hanly, and P. Whiting, ‘‘Optimal resource allocation in
HetNets,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2013, pp. 5437–5441.
[77] S. Deb, P. Monogioudis, J. Miernik, and J. P. Seymour, ‘‘Algorithms for
enhanced inter-cell interference coordination (eICIC) in LTE HetNets,’’
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 137–150, Feb. 2014.
[78] B. Soret, K. I. Pedersen, T. Kolding, H. Kroener, and I. Maniatis, ‘‘Fast
muting adaptation for LTE-A HetNets with remote radio heads,’’ in Proc.
IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2013, pp. 3790–3795.
[79] S. V. Hanly and P. A. Whiting, ‘‘On the capacity of HetNets,’’ in Proc.
ITA, Feb. 2014, pp. 1–9.
[80] D. Bethanabhotla, O. Y. Bursalioglu, H. C. Papadopoulos, and G. Caire,
‘‘User association and load balancing for cellular massive MIMO,’’ in
Proc. ITA, Feb. 2014, pp. 1–10.
[81] T. A. Levanen, J. Pirskanen, T. Koskela, J. Talvitie, and M. Valkama,
‘‘Radio interface evolution towards 5G and enhanced local area commu-
nications,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 2, pp. 1005–1029, 2014.
[82] D. Bharadia, E. McMilin, and S. Katti, ‘‘Full duplex radios,’’ in Proc.
ACM SIGCOMM Conf. SIGCOMM (SIGCOMM), 2013, pp. 375–386.
[83] T. S. Rappaport et al., ‘‘Millimeter wave mobile communications for 5G
cellular: It will work!’’ IEEE Access, vol. 1, pp. 335–349, 2013.
[84] Z. Pi and F. Khan, ‘‘An introduction to millimeter-wave mobile broad-
band systems,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 101–107,
Jun. 2011.
[85] F.
Gutierrez,
S.
Agarwal,
K.
Parrish,
and
T.
S.
Rappaport,
‘‘On-chip integrated antenna structures in CMOS for 60 GHz WPAN
systems,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1367–1378,
Oct. 2009.
[86] T. S. Rappaport, E. Ben-Dor, J. N. Murdock, and Y. Qiao, ‘‘38 GHz
and 60 GHz angle-dependent propagation for cellular & peer-to-peer
wireless communications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2012,
pp. 4568–4573.
[87] T. S. Rappaport, J. N. Murdock, and F. Gutierrez, ‘‘State of the art in
60-GHz integrated circuits and systems for wireless communications,’’
Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 8, pp. 1390–1436, Aug. 2011.
[88] W. Hong, K.-H. Baek, Y. Lee, Y. Kim, and S.-T. Ko, ‘‘Study and proto-
typing of practically large-scale mmWave antenna systems for 5G cellular
devices,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 63–69, Sep. 2014.
[89] Estimated Spectrum Bandwidth Requirements for the Future Develop-
ment of IMT-2000 and IMT-Advanced, document Rep. M.2078, ITU-R,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
[90] T. Baykas et al., ‘‘IEEE 802.15.3c: The ﬁrst IEEE wireless standard for
data rates over 1 Gb/s,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 114–121,
Jul. 2011.
[91] W. Roh et al., ‘‘Millimeter-wave beamforming as an enabling technology
for 5G cellular communications: Theoretical feasibility and prototype
results,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 106–113, Feb. 2014.
[92] A. R. Khan, M. Othman, S. A. Madani, and S. U. Khan, ‘‘A survey of
mobile cloud computing application models,’’ IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 393–413, First Quarter 2014.
[93] N. Fernando, S. W. Loke, and W. Rahayu, ‘‘Mobile cloud computing:
A survey,’’ Future Generat. Comput. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 84–106,
2012.
[94] L. Mei, W. K. Chan, and T. H. Tse, ‘‘A tale of clouds: Paradigm com-
parisons and some thoughts on research issues,’’ in Proc. Asia-Paciﬁc
Services Comput. Conf. (APSCC), Dec. 2008, pp. 464–469.
[95] E. E. Marinelli, ‘‘Hyrax: Cloud computing on mobile devices using
MapReduce,’’ M.S. thesis, School Comput. Sci., Carnegie Mellon Univ.,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2009.
[96] M. Satyanarayanan, P. Bahl, R. Caceres, and N. Davies, ‘‘The case for
VM-based cloudlets in mobile computing,’’ IEEE Pervasive Comput.,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 14–23, Oct./Dec. 2009.
[97] P. Mell and T. Grance. (Sep. 2011). The NIST deﬁnition of cloud
computing. NIST. [Online]. Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf, accessed Aug. 2013.
[98] M. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Zhao, and C. Wang, ‘‘System architecture and key
technologies for 5G heterogeneous cloud radio access networks,’’ IEEE
Netw., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 6–14, Mar./Apr. 2015.
[99] M. Peng, X. Xie, Q. Hu, J. Zhang, and H. V. Poor, ‘‘Contract-based
interference coordination in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks,’’
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1140–1153, Jun. 2015.
[100] M. Peng, C. Wang, V. Lau, and H. V. Poor, ‘‘Fronthaul-constrained
cloud radio access networks: Insights and challenges,’’ IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 152–160, Apr. 2015.
[101] M. Peng, C. I, C. Tan, and C. Huang, ‘‘IEEE ACCESS special section
editorial: Recent advances in cloud radio access networks,’’ IEEE Access,
vol. 2, pp. 1683–1685, Dec. 2014.
VOLUME 3, 2015
1231

A. Gupta, R. K. Jha: Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging Technologies
[102] M. Peng, Y. Li, J. Jiang, J. Li, and C. Wang, ‘‘Heterogeneous cloud radio
access networks: A new perspective for enhancing spectral and energy
efﬁciencies,’’ IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 126–135,
Dec. 2014.
[103] P. Rost et al., ‘‘Cloud technologies for ﬂexible 5G radio access networks,’’
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 68–76, May 2014.
[104] H.-H. Cho, C.-F. Lai, T. K. Shih, and H.-C. Chao, ‘‘Integration of SDR
and SDN for 5G,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 2, pp. 1196–1204, 2014.
[105] V. Tikhvinskiy and G. Bochechka, ‘‘Perspectives and quality of service
requirements in 5G networks,’’ J. Telecommun. Inf. Technol., no. 1,
pp. 23–26, 2015.
[106] Y. Park, 5G Vision and Requirements, 5G Forum, Korea, Feb. 2014.
[107] 5GNOW, (5th Generation Non-Orthogonal Waveforms for Asynchronous
Signaling) is a European collaborative Research Project Supported by
the European Commission Within FP7 ICT Call 8, 2015.
[108] M. Hatton, The Global M2M Market in 2013. London, U.K.: Machina
Research White Paper, Jan. 2013
[109] 4G America’s Summary of Global 5G Initiatives, A One-Time Overview
of Global 5G Initiatives as of the First Quarter of 2014, Jun. 2014.
[110] G. Wunder et al., ‘‘5GNOW: Non-orthogonal, asynchronous waveforms
for future mobile applications,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 2,
pp. 97–105, Feb. 2014.
[111] G. Wunder et al., ‘‘5GNOW: Challenging the LTE design paradigms
of orthogonality and synchronicity,’’ in Proc. IEEE 77th Veh. Technol.
Conf. (VTC Spring), Jun. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[112] K. Samdanis, A. Ripke, and D. Kutscher, ‘‘Enhancing user QoE in
multi-carrier LTE dense networks via multi-path support,’’ in Proc. Eur.
Wireless, 20th Eur. Wireless Conf., May 2014, pp. 1–5.
[113] H. Tullberg et al., ‘‘Towards the METIS 5G concept: First view on hor-
izontal topics concepts,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun. (EuCNC),
Jun. 2014, pp. 1–5.
[114] J. F. Monserrat et al., ‘‘Rethinking the mobile and wireless network
architecture: The METIS research into 5G,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw.
Commun. (EuCNC), Jun. 2014, pp. 1–5.
[115] J.-C. Belﬁore, ‘‘Codes for wireless wiretap channels,’’ in Proc. IEEE Inf.
Theory Workshop (ITW), Nov. 2014, pp. 307–308.
[116] M. Olsson, C. Cavdar, P. Frenger, S. Tombaz, D. Sabella, and
R. Jantti, ‘‘5GrEEn: Towards Green 5G mobile networks,’’ in Proc. 9th
Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., Netw. Commun. (WiMob), Oct. 2013,
pp. 212–216.
AKHIL
GUPTA
(S’15)
received
the
B.E. degree in electronics and communication
engineering from Jammu University, Jammu and
Kashmir, India, in 2010, and the M.Tech. degree in
electronics and communication engineering from
the Jaypee University of Information Technology,
Waknaghat, India, in 2013. He is currently pursu-
ing the Ph.D. degree in electronics and communi-
cation engineering with Shri Mata Vaishno Devi
University, Jammu and Kashmir.
He is currently involved in research work on massive MIMO and device-
to-device communication. He is also working on the security issues of next-
generation networks, and OPNET simulation, MATLAB, and NS3 tools
for wireless communication. His research interests include the emerging
technologies of 5G wireless communication network.
Mr. Gupta received the Teaching Assistantship at the Ministry of Human
Resource Development from 2011 to 2013. He is a member of the Interna-
tional Association of Engineers and the Universal Association of Computer
and Electronics Engineers.
RAKESH KUMAR JHA (S’10–M’13–SM–15)
received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and
communication engineering in Bhopal, India, the
M.Tech. degree from NIT Jalandhar, India, and the
Ph.D. degree from NIT Surat, India, in 2013.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
School of Electronics and Communication Engi-
neering, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University,
Jammu and Kashmir, India. He is carrying out
his research on wireless communication, power
optimizations, wireless security issues, and optical communications.
He has authored over 30 international journal papers and more than
20 international conference papers. His area of interest is wireless communi-
cation, optical ﬁber communication, computer networks, and security issues.
Dr. Jha’s concept related to router of wireless communication has been
accepted by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in 2010.
He received the Young Scientist Author Award from ITU in 2010, the APAN
Fellowship in 2011 and 2012, and the Student Travel Grant from COMSNET
in 2012. He is a Senior Member of the Global ICT Standardization Forum for
India, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, the International
Association of Engineers, and the Advance Computing and Communication
Society.
1232
VOLUME 3, 2015
