arXiv:cond-mat/0311416v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  18 Nov 2003
The architecture of complex weighted networks
Alain Barrat1, Marc Barth´el´emy2, Romualdo Pastor-Satorras3, and Alessandro Vespignani1
1 Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique (UMR du CNRS 8627),
Batiment 210, Universit´e de Paris-Sud 91405 Orsay, France
2CEA-Centre d’Etudes de Bruy`eres-le-Chˆatel, D´epartement de Physique
Th´eorique et Appliqu´ee BP12, 91680 Bruy`eres-Le-Chˆatel, France
3Departament de F´isica i Enginyeria Nuclear Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Campus Nord 08034 Barcelona, Spain
(Dated: November 26, 2024)
Networked structures arise in a wide array of diﬀerent contexts such as technological and trans-
portation infrastructures, social phenomena, and biological systems. These highly interconnected
systems have recently been the focus of a great deal of attention that has uncovered and character-
ized their topological complexity. Along with a complex topological structure, real networks display
a large heterogeneity in the capacity and intensity of the connections. These features, however, have
mainly not been considered in past studies where links are usually represented as binary states, i.e.
either present or absent. Here, we study the scientiﬁc collaboration network and the world-wide
air-transportation network, which are representative examples of social and large infrastructure
systems, respectively. In both cases it is possible to assign to each edge of the graph a weight pro-
portional to the intensity or capacity of the connections among the various elements of the network.
We deﬁne new appropriate metrics combining weighted and topological observables that enable us
to characterize the complex statistical properties and heterogeneity of the actual strength of edges
and vertices. This information allows us to investigate for the ﬁrst time the correlations among
weighted quantities and the underlying topological structure of the network. These results provide
a better description of the hierarchies and organizational principles at the basis of the architecture
of weighted networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A large number of natural and man-made systems are
structured in the form of networks.
Typical examples
include large communication systems (the Internet, the
telephone network, the World-Wide-Web), transporta-
tion infrastructures (railroad and airline routes), biolog-
ical systems (gene and/or protein interaction networks),
and a variety of social interaction structures. [1, 2, 3, 4].
The macroscopic properties of these networks have been
the subject of an intense scientiﬁc activity that has high-
lighted the emergence of a number of signiﬁcant topolog-
ical features. Speciﬁcally, many of these networks show
the small-world property [5], which implies that the net-
work has an average topological distance between the
various nodes increasing very slowly with the number of
nodes (logarithmically or even slower), despite showing a
large degree of local interconnectedness typical of more
ordered lattices. Additionally, several of these networks
are characterized by a statistical abundance of “hubs”
with a very large number of connections k compared to
the average degree value ⟨k⟩.
The empirical evidence
collected from real data indicates that this distinctive
feature ﬁnds its statistical characterization in the pres-
ence of scale-free degree distributions P(k), i.e., showing
a power-law behavior P(k) ∼k−γ for a signiﬁcant range
of values of k [2, 3]. These topological features turn out
to be extremely relevant since they have a strong impact
in assessing such networks’ physical properties as their
robustness or vulnerability [6, 7, 8, 9].
While these ﬁndings alone might provide possibilities
for threats analysis and policy decisions, yet networks are
not only speciﬁed by their topology but also by the dy-
namics of information or traﬃc ﬂow taking place on the
structure. In particular, the heterogeneity in the inten-
sity of connections may be very important in the under-
standing of social systems. Analogously, the amount of
traﬃc characterizing the connections of communication
systems or the quantity of traﬃc in large transport in-
frastructures is fundamental for a full description of these
networks.
Motivated by these observations, we undertake in this
paper the statistical analysis of complex networks whose
edges have assigned a given weight (the ﬂow or the
intensity) and thus can be generally described in terms
of weighted graphs [10, 11].
Working with two typical
examples of this kind of networks, we introduce some
new metrics that combine in a natural way both the
topology of the connections and the weight assigned to
them. These quantities provide a general characteriza-
tion of the heterogenous statistical properties of weights
and identify alternative deﬁnitions of centrality, local
cohesiveness, and aﬃnity. By appropriate measurements
it is also possible to exploit the correlation between the
weights and the topological structure of the graph, un-
veiling the complex architecture shown by real weighted
networks.
II.
WEIGHTED NETWORKS DATA
In order to proceed to the general analysis of complex
weighted networks we consider two speciﬁc examples for
which it is possible to have a full characterization of the
links among the elements of the systems, the world-wide

2
airport transportation network and the scientist collabo-
ration network.
World-wide Airport Network (WAN): We analyze the
International Air Transportation Association (IATA) [25]
database containing the world list of airports pairs con-
nected by direct ﬂights and the number of available seats
on any given connection for the year 2002. The resulting
air-transportation graph comprises N = 3880 vertices de-
noting airports and E = 18810 edges accounting for the
presence of a direct ﬂight connection. The average degree
of the network is ⟨k⟩= 2E/N = 9.70, while the maximal
degree is 318. The topology of the graph exhibits both
small-world and scale-free properties as already observed
in diﬀerent dataset analyses [12, 13]. In particular, the
average shortest path length, measured as the average
number of edges separating any two nodes in the net-
work, shows the value ⟨ℓ⟩= 4.37, very small compared
to the network size N. The degree distribution, on the
other hand, takes the form P(k) = k−γf(k/kx), where
γ ≃2.0 and f(k/kx) is an exponential cut-oﬀfunction,
that ﬁnds its origin in physical constraints on the max-
imum number of connections that a single airport can
handle [4, 13]. The airport connection graph is there-
fore a clear example of heterogeneous network showing
scale-free properties on a deﬁnite range of degree values.
Scientiﬁc Collaboration Network (SCN): We consider
the network of scientists who have authored manuscripts
submitted to the e-print archive relative to condensed
matter physics (http://xxx.lanl.gov/archive/cond-mat)
between 1995 and 1998.
Scientists are identiﬁed with
nodes and an edge exists between two scientists if they
have co-authored at least one paper. The resulting con-
nected network has N = 12722 nodes, with an average
degree (i.e. average number of collaborators) ⟨k⟩= 6.28
and maximal degree 97. The topological properties of
this network and other similar networks of scientiﬁc col-
laborations have been studied in Ref. [14, 15].
The properties of a graph can be expressed via its ad-
jacency matrix aij, whose elements take the value 1 if an
edge connects the vertex i to the vertex j and 0 other-
wise. The data contained in the previous datasets permit
to go beyond this topological representation by deﬁning a
weighted graph [10] that assigns a weight or value charac-
terizing each connecting link. In the case of the WAN the
weight wij of an edge linking airports i and j represents
the number of available seats in ﬂights between these two
airports. The inspection of the weights shows that the
average numbers of seats in both directions are identi-
cal wij = wji for an overwhelming majority of edges. In
the following we will thus work with the symmetric undi-
rected graph and avoid the complication deriving from
ﬂow imbalances. We show an example of the resulting
weighted graph in Fig. 1.
Noticeably, the above deﬁ-
nition of weights is a straightforward and an objective
measure of the traﬃc ﬂow on top of the network.
For the SCN we follow the deﬁnition of weight intro-
duced in Ref. [14]: The intensity wij of the interaction
FIG. 1: Pictorial representation of the weighted graph ob-
tained from the airport network data.
Major US airports
are connected by edges denoting the presence of a non-stop
ﬂight in both directions whose weights represent the number
of avaliable seats (million/year).
between two collaborators i and j is deﬁned as
wij =
X
p
δp
i δp
j
np −1 ,
(1)
where the index p runs over all papers, np is the number
of authors of the paper p, and δp
i is 1 if author i has
contributed to paper p, and 0 otherwise.
While any
deﬁnition of the intensity of a connection in social
networks is depending on the particular elements chosen
to be relevant, the above deﬁnition seems to be rather
objective and representative of the scientiﬁc interaction:
It is large for collaborators having many papers in
common but the contribution to the weight introduced
by any given paper is inversely proportional to the
number of authors.
III.
CENTRALITY AND WEIGHTS
In order to take into account the information provided
by the weighted graph, we shall identify the appropriate
quantities characterizing it structure and organization at
the statistical level. The statistical analysis of weights
wij between pairs of vertices indicates the presence of
right skewed distributions, already signaling a high level
of heterogeneity in the system for both the WAN and
the SCN as also reported in Refs. [12, 14]. It has been
observed, however, that the individual edge weights do
not provide a general picture of the network’s complex-
ity [11].
A more signiﬁcative measure of the network
properties in terms of the actual weights is obtained by
looking at the vertex strength si, deﬁned as
si =
N
X
j=1
aijwij .
(2)

3
This quantity measures the strength of vertices in terms
of the total weight of their connections. In the case of the
WAN the vertex strength simply accounts for the total
traﬃc handled by each airport. For the SCN, on the other
hand, the strength is a measure of scientiﬁc productivity
since it is equal to the total number of publications of any
given scientist. This quantity is a natural measure of the
importance or centrality of a vertex i in the network.
The identiﬁcation of the most central nodes in the sys-
tem is a major issue in networks characterization [16].
The most intuitive topological measure of centrality is
given by the degree—more connected nodes are more
central. However, more is not necessarily better. Indeed,
by considering solely the degree of a node we overlook
that nodes with small degree may be crucial for connect-
ing diﬀerent regions of the network by acting as bridges.
In order to quantitatively account for the role of such
nodes it has been introduced the concept of betweenness
centrality [14, 16, 17], that is deﬁned as the number of
shortest paths between pairs of vertices that pass through
a given vertex [18]. Central nodes are therefore part of
more shortest paths within the network than peripheral
nodes. Moreover, the betweenness centrality is often used
in transport networks to provide an estimate of the traf-
ﬁc handled by the vertices, assuming that the number
of shortest paths is a zero-th order approximation to the
frequency of use of a given node [26]. The above deﬁni-
tion of centrality relies only on topological elements. It is
therefore intuitive to consider the alternative deﬁnition
of centrality constructed by looking at the strength si of
the vertices as a more appropriate deﬁnition of the im-
portance of a vertex in weighted networks. For instance,
in the case of the WAN this quantity provides the actual
traﬃc going through the vertex i, and it is natural to
study how it compares and correlates with the topologi-
cal measures of centrality.
The probability distribution P(s) that a vertex has
strength s is heavy tailed in both networks and the func-
tional behavior exhibits similarities with the degree dis-
tribution P(k) (see Fig. 2). A precise functional descrip-
tion of the heavy-tailed distributions may be very impor-
tant in understanding the network evolution and will be
deferred to future analysis. This behavior is not unex-
pected since it is plausible that the strength si increases
with the vertex degree ki, and thus the slow decaying
tail of P(s) stems directly from the very slow decay of
the degree distribution. In order to shed more light on
the relation between the vertices’ strength and degree, we
investigate the dependence of si on ki. We ﬁnd that the
average strength s(k) of vertices with degree k increases
with the degree as
s(k) ∼kβ.
(3)
In the absence of correlations between the weight of
edges and the degree of vertices, Eq. (2) implies that
s(k) = ⟨w⟩k, where ⟨w⟩= (2E)−1 P
i,j aijwij is the av-
erage weight in the network. The strength of a vertex
is then simply proportional to its degree, yielding an ex-
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (number of collaborators)
10
-6
10
-4
10
-2
10
0
P(k)
10
0
10
1
10
2
s (number of papers)
10
-4
10
-2
10
0
P(s)
A)
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (non-stop connections)
10
-6
10
-4
10
-2
10
0
P(k)
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
s (airport traffic)
10
-10
10
-8
10
-6
10
-4
P(s)
B)
FIG. 2:
A Degree and strength distribution in the scien-
tiﬁc collaboration network. The degree k corresponds to the
number of co-authors of each scientist and the strength rep-
resent its total number of publications. The distributions are
heavy-tailed even if it is not possible to distinguish a deﬁnite
functional form. B The same distributions for the world-wide
airport network. The degree is the number of non-stop con-
nections to other airports and the strength is the total number
of passengers handled by any given airport. In this case, the
degree distribution can be approximated by the power-law
behavior P(k) ∼k−γ with γ = 1.8 ± 0.2. The strength distri-
bution has a heavy-tail extending over more than four orders
of magnitude.
ponent β = 1, and the two quantities provide therefore
the same information on the system. In Fig. 3 we re-
port the behavior obtained for both the real weighted
networks and their randomized versions, generated by a
random re-distribution of the actual weights on the ex-
isting topology of the network. For the SCN the curves
are very similar and well ﬁtted by the uncorrelated ap-
proximation s(k) = ⟨w⟩k. Strikingly, this is not the case
of the WAN. Fig. 3B clearly shows a very diﬀerent be-
havior for the real data set and its randomized version.
In particular, the power-law ﬁt for the real data gives
an “anomalous” exponent βWAN = 1.5 ± 0.1. This im-
plies that the strength of vertices grows faster than their
degree, i.e. the weight of edges belonging to highly con-
nected vertices tends to have a value higher than the one
corresponding to a random assignment of weights. This
denotes a strong correlation between the weight and the
topological properties in the WAN, where the larger is
an airport, the more traﬃc it can handle.

4
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (number of collaborators)
10
0
10
1
10
2
 s (number of papers)
Real data
Randomized weights
s = k  < w >
A)
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (non-stop connections)
10
4
10
6
s (airport traffic)
k <w>
Randomized weights
k
1.5
Real data
B)
FIG. 3:
Average strength s(k) as function of the degree k of
nodes. A In the scientiﬁc collaboration network the real data
are very similar to those obtained in a randomized weighted
network. Only at very large k values it is possible to observe
a slight departure from the expected linear behavior. B In
the world airport network real data follow a power-law be-
havior with exponent β = 1.5 ± 0.1. This denotes anomalous
correlations between the traﬃc handled by an airport and the
number of its connections.
The ﬁngerprint of these correlations is also observed in
the dependence of the weight wij on the degrees of the
end point nodes ki and kj. As we can see in Fig. 4, for
the WAN the behavior of the average weight as a function
of the end points degrees can be well approximated by a
power-law dependence
⟨wij⟩∼(kikj)θ
(4)
with an exponent θ = 0.5±0.1. This exponent can be re-
lated to the β exponent by noticing that s(k) ∼k(kkj)θ,
resulting in β = 1 + θ, if the topological correlations be-
tween the degree of connected vertices can be neglected.
This is indeed the case of the WAN where the above
scaling relation is well satisﬁed by the numerical values
provided by the independent measurements of the expo-
nents. In the SCN, instead, ⟨wij⟩is almost constant for
over two decades conﬁrming a general lack of correlations
between the weights and the vertices degree.
Analogously, a study of the average value s(b) of the
strength for vertices with betweenness b shows that the
functional behavior can be approximated by a scaling
form s(b) ∼bδ with δSCN ≃0.5 and δWAN ≃0.8 for the
SCN and the WAN, respectively. As before, the compar-
ison between the behavior of the real data and the ran-
domized case shows more pronounced diﬀerences in the
case of the WAN. In both networks, the strength grows
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
ki kj
10
2
10
4
10
6
<wi, j>
WAN
SCN
(kikj)
0.5
FIG. 4: Average weight as a function of the degree end points.
The full line corresponds to a power-law behavior ⟨wi,j⟩∼
(kikj)θ, with exponent θ = 0.5 ± 0.1.
In the case of the
scientiﬁc collaboration network it is possible to observe an
almost ﬂat behavior for roughly three orders of magnitude.
with the betweenness faster than in the randomized case,
specially in the WAN. This is another clear signature of
the correlations between weighted properties and the net-
work topology.
IV.
STRUCTURAL ORGANIZATION OF
WEIGHTED NETWORKS
Along with the general vertices hierarchy imposed by
the strength distribution—the larger the more central—
complex networks show an architecture imposed by the
structural and administrative organization of these sys-
tems. For instance, topical areas and national research
structures give rise to well deﬁned groups or communi-
ties in the SCN. In the WAN, on the other hand, diﬀer-
ent hierarchies correspond to domestic or regional airport
groups and intra-continental transport systems; political
or economical factors can as well impose additional con-
straints to the network structure [13]. In order to uncover
these structures, some topological quantities are custom-
arily studied. The clustering coeﬃcient measures the lo-
cal group cohesiveness and is deﬁned for any vertex i as
the fraction of connected neighbors of i [5]. The aver-
age clustering coeﬃcient C = N −1 P
i ci thus expresses
the statistical level of cohesiveness measuring the global
density of interconnected vertices’ triples in the network.
Further information can be gathered by inspecting the
average clustering coeﬃcient C(k) restricted to classes of
vertices with degree k. Often, C(k) exhibits a highly non-
trivial behavior with a power-law decay as a function of
k, signaling a hierarchy in which low degree vertices be-
long generally to well interconnected communities (high
clustering coeﬃcient), while hubs connect many vertices
that are not directly connected (small clustering coeﬃ-
cient) [19, 20]. Another quantity used to probe the net-
works’ architecture is the behavior of the average degree
of nearest neighbors, knn(k), for vertices of degree k [21].
This last quantity is related to the correlations between
the degree of connected vertices [22] since it can be ex-

5
w
w=5
w=1
w
C = 0.5     C  = 0.25
nn
nn
K    = 1.8     K    = 3.2
FIG. 5: Examples of local conﬁgurations whose topological
and weighted quantities are diﬀerent. In both cases the cen-
tral vertex (ﬁlled) has a very strong link with only one of
its neighbors. The weighted clustering and average nearest
neighbors degree capture more precisely the eﬀective level
of cohesiveness and aﬃnity due to the actual interaction
strength.
pressed as knn(k) = P
k′ k′P(k′|k), where P(k′|k) is the
conditional probability that a given vertex with degree
k is connected to a vertex of degree k′. In the absence
of degree correlations, P(k′|k) does not depend on k and
neither does the average nearest neighbors’ degree; i.e.
knn(k) = const. [21].
In the presence of correlations,
the behavior of knn(k) identiﬁes two general classes of
networks. If knn(k) is an increasing function of k, ver-
tices with high degree have a larger probability to be
connected with large degree vertices. This property is re-
ferred in physics and social sciences as assortative mixing
[23]. On the contrary, a decreasing behavior of knn(k) de-
ﬁnes disassortative mixing, in the sense that high degree
vertices have a majority of neighbors with low degree,
while the opposite holds for low degree vertices.
The above quantities provide clear signatures of a
structural organization of networks in which diﬀerent de-
gree classes show diﬀerent properties in the local con-
nectivity structure. However, they are deﬁned solely on
topological grounds and the inclusion of weights and their
correlations might change consistently our view of the
hierarchical and structural organization of the network
(see Fig. 5).
This can be easily understood with the
simple example of a network in which the weights of all
edges forming triples of interconnected vertices are ex-
tremely small. Even for a large clustering coeﬃcient, it
is clear that these triples have a minor role in the net-
work dynamics and organization, and that the clustering
properties are deﬁnitely overestimated by a simple topo-
logical analysis. Similarly, high degree vertices could be
connected to a majority of low degree vertices while con-
centrating the largest fraction of their strength only on
the vertices with high degree. In this case the topological
information would point out to disassortative properties
while the network could be considered assortative in an
eﬀective way, since the more relevant edges in term of
weights are linking high degree vertices.
In order to solve the previous incongruities we intro-
duce new metrics that combine the topological informa-
tion with the weight distribution of the network. First,
we consider the weighted clustering coeﬃcient deﬁned as
cw
i =
1
si(ki −1)
X
j,h
(wij + wih)
2
aijaihajh.
(5)
This is a measure of the local cohesiveness that takes
into account the importance of the clustered structure
on the basis of the amount of traﬃc or interaction in-
tensity actually found on the local triples. Indeed, cw
i
is counting for each triple formed in the neighborhood
of the vertex i the weight of the two participating edges
of the vertex i. In this way we are not just considering
the number of closed triangles in the neighborhood of a
vertex but also their total relative weight with respect to
the vertex’ strength. The normalization factor si(ki −1)
account for the weight of each edge times the maximum
possible number of triangles it may participate, and it
ensures that 0 ≤cw
i ≤1. Consistently, the cw
i deﬁnition
recovers the topological clustering coeﬃcient in the case
that wij = const. Next we deﬁne Cw and Cw(k) as the
weighted clustering coeﬃcient averaged over all vertices
of the network and over all vertices with degree k, re-
spectively. This quantities provide global information on
the correlation between weights and topology, specially
by comparing them with their topological analogs.
In
the case of a large randomized network (lack of correla-
tions) it is easy to see that Cw = C and Cw(k) = C(k).
In real weighted networks, however, we can face two op-
posite cases. If Cw > C, we are in presence of a net-
work in which the interconnected triples are more likely
formed by the edges with larger weights. On the con-
trary, Cw < C signals a network in which the topological
clustering is generated by edges with low weight. In this
case it is obvious that the clustering has a minor eﬀect in
the organization of the network since the largest part of
the interactions (traﬃc, frequency of the relations, etc.)
is occurring on edges not belonging to interconnected
triples. The same may happen for Cw(k), for which it
is also possible to analyze the variations with respect to
the degree class k.
Along with the weighted clustering coeﬃcient, we in-
troduce the weighted average nearest neighbors degree,
deﬁned as
kw
nn,i = 1
si
N
X
j=1
aijwijkj.
(6)
In this case, we perform a local weighted average of
the nearest neighbor degree according to the normalized
weight of the connecting edges, wij/si. This deﬁnition
implies that kw
nn,i > knn,i if the edges with the larger
weights are pointing to the neighbors with larger degree
and kw
nn,i < knn,i in the opposite case. The kw
nn,i thus
measures the eﬀective aﬃnity to connect with high or
low degree neighbors according to the magnitude of the
actual interactions. As well, the behavior of the function
kw
nn(k) marks the weighted assortative or disassortative
properties considering the actual interactions among the
system’s elements.

6
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (number of collaborators)
10
-1
10
0
C(k), C
w(k)
C(k)
C
w(k)
A)
10
0
10
1
10
2
k (number of collaborators)
10
1
knn(k), knn
w(k)
knn
w
knn
B)
FIG. 6:
Topological and weighted quantities for the SCN.
A The weighted clustering separates form the topological one
around k ≥10.
This marks a diﬀerence for authors with
larger number of collaborators. B The assortative behavior
is enhanced in the weighted deﬁnition of the average nearest
neighbors degree.
10
0
10
1
10
2
k  (non-stop connections)
10
-1
10
0
C(k), C
w(k)
C(k)
C
w(k)
A)
10
0
10
1
10
2
k  (non-stop connections)
10
2
knn(k), knn
w(k)
knn
w
knn
B)
FIG. 7:
Topological and weighted quantities for the WAN. A
The weighted clustering coeﬃcient is larger than the topolog-
ical one in the whole degree spectrum. B knn(k) is reaching a
plateau for k > 10 denoting the absence of marked topological
correlations. On the contrary kw
nn(k) exhibits a more deﬁnite
assortative behavior.
As a general test, we inspect the results obtained for
both the SCN and the WAN by comparing the regu-
lar topological quantities with those obtained with the
weighted deﬁnition introduced here.
The topological
measurements tell us that the SCN has a continuously
decaying spectrum C(k) (see Fig. 6a). This implies that
hubs present a much lower clustered neighborhood than
low degree vertices.
This eﬀect can be interpreted as
the evidence that authors with few collaborators usually
work within a well deﬁned research group in which all the
scientists collaborate together (high clustering). Authors
with a large degree, however, collaborate with diﬀerent
groups and communities which on their turn do not have
often collaborations, thus creating a lower clustering co-
eﬃcient. Furthermore, the SCN exhibits an assortative
behavior in agreement with the general evidence that so-
cial networks are usually denoted by a strong assortative
character [23] (see Fig. 6b).
The analysis of weighted
quantities conﬁrms this topological picture, providing
further information on the network architecture.
The
weighted clustering coeﬃcient is very close to the topo-
logical one (Cw/C ≃1). This fact states in a quanti-
tative way that group collaborations tend on average to
be stable and determine the average intensity of the in-
teractions in the network. In addition, the inspection of
Cw(k) (see Fig. 6a) shows generally that for k ≥10 the
weighted clustering coeﬃcient is larger than the topo-
logical one. This implies that high degree authors (i.e.
with many collaborators) tend to publish more papers
with interconnected groups of co-authors. This is even-
tually a signature that inﬂuential scientists form stable
research groups where the largest part of their produc-
tion is obtained. Finally, the assortative properties ﬁnd
a clearcut conﬁrmation in the weighted analysis with a
kw
nn(k) strikingly growing as a power-law as a function of
k.
A diﬀerent picture is found in the WAN, where the
weighted analysis provides a richer and somehow diﬀer-
ent scenario. This network also shows a decaying C(k),
consequence of the role of large airports that provide non-
stop connections to very far destinations on an interna-
tional and intercontinental scale. These destinations are
usually not interconnected among them, giving rise to a
low clustering coeﬃcient for the hubs. We ﬁnd, however,
that Cw/C ≃1.1, indicating an accumulation of traﬃc
on interconnected groups of vertices. The weighted clus-
tering coeﬃcient Cw(k) also has a diﬀerent behavior in
that its variation is much more limited in the whole spec-
trum of k. This implies that high degree airports have a
progressive tendency to form interconnected groups with
high traﬃc links, thus balancing the reduced topologi-
cal clustering. Since high traﬃc is associated to hubs,
we have a network in which high degree nodes tend to
form cliques with nodes with equal or higher degree, the
so-called rich-club phenomenon [24]. An interesting ev-
idence emerges also from the comparison of knn(k) and
kw
nn(k). Indeed, the topological knn(k) does show an as-
sortative behavior only at small degrees. For k > 10,

7
knn(k) approaches a constant value, a fact revealing an
uncorrelated structure in which vertices with very dif-
ferent degrees have a very similar neighborhood.
The
analysis of the weighted kw
nn(k), however, exhibits a pro-
nounced assortative behavior in the whole k spectrum,
providing a diﬀerent picture in which high degree air-
ports have a larger aﬃnity for other large airports where
the major part of the traﬃc is directed.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
We have shown that a more complete view of complex
networks is provided by the study of the interactions
deﬁning the links of these systems.
The weights
characterizing the various connections exhibit complex
statistical features with highly varying distributions and
power-law behavior.
In particular we have considered
the speciﬁc examples of the scientiﬁc collaboration and
world-wide airport networks where it is possible to
appreciate the importance of the correlations between
weights and topology in the characterization of real
networks properties. Indeed, the analysis of the weighted
quantities and the study of the correlations between
weights and topology provide a complementary per-
spective on the structural organization of the network
that might be undetected by quantities based only
on topological information.
Our study thus oﬀer a
quantitative and general approach to understand the
complex architecture of real weighted networks.
Acknowledgments
We
thank
IATA
for
making
the
airline
commercial
ﬂight database available to us.
We also thank M.E.J.
Newman for conceding us the possibility
of using the
scientiﬁc
collaboration
network
data
(see
http://www-
personal.umich.edu/∼mejn/collaboration/). We are grateful
to L. A. N. Amaral and R. Guimer`a for the many discus-
sions and sharing of results during the various stages of this
work.
A.B., R.P.-S. and A.V. are partially funded by the
European Commission - Fet Open Project COSIN IST-2001-
33555. R.P.-S. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Min-
isterio de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa (Spain) and from the Depar-
tament d’Universitats, Recerca i Societat de la Informaci´o,
Generalitat de Catalunya (Spain).
[1] Barab´asi, A.-L & Albert, R. (1999) Science 286, 509.
[2] Albert, R. & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2002) Rev. Mod. Phys. 74,
47–97.
[3] Dorogovtsev, S. N. & Mendes, J. F. F.
(2003) Evolu-
tion of networks: From biological nets to the Internet and
WWW. (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
[4] Amaral, L. A. N., Scala, A., Barth´elemy, M, & Stanley,
H. E.
(2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11149–
11152.
[5] Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. (1998) Nature 393, 440–
442.
[6] Cohen, R., Erez, K., ben Avraham, D., & Havlin, S.
(2000) Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4626–4628.
[7] Callaway, D. S., Newman, M. E. J., Strogatz, S. H., &
Watts, D. J. (2000) Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5468–5471.
[8] Albert, R., Jeong, H., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2000) Nature
406, 378–382.
[9] Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. (2001) Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 3200–3203.
[10] Clark, J. & Holton, D. A. (1998) A ﬁrst look at graph
theory. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore).
[11] Yook, S. H., Jeong, H., Barab´asi, A.-L., & Tu, Y. (2001)
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5835–5838.
[12] Li, W. & Cai, X. (2003) Statistical analysis of airport
network of china. e-print cond-mat/0309236.
[13] Guimer`a, R., Mossa, S., Turtschi, A., & Amaral, L. A. N.
(2003). submitted.
[14] Newman, M. E. J.
(2001) Phys. Rev. E 64, 016131;
(2001) Phys. Rev. E 64, 016132.
[15] Barab´asi A. L., Jeong H., N´eda Z., Ravasz E., Schubert
A. & Vicsek T. (2001) Physica A 299, 559.
[16] Freeman, L. C. (1977) Sociometry 40, 35–41.
[17] Goh, K.-I., Kahng, B. & Kim D. (2001) Phys. Rev. Lett.
87, 278701.
[18] More precisely, if Dhj is the total number of shortest
paths from h to j and Dhj(i) is the number of these short-
est paths that pass through the vertex i, the betweenness
of the vertex i is deﬁned as bi = P Dhj(i)/Dhj, where
the sum runs over all h, j pairs with j ̸= h ̸= i. An
eﬃcient algorithm to compute betweenness centrality is
reported Brandes, U. (2001) Journal of Math. Sociology
25, 163–177.
[19] V´azquez, A., Pastor-Satorras, R., & Vespignani, A.
(2002) Phys. Rev. E 65, 066130.
[20] Ravasz, E. & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2003) Phys. Rev. E 67,
026112.
[21] Pastor-Satorras, R., V´azquez, A., & Vespignani, A.
(2001) Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 258701.
[22] Maslov, S. & Sneppen, K. (2001) Science 296 910.
[23] Newman, M. E. J. (2002) Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 208701.
[24] Zhou, S. & Mondragon, R. J.
(2003) The missing
links in the BGP-based AS connectivity maps. e-print
cs.NI/0303028.
[25] http://www.iata.org.
[26] For the airport network, the analysis of the betweenness
centrality and its correlation with the degree has been
discussed in Ref. [13].
