The Network Data Repository with
Interactive Graph Analytics and Visualization
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed
Dept. of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
Abstract
(NR) is the ﬁrst interactive data repository with a web-based
platform for visual interactive analytics. Unlike other data
repositories (e.g., UCI ML Data Repository, and SNAP),
the network data repository (networkrepository.com) allows
users to not only download, but to interactively analyze and
visualize such data using our web-based interactive graph an-
alytics platform. Users can in real-time analyze, visualize,
compare, and explore data along many different dimensions.
The aim of NR is to make it easy to discover key insights into
the data extremely fast with little effort while also providing
a medium for users to share data, visualizations, and insights.
Other key factors that differentiate NR from the current data
repositories is the number of graph datasets, their size, and va-
riety. While other data repositories are static, they also lack a
means for users to collaboratively discuss a particular dataset,
corrections, or challenges with using the data for certain ap-
plications. In contrast, NR incorporates many social and col-
laborative aspects that facilitate scientiﬁc research, e.g., users
can discuss each graph, post observations, and visualizations.
Discussion
This paper presents (NR) — the ﬁrst interactive data reposi-
tory with real-time graph analytics and visualization. NR has
hundreds of graphs and network datasets for users to down-
load (and share). However, the key factor that differentiates
NR from other repositories (SNAP; UCI ML Repository) is
our interactive graph analytics and visualization platform.
NR allows users to interactively, in real-time, explore and
visualize the data.
Scientiﬁc progress depends on standard datasets for which
claims, hypotheses, and algorithms can be compared and
evaluated. NR aims to improve and facilitate the scientiﬁc
study of networks and other data by making it easy to inter-
actively explore, visualize, and compare a large number of
datasets. NR is the ﬁrst interactive graph data repository that
provides researchers with the ability to interactively explore
and visualize data in seconds using our fast and easy-to-use
interactive analytics platform (e.g., Figure 1 and 2). The
repository has a comprehensive and representative set of the
most popular and frequently used datasets in academia and
industry. More speciﬁcally, NR currently has 500+ graphs
Copyright c⃝2015, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Figure 1: Visualize graph structure and discover valuable
insights using our interactive graph visualization platform.
Compare with hundreds of other networks across many dif-
ferent collections and types.
from 19 general collections (social, information, and bio-
logical networks, among others) that span a wide range of
types (bipartite, time-series, etc.) and domains (social sci-
ences, physics, bioinformatics).
Unlike other data repositories (e.g., UCI ML Repository,
SNAP), NR allows users to not only download, but to inter-
actively analyze and visualize the data in real-time on the
web (e.g., see Figure 2). NR goes beyond traditional static
repositories by giving users the ability to interactively ex-
plore and compare data along many different dimensions.
The goal of NR is to make it easy for users to discover key
insights into the data quickly with little effort, while also
providing a medium for researchers to share data, visual-
izations, and insights. In addition, we also make it easy for
users to upload and visualize their own data.
Static plots found in papers and other repositories are
severely limiting as they only provide a single view of the
data. By contrast, the interactive platform gives rise to an
inﬁnite number of possible views (e.g., scaling, zooming,
ﬁltering, and other data transformations). Thus, NR gives re-
searchers the ﬂexibility to interactively plot and visualize the
data according to the properties and characteristics of inter-
est to them. Researchers can begin analyzing and investi-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
4292

gating the data independently, asking their own questions,
and/or verifying recently published ﬁndings/claims. For in-
stance, users can zoom-in on interesting data points (e.g.,
nodes and/or graphs) as well as scale the data (linear, log,
exp, etc.) for speciﬁc applications and/or questions.
The platform also allows researchers to easily explore,
analyze, and compare graph data in an interactive fashion
by selecting (or ﬁltering) data points (representing graphs,
nodes, and/or edges) across a variety of important and fun-
damental graph statistics and properties. Intuitively, this ﬁl-
tering and selection tool highlights all such nodes that have
certain properties of interest such as the nodes that have a
triangle count in a certain user-deﬁned range. Thus, NR’s in-
teractive platform gives rise to an inﬁnite amount of ways to
visualize and compare such data in real-time.
The interactive data analytics platform is ﬂexible and has
many potential applications and use cases. For instance, it
has shown to be useful for tasks such as spotting anomalous
nodes/subgraphs through interactive comparisons across a
wide range of graph properties. We also provide many other
interactive analysis tools, e.g., interactive graph clustering
tasks such as role discovery and community detection.
Big graph data may also be interactively explored and vi-
sualized using NR. For instance, users can interactively ex-
plore a range of distributions from a wide variety of impor-
tant graph properties and statistics. We also leverage state-
of-the-art graph sampling methods to ensure fast and efﬁ-
cient loading and processing of the data while being as accu-
rate as possible, see (Ahmed, Neville, and Kompella 2014).
Despite the increasing interest in graph data and algo-
Figure 2: A snapshot of a graph’s page showing the inter-
active graph structure visualization and node-level statistics
for ca-netscience graph. Note that each graph is automat-
ically processed and assigned a unique URL for reference
purposes making it easy for others to obtain the exact data
for experimental and evaluation purposes. The page also
contains other analytics based on graph-level/point statistics,
node and edge-level statistics and distributions.
rithms, there still remains a lack of standard benchmark
datasets for many problems and research areas. Unfortu-
nately, most research uses proprietary data and/or some pre-
processed versions of existing network datasets. Thus, it is
often impossible to ﬁnd the original data used in published
experiments, and at best it is difﬁcult and time consum-
ing. For the purpose of reproducible research, we encour-
age users to upload data (including a reference to the pub-
lished paper), even if the data has been preprocessed for a
particular problem/domain. Thus, users can leverage NR to
quickly ﬁnd and understand the data of interest to them, even
if the name and other properties are ambiguous. In addition,
NR is a community-oriented repository that allows users to
discuss, share observations, recent ﬁndings/papers, and any
other insights. This would facilitate comparisons of various
algorithms and models. For more details, we refer the reader
to a longer version of this paper (Rossi and Ahmed 2014).
We summarize a few of the contributions and features below.
• An interactive data repository where researchers can com-
pare, explore, search, and analyze over 500+ graphs inter-
actively in real-time via NR’s web-based platform.
• Interactive visualization and exploration of the graph
structure and connectivity patterns (e.g., nodes and edges).
• Global network statistics and parameters (e.g., triangle
counts, max clique size, etc.) can be interactively ana-
lyzed, visualized, and compared among graphs.
• Local node-level network statistics and features (e.g., k-
core number of each node).
• Interactive visualizations and plots of key statistical dis-
tributions of each network (e.g., degree distribution).
• Community-oriented data repository where users can cre-
ate proﬁles donate datasets, share visualizations, and in-
sights, as well as save their synthetically generated net-
works and visualizations created using NR.
• Interactive graph generation including model-based (e.g.,
Chung-Lu (Aiello, Chung, and Lu 2001), BA (Barab´asi
and Albert 1999), pattern-based (e.g., cliques, stars, cy-
cles, etc.), and hybrid generators that combine both.
References
Ahmed, N. K.; Neville, J.; and Kompella, R. 2014. Network
sampling: From static to streaming graphs. TKDD 8(2):7:1–
7:56.
Aiello, W.; Chung, F.; and Lu, L. 2001. A random graph
model for power law graphs.
Experimental Mathematics
10(1):53–66.
Barab´asi, A.-L., and Albert, R. 1999. Emergence of scaling
in random networks. science 286(5439):509–512.
Rossi, R. A., and Ahmed, N. K.
2014.
Networkreposi-
tory: A graph data repository with visual interactive analyt-
ics. arXiv:1410.3560.
SNAP. http://snap.stanford.edu/data/index.html.
UCI ML Repository. http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.
4293
