Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
DOI 10.1007/s13748-016-0094-0
REVIEW
Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges
and future directions
Bartosz Krawczyk1
Received: 5 January 2016 / Accepted: 11 April 2016 / Published online: 22 April 2016
© The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Despite more than two decades of continuous
development learning from imbalanced data is still a focus
of intense research. Starting as a problem of skewed distri-
butions of binary tasks, this topic evolved way beyond this
conception. With the expansion of machine learning and data
mining, combined with the arrival of big data era, we have
gained a deeper insight into the nature of imbalanced learn-
ing, while at the same time facing new emerging challenges.
Data-level and algorithm-level methods are constantly being
improved and hybrid approaches gain increasing popularity.
Recent trends focus on analyzing not only the disproportion
between classes, but also other difﬁculties embedded in the
nature of data. New real-life problems motivate researchers
to focus on computationally efﬁcient, adaptive and real-time
methods. This paper aims at discussing open issues and chal-
lenges that need to be addressed to further develop the ﬁeld
of imbalanced learning. Seven vital areas of research in this
topic are identiﬁed, covering the full spectrum of learning
from imbalanced data: classiﬁcation, regression, clustering,
data streams, big data analytics and applications, e.g., in
social media and computer vision. This paper provides a dis-
cussion and suggestions concerning lines of future research
for each of them.
Keywords
Machine learning · Imbalanced data ·
Multi-class imbalance · Big data · Data streams ·
Imbalanced clustering · Imbalanced regression
B Bartosz Krawczyk
bartosz.krawczyk@pwr.edu.pl
1
Department of Systems and Computer Networks,
Wrocław University of Technology, Wyb. Wyspia´nskiego 27,
50-370 Wrocław, Poland
1 Introduction
Canonical machine learning algorithms assume that the
number of objects in considered classes is roughly simi-
lar. However, in many real-life situations the distribution of
examples is skewed since representatives of some of classes
appear much more frequently. This poses a difﬁculty for
learning algorithms, as they will be biased towards the major-
ity group. At the same time usually the minority class is the
one more important from the data mining perspective, as
despite its rareness it may carry important and useful knowl-
edge. Therefore, when facing such disproportions one must
design an intelligent system that is able to overcome such
a bias. This domain is known as learning from imbalanced
data [29]. This problem has been widely discussed in the
last two decades. One of the ﬁrst deeper analyses of learn-
ing from skewed data was related to convergence rates of
backpropagation-trained neural networks [2]. Since then a
plethora of methods were developed, usually concentrating
on balancing data via preprocessing or modifying and adapt-
ing existing classiﬁers.
Several excellent surveys and paper collections that cap-
ture recent advances in imbalanced learning ﬁeld were
published during last years. He and Garcia [24] provided a
systematic review of metrics and algorithm-level approaches.
In the same year another survey by Sun et al. [51] was
published, concentrating on the classiﬁcation aspect of
imbalanced learning. A more recent book in a form of paper
collection was edited by He and Ma [25], covering such
important issues as sampling strategies, active learning and
streaming data. A book by García et al. [21] discusses the top-
ics of data preprocessing, among which a reasonable amount
of space is dedicated to preparing, sampling and cleaning
imbalanced datasets. A more global review on learning from
skewed data was proposed by Branco [5] and concentrates
123

222
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
on a more general issue of imbalanced predictive modeling.
Among more specialized discussions on this topic a thorough
survey on ensemble learning by Galar et al. [17], an in-
depth insight into imbalanced data characteristics by López
et al. [36] and discussion on new perspectives for evaluation
classiﬁers on skewed datasets [42] deserve mentioning.
Contrary to mentioned works this paper is not an exhaus-
tive review of existing methodologies. Instead it aims to
discuss open challenges and future directions in learning
from imbalanced data. It points to important issues that are
yet to be addressed in order to gain a deeper understanding
of this vast ﬁeld. It discusses emerging topics and contem-
porary applications that require new methods for managing
data imbalance.
The scope of this paper is not limited to classiﬁca-
tion problems that seem to capture the majority of focus
in the imbalanced domain. Instead it discusses the var-
ied forms of learning where data imbalance may be the
issue. Seven vital areas are identiﬁed and open challenges
in each of them are highlighted. These include classiﬁca-
tion of binary and multi-class problems, multi-label and
multi-instance learning, semi-supervised and unsupervised
handling of imbalanced datasets, performing regression on
skewed examples, learning from imbalanced data streams
in stationary and drifting environments, and ﬁnally large
scale and big data cases. Along with a detailed discussion
of these open topics, we present our position on promising
research directions that should be explored to address these
challenges.
The remaining part of this manuscript is organized as
follows. Next section gives a necessary background on the
imbalanced learning domain. Section 3 discusses open chal-
lenges in binary classiﬁcation, while Sect. 4 expands this
to multi-class problems. Going beyond these popular tasks
Sect. 6 presents future directions in imbalanced regression
and Sect. 7 in semi-supervised, active and unsupervised
learning. Perspectives on mining imbalanced streaming and
big data are given in Sects. 8 and 9. The ﬁnal section con-
cludes this paper.
2 Learning from imbalanced data: preliminaries
This section introduces basic concepts related to imbalanced
learning and presents the nomenclature used during dis-
cussing open challenges and future directions in following
sections. Recent and emerging applications that face the dif-
ﬁculty of skewed class distributions are also discussed.
2.1 Tackling imbalanced data
We may distinguish three main approaches to learning from
imbalanced data:
– Data-level methods that modify the collection of exam-
ples to balance distributions and/or remove difﬁcult
samples.
– Algorithm-level methods that directly modify existing
learning algorithms to alleviate the bias towards major-
ity objects and adapt them to mining data with skewed
distributions.
– Hybrid methods that combine the advantages of two pre-
vious groups.
Let us now present a short overview of the mentioned
approaches.
Data-level methods: concentrate on modifying the train-
ing set to make it suitable for a standard learning algorithm.
With respect to balancing distributions we may distinguish
approaches that generate new objects for minority groups
(oversampling) and that remove examples from majority
groups (undersampling). Standard approaches use random
approach for selection of target samples for preprocessing.
However, this often leads to removal of important sam-
ples or introduction of meaningless new objects. Therefore,
more advanced methods were proposed that try to maintain
structures of groups and/or generate new data according to
underlying distributions [9]. This family of algorithms also
consists of solutions for cleaning overlapping objects and
removing noisy examples that may negatively affect learn-
ers [49].
Algorithm-level methods:
concentrate
on
modifying
existing learners to alleviate their bias towards majority
groups. This requires a good insight into the modiﬁed learn-
ing algorithm and a precise identiﬁcation of reasons for its
failure in mining skewed distributions. The most popular
branch is cost-sensitive approaches [67]. Here, given learner
is modiﬁed to incorporate varying penalty for each of consid-
ered groups of examples. This way by assigning a higher cost
to less represented set of objects we boost its importance dur-
ing the learning process (which should aim at minimizing the
globalcostassociatedwithmistakes).Itmustbenotedthatfor
manyreal-lifeproblemsitisdifﬁculttosettheactualvaluesin
the cost matrix and often they are not given by expert before-
hand. Another algorithm-level solution is to apply one-class
learning that focuses on target group, creating a data descrip-
tion [28]. This way we eliminate bias towards any group, as
we concentrate only on a single set of objects. One, however,
needs some specialized methods to use one-class learners for
more complex problems [33].
Hybrid methods: concentrate on combining previously
mentioned approaches to extract their strong points and
reduce their weaknesses [63]. Merging data-level solutions
with classiﬁer ensembles [64], resulting in robust and efﬁ-
cient learners [34] is highly popular. There are some works
that propose hybridization of sampling and cost-sensitive
learning [57].
123

Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
223
Table 1 A list of selected recent real-life applications with data imbalance present
Application area
Problem description
Activity recognition [19]
Detection of rare or less-frequent activities (multi-class problem)
Behavior analysis [3]
Recognition of dangerous behavior (binary problem)
Cancer malignancy grading [30]
Analyzing the cancer severity (binary and multi-class problem)
Hyperspectral data analysis [50]
Classiﬁcation of varying areas in multi-dimensional images (multi-class problem)
Industrial systems monitoring [44]
Fault detection in industrial machinery (binary problem)
Sentiment analysis [65]
Emotion and temper recognition in text (binary and multi-class problem)
Software defect prediction [48]
Recognition of errors in code blocks (binary problem)
Target detection [45]
Classiﬁcation of speciﬁed targets appearing with varied frequency (multi-class problem)
Text mining [39]
Detecting relations in literature (binary problem)
Video mining [20]
Recognizing objects and actions in video sequences (binary and multi-class problem)
2.2 Real-life imbalanced problems
Developments in learning from imbalanced data have been
mainlymotivatedbynumerousreal-lifeapplicationsinwhich
we face the problem of uneven data representation. In such
cases the minority class is usually the more important one and
hence we require methods to improve its recognition rates.
This is closely related with important issues like preventing
malicious attacks, detecting life-threatening diseases, man-
aging atypical behavior in social networks or handling rare
cases in monitoring systems.
A list of selected recent real-life problems that have
embedded the class imbalance difﬁculty is presented in
Table 1.
3 Binary imbalanced classiﬁcation
Binary classiﬁcation problems can be considered as the most
developed branch of learning from imbalanced data [51].
This task originates from various real-life applications, like
medicine (sick vs. healthy), computer security (valid activ-
ity vs. unauthorized or malicious one), or computer vision
(target object vs. background). In such a scenario the rela-
tionship between classes is well deﬁned: one of them is a
majority, while the other is a minority group. This allows for
many straightforward approaches to balance the distributions
or shift classiﬁers towards the minority class. Despite numer-
ous works on this topic there are still many open challenges
that need to be addressed. We identify the following future
directions of research.
3.1 Analyzing the structure of classes
One of the most interesting directions in binary imbalanced
classiﬁcation is the notion that imbalance ratio is not the
sole source of learning difﬁculties. Even if the dispropor-
tion is high, but both classes are well represented and come
from non-overlapping distributions we may obtain good clas-
siﬁcation rates using canonical classiﬁers. Degradation of
performance may also be caused by the presence of difﬁcult
examples, especially within the minority class [35]. Recent
work of Napierala and Stefanowski [40] proposed to analyze
the neighborhood of each minority class example and assign
it to one of four predeﬁned groups: safe, borderline, rare
and outliers. This allows to shed new light onto imbalanced
datasets and analyze their difﬁculty from the minority class
structure perspective. Such a proposal interestingly expands
the understanding of difﬁculties embedded in the nature of
data. This can be seen as a starting point for promising future
research.
Following directions should be taken in order to fully
understand and exploit the role of minority class structure:
– It is important to propose new classiﬁers that can either
directly or indirectly incorporate this background knowl-
edge about objects into their training procedure. Thus,
when designing an efﬁcient classiﬁer one must not only
alleviate the bias towards the majority class, but also pay
attention to difﬁculties of individual minority examples.
Preliminary works present in the literature show the high
potential of this solution [4,32].
– The same idea can be carried over to data preprocessing
approaches. Here established structure of the minority
class would allow for selecting important or difﬁcult sam-
ples to concentrate on. This way we may vary the level of
oversampling according to example types (ﬁrst idea can
be tracked to ADASYN method that ignored safe exam-
ples [23]) or supervise the undersampling procedure in
order not to discard the important minority representa-
tives.
– Separate studies should be done on the role of noisy /
outlier samples in minority class. Recent work by Sáez
et al. [47] suggests to remove such examples. However,
when dealing with small sample sizes further reduc-
123

224
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
tions may be dangerous. Additionally, how one can
be sure that given object is an actual noise or outlier
and not an inappropriately sampled minority represen-
tative? Thus removing such example may lead to wrong
classiﬁcation of potential new objects to appear in its
neighborhood.
– The current labeling method for identifying types of
minority objects relies on k-nearest neighbors (with k
= 5) or kernel methods. This, however, strongly implies
uniform distribution of data. It seems promising to
propose adaptive methods that will adjust the size of ana-
lyzed neighborhood according to local densities or chunk
sizes.
3.2 Extreme class imbalance
Another important issue is related to the disproportion
between classes. Most of the contemporary works in class
imbalance concentrate on imbalance ratios ranging from
1:4 up to 1:100. However, there is a lack of studies on the
classiﬁcation of extremely imbalanced datasets. In real-life
applications such as fraud detection [61] or cheminformat-
ics [12] we may deal with problems with imbalance ratio
ranging from 1:1000 up to 1:5000. This poses new challenges
to data preprocessing and classiﬁcation algorithms, as they
must be adjusted to such extreme scenarios.
Following directions should be taken in order to gain a
better insight into classiﬁcation of extremely imbalanced
datasets:
– In cases with such a high imbalance the minority class
is often poorly represented and lacks a clear structure.
Therefore, straightforward application of preprocessing
methods that rely on relations between minority objects
(like SMOTE) can actually deteriorate the classiﬁcation
performance. Using randomized methods may also be
inadvisable due to a high potential variance induced by
theimbalanceratio.Methodsthatwillbeabletoempower
the minority class and predict or reconstruct a potential
class structure seem to be a promising direction.
– Another possible research track to be envisioned relies
on decomposition of the original problem into a set of
subproblems, each characterized by a reduced imbal-
ance ratio. Then canonical methods could be used. This
approach, however, requires a two-way development:
(i) algorithms for meaningful problem division and (ii)
algorithms for reconstruction of the original extremely
imbalanced task.
– Third challenge lies in efﬁcient extraction of features for
such problems. Internet transactions or protein data are
characterized by potentially high-dimensional and sparse
feature spaces. Furthermore one can predict emergence
of such problems in social networks and computer vision.
This calls for development of new approaches for repre-
senting such data that will allow at the same time for an
efﬁcient processing and boosting discrimination of the
minority class.
3.3 Classiﬁer’s output adjustment
As mentioned in Sect. 2 methods for addressing class
imbalance are either concentrating on modifying the learn-
ing algorithm or the training set. However, as noted by
Provost [43], simply changing the data distribution without
considering the imbalance effect on the classiﬁcation output
(and thus adjusting it properly) may be misleading. Recent
studies show that weighting or putting a threshold on contin-
uous output of a classiﬁer (known also as support functions
or class probability estimates) can often lead to better results
than data resampling and may be applied to any conventional
classiﬁer [31,66].
Following directions should be taken in order to fur-
ther develop classiﬁer’s output compensation for imbalanced
data:
– Currently the output is being adjusted for each class
separately, using the same value of compensation para-
meter for each classiﬁed object. However, from our
previous discussion we may see that the minority class
usually is not uniform and difﬁculty level may vary
among objects within. Therefore, it is interesting to
develop new methods that will be able to take into
consideration the characteristics of classiﬁed example
and adjust classiﬁer’s output individually for each new
object.
– A drawback of methods based on output adjustment lies
in possibility of overdriving the classiﬁer towards the
minority class, thus increasing the error on the majority
one. As we may expect that the disproportion between
classes will hold also for new objects to be classiﬁed, we
may assume that output compensation will not always
be required (as objects will predominantly originate
from majority class distribution). Techniques that will
select uncertain samples and adjust outputs only for such
objects are of interest to this ﬁeld. Additionally, dynamic
classiﬁer selection between canonical and adjusted clas-
siﬁers seems as a potential useful framework.
– Output adjustment is considered as an independent
approach. Yet from a general point of view it may
be fruitful to modify outputs even when data-level or
algorithm-level solutions have been previously utilized.
This way we may achieve class balancing on different
levels, creating more reﬁned classiﬁers. Analyzing the
output compensation may also bring new insight into
supervising undersampling or oversampling to ﬁnd bal-
anced performance on both classes.
123

Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
225
3.4 Ensemble learning
Ensemble learning is one of the most popular approaches
for handling class imbalance [4,17,34]. Hybridization of
Bagging, Boosting and Random Forests with sampling or
cost-sensitive methods prove to be highly competitive and
robust to difﬁcult data. However, most of these approaches
used are heuristic based and still there is a lack of proper
insight into the performance of classiﬁer committees with
skewed classes.
Following directions should be taken in order to expand
the branch of imbalanced ensemble learning:
– There is a lack of good understanding of diversity in
imbalanced learning. What actually contributes to this
notion? Is diversity on majority class as important as
on minority class? Undersampling-based ensembles usu-
ally maintain the minority class intact or introduce some
small variations to it. Therefore, their diversity should not
be very high which intuitively is a signiﬁcant drawback.
How then we can explain their excellent classiﬁcation
performance? A detailed study of this is required to bet-
ter understand this phenomenon.
– There are no clear indicators on how large ensembles
should be constructed. Usually their size is selected arbi-
trarily, which may result in some similar classiﬁers being
stored in the pool. It would be beneﬁcial to analyze rela-
tions betweens characteristics of imbalanced dataset and
the number of classiﬁers required to efﬁciently handle
it, while maintaining their individual quality and mutual
complementarity. Additionally, ensemble pruning tech-
niques dedicated speciﬁcally to imbalanced problems
should be developed [18].
– Finally, most of imbalanced ensemble techniques use
majority voting combination method. In standard scenar-
ios this is a simple and effective solution. However, we
may ask ourselves if this is really suitable for imbalanced
learning, especially in case of randomized methods. It
seems reasonable to assume that base classiﬁers trained
using sampling methods will differ in their individual
qualities due to being based on examples with varying
difﬁculties. Therefore, this will propagate into their indi-
vidual competencies that should be exploited during the
combination phase.
4 Multi-class imbalanced classiﬁcation
Multi-class imbalanced classiﬁcation is not as well-devel-
oped as its binary counterpart. Here we deal with a more
complicated situation, as the relations among the classes are
no longer obvious. A class may be a majority one when
it is compared to some other classes, but a minority or
well-balanced for the rest of them [57]. When dealing with
multi-class imbalanced data we may easily lose performance
on one class while trying to gain it on another [14]. Con-
sidering this problem there are many issues that must be
addressedbynovelproposals.Adeeperinsightintothenature
of the class imbalance problem is needed, as one should
know in what domains does class imbalance most hinder the
performance of standard multi-class classiﬁers when design-
ing a method tailored for this problem. While most of the
challenges discussed in Sect. 3 can also be transferred to
multi-class problems, there is a number of topics speciﬁc
just to them. We identify the following vital future directions
of research.
4.1 Data preprocessing
The role of data preprocessing may be of even higher impor-
tance here than in case of binary problems. One may easily
identify possible difﬁculties: class overlapping may appear
with more than two groups, class label noise may affect the
problem and borders between classes may be far from being
clearlydeﬁned.Therefore,properdatacleaningandsampling
procedures that take into account the varying characteristics
of classes and balanced performance on all of them must be
proposed.
Following directions should be taken for introducing new
methods dedicated to multi-class imbalanced preprocessing:
– It is interesting to analyze the type of examples present
in each class and their relations to other classes. Here
it is not straightforward to measure the difﬁculty of each
sample, as it may change with respect to different classes.
For example, a given object may be of borderline type
for some groups and at the same time a safe example
when considering remaining classes. Therefore, a new
and more ﬂexible taxonomy should be presented. Our ini-
tial works on this topic indicate that analysis of example
difﬁculty may signiﬁcantly boost the multi-class perfor-
mance [46].
– New data cleaning methods must be developed to han-
dle presence of overlapping and noisy samples that may
additionally contribute to deteriorating classiﬁer’s per-
formance. One may think of projections to new spaces in
which overlapping will be alleviated or simple removal
of examples. However, measures to evaluate if a given
overlapping example can be discarded without harming
one of classes are needed. In case of label noise it is very
interesting to analyze its inﬂuence on actual imbalance
between classes. Wrongly labeled samples may increase
the imbalance (when actually it’s ratio is lower) or mask
actual disproportions (wrongly re-balancing the classes).
Such scenarios require dedicated methods for detecting
123

226
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
and ﬁltering noise, as well as strategies for handling and
relabeling such examples.
– New sampling strategies are required for multi-class
problems. Simple re-balancing towards the biggest or
smallest class is not a proper approach [1,15]. We need to
develop dedicated methods that will adjust the sampling
procedures to both individual properties of classes and to
their mutual relations. Hybrid approaches, utilizing more
than one method seem as an attractive solution.
4.2 Multi-class decomposition
An intuitive approach for handling multi-class imbalanced
datasets is to apply a decomposition strategy and reduce it to
a set of binary problems that can be solved by one of existing
techniques [14]. Advantages of such an approach include
simpliﬁed subproblems and alleviation of some data-level
difﬁculties (like overlapping and class noise). However, one
must be aware of possible drawbacks such as loss of balanced
performance on all of classes or rejecting the global outlook
on the multi-class problem. Nevertheless, this direction can
be considered as highly promising one, yet still requiring a
signiﬁcant development.
Following directions should be taken when designing
decomposition strategies for multi-class imbalanced prob-
lems:
• Decomposition methods used so far [14] apply identical
approach for each pair of classes. This seems as a slightly
naive solution as the pairwise relationships may highly
vary. Adjusting used solution to individual pairwise prob-
lems seems a highly more ﬂexible solution. Calculating
the cost penalties or oversampling ratios individually for
each pairs is a good starting direction, but the true chal-
lenge lies in proposing a framework that will be able
to select speciﬁc data or algorithm-level solution on the
basis of subproblem characteristics.
• So far only binary decomposition in form of one-vs-one
and one-vs-all was considered. However, there is a num-
ber of different techniques that may achieve the same
goal, while alleviating the drawbacks of binary solutions
(like high number of base classiﬁers or introducing addi-
tional artiﬁcial imbalance). Hierarchical methods seem
as a promising direction. Here we need solutions to
aggregate classes according to their similarities or dis-
similarities, preprocess them at each level and then use
a sequential, step-wise approach to determine the ﬁnal
class. Alternatively, decomposition with one-class clas-
siﬁers can be considered, as they are robust to class
imbalance and can serve as an efﬁcient tool for dealing
with difﬁcult multi-class datasets [33].
• Finally, using decomposition methods require dedicated
combination strategies that are able to reconstruct the
original multi-class problem. As ones canonically used in
this ﬁeld were designed for roughly balanced scenarios,
it seems worthwhile to design new fusion approaches
suitable for cases with skewed distributions. This way it
may be possible to compensate for the imbalance both on
decomposed class level and on ﬁnal output combination
level.
4.3 Multi-class classiﬁers
High potential lies in the design of multi-class classiﬁers that
are skew-insensitive. They will allow to handle multi-class
problems without referring to decomposition or resampling
strategies, while using algorithm-level solutions to counter
the class imbalance. Recently a Hellinger-distance modiﬁ-
cation of decision trees [10] and neural networks [66] were
proposed and proved to work highly efﬁciently. Therefore,
one may wonder if it is possible to adapt other popular clas-
siﬁers to this scenario.
Following issues should be considered when designing
multi-class classiﬁers in presence of class imbalance:
– A deeper insight is required into how multiple skewed
distributions affect the forming of decision boundaries
in classiﬁers. As Hellinger distance was proven to be
useful in class imbalance cases, it should be incorpo-
rated to other distance-based classiﬁers. Other solutions
with potential robustness to imbalance, like density-
based methods, must be explored. When combined with
approaches for reducingclass overlappingandlabel noise
(two phenomenons present in multi-class imbalanced
data that may severely degrade the density estimation
process) they should provide a powerful tool for classiﬁ-
cation.
– Ensemble solutions should be investigated. They may
offer ways to rebalance the distributions in varied ways.
Exploring local competencies of classiﬁers and creating
sectional decision areas may also alleviate signiﬁcantly
the difﬁculty of the problem. Here once again rises the
issue of maintaining the diversity in ensemble systems
and proper selection of useful base learners.
5 Multi-label and multi-instance imbalanced
classiﬁcation
Multi-label and multi-instance learning are speciﬁc branches
of pattern classiﬁcation problems, dealing with structured
outputs and inputs. In the ﬁrst case a single example can
be characterized by more than one class label. In second
case we work with bags of objects and labels are provided
only for bags, not for objects within. One must note that
having assigned a class label to a bag does not imply that
123

Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
227
this bag consists only of objects from a given class. Both
of these problems became very popular in machine learn-
ing communities in recent years. However, little attention
was paid to imbalanced learning in their context, despite the
fact that these areas suffer from it. In multi-label learning so
far measures of imbalance and SMOTE-based oversampling
approach have been proposed [8]. In multi-instance learn-
ing cost-sensitive and standard resampling have been used
to counter skewed distributions with regard to number of
bags and number of instances within bags [38,59]. Therefore,
imbalancedlearningfrommulti-labelandmulti-instancedata
still requires a signiﬁcant development and presents many
open challenges lying before future researchers.
Followingchallengesaretobefacedintheﬁeldoflearning
from imbalanced multi-label and multi-instance data:
– Inmulti-labellearningthereisaneedforskew-insensitive
classiﬁers that do not require resampling strategies.
It seems promising to use existing multi-label meth-
ods (such as hierarchical multi-label classiﬁcation tree
or classiﬁer chains) and combine them with skew-
insensitive solutions available in multi-class classiﬁca-
tion domain. An ideal goal would be development of such
multi-label classiﬁers that display similar performance
to canonical methods on balanced multi-label problems,
while being at the same time robust to presence of imbal-
ance.
– Another interesting direction is to investigate the possi-
bilities of using decomposition-based solutions. Binary
relevance is a popular method, transforming a multi-label
problem into a set of two-label subproblems. Hence, bal-
ancing label distributions seems more straightforward
whenappliedtoeachsubproblemindividually.Thisprob-
lem could also be approached as an aggregation, to create
balanced super-classes and then solve the problem in an
iterative divide-and-conquer manner.
– Inmulti-instancelearningwhenresamplingbagswemust
take into consideration that they may be characterized by
a different level of uncertainty. Bags that have a higher
probability of consisting purely of objects from the same
class should be prioritized, as they carry a better represen-
tation of the target concept. This requires a development
of new measures for assessing the quality of training bags
and selecting the most useful ones.
– Current sampling approaches for multi-instance learning
work on the level of either bags or objects within bags.
However, difﬁculties may arise from both of these situ-
ations occurring at the same time. Firstly, it is important
to establish how each of those types of sample imbalance
affects a classiﬁer’s performance and is any of them more
harmful to it. Secondly, global schemes for tackling these
two types of imbalance at once must be proposed. They
should identify, which type of imbalance is predominant
and adapt their solution based on the characteristics of
analyzed problem.
6 Regression in imbalanced scenarios
Another branch of learning algorithms that is yet to be
explored from the imbalanced perspective is regression.
Many important real-life applications like economy, crisis
management, fault diagnosis, or meteorology require pre-
dicting rare and extreme values of continuous target variable.
These values are often accompanied by an abundance of stan-
dard or common values that model normal behavior of the
analyzed system. This leads to creation of an imbalanced
learning scenario. Despite frequent presence of this phenom-
enon in various problems so far little attention was paid to it.
Main works done on this topic include proposal of evaluation
metrics that take into account varying importance of obser-
vations [54] and adaptation of undersampling and SMOTE
to continuous output prediction problems [53]. This shows
that the research community took only its ﬁrst step into the
problem of imbalanced regression and further works on this
topic are of vital importance.
Following open issues are crucial when developing novel
methods for imbalanced regression:
– Development of cost-sensitive regression solutions that
are able to adapt the penalty to the degree of importance
assigned to rare observations. Not only existing methods
should be modiﬁed to include object-related cost infor-
mation, but also methodologies for assigning such costs
must be developed. It seems interesting to investigate the
possibility of adapting the cost not only to the minor-
ity group, but to each individual observation. This would
allow for a more ﬂexible prediction of rare events of dif-
fering importance.
– Methods that will allow to distinguish between minority
and noisy samples must be proposed. In case of small
number of minority observations the potential presence
of noisy ones may signiﬁcantly affect both preprocess-
ing and regression itself. Therefore, a deeper insight into
what makes a certain observation a noisy outlier and what
a valuable minority example is required.
– As in classiﬁcation problems, ensemble learning may
offer signiﬁcant improvement in both robustness to
skewed distributions and in predictive power. This direc-
tion is especially interesting, as the notion of ensemble
diversity is better explored from theoretical point of view
in regression than in classiﬁcation [6]. This should allow
to developing efﬁcient ensemble regression systems that
will have directly controlled diversity level on minority
observations.
123

228
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
7 Semi-supervised and unsupervised learning from
imbalanced data
Previous four sections concentrated on imbalanced scenarios
in supervised tasks. While this is the most popular area, it is
at the same time not the only one where skewed distributions
may affect the learning process. This phenomenon appears
often in semi-supervised [56], active [68] and unsupervised
learning [41], especially in clustering. Despite numerous
solutions dedicated to this problem, most of them display
reduced effectiveness when true underlying groups of data
have highly varying sizes. This is due to the so-called unifor-
mity effect that causes these algorithms to generate clusters
of similar sizes. This is especially vivid in case of centroid-
based approaches [60], while density-based ones seem to
display some robustness to it [52].
Clustering imbalanced data can be seen from various per-
spectives: as a process of group discovery on its own, as a
method for reducing the complexity of given problem, or as
a solution to analysis of the minority class structure. Such
knowledge discovery approach is important in many aspects
of learning from imbalanced data.
Following open issues are to be faced when developing
novel methods for clustering imbalanced datasets:
– There exist plethora of cluster validity indexes designed
for evaluating and selecting proper clustering models.
However, none of them takes into account the fact that
actual clusters may be of highly varying sizes. Therefore,
existing methods should be modiﬁed and new indexes
should be proposed that measure how well discovered
groups reﬂect the actual skewed distributions in analyzed
dataset.
– Popular centroid-based clustering approaches should be
adjusted to imbalanced scenarios, allowing more ﬂexible
cluster adjustment. A high potential lies in hybridiza-
tion with density-based methods for analyzing the local
neighborhood of centroid, or in local differing of sim-
ilarity measures that are used to assign given object to
certain cluster.
– It is very interesting to apply clustering only on the
minority class. This way we would be able to discover
substructures within that can be utilized in further learn-
ing steps. Extracting additional knowledge about the
examples within the minority class would also allow
for a more detailed insight into difﬁculties embedded in
the nature of data. However, for this we need reﬁned
clustering solutions that would be able to analyze the
structure of this class, while paying attention to different
possible types of examples that may appear. Here an algo-
rithm cannot be to generative (not to lose small groups of
objects) or to prone to overﬁtting (which can be an issue
in case of small-sample sized minority classes).
– Clustering can also be used as a method for ﬁtting more
specialized classiﬁers. Hence, we would be interested
in methods that are able to divide the original problem
into a set of atomic subproblems and identify difﬁcult
areas in the decision space. Such clusters would allow
to decompose the classiﬁcation problem and analyze it
independently for each part of the decision space, thus
being able to locally adapt the solution to the level and
type of difﬁculty present.
– Important issue is how to detect the underlying class
imbalance in semi-supervised and active learning. Here
the initial batch of examples may be fairly balanced, but
original distributions can be signiﬁcantly skewed. On
the other hand, the starting set of objects may display
imbalance that do not reﬂect the original one (majority
class may be in fact the minority one or there may be
in fact no imbalance at all). To answer such questions
novel unsupervised methods for assessing the distribu-
tions and potential difﬁculty of unlabeled objects must
be introduced. Additionally, novel active learning strate-
gies that can point out to the most difﬁcult objects that
will have highest effect on learned decision boundaries
are of interest to machine learning community.
8 Learning from imbalanced data streams
Mining data streams is one of the important contemporary
topics in machine learning [16,62]. Dynamical nature of
data that arrive either in batches or online poses new chal-
lengeswhenimbalanceddistributionsaretobeexpected[26].
Whether dealing with stationary or evolving streams we
require adaptive methods that are able to deal with skewed
objects coming in real time. Additionally, in case of chang-
ing streams the relationships between classes are no longer
permanent. We may face a situation in which the imbalance
ratio, as well as which class is the minority one, changes
with stream progress. Despite intense works on this subject
in recent years with single model approaches [22] and ensem-
ble learning [58] there are still numerous open challenges to
be addressed.
Following open issues are of high importance when
designing new algorithms for learning from imbalanced data
streams:
– Most of existing works assume that we deal with a binary
data stream for which the relationships between classes
may change over time: one of the classes may obtain
increased number of samples in given time window, other
class may have reduced number of new instances, or
classes may reach equilibrium. However, the imbalanced
problem may occur in data streams from various reasons.
A very important aspect that requires a proper attention
123

Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
229
is connected with the phenomenon of new class emer-
gence and/or disappearance of the old ones. When a new
class appears it will be naturally underrepresented with
respect to the ones present so far. Even with increased
number of examples from it the imbalance still will be
present,asclassiﬁershaveprocessedasigniﬁcantnumber
of objects before this new class emerged. It is interesting
how to handle this bias originating from classiﬁer’s his-
tory. Another issue is how to handle fading classes. When
objects from given distribution will become less and less
frequent should we increased their importance along with
increasing imbalance ratio? Or on the contrary, we should
reduce it as this class becomes less representative to the
current state of the stream?
– Another vital challenge is connected with the availability
of class labels. Many contemporary works assume that
class label is available immediately after the new sample
is being classiﬁed. This is far from real-life scenarios and
would impose tremendous labeling costs on the system.
Therefore, method for streaming data that reduce the cost
of supervision (e.g., by active learning) is currently of
crucial importance in this ﬁeld [69]. This raises an open
issue on how to sample imbalanced data streams? Can
the active learning approach be beneﬁcial to reducing the
bias towards the majority class by intelligent selection of
samples? On the other hand, one must develop labeling
strategies that will not overlook minority representatives
and adjust their labeling ratio to how well the current state
of minority class is captured.
– In many real-life streaming applications (like computer
vision or social networks) the imbalance may be caused
by reappearing source. This leads to recurring drift that
affects proportions between class distributions. Thus,
it seems worthwhile to develop methods dedicated to
storing general solutions to such scenarios instead of
reacting to each reappearance of class imbalance anew.
This requires development of algorithms to extract drift’s
templates and use them to train speciﬁc classiﬁers that
will be stored in repository. When a similar change in
class distributions will appear we may use available clas-
siﬁer instead of training a new one from the scratch. To
obtain best ﬂexibility and account for the fact that even in
recurring drifts the properties of individual imbalanced
cases may differ, one needs fast adaptation methods that
will use the stored classiﬁers as a starting point.
– Using characteristics and structure of minority class is a
promising direction for static imbalanced learning. But
is it possible to adapt this approach to streaming data?
The analysis of minority example types poses a high
computational cost, but one may use hardware speed-up
to alleviate this problem. Additionally, even if samples
arrive online their inﬂuence on minority class is local
which may be an useful hint for designing such sys-
tems. Algorithms dedicated to tracking and analyzing
the history of changes in minority class structure may
also provide us with valuable insight into the evolution
of imbalance problem in given stream over time.
9 Imbalanced big data
The ﬁnal open challenge discussed in this paper is connected
with increasing complexity of data. Modern systems generate
massive amounts of information that forces us to develop
computationally effective solutions for processing them. Big
datacanalsobeaffectedbyclass imbalance, posingincreased
challenge to learning systems [55]. Not only the increasing
datavolumecanbecomeprohibitiveforexistingmethods,but
also the nature of problem can cause additional difﬁculties.
Big imbalanced data can originate from various speciﬁc areas
like social networks [27] or computer vision [11] that forces
us to work with speciﬁc types of data like graphs, tensors or
video sequences. This requires not only scalable and efﬁcient
algorithms, but also methods for handling heterogeneous and
atypical data. Additional challenges are posed by computing
environments like Spark or Hadoop that were initially not
developed for handling skewed datasets.
Following open issues must be analyzed in order to gain
better understanding of how to tackle imbalanced big data:
– SMOTE-based oversampling methods applied in distrib-
uted environments such as MapReduce tend to fail [13].
This can be caused by a random partitioning of data
for each mapper and thus introducing artiﬁcial samples
on the basis of real objects that have no spatial rela-
tionships. Therefore, to apply SMOTE-based techniques
for massive datasets one either require new global-scale
and efﬁcient implementations, data partitioning meth-
ods that preserve relations between examples, or some
global arbitration unit that will supervise the oversam-
pling process.
– When mining big data we are interested in value we
can extract from this process. A promising direction lies
in developing methods that by analyzing the nature of
imbalance will allow us to gain a deeper understanding
of given problem. What is the source of imbalance, which
types of objects are the most difﬁcult ones, where over-
lapping and noise occurs and how does this translate to its
business potential? Additionally, interpretable classiﬁers
that can handle massive and skewed data are of interest.
– We must develop methods for processing and classify-
ing big data in form of graphs, xml structures, video
sequences, hyperspectral images, associations, tensors
etc [7,37]. Such data types are becoming more and more
frequent in both imbalanced and big data analytics and
impose certain restrictions on machine learning systems.
123

230
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
Instead of trying to convert them to numerical values it
seems valuable to design both preprocessing and learning
algorithms that will allow a direct handling of massive
and skewed data represented as such complex structures.
– When dealing with imbalanced big data we face one of
two possible scenarios: when majority class is massive
and minority class is of a small sample size and when
imbalanceispresentbutrepresentativesfrombothclasses
are abundant. First issue is related directly to the problem
of extreme imbalance discussed in Sect. 3.2 and solutions
proposed there should be adjusted to large-scale analyt-
ics. Second issue is related to the observations that imbal-
ance ratio may not be the main source of learning difﬁ-
culties. This requires an in-depth analysis of the structure
of minority class and examples present there. But it also
raises a question: is the taxonomy discussed in Sect. 3.1
still valid when facing massive datasets? Big data imbal-
ance may cause the appearance of new types of examples
or changes in properties of already described types. Addi-
tionally, we deal with a much more complex scenarios
that would require local analysis of each difﬁcult region
and ﬁtting solutions individually to each of them.
10 Conclusions
In this paper, we have discussed current research challenges
standing before learning from imbalanced data that have
roots in contemporary real-world applications. We analyzed
different aspects of imbalanced learning such as classiﬁca-
tion, clustering, regression, mining data streams and big data
analytics, providing a thorough guide to emerging issues in
thesedomains.Despiteintenseworksonimbalancedlearning
over the last two decades there are still many shortcomings in
existing methods and problems yet to be properly addressed.
In summary the research community should consider the
following directions when further developing solutions to
imbalanced learning problems:
– Focus on the structure and nature of examples in minority
classes in order to gain a better insight into the source of
learning difﬁculties.
– Develop methods for multi-class imbalanced learning
that will take into account varying relationships between
classes.
– Propose new solutions for multi-instance and multi-label
learning that are based on speciﬁc structured nature of
these problems.
– Introduce efﬁcient clustering methods for unevenly dis-
tributed object groups and measures to properly evaluate
and select partitioning models in such scenarios.
– Consider imbalanced regression problems and develop
methods for deeper analysis of individual properties of
rare examples.
– Analyze the nature of class imbalance in data streams
beyond simple notion of two classes with shifting distri-
butions.
– Gain a deeper insight into the potential value that can be
extracted from interpretable analysis of imbalanced big
data.
This paper showed that there are many challenges in the
vast ﬁeld of imbalanced learning that require attention from
the research community and intensive development. There
are still many unaudited directions to be taken in this branch
of machine learning. And this is what makes it still fresh and
exciting. Let us hope that all of issues and challenges high-
lighted in this paper will be addressed in future and that this
will lead to advancing our understanding of the imbalance
phenomenon in learning systems.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Polish National
Science Center under the Grant no. DEC-2013/09/B/ST6/02264.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1. Abdi, L., Hashemi, S.: To combat multi-class imbalanced problems
by means of over-sampling techniques. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng. 28(1), 238–251 (2016)
2. Anand, R., Mehrotra, K.G., Mohan, C.K., Ranka, S.: An improved
algorithm for neural network classiﬁcation of imbalanced training
sets. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 4(6), 962–969 (1993)
3. Azaria, A., Richardson, A., Kraus, S., Subrahmanian, V.S.: Behav-
ioral analysis of insider threat: a survey and bootstrapped prediction
in imbalanced data. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 1(2), 135–155
(2014)
4. Blaszczynski, J., Stefanowski, J.: Neighbourhood sampling in bag-
ging for imbalanced data. Neurocomputing 150, 529–542 (2015)
5. Branco, P., Torgo, L., Ribeiro, R.P.: A survey of predictive mod-
elling under imbalanced distributions. CoRR. arXiv:1505.01658
(2015)
6. Brown, G., Wyatt, J.L., Tiño, P.: Managing diversity in regression
ensembles. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6, 1621–1650 (2005)
7. Brzezinski, D., Piernik, M.: Structural XML classiﬁcation in con-
cept drifting data streams. New Generat. Comput. 33(4), 345–366
(2015)
8. Charte, F., Rivera, A.J., del Jesús, M.J., Herrera, F.: MLSMOTE:
approaching imbalanced multilabel learning through synthetic
instance generation. Knowl. Based Syst. 89, 385–397 (2015)
9. Chawla, N.V., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O., Kegelmeyer, W.P.: Smote:
syntheticminorityover-samplingtechnique.J.Artif.Intell.Res.16,
321–357 (2002)
123

Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
231
10. Cieslak, D.A., Hoens, T.R., Chawla, N.V., Kegelmeyer, W.P.:
Hellinger distance decision trees are robust and skew-insensitive.
Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 24(1), 136–158 (2012)
11. Cyganek, B.: Object Detection and Recognition in Digital
Images:Theory and Practice. Wiley, New York (2013)
12. Czarnecki, W.M., Rataj, K.: Compounds activity prediction in large
imbalanced datasets with substructural relations ﬁngerprint and
EEM. In: 2015 IEEE TrustCom/BigDataSE/ISPA, Helsinki, Fin-
land, August 20–22, 2015, vol. 2, p. 192 (2015)
13. del Río, S., López, V., Benítez, J.M., Herrera, F.: On the use of
mapreduce for imbalanced big data using random forest. Inform.
Sci. 285, 112–137 (2014)
14. Fernández, A., López, V., Galar, M., del Jesús, M.J., Herrera, F.:
Analysing the classiﬁcation of imbalanced data-sets with multiple
classes: binarization techniques and ad-hoc approaches. Knowl.
Based Syst. 42, 97–110 (2013)
15. Fernández-Navarro, F., Hervás-Martínez, C., Gutiérrez, P.A.: A
dynamic over-sampling procedure based on sensitivity for multi-
class problems. Pattern Recognit. 44(8), 1821–1833 (2011)
16. Gaber, M.M., Gama, J., Krishnaswamy, S., Gomes, J.B., Stahl,
F.T.: Data stream mining in ubiquitous environments: state-of-the-
artandcurrentdirections.WileyInterdiscip.Rev.DataMin.Knowl.
Discov. 4(2), 116–138 (2014)
17. Galar, M., Fernández, A., Barrenechea, E., Bustince, H., Her-
rera, F.: A review on ensembles for the class imbalance problem:
bagging-, boosting-, and hybrid-based approaches. IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. Part C 42(4), 463–484 (2012)
18. Galar, M., Fernández, A., Barrenechea, E., Bustince, H., Her-
rera, F.: Ordering-based pruning for improving the performance of
ensembles of classiﬁers in the framework of imbalanced datasets.
Inform. Sci. 354, 178–196 (2016)
19. Gao, X., Chen, Z., Tang, S., Zhang, Y., Li, J.: Adaptive weighted
imbalance learning with application to abnormal activity recogni-
tion. Neurocomputing 173, 1927–1935 (2016)
20. Gao, Z., Zhang, L., Chen, M.-Y., Hauptmann, A.G., Zhang, H.,
Cai, A.-N.: Enhanced and hierarchical structure algorithm for data
imbalance problem in semantic extraction under massive video
dataset. Multimed. Tools Appl. 68(3), 641–657 (2014)
21. García, S., Luengo, J., Herrera, F.: Data Preprocessing in Data Min-
ing, In: Intelligent Systems Reference Library, vol. 72. Springer,
Berlin (2015)
22. Ghazikhani, A., Monseﬁ, R., Yazdi, H.S.: Online cost-sensitive
neural network classiﬁers for non-stationary and imbalanced data
streams. Neural Comput. Appl. 23(5), 1283–1295 (2013)
23. He, H., Bai, Y., Garcia, E.A., Li, S.: Adasyn: Adaptive synthetic
sampling approach for imbalanced learning. In: Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2008, part of
the IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence, 2008,
Hong Kong, China, June 1–6, 2008, pp. 1322–1328 (2008)
24. He, H., Garcia, E.A.: Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng. 21(9), 1263–1284 (2009)
25. He, H., Ma, Y.: Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algo-
rithms, and Applications, 1st edn. Wiley-IEEE Press, New York
(2013)
26. Hoens, T.R., Polikar, R., Chawla, N.V.: Learning from streaming
data with concept drift and imbalance: an overview. Progress AI
1(1), 89–101 (2012)
27. Hurtado, J., Taweewitchakreeya, N., Kong, X., Zhu, X.: A classiﬁer
ensemblingapproachforimbalancedsociallinkprediction.In:12th
International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications,
ICMLA 2013, Miami, FL, USA, December 4–7, 2013, vol. 1, pp.
436–439 (2013)
28. Japkowicz, N., Myers, C., Gluck, M.: A novelty detection approach
to classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 1, pp. 518–523, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc, San Francisco (1995)
29. Japkowicz, N., Stephen, S.: The class imbalance problem: a sys-
tematic study. Intell. Data Anal. 6(5), 429–449 (2002)
30. Krawczyk, B., Galar, M., Jelen, Ł., Herrera, F.: Evolutionary under-
sampling boosting for imbalanced classiﬁcation of breast cancer
malignancy. Appl. Soft Comput. 38, 714–726 (2016)
31. Krawczyk, B., Wo´zniak, M.: Cost-sensitive neural network with
roc-based moving threshold for imbalanced classiﬁcation. In:
Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning—IDEAL
2015—16th International Conference Wroclaw, Poland, October
14–16, 2015, Proceedings, pp. 45–52 (2015)
32. Krawczyk, B., Wo´zniak, M., Herrera, F.: Weighted one-class
classiﬁcation for different types of minority class examples in
imbalanced data. In: 2014 IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence and Data Mining, CIDM 2014, Orlando, FL, USA,
December 9–12, 2014, pp 337–344 (2014)
33. Krawczyk, B., Wo´zniak, M., Herrera, F.: On the usefulness of
one-class classiﬁer ensembles for decomposition of multi-class
problems. Pattern Recognit. 48(12), 3969–3982 (2015)
34. Krawczyk, B., Wo´zniak, M., Schaefer, G.: Cost-sensitive decision
tree ensembles for effective imbalanced classiﬁcation. Appl. Soft
Comput. 14, 554–562 (2014)
35. Kubat,M.,Matwin,S.:Addressingthecurseofimbalancedtraining
sets: One-sided selection. In: In: Proceedings of the 14th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 179–186. Morgan
Kaufmann (1997)
36. López, V., Fernández, A., García, S., Palade, V., Herrera, F.: An
insight into classiﬁcation with imbalanced data: Empirical results
and current trends on using data intrinsic characteristics. Inform.
Sci. 250, 113–141 (2013)
37. Mardani, M., Mateos, G., Giannakis, G.B.: Subspace learning and
imputationforstreamingbigdatamatricesandtensors.IEEETrans.
Signal Process. 63(10), 2663–2677 (2015)
38. Mera, C., Arrieta, J., Orozco-Alzate, M., Branch, J.: A bag over-
sampling approach for class imbalance in multiple instance learn-
ing. In: Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis, Computer
Vision, and Applications—20th Iberoamerican Congress, CIARP
2015, Montevideo, Uruguay, November 9–12, 2015, Proceedings,
pp. 724–731 (2015)
39. Munkhdalai, T., Namsrai, O.-E., Ryu, K.H.: Self-training in signif-
icance space of support vectors for imbalanced biomedical event
data. BMC Bioinform. 16(S–7), S6 (2015)
40. Napierala, K., Stefanowski, J.: Types of minority class examples
and their inﬂuence on learning classiﬁers from imbalanced data. J.
Intell. Inform. Syst. (2015). doi:10.1007/s10844-015-0368-1
41. Nguwi, Y.-Y., Cho, S.-Y.: An unsupervised self-organizing learning
with support vector ranking for imbalanced datasets. Expert Syst.
Appl. 37(12), 8303–8312 (2010)
42. Prati, R.C., Batista, G.E.A.P.A., Silva, D.F.: Class imbalance revis-
ited: a new experimental setup to assess the performance of
treatment methods. Knowl. Inform. Syst. 45(1), 247–270 (2015)
43. Provost, F.: Machine learning from imbalanced data sets 101. In:
Proceedings of the AAAI 2000 workshop on imbalanced data sets,
pp. 1–3 (2000)
44. Ramentol, E., Gondres, I., Lajes, S., Bello, R., Caballero, Y., Cor-
nelis, C., Herrera, F.: Fuzzy-rough imbalanced learning for the
diagnosisofhighvoltage circuit breakermaintenance: the SMOTE-
FRST-2T algorithm. Eng. Appl. AI 48, 134–139 (2016)
45. Razakarivony, S., Jurie, F.: Vehicle detection in aerial imagery: a
small target detection benchmark. J. Vis. Commun. Image Repre-
sent. 34, 187–203 (2016)
46. Sáez, J.A., Krawczyk, B., Wo´zniak, M.: Analyzing the oversam-
pling of different classes and types of examples in multi-class
imbalanced datasets. Pattern Recognit. doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2016.
03.012 (2016)
47. Sáez, J.A., Luengo, J., Stefanowski, J., Herrera, F.: SMOTE-IPF:
addressing the noisy and borderline examples problem in imbal-
123

232
Prog Artif Intell (2016) 5:221–232
anced classiﬁcation by a re-sampling method with ﬁltering. Inform.
Sci. 291, 184–203 (2015)
48. Siers, M.J., Islam, M.Z.: Software defect prediction using a cost
sensitive decision forest and voting, and a potential solution to the
class imbalance problem. Inform. Syst. 51, 62–71 (2015)
49. Stefanowski, J.: Dealing with data difﬁculty factors while learning
from imbalanced data. In: Challenges in Computational Statistics
and Data Mining, pp. 333–363 (2016)
50. Sun,T.,Jiao,L.,Feng,J.,Liu,F.,Zhang,X.:Imbalancedhyperspec-
tral image classiﬁcation based on maximum margin. IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett. 12(3), 522–526 (2015)
51. Sun, Y., Wong, A.K.C., Kamel, M.S.: Classiﬁcation of imbalanced
data: a review. Int. J. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell. 23(4), 687–719
(2009)
52. Tabor, J., Spurek, P.: Cross-entropy clustering. Pattern Recognit.
47(9), 3046–3059 (2014)
53. Torgo, L., Branco, P., Ribeiro, R.P., Pfahringer, B.: Resampling
strategies for regression. Expert Syst. 32(3), 465–476 (2015)
54. Torgo, L., Ribeiro, R.P.: Precision and recall for regression. In:
Discovery Science, 12th International Conference, DS 2009, Porto,
Portugal, October 3–5, 2009, pp. 332–346 (2009)
55. Triguero, I., del Río, S., López, V., Bacardit, J., Benítez, J.M., Her-
rera, F.: ROSEFW-RF: the winner algorithm for the ecbdl’14 big
data competition: an extremely imbalanced big data bioinformatics
problem. Knowl. Based Syst. 87, 69–79 (2015)
56. Triguero, I., García, S., Herrera, F.: SEG-SSC: a framework based
on synthetic examples generation for self-labeled semi-supervised
classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 45(4), 622–634 (2015)
57. Wang, S., Li, Z., Chao, W.-H., Cao, Q.: Applying adaptive over-
sampling technique based on data density and cost-sensitive SVM
to imbalanced learning. In: The 2012 International Joint Con-
ference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Brisbane, Australia, June
10–15, 2012, pp. 1–8 (2012)
58. Wang, S., Minku, L.L., Yao, X.: Resampling-based ensemble meth-
ods for online class imbalance learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng. 27(5), 1356–1368 (2015)
59. Wang, X., Liu, X., Japkowicz, N., Matwin, S.: Resampling and
cost-sensitive methods for imbalanced multi-instance learning. In:
13th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops,
ICDM Workshops, TX, USA, December 7–10, 2013, pp. 808–816
(2013)
60. Wang, Y., Chen, L.: Multi-exemplar based clustering for imbal-
anced data. In: 13th International Conference on Control Automa-
tion Robotics & Vision, ICARCV 2014, Singapore, December
10–12, 2014, pp. 1068–1073 (2014)
61. Wei, W., Li, J., Cao, L., Ou, Y., Chen, J.: Effective detection of
sophisticated online banking fraud on extremely imbalanced data.
World Wide Web 16(4), 449–475 (2013)
62. Wo´zniak, M.: A hybrid decision tree training method using data
streams. Knowl. Inform. Syst. 29(2), 335–347 (2011)
63. Wo´zniak, M.: Hybrid Classiﬁers—Methods of Data, Knowledge,
and Classiﬁer Combination. In: Studies in Computational Intelli-
gence, vol. 519. Springer, Berlin (2014)
64. Wo´zniak, M., Grana, M., Corchado, E.: A survey of multiple classi-
ﬁer systems as hybrid systems. Inform. Fusion 16(1), 3–17 (2014)
65. Xu, R., Chen, T., Xia, Y., Lu, Q., Liu, B., Wang, X.: Word embed-
ding composition for data imbalances in sentiment and emotion
classiﬁcation. Cogn. Comput. 7(2), 226–240 (2015)
66. Yu, Hu, Sun, C., Yang, X., Yang, W., Shen, J., Qi, Y.: Odoc-elm:
optimal decision outputs compensation-based extreme learning
machine for classifying imbalanced data. Knowl. Based Syst. 92,
55–70 (2016)
67. Zhou, Z.-H., Liu, X.-Y.: On multi-class cost-sensitive learning.
Comput. Intell. 26(3), 232–257 (2010)
68. Zieba, M., Tomczak, J.M.: Boosted SVM with active learning strat-
egy for imbalanced data. Soft Comput. 19(12), 3357–3368 (2015)
69. Zliobaite, I., Bifet, A., Pfahringer, B., Holmes, G.: Active learning
with drifting streaming data. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.
25(1), 27–39 (2014)
123
