SPECIAL SECTION ON MILLIMETER-WAVE AND TERAHERTZ
PROPAGATION, CHANNEL MODELING AND APPLICATIONS
Received May 13, 2019, accepted May 27, 2019, date of publication June 6, 2019, date of current version June 28, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2921522
INVITED PAPER
Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz:
Opportunities and Challenges for 6G and Beyond
THEODORE S. RAPPAPORT
1, (Fellow, IEEE), YUNCHOU XING
1,
OJAS KANHERE
1, SHIHAO JU
1, ARJUNA MADANAYAKE
2, (Member, IEEE),
SOUMYAJIT MANDAL
3, (Senior Member, IEEE), AHMED ALKHATEEB4,
AND GEORGIOS C. TRICHOPOULOS
4, (Member, IEEE)
1NYU WIRELESS, Department of Electrical Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY 11220, USA
2Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA
3Case School of Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
4Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Corresponding author: Yunchou Xing (yx775@nyu.edu)
This work was supported by the NYU WIRELESS Industrial Afﬁliates Program and the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant
1702967, Grant 1731290, Grant 1902283, Grant 1711395, Grant 1854798, and Grant 1730946.
ABSTRACT Frequencies from 100 GHz to 3 THz are promising bands for the next generation of wireless
communication systems because of the wide swaths of unused and unexplored spectrum. These frequencies
also offer the potential for revolutionary applications that will be made possible by new thinking, and
advances in devices, circuits, software, signal processing, and systems. This paper describes many of
the technical challenges and opportunities for wireless communication and sensing applications above
100 GHz, and presents a number of promising discoveries, novel approaches, and recent results that will
aid in the development and implementation of the sixth generation (6G) of wireless networks, and beyond.
This paper shows recent regulatory and standard body rulings that are anticipating wireless products and
services above 100 GHz and illustrates the viability of wireless cognition, hyper-accurate position location,
sensing, and imaging. This paper also presents approaches and results that show how long distance mobile
communications will be supported to above 800 GHz since the antenna gains are able to overcome air-
induced attenuation, and present methods that reduce the computational complexity and simplify the signal
processing used in adaptive antenna arrays, by exploiting the Special Theory of Relativity to create a cone of
silence in over-sampled antenna arrays that improve performance for digital phased array antennas. Also, new
results that give insights into power efﬁcient beam steering algorithms, and new propagation and partition
loss models above 100 GHz are given, and promising imaging, array processing, and position location results
are presented. The implementation of spatial consistency at THz frequencies, an important component of
channel modeling that considers minute changes and correlations over space, is also discussed. This paper
offers the ﬁrst in-depth look at the vast applications of THz wireless products and applications and provides
approaches for how to reduce power and increase performance across several problem domains, giving early
evidence that THz techniques are compelling and available for future wireless communications.
INDEX TERMS mmWave, millimeter wave, 5G, D-band, 6G, channel sounder, propagation measurements,
Terahertz (THz), array processing, imaging, scattering theory, cone of silence, digital phased arrays, digital
beamformer, signal processing for THz, position location, channel modeling, THz applications, wireless
cognition, network ofﬂoading.
I. INTRODUCTION
The tremendous funding and research efforts invested in
millimeter wave (mmWave) wireless communications, and
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Thomas Kuerner.
the early success of 5G trials and testbeds across the world,
ensure that commercial wide-spread 5G wireless networks
will be realized by 2020 [1]. The use of mmWave in 5G
wireless communication will solve the spectrum shortage
in current 4G cellular communication systems that operate
VOLUME 7, 2019
2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
78729

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 1. The electromagnetic spectrum, and various applications as a function of frequency.
at frequencies below 6 GHz [2]. However, the increasing
number of new applications such as virtual/augmented real-
ity (VR/AR), autonomous driving, Internet of Things (IoT),
and wireless backhaul (as a replacement for labor-intensive
installation of optical ﬁber) [3], [4], as well as newer appli-
cations that have not been conceived yet, will need even
greater data rates and less latency than what 5G networks will
offer.
Today, within the global unlicensed wireless mmWave
band of 60 GHz, there is ∼7 GHz of bandwidth avail-
able [5], and in such a wide bandwidth, data rates on the
order of 100 Gigabits per second (Gbps) can only be achieved
with transmission schemes having a spectral efﬁciency of at
least 14 bit/s/Hz, which requires symbol ﬁdelity that is not
feasible using currently known digital modulation techniques
or transceiver components [6]–[8]. Therefore, data rates on
the order of 100 Gbps or more will ﬂourish at frequencies
above 100 GHz, where the available spectrum is massively
abundant [9].
Fig. 1 illustrates the applications and range of frequencies
available from the sub-THz regime up through and beyond
the optical spectrum, and shows how mmWaves and THz
frequencies are three and two orders of magnitude, respec-
tively, below the frequencies of visible light. At optical and
infrared frequencies, issues like the impact of atmospheric
and water absorption on the signal propagation, ambient sun-
light, required low transmission power budget due to eye-
safety limits, and high diffusion losses on rough surfaces
limit their use for wireless communication systems [10].
Ionizing radiation, which includes ultraviolet, x-rays, galactic
radiation, and gamma-rays, is dangerous since it is known to
have sufﬁciently high particle energy to dislodge electrons
and create free-radicals that can lead to cancer [11], [12]
and is believed to be a major health risk for interplanetary
travel [12], [13]. The adverse health effects of ionizing radi-
ation may be negligible, however, if used with care [14].
Ionizing radiation can be used for gauging the thickness of
metals, Roentgen Stereophotogrammetry, astronomy, nuclear
medicine, sterilizing medical equipment, and pasteurizing
certain foods and spices [15]. Unlike ionizing radiation,
mmWave and THz radiation are nonionizing because the
photon energy is not nearly sufﬁcient (0.1 to 12.4 meV,
which is more than three orders of magnitude weaker than
ionizing photon energy levels) to release an electron from
an atom or a molecule, where typically 12 eV is required
for ionization [11], [12], [16]. Since ionizing radiation is not
known to be a concern at mmWave and THz frequencies, and
heating is believed to be the only primary cancer risk [11],
[12], the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and
International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protec-
tion (ICNIRP) standards [17], [18] are designed principally
to protect against thermal hazards, particularly for the eyes
and skin where these tissues are most sensitive to heat from
radiation due to lack of blood ﬂow. However, we must point
out that with the likelihood of THz sources becoming more
widely available, there should be careful work done to under-
stand the biological and molecular impact of THz radiation
on human health [12], since, even though THz is more than
two orders of magnitude lower in frequency than ionizing
radiation, it would be prudent to know with certainty that
heating is the only health concern at THz [11].
While 5G, IEEE 802.11ay, and 802.15.3d [19], [20] are
being built out for the mmWave spectrum and promise data
rates up to 100 Gbps, future 6G networks and wireless appli-
78730
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
cations are probably a decade away from implementation, and
are sure to beneﬁt from operation in the 100 GHz to 1 THz
frequency bands where even greater data rates will be possi-
ble [3], [7], [10]. The short wavelengths at mmWave and THz
will allow massive spatial multiplexing in hub and back-
haul communications, as well as incredibly accurate sens-
ing, imaging, spectroscopy, and other applications described
subsequently in this paper [21]–[24]. The THz band, which
we shall describe as being from 100 GHz through 3 THz,
can also enable secure communications over highly sensitive
links, such as in the military due to the fact that extremely
small wavelengths (orders of microns) enable extremely high
gain antennas to be made in extremely small physical dimen-
sions [25]. Although we note the formal deﬁnition of the THz
region is 300 GHz through 3 THz, some have begun to use the
terms ‘‘sub-THz’’ or ‘‘sub-mmWave’’ (e.g. using frequency
or wavelength) to deﬁne the 100-300 GHz spectrum.
There are tremendous challenges ahead for creating com-
mercial transceivers at THz frequencies, but global research
is addressing the challenges. For example, the DARPA
T-MUSIC program is investigating SiGe HBT, CMOS/SOI
and BiCMOS circuit integration, in hopes of achieving power
ampliﬁer threshold frequencies ft of 500-750 GHz [26].
A survey of power ampliﬁer capabilities since the year
2000 is given in [27]. It should be clear that the semiconductor
industry will solve these challenges, although new architec-
tures for highly dense antenna arrays will be needed, due to
the small wavelengths and physical size of RF transistors
in relation to element spacing in THz arrays. Section III
provides some promising design approaches for future dig-
ital arrays.
Since there is very high atmospheric attenuation at THz
band frequencies, especially at frequencies above 800 GHz
(see Fig. 6), highly directional ‘‘pencil’’ beam antennas
(antenna arrays) will be used to compensate for the increased
path loss due to the fact that the gain and directivity increase
by the square of the frequency for a ﬁxed physical antenna
aperture size [6], [28]. This feature makes THz signals
exceedingly difﬁcult to intercept or eavesdrop [4], [10], [25],
[29]. However, a narrow pencil-like beam does not guaran-
tee immunity from eavesdropping, and physical-layer secu-
rity in THz wireless networks and transceiver designs that
incorporate new counter-measures for eavesdropping will be
needed [30].
Energy efﬁciency is always important for communication
systems, especially as circuitry moves up to above 100 GHz,
and a theoretical framework to quantify energy consump-
tion in the presence of vital device, system, and network
trade-offs was presented in [31], [32]. The theory, called the
consumption factor theory (CF, with a metric measured in
bps/W), provides a means for enabling quantitative analysis
and design approaches for understanding power trade-offs
in any communication system. It was shown in [31], [32]
that the efﬁciency of components of a transmitter closest
to the output, such as the antenna, have the largest impact
on CF [31]. The power efﬁciency increases with increasing
TABLE 1. Unlicensed spectrum proposed by FCC [33].
bandwidth when most of the power used by components that
are ‘‘off’’, e.g., ancillary, to the signal path (e.g., the baseband
processor, oscillator, or a display) is much greater than the
power consumed by the components that are in line with
the transmission signal path (e.g., power ampliﬁer, mixer,
antenna) [31], [32]. For a very simple radio transmitter,
such as one that might be used in low cost IoT or ‘‘smart
dust’’applications where the power required by the ancillary
baseband processor and oscillator is small compared to the
delivered radiated power, the power efﬁciency is indepen-
dent of the bandwidth [31]. Thus, contrary to conventional
wisdom, the CF theory proves that for antennas with a ﬁxed
physical aperture, it is more energy efﬁcient to move up
to mmWave and THz frequencies which yield much wider
bandwidth and better power efﬁciency on a bits per second
per watt (bps/W) basis, as compared to the current, sub-6 GHz
communication networks.
Global regulatory bodies and standard agencies such as
the FCC [33], the European Telecommunication Standards
Institute (ETSI) [34], and the International Telecommuni-
cation Union (ITU) [35], are seeking comments to allocate
frequency bands above 95 GHz for point-to-point use, broad-
casting services, and other wireless transmission applications
and use cases [36]–[39]. In fact, in March 2019, the FCC
voted to open up spectrum above 95 GHz for the ﬁrst time
ever in the USA, and provided 21.2 GHz of spectrum for
unlicensed use shown in Table 1, and permitted experimental
licensing up to 3 THz [40]. The mmWave coalition [41],
which is a group of innovative companies and universities
united in the objective of removing regulatory barriers to tech-
nologies using frequencies ranging from 95 GHz to 275 GHz
in the USA, submitted comments to the FCC and to the
National Telecommunications and Information Administra-
tion (NTIA) for developing a sustainable spectrum strategy
for America’s future, and urged NTIA to facilitate greater
access to spectrum above 95 GHz for non-Federal use in
January 2019 [41]. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) formed the IEEE 802.15.3d [20] task force
in 2017 for global Wi-Fi use at frequencies from 252 GHz
to 325 GHz, creating the ﬁrst worldwide wireless commu-
nications standard for the 250-350 GHz frequency range,
with a nominal PHY data rate of 100 Gbps and channel
bandwidths from 2 GHz to 70 GHz [20]. The use cases
for IEEE 802.15.3d include kiosk downloading (dubbed the
‘‘Information Shower’’ by an author of this paper) [42], intra-
device radio communication [43], connectivity in data cen-
VOLUME 7, 2019
78731

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
ters, and wireless ﬁber for fronthaul and backhaul [20], [41],
[44]. As indicated in [41], an interesting issue is the system
simulation and fabrication of antennas to ensure that ground-
based ﬁxed and mobile sub-THz systems do not interfere with
satellites and space-based sensors operating in the same sub-
THz bands above earth.
This paper is organized as follow: Section II provides
insights into mmWave and THz applications. Section III
explores the possibility of using array signal processing tech-
niques for improved front-end performance at frequencies
above 100 GHz. Section IV demonstrates viability for true
time delay (TTD) beamformers for wideband digital arrays.
Section V reviews key wireless propagation fundamentals
and presents measurements and research above 100 GHz
which could be used for many novel applications, including
future 6G communications. Channel sounding systems and
measured results at above 100 GHz are given in Section VI,
respectively. 28, 73 and 142 GHz channels are compared in
Section VII. Scattering mechanism at mmWave and THz fre-
quencies is explained in Section VIII. Section IX investigates
positioning approaches (e.g., position location that can be
used in navigation) at THz frequencies that promise unprece-
dented accuracy. Section X discusses the implementation
of spatial consistency, an important component of channel
modeling at THz frequencies, and Section XI concludes the
paper and summarizes key areas that warrant future research.
II. mmWave AND THz APPLICATIONS
The ultra-high data rates facilitated by mmWave and THz
wireless local area and cellular networks will enable
super-fast download speeds for computer communication,
autonomous vehicles, robotic controls, the information
shower [42], high-deﬁnition holographic gaming, entertain-
ment, video conferencing, and high-speed wireless data dis-
tribution in data centers [10]. In addition to the extremely
high data rates, there are promising applications for future
mmWave and THz systems that are likely to evolve in 6G
networks, and beyond. These applications can be categorized
into main areas such as wireless cognition, sensing, imaging,
wireless communication, and position location/THz naviga-
tion (also called localization, or positioning), as summarized
in Table 2.
A. WIRELESS COGNITION
Wireless cognition is the concept of providing a communica-
tion link that enables massive computations to be conducted
remotely from the device or machine that is doing real time
action [46]. For example, a lightweight drone ﬂeet may not
have the power or weight budget to conduct massive com-
putations on board the apparatus, but with a wide enough
channel bandwidth and sufﬁciently fast data rate, real time
computations for extremely complex tasks, such as contextual
awareness, vision, and perception may be carried out at a
ﬁxed base station or edge server that is in wireless connec-
tion and supporting real time cognition for the drone ﬂeet.
Robots, autonomous vehicles, and other machines may be
TABLE 2. Promising applications at mmWave and THz.
similarly designed to exploit cognitive processing performed
remotely from the machine using wireless, with the ability to
perform tasks without the beneﬁt of local cognition on the
platform [45], [46].
When one considers the growth of computational power
provided by Moore’s law, it can be seen that the modest
price of 1000 USD (the cost of today’s smart phone) will
likely be able to purchase a computer with computational
capabilities that are on the order of the human brain by the
year 2036. This observation stems from results in [54], [55]
which extrapolate the increase in computational capabilities
over time since 1965 [56]. The following analysis shows
that Terahertz frequencies will likely be the ﬁrst wireless
spectrum that can provide the real time computations needed
for wireless remoting of human cognition [52].
There are about 100 billion (1011) neurons in the human
brain, each of which can ﬁre 200 times per second (5 ms
update rate), and each neuron is connected to about 1000 oth-
ers, resulting in a computation speed of 20 × 1015 ﬂoating-
point operations per second (ﬂops) [54], [55], which, if each
operation is assumed to be binary, will require a data rate
of 20,000 Tbps:
Human Brain ﬂops (Computation Speed)
= 1011 neurons × 200 ﬂop/sec × 103/neuron
= 20 × 1015 ﬂop/sec = 20 petaﬂops/sec × 1 bit/ﬂop
= 20, 000 Tbps.
(1)
Each neuron has write access to 1000 bytes resulting in a
memory size of the human brain of 100 Terabytes [54], [55]:
Storage = 1011 neurons × 103 bytes/neuron
= 1014 bytes = 100 TB.
(2)
78732
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
Today’s state-of-the art 1000 USD computer technology
performs one trillion (e.g., 1012) computations/sec, which is
four orders of magnitude less than the speed of the human
brain. Future wireless generations (e.g., 6G or 7G) are likely
to allocate up to 10 GHz RF channels for each user in the THz
regime, and by assuming that each user is able to exploit
10 bits/symbol modulation methods and 1000 times increase
in channel capacity using yet-to-be-invented concepts beyond
cooperative multipoint (CoMP) and Massive-MIMO, it is
readily seen in (3) that data rates of 100 Terabytes/sec will
be achieved.
R = 10 GHz channel × 10 bits/(sec · Hz) × 103
= 100 Tbps.
(3)
From (1) and (2), it is clear that a 100 Tbps link is plausible
in a 10 GHz channel bandwidth, providing 0.5% of real
time human computational power. Ambitiously, if 100 GHz
channel bandwidths are used, 1 Petabits/sec of information,
or 5% of the real time computational power of the human
brain, could be carried over wireless [52].
B. SENSING
Sensing applications enabled by mmWave and THz frequen-
cies exploit the sub-mm wavelength and frequency selectivity
of the measured environment to gain knowledge about the
environment based on the observed signature of the propa-
gated signal. Sensing applications may exploit both the vastly
wider channel bandwidths at above 100 GHz, as well as
the frequency-selective resonances and absorption of various
materials. The ability to implement very high gain antennas
in a small physical form factor also enables sensing applica-
tions that are very directional, and as frequencies increase,
the spatial resolution becomes much ﬁner as a function of
wavelength, thereby enabling sub-millimeter spatial differen-
tiation as frequencies exceed 300 GHz.
Through beam scanning, it will become possible to create
images of physical spaces, through the systematic monitoring
of received signal signatures at a wide array of different
angles. Because electrical beam steering algorithms can be
implemented in real time (sub microsecond) and radio prop-
agation distances are small (e.g., on the order of meters in
a room) thus lending to propagation times that are less than
10 ns, it shall be feasible to measure the properties of a
room, an ofﬁce, or a complex environment in a matter of
seconds or less. This ability opens up a new dimension of
wireless, that enables future wireless devices to do ‘‘wireless
reality sensing’’ and gather a map or view of any loca-
tion, leading to detailed 3-D maps of the world created on
the ﬂy and uploaded/shared on the cloud by future devices
[57], [58]. Also, since certain materials and gasses have vibra-
tional absorption (e.g., resonances) at particular frequencies
throughout the THz band, it becomes possible to detect the
presence of certain items based on frequency scanning spec-
troscopy. The presence of certain chemicals or allergens in
food or drink or air, or other defects in the world around us,
may be sensed based on spectroscopy that could be enabled
in smart phones for 6G and beyond.
THz will enable new sensing applications such as
miniaturized radars for gesture detection and touchless
smartphones, spectrometers for explosive detection and gas
sensing [49], THz security body scanning, air quality detec-
tion [24], personal health monitoring systems [48], precision
time/frequency transfer, and wireless synchronization [10],
[22], [59]. By building real time maps of any environment,
it may also be possible to predict channel characteristics at a
mobile device, to aid in the alignment of directional antennas,
to provide on-the-ﬂy position location, as well as adaptation
of wireless capabilities [53]. This capability could also be fed
to the cloud to enable a real time collection capability for
mapping and sensing the world, which then could be used
in commercial applications for transportation, shopping, and
other retail uses.
C. IMAGING
Radar at mmWave and THz frequencies are more effective
than light or infrared-based imaging such as Light Detection
and Ranging (LIDAR), due to the smaller impact that weather
and ambient light have on the THz channel. It is worth
noting that although LIDAR can provide higher resolution,
LIDAR cannot work when it is foggy, raining, or cloudy [60].
However, mmWave and THz radar can be used for assist-
ing driving or ﬂying in foul weather, as well as in mili-
tary and national security [10], [21], [25]. High-deﬁnition
video resolution radars that operate at several hundred giga-
hertz will be sufﬁcient to provide a TV-like picture quality
and will complement radars at lower frequencies (below
12.5 GHz) that provide longer range detection but with poor
resolution [21], [23]. Dual-frequency radar systems will
enable driving or ﬂying in very heavy fog or rain [21].
THz waves can augment human and computer vision to see
around corners and to ‘‘view’’ NLOS objects, which enables
unique capabilities in rescue and surveillance, autonomous
navigation, and localization. A building surface (e.g., wall,
ﬂoor, door) typically behaves to a ﬁrst order as mirrors (e.g.,
perfect reﬂectors of THz energy), thus allowing THz imaging
to see around corners and behind walls if there are sufﬁcient
reﬂection or scattering paths (see Section VIII) [61], [62].
NLOS imaging methods based on visible and infrared light
have also been proposed in [63]–[65]. However, the optical
wavelength is smaller than the surface roughness of most sur-
faces, thus optical NLOS imaging requires complex hardware
and computationally expensive reconstruction algorithms,
while exhibiting short imaging distances (<5 m). In general,
the practical deployment of visible light systems is still not
clearly evolved due to weakly scattered signals, small ﬁeld
of view, and long integration times.
Alternatively, lower frequency (<10 GHz) NLOS radar
systems suffer less loss and objects appear relatively much
smoother. However, in the lower frequency spectrum, mate-
rials are semitransparent, edge diffraction become much
stronger, and images are easily cluttered due to strong multi-
VOLUME 7, 2019
78733

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 2. Surface scattering across the EM spectrum a) Most surfaces
appear smooth at microwave frequencies (specular scattering), b) Same
surfaces exhibit significant considerable roughness in optical spectrum
(diffuse scattering) c) in THz regime most building surfaces exhibit
significant diffuse scattering and strong specular reflections.
reﬂection propagation [66]–[70]. Additionally, radar systems
require accurate knowledge of the static geometry and are
limited to object detection rather that detailed images of the
hidden scene.
THz waves combine many of the advantageous traits of
both microwaves and visible light. Namely, they feature
small wavelengths and wide bandwidths that allow high
spatial resolution images with moderately sized imaging
systems [71], [72]. Additionally, THz scattering exhibits
both specular and diffuse scattering from most building sur-
faces, as depicted in Fig. 2 (see Section VIII for further
details). The strong specular component turns the surfaces
into something close to ‘‘electrical mirrors’’, thus allow-
ing to image objects around obstacles, while maintaining
spatial coherency (narrow beams) and high spatial reso-
lution [62]. Radar imaging systems illuminate the scene
with THz waves and generate 3D images by computing the
time of ﬂight (ToF) of the backscattered signals. When the
path of the scattered signal involves multiple bounces on
surrounding surfaces, the resulting 3D image appears dis-
torted. If the LOS surfaces act as mirrors due to the strong
specular reﬂections, a corrected image of the NLOS objects
can be reconstructed by applying relatively simple mirroring
transformations [61].
D. PRECISE POSITIONING
Leveraging mmWave imaging and communications for
centimeter-level localization is an exciting feature that will
likely be incorporated in future portable devices operating
above 100 GHz [52]. A simple example of what is pos-
sible was illustrated in [50] using an experimental setup,
as shown in Fig. 3(a). The experiment demonstrates excellent
accuracy when a LOS does not exist, and illustrates how
positioning and sensing will become part of communication
devices. Figure 3(a) shows the setup, which consists of (i) a
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) emulating a 13-cm aperture
linear antenna array and operating at 220-300 GHz, (ii) two
drywall sheets, and (iii) a single-antenna user that is in the
NLOS of the SAR. First, a mmWave image (e.g., map) of
the surrounding environment, including both LOS and NLOS
objects, is constructed by rapid beam steering and analyzing
the radar returns at very narrow beam angle separations.
Second, the user sends an uplink pilot that is used by the
FIGURE 3. Leveraging mmWave imaging and communications can
position devices with centimeter accuracy, even in NLOS scenarios. Figure
(a) shows the experimental setup adopted by [50] to illustrate the
capability of mmWave imaging-based positioning. In Figure (b) the user
location is projected on the constructed mmWave image.
antenna array, for example at a base station or an access point,
to estimate the angle and time of arrival (AOA and TOA).
Finally, the AOA and TOA are used to back-track the path of
the user signal on the constructed mmWave image, as shown
in Fig. 3(b), to determine the user location (see Section II-D
for more details). Considering Fig. 3(a), this mmWave
imaging/communication-based method was able to localize
the user within a 2 cm radius over a distance of 2.8 m, and
as shown in Section IX, excellent accuracy are possible over
much greater distances.
Leveraging mmWave and THz imaging for localization has
interesting and unique beneﬁts compared to other methods.
The mmWave imaging/communication methods proposed
in [50], [53], [58] can localize users in the NLOS areas,
even if their travel paths to the base station/access points
experience more than one reﬂection (e.g., multiple bounces).
For example, the experiment in Fig. 3(a) was able to localize
the user even though its path experiences two bounces. Fur-
ther, different from classical simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) methods, which require prior knowledge
and calibration of the environment, the proposed mmWave
imaging/communication-based technique in [50] does not
require any prior knowledge of the environment. By building
or downloading the map of the environment, the mobile
device will be able to exploit many other capabilities, such
as predicting the signal level, using real time site-speciﬁc
prediction [57], or uploading the map to the cloud that com-
piles physical maps, or which uses such maps for mobile
78734
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
applications [50], [53], [58]. Finally, due to leveraging the
large bandwidth available at frequencies above 100 GHz,
the LOS and NLOS users can be localized with centimeter
accuracy. These promising user features highlight the poten-
tial of merging mmWave imaging and communications for
precise positioning in 6G systems and beyond.
Using mmWave or THz imaging (e.g., a mmWave cam-
era as discussed in Section II-C) to reconstruct 3D maps
of the surroundings in unknown environments, it will be
possible to merge sensing and imaging and position loca-
tion all at the same time. As shown subsequently, mmWave
and THz signals reﬂect strongly from most building materials
which enable imaging of hidden objects (NLOS imaging)
[50], [53], [58], although as shown in Section VIII, scattering
can also be well modeled and predicted. Based on the 3D
maps of the physical surroundings, and the time and angular
information from a mobile (TOA and AOA), centimeter level
localization and mapping are achievable with the massive
bandwidth and large antenna arrays at mmWave and THz
frequencies [50], [53], [58].
III. MULTI-PORT ARRAY TRANSCEIVER ARCHITECTURES
BASED ON SPACE-TIME SIGMA-DELTA THEORY
The adoption of mmWave and THz frequency bands above
100 GHz may require new approaches to transceiver front-
end design, due to the challenges of power efﬁciency and the
vastly increased number of antennas that will be possible in a
small physical area. In fact, the physical size of RF ampliﬁers
may not be small enough to be physically located behind
individual antenna elements at THz frequencies, possibly
necessitating hybrid beamforming approaches for practical
implementations [73], [74].
Key transceiver performance metrics such as i) noise ﬁg-
ure (NF) and linearity of the low-noise ampliﬁer (LNA),
and ii) the peak output power Psat and power-added efﬁ-
ciency (PAE) of the power ampliﬁer, degrade rapidly with
increasing operating frequency f0 [6], [27], [75]. For exam-
ple, a survey of the recent literature shows the product of
Psat, gain, and PAE scales as 1/f 2
0 [27]. Phase noise also
increases with frequency, creating increased noise levels for
practical coherent demodulation. Thus, it becomes challeng-
ing to provide sufﬁcient performance at these frequencies to
facilitate higher-order modulations, such as those adopted by
modern 5G wireless and Wi-Fi systems. The larger number
of antennas used at mmWave and THz frequencies begs
consideration of array signal processing techniques that can
lead to improved antenna array performance in the face
of noise and linearity limitations for mmWave and THz
transceivers. In this section, we illustrate a promising new
technique of spatially-oversampled antennas, and present
new phased array device architectures and compact compu-
tational approaches that can provide accurate beam steering
with exponentially less power and physical chip real estate
than today’s methods of phased array beamforming.
A mmWave digital phased array transmits and receives
far-ﬁeld propagating electromagnetic plane-waves. One
FIGURE 4. (a) A spatially-oversampled Nx × Ny uniform rectangular
antenna array (URA). The antenna spacing is λm/  2Kx
 and λm/  2Ky

along the x-and y-axes, respectively. Here λm is the electromagnetic
wavelength, Kx ≥1 and Ky ≥1 are the spatial oversampling factors along
x and y, respectively, and assume Kx = Ky = Ku for convenience. (b) The
ROS of waves received by the 2-D URA (green) consists of a narrow light
cone that is sparse in the 3-D spacetime frequency domain.
promising viewpoint is to consider the spatio-temporal
frequency-domain region of support (ROS) of these plane-
waves as a region of causality that contains all possible
signals of interest seen by the array, while ignoring all other
components outside of the ROS [76]–[80]. This region of
causality, which is a frequency-domain version of the
light-cone that is well-described by the Special Theory of
Relativity, is a conical region of the spatio-temporal fre-
quency domain inside of which all plane-waves for a given
space-time beam pattern are constrained to exist (see Fig. 4).
For a Nyquist-sampled planar antenna array in the x-y plane,
the cone-shaped frequency domain region deﬁned by the sur-
face ω2
x + ω2
y = ω2
ct contains all propagating RF beams used
for wireless communications, where ωx and ωy are spatial
frequencies for the wave along the x and y axes, while ωct is
its temporal frequency in units such that the speed of light is
unity. When the antenna arrays are spatially-oversampled (see
Fig. 4(a)), the cone-shaped ROS becomes correspondingly
narrower, with a surface given by ω2
x + ω2
y = ω2
ct/K 2
u where
Ku ∈Z+ is the spatial over-sampling factor (see Fig. 4(b)).
Speciﬁcally, the opening angle of the cone is given by
θ′ = tan−1(1/Ku) (see Fig. 4(b)), which decreases as Ku
increases. Thus, the fractional volume of 3-D spacetime
occupied by the cone-shaped ROS of all propagating waves
decreases with Ku.
In other words, spatial oversampling of the antenna array
makes the cone increasingly sparse within 3-D spacetime.
As a simple numerical example, consider a carrier frequency
of 300 GHz, corresponding to a free-space wavelength of
λ = 1 mm. A conventional Nyquist-sampled antenna array
would have an antenna spacing of λ/2 = 0.5 mm, resulting
in an open cone angle θ′ = 45◦. By contrast, a 4× spatially-
oversampled array would have an oversampled antenna spac-
ing of λ/8 = 0.125 mm, resulting in θ′ = 14.0◦. Such
sparsity does not allow the array to generate sharper beams
(since beam width is ultimately limited by the total aperture),
but does result in other beneﬁts in terms of reduced noise
ﬁgure (NF), increased linearity, and a relaxing of the require-
ment of analog-to-digital converters or digital-to-analog con-
VOLUME 7, 2019
78735

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
verters (ADCs/DACs) resolution, as described in more detail
in the next sub-section.
A. CONES OF SILENCE IN ANTENNA ARRAYS
For a given spatial over-sampling factor Ku, all possible elec-
tromagnetic plane-waves and their beam-shaped wideband
spectral ROSs across an antenna array lie inside the cone-
shaped region of causality. Because of relativistic constraints,
no propagating waves can exist outside this region. This is a
direct result of the nature of the wave equation as observed in
the frequency domain. Thus, the rest of the spectral domain is
devoid of any propagating waves. Hence we denote the cone-
shaped ROS deﬁned by a particular antenna array’s over-
sampling factor as an array’s ‘‘cone of silence’’, and our
design mission becomes one of shifting all possible noise
and distortion to outside of this cone. Such cones directly
arise from fundamental physics, namely the causality of elec-
tromagnetic plane-waves in the spacetime frequency domain
(ωx, ωy, ωct) ∈R3 [76]–[80], and are thus present for all
uniformly-spaced rectangular arrays. We now show that these
naturally occurring ‘‘cones of silence’’ can be quite effective
in improving the performance of antenna array electronics as
the industry moves to THz bands.
B. MOVING FROM N 2-PORT TANSCEIVERS TO ONE
MULTI-PORT TRANSCEIVER FOR ARRAY PROCESSING
In conventional digital phased array transceivers, a single
transceiver is replicated N times to form an N-element array.
In the proposed approach, these N individual transceivers
are replaced by a single multi-port transceiver. For example,
N conventional multi-bit ADCs in an N element array are
replaced by a single KuN-port ADC which uses 1-bit reso-
lution. The multi-port ADC takes in KuN number of analog
inputs and produces KuN number of 1-bit digital outputs.
The algorithm, implemented in circuit form, shapes noise
and distortion in both space- and time-frequency domains,
such that the dominant parts of noise and distortion energy
lies outside the ‘‘cone of silence’’ of the signals of interest.
The fact that the noise and distortion has been shaped to be
outside the ‘‘cone of silence’’, while the signal of interest
itself lies inside it, allows lower-resolution ADC outputs to
be employed in an KuN element digital beamformer that
generates outputs with a higher digital resolution than in con-
ventional N-element array receivers. Such multi-port ﬂash
ADCs have the potential to achieve ≈2Ku(i.e., exponential)
savings in number of comparators at a Ku (i.e. linear) cost in
number of antennas. The idea of noise shaping is motivated by
the fact that, at sub-THz carrier frequencies with basebands
spanning tens of GHz, fully-digital arrays having KuN num-
ber of ‘‘crude 1-bit ADCs making up the multi-port ADC’’
is possible, unlike building N high-resolution ADCs for con-
ventional arrays, which is more extensive from a power and
part count perspective. The noise-shaping approach allows a
spatially over-sampled dense 1-bit receiver array to have the
same quantization noise performance as a 3-4 bit resolution
array which is Nyquist spaced.
FIGURE 5. An overview of a space-time 1 −6 ADC where spatio-temporal
noise-shaping occurs along both spatial- and temporal-frequency
domains. The analog filtering module inside the multi-port ADC couples
the inputs and output ports in such a manner that the quantization noise
arising from the 1-bit quantizers are shaped to be outside the
Ku-compressed ‘‘cone of silence’’ of the array. The plane-wave signals of
interest, on the other hand, now lie inside the ‘‘cone of silence’’ and can
be extracted by a sharp digital beamformer whose minor lobes will
significantly attenuate the quantization noise of the system.
C. SPATIALLY NOISE-SHAPED CIRCUITS FOR ANTENNA
ARRAYS
The fact that ‘‘cones of silence’’ exist for all phased arrays
and become increasingly sparse in 3-D spacetime as Ku
increases was previously exploited to improve array perfor-
mance, but offers even greater promise for mmWave and
Terahertz phased array antennas. As was ﬁrst shown in [81]
and later expanded upon in [82]–[86], it is possible to exploit
such multi-dimensional spatio-temporal feedback between
the individual transceiver channels, i.e., along both spatial as
well as temporal dimensions. These feedback loops emulate
the performance of 1 −6 algorithms, which are widely
used to improve the resolution of ADCs and digital-to-analog
converters (DACs) [6], [87]. Fig. 5 shows an example 1 −6
ADC and LNA compared with the topology of a conventional
digital phased array. A critical and valuable practical result
of using the phased array architecture in Fig. 5 is that it
becomes possible to use RF circuitry (which may be phys-
ically large compared to antenna element spacing) behind
numerous antenna elements (either in a true digital or hybrid
beamforming implementation). Conventional array designs
simply may not be able to accommodate, physically, the RF
transistors in a phased array package.
A conventional 1−6 ADC is designed to separate desired
signals (i.e., the inputs to be digitized) from undesired ones
(i.e., quantization noise) along the temporal frequency axis,
thus increasing the ADC’s precision beyond that of its quan-
tizer. In fact, many 1 −6 ADCs use a 1-bit quantizer
(i.e., a single comparator) but nevertheless provide several
bits of effective resolution (i.e., effective number of bits or
ENOB≫1). Such improved performance arises by combining
two key principles: i) temporal oversampling to expand the
frequency range over which the ADC’s quantization noise
is spread, thus reducing its power spectrum density (PSD);
and ii) noise shaping to actively ﬁlter quantization noise
out of the small frequency range (at low frequencies) within
which the input signals of interest must be conﬁned (due
to oversampling). Note that a 1 −6 DAC operates in a
fundamentally similar way, but with the roles of the analog
input and digital output signals reversed.
78736
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
The key point exploited in [81]–[86] is that the potential
beneﬁts of i) spatially oversampling an antenna array, and
ii) shaping unwanted thermal and quantization noise of the
array electronics away from the ‘‘cone of silence’’ occupied
by propagating electromagnetic waves, are exactly analo-
gous to those provided by temporal oversampling and noise
shaping in a conventional 1 −6 ADC or DAC. In partic-
ular, it becomes clear that it is possible to add appropriate
spatial-domain, and spatio-temporal domain feedback loops
(i.e., carefully-designed electrical coupling networks between
the ampliﬁers and data converters present in adjacent
transceiver channels as shown in Fig. 5) that mimic the noise
shaping provided by a 1 −6 converter, but in the spatio-
temporal (rather than temporal) frequency domain. As a
result, the thermal noise, quantization noise, and nonlinear
distortion added by low-noise ampliﬁers (LNAs), ADCs,
and DACs within the array can be actively shaped to lie
outside the array’s ‘‘cone of silence’’, effectively separating
them from the propagating electromagnetic waves received
or transmitted by the antennas. As a result, spatial noise
shaping improves all the important performance metrics for
a receive array: it reduces NF, greatly increases linearity,
and signiﬁcantly increases ENOB [85], [86]. These improve-
ments enable receiver power consumption to be reduced
for a given set of performance metrics. For example, one
can use individually noisy and nonlinear ampliﬁers and
low-resolution quantizers to emulate high-performance ver-
sions, thus greatly reducing hardware complexity and overall
power consumption. As a result, the design and cooling
requirements of dense multi-beam arrays can be greatly
simpliﬁed.
In practice, the available performance improvements due to
spatial and spatio-temporal noise-shaping are eventually lim-
ited by the increase in mutual coupling between the antenna
elements as the spatial oversampling factor Ku increases.
Intuitively, a highly-oversampled array approaches a con-
tinuous aperture, implying that no further improvements in
NF, linearity, or ENOB are possible [85], [86]. However,
both simulations and experiments conﬁrm that signiﬁcant
performance beneﬁts are achievable using common antenna
elements (e.g., patches and dipoles) for moderate oversam-
pling ratios (Ku ≤4).
IV. NOVEL WIDEBAND MULTI-BEAMFORMERS AT LOW
SIZE, WEIGHT, AND POWER (SWaP)
We now demonstrate promising new approaches in computa-
tion for obtaining beamforming array patterns with much less
computation power and time than conventional methods.
An N-element uniformly-spaced linear antenna array can
be used to realize an N-beam multi-beamformer by comput-
ing N-element discrete Fourier transforms (DFTs) along the
spatial dimension. These computations can be efﬁciently per-
formed using a spatial Fast Fourier transform (FFT), which
can be implemented using both analog as well as digital
approaches [88] and reduces the brute force computational
complexity of the DFT from O(N 2) down to O(N log N).
Moreover, approximate versions of the DFT can be com-
puted with even lower complexity than the FFT, as shown by
Cintra, Bayer, and their collaborators [89]–[93]. The Cintra-
Bayer approach to approximate-DFT computation allows
signiﬁcantly smaller arithmetic complexity over FFT-based
approaches (in some cases, reducing the computation burden
by an order of magnitude for large N) at the cost of only
∼2 dB penalty in worst-case sidelobe level [89]–[93]. Note
that while today’s mobile devices do not concern themselves
with the power savings due to FFT computations (because
ﬁdelity of the modulation is vital for bit error rate), the same
may not be true for future wireless devices at mm-wave
and THz. In fact, the availability of massive channel band-
widths and likely increase in sensitivity to power consump-
tion (e.g., prolonged battery life) may remove the present-day
need for perfect ﬁdelity in DFT/FFT processing and making
approximate versions attractive [93].
However, both DFT/FFT and approximate-DFT approaches
are narrowband digital beamformers and are therefore not
suitable for emerging wideband 5G/6G digital arrays [94].
In fact, true time delay (TTD) beamformers are required
for achieving electronically-steered wideband RF beams.
Unlike phased-array (i.e., DFT-based) beamformers, which
are limited to a relatively small fractional bandwidth because
of ‘‘beam squint’’ [95], a TTD beamformer achieves fre-
quency independent wideband RF beams as demanded by
5G and impending 6G applications. However, the digital
arithmetic complexity required to generate a massive num-
ber of TTD beams can be quite staggering compared to
the traditional narrowband methods used in digital phased-
arrays. Thus, while the use case for generating a large
number of TTD digital beams in emerging wireless systems
is a strong one, the resulting arithmetic circuit complexity
and power consumption often becomes a limiting factor.
A novel approach to multi-beam TTD beamforming has been
explored, where the delay Vandemonde Matrix (DVM) and
its factorization [96], [97], has the potential to signiﬁcantly
lower the net arithmetic complexity of the underlying dig-
ital system, well below the brute-force matrix computations
required for the direct-computed DVM approach [95]. Exten-
sions to FFT-like algorithms for the case of the multi-beam
DVM-based TTD beamformer are the subject of ongoing
research. In particular, fast algorithms for DVM factorization
have already been found for relatively small N, while more
general versions applicable to larger values of N are being
actively developed [95]–[97]. What is fascinating to note is
that the use of TTD approaches has also found promise in
mmWave and THz circulators and duplexers, which are non-
linear devices that allow one-way transmission for coupling
multiple signals to a single RF port [98]. Thus, it is clear that
TTD approaches for both antennas and circulators/duplexers
offer great promise in reducing noise and increasing isolation
and linearity for future mm-wave and THz electronics as
compared to the electronics used in present-day wireless
systems [99].
VOLUME 7, 2019
78737

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 6. Atmospheric absorption beyond the natural Friis free space
loss of electromagnetic waves at sea level versus frequency under
different humidity conditions [101], [104].
V. MOVING TO BEYOND 5G AND ABOVE 100 GHz–
A NEW TYPE OF CHANNEL
The importance of atmosphere absorption effects on the
transmission of high frequency signals has long been rec-
ognized [100], [101]. At lower frequencies (below 6 GHz),
the attenuation of a propagating wave is mainly caused by
molecular absorption in free space, which is minimal [102],
but at higher frequencies, as the wavelength approaches the
size of dust, rain, snow, or hail, the effects of Mie scattering
become more severe [6], [103], [104]. The various resonances
of oxygen, hydrogen, and other gases in the atmosphere, how-
ever, cause certain frequency bands to suffer from signiﬁcant
signal absorption. Fig. 6 illustrates how the frequency bands
of 183 GHz, 325 GHz, 380 GHz, 450 GHz, 550 GHz, and
760 GHz suffer much greater attenuation over distance in
typical air due to the atmospheric absorption, which is in
addition to the natural Friis’ free space loss, making these
particular bands well suited for very short range and secure
communications such as ‘‘whisper radio’’ applications, where
massive bandwidth channels will attenuate very rapidly out to
a few tens of meters, meters, or fractions of a meter [2], [4],
[6], [25], [104]. Fig. 6 also shows many mmWave and THz
bands suffer surprising little loss as compared to sub 6-GHz
bands, perhaps less than 10 dB/km of additional loss than
caused by free space propagation in air up to 300 GHz. These
frequency bands could easily be used for high speed 6G
mobile wireless networks with up to km size coverage range,
and perhaps even up to 10 km or beyond in ﬁxed applications
[4], [25], [105]–[107]. In fact, Fig. 6 shows that much of the
spectrum between 600 and 800 GHz suffers 100 to 200 dB/km
attenuation, which is only 10 to 20 dB over a 100 m distance
(the typical radius of a small cell). As shown subsequently,
high gain electronically steered directional antennas, that
are physically small, will easily overcome this atmospheric
attenuation, meaning that the mobile industry will be able
to work well up to 800 GHz in the future using the small-
cell architectures envisioned for 5G if line-of-sight or strong
reﬂectors exist.
FIGURE 7. Rain attenuation flattens out above 100 GHz. The rain
attenuation at 1 THz is 10 dB/km for moderate rainfall of 25 mm/h, only
4 dB/km more than the rain attenuation experienced at
28 GHz [2], [101], [110].
Work in [108] showed that particles such as rain
drops, snow, and hail caused substantial attenuation at
frequencies above 10 GHz. 73 GHz signals attenuate at
10 dB/km when the rain rate is 50 mm/h [2], [6], [109].
Interestingly, as shown in [2], [101], [110] rain attenuation
ﬂattens out from 100 GHz to 500 GHz, meaning that rain will
not cause any additional attenuation at operating frequencies
above 100 GHz (see Fig. 7). For all mmWave frequencies
where the urban cell sizes are on the order of 200 m, rain
or snow attenuation can clearly be overcome with additional
antenna gain (obtainable by switching in more antenna array
elements) [2], [4], [6].
Work in [102], [111]–[115] showed effects of rain, fog,
dust, and air turbulence at THz and infrared frequencies
based on measurements with less than 10 m links, which
indicated a relatively small change (a few dB) in the received
power compared to the power received in clear weather. THz
outdoor measurements during a snow fall at 200 GHz were
presented in [103], and a 2 dB decrease in the received power
was observed across an 8 m LOS link indicating that a higher
transmitted power was required during a snow fall to maintain
the same data rate. As shown in Fig. 7, mmWave and THz
wireless channels are expected to experience ∼30 dB/km of
maximum rain attenuation above 100 GHz.
Since the ﬁrst Fresnel zone is tiny at THz frequencies,
the antenna beams of wireless devices are easily blocked
[116], [117], which requires rapidly steerable phased array
transceivers to support both adequate transmission range and
to provide adaptive beam steering [2], [8], [60], [110]. The
78738
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
array angular resolution approximates λ/L, where λ is the
wavelength at the carrier frequency and L is the aperture of
the array. For example, consider a ﬁxed wireless system or
mobile base station using a 340 GHz carrier with a 35 cm
(14 inch) aperture – this permits a sharp 0.14 ◦beam reso-
lution [21]. Three system examples – a 140 GHz, 10 Gbps
picocell backhaul unit using 64-element arrays; a 340 GHz,
8-channel 160 Gbps MIMO backhaul link with each channel
comprised of a 64-element subarray module; and a heads-
up-display 400 GHz automotive imaging radar using a linear
64 × 512 array and frequency scanned beam steering were
presented in [60], thus proving the capability of building THz
systems.
There is still a recurring misconception among researchers,
that the wireless channels at higher frequencies would expe-
rience more loss, since they have been taught to only con-
sider the free space path loss (FSPL) with omnidirectional
antennas. However, it is important to note that at higher
frequencies, the antennas (for a given physical size) will
be more directional and have more gain. Friis free space
equation (4) with antenna gain (5) readily demonstrate that
higher frequency links are viable with less loss, not more
[6], [28]. With directional antennas at both link ends,
the received power is given by (6). Theoretically, the path
loss in free space decreases quadratically as frequency
increases, so long as the physical size of the antenna (effec-
tive aperture) is kept constant over frequency at both link
ends [4], [6], [28], [118].
The astounding result of improved coverage at higher fre-
quencies for a given antenna aperture at both ends of the link
is clear in Fig. 8, where the received power at 140 GHz free
space is 5.7 dB and 14 dB greater than the power received
at 73 GHz and at 28 GHz, respectively, for the same TX
output power and for identical physical antenna areas at all
frequencies (see Ch.3 in [6]). The better wireless links at
higher frequencies enable wider bandwidths to be used while
keeping the same signal to noise ratio as at lower frequen-
cies, implying that highly directional steerable antennas will
enable mobile systems to overcome air-induced attenuation
well into the THz region.
VI. CHANNEL SOUNDING AND CHANNEL PROPERTIES
ABOVE 100 GHz
There are three main channel sounding techniques in the THz
range, namely, THz Time Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS),
Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) based channel sounding,
and correlation based sounding [6], [28], [118]–[121]. THz-
TDS is based on sending ultrashort pulsed laser light from
a common source to the transmitter (TX) and the receiver
(RX). The TX converts the ultrashort light pulse to the THz
range and the detector at the RX transforms the received ﬁeld
strength of the THz impulse into an electrical signal when
the optical impulse hits the detector [119], [120]. The short
THz-TDS pulses cover a huge bandwidth and are excellent
for estimating electrical and scattering parameters of sample
materials. However, due to the large size of the spectrometer
FIGURE 8. Received power vs. distance with (i) TX and RX are both
directional, (ii) TX is directional but RX is omnidirectional, and (iii) both TX
and RX are omnidirectional at 28 GHz, 73 GHz, and 140 GHz. Directional
antennas with equal effective aperture (Ae = 2.9 cm2) at both TX and RX
have much less path loss at higher frequencies (see Ch.3 in [6] and [28]).
and the limited output power, it is not suitable to be used over
a wide range of indoor or outdoor scenarios or for measuring
the wireless channels at more than a few meters of distance.
Four-port VNAs are commonly used for THz range chan-
nel sounding, where the two additional ports (compared to
the traditional two-port VNAs used at lower frequencies)
are used to generate a local oscillator for the mixer in the
frequency extensions, that are used to elevate the VNA stock
frequency range to much higher frequencies through hetero-
dyning [120], [121]. A VNA sweeps discrete narrowband
frequency tones across the bandwidth of interest to mea-
sure the S21 parameter of the wireless channel. Due to the
long sweep time across a broad spectrum which can exceed
the channel coherence time, VNA-based channel sounders
are typically used in a static environment and require a
cable that can be a tripping hazard over tens or hundreds of
meters [28], [118], [121].
Correlation based channel sounder systems transmit a
known wideband pseudo-random sequence. At the RX,
the received signal is cross-correlated with an identical but
slightly delayed pseudo-random sequence, providing auto-
correlation gain at the expense of a slightly longer acquisi-
tion time (on the order of tens of ms) [118], [121], [122].
Sliding correlator chips have recently been produced that
offer a 1 Gbps baseband spread spectrum sequence [123],
and sliding correlators generally enable cable-free operation
over useful mobile communication distances of up to 200 m
at sub-THz frequencies, depending on transmit power, band-
width, and antenna gain [28], [121]. A 140 GHz channel
sounder with 1 GHz RF bandwidths has been used to mea-
sure indoor channels at NYU [28], with new measurements
results given in Section VII. A correlation-based channel
sounder at 300 GHz with 8 GHz bandwidth was presented
and evaluated in [120] with the same wired clock source being
connected to both the TX and RX, which use a subsampling
technique to avoid the expense of high-speed A/D converters.
A 12th order M-sequence was used with a subsampling factor
VOLUME 7, 2019
78739

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
of 128, and the theoretically maximum measurable Doppler
frequency was 8.8 kHz, equivalent to a velocity of 31.7 km/h
at 300 GHz [120].
Measurements at 100, 200, 300, and 400 GHz with a
1 GHz RF bandwidth THz-TDS channel sounder showed
that both indoor LOS and NLOS (specular reﬂection from
interior building walls) links could provide a data rate
of 1 Gbps [104].
Propagation loss measurements for estimating the perfor-
mance of a communication link in the 350 GHz frequency
band were presented in [124], where a VNA based system
was used with 26 dBi gain co-polarized horn antennas at both
the TX and RX. The presence of water absorption lines in the
spectra at 380 GHz and 448 GHz was very evident. Data rates
of 1 Gbps for a 8.5 m link and 100 Gbps for a 1 m T-R sepa-
ration distances were shown to be possible via wireless com-
munication links at 350 GHz [124]. Channel and propagation
measurements at 300 GHz were presented in [125], [126],
where a VNA based channel system with 26 dBi gain horn
antennas at both TX and RX was used to analyze the chan-
nel characteristics from 300-310 GHz with an IF frequency
bandwidth of 10 kHz. Maximum transmission rates of several
tens of Gbps for LOS and several Gbps for NLOS paths were
shown to be achievable [126]. THz band indoor propagation
measurements were conducted in [127] using a VNA based
system covering a frequency range from 260 GHz to 400 GHz
with 25 dBi gain horn antennas at both TX and RX within a
T-R separation range of 0.95 m. Measurement results showed
that Tbps throughput was achievable in the THz band. How-
ever, robust beam forming algorithms will be required in THz
band communications. Acoustic ceiling panels, which were
shown to be good reﬂectors at THz band, could be used as
low cost components to support NLOS links [127].
Absorption coefﬁcients of glass, medium density ﬁber-
board, and plexiglass were measured where the S21 parameter
was recorded at a T-R separation distance of 10 cm with and
without the obstructions brought into the ray path, showing
that a 2.5 cm thick window and a 3.5 cm thick ﬁberboard
door would induce absorption attenuation of approximately
65.5 dB and 86.7 dB at 300 GHz [125], respectively. Sec-
ond generation transceivers demos for D-band radars with
Doppler, loop-back, and 4 Gbps NLOS radio links, over the
air and at distances exceeding one meter were presented
in [128]. The transceiver chip-set operated at 122 GHz based
on low-voltage typologies with a 7.5 dB noise ﬁgure and
−95 dBc/Hz phase noise while consuming only 220 mW.
VII. COMPARING 28, 73, AND 142 GHz CHANNELS
Propagation measurements in the 140 GHz band were con-
ducted in a shopping mall [129], [130] using a VNA based
channel sounder with a 19 dBi horn antenna at the RX, and
a 2 dBi bicone antenna at the TX. It was shown that the
numbers of clusters and multipath components (MPCs) in
each cluster in the 140 GHz band, an average of 5.9 clus-
ters and 3.8 MPCs/cluster, were fewer compared to the
28 GHz band, which had an average of 7.9 clusters and
5.4 MPCs/cluster [129]. Work in [131], [132] presented
D-band propagation measurements in a very close-in envi-
ronment around a personal computer using a VNA based
sounder. Indoor directional path losses at 30 GHz, 140 GHz,
and 300 GHz were compared using different path loss models
in [132]. Although the LOS path loss models predicted path
loss exponents (PLE) close to 2.0, the multi-frequency close-
in free space reference distance model with a frequency-
dependent term (CIF) and alpha-beta-gamma (ABG) model
had slightly better PLE and standard deviation stability for
the indoor environments than the single-frequency CI and
Floating Intercept (FI) models (although a sensitivity analysis
such as provided in [133] has not yet been performed for
indoor sub-THz channels) [4], [132], [134], [135].
Indoor channel measurements in the 126-156 GHz fre-
quency band were given in [136] using a VNA-based channel
sounder and 20 dBi gain horn antennas at both TX and RX
within a T-R separation distance of 10.6 m. The PLE for the
measured D band signal was close to 2 (free space) since
the LOS component is much stronger than the secondary
paths. The root mean square delay spread was found to be
15 ns [136].
Channel modeling and capacity analysis for THz band
electromagnetic (EM) wireless nano-networks were explored
in [137], where a propagation model accounting for the total
path loss and the molecular absorption for EM communica-
tions in the THz bands (0.1-10 THz) was developed based on
radiative transfer theory. Channel capacity of the THz band
was investigated by using the proposed path loss model for
different power allocation schemes, showing that for several
tens of millimeters propagation distance, the THz channel
supports very large bit-rates (up to few terabits per second),
which enables a radically different communication paradigm
for nano-networks [137].
A. CALIBRATION, FREE SPACE PATH LOSS (FSPL), AND
ANTENNA CROSS-POLARIZATION DISCRIMINATION
A key to all measurements is using a standard approach
for calibration, that assures repeatable measurements by any
research team at any frequency [138]. 140 GHz FSPL ver-
iﬁcation measurements were conducted at T-R separation
distances of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 m using the standard calibration
and veriﬁcation method taught in [138], and the results are
shown after removal of antenna gains in Fig. 10, together with
28 GHz and 73 GHz path loss measurement data [2], [139].
The measured path loss at 140 GHz agrees with Friis FSPL
equation [140]. The CI path loss model with 1 m reference
distance [2] ﬁts perfectly to the measured data, showing that
the CI model is viable well above 100 GHz.
As shown in Fig. 10, the difference in the path loss
measured at 73 GHz and 140 GHz in far ﬁeld distances
within a few meters is 5.85 dB, which is extremely close
to the theoretical value calculated by Friis FSPL equation
(20 × 10 log10
140
73
= 5.66 dB), indicating the high accu-
racy and proper calibration of the channel sounder system.
The difference in the path loss between the 28 and 73 GHz
78740
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
TABLE 3. Summary of NYU channel sounder systems and antennas used in measurements at 28 GHz, 73 GHz and 142 GHz [2], [28], [121].
FIGURE 9. Block diagram of 140 GHz broadband channel sounder system with 4 GHz 3 dB RF bandwidth used at NYU WIRELESS.
measurements at the same distance is 8.45 dB, which is
virtually identical to Friis FSPL equation (20×10 log10
73
28 =
8.32 dB) [138], where calibration and path loss values were
calculated using (4)-(6).
Pr = PtGtGrλ2
(4πd)2
(4)
G = Ae4π
λ2
(5)
Pr = PtAetAer
d2λ2
(6)
Polarization diversity can provide up to twice the data
rates in dual-polarized communication systems, as com-
pared to single co-polarized systems without any extra band-
width or spatial separation between antennas [141], [142].
Measurements and calibration for antenna cross-polarization
discrimination (XPD) at 28, 73, and 140 GHz were con-
ducted to analyze the polarization characterization of the horn
antennas [138], [143]. The XPD values also are required
to analyze the polarization effects of partitions at different
frequencies.
The architectures of the channel sounders used in the
measurements given here have been extensively described
in [28], [121]. The LO, IF frequencies, and antenna charac-
teristics are summarized in Table 3. The output power from
the TX waveguide (with the antenna removed) was measured
FIGURE 10. 28, 73 and 140 GHz free space path loss (after subtracting out
all antenna gains) verification measurements at distances of 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 m.
using a PM5-VDI/Erickson Power Meter having a highly
accurate power resolution of 10−4 mW.
To properly calibrate our measurements, FSPL measure-
ments at 28, 73, and 140 GHz were ﬁrstly conducted at 3, 3.5,
4, 4.5, and 5 m, according to the reference procedures intro-
duced in [138], with vertically polarized 27 dBi gain horn
antennas at both the TX and RX. The FSPL measurement
results after removing the antenna gains are shown in Fig. 8,
indicating a negligible difference (less than 0.5 dB) from
the theoretical Friis FSPL equation over all distances, which
validates the accuracy of the channel sounder.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78741

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
TABLE 4. Partition loss of common outdoor materials.
FIGURE 11. Measured free space antenna XPD at 28, 73, and 140 GHz.
The solid lines and the dash lines represent the path loss measured with
co-polarized and cross-polarized antennas, respectively. The XPD values
calculated across five distances are within 1 dB at each frequency, which
verifies the XPD measurement procedure is correct.
After the free space power measurements with co-
polarized antennas, measurements were conducted at the
same distances but with cross-polarized antennas (e.g., V-H).
Cross-polarization was realized by using a waveguide twist
which rotates the antenna by 90◦. The insertion loss caused
by the twist was measured and calibrated out. The received
power for the cross-polarized antennas is shown in Fig. 11.
The XPD was calculated by taking the difference between
the path losses of the V-V and V-H antenna conﬁgurations
at same distances. See [138] for a detailed description of
the XPD veriﬁcation and calibration procedure used, that
can be universally applied. Note that at a ﬁxed TR separa-
tion distance, the free space received powers for the H-H
and H-V conﬁgurations were within 1 dB of the V-V and
V-H received powers, respectively, showing reciprocity with
cross-polarization measurements.
B. mmWave AND THz PARTITION LOSS MEASUREMENTS
Wideband mmWave and THz networks, as well as pre-
cise ray-tracer algorithms [153], [154], will require accurate
channel models that accurately represent the partition losses
induced by common building objects [53], [138]. There-
fore, partition loss of common building materials needs to
be extensively investigated for 5G mmWave wireless sys-
tems and future THz wireless communications in and around
buildings.
Partition loss measurements at 2.5 and 60 GHz of a vari-
ety of materials like drywall, ofﬁce whiteboard, clear glass,
mesh glass, using a wideband channel sounder with verti-
cally polarized antennas at both TX and RX were presented
in [146], where root mean square (RMS) delay spreads were
found to be much lower at 60 GHz than at 2.5 GHz. Based
on the measured data, a partition-based path loss model
which provided fast and accurate link budget predictions in
a multipath-rich environment was developed in [145], [146].
Partition loss measurements at 73 GHz for V-V and V-H
polarization conﬁgurations for glass doors, drywall, steel
doors, and clear glass were conducted in [147]. The co-
polarized partition loss for glass doors and windows was
found to be 5-7 dB at 73 GHz, and steel doors induced a parti-
tion loss as large as 40-50 dB, showing that different materials
could be properly chosen for propagation or interference
isolation between neighboring rooms [28], [138], [147]. The
partition loss of common outdoor and indoor materials are
summarized in Table 4 and 5, respectively, and reveal that
not much is known above 100 GHz.
Effective attenuation of typical building materials such
as concrete bricks, wood, tiles, and a gypsum plate were
measured at 100 GHz with the TX and RX boresight-
aligned [152]. The co-polarization situations (both TX and
RX were vertically or horizontally polarized) were analyzed,
and the effective attenuation of most of the building materials
was observed to be polarization sensitive [152].
Work in [149] presented penetration loss measurements
of concrete walls and plasterboard walls over the frequency
range of 900 MHz to 18 GHz, as shown in Table 5, and
the penetration loss was shown to not necessarily increase
monotonically with respect to frequency. A comparison of
measured partition loss versus frequency for a variety of
different common building materials was shown in [150].
As measured in [150], an 8-inch concrete wall had a typical
partition loss of 2 to 4 dB at 900 MHz for both V-V and
78742
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
TABLE 5. Partition loss of common indoor materials.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78743

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
TABLE 6. Partition loss measurement results at 28, 73, and 140 GHz for
clear glass.
H-H antenna conﬁgurations. The attenuation through solid
wood, having a thickness of 2 cm, was measured to be about
5 dB and 8 dB at 45 GHz for both H-H and V-V antenna
conﬁgurations, respectively, while the attenuation through a
concrete slab having a thickness of 3 cm was measured to
be about 13 dB at 45 GHz for both H-H and V-V antenna
conﬁgurations [151]. Penetration loss measurements in THz
band (0.1 - 10 THz) of plastic board, paper, and glass which
had losses of 12.47 dB/cm, 15.82 dB/cm, and 35.99 dB/cm
were presented in [148]. However, the measurements in [148]
were conducted in a very short range (less than 10 cm) and
the thicknesses of sample materials were less than 1 cm which
may cause large uncertainty or error.
Absorption coefﬁcients of glass, medium density ﬁber-
board, and plexiglass were measured where the S21 parameter
was recorded at a T-R separation distance of 10 cm with and
without the obstructions brought into the ray path, showing
that a 2.5 cm thick window and a 3.5 cm thick ﬁberboard
door would induce absorption attenuation of approximately
65.5 dB and 86.7 dB at 300 GHz [125], respectively.
Partition loss measurements at 28, 73, and 140 GHz were
conducted at the NYU WIRELESS research center. T-R sep-
aration distances of 3, 3.5, 4, 4.5, and 5 m were used and
the TX/RX antenna heights were 1.6 m (see Fig. 3 in [138]).
These distances are greater than 5 × Df , where Df is the
Fraunhofer distance to ensure a plane wave is incident upon
the measured material, and the dimensions of the measured
materials are large enough such that the radiating wavefront
from the TX antenna is illuminated on the material without
exceeding the projected HPBW angle spread from the TX
antenna [138]. At each distance, ﬁve measurements/power
delay proﬁles (PDP) were recorded with slight movements on
the order of half a wavelength, taking the average of the power
in the ﬁrst arriving multipath component of the recorded
PDPs, to exclude the multipath constructive or destructive
effects. With 4 GHz RF bandwidth, the channel sounder
systems used in this paper have a time resolution of 0.5 ns,
which means any multipath components spaced more than
0.15 m in propagation distance can be resolved [28].
The partition loss results of common building construction
materials, drywall and clear glass, at 28, 73 and 140 GHz,
were listed in Table 6 and Table 7. The mean partition loss
of clear glass at 28 GHz for co-polarized situation (V-V
and H-H), see Table 6, was about 1.5 dB with a standard
TABLE 7. Partition loss measurement results at 28, 73, and 140 GHz for
drywall.
FIGURE 12. Partition loss measurement results of clear glass with a
thickness of 1.2 cm at 28, 73, and 140 GHz. Partition loss trends to
increase with frequencies for both co-polarized and cross-polarized
antenna configurations.
deviation (std) of 0.5 dB. But the same glass had greater
partition losses of 7.17 dB and 10.22 dB at 73 GHz and
140 GHz, respectively, for the co-polarization situation.
It is worth noting that the antenna free space XPD has
not been subtracted from the cross-polarized partition loss
measurements shown in Fig. 12, Fig. 13, Table 6 and Table 7.
Subtracting the XPD results in a negative value of partition
loss due to the polarization coupling effects (depolarization)
of the building materials. It is shown in Fig. 12 and 13 that
the partition loss tends to increase with frequencies for both
co-polarized and cross-polarized antenna conﬁgurations.
VIII. SCATTERING ABOVE 100 GHz
Scattering at mmWave and THz frequencies is an important
propagation mechanism [6], [62]. The surfaces of buildings,
terrain, walls, and ceilings have usually been assumed to be
electrically smooth since their surface height variations are
small compared to the carrier wavelength at lower frequen-
cies (e.g., greater than 5 cm at below 6 GHz) [155]. At today’s
sub-6 GHz cellular and WLAN systems, the reﬂection pro-
cess is dominated by a strong specular path at an angle of
reﬂection equal to the angle of incidence, and scattering,
being a weaker propagation phenomenon, is negligible.
However, in mmWave bands and above, the roughness of
surfaces are comparable to the carrier wavelength and the
78744
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 13. Partition loss measurement results of drywall with a
thickness of 14 cm at 28, 73, and 140 GHz.
FIGURE 14. Setup for scattering measurements. θi is the angle the
incident ray makes with the normal and θs is the scattered angle.
illuminated scatterers may actually create signal paths that
are as substantial as, or even stronger than reﬂected paths,
depending on the incident angle [6], [62], [155].
A. DIRECTIVE SCATTERING MODEL
The directive scattering (DS) model is widely used to pre-
dict the scattered power in optics [156]. The single lobe
DS model [157], [158] assumes that the main scattering
lobe is steered in the direction of the specular reﬂection
(θr shown in Fig. 16). The DS model has been used in [158] to
model the RF propagation environment of a hospital room at
60 GHz. The PDP of the environment agreed well with sim-
ulations using the DS model, up to an excess delay of 30 ns.
The DS model has also been tested at 1.296 GHz in [157],
where the DS model agreed with the scattering from rural and
suburban buildings. When an electromagnetic wave impinges
upon a surface at an incident angle θi, the scattered electric
ﬁeld at any particular scattering angle θs can be calculated
using the DS model. The DS scattered electric ﬁeld in the
incident plane is given by:
|Es|2 = |Es0|2 ·
1 + cos(9)
2
αR
FIGURE 15. Photograph of the scattering measurement setup. The
scattered power of drywall was measured at a distance 1.5 m away from
the wall, in angular increments of 10◦.
FIGURE 16. A radio wave incident at an angle θi with respect to the
normal to the targeted rough surface. θr and θs are reflected and
scattered angle, respectively. From Snell’s law, reflections obey θi = θr .
9 is the angle between reflected and scattered waves.
=
 SK
dtdr
2 l cos θi
FαR
·
1 + cos(9)
2
αR
(7)
where Es is the scattered electric ﬁeld at the scattering angle
9. Es0 is the maximum scattered electric ﬁeld, which is
adopted from an effective roughness model [157]. K is given
by √60 PtGt which is a constant depending on the transmit-
ted power and the transmitter antenna gain [159]. dt and dr
are the distances between the scatterer and the transmitter and
receiver, respectively. l is the length of the scattering object.
9 is the angle between the reﬂected wave and the scattered
wave, as shown in Fig. 16. αR determines the width of the
scattering lobe with higher values of αR implying a narrower
scattering lobe.
The received power at the receiver can then be calculated
as [118]:
Pr = PdAe = |Es|2
120π · Grλ2
4π
= |Es|2Grλ2
480π2
(8)
where Pd is the power ﬂux density of the scattered wave,
and Ae is receiver antenna aperture [118]. Gr is the receiver
antenna gain, and λ is the wavelength of the radio wave. The
scattered power is calculated using (7)-(8), and the reﬂected
power is calculated using:
0rough = ρs · 0smooth,
(9)
VOLUME 7, 2019
78745

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
where ρs is the scattering loss factor and
ρs =exp
h
−8
πhrms cos θi
λ
2i
I0
h
8
πhrms cos θi
λ
i
, (10)
where I0 is the zero-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind.
When θi = 1◦, 30◦, and 45◦(small incident angles), it was
shown in [62] that the maximum scattered power (in the
reﬂection direction as in Snell’s law) computed by the DS
model is stronger than the reﬂected power obtained from the
rough surface reﬂection model for a rough surface.
Simulations were performed using three materials with
incident angle θi ranging from 10◦to 90◦and over frequencies
from 1 GHz to 1 THz [62]. It was shown that as the frequency
increases, the received scattered power increases, which can
be expected since the surfaces tend to be rough as the fre-
quency increases and rougher surfaces cause greater scattered
power (even greater than the reﬂected power). Moreover,
the maximum scattered power is received when the incident
wave impinges upon the surface along the normal direc-
tion. The scattered power falls off sharply when the incident
wave becomes grazing, and most of the incident power is
reﬂected [62].
The single lobe DS model may be modiﬁed to incorporate
power an additional back-scatter lobe [157]. The DS scattered
electric ﬁeld taking into account for backscattering is given
by:
|Es|2 = |Es0|2

3 ·
1 + cos(9)
2
αR
+ (1 −3) ·
1 + cos(9i)
2
αR 
(11)
where 9i is the angle between the scattered ray and the
incident ray and 3 determines the relative strength of the back
scattered lobe with respect to the main scattered lobe.
B. SCATTERING MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS
A smooth metal plate or a conformal metal foil attached on
the wall (having a size much larger than the radius of ﬁrst
Fresnel zone for frequencies of 100, 200, 300, and 400 GHz)
was shown to provide 6-10 dB more power from specular
reﬂection (at an incident angle of 50◦) than the bare painted
cinderblock wall did [104], indicating that the effect of scat-
tering from the rough surface was signiﬁcantly smaller than
the effect of absorption from the bare painted cinderblock
wall, even at 400 GHz. Specular reﬂection loss with varied
incident angles measurements at 400 GHz were also con-
ducted in [104] with 5 different incident angles ranging from
20◦to 60◦which showed that when the incident angle is large,
reﬂection loss is small (absorption loss plus the scattering
loss) and the scattering loss is negligible. However, when the
incident angle is small (e.g., incident ray impinges the wall
perpendicularly), the scattering loss is not negligible (4 dB
difference than predicted result when scattering losses are
neglected) [104].
Scattering measurements at 60 GHz were presented
in [155] using a 2 GHz wide baseband sounder to measure the
FIGURE 17. Polar plots of the scattered power off drywall, measured at
four incident angles. Power at scattered angles is measured
in 10◦increments.
non-specular diffuse scattering with an incident angle of 15◦,
30◦, and 45◦. Two types of building materials were used: a
red stone wall (a rough wall surface) and a concrete pillar
(a smooth wall surface). The received power was measured in
the range of 0◦to 90◦from the normal to the wall and the term
of power concentration was deﬁned as the angular span cor-
responding to 90% of the received power. It was shown that
the angular span is centered at the incident angle and higher
incident angles lead to smaller angular spread [155]. The
power concentration of the rough wall surface was shown to
be signiﬁcantly larger than the case of a smooth wall surface
and the coupling effects (depolarization) is more severe when
reﬂecting/scattering from rough wall surface [155].
Scattering measurements of a drywall were conducted at
142 GHz using the channel sounder system summarized
in Table 3, and the measurement setups and photos are shown
in Fig. 14 and 15. During the scattering measurements, both
the heights of TX and RX were set at 1.2 m on an arc with a
radius of 1.5 m. Incident angles of 10◦, 30◦, 60◦, 80◦were
chosen to study the scattering performance from a small
incident angle to a large angle with respect to the normal. The
RX power was measured in the same plane of the incident ray
and the normal of the surface from 10◦to 170◦in 10◦/step (0◦
and 180◦are not able to measure due to the physical size of
the channel sounder system).
The path loss is calculated by:
PL[dB]=PTX[dBm]−PRX[dBm] + GTX[dBi] + GRX[dBi],
(12)
where PTX [dBm] is the true transmit power in dBm, PRX
[dBm] is the record received power by the channel sounder
system, GTX [dBi] and GRX [dBi] are the TX and RX antenna
gain in dB, respectively. The scattered loss (SL) was then
normalized with respect to the FSPL:
SL = PL[dB] −FSPL(f , d)[dB],
(13)
FSPL(f , d)[dB] = 32.4 + 20 log10(f ) + 20 log10 d,
(14)
where f is the carrier frequency in GHz and d is the TR
separation distance in meter.
78746
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 18. Comparison between measured data and the dual-lobe Directive Scattering model with TX incident angle θi = 80◦, 60◦, 30◦, and 10◦
at 142 GHz. (a) θi = 80◦. (b) θi = 60◦. (c) θi = 30◦. (d) θi = 10◦.
Measured scatter patterns of different incident angles
at 142 GHz are shown in Fig. 17. The peak scattered
power (scattered plus reﬂected) was observed at the specular
reﬂected angle (Snell’s law), and peak scattered power was
greater at large incident angles than at small incident angles
(9.4 dB difference between 80◦and 10◦, where most of the
energy is due to reﬂection and not scattering). At all angles
of incidence, measured power is within 10 dB below the
peak power in a ± 10◦angle range of the specular reﬂection
angle, likely a function of antenna patterns. In addition, back
scattered are also observed (negative RX angles) when the
incident angle is small (e.g., 30◦and 10◦) but was more
than 20 dB below the peak received power,which means that
the surface of drywall can be modeled as smooth surface at
140 GHz and the reﬂected power can be used to estimate the
received power in the specular reﬂection direction, especially
close to grazing.
A comparison between measurements and predictions
made by the dual-lobe DS model (11) with TX incident angle
θi = 10◦, 30◦, 60◦, and 80◦is shown in Fig. 18. It is shown
that the peak received power of the simulation at the specular
reﬂection angle agrees well with the measured data (within
2 dB). The received power (measured and simulated) changes
versus the RX pointing angle (θr as shown in Fig. 14). A back-
scattered peak is observed in both the measurement data and
the dual-lobe DS model prediction for all the incident angles,
and the back-scattered power could be used for imaging
around the corner [50], [58].
IX. USER LOCALIZATION IN MILLIMETER WAVE AND
TERAHERTZ BANDS
Positioning is the determination of the location of a user
that is ﬁxed or moving, based on the known locations of
other base stations (BSs). Although users can be localized to
within 4.9 m under open sky [160] by the global positioning
system (GPS), in obstructed environments such as urban
canyons and indoors, the positioning accuracy of GPS is poor.
In such environments, 3D maps of the environment along
with accurate ToF and angle of arrival (AoA) measurements
could be leveraged for precise positioning.
A. TIME OF FLIGHT (ToF) AND PHASE-BASED
POSITIONING
In LOS environments, the ToF of a signal can be used to
estimate the TR separation distance d (since d = c·t where c
is the speed of light and t is the ToF). The RX’s position may
then be estimated by trilateration. In NLOS environments,
ranging introduces a positive bias in the position estimates
since the path length of reﬂected multipath rays is longer than
the true distance between the user and the BS.
The ultra-wide bandwidths available at THz frequencies,
allow the RXs to resolve ﬁnely spaced multipath components
and accurately measure the signal’s ToF. In [161], the phase
of the received signal in LOS was used to estimate the TR
separation distance at 300 GHz. By tracking the baseband
modulated signal’s phase at the RX and manually correcting
VOLUME 7, 2019
78747

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 19. The UE measures the relative AoAs, θ1 and θ2 from BS1, BS2,
and BS3. Narrow antenna beamwidths at THz frequencies facilitate
accurate AoA measurements.
for phase ambiguity, decimeter-level accuracy was achieved
up to a distance of 40 m [161].
To get the absolute ToF, synchronization is required
between the TX and RX, which is not easy in a large network
of nodes widely separated. A timing error of 1 ns may result
in a positioning error of 30 cm, if no correction for clock bias
or clock drift is applied. It is easier for the RX to measure the
time-difference-of-arrival (TDoA) of signals arriving from
multiple synchronized TXs. In order to determine the relative
time delays between the signals, cross-correlation is done.
The peaks in the cross-correlation function correspond to the
signal propagation time delay.
B. ANGLE BASED POSITIONING
The line of bearing to the BS is given by the AoA of the signal
at the user. The user is localized to the point of intersection
of the lines of bearing from several BSs, as seen in Fig. 19.
In NLOS environments, due to specular reﬂections off walls
and metallic surfaces, rays do not arrive from the direction of
the BS, leading to accuracy penalties [53].
The AoA of the signal is found from detecting the maxi-
mum amplitude of the received signal as a function of angu-
lar direction. Many methods, such as a sum and difference
method used in radars or optical receivers [162] or peak power
method may be used. In [53], [163], all possible directions
were scanned by a rotating RX antenna and the angle at which
maximal power was received was determined to be the AoA.
Alternatively, an antenna array may be used to estimate the
AoA, by beamforming and subspace based methods [164].
The Cramer-Rao lower bound (CRLB) is a bound on the
minimum variance of an unbiased estimate of a parameter.
An increase in the number of antenna array elements leads to
greater angular resolution and thus a reduction in the CRLB
for estimating AoA [165].
C. NYURay - A 3D mmWave RAY TRACER
Ray tracing can be done to simulate channel characteristics
at different locations. By using a ray tracer that replicates
measured data with high accuracy, costly and time-intensive
measurement campaigns can be avoided. Ray tracing allows
researchers to test positioning algorithms. In addition, ray
tracers can be used to create a radio map of an environ-
ment, which could replace the off-line stage of ﬁngerprinting
algorithms.
Building on the 2-D mmWave ray tracer developed in [53],
NYURay, a 3-D mmWave ray tracer has been developed.
NYURay is a hybrid ray tracer which combines shooting-
bouncing ray (SBR) based ray tracing with geometry based
ray tracing [58].
D. MAP-BASED LOCALIZATION
Work in [50] demonstrated how ToF, AoD measurements,
along with a map of the obstacles encountered by the signal
could be used to localize a user as described in Section II-D.
However, [50] assumes that all materials act like mirrors.
The measurements described in Section VII illustrate that
at 140 GHz, the partition loss through glass and dry wall is
close to 10dB, indicating that materials do not act like perfect
reﬂectors at mmWave and THz frequencies.
The authors of [166] used ToF and an indoor map for local-
ization, using the principal of ‘‘virtual access points’’ to get
additional anchor points to localize users that are in NLOS.
However [166] does not use AoA information, which will
be available with high accuracy using directional antennas
at THz frequencies.
In [167], authors used backwards ray tracing using AoA
and power observations to estimate the TX location. The
transmitted signal had a power of 30 dBm and a bandwidth
of 300 MHz. A thermal noise ﬂoor of -85 dBm was assumed.
Assuming perfect AoA resolution, TXs were localized to
within 5 m, 90 % of the time, using six RX locations.
E. MAP-ASSISTED LOCALIZATION WITH A SINGLE BS
Map-assisted positioning with angle and time (MAP-AT) is
a novel map-assisted localization technique that shall now be
presented. MAP-AT may be used when at least two multipath
components arrive at the user. The user need not be in LOS
of the BS. The user may either be the TX or the RX of
a known radio signal. If the user is a TX, ToF and AoA
information is required. If the user is an RX, ToF and AoD
information is required. In combination with a 3-D map of
the area, the location of the user can be determined.
First consider the case where the user is an RX. If the ToF
and AoD of the ray that reaches the user is known and if the
ray reaches the user either directly from the BS or through
one reﬂection or by passing through one obstruction, there are
two possible locations of the user. If the ray reached the user
after one reﬂection, the BS and user must lie on the same side
of the reﬂecting object. If the ray reached the user directly
from the BS, or through one obstruction, the BS and user must
lie on a straight line joining the BS and user. The possible
locations of the user, based on ToF and AoD measurements
at the BS shall henceforth be referred candidate locations.
The process of ﬁnding candidate locations is repeated for all
multipath components. The actual user location corresponds
to the candidate location identiﬁed by the maximum number
of multipath components.
78748
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 20.
Three multipath components arrive at the user (RX) shown
above - one LOS component (in green) and two NLOS components (in
blue and black). Of the six candidate locations for the user (RX), based on
AoD and ToF measurements at the BS (TX) (CL1 −CL6), three candidate
locations (CL3, CL5, CL6) correspond to the actual location of the user.
The position of the user is estimated to be the modal candidate location
(i.e. CL3, CL5, CL6).
Errors in ToF measurements cause the BS to incorrectly
estimate the path length to the user. Due to inaccurate AoD
measurements the BS incorrectly estimate the user’s bearing.
As a result, a candidate locations estimated by MAP-AT using
imprecise ToF and AoD information will not coincide with
the user’s true location. However, it is likely that the candidate
locations will be close to the user’s true location, and hence
close to one-another. MAP-AT is modiﬁed to ﬁrst group the
candidate locations that are close to one another (at a distance
of up to 40 cm) and then estimate the user position to be
the centroid of the candidate location group with maximal
members.
If the user is a TX, a similar technique can be used for
user localization, using AoA information at the BS and doing
backwards ray tracing instead of forwards ray tracing.
1) SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
Simulations of localization using candidate locations were
done by synthesizing ToF and AoD measurements at
30 BS-user combinations using NYURay, of which 18 were
in NLOS and 12 were in LOS. The BS and user locations
were taken from previous indoor propagation measurement
campaigns conducted in the NYU WIRELESS research cen-
ter on the 9th ﬂoor of 2 MetroTech Center in downtown
Brooklyn, New York [168]. The research center has an open-
ofﬁce architecture, with cubicles, walls made of drywalls and
windows. The entire ﬂoor has dimensions of 35 m by 65.5 m
as shown in Fig. 22.
The position of each user was determined using a single
BS. To make the simulations realistic, zero mean Gaussian
noise with standard deviation σToF and σAoD was added to the
ToF and AoD measurements. The positioning error for each
RX was deﬁned to be equal to the Euclidean distance between
the position estimate and the true position of the RX.
FIGURE 21.
The CDF of the positioning error, when an RX is localized
using a single TX. The median positioning error is 6.7 cm when σToF and
σAoD were 0.25 ns and 0.5◦respectively.
TABLE 8. Performance of the map-assisted localization algorithm for
different TR separation distances in LOS and NLOS environments at NYU
WIRELESS.
2) LOCALIZATION ERROR ANALYSIS
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) for the root mean
squared (rms) positioning error in presence of Gaussian noise
over 100 simulation runs at each user location is plotted
in Fig. 21. When σAoD
=
0.5◦and σToF
=
0.25 ns,
the median positioning error was 6.7 cm. Three concen-
tric error circles of radii equal to the rms positioning error
corresponding to the three levels of noise added to ToF mea-
surements have been drawn centered at each user location
in Fig. 22. The error circles for two outlier user locations
having errors of 4.0 m and 4.9 m have not been plotted.
The localization error of the outliers can be reduced by using
additional BSs for positioning the users [58].
Table 8 illustrates how the localization error varies with TR
separation distance in LOS and NLOS environments.
X. SPATIAL STATISTICAL CHANNEL MODELING
THz frequency poses new challenges for channel modeling.
Diffraction effect at THz frequencies will not be as promi-
nent as it is at microwave frequencies. Scattering, instead,
is expected to be more notable since the wavelength at THz
frequencies are comparable to the size of dust, rain, snow,
and roughness of walls [113]. Thus, the THz channel will be
even more sparse than the mmWave channels, and LOS and
specular reﬂection may be the only two reliable propagation
paths.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78749

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
FIGURE 22.
The three error circles centered at each user location correspond to the rms error over 100 simulations for three noise
levels: σToF = 0.25, 0.5 and 1 ns with σAoD = 0.5◦in the azimuth and elevation plane. A single BS was used to localize each of the
30 user locations.
A. SPATIAL CONSISTENCY
Spatial consistency, an important channel modeling compo-
nent, has been acknowledged by 3GPP standards [169]. Most
of current statistical channel models are drop-based, which
are only able to generate channel impulse responses (CIRs)
for a particular user at a randomly picked location in a
distance range [170]. There is no spatial correlation between
two consecutive simulation runs. Thus, it is impossible to
generate dynamic CIRs with spatial correlation based on a
user’s motion within a local area [73], [171], [172]. Spatial
consistency enables channel models to provide spatially con-
sistent and smoothly time-evolving CIRs for closely spaced
locations.
B. EARLY RESEARCH ON SPATIAL CONSISTENCY
Even though spatial consistency is a relatively new channel
modeling component, some valuable works have been done
not only for channel models but also for channel simula-
tors. 3GPP Release 14 proposed a three-dimensional (3D)
geometry-based stochastic channel model (GSCM) and also
provided alternative spatial consistency procedures to enable
spatially consistent mobility simulations [169]. 5GCM pro-
posed three spatial consistency approaches, which the ﬁrst
one uses spatially correlated random variables as small-scale
parameters, and the other two are based on the geometry and
ﬁxed locations of scatterers [173]. COST 2100 introduced
spatial consistency based on the visible region over which
a group of MPCs is visible at a user [174]. QuaDRiGa
proposed a time-evolving channel model for user trajec-
tory based on the WINNER II model using geometrical
approaches [175]. NYUSIM channel model, a spatial statisti-
cal channel model, has also been enabled spatial consistency
by generating spatial-correlated large-scale parameters and
time-variant small-scale parameters [170]. Some local area
measurements in a street canyon scenario have been con-
ducted, and the results indicated that the correlated distance of
the large-scale parameters such as the number of time clusters
is about 10-15 meters [176].
C. CHALLENGES FOR SPATIAL CONSISTENCY AT mmWAVE
AND THz FREQUENCIES
The Doppler shift will be more severe at THz frequencies,
which is 90 kHz at 1 THz with a speed of 60 mph. Further,
as the channel coherence time decreases, the channel status
will change fast and needs to be updated more frequently.
Thus, it is critical to provide consecutive and realistic CIRs as
time evolves, which can be provided by spatial consistency.
For super resolution imaging, understanding the minor
differences of the channel over a few wavelengths, e.g.,
over hundreds of wavelengths (hundred of micrometers),
will require new measurements and models to determine the
tiny variations. Statistical modeling for sensing and imaging
at THz will require much greater spatial resolution than ever
used before in channel modeling.
Most current research on spatial consistency is based on the
assumption of omnidirectional antennas at the transmitter and
receiver [175], [177]. However, considering that high-gain
steerable antennas and beamforming will be used at mmWave
and THz frequencies, spatial consistency must be studied
and implemented with directionality. When a narrowbeam
antenna points to a certain direction, just a few scatterers
are illuminated and can generate MPCs. Thus, when the user
is moving, the part of environment that can be ‘‘seen’’ will
change fast. Spatial consistency needs to be maintained with
advanced beam tracking schemes to provide accurate CIRs
with time evolution.
78750
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
Many challenges have not been resolved yet before the
actual implementation of spatial consistency for narrowbeam
directional antennas. The correlation distances of different
parameters are abstracted from ﬁeld measurements, but most
measurements only provide reference correlation distance of
spatial consistency for omnidirectional antennas. The antenna
beamwidth and the ability of beam steering will have an
impact on the value of correlation distance, which has not
been investigated but will be at much smaller distance scales
than ever used before. In addition, more user cases (scenarios)
are introduced in the latest 3GPP Release 15 [5] for 5G than
the previous generations of cellular systems, and even more
user cases will surely evolve into 6G and beyond. Therefore,
scenario-speciﬁc values of several key channel model param-
eters will be needed in the future.
XI. CONCLUSION
This paper has provided a broad and deep look at fundamental
opportunities, challenges, and approaches to creating future
wireless, sensing, and position location systems for spectrum
above 100 GHz, which are likely to be a part of the 6G era
in the 2025-2035 time frame. The paper described recent
regulatory and standard body activities aimed at fostering
future wireless systems that will use multi-GHz bandwidth
channels at above 100 GHz, and which may support data
rates in excess of 100 Gbps. We demonstrated a large number
of promising applications that future THz frequencies will
support, as computing power concurrently grows to approach
the processing power of the human brain. Many applica-
tions of THz wireless will enable novel cognition, sensing,
imaging, communications, and positioning capabilities that
will be used by automated machinery, autonomous cars, and
new human interfaces, all enabled by the ultra-wide band-
width and ultra-short wavelength at THz which appears to
be a promising spectrum for future wireless communications
beyond the mmWave regime.
We showed how directional steerable antennas will enable
mobile communications well into the THz band, where the
combined antenna gains can overcome the atmospheric and
weather losses that have been believed to be prohibitive in
the past. Antenna array technologies will need to exploit
new approaches and physical architectures, such as spatial
noise-shaping, beamforming, hybrid beamforming, and the
cones of silence, as these were shown to provide signiﬁcant
performance beneﬁts and will solve design constraints such
as the physical size of RF components with a vast number of
antenna elements. We also indicated how simultaneous imag-
ing and sensing with location capabilities may be enabled
by the move to above 100 GHz. This paper surveyed past
work and presented new propagation measurements above
100 GHz, including a comparison of cross-polarization dis-
crimination (XPD) and partition loss measurements for com-
mon building materials at 28, 73, and 140 GHz. We also
derived scattering theory results that are useful for under-
standing how the frequency and surface roughness inﬂuence
scattering behavior across the mmWave and THz bands, and
provided reﬂection/scattering measurements at 140 GHz that
validated the Directive Scattering (DS) theory. We noted
that extensive measurements in urban, suburban, and rural
areas are necessary to study the channel characteristics using
statistical and deterministic approaches at frequencies above
100 GHz.
It is clear from this work that THz positioning will support
centimeter level accuracy and may also support imaging, even
in non line of sight (NLOS) environments. Challenges such
as power-efﬁcient devices, cost-effective integrated circuit
solutions, and practical phased arrays that may be inter-
connected with minimal loss loom as impediments to 6G
and THz product development, and offer open research and
development problems that are being investigated by DARPA
and other global research agencies. Other challenges remain,
such as how to efﬁciently construct and code maps of the
environment, how to model the THz channel for spatial con-
sistency, and how to reduce computational complexity in spa-
tial multiplexing and beam codebooks for massive numbers
of antenna elements, and this paper gave some insights into
possible solutions in these areas. Certainly not least, as the
world begins to look to 6G and beyond, at frequencies above
100 GHz, there should be careful studies to determine the
impact that THz radiation has on the biological effects of
humans and animals, and to see if such radiation could be
used as a safe and effective replacement for more dangerous
ionizing imaging methods such as X-rays and CT/PET
scans, provided losses due to water and tissue are not too
great.
REFERENCES
[1] B5GS 2018. (Apr. 2018). The Brooklyn 5G Summit. [Online]. Available:
https://2018.brooklyn5gsummit.com/
[2] T. S. Rappaport, S. Sun, R. Mayzus, H. Zhao, Y. Azar, K. Wang,
G. N. Wong, J. K. Schulz, M. Samimi, and F. Gutierrez, Jr., ‘‘Millime-
ter wave mobile communications for 5G cellular: It will work!’’ IEEE
Access, vol. 1, pp. 335–349, May 2013.
[3] A.-A. A. Boulogeorgos, A. Alexiou, T. Merkle, C. Schubert, R. Elschner,
A. Katsiotis, P. Stavrianos, D. Kritharidis, P.-K. Chartsias, J. Kokkoniemi,
M. Juntti, J. Lehtomaki, A. Teixeira, and F. Rodrigues, ‘‘Terahertz tech-
nologies to deliver optical network quality of experience in wireless
systems beyond 5G,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 144–151,
Jun. 2018.
[4] T. Rappaport, Y. Xing, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., A. F. Molisch, E. Mellios,
and J. Zhang, ‘‘Overview of millimeter wave communications for ﬁfth-
generation (5G) wireless networks-with a focus on propagation mod-
els,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 6213–6230,
Dec. 2017.
[5] Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access Network; Study on Scenarios
and Requirements for Next Generation Access Technologies (Release 15),
Tech. Rep. 38.913 Version 15.0.0, 3GPP, Jun. 2018.
[6] T. S. Rappaport, R. W. Heath, Jr., R. C. Daniels, and J. N. Murdock,
Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications. Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 2015.
[7] T. Kürner and S. Priebe, ‘‘Towards THz communications—Status in
research, standardization and regulation,’’ J. Infr., Millim., THz Waves,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–62, Aug. 2013.
[8] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Millimeter-wave base
station diversity for 5G coordinated multipoint (CoMP) applications,’’
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., May 2019.
[9] P. H. Siegel, ‘‘Terahertz technology,’’ IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 910–928, Mar. 2002.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78751

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
[10] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and C. Han, ‘‘Terahertz band: Next fron-
tier for wireless communications,’’ Phys. Commun., vol. 12, pp. 16–32,
Sep. 2014.
[11] T. Wu, T. S. Rappaport, and C. M. Collins, ‘‘Safe for generations to come:
Considerations of safety for millimeter waves in wireless communica-
tions,’’ IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 65–84, Mar. 2015.
[12] C. Cho, M. Maloy, S. M. Devlin, O. Aras, H. Castro-Malaspina,
L. T. Dauer, A. A. Jakubowski, R. J. O’Reilly, E. B. Papadopoulos,
M.-A. Perales, T. S. Rappaport, R. Tamari, M. R. M. van den Brink,
and S. A. Giralt, ‘‘Characterizing ionizing radiation exposure after T-cell
depleted allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation,’’ Biol. Blood Mar-
row Transplantation, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. S252–S253, Mar. 2018.
[13] ‘‘NASA space ﬂight human-system standard, revision A: Crew health,’’
NASA Tech. Standard, Tech. Rep. NASA-STD-3001, 2014, vol. 1.
[14] N. R. Council, Health Risks From Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing
Radiation: BEIR VII Phase 2, vol. 7. Washington, DC, USA: National
Academies Press, 2006.
[15] R. Fazel, H. M. Krumholz, Y. Wang, J. S. Ross, J. Chen, H. H. Ting,
N. D. Shah, K. Nasir, A. J. Einstein, and B. K. Nallamothu, ‘‘Exposure
to low-dose ionizing radiation from medical imaging procedures,’’ New
England J. Med., vol. 361, no. 9, pp. 849–857, Aug. 2009.
[16] T. Wu, T. S. Rappaport, and C. M. Collins, ‘‘The human body
and millimeter-wave wireless communication systems: Interactions and
implications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2015,
pp. 2423–2429.
[17] Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radio Frequency
Radiation, document FCC 96-326, Aug. 1996.
[18] International
Commission
on
Non-Ionizing
Radiation
Protection,
‘‘Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric, magnetic, and
electromagnetic ﬁelds (up to 300 GHz),’’ Health Phys., vol. 97, no. 3,
pp. 257–258, Sep. 2009.
[19] A. Maltsev, Channel Models for IEEE 802.11ay, IEEE Standard 802.11-
15/1150r9, Mar. 2017.
[20] IEEE Standard for High Data Rate Wireless Multi-Media Networks–
Amendment, 100Gb/s Wireless Switched Point-to-Point Physical Layer,
IEEE Standard 802.15.3d-2017 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.15.3-2016
as amended by IEEE Std 802.15.3e-2017), Oct. 2017, vol. 2, pp. 1–55.
[21] M. J. W. Rodwell, Y. Fang, J. Rode, J. Wu, B. Markman, S. T. Š. Brunelli,
J. Klamkin, and M. Urteaga, ‘‘100-340 GHz systems: Transistors and
applications,’’ in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2018, pp. 14.3.1–14.3.4.
[22] H. Aggrawal, P. Chen, M. M. Assefzadeh, B. Jamali, and A. Babakhani,
‘‘Gone in a picosecond: Techniques for the generation and detection of
picosecond pulses and their applications,’’ IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 17,
no. 12, pp. 24–38, Dec. 2016.
[23] D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Twenty years of terahertz imaging,’’ Opt. Express,
vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 9417–9431, Apr. 2018.
[24] M. Tonouchi, ‘‘Cutting-edge terahertz technology,’’ Nature Photon.,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 97–105, Feb. 2007.
[25] J. Harvey, M. B. Steer, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Exploiting high millime-
ter wave bands for military communications, applications, and design,’’
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 52350–52359, Apr. 2019.
[26] W. Chappell, ‘‘Brieﬁng prepared for T-MUSIC Proposer’s Day,’’
Defense Adv. Res. Projects Agency (DAPRA), Jan. 2019. [Online].
Available:
https://www.darpa.mil/attachments/T-MUSIC_Proposers
%20Day_Jan30.pdf
[27] H. Wang. (2019). Power Ampliﬁers Performance Survey 2000-Present.
[Online]. Available: https://gems.ece.gatech.edu/PA_survey.html
[28] Y. Xing and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Propagation measurement system and
approach at 140 GHz-moving to 6G and above 100 GHz,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[29] R. Piesiewicz, T. Kleine-Ostmann, N. Krumbholz, D. M. Mittleman,
M. Koch, J. Schoebei, and T. Kürner, ‘‘Short-range ultra-broadband
terahertz communications: Concepts and perspectives,’’ IEEE Antennas
Propag. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 24–39, Dec. 2007.
[30] J. Ma, R. Shrestha, J. Adelberg, C.-Y. Yeh, Z. Hossain, E. Knightly,
J. M. Jornet, and D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Security and eavesdropping in tera-
hertz wireless links,’’ Nature, vol. 563, no. 7729, pp. 89–93, Oct. 2018.
[31] J. N. Murdock and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Consumption factor: A ﬁgure of
merit for power consumption and energy efﬁciency in broadband wireless
communications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM)
Workshops, Dec. 2011, pp. 1393–1398.
[32] J. N. Murdock and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Consumption factor and power-
efﬁciency factor: A theory for evaluating the energy efﬁciency of cas-
caded communication systems,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 221–236, Feb. 2014.
[33] Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, document FCC 18-21, Feb. 2018.
[34] Millimeter Wave Transmission (mWT); Applications and use Cases
of Milliimeter Wave Transmission, ETSI, Sophia Antipolis, France,
Aug. 2015.
[35] M. J. Marcus, ‘‘WRC-19 issues: Agenda item 1.15 and the use of
275–450 GHz,’’ IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 2–3,
Dec. 2016.
[36] T. Nagatsuma, ‘‘Breakthroughs in photonics 2013: THz communica-
tions based on photonics,’’ IEEE Photon. J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–5,
Apr. 2014.
[37] X. Yu, R. Asif, M. Piels, D. Zibar, M. Galili, T. Morioka, P. U. Jepsen, and
L. K. Oxenløwe ‘‘400-GHz wireless transmission of 60-Gb/s Nyquist-
QPSK signals using UTC-PD and heterodyne mixer,’’ IEEE Trans. THz
Sci. Technol., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 765–770, Nov. 2016.
[38] J. Ma, N. J. Karl, S. Bretin, G. Ducournau, and D. M. Mittleman,
‘‘Frequency-division multiplexer and demultiplexer for terahertz wireless
links,’’ Nature Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 729–737, Feb. 2017.
[39] S. Mumtaz, J. M. Jornet, J. Aulin, W. H. Gerstacker, X. Dong, and B. Ai,
‘‘Terahertz communication for vehicular networks,’’ IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 5617–5625, Jul. 2017.
[40] Spectrum Horizons, FCC First Report and Order ET Docket 18-21,
Mar. 2019.
[41] mmWave Coalition. (Jan. 2019). mmWave Coalition’s NTIA Comments.
[Online].
Available:
http://mmwavecoalition.org/mmwave-coalition-
millimeter-waves/mmwave-coalitions-ntia-comments/
[42] V. Petrov, D. Moltchanov, and Y. Koucheryavy, ‘‘Applicability assessment
of terahertz information showers for next-generation wireless networks,’’
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–7.
[43] V. Petrov, A. Pyattaev, D. Moltchanov, and Y. Koucheryavy, ‘‘Terahertz
band communications: Applications, research challenges, and standard-
ization activities,’’ in Proc. 8th Int. Congr. Ultra Modern Telecommun.
Control Syst. Workshops (ICUMT), Oct. 2016, pp. 183–190.
[44] K. Sengupta, T. Nagatsuma, and D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Terahertz integrated
electronic and hybrid electronic–photonic systems,’’ Nature Electron.,
vol. 1, no. 12, pp. 622–635, Dec. 2018.
[45] S. Chinchali, A. Sharma, J. Harrison, A. Elhafsi, D. Kang, E. Pergament,
E. Cidon, S. Katti, M. Pavone, ‘‘Network ofﬂoading policies for cloud
robotics: A learning-based approach,’’ Feb. 2019, arXiv:1902.05703.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05703
[46] S. Garg et al., ‘‘Enabling the next generation of mobile robotics using 5G
wireless,’’ IEEE Access, submitted for publication.
[47] M. Chen, Y. Tian, G. Fortino, J. Zhang, and I. Humar, ‘‘Cognitive Internet
of vehicles,’’ Comput. Commun., vol. 120, pp. 58–70, May 2018.
[48] X.-F. Teng, Y.-T. Zhang, C. C. Y. Poon, and P. Bonato, ‘‘Wearable medical
systems for p-health,’’ IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 62–74,
Jan. 2008.
[49] D. M. Mittleman, R. H. Jacobsen, R. Neelamani, R. G. Baraniuk, and
M. C. Nuss, ‘‘Gas sensing using terahertz time-domain spectroscopy,’’
Appl. Phys. B, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 379–390, Sep. 1998.
[50] M. Aladsani, A. Alkhateeb, and G. C. Trichopoulos, ‘‘Leveraging
mmWave imaging and communications for simultaneous localization
and mapping,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), May 2019, pp. 4539–4543.
[51] S. Koenig, D. Lopez-Diaz, J. Antes, F. Boes, R. Henneberger, A. Leuther,
A. Tessmann, R. Schmogrow, D. Hillerkuss, R. Palmer, T. Zwick,
C. Koos, W. Freude, O. Ambacher, J. Leuthold, and I. Kallfass, ‘‘Wireless
sub-THz communication system with high data rate,’’ Nature Photon.,
vol. 7, pp. 977–981, Oct. 2013.
[52] T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘6G and beyond: Terahertz communications and
sensing,’’ 2019 Brooklyn 5G Summit Keynote, Apr. 2019. [Online].
Available:
https://ieeetv.ieee.org/conference-highlights/keynote-ted-
rappaport-terahertz-communication-b5gs-2019?
[53] O. Kanhere and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Position locationing for millime-
ter wave systems,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2018,
pp. 206–212.
[54] R. Kurtzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed
Human Intelligence. New York, NY, USA: Penguin Books, 1999.
78752
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
[55] H. Moravec, ‘‘When will computer hardware match the human brain,’’
J. Evol. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, p. 10, 1998.
[56] P. Horn, former IBM SvP and Director of Research of New York Univer-
sity, private communications, 2018.
[57] H. Wang and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘A parametric formulation of the UTD
diffraction coefﬁcient for real-time propagation prediction modeling,’’
IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 253–257, Aug. 2005.
[58] O. Kanhere, S. Ju, Y. Xing, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Map assisted millimeter
wave localization for accurate position location,’’ submitted to IEEE
Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[59] D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Perspective: Terahertz science and technology,’’
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 122, no. 23, Dec. 2017, Art. no. 230901.
[60] M. J. W. Rodwell, ‘‘Sub-mm-wave technologies: Systems, ICs, THz
transistors,’’ in Proc. Asia–Paciﬁc Microw. Conf. (APMC), Nov. 2013,
pp. 509–511.
[61] S. K. Doddalla and G. C. Trichopoulos, ‘‘Non-line of sight terahertz imag-
ing from a single viewpoint,’’ in IEEE/MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. (IMS),
Jun. 2018, pp. 1527–1529.
[62] S. Ju, S. Shah, M. Javed, J. Li, G. Palteru, J. Robin, Y. Xing, O. Kanhere,
and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Scattering mechanisms and modeling for terahertz
wireless communications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Commun. Conf. (ICC),
May 2019, pp. 1–7.
[63] A. Velten, T. Willwacher, O. Gupta, A. Veeraraghavan, M. G. Bawendi,
and R. Raskar, ‘‘Recovering three-dimensional shape around a cor-
ner using ultrafast time-of-ﬂight imaging,’’ Nature Commun., vol. 3,
Mar. 2012, Art. no. 745.
[64] M. O’Toole, D. B. Lindell, and G. Wetzstein, ‘‘Confocal non-line-of-sight
imaging based on the light-cone transform,’’ Nature, vol. 555, no. 7696,
pp. 338–341, Mar. 2018.
[65] F. Xu, G. Shulkind, C. Thrampoulidis, J. H. Shapiro, A. Torralba,
F. N. C. Wong, and G. W. Wornell, ‘‘Revealing hidden scenes by photon-
efﬁcient occlusion-based opportunistic active imaging,’’ Opt. Express,
vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 9945–9962, Apr. 2018.
[66] A. Sume, M. Gustafsson, M. Herberthson, A. Janis, S. Nilsson, J. Rahm,
and A. Orbom, ‘‘Radar detection of moving targets behind corners,’’
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2259–2267,
Jun. 2011.
[67] K.-P.-H. Thai, O. Rabaste, J. Bosse, D. Poullin, I. Hinostroza, T. Letertre,
and T. Chonavel, ‘‘Around-the-corner radar: Detection and localization
of a target in non-line of sight,’’ in Proc. IEEE Radar Conf. (RadarConf),
May 2017, pp. 842–847.
[68] P. Setlur, T. Negishi, N. Devroye, and D. Erricolo, ‘‘Multipath exploitation
in non-LOS urban synthetic aperture radar,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 137–152, Feb. 2014.
[69] R. Zetik, M. Eschrich, S. Jovanoska, and R. S. Thoma, ‘‘Looking behind
a corner using multipath-exploiting UWB radar,’’ IEEE Trans. Aerosp.
Electron. Syst., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 1916–1926, Jul. 2015.
[70] T. S. Rappaport, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., S. Sun, H. Yan, and S. Deng,
‘‘Small-scale, local area, and transitional millimeter wave propagation for
5G communications,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 65, no. 12,
pp. 6474–6490, Dec. 2017.
[71] G. C. Trichopoulos, H. L. Mosbacker, D. Burdette, and K. Sertel,
‘‘A broadband focal plane array camera for real-time THz imaging appli-
cations,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1733–1740,
Jan. 2013.
[72] T. Chi, M.-Y. Huang, S. Li, and H. Wang, ‘‘ A packaged 90-to-300 GHz
transmitter and 115-to-325 GHz coherent receiver in CMOS for full-band
continuous-wave mm-wave hyperspectral imaging,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), Feb. 2017, pp. 304–305.
[73] S. Sun, T. S. Rappaport, M. Shaﬁ, P. Tang, J. Zhang, and P. J. Smith,
‘‘Propagation models and performance evaluation for 5G millimeter-
wave bands,’’ IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8422–8439,
Sep. 2018.
[74] S. Sun, T. S. Rappaport, and M. Shaft, ‘‘Hybrid beamforming
for 5G millimeter-wave multi-cell networks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2018,
pp. 589–596.
[75] D. J. Allstot, X. Li, and S. Shekhar, ‘‘Design considerations for CMOS
low-noise ampliﬁers,’’ in Proc. IEE Radio Freq. Integr. Circuits (RFIC)
Syst. Dig. Papers, Jun. 2004, pp. 97–100.
[76] L. Bruton and N. Bartley, ‘‘Three-dimensional image processing using the
concept of network resonance,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. CAS-32,
no. 7, pp. 664–672, Jul. 1985.
[77] L. T. Bruton, ‘‘Selective ﬁltering of spatio-temporal plane waves using
3D cone ﬁlter banks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conf. Commun., Com-
put. Signal Process., vol. 1, Aug. 2001, pp. 67–70.
[78] L. T. Bruton, ‘‘Three-dimensional cone ﬁlter banks,’’ IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 208–216,
Feb. 2003.
[79] N. Liyanage, L. T. Bruton, and P. Agathoklis, ‘‘On the attenuation of
interference and mutual coupling in antenna arrays using 3D space-time
ﬁlters,’’ in Proc. IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal
Process. (PacRim), Aug. 2009, pp. 146–151.
[80] C. U. S. Edussooriya, L. T. Bruton, P. Agathoklis, and T. K. Gunaratne,
‘‘Low-complexity maximally-decimated multirate 3-D spatio-temporal
FIR cone and frustum ﬁlters,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers,
vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1845–1856, Jul. 2013.
[81] S. Handagala, A. Madanayake, L. Belostotski, and L. T. Bruton, ‘‘Delta-
sigma noise shaping in 2D spacetime for uniform linear aperture
array receivers,’’ in Proc. IEEE Moratuwa Eng. Res. Conf. (MERCon),
Apr. 2016, pp. 114–119.
[82] Y. Wang, S. Handagala, A. Madanayake, L. Belostotski, and S. Mandal,
‘‘N-port LNAs for mmW array processors using 2-D spatio-temporal
1 −6 noise-shaping,’’ in Proc. IEEE 60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuit
Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2017, pp. 1473–1476.
[83] A. Nikoofard, J. Liang, M. Twieg, S. Handagala, A. Madanayake,
L. Belostotski, and S. Mandal, ‘‘Low-complexity N-port ADCs using
2-D 1 −6 noise-shaping for N-element array receivers,’’ in Proc. IEEE
60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2017,
pp. 301–304.
[84] A. Madanayake, N. Akram, S. Mandal, J. Liang, and L. Belostot-
ski, ‘‘Improving ADC ﬁgure-of-merit in wideband antenna array
receivers using multidimensional space-time delta-sigma multiport cir-
cuits,’’ in Proc. 10th Int. Workshop Multidimensional (nD) Syst. (nDS),
Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[85] Y. Wang, J. Liang, S. Handagala, A. Madanayake, and S. Mandal, ‘‘1−6
noise-shaping in 2-D space-time for wideband antenna array receivers,’’
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 569–582,
Feb. 2019.
[86] Y. Wang, J. Liang, L. Belostotski, A. Madanayake, and S. Mandal,
‘‘1 −6 noise-shaping in 3-D space–time for 2-D wideband antenna
array receivers,’’ Multidimensional Syst. Signal Process., pp. 1–23,
Oct. 2018.
[87] S. Pavan, R. Schreier, and G. C. Temes, Understanding Delta-Sigma Data
Converters (IEEE Press Series on Microelectronic Systems). Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 2017.
[88] H. Zhao, S. Mandal, V. Ariyarathna, A. Madanayake, and R. J. Cintra,
‘‘An offset-canceling approximate-DFT beamforming architecture for
wireless transceivers,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS),
May 2018, pp. 1–5.
[89] V. Ariyarathna, D. F. G. Coelho, S. Pulipati, R. J. Cintra, F. M. Bayer,
V. S. Dimitrov, and A. Madanayake, ‘‘Multibeam digital array receiver
using a 16-point multiplierless DFT approximation,’’ IEEE Trans. Anten-
nas Propag., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 925–933, Feb. 2019.
[90] S. Kulasekera, A. Madanayake, D. Suarez, R. J. Cintra, and F. M. Bayer,
‘‘Multi-beam receiver apertures using multiplierless 8-point approx-
imate DFT,’’ in Proc. IEEE Radar Conf. (RadarCon), May 2015,
pp. 1244–1249.
[91] D. Suarez, R. J. Cintra, F. M. Bayer, A. Sengupta, S. Kulasekera,
and A. Madanayake, ‘‘Multi-beam RF aperture using multiplierless
FFT approximation,’’ Electron. Lett., vol. 50, no. 24, pp. 1788–1790,
Dec. 2014.
[92] V. Ariyarathna, S. Kulasekera, A. Madanayake, K.-S. Lee, D. Suarez,
R. J. Cintra, F. M. Bayer, and L. Belostotski, ‘‘Multi-beam 4
GHz microwave apertures using current-mode DFT approximation
on 65 nm CMOS,’’ in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig.,
May 2015, pp. 1–4.
[93] V. Ariyarathna, A. Madanayake, X. Tang, D. Coelho, R. J. Cintra,
L. Belostotski, S. Mandal, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Analog approximate-
FFT 8/16-beam algorithms, architectures and CMOS circuits for 5G
beamforming MIMO transceivers,’’ IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits
Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 466–479, Sep. 2018.
[94] S. Kulasekera, A. Madanayake, C. Wijenayake, F. M. Bayer, D. Suarez,
and R. J. Cintra, ‘‘Multi-beam 8×8 RF aperture digital beamformers
using multiplierless 2-D FFT approximations,’’ in Proc. Moratuwa Eng.
Res. Conf. (MERCon), Apr. 2015, pp. 260–264.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78753

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
[95] S. M. Perera, V. Ariyarathna, N. Udayanga, A. Madanayake, G. Wu,
L. Belostotski, Y. Wang, S. Mandal, R. J. Cintra, and T. S. Rappaport,
‘‘Wideband N-beam arrays using low-complexity algorithms and mixed-
signal integrated circuits,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12,
no. 2, pp. 368–382, May 2018.
[96] A.
Madanayake,
V.
Ariyarathna,
N.
Udayanga,
L.
Belostotski,
S. K. Perera, and R. J. Cintra, ‘‘Design of a low-complexity wideband
analog true-time-delay 5-beam array in 65 nm CMOS,’’ in Proc.
IEEE 60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2017,
pp. 1204–1207.
[97] V.
Ariyarathna,
N.
Udayanga,
A.
Madanayake,
S.
M.
Perera,
L. Belostotski,
and
R.
J.
Cintra,
‘‘Design
methodology
of
an
analog
9-beam
squint-free
wideband
IF
multi-beamformer
for
mmW applications,’’ in Proc. Moratuwa Eng. Res. Conf. (MERCon),
May 2017, pp. 236–240.
[98] N. Reiskarimian, T. Dinc, J. Zhou, T. Chen, M. B. Dastjerdi,
J. Diakonikolas, G. Zussman, and H. Krishnaswamy, ‘‘One-way ramp
to a two-way highway: Integrated magnetic-free nonreciprocal antenna
interfaces for full-duplex wireless,’’ IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 56–75, Feb. 2019.
[99] N. Reiskarimian and H. Krishnaswamy, ‘‘Magnetic-free non-reciprocity
based on staggered commutation,’’ Nature Commun., vol. 7, Apr. 2016,
Art. no. 11217.
[100] H. J. Liebe, T. Manabe, and G. A. Hufford, ‘‘Millimeter-wave attenuation
and delay rates due to fog/cloud conditions,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 1612–1617, Dec. 1989.
[101] T. S. Rappaport, J. N. Murdock, and F. Gutierrez, Jr., ‘‘State
of the art in 60-GHz integrated circuits and systems for wire-
less communications,’’ Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 8, pp. 1390–1436,
Aug. 2011.
[102] Y. Yang, M. Mandehgar, and D. Grischkowsky, ‘‘Determination of
the water vapor continuum absorption by THz-TDS and molecu-
lar response theory,’’ Opt. Express, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4388–4403,
Feb. 2014.
[103] J. Ma, J. Adelberg, R. Shrestha, L. Moeller, and D. M. Mittleman,
‘‘The effect of snow on a terahertz wireless data link,’’ J. Infr., Millim.,
THz Waves, vol. 39, pp. 505–508, Jun. 2018.
[104] J. Ma, R. Shrestha, L. Moeller, and D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Invited article:
Channel performance for indoor and outdoor terahertz wireless links,’’
APL Photon., vol. 3, no. 5, Feb. 2018, Art. no. 051601 .
[105] Attenuation by Atmospheric Gases, Tech. Rep. ITU-R P.676-11,
Sep. 2016.
[106] S. Sun, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘A novel millimeter-
wave channel simulator and applications for 5G wireless commu-
nications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2017,
pp. 1–7.
[107] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Rural macrocell
path loss models for millimeter wave wireless communications,’’
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1663–1677,
Jul. 2017.
[108] H. Xu, T. S. Rappaport, R. J. Boyle, and J. H. Schaffner, ‘‘Measure-
ments and models for 38-GHz point-to-multipoint radiowave propa-
gation,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 310–321,
Mar. 2000.
[109] Speciﬁc Attenuation Model for Rain for use in Prediction Meth-
ods, Propagation in Non-Ionized Media, Tech. Rep. ITU-R P.838-3,
Mar. 2005.
[110] Z. Qingling and J. Li, ‘‘Rain attenuation in millimeter wave ranges,’’ in
Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Antennas, Propag. EM Theory (ISAPE), Oct. 2006,
pp. 1–4.
[111] K. Su, L. Moeller, R. B. Barat, and J. F. Federici, ‘‘Experimental compari-
son of performance degradation from terahertz and infrared wireless links
in fog,’’ J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, Opt. Image Sci., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 179–184,
Feb. 2012.
[112] K. Su, L. Moeller, R. B. Barat, and J. F. Federici, ‘‘Experimental com-
parison of terahertz and infrared data signal attenuation in dust clouds,’’
J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, Opt. Image Sci., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2360–2366,
Nov. 2012.
[113] J. Ma, L. Moeller, and J. F. Federici, ‘‘Experimental comparison of
terahertz and infrared signaling in controlled atmospheric turbulence,’’
J. Infr., Millim., Terahertz Waves, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 130–143,
Feb. 2015.
[114] J. Ma, F. Vorrius, L. Lamb, L. Moeller, and J. F. Federici, ‘‘Comparison
of experimental and theoretical determined terahertz attenuation in con-
trolled rain,’’ J. Infr., Millim., THz Waves, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 1195–1202,
Dec. 2015.
[115] E.-B. Moon, T.-I. Jeon, and D. R. Grischkowsky, ‘‘Long-path THz-TDS
atmospheric measurements between buildings,’’ IEEE Trans. THz Sci.
Technol., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 742–750, Sep. 2015.
[116] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., S. Deng, S. Sun, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Millimeter-
wave human blockage at 73 GHz with a simple double knife-edge
diffraction model and extension for directional antennas,’’ in Proc. IEEE
84th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Sep. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[117] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., T. S. Rappaport, and S. Rangan, ‘‘Rapid fading due
to human blockage in pedestrian crowds at 5G millimeter-wave frequen-
cies,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2017,
pp. 1–7.
[118] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice,
2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[119] W. L. Chan, J. Deibel, and D. M. Mittleman, ‘‘Imaging with terahertz
radiation,’’ Rep. Prog. Phys., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 1325–1379, Jul. 2007.
[120] S. Rey, J. M. Eckhardt, B. Peng, K. Guan, and T. Kürner, ‘‘Channel
sounding techniques for applications in THz communications: A ﬁrst
correlation based channel sounder for ultra-wideband dynamic channel
measurements at 300 GHz,’’ in Proc. 9th Int. Congr. Ultra Mod. Telecom-
mun. Control Syst. Workshops (ICUMT), Nov. 2017, pp. 449–453.
[121] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘A ﬂexible millimeter-wave
channel sounder with absolute timing,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1402–1418, Jun. 2017.
[122] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., H. Yan, S. Sun, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘A ﬂexible
wideband millimeter-wave channel sounder with local area and NLOS to
LOS transition measurements,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
May 2017, pp. 1–7.
[123] T. Wu, T. S. Rappaport, M. E. Knox, and D. Shahrjerdi, ‘‘A wideband
sliding correlator-based channel sounder with synchronization in 65 nm
CMOS,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2019,
pp. 1–5.
[124] S. Bhardwaj, N. K. Nahar, and J. L. Volakis, ‘‘All electronic propagation
loss measurement and link budget analysis for 350 GHz communication
link,’’ Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 415–423, Jul. 2016.
[125] S. Priebe, C. Jastrow, M. Jacob, T. Kleine-Ostmann, T. Schrader, and
T. Kürner, ‘‘Channel and propagation measurements at 300 GHz,’’ IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1688–1698, May 2011.
[126] T. Kleine-Ostmann, C. Jastrow, S. Priebe, M. Jacob, T. Kürner, and
T. Schrader, ‘‘Measurement of channel and propagation properties at
300 GHz,’’ in Proc. Conf. Precis. Electromagn. Meas., Jul. 2012,
pp. 258–259.
[127] N. Khalid and O. B. Akan, ‘‘Wideband THz communication channel
measurements for 5G indoor wireless networks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–6.
[128] I. Sarkas, E. Laskin, J. Hasch, P. Chevalier, and S. P. Voinigescu, ‘‘Sec-
ond generation transceivers for d-band radar and data communication
applications,’’ in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., May 2010,
pp. 1328–1331.
[129] S. L. H. Nguyen, J. Jarvelainen, A. Karttunen, K. Haneda, and
J. Putkonen, ‘‘Comparing radio propagation channels between 28 and
140 GHz bands in a shopping mall,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Antennas
Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[130] S. L. H. Nguyen, K. Haneda, and J. Putkonen, ‘‘Dual-band multipath
cluster analysis of small-cell backhaul channels in an urban street envi-
ronment,’’ in Proc. Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM) Workshops,
Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[131] S. Kim, W. T. Khan, A. Zajić, and J. Papapolymerou, ‘‘D-band channel
measurements and characterization for indoor applications,’’ IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 3198–3207, Jul. 2015.
[132] C.-L. Cheng, S. Kim, and A. Zajić, ‘‘Comparison of path loss models for
indoor 30 GHz, 140 GHz, and 300 GHz channels,’’ in Proc. 11th Eur.
Conf. Antennas Propag. (EuCAP), Mar. 2017, pp. 716–720.
[133] S. Sun, T. S. Rappaport, T. A. Thomas, A. Ghosh, H. C. Nguyen,
I. Z. Kovács, I. Rodriguez, O. Koymen, and A. Partyka, ‘‘Investigation
of prediction accuracy, sensitivity, and parameter stability of large-scale
propagation path loss models for 5G wireless communications,’’ IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2843–2860, May 2016.
[134] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., T. S. Rappaport, S. Sun, and S. Deng, ‘‘Indoor
ofﬁce wideband millimeter-wave propagation measurements and channel
models at 28 and 73 GHz for ultra-dense 5G wireless networks,’’ IEEE
Access, vol. 3, pp. 2388–2424, Oct. 2015.
[135] B. Peng, S. Rey, and T. Kürner, ‘‘Channel characteristics study for future
indoor millimeter and submillimeter wireless communications,’’ in Proc.
10th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2016, pp. 1–5.
78754
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
[136] L. Pometcu and R. D’Errico, ‘‘Characterization of sub-THz and mmWave
propagation channel for indoor scenarios,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Antennas
Propag. (EuCAP), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–4.
[137] J. M. Jornet and I. F. Akyildiz, ‘‘Channel modeling and capacity
analysis for electromagnetic wireless nanonetworks in the terahertz
band,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 3211–3221,
Oct. 2011.
[138] Y. Xing, O. Kanhere, S. Ju, T. S. Rappaport, and G. R. MacCartney, Jr.,
‘‘Veriﬁcation and calibration of antenna cross-polarization discrimination
and penetration loss for millimeter wave communications,’’ in Proc. IEEE
88th Veh. Technol. Conf., Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[139] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘73 GHz millimeter wave
propagation measurements for outdoor urban mobile and backhaul com-
munications in New York City,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
Jun. 2014, pp. 4862–4867.
[140] H. T. Friis, ‘‘A note on a simple transmission formula,’’ Proc. IRE, vol. 34,
no. 5, pp. 254–256, May 1946.
[141] R. G. Vaughan, ‘‘Polarization diversity in mobile communications,’’
IEEE
Trans.
Veh.
Technol.,
vol.
39,
no.
3,
pp.
177–186,
Aug. 1990.
[142] A. Ghosh, T. A. Thomas, M. C. Cudak, R. Ratasuk, P. Moorut, F. W. Vook,
T. S. Rappaport, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., S. Sun, and S. Nie, ‘‘Millimeter-
wave enhanced local area systems: A high-data-rate approach for future
wireless networks,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 6,
pp. 1152–1163, Jun. 2014.
[143] T. S. Rappaport and S. Deng, ‘‘73 GHz wideband millimeter-
wave foliage and ground reﬂection measurements and models,’’
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshop (ICCW), Jun. 2015,
pp. 1238–1243.
[144] H. Zhao, R. Mayzus, S. Sun, M. Samimi, J. K. Schulz, Y. Azar, K. Wang,
G. N. Wong, F. Gutierrez, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘28 GHz millimeter
wave cellular communication measurements for reﬂection and penetra-
tion loss in and around buildings in New York city,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2013, pp. 5163–5167.
[145] G. D. Durgin, T. S. Rappaport, and H. Xu, ‘‘Measurements and models
for radio path loss and penetration loss in and around homes and trees
at 5.85 GHz,’’ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 1484–1496,
Nov. 1998.
[146] C. R. Anderson and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘In-building wideband partition
loss measurements at 2.5 and 60 GHz,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 922–928, May 2004.
[147] J. Ryan, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Indoor ofﬁce
wideband penetration loss measurements at 73 GHz,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun (ICC). Workshop, May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[148] J. Kokkoniemi, J. Lehtomäki, and M. Juntti, ‘‘Measurements on penetra-
tion loss in terahertz band,’’ in Proc. 10th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag.
(EuCAP), Apr. 2016, pp. 1–5.
[149] Y. P. Zhang and Y. Hwang, ‘‘Measurements of the characteristics of indoor
penetration loss,’’ in Proc. IEEE 44th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC), vol. 3,
Jun. 1994, pp. 1741–1744.
[150] L. M. Frazier, ‘‘Radar surveillance through solid materials,’’ Proc. SPIE,
vol. 2938, pp. 139–147, Feb. 1997.
[151] A. K. M. Isa, A. Nix, and G. Hilton, ‘‘Impact of diffraction and
attenuation for material characterisation in millimetre wave bands,’’
in Proc. Loughborough Antennas Propag. Conf. (LAPC), Nov. 2015,
pp. 1–4.
[152] B. Kapilevich, M. Einat, A. Yahalom, M. Kanter, B. Litvak, and
A. Gover, ‘‘Millimeter waves sensing behind walls—Feseability study
with FEL radiation,’’ in Proc. FEL, vol. 2007, Novosibirsk, Russia, 2007,
pp. 1–4.
[153] R. R. Skidmore, T. S. Rappaport, and A. L. Abbott, ‘‘Interactive coverage
region and system design simulation for wireless communication systems
in multiﬂoored indoor environments: SMT PLUS,’’ in Proc. 5th IEEE Int.
Conf. Universal Pers. Commun., vol. 2, Sep. 1996, pp. 646–650.
[154] S. Y. Seidel and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘900 MHz path loss measure-
ments and prediction techniques for in-building communication system
design,’’ in Proc. 41st IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC), May 1991,
pp. 613–618.
[155] A. A. Goulianos, A. L. Freire, T. Barratt, E. Mellios, P. Cain, M. Rumney,
A. Nix, and M. Beach, ‘‘Measurements and characterisation of surface
scattering at 60 GHz,’’ in Proc. IEEE 86th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall),
Sep. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[156] A. Navarro, D. Guevara, and D. A. Parada, ‘‘Diffuse scattering implemen-
tation and veriﬁcation in ray launching based tool at 5.4 GHz,’’ in Proc.
32nd URSI GASS, Montreal, QC, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[157] V. Degli-Esposti, F. Fuschini, E. M. Vitucci, and G. Falciasecca, ‘‘Mea-
surement and modelling of scattering from buildings,’’ IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 143–153, Jan. 2007.
[158] J. Järveläinen, K. Haneda, M. Kyrö, V.-M. Kolmonen, J.-I. Takada, and
H. Hagiwara, ‘‘60 GHz radio wave propagation prediction in a hospital
environment using an accurate room structural model,’’ in Proc. Lough-
borough Antennas Propag. Conf. (LAPC), Nov. 2012, pp. 1–4.
[159] V. Degli-Esposti, ‘‘A diffuse scattering model for urban propaga-
tion prediction,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 49, no. 7,
pp. 1111–1113, Jul. 2001.
[160] GPS.gov.
(May
2019).
GPS
Accuracy.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.gps.gov/systems/gps/performance/accuracy/
[161] J. S. Parke, P. Mickelson, J. Yeak, K. Kremeyer, and J. Rife, ‘‘Exploiting
the terahertz band for Radionavigation,’’ J. Infr., Millim., and THz Waves,
vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 1021–1042, Oct. 2016.
[162] C. D. McGillem and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘A beacon navigation method
for autonomous vehicles,’’ IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 38, no. 3,
pp. 132–139, Aug. 1989.
[163] B. Peng, K. Guan, and T. Kürner, ‘‘Cooperative dynamic angle of arrival
estimation considering space–time correlations for terahertz communica-
tions,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6029–6041,
Sep. 2018.
[164] S. U. Pillai, Array Signal Processing. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2012.
[165] T. E. Tuncer and B. Friedlander, Classical and Modern Direction-of-
Arrival Estimation. New York, NY, USA: Academic, 2009.
[166] P. Meissner, E. Leitinger, M. Fröhle, and K. Witrisal, ‘‘Accurate and
robust indoor localization systems using ultra-wideband signals,’’ in Proc.
Eur. Navigat. Conf. (ENC), Apr. 2013, pp. 1–9.
[167] A. O. Kaya, L. Greenstein, D. Chizhik, R. Valenzuela, and N. Moayeri,
‘‘Emitter localization and visualization (ELVIS): A backward ray tracing
algorithm for locating emitters,’’ in Proc. 41st Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst.,
Mar. 2007, pp. 376–381.
[168] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., S. Deng, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Indoor ofﬁce plan
environment and layout-based mmWave path loss models for 28 GHz
and 73 GHz,’’ in Proc. IEEE 83rd Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring),
May 2016, pp. 1–6.
[169] Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access Network; Study on Chan-
nel Model for Frequencies From 0.5 to 100 GHz (Release 14),
document TR 38.901 Version 14.2.0, 3GPP, Sep. 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/38901.htm
[170] S. Ju and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Simulating motion—Incorporating spatial
consistency into NYUSIM channel model,’’ in Proc. IEEE 88th Veh.
Technol. Conf. Workshops (VTC-Fall WKSHPS), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[171] S. Sun, H. Yan, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Millimeter
wave small-scale spatial statistics in an urban microcell scenario,’’ in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2017, pp. 1–7.
[172] M. K. Samimi and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘3-D millimeter-wave statistical
channel model for 5G wireless system design,’’ IEEE Trans. Microw.
Theory Techn., vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2207–2225, Jul. 2016.
[173] Aalto University, AT&T, BUPT, CMCC, Ericsson, Huawei, Intel, KT
Corporation, Nokia, NTT DOCOMO, New York University, Qualcomm,
Samsung, University of Bristol, and University of Southern California.
(Oct. 2016). 5G Channel Model for Bands Up to 100 GHz. [Online].
Available: http://www.5gworkshops.com/5GCM.html
[174] L. Liu, C. Oestges, J. Poutanen, K. Haneda, P. Vainikainen, F. Quitin,
F. Tufvesson, and P. De Doncker, ‘‘The COST 2100 MIMO chan-
nel model,’’ IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 92–99,
Dec. 2012.
[175] S. Jaeckel, L. Raschkowski, K. Börner, and L. Thiele, ‘‘QuaDRiGa:
A 3-D multi-cell channel model with time evolution for enabling
virtual ﬁeld trials,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 6,
pp. 3242–3256, Jun. 2014.
[176] S. Ju and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘Millimeter-wave extended NYUSIM chan-
nel model for spatial consistency,’’ in Proc. IEEE Global Commun.
Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[177] F. Ademaj, M. K. Mueller, S. Schwarz, and M. Rupp, ‘‘Modeling of
spatially correlated geometry-based stochastic channels,’’ in Proc. IEEE
86th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78755

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
THEODORE
S.
RAPPAPORT
(S’83–M’84–
SM’91–F’98) is currently the David Lee/Ernst
Weber Professor with New York University (NYU)
and holds faculty appointments in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department of the
NYU Tandon School of Engineering, the Courant
Computer Science Department, and the NYU Lan-
gone School of Medicine. He is also the Founder
and the Director of NYU WIRELESS, a multidis-
ciplinary research center focused on the future of
wireless communications and applications. His research has led the way
for modern wireless communication systems. In 1987, his Ph.D. at Purdue
University provided fundamental knowledge of indoor wireless channels
used to create the ﬁrst Wi-Fi standard (IEEE 802.11), and he conducted
fundamental work that led to the ﬁrst US Digital cellphone standards, TDMA
IS-54/IS-136, and CDMA IS-95. He and his students engineered the world’s
ﬁrst public Wi-Fi hotspots, and more recently, his work proved the viability
of millimeter waves for mobile communications, and the global wireless
industry adopted his vision for 5th generation (5G) cellphone networks.
He founded three academic wireless research centers at Virginia Tech, The
University of Texas, and NYU that have produced thousands of engineers
and educators, since 1990, and he has coauthored over 300 papers and twenty
books, including the most cited books on wireless communications, adaptive
antennas, wireless simulation, and millimeter-wave communications. He co-
founded two wireless companies, TSR Technologies and Wireless Valley
Communication, which were sold to publicly traded companies, and he
has advised many others. He co-founded the Virginia Tech Symposium on
Wireless Communications in 1991, the Texas Wireless Summit in 2003, and
the Brooklyn 5G Summit (B5GS) in 2014. He has more than 100 patents,
serves on the Technological Advisory Council of the Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC), is a Fellow of the Radio Club of America and
the National Academy of Inventors, a life member of the American Radio
Relay League, a licensed professional engineer in Texas and Virginia, and
an amateur radio operator (N9NB). He has received ASEE’s Terman Award,
The Sir Monty Finniston Medal from the Institution of Engineering and
Technology (IET), the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society’s James R. Evans
Avant Garde and Stu Meyer Awards, the IEEE Education Society William
E. Sayle Award for achievement in education, the IEEE Communications
Society Armstrong Award, and the Armstrong Medal from the Radio Club
of America.
YUNCHOU XING received the B.S. degree in
electronic science and technology from Tian-
jin University, Tianjin, China, in 2014, and the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the
Tandon School of Engineering, New York Univer-
sity (NYU), Brooklyn, NY, USA, in 2016. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with a topic on
ﬁfth-generation (5G) millimeter-wave (mmWave)
wireless communications under the supervision of
Prof. T. S. Rappaport.
He has authored or coauthored seven technical papers in the ﬁeld of
mmWave wireless communications, including a 2018 IEEE VTC Best Stu-
dent Paper Award for the paper Veriﬁcation and Calibration of Antenna
Cross Polarization Discrimination and Penetration Loss for Millimeter Wave
Indoor Communications. His research interests include radio propagation,
channel sounding, and channel modeling for ultra-wideband communica-
tions systems with a focus on frequencies above 100 GHz.
OJAS
KANHERE
received the B.Tech. and
M.Tech. degrees in electrical engineering from IIT
Bombay, Mumbai, India, in 2017. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineer-
ing with the NYU WIRELESS Research Center,
New York University (NYU) Tandon School of
Engineering, Brooklyn, NY, USA, under the super-
vision of Prof. T. S. Rappaport. His research inter-
ests include mmWave localization and channel
modeling.
SHIHAO JU received the B.S. degree in commu-
nications engineering from the Harbin Institute of
Technology, Harbin, China, in 2017, and the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering from New York
University (NYU), Brooklyn, NY, USA, in 2019,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering, under the supervision of
Prof. T. S. Rappaport.
He joined the NYU WIRELESS Research Cen-
ter, in 2017. He has three ﬁrst-author conference
publications and coauthored one publication. His current research interests
include millimeter-wave and Terahertz channel measurements, channel mod-
eling, and channel simulation.
ARJUNA MADANAYAKE (S’03–M’08) received
the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) in electronic and telecom-
munication engineering from the University of
Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, in 2002, and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of Calgary, Canada. He has been a
tenured Associate Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida
International University (FIU), Miami, FL, USA,
since 2018. He was a tenured Associate Profes-
sor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univer-
sity of Akron, from 2015 to 2018, and a tenure-track Assistant Professor,
from 2009 to 2015. He was a pupil of Ananda Vidyalaya, Sri Lanka. His
research interests span wireless communications, electronics, circuits and
systems, one- and multi-dimensional signal processing, circuit theory and
applications, FPGA and digital VLSI, analog IC design, microwave, mm-
wave, and sub-THz RF circuits, and antenna array processing. His research
has recently been supported by DARPA, ONR, and NSF with several
grants.
SOUMYAJIT
MANDAL
(S’01–M’09–SM’14)
received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and
electrical communications engineering from the
IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India, in 2002, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA, in 2004 and 2009,
respectively. He was a Research Scientist with
Schlumberger-Doll Research, Cambridge, MA,
USA, from 2010 to 2014. He is currently the T.
and A. Schroeder Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
His research interests include analog and biological computation,
magnetic resonance sensors, low-power analog and RF circuits, and
precision instrumentation for various biomedical and sensor interface
applications. He received the President of India Gold Medal, in 2002,
the annual MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratories (MTL) Doc-
toral Dissertation Seminar, in 2009, the T. Keith Glennan Fellowship,
in 2016, and the IIT Kharagpur Young Alumni Achiever Award, in 2018.
He has over 120 publications in peer-reviewed journals and premier
conferences.
78756
VOLUME 7, 2019

T. S. Rappaport et al.: Wireless Communications and Applications Above 100 GHz
AHMED ALKHATEEB received the B.S. degree
(Hons.) and the M.S. degree in electrical engi-
neering from Cairo University, Egypt, in 2008 and
2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in elec-
trical engineering from The University of Texas
at Austin, USA, in 2016. From 2016 to 2017,
he was a Wireless Communications Researcher
with the Connectivity Lab, Facebook, Menlo Park,
CA, USA. He joined Arizona State University
(ASU), in 2018, where he is currently an Assistant
Professor with the School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering.
He has held R&D internships at FutureWei Technologies (Huawei), Chicago,
IL, USA, and Samsung Research America (SRA), Dallas, TX, USA. His
research interests include wireless communications, communication theory,
signal processing, machine learning, and applied math. Dr. Alkhateeb was
a recipient of the 2012 MCD Fellowship from The University of Texas at
Austin and the 2016 IEEE Signal Processing Society Young Author Best
Paper Award for his work on hybrid precoding and channel estimation in
millimeter wave communication systems.
GEORGIOS
C.
TRICHOPOULOS
(M’05)
received the Diploma degree in electrical and
computer engineering from the Democritus Uni-
versity of Thrace, Xanthi, Greece, in 2004,
the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering from
the National Technical University of Athens,
Athens and University of Patras, Patras, Greece,
(under a joint program), in 2006, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and computer engineering
from the Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
USA, in 2013. His doctoral work provided fundamental knowledge for
the design of real-time terahertz cameras and non-contact probing of
mmWave/THz circuits and devices. From 2013 to 2015, he was a Postdoc-
toral Researcher with the ElectroScience Laboratory, Ohio State University.
In 2015, he joined Arizona State University, as an Assistant Professor
with the School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering. His
research interests include antennas, microwaves, and electromagnetic theory.
He focuses on mmWave/THz imaging methods and systems, antenna design
for mmWave/THz sensors, and high-frequency device and circuit characteri-
zation methods. He received the Best Student Paper Award in the 2013 IEEE
Antennas and Propagation Symposium, Orlando, FL, USA, and the NSF
CAREER Award, in 2019.
VOLUME 7, 2019
78757
