Abstract A relatively broad consolidated consensus has emerged among experts regarding the competencies that should be fostered through an education for sustainable development at the higher education level. However, there is little empirical support to aid in answering the question of which competencies should be promoted from the perspective of students and graduates. This was the main purpose for analyzing the corresponding results of the evaluation of the study programs in sustainable development at the University of Bern. In a standardized survey, students (N = 124), graduates (N = 121), and the supervisors of internships (N = 37) were asked, among other questions, how important they consider the fostering of the respective 13 competencies during their studies and for their professional activities. Overall, the results confirm the view of experts: the study programs should be designed for a comprehensive empowerment with respect of responsible and self-motivated participation in meeting the challenges of sustainable development. Even the students are of the opinion that competency-oriented education is important and that not only the acquisition, respectively the imparting of knowledge is relevant. Regarding the estimation of the promotion of competencies in the study program, the three groups agree that the competencies “Interconnected, foresighted, and thinking approaches in system-dynamic contexts” and “Recognizing on one’s own perspective on a situation and problem, empathizing with other perspectives, and taking these into account when solving problems” are the most important. For the professional field, the competency “Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner” is rated most important by all three groups. However, it must be noted that there are also differences between the varying perspectives of the students, graduates, and internship supervisors. The results indicate opportunities for improvement that can also be considered as recommendations in the further development of inter- and transdisciplinary sustainability-oriented study programs. Furthermore, lecturers should, especially regarding a multidisciplinary team, coordinate and communize the development of competencies across the different educational elements. Students should be well informed regarding how the various educational elements, i.e., teaching/learning arrangements and assessments, are intended to contribute to the overall development of competency. Finally, in order to ensure that lecturers align respective learning outcomes, as well as teaching/learning arrangements and assessments in their educational elements, there will need to be a greater focus on competency development across a program of study.