1
The Chemistry of TALSPEAK: 
A Review of the Science 
 
 
Kenneth L. Nash 
Washington State University 
Department of Chemistry 
PO Box 644630 
Pullman, WA 99164-4630 
 
Contact information knash@wsu.edu  
 
 
For submission to Solvent Extraction and Ion Exchange 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The TALSPEAK Process (Trivalent Actinide Lanthanide Separation with Phosphorus-reagent 
Extraction from Aqueous Komplexes) was originally developed at Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory by B. Weaver and F.A. Kappelmann in the 1960s. It was envisioned initially as an 
alternative to the TRAMEX process (selective extraction of trivalent actinides by tertiary or 
quaternary amines over fission product lanthanides from concentrated LiCl solutions). 
TALSPEAK proposed the selective extraction of trivalent lanthanides away from the actinides, 
which are retained in the aqueous phase as aminopolycarboxylate complexes. After several 
decades of research and development, the conventional TALSPEAK process (based on di-(2-
ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (extractant) in 1,4-di-isopropylbenzene  (diluent) and a concentrated 
lactate buffer containing diethylenetriamine-N,N,N’,N”,N”-pentaacetic acid (actinide-selective 
holdback reagent)) has become a widely recognized benchmark for advanced aqueous 
partitioning of the trivalent 4f/5f elements. TALSPEAK chemistry has also been utilized as an 
actinide-selective stripping agent (Reverse TALSPEAK) with some notable success. Under ideal 
conditions, conventional TALSPEAK separates Am3+ from Nd3+ (the usual limiting pair) with a 
single-stage separation factor of about 100; both lighter and heavier lanthanides are more 
completely separated from Am3+. Despite this apparent efficiency, TALSPEAK has not seen 
enthusiastic adoption for advanced partitioning of nuclear fuels at process scale for two principle 
reasons: 1) all adaptations of TALSPEAK chemistry to process scale applications require rigid 
pH control within a narrow range of pH, and 2) phase transfer kinetics are often slower than ideal. 

 
2
To compensate for these effects, high concentrations of the buffer (0.5-2 M H/Na lactate) are 
required. Acknowledgement of these complications in TALSPEAK process development has 
inspired significant research activities dedicated to improving understanding of the basic 
chemistry that controls TALSPEAK (and related processes based on the application of actinide-
selective holdback reagents). In the following report, advances in understanding of the 
fundamental chemistry of TALSPEAK that have occurred during the past decade will be 
reviewed and discussed.  
 
Keywords: TALSPEAK, actinide, lanthanide, solvent extraction, HDEHP, lactic acid, DTPA 
 

 
3
INTRODUCTION: 
Background on the TALSPEAK Process 
In Volume 6 of Ion Exchange and Solvent Extraction (1974) a review of separation of 
lanthanides from each other and from actinides was published1. In that report, Boyd Weaver 
observed (in describing the TALSPEAK -Trivalent Actinide Lanthanide Separation with 
Phosphorus-reagent Extraction from Aqueous Komplexes -  process) that “Much fruitless effort 
was expended searching for extractants to separate the two groups of elements… The separation 
was only accomplished by considerably modifying the aqueous medium.” This separation is 
challenging because 1) the target metal ions exhibit very similar chemistry dominated by the 
trivalent oxidation state, 2) the radii of the ions decrease by about 20% across the series and the 
radii of isoelctronic pairs are nearly identical, 3) feeds are typically intensely radioactive, hence 
radiolytic degradation of reagents (and its effect on extraction conditions) is an issue, and 4) the 
separation chemistry is based on the very slight increase that is seen in the covalency of 
interaction between An(III) and Ln(III) cations and ligand donor atoms “softer” than oxygen. The 
separation is important because 241Am dominates the heat load of used nuclear fuel from reactors 
from about 20-4000 years after the discharge of fuel from a reactor; heat load in the surrounding 
rock is a primary determinant of the size of a geologic repository for used nuclear fuel or high-
level waste from reprocessing.2 Americium can be transmuted to less hazardous materials in a 
reactor, but only after most of the fission product lanthanides have been removed.* 
Forty years later, efforts continue to develop industrially-viable approaches to the challenging 
task of separating trivalent transplutonium actinides from fission product lanthanides. Some 
significant portion of the new research on this subject focuses on the development of new 
reagents that exhibit useful selectivity for the (5f) trivalent actinides over the (4f) lanthanides. 3-6 
In every case, these approaches focus on taking advantage of the slightly greater covalency that 
characterizes the bonding of the actinides. The TALSPEAK Process, originally developed by 
                                                 
* Several fission product lanthanides have large neutron capture cross sections thus they compete with Am for 
fission neutrons decreasing the efficiency of the transmutation process. Several of these lanthanides can be 
present at higher concentrations than Am, depending on the time since discharge of the fuel from the reactor 
where it was produced (beta decay of 241Pu – representing about 1 kg/ton of fuel, t1/2 = 14.4 years , at discharge).  

 
4
Weaver and Kappelmann7 at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the 1960s, remains a viable 
contender for accomplishing this challenging separation.  
A revival of interest in TALSPEAK separations was arguably led by researchers at Argonne 
National Lab during the course of developing the UREX suite of advanced reprocessing 
schemes.8-10 The UREX process begins with some material control options (based principally on 
tributyl phosphate extraction from nitric acid media) for managing the bulk of actinides present 
(U, Np, Pu) using oxidized actinide chemistry. In UREX, the residues (aqueous raffinates) 
containing all Am, Cm and fission products and reduced concentrations of U, Np, Pu are 
subjected first to a TRUEX partitioning of Am, Cm, and lanthanides from the remainder of 
fission and corrosion products and subsequently to a trivalent actinide/lanthanide separation. 
Though other options were considered in the development of various UREX reprocessing 
flowsheets, TALSPEAK emerged as the best option for accomplishing this final, chemically 
challenging separation.   
TALSPEAK Process Characteristics. The TALSPEAK process is based on the balance of the 
relative affinity of cation exchanging solvent extraction reagents and comparably powerful 
aqueous complexants for the two classes of metal ions. In its simplest operational mode, the 
extractant exhibits strong affinity for both lanthanides and actinides while the actinide-selective 
aqueous complexants more strongly binds trivalent actinides. Introducing a “soft-donor” atom 
(nitrogen and sulfur are most effective) into either the extractant phase or the aqueous phase in 
principal modifies the natural tendency of trivalent actinides to “follow” trivalent lanthanides to 
result in the desired selective partitioning of one group from the other. Of course, the task is not 
quite that simple, as the cationic radii (and hence the electrostatic components of the bonding 
interactions/solvation) steadily decrease across the respective series. The cationic radius of 
americium (Am3+), the principal actinide of concern in this context, is nearly identical to that of 
Nd3+; this particular separation is often the most difficult to accomplish. In process development, 
thermodynamic parameters of these ions in hard donor systems are often compared. The actinide 
isotope of greatest concern is 241Am, which is a low-yield product of neutron capture reactions, 
but of increasing importance in aged fuel as its concentration increases as its radioactive parent 
decays (241Pu represents about 0.1% of freshly discharged fuel from LWRs and decays with a 
14.4 year half-life to produce 241Am; the longer-lived 241Am accumulates much more rapidly than 

 
5
it decays). The lanthanides of interest include La-Dy, some of which are important neutron 
poisons (Nd, Sm, Pm, Eu, Gd) while others are among the larger contributors to the fission 
product mass (Ce, Nd, Sm, Y); lanthanides heavier than Dy are not important fission products. 11 
In the original development of the TALSPEAK process, Weaver and Kappelmann focused on the 
extractive power of dialkyl phosphoric and phosphonic acid extractants balanced against the 
actinide selectivity of aminopolycarboxylic acid complexing agents. Bis-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric 
acid (HDEHP), which ultimately emerged as the favored extractant, can extract trivalent f-
elements from dilute (0.1-0.01 M) mineral acid solutions; aminopolycarboxylic acid complexants 
generally require somewhat higher pH for both adequate solubility and appropriate complex 
strength. Of necessity, TALSPEAK evolved toward buffered aqueous media in the pH 2.5-4.5 
range. The cation exchanging extractant exhibits a moderate sensitivity to the decreasing cationic 
radius of lanthanide and actinide cations that occurs with increasing atomic number. 
Thermodynamic extraction efficiency increasing on average by about 2 kJ/mol for each 
successive member of the series. The extractant typically does not distinguish between Ln3+ and 
An3+ ions of comparable size. The aminopolycarboxylate ligands tend to complex trivalent 
actinides more strongly than the lanthanides of similar ionic size, though complex stability 
patterns tend to exhibit different trends based on complex stoichiometry and ligand denticity 
(which will be considered in more detail below).  
To solve issues of solubility, to accommodate the need for pH control, and to improve phase 
transfer kinetics, Weaver and Kappelmann considered a variety of carboxylic acid buffers. The 
most efficient pH range for operation of various TALSPEAK options lies between pH 3.0 and 
4.5. Establishing acceptable phase transfer kinetics and pH control ultimately demanded that the 
concentration of the buffers be maintained in the range of 0.5 to 2.0 M. Ultimately, Weaver and 
Kappelmann settled on a combination of di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (HDEHP) in 1,4-
diisopropylbenzene balanced against a concentrated sodium lactate buffer containing an 
appropriate concentration of diethylenetriamine-N,N,N’,N”,N”-pentaacetic acid (DTPA) 
operating in the range of pH 3.0-4.0 as a baseline formulation for TALSPEAK separations. They 
observed that aliphatic diluents gave higher extraction efficiency, but reduced actinide/lanthanide 
selectivity, hence the hybrid diluent. Over the past four decades this chemistry has been 
investigated periodically with a variety of different concentrations of each component, with 

 
6
alternative cation exchanging extractants, substituted into other separation platforms, even 
adapted to processes attempting total spent fuel management strategies based on a single 
extraction platform (e.g., CTH 12,13 and DIDPA14 processes). Actinide-selective 
aminopolycarboxylate complexants in buffered media have also been adapted to separation 
platforms not based on liquid cation exchanging extractants with mixed success.15   
Though a number of “fundamental” studies have been conducted on some features of 
TALSPEAK during the years since its inception (radiolysis, phase transfer kinetics, extraction 
reactions via stoichiometric slope analysis), more studies have focused on application 
development and optimization. The fundamental chemistry of TALSPEAK was reviewed in 
detail in 2007, coinciding with its integration into UREX process development.16 In that report an 
attempt was made to correlate numerous independent observations to develop a coherent picture 
of the potential gaps in understanding of the TALSPEAK process. As usual, correlating the 
observations of numerous investigators (or teams of investigators) operating with various 
constraints in widely dispersed locations provides some insights, but only a limited number of 
clear consistencies. Focusing in principal on the baseline TALSPEAK process (0.1-0.5 M 
HDEHP in NPH or DIPB, 0.5-2.0 M Na/H-Lactate, 0.05-0.10 M DTPA, pH 3.0-4.0), three 
observations have been made concerning issues to be overcome prior to process-level 
application:  
 
1) Extraction of lanthanides and actinides decreases significantly as pH rises, hence pH 
control is essential for process-scale applications,  
 
2) Extraction kinetics are often slow enough to require longer than desirable phase 
contact times,  
 
3) Process-worthy system performance is closely tied to a relatively narrow band of 
conditions, in particular pH.  
The Thermodynamics of TALSPEAK. Between 1960 and 1980, a considerable amount of 
thermodynamic data describing the interactions of lanthanides and actinides with primary 
components of conventional TALSPEAK was reported in the open literature.17 Numerous studies 
reported stability constant values for lanthanide carboxylate and aminopolycarboxylate 

 
7
complexes, a smaller number of equilibrium constants for trivalent actinide complexes, and a few 
studies reported reliable trans-lanthanide extraction data for HDEHP extraction systems. These 
data enabled (with a few approximations) the calculation of predicted solvent extraction 
partitioning trends. Because there is no standard “reference state” (ionic strength, temperature, 
ionic medium) in such studies, one challenge of predicting the thermodynamics of TALSPEAK 
process performance is the requirement that the relevant thermodynamic data must be compiled 
and compared with a cautious eye toward internal consistency.  
Of particular interest in thermodynamic modeling of TALSPEAK was the relationship between 
lanthanide extraction patterns from concentrated lactate buffer solutions containing DTPA as a 
function of pH. Though the basic phase transfer reaction has a clear inverse third power 
dependence on [H+], 
M3+ + 3 (HDEHP)2 org  ⇌  M(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 org  + 3 H+,   
 
(1) 
 
 
the acid dependence of the competing aqueous metal complexes with H5-nDTPAn- and the 
corresponding lactate complexes is more complex. The aqueous equilibria of importance include 
that of the phase transfer reaction (equation 1), protonation of lactic acid and DTPA (equations 2 
and 3),  
H+ + Lac-  ⇌ HLac  
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
 
 
H+ + DTPA5- ⇌ HDTPA4-, (etc. up to H5L)   
 
(3) 
 
 
The formation of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3 lanthanide and actinide lactate complexes, 
 
 
M3+ + nLac- ⇌ MLacn
3-n,  
 
 
 
(4) 
 
 
and complexes of Ln3+ and An3+ with DTPA to form M(DTPA)2- and M(H(DTPA))- complexes, 
 M3+ + H+ + DTPA5- ⇌ M(HDTPA)-, 
 
 
(5) 
 
 
M3+ +   DTPA5- ⇌ M(DTPA)-. 
 
       
(6) 
 
 

 
8
In the previous report, speciation diagrams were prepared for each of the lanthanides, yttrium and 
Am3+ to assess differences in speciation. It was clear in this exercise that the complexometric 
balance between HDEHP and DTPA was primarily responsible for the observed patterns of 
extraction and group separation, though lactate complexes gained importance in its potential 
impact on extraction efficiency at higher lactate concentration for the lightest and heaviest 
lanthanide ions.  
Basic thermodynamic modeling calculations reported in reference 18 (based on the assumption 
that the above equations are the only reactions to consider) indicate that in the range of pH 3.0-
4.5 the extraction reactions of Ln3+ and An3+ should be nearly constant, with a slight increase in 
distribution ratios at pH > 3.2 (Figure 1†). The most important DTPA-HDEHP equilibrium at the 
normal pH = 3.5 operational condition is: 
Ln(DTPA)2- 
aq  + 3 (HDEHP)2 org  ⇌ Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 org + H3(DTPA)2-
aq  .    (7) 
 
  
For trivalent lanthanides the equilibrium lies to the product side, for trivalent actinides to the 
reactant side. 
In contrast with this prediction of near acid independence, numerous reports in the literature on 
conventional TALSPEAK (and related systems) experimentally demonstrate decreasing 
extraction (in some reports, relatively steep changes) as pH increases.7,19,20  Though the 
thermodynamic modeling calculations do not  predict the pH profile observed in TALSPEAK 
applications, they do accurately predicted the trans-lanthanide pattern of extraction and the 
Am/Ln separation efficiency that is observed at the baseline TALSPEAK pH of 3.5 (Figure 1b).‡ 
Coupled with the general lack of a chemical explanation for the slow phase transfer kinetics, 
these results motivated a series of studies directly probing the chemistry of TALSPEAK. 
FIGURE 1 NEAR HERE 
 
                                                 
† The reader is referred to reference 16 for the details of this calculation. 
‡ The validity of such calculations is highly dependent on stringent adherence to developing an internally consistent 
set of thermodynamic parameters.  

 
9
Summary of 2007 review: TALSPEAK process profile  
The combined review of the prior literature and computational analysis of the thermodynamics of 
TALSPEAK described in the 2007 review clearly describe a system based on complex chemical 
interactions. Slope analysis results from the previous literature hint at, but ultimately provide 
unsatisfactory explanations for, many of the observations that have been made during efforts to 
develop viable TALSPEAK processes. Aside from the issues of slow phase transfer kinetics and 
unexpected/undesirable acid dependence in the extraction reactions, the earlier review describes 
selected overarching features of TALSPEAK separations that are reasonably well known, as 
follows: 
1) The primary roles of the components (lactate = buffer, DTPA = actinide holdback reagent, 
HDEHP = lanthanide extractant) do not account for the relative impact of each species on 
process performance (only DTPA is consistently predictable).  
2) High concentrations of lactate buffer increase the solubility of DTPA21 
3) Lactate serves as a radiation scavenger and increases the  effective  lifetime of DTPA in 
the process 
4) The order of extraction of trivalent lanthanides and Am3+ is Am << Nd < Pm < Sm = Eu 
< Pr < Ce = Gd < La < Tb < Dy < Ho < Er < Tm < Yb < Lu. This pattern is consistent 
with predictions based on the relative stability of lanthanide and Am complexes with 
HDEHP vs. DTPA; thermodynamic data for lanthanide and actinide complexation by 
DTPA, lactate, and HDEHP predict relatively closely the observed (pseudo-parabolic) 
pattern of relative extraction efficiency and separation. 
5) Lactate effectively serves as a phase transfer catalyst 
6) An option for a citrate-based TALSPEAK has been described in the prior literature; 22 this 
option may offer advantages in the management of fission product zirconium 
7) At high concentrations, lactate is reportedly responsible for phase separation issues 
(increased dissolution of HDEHP in the aqueous media) while at lower concentrations it 
assists with phase disengagement.7 

 
10
8) Lactic acid impacts the kinetics of the complexation between DTPA and metal ions in the 
aqueous phase, possibly forming a mixed complex, probably as a transient species. 23  
9) Several reports have suggested (based on slope analysis primarily) the presence of ternary 
complexes (M(lac)(HDEHP)x and M(lac)(DTPA)) represent an unknown aspect of 
TALSPEAK, as there are no fundamental data establishing their existence, only 
inferences of the effect of lactate on cation partitioning.  
10) The complexes of lanthanide cations by polyaminopolycarboxylic acids are known to be 
kinetically hindered, with metal complex dissociation reactions proceeding via a 
sometimes involved series of steps 24,25, though in buffered aqueous media the kinetics of 
these reactions are too rapid to account for the observed slow phase transfer kinetics of 
TALSPEAK  
11) The phase transfer mechanistic studies done previously by Kolarik and Kuhn 23 and by 
Danesi and Cianetti 26 provide a workable and useful description of the operation of the 
process, but do not establish a clear molecular-scale explanation for the observed kinetics 
or an explanation of why lactate is (or is not) a unique phase transfer catalyst; each study 
cites interfacial decomplexation reactions as rate limiting processes. 
12) Analysis of the thermodynamics of extraction based on literature data indicate that the 
observed Ln/An extraction pattern results from a counterbalance between a highly 
effective solvent extraction reagent and a powerful aqueous complexant. As will be seen 
below, matching weaker extractants with weaker aqueous complexants can yield similar 
system performance.    
Because of the gaps that exist in the fundamental understanding of the chemistry of TALSPEAK, 
attempts to adapt the basic philosophy of TALSPEAK to other separations systems will have to 
rely to a large degree on trial and error approaches. This potentially powerful lanthanide-actinide 
partitioning technique could have far greater impact on spent fuel partitioning efficiency if 
additional studies of its basic features were conducted. This analysis of the known literature 
inspired a number of detailed investigations of the molecular scale interactions that drive, limit 
and generally complicate the basic chemistry of TALSPEAK. 

 
11
Two specific features of this analysis of TALSPEAK emerged as areas of particular interest for 
further consideration 1) the clear mismatch between the predictions of slight pH dependence of 
the extraction as compared with the repeated reports of a strong negative correlation between 
increasing pH and extraction efficiency;18 the observed disagreement between thermodynamic 
model predictions and observed behavior can be most simply considered to result from 
phenomena that cause a) extraction strength to be lost or, b) holdback strength to be gained, and 
2) the absence of a clear picture of the relationship between the chemical kinetics of the reactions 
that must define phase transfer reactions and the observed complexity of the phase transfer 
kinetics.  
• On the acid dependence question, the prospect of involvement of ternary complexes in 
either the organic or aqueous phases (or both) offered an obvious target for investigation 
and has been previously implicated. 7,19,20 The earlier reports of reduced extractant 
dependence in TALSPEAK extraction reactions, explained in the prior literature as a 
result of extraction of Ln(Lac)2+ species, was the most widely considered explanation. As 
this conclusion was based principally on the results of slope analysis experiments, it was 
thought that a more direct probing of this possibility was in order. The other possible 
explanation for declining extraction of metal ions that is seen as the pH increases is the 
possible loss of extraction efficiency (in contrast to the predicted slightly rising extraction 
predicted by the HDEHP-DTPA modeling) that could result from a change in the 
extractant organization or another competing reaction that reduces the availability of 
HDEHP for the essential task of lanthanide extraction.  
• On the question of the kinetics of the phase transfer reaction (and the evident catalysis of 
lanthanide phase transfer by lactate), the complementary questions of ligand exchange 
reactions in the aqueous and organic phases separately were an obvious complement to 
the results of Kolarik and Danesi (which concluded that hindrance was arising from 
interfacial species, implicitly intermediate between the thermodynamically stable species 
of Ln(DTPA)2- and Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3) offered another intriguing target for 
investigation.  
 

 
12
Scope of this Report  
In the following, the results of experimental investigations of the fundamental basis of the 
conventional TALSPEAK process that have been completed since the 2007 review are described 
and an attempt is made at integration of these observations. The reported work includes 
examination of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the basic chemistry of the system. It also 
examines metal ion and complexant speciation and the effect of supramolecular organization on 
extraction reactions. Most components have been investigated using a combination of 
radiometric analysis methods and direct spectroscopic interrogation of TALSPEAK molecules 
and ions (or representative model species). In the closing sections reports on minor adjustments 
of TALSPEAK in process development, investigations of process monitoring and control 
relevant to TALSPEAK, and updated approaches to application development of TALSPEAK 
process alternatives are discussed. 
Thermodynamic Modeling of TALSPEAK 
As there were several reports of a strong acid dependence in TALSPEAK extraction and since 
the thermodynamic modeling exercise in the earlier review did not correlate with observed 
reports from the separations literature, it was deemed prudent to conduct a carefully controlled 
investigation to examine the acid dependence for extraction of all lanthanides and Am3+. Trans-
lanthanide studies are considered to be integral to the discovery process because La-Dy and Y are 
important fission produces, but also because trans-lanthanide studies can provide useful insights 
of broad impact. The system performance experiments focused on 1 M lactate/0.05 M DTPA, pH 
3.6 solutions in which lanthanides and Am are extracted into 0.2 M HDEHP/1,4-DIPB solutions; 
all experiments were completed under carefully controlled conditions of constant ionic strength§, 
pH, and temperature. 18 The prior reports from the solvent extraction literature focused primarily 
on process optimization rather than maintaining conditions designed to support thermodynamic 
modeling of the system. It was considered that perhaps the mismatch between observed acid 
dependence and model predictions might arise from the inconstant activity of concentrated 
                                                 
§ It is probably not necessary to maintain constant ionic strength in TALSPEAK process operation, but to facilitate 
understanding of the system control it is a desirable system constraint, particularly for model predictions.  

 
13
lactate buffer media. By controlling ionic strength and temperature, the impact of this possibility 
could be reduced.  
It was reported by Nilsson and Nash 18 that even under such carefully controlled conditions 
extraction of both lanthanides and Am3+ decreased with increasing pH and also with increasing 
temperature (at constant pH 3.6 and fixed ionic strength, 2.0 M, Figure 1a, above). As pH 
increased and distribution ratios dropped, Ln3+/Am3+ separation factors remain approximately 
constant, within the accuracy of the measurements; of course in reality the utility of the 
“separation” decreased as lanthanide extraction decreased with increasing pH. Adopting the best-
available compilation of thermodynamic data from the prior literature, 17 cation partitioning 
calculations failed to predict the experimentally observed loss of extraction as pH increases. 
Calculations again indicated that for the simplest model dominated by DTPA complexes and 
HDEHP extracted complexes a rise in pH should produce a slight increase in extraction of both 
lanthanides and actinides. This modeling exercise did predict the observed lanthanide and Am 
pattern of extraction (Figure 1b).  
To assess whether the thermodynamic data being used in the modeling was appropriate to the 
task, Nilsson and Nash 18 examined also the temperature dependence of TALSPEAK extraction 
reactions. Completing a series of lanthanide and Am extraction reactions as a function of 
temperature enabled the experimental determination of a conditional extraction enthalpy for the 
net extraction reaction (pH 3.5), as shown in equation 7. Conditional enthalpies for lanthanide 
extraction under TALSPEAK conditions that were calculated from the adjusted slopes of ln D 
versus inverse temperature (1/T, K-1) are shown in Figure 2. The two sets of data using constant 
nitrate (designated run 4) or constant sodium ion concentrations (run 5) are shown separately in 
the figure. Also shown in the figure are enthalpy values for the extraction of lanthanides from 
mineral acid solutions by HDEHP in n-heptane determined by the Van’t Hoff method, 27, 28 and 
by biphasic titration calorimetry of lanthanide extraction by HDEHP in n-dodecane. 29 Except for 
Am, the extraction reactions are exothermic, for both the HDEHP extraction of these metal ions 
from mineral acid solutions, and from TALSPEAK aqueous media. In each lanthanide system the 
least exothermic reaction is seen for Nd3+. Most surprising is the parallel patterns that are seen for 
the TALSPEAK and mineral acid solution systems. For the lightest lanthanides enthalpy values 
overlap within the uncertainty of the measurement. For the lanthanides heavier than Nd, the 

 
14
extraction from TALSPEAK aqueous phases is 5-10 kJ/mol less exothermic. Unfortunately, there 
are too many potential variables in the composition of these media to allow a more detailed 
analysis/attribution of potential cause. This observation is further addressed with the results of 
new thermodynamic data, as discussed below.   
FIGURE 2 HEAR HERE 
 
Free Energies of ligand protonation and complexation reactions 
One final limitation to the accuracy of the thermodynamic modeling of TALSPEAK was the 
reliance on Ln-DTPA stability constant and ligand protonation constants from the prior literature. 
In the calculations described above, it proved impossible to find in the existing literature a 
completely consistent set of thermodynamic equilibrium constants describing all possible 
reactions. The most important matching of conditions was made between ligand protonation and 
complexation constants for lactate and DTPA. Literature data for extraction equilibria are far less 
consistent (and suffer the effects of a wider array of variables). Of particular concern was the 
need to match I = 2.0 M lactate data with I = 0.1 M DTPA data. To reduce the uncertainty of the 
modeling from this factor, fresh estimates were made of the thermodynamic parameters 
describing lanthanide-DTPA interactions at 2 M ionic strength (NaClO4) and 25.0°C.30-32 
Protonation equilibrium constant data reported by Grimes are compared with earlier reports of 
similar data at lower ionic strength in Table 1. Lanthanide complexation equilibrium constant 
values are given in Table 2. DTPA protonation constants are defined for the successive 
protonation equilibria noted schematically in equation 3. Lanthanide-DTPA complexation 
equilibrium constants are defined as in equations 5 and 6. The protonation constants most 
affected by ionic strength are the first and second equilibria. From examination of the 0.1 M and 
2.0 M ionic strength data, it is apparent that, while selected equilibrium constants are larger at 0.1 
M than at 2.0 M, the relative magnitude of protonation and metal complex stability vary 
consistently, thus either set might be expected to produce a reasonable representation of 
equilibrium speciation in TALSPEAK systems. Care must be taken in assembling data sets for 
such modeling to match as closely as possible the conditions for parameter sets to maximize 
accuracy of predictions. 

 
15
TABLE 1 NEAR HERE 
TABLE 2 NEAR HERE 
 
It can be seen in an examination of these data that equilibrium constants are 50-100 times lower 
at 2.0 M ionic strength than at 0.1 M (as is typically seen). However, ligand protonation 
equilibrium constants are also lower at 2.0 M ionic strength (though the first and second ligand 
protonation reactions are more significantly impacted). Considering that the dominant DTPA free 
ligand species at pH 3.6 is H3DTPA2-, the effective metal complexation reaction in TALSPEAK 
aqueous phases is:  
H3DTPA2- + M3+  ⇌ M(DTPA)2-  +  3 H+   
 
(8) 
 
 
for which a few representative equilibrium constant values (log β1 – log (Kh1∙Kh2∙Kh3)) are: La3+ 
= -3.88 (I = 0.1 M), -4.27 (I = 2.0 M), Nd3+ = -1.76 (I = 0.1 M), -1.96 (I = 2.0 M), Eu3+ = -0.97 (I 
= 0.1 M), -1.16 (I = 2.0 M), Tb3+ = -0.65 (I = 0.1 M), -1.04 (I = 2.0 M). It can be seen that, 
although the metal complex “stability constants” may differ significantly, the compensating 
change in affinity for H+ tends to offset the impact of this change. A more important impact 
would be seen in comparing the relative strength of competing complexants (e.g., lactate vs. 
DTPA) if the equilibrium constants were not determined at the same ionic strength and 
temperature.  
It is also necessary in some cases to consider the internal consistency of tabulated 
thermodynamic parameters. Among the compiled data 17 describing lanthanide lactate complexes 
at 2.0 M ionic strength, as shown in Figure 3, most of the reported data is internally consistent. 
However, selected values in the compilation are not consistent with the other 80% of the data 
(they have been eliminated from this plot). For purposes of the modeling to be shown below, 
polynomial functions were developed (Origin 7.5) and the suspect data were “improved” with 
estimates based on interpolation (a reasonable approach to refining thermodynamic data trends 
probably most reliably employed only within the lanthanide series) shown in Table 3. Using this 
internally-consistent data set, speciation plots were constructed.  
FIGURE 3 NEAR HERE 
 
TABLE 3 NEAR HERE 
  
 

 
16
Using the data analysis and plotting routines of HySS 2009, aqueous phase speciation plots 
(extraction equilibria not considered) have been developed for the lanthanides for a TALSPEAK-
relevant aqueous medium comprised of 0.01 M DTPA, 2.0 M Na/HLac, I = 2.0 M, T = 25°C in 
the TALSPEAK operational pH range of 1-4 (figure 4) where speciation plots are shown for La3+ 
to Gd3+ and Yb3+. It can be seen that below pH 2 lanthanide lactate complexes dominate aqueous 
speciation. At the pH 4 upper limit of the plots LnDTPA2- is the dominant species, though only 
just so for La3+; the increasing relative strength of lanthanide DTPA complexes from La3+ to 
Nd3+ actually account for the decline in extraction that is observed for these lanthanides in 
TALSPEAK. In the pH 2-4 region, the complexes Ln(Lac)n
3-n and LnDTPA2- are competitive 
(within the constraints of the concentration limits selected). Based on the pH at which the 
LnDTPA2- and Ln(Lac)3 curves intersect, it is obvious that the competitive balance shifts 
increasingly toward Ln(DTPA)2- from La3+ to Gd3+. The reverse shift toward a more competitive 
balance between 0.01 M DTPA and 2.0 M lactate seen in the Yb3+ curve is representative of the 
trend seen in the second half of the series, in which the DTPA holdback effect becomes less 
competitive with HDEHP extraction and the lanthanides heavier than Nd are successively 
extracted more strongly. This pattern arises because lanthanide lactate complex stability 
continues to increase across the series, while Ln(DTPA)2- stability levels off for the ions heavier 
than Gd3+.  
FIGURE 4 NEAR HERE 
Speciation calculations assessing the relative stability of the Eu∙DTPA2-, Eu(HDTPA)-, and free 
DTPA ligand in 0.1 M KNO3, 2.0 M NaClO4 and 2.0 M NaO3SCF3 indicate a somewhat 
diminished importance for the Ln(HDTPA)- complexes at 2 M ionic strength than at 0.1 M. 
Under TALSPEAK relevant conditions, it is seen that Ln-lactate and Ln DTPA complexes are 
competitive for the lightest and heaviest lanthanides (in the aqueous speciation), but in the 
middle of the series Ln(DTPA)2- is the dominant aqueous species.  
 
FIGURE 5 NEAR HERE 
 

 
17
Complexation Enthalpies 
In a titration microcalorimetry investigation, Grimes 32 reported results that could only be 
interpreted to indicate that Eu DTPA complexes were weaker in 1.9 M lactate media than in 0.2 
M lactate media (at constant 2.0 M ionic strength and temperature). This unexpected result points 
to a specific ion activity effect related to lactate solutions. Specific ion effects of this sort can 
compromise the accuracy of thermodynamic modeling predictions in aqueous media as complex 
as TALSPEAK aqueous phases. Furthermore, the balance between enthalpy and entropy in 
complexation reactions can provide useful insights into cation binding trends. To address this 
observation and to gain insights into the limits of titration calorimetry, experiments have been 
completed examining the thermochemistry of Ln-DTPA complex formation reactions.33  
The ΔH values for complexation of the rare earth metals by DTPA in 2.0 M NaNO3 at 25.0°C 
and corrected for enthalpies of protonation are shown in Table 4. They are compared to results 
obtained previously 39,40 at lower ionic strength. At either ionic strength, the complexation 
enthalpies of all lanthanides according to equation 6 (above) are exothermic. The ΔH values 
increase in magnitude from lanthanum through europium, level off through dysprosium, and 
decrease thereafter such that ΔHLu is similar to ΔHLa. The reaction becomes approximately 8-9 
kJ/mol less exothermic as the medium is shifted toward infinite dilution at 0.1 M ionic strength. 
The difference in magnitude of ΔHc between the middle lanthanides and those towards the ends 
of the series is more pronounced in NaClO4 media than in the NaNO3 media. 
 
TABLE 4 NEAR HERE 
The ΔGc values determined by potentiometric titration were combined with the ΔHc values 
determined in the calorimetric experiments to calculate ΔSc values, shown in Table 5. At 0.1 M 
and 2.0 M ionic strengths, a largely linear increase in ΔS is seen across the series. These are the 
same conditions under which the largest mid-series decrease was observed in ΔH for this reaction. 
As with ΔG and ΔH, dependence of ΔS on ionic strength at high supporting electrolyte 
concentrations is minimal, but ionic strength has an appreciable effect as supporting electrolyte 
concentration is lowered toward infinite dilution. 
TABLE 5 NEAR HERE 

 
18
The pattern of increasing DGLnDTPA from La to Eu in this series is revealed by the information in 
Figure 6 to arise from a changing complexation enthalpy while entropy remains largely constant. 
From Eu-Dy both entropy and enthalpy remain nearly constant (thus the free energy is also 
constant). From Dy to Lu complexation enthalpies become steadily less exothermic while a 
compensating entropy increase compensates to maintain a stable free energy. It is not 
unreasonable to speculate that beyond Dy the decreasing size of the lanthanide ion combined 
with the comparative bulk of DTPA lead to reduced space for residual hydration of Ln(DTPA)2- 
and a resultant increase in entropy resulting from the increased release of hydration sphere water 
molecules to the bulk.  
 
FIGURE 6 NEAR HERE 
 
The determination of lanthanide-DTPA complexation enthalpies at high ionic strength enabled a 
comparison of the observed enthalpies of the individual components of TALSPEAK with the 
observed net enthalpy of the process as determined by Nilsson18  (Figure 2). To do this, the 
individual enthalpies of each step in the series of reactions required to move a lanthanide ion 
from the aqueous phase to the organic phase were summed. This model starts with the lanthanide 
ion in a stable complex with DTPA in the aqueous phase. It is necessary (thermodynamically) to 
first de-complex the lanthanide from DTPA, then extract the lanthanide into the organic phase 
(releasing three protons per extracted metal ion), and finally to re-protonate DTPA5- to H3DTPA2-
.** The observed enthalpies for the DTPA decomplexation reaction, the HDEHP-facilitated 
phase-transfer reaction, and all relevant protonation and deprotonation reactions were summed to 
obtain the heat of extraction one would expect in an ideal TALSPEAK system. The data used to 
construct the model for europium are provided as an example in Table 6. The ideal net reaction 
enthalpy was then compared to the experimentally determined enthalpy of the TALSPEAK 
process, in the case of Eu3+ showing a discrepancy of 27.7 kJ/mol for the europium extraction. 
 
                                                 
** The possibility that the liberated protons might be absorbed by the lactate buffer instead of DTPA5- was 
considered. However, DTPA5- and HDTPA4- are both significantly more basic than Lac-. The formation of HLac could 
be expected to compete with the formation of H3DTPA2-, but both protonation reactions have similar enthalpy 
values; which reaction predominates probably does not significantly affect the model. 

 
19
TABLE 6 NEAR HERE 
 
As shown in Figure 7, the energetic discrepancy observed for the extraction of europium in an 
ideal system vs. an experimental system remains relatively constant across the entire lanthanide 
series. The similarity between the experimental enthalpies of the extraction reaction and the full 
system has previously been taken to indicate that the extraction step is the primary contributor to 
the heat evolved by the TALSPEAK process and that the DTPA decomplexation step is only a 
minor contributor.13 In light of the thermodynamic data produced by this study, it seems that the 
breakup of the MDTPA2- complex must have a large effect on the overall enthalpy of a 
TALSPEAK extraction. This enthalpy contribution is apparently roughly compensated for by 
endothermic contributions from some unknown reaction or set of reactions. These reactions are 
likely related to the poorly-understood behavior of the lactic acid/lactate buffer used in 
conventional TALSPEAK. It is quite conceivable that the missing heat represents a contribution 
from an endothermic heat of dilution unique to the solvent extraction system that was not present 
in the calorimetry experiments.  
 
FIGURE 7  NEAR HERE 
 
 
Are Ternary Complexes Important?  
As all manner of thermodynamic modeling based on known equilibria proved to offer no 
explanation for the observed acid dependence of TALSPEAK and the prior TALSPEAK 
literature repeatedly invoked mixed ligand complexes to explain selected features of TALSPEAK, 
it was rational to examine the possibility of mixed-ligand complexes in conventional 
TALSPEAK. Jensen and co-workers 41 conducted spectrophotometric investigations of Nd3+-
DTPA-lactate media complemented by Eu3+ fluorescence studies and thermometric titrations. 
These authors report no evidence via any of these techniques for addition of lactate to LnDTPA2- 
complexes even at 0.75 M total lactate. They conclude that, if such species are present in 
TALSPEAK aqueous media, they are too rare to account for the consistently observed pH 
dependence of the system. As will be seen below, it is the full occupation of lanthanide 
“coordination sites” by DTPA that inhibits the formation of ternary complexes in TALSPEAK 

 
20
aqueous phases. Substitution of aminopolycarboxylic acid complexants of lower denticity does 
permit the formation of ternary complexes (though such species are still not implicated in the 
strong and unexpected pH dependence of TALSPEAK). It will also be demonstrated below that 
mixed Ln(Lac)(HDEHP) complexes are important in the organic phase, but apparently only 
under conditions of high metal loading. Ternary complexes are also implicated as transient 
species on TALSPEAK phase transfer and aqueous phase complexation reactions, as will be 
discussed below.   
Lactate Partitioning/Water Miscibility  
Finding no enlightenment in the basic thermodynamics of the TALSPEAK system, the search for 
an explanation for the TALSPEAK pH dependence shifted toward the lactate buffer system. 
Utilizing 14C-labeled sodium lactate, the partitioning of lactate between TALSPEAK aqueous 
and organic phases was probed directly by Grimes. 42 In the prior literature on TALSPEAK, 
organic phase lactate was implicated as an explanation for reduced extractant dependence in 
selected TALSPEAK studies.19 Weaver and Kappelmann indicated that partitioning of HDEHP 
into the aqueous phase could be induced at high lactate concentrations; certainly, one possible 
explanation for declining lanthanide extraction efficiency with increasing pH could correlate with 
the loss of extractant, either to the aqueous phase or by some other means. The availability of 
labeled lactate and facilities to handle it offered a clear pathway to directly probing this facet of 
TALSPEAK chemistry. 
Grimes 42 found that, contrary to information in the prior literature in which lactate partitioning 
was correlated with lanthanide extraction, lactic acid partitions into the TALSPEAK organic 
phase independently of the amount and identity of the metal ions that are present. In Figure 8, it 
can be seen that in 0.001 M solutions of Y3+, La3+, Nd3+, or Eu3+  the lanthanide ions are 
quantitatively (or nearly so) extracted by 0.2 M HDEHP from all lactate media between 0.01 and 
2.0 M at pH 3.6. In the low lactate limit, the lanthanide ions are extracted independent of lactate, 
no doubt via the formation of Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complexes. In the low lactate limit, [Ln]org is 
50-100 times greater than [HLac]org; in the high lactate limit [HLac] is 40-80 times higher than 
the extracted lanthanides. From these results, it is clear that the predominant lanthanide 
extraction mode is not via Ln(Lac)(DEHP∙HDEHP)2, as suggested in several prior references; it 
is equally clear that lactic acid (or possibly sodium lactate) is extracted independently of 

 
21
lanthanide extraction. A reasonable conclusion that might be drawn is that in a system this 
complex, there are likely multiple competing pathways for extraction reactions to occur. 
FIGURE 8 NEAR HERE 
To probe lactate extraction further, these authors examined lactate partitioning as a function of 
pH (Figure 9a and with different concentrations of  Na+ present in the aqueous phase (Figure 9b. 
The results in Figure 9a demonstrate the unusual and unexpected result that lactate extraction 
actually increases as the pH increases from pH 3.0 to 4.2; assuming that there are no important 
specific ion effects and that the pKa value for lactic acid is constant at 3.6, the aqueous phase 
species distribution is 25%Lac-/75% HLac at pH 3.0, 50% each at pH 3.6, 75%Lac-/25%HLac at 
pH 4.2. Though the distribution ratios are not very high, they do indicate a significant salting out 
effect arising from the increasing concentration of lactate ion. The results shown in figure 9b  
demonstrate that lactate extraction and that of Na+ are not necessarily correlated, implying that 
the primary extracted lactate species is likely to be HLac.   
FIGURE 9 HERE 
The partitioning of lactic acid as a function of increasing concentrations of HDEHP/1,4-DIPB is 
demonstrated in Figure 10. Lactic acid distribution ratios (for partitioning from 1.0 and 2.0 M pH 
3.6 lactate solutions) into HDEHP/1,4-DIPB media increase in approximate proportion to 
[HDEHP]2 reaching maximum values of about 0.2 in 1 M HDEHP; in this limit the apparent 
concentrations of lactic acid in the organic phase is 0.17 M for the sample in contact with 1 M 
lactic acid buffer, double that for the 2 M lactic acid system. If the apparent limiting slope of 2 is 
used to define the organic phase lactate species as (HLac∙(HDEHP)2), the effective concentration 
of free extractant available for lanthanide extraction (at 1.0 M HDEHP) is reduced to (1.0-2∙0.34) 
= 0.32 M (monomer equivalent) in contact with 2 M lactate. If it is assumed that the hypothetical 
HLac(HDEHP)2 species does not participate in lanthanide extraction reactions and that the 
lanthanide extraction equilibrium is represented by equation 1 (based on the dimer concentration), 
the concentration of the extractant ((HDEHP)2) available for lanthanide extraction is reduced to 
0.16 M. With the 1:3 (Ln:(HDEHP)2) stoichiometry taken into account, the potential suppression 
of lanthanide extraction is equivalent to approximately 250. Considering that HLac extraction 
increases with increasing pH, the competing extraction of HLac by HDEHP represents a viable 

 
22
explanation for the unexpected pH dependence of lanthanide extraction in conventional 
TALSPEAK. Given the evident complexity of the overall interactions, model development to 
account for all relevant reactions in this system appears to represent a monumental challenge for 
solution chemistry. 
FIGURE 10 NEAR HERE 
Finally, Grimes 32 reports also the results of studies of the partitioning of water and lactic acid 
into TALSPEAK organic phases as a function of lactate concentration and [HDEHP] (Figure 11). 
It is clearly seen that lactic acid extraction increases with [HDEHP]. None of these systems give 
any indication of a lactic acid saturation effect at the highest concentrations of lactate, implying 
that additional extraction of lactic acid (without achieving saturation) is possible. The water 
content of the extractant phase increases with [HDEHP], at the lower lactate concentrations 
remaining in the range of 10-20% H2O to HDEHP. For samples equilibrated with 2 M lactate 
(pH 3.6) water content increases by a factor of 10; for the 1 M HDEHP/2 M lactate sample, the 
equilibrium concentrations of HLac and H2O are 0.32 M and 1.2 M respectively. If the 
previously estimated HLac:2 HDEHP stoichiometry†† obtains here, the extractant phase 
composition would be approximately 0.32 M HLac(HDEHP)2, 0.18 M (HDEHP)2, 1.2 M H2O in 
1,4-DIPB. Complex movements of solute molecules (including H2O in the organic phase) appear 
to be an essential feature of conventional TALSPEAK chemistry.  
FIGURE 11 NEAR HERE 
 
Overall, these results clearly establish the following correlations: 
1. Lactate and lanthanide partitioning are not connected under all conditions 
2. Sodium lactate does not appear to be a major contributor to lactate partitioning to the 
organic phase, though there is some partitioning of Na+ 
3. There is a considerable salting out effect associated with the presence of higher 
concentrations of lactate in the aqueous phase as evidenced by increased HLac presence 
in the extractant phase as pH is increased (at higher pH, the [HLac]/[Lac-] decreases, 
i.e.,  the relative concentration of protonated lactate decreases while the salting agent 
NaLac increases 
                                                 
†† Evidence is offered in the discussion of neutron scattering results below that this stoichiometry might rise to 
HLac:HDEHP3 under some conditions, 

 
23
4. Under none of the studied conditions does the  organic phase give the appearance of 
being saturated with lactate  
5. Lactate partitioning increases as [HDEHP] increases (this could be attributable to the 
increased polarity of the extractant phase, but Figure 10 suggests a possible 
HLac:HDEHP stoichiometry of 1:2) 
It also appears likely that lactic acid extraction could account for a large component of the 
observed pH dependence of lanthanide extraction in conventional TALSPEAK extraction 
systems. 
 
Na+ Partitioning  
The results of the lactic acid partitioning study suggested the possibility of partitioning of Na+ 
independently of lactate. In fact, lactate partitioning seems to indicate that NaLac is not 
partitioned in conventional TALSPEAK. Robinson and co-workers 43 on the other hand conclude 
that NaLac is the primary means by which lactate is partitioned into HDEHP isooctane solutions. 
McDowell and Coleman 44 have reported extraction equilibrium constants for extraction of Na+ 
from aqueous (nitrate/perchlorate) media into HDEHP; the predominant extracted complex is 
Na(DEHP)(HDEHP)3. Again employing radiotracer techniques, the partitioning of Na+
 between 
TALSPEAK aqueous and organic solutions has been investigated.45 Distribution of Na and 
lactate between HDEHP diluted by DIPB and high concentration of lactate media with 2 M ionic 
strength was investigated. Distribution ratio of Na (DNa) increased with increasing equilibrated 
aqueous lactate concentration (Figure 12).  The mole ratio of Na to (HDEHP)2 in the organic 
phase was greater than traditionally confirmed complex composition ratio, 0.5, in concentration 
ranges of [HDEHP] > 0.5 M, [lactate] > 0.7 M and pH > 3.6. These experimental results 
indicated the possibility for the formation of Na-lactate-HDEHP complexes in the organic phase. 
However, extraction model including the ternary complexation did not fit the Na and the lactate 
experimental results simultaneously with any combinations of stoichiometric coefficients for the 
ternary components. 
In the figure below and absent any additional lactate, comparatively weak extraction of Na+ by 
HDEHP is indicated; the limiting slope (at low pH) of the log D vs. pH curve indicates the 
expected increase in Na+ extraction with decreasing [H+], but at an apparent reduced dependence 

 
24
on [H+]. Introduction of 1 M total lactate into the 2.0 M nitrate system has no effect on Na+ 
partitioning at pH 1.3, though extraction increases with an approximate 1:1 ratio between DNa 
and pH up to a pH of about 3.2. Above this pH DNa continues to increase, but with a reduced 
stoichiometry with respect to [H+]. A wide range of additional tests provided limited guidance 
relative to the establishment of an overall mechanism for Na+ extraction. An indication of a 
lactate-induced specific ion activity effect can be inferred from these results, as discussed further 
below.  
FIGURE 12 NEAR HERE 
Specific Ion Activity Effects 
The Na+ extraction results and the results of other TALSPEAK thermodynamics studies 
suggested a contribution from cation-specific activity effects, as shown in Figure 13 32. It can be 
seen that lactate partitioning into 0.02 M HDEHP/1,4-DIPB varies with the identity of the cation 
in the metal nitrate supporting electrolyte (at pH 3.6). At lactate concentrations below 0.5 M total 
lactate (note that at pH 3.6 lactate is approximately 50% MLac/50%HLac) Na+ and NH4
+ tend to 
suppress lactate partitioning while Li+ and K+ allow about ten times higher extraction of lactate. 
At concentrations above 0.5 M, Na+, K+, and NH4
+ appear to promote extraction of lactate, while 
Li+ does not seriously impact lactate partitioning. At 2 M lactate the order of lactate partitioning 
from MLac media  is NH4
+ = Li+ < Na+ < K+. The respective hydration enthalpies are -132.5 
kJ/mol, -278.5 kJ/mol, -240 kJ/mol, -252.4 kJ/mol; thus there appears to be no simple correlation 
between the extractability of the cation (which might be expected to correlate with the ease of 
dehydration of the cation) and the observed lactate partitioning. Figure 9 above has also 
demonstrated that Na+ extraction does not correlate with the concentration of lactate present at 
pH 3.6. It could be inferred from these results (and those above) that MLac is an effective salting 
agent promoting the extraction of lactic acid into HDEHP/1,4-DIPB media. 
FIGURE 13 NEAR HERE 
To explore the effect of the medium on lactate aqueous chemistry, Zalupski and co-workers 46,47 
determined lactate stability constants for Nd3+ and Am3+ and investigated the thermochemistry of 
lactate protonation reactions, measuring in particular the heat of protonation of lactate in a 1 M 
Na lactate solution. By comparing the thermodynamic features of lactate protonation as a 

 
25
function of the supporting electrolyte (using titration microcalorimetry) they concluded that the 
closest mimic of lactate ion in a concentrated salt medium was triflate (F3C-SO3
-). Protonation 
heats measured in a titration with 0.1 M HClO4/0.9 M NaClO4 of 1 M NaLac and 0.01 M 
NaLac/0.99 M NaClO4 resulted in DHh values that differed by a factor of three. In parallel 
experiments with nitrate, triflate and methylsulfonate as supporting electrolyte, it was 
demonstrated that the thermochemical features of triflate most closely mimic those of lactate. It 
was also demonstrated that the background electrolyte has minimal influence on the 
thermodynamics of Nd3+ and Am3+ lactate complexes. Given the apparent “thermal equivalence” 
of Lac- and F3C-SO3
-, it would seem reasonable to suggest that triflate could be considered a 
preferred non-complexing representative of lactate in investigations of lactate-based TALSPEAK 
solution chemistry.    
Activity coefficients are usually assumed to be constant in solvent extraction systems and the 
typical success of application of slope analysis methods generally justifies this assumption, at 
least as a first approximation. In fact, in many solvent extraction systems considerable 
uncertainty arises when activity corrections are called for, in particular because solvent extraction 
reactions include both aqueous and organic media (and the intent of mixing solute species 
between phases) knowing where and when to apply activity corrections can be challenging. The 
salting out effects described above clearly indicate an opportunity for introducing activity 
corrections in TALSPEAK aqueous media. However, the complexity of the aqueous solution in 
TALSPEAK leaves the question of applying such corrections somewhat problematic. In principal, 
the TALSPEAK organic phase is far less complex, consisting of a two component mixture 
HDEHP dimers (the predominant form in aliphatic hydrocarbon solvents) and the diluent. Of 
course the analysis of lactate partitioning discussed above implies that even this simplification is 
also arguably an oversimplification. Nonetheless, Nilsson and coworkers48 have reported activity 
coefficients for HDEHP in toluene, dodecane and cyclooctane using vapor pressure osmometry. 
They cite the utility of vapor pressure osmometry based on calibrations using multiple standards.  
Speciation of Extracted Complexes  
By convention in solvent extraction, slope analysis methods are considered the first option for 
defining the stoichiometry of extracted metal complexes in solvent extraction. As a first step, 
slope analysis experiments when properly constrained and performed (conducted with 

 
26
appropriately preconditioned organic and aqueous phases at controlled, constant temperature and 
with the metal ion present at low concentrations relative to the extractant with extraction 
conducted from an aqueous medium in which activities of ions can be considered constant) can 
provide useful guidance for defining the stoichiometry of the metal complex. Several reports of 
TALSPEAK systems conducted using radiotracer methods and low metal loading appear to 
indicate a reduced extractant dependence near 2, 19 which has been interpreted to indicate the 
extraction of Ln(Lac)(DEHP∙HDEHP)2 as the dominant extracted species. Based on the 
observation above and the probable competition for HDEHP by both Na+ and HLac, the first 
principle of a poised and understood biphasic system is probably not realistic in studies of 
TALSPEAK.  
Recognizing this potential limitation in interpreting TALSPEAK speciation, Grimes and co-
workers 49 examined the speciation of extracted lanthanide metal ions in TALSPEAK organic 
phases using FTIR spectroscopy and time resolved fluorescence spectroscopy. FTIR can be used 
to probe the organization of molecules in the extractant phase while fluorescence spectroscopy 
directly probes the primary coordination sphere of selected lanthanide and actinide ions. In this 
study, the properties of TALSPEAK organic phases created by extraction experiments of 
HDEHP and of (2-ethylhexyl)phosphonic acid mono(2-ethylhexyl)ester (HEH[EHP]) in 1,4-
DIPB. HEH[EHP] is a more basic structural analog  to HDEHP. It will emerge further along in 
this discussion as a potential alternative extractant to HDEHP in the Advanced TALSPEAK 
process. The objective of this study was to provide fresh insights into the specific role of lactate 
in the coordination chemistry of lanthanides in the TALSPEAK organic phase. In particular, the 
objective was to establish conditions under which the mixed Ln(Lac)(DEHP∙HDEHP)2 mixed 
complex might be present. The water content in the organic phase was also monitored.  
Emission spectra of Eu3+ complexes with HDEHP or HEH[EHP] demonstrate that, while [Eu3+] 
remains well-below the level of saturation of the organic extractant solution (1:6 Eu:HDEHP), 
the Eu3+ coordination environment remains constant as both [HLac]org and [H2O]org increase. The 
fluorescence decay rate also correlates with the presence of water molecules in the coordination 
sphere of the Eu3+ metal center; as water molecules enter the cation coordination sphere the 
lifetime of the fluorescence decay gets shorter as the number of coordinated water molecules 
increases. The observed lifetimes in the extracted Eu(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 species are consistent with 

 
27
the interpretation that there are no coordinated water molecules in the extracted complex under 
these conditions, as evidenced by the comparatively low decay constants in Figure 14. As the 
concentration of lactate in the organic phase increases (samples were prepared by contact of the 
extractant phase with aqueous media containing 0-2 M total lactate at pH 3.6), the spectral 
signature remains constant. Since the baseline sample was prepared in the absence of lactate, it 
was concluded that the most probable stoichiometry of the extracted complex was 
Eu(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 and that no lactate ions were coordinated to the Eu3+ metal center in the 
extracted complex, contradicting the previous reports from slope analysis results.  
FIGURE 14 NEAR HERE 
When higher concentrations of optically transparent La3+ are added to the aqueous feed to raise 
the total lanthanide concentration toward the saturation limit in the extracted complex while 
keeping [Eu3+] constant, the emission spectra get more complex (Figure 15)‡‡. The 5D0→7F1 
transition singlet splits into a doublet with a notable increase in the intensity of both 5D0→7F1 and 
5D0→7F2 electronic transitions. The increased multiplicity in the emission spectra indicates that 
Eu3+ ions may be present in multiple coordination environments at high metal loading. The 
increased emission intensity of the 614 nm band can be interpreted to indicate an overall decrease 
in the symmetry of the extracted Eu3+ complex in the presence of macroscopic La3+. Although 
[H2O]org increases to above 1 M at high [HL]tot, this water does not under any conditions appear 
to be directly coordinated to the Eu3+ metal center. It appears likely that the organic phase water 
is associated with either HDEHP dimers, with some extracted lactic acid species, or simply 
solvated within interstices in the extractant solutions; the water/lactic acid extraction results 
described above also indicated notably high organic phase water concentrations, hence they are 
consistent with this suggestion. Given the high concentration of organic phase water, it is not 
unreasonable to project that in the presence of lactate a reorganization of HDEHP from the 
conventional dimer to some higher order state of aggregation (reverse micelle) might be 
occurring; the fluorescence spectroscopy does not directly or indirectly probe such interactions, 
only the state of the metal center. 
                                                 
‡‡ It is assumed in these experiments that La3+ and Eu3+ occupy similar coordination sites in whatever complexes are 
present. 

 
28
FIGURE 15 NEAR HERE 
 IR Spectra 
After confirming spectrometer performance by benchmarking spectral properties in comparison 
with earlier work on HDEHP from Peppard and Ferraro,50 TALSPEAK-relevant samples were 
prepared for examination using infrared spectroscopy by Grimes et al.49 For the organic phase 
samples extracted from lactic acid buffer, when La3+ metal concentrations were at 0.003 M and 
0.010 M, the 1680 cm-1 band  shifted to 1740 cm-1, is much sharper and displays greater intensity 
than the broad 1680 cm-1 band that is observed for the neat HDEHP sample (Figure 16). As the 
metal concentration is increased to 0.017 M and 0.025 M, the 1740 cm-1 band decreases in 
intensity and a new band is observed at around 1570 cm-1. The new band grows in intensity as a 
function of metal concentration. The appearance of the two new peaks creates an isosbestic point 
indicating the presence of two species in the La3+ metal-loaded organic phases. Simultaneously 
with the appearance of the 1570 cm-1 band, the intensity in the P-O stretch (around 1200 cm-1) 
and asymmetric stretch bands (around 1010 cm-1) decreases. These combined results were 
interpreted to indicate the probable exchange of one or more HDEHP molecules for a lactate ion 
in the extracted metal complex. The IR spectra in Figure 16, panel a, (La3+ loaded into  HDEHP 
from an aqueous phase containing nitric acid) does not show any change to the major absorption 
bands over the entire range of extracted La3+ metal to the organic phase. The 1680 cm-1 band was 
slightly shifted to 1650 cm-1; the P-O stretch and asymmetric stretch bands are unaffected by the 
increased organic phase metal concentrations.  
The IR spectra indicate the lactate ion is responsible for the changing 1680 cm-1 band and the 
reduction of the P-O stretch and the asymmetric stretch bands. The isosbestic point created by 
increasing metal concentration in the organic phase could represent the shift of the six-coordinate 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complex to a ternary complex that could be La(Lac)(DEHP∙HDEHP)2 
(consistent with an NMR/ESI-MS study that is discussed below). Kosyakov and Yerin 19 have 
previously postulated the presence of the mixed extracted complex Ln(Lac)(DEHP∙HDEHP)2 for 
both Eu3+ and Cm3+. The IR data supports the premise that as the ratio of the molar concentration 
of HDEHP to that of La3+ drops below the 6:1 ratio required for the formation of the 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 org complex, it is likely that lactate ion is integrated into the extracted 
complex. From the perspective of the thermodynamics of the phase transfer reaction, it matters 

 
29
not whether La(Lac)2+ is formed in the aqueous phase then extracted by two HDEHP dimers or if 
some species of HLac(org) complexes La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2
+ in the interface with the coordinated 
release of H+ to the aqueous phase.  
FIGURE 16 NEAR HERE 
NMR/ESI-MS Investigation of Speciation in TALSPEAK Extractant Phase  
As a complement to the optical spectroscopy, which primarily probes the metal coordination 
environment, application of 31P NMR spectrometry can be used to interrogate the organization of 
extracted lanthanide complexes from the perspective of the ligand and its arrangement around the 
metal center. In sufficiently robust systems, electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) 
can provide higher order structural information, up to and including potentially the identity of 
multiple species in a mixture. The adequacy of these techniques for the task objective and the 
value of the information and insights gained are often linked closely to chemical inertia of the 
bonds that hold the chemical system together. Because there is so little covalency in the bonding 
of lanthanide coordination complexes relevant to solvent extraction separations the issue of bond 
lability is an important consideration in the ultimate interpretation of the results obtained. 
The optical spectroscopy results have established that under a moderately wide range of 
conditions the predominant extracted complex in TALSPEAK extractant phases is 
Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3, in which the metal center is surrounded by three extractant dimers in a 
pseudo-octahedral local geometry. It is important to remember the predominantly electrostatic 
bonding mode of these (and most other) lanthanide coordination complexes. There is evidence 
that the coordination environment around the metal center changes as higher concentrations of 
lanthanide ions are introduced. The FTIR spectra indicate that lactate is likely incorporated in 
these species. Investigation of some of the details of metal-extractant interactions would help 
establish details about the connectivity of these complexes. 
Marie et al. 51 completed a detailed investigation of TALSPEAK-relevant lanthanide-HDEHP 
interactions using 31P NMR spectrometry and ESI-MS. The application of these techniques to 
solutions similar to those addressed in the optical spectroscopic investigation produced insights 
into the numbers and arrangements of HDEHP extractant molecules around the lanthanide metal 

 
30
center§§ in the extracted complexes formed in connection with lanthanide extraction in 
TALSPEAK. The 31P NMR experiments directly probe the number of unique phosphorus 
environments present in the sample. The carefully–conducted ESI-MS studies provide clear 
indications of the metal complex species likely dominant in TALSPEAK organic phases under 
conditions of high metal loading. The NMR experiments also provide insights into some aspects 
of extractant phase ligand-exchange dynamics, which will be discussed below. 
In Figure 17 five successive spectra are shown. Spectrum (1) demonstrates the narrow single 
resonance attributable to the HDEHP dimer, which is the dominant species present in the neat 
extractant solution (in 1,3-DIPB) exhibiting a chemical shift of approximately -1 ppm (relative to 
an H3PO4 external standard). Extraction of La3+ from HNO3 aqueous media results in a broad 
composite resonance (-4 ppm) attributed to an average peak representing rapid exchange between 
(HDEHP)2 and La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3; the dynamics of the exchange will be discussed below. 
Spectrum (3) profiles the La-HDEHP partitioning in a sample prepared under TALSPEAK –
representative conditions. In this sample there is no evidence for free (HDEHP)2 or 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3; the spectrum is characterized by two (or possibly three) closely spaced 31P 
resonances centered at about -10 ppm. The width of the lines indicates that the complexes are 
substitution-inert on the NMR timescale. Extraction of Sm3+ from solutions (Spectrum (4)) 
shows two relatively broad resonances representing (HDEHP)2 and Sm(DEHP∙HDEHP)3, 
indicating somewhat slower ligand exchange dynamics for this system than is seen in the La3+ 
system (and some paramagnetic line broadening). The Sm-TALSPEAK sample (Spectrum (5)) 
shows some evidence for free (HDEHP)2 and Sm(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 plus a third cluster of three 
31P peaks intermediate between the (HDEHP)2 and Sm(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 resonances.  
FIGURE 17 NEAR HERE 
To examine the relationship between La3+ extraction, aqueous lactate concentration, and the 
resulting distribution of HDEHP species in the extractant phase, Marie also investigated systems 
prepared using aqueous media containing increasing concentrations of lactate (Figure 18). Each 
sample was prepared by contact with a 0.025 M solution of La3+; at zero added lactate, the 
                                                 
§§ Due to the influence of paramagnetic lanthanide ions on the chemical shifts of NMR-active nuclei, most of the 
reported work focused on  La3+, Sm3+ (a 4f5 ion that exhibits low magnetic susceptibility, hence minimal 
paramagnetic shifts), Y3+ (a diamagnetic non-lanthanide most similar in size to Ho3+), and Lu3+. 

 
31
extractant phase contains only (HDEHP)2 and La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3  and about 0.004 M La3+ 
(Spectrum (1)). Contact with 0.5 M lactate solution increased La3+ extraction to near quantitative 
(0.024 M), accompanied by a diminished amount of (HDEHP)2 and La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 and 
more than 90% of HDEHP in the substitution-inert peaks near -10 ppm. As the equilibrated 
lactate concentration increases from 0.5 M to 2.0 M, the amount of extracted La3+ decreases 
slightly (probably an indication of increased hold back of La3+ in the aqueous phase as higher 
order water soluble La-Lac complexes) and the integrations of peaks at 9.5 and 10.3 ppm 
apparently shifting more towards the 10.3 ppm peak. Because less La3+ is extracted, the free-
extractant/composite peak also increases in intensity. The changing ratio of 9.5 and 10.3 ppm 
peaks with the change in [Lac] implies direct involvement of Lac- in the extracted complex when 
the extracted metal concentration is greater than the nominal 1:6 stoichiometric limit of 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3, but the integrations are not accurate enough to provide believable 
quantitative information.  
FIGURE 18 NEAR HERE 
 
Similar conclusions can be drawn from Figure 19, in which the lactate concentration is fixed at 
1.0 M and [La]org varies from 3.3 to 42.5 mM. Using radiotracer (14C-labeled lactate) methods, 
Marie and co-workers were also able to establish that in the saturation limit the La3+: Lac- 
stoichiometry was 1:1. To satisfy the requirement of electroneutrality in the extracted complexes, 
it is reasonable to assume that two singly ionized HDEHP dimer-equivalents are incorporated in 
the mixed ligand complex.  
FIGURE 19 NEAR HERE 
ESI-MS Characterization of La-HDEHP Extracted Species. The possible formation of 
substitution-inert La3+ and Sm3+ complexes (involving La3+/Sm3+, Lac, and HDEHP in an 
apparent 1:1:2 mole ratio configuration) suggested a possible opportunity for effective 
application of ESI-MS in characterization of the species present. Marie et al. also report the 
results of an ESI-MS study of this system. The samples investigated were identical to those 
described in Figure 19 (with the radiotracer lactate omitted).  Electrospray ionization (ESI) is a 
soft ionization technique that allows the sample molecules to be transferred directly from the 
solution to the gas phase by generating charged ions without appreciably disrupting metal-ligand 

 
32
bonds (in the best of circumstances). For analysis, samples of the extractant solutions were 
diluted in methanol to facilitate volatilization. In samples of the extractant alone, monomer 
HDEHP was identified as the dominant species present in the analyte; the polar methanol is 
responsible for the de-dimerization. For samples loaded with La from nitric acid media, the 
predominant peaks in the mass spectrum were La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2
+, 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)+, La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)2
+ and 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)3
+. The La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)2
+ ion (corresponding to the 
protonation of the 1:6 complex La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3) had the highest intensity, hence might be 
considered the dominant species in the bulk solvent. That these peaks persist in the methanol-
diluted sample indicates a greater degree of bonding inertia in the gas phase for the lanthanide 
complexes than is seen for (HDEHP)2.  
Numerous additional peaks were identified in the sample loaded from a 1 M lactate buffer, 
including 
La-DEHP 
binary 
species 
(La(HDEHP)DEHP2
+, 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2
+, 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)+, La(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(HDEHP)2
+, La2(HDEHP)DEHP5
+) and 
ternary species (La(DEHP∙HDEHP)Lac+, La2DEHP4Lac2H+, La2DEHP4Lac+, La2DEHP5LacH+, 
La2(HDEHP)DEHP5LacH+). The ternary complex ions were subjected to MS-MS analysis to 
develop additional information on connectivity. A collision energy of 60 V (or less) was 
adequate to remove ethylhexyl groups from the HDEHP core. For the most abundant species 
(La2DEHP4Lac+) successive removal of eight ethylhexyl groups and a lactate left a residual peak 
at m/z = 664.9, which can be attributed to the cation La2(PO4)4H7
+. This species demonstrates the 
significant stability of the bimetallic structure formed between the two cations and the four 
phosphoric acid groups (PO4
3-) of DEHP-. It was suggested that the multiple 31P resonances seen 
in the NMR spectrum at high metal loading could represent some combination of chelating, 
monodentate, bidentate, and bridging phosphate groups in HDEHP complexes, as postulated in 
Figure 20. Significantly more solution phase data would be required to develop equilibrium 
models (assuming that reversible equilibria are applicable in such systems) of this complex 
system.  Results derived from both techniques used in this study are consistent with the possible 
formation of polymer aggregates wherein the HDEHP could bind to the lanthanide ion in a 
bidentate fashion or form bridges between two metal centers. Such species are consistent with the 
observation of different phosphorus environments by 31P NMR spectroscopy. 
 

 
33
Figure 20 NEAR HERE 
 
Supramolecular Organization in TALSPEAK Extractant Phases Using SANS 
Neutron scattering techniques have been employed to define the supramolecular organization of 
extractant molecules and extracted complexes in solvent extraction systems. Using the unique 
properties of neutrons and introducing a deuterated contrast medium (e.g., xylene-d10) provide an 
opportunity to reveal details about the organization of solute molecules in extractant solutions. 
Grimes and co-workers 52 investigated the organization of HDEHP-based TALSPEAK systems 
using the methods and mathematics of Small Angle Neutron Scattering (SANS) focusing on 
some of the same systems investigated by Marie and co-workers. The neutron scattering 
experiments were conducted at the High Flux Isotope Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 
As has been noted in the narrative above, lanthanide extracted complexes in TALSPEAK organic 
media appear to include the conventional 1:6 complex (Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3) at low 
concentrations of total metal ion, and at least one polynuclear complex with the apparent 2:2:4 
(Ln:Lac:DEHP) stoichiometry as the lanthanide:HDEHP ratio drops below 1:6 (when lactate is 
available). The dominant form of free HDEHP in the presence of extracted lactic acid is the 
conventional dimer (HDEHP)2, but there is enough HLac extracted to have an impact on 
[HDEHP]free; some of the information on HLac extraction above suggests a possible terminal 
stoichiometry for extracted lactic acid of HLac∙(HDEHP)2-3 as an important species. Each of 
these species could be expected to contribute to the neutron scattering profile of TALSPEAK 
extractant phases.  
Grimes et al. reported the results of neutron scattering experiments on extractant solutions 
(primarily HDEHP, but one sample contained HEH[EHP]) in deuterated xylene samples prepared 
for analysis by contact with buffered lactate solutions of increasing concentrations (Table  7). 
Parallel samples examined the influence of increasing concentrations of lanthanide ions (La, Gd, 
Yb taken to represent light, middle, and heavy members of the series) on the state of aggregation 
in TALSPEAK organic solutions. In the extractant samples equilibrated only with lactic acid, the 
ratio of HDEHP:HLac ranges from 200:1 down to 2.4:1 at the highest extracted lactate system. In 
the metal loaded samples, the ratio of metal:lactate averages near to1 (except at the lowest lactate 

 
34
concentration) while the HDEHP:Ln ratios vary from a maximum near 30:1 down to 3:1 in 
sample La0.031. The spectrophotometry, NMR and ESI-MS results point towards domination of 
metal speciation by Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 at low metal loading and most lactate concentrations, 
shifting toward domination by Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4 as the ratio of HDEHP:Ln drops below 6:1. 
Comparing samples HL1.0 (HDEHP) with HL1.0 (HEH[EHP]), the 50% greater extraction of 
lactate and 30 times higher water content of the HDEHP samples are notable. 
TABLE 7 NEAR HERE 
 
The neutron scattering results were first analyzed considering the scattering particles to be 
spherical (Guinier analysis, TABLE 8 ***. As the neutron scattering results reflect most clearly 
the contrast between areas of concentration of 1H atoms and 2H atoms, the dimensions of metal 
ions, oxygen, phosphorus and carbon are unimportant aside from the effect they each have on 
ordering the orientation of the hydrogen atoms of HDEHP (primarily) relative to the deuterium of 
the xylene diluents, i.e., they do not impact neutron scattering directly. The fits of the scattering 
curves produce an estimate of the average radius of the scattering sphere (of 1H atoms), which is 
used to calculate a number density of scattering particles (Mw). From the analysis the simple 
model can be used to calculate the number of HDEHP monomers present in the average 
scattering particle (nw).  
TABLE  8 NEAR HERE 
It is seen in Table 8 that (HDEHP)2 is likely the primary scattering particle††† for samples HA0.1, 
HA0.2 (samples not contacted with lactate buffer solutions) and HL0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.0,HB. A 30% larger 
average scattering particle is indicated for HL2.0, coinciding with a 1:5 ratio of [Lac]:[HDEHP] in 
the extractant solution. Assuming a simple two component model (ignoring the possible 
contribution of monomer HDEHP to the scattering pattern), a mass balance expression can be 
used to relate the size of the average scattering particle to these species:  
                                                 
*** The reader is referred to the original report for the details of the mathematical treatment of SANS data by this 
approach. 
†††  Maximum scattering is provided by HDEHP based on the H-atom count in the principal scattering entities, H2O, 
H5C3O3, H35C16PO4 

 
35
    
tot
free
2
2
m
2
calc
w
[HDEHP]
]
[(HDEHP)
2
]
P)
[HLac(HDEH
m
n
⋅
+
⋅
=
 
                  (8)  
 
where [(HDEHP)2]free represents all HDEHP not associated with lactic acid and m is the average 
HLac:HDEHP stoichiometry. Considering values of m = 1-3, the best fit was provided using m = 
3 (
calc
w
n
(HL0.1) = 2.01, 
calc
w
n
(HL0.5) = 2.05, 
calc
w
n
(HL1.0) = 2.14, 
calc
w
n
(HL2.0) = 2.62). At the highest 
[HLac]org, the 0.2 M HDEHP solution is 0.041 M (HLac)∙(HDEHP)3/0.038 M (HDEHP)2 or 
roughly 60% bound to lactic acid, 40% free dimer. 
In the metal containing samples, larger particles are seen and the complexes 
Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3
‡‡‡ and Ln2(L)2(DEHP)4 must be considered (besides the HDEHP and Lac 
species. Three mass balance expressions must be accommodated to analyze the speciation: 
 
         [Ln]t org = [Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3] + 2∙[Ln2(L)2(DEHP)4]   
(9) 
 
 
 
        [HLac]t org = [HLac(HDEHP)3] + 2∙[Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4] 
 
 (10) 
 
 
 
[HDEHP]t org =  2∙[(HDEHP)2] + 3∙[HLac(HDEHP)3] + 
 
 
   
 
 
6∙[Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3] + 4∙[Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4] 
 (11) 
 
 
As above, HDEHP represents the primary scatterer of neutrons in these samples. Taking these 
relationships and species into account, the modified expression for a calculated 
calc
w
n
 when 
lanthanides are present would be:
            
tot
4
2
2
2
3
2
free
2
2
3
2
calc
w
[HDEHP]
]
)
DEHP
(
L
Ln
[
4
]
)
HDEHP
(
HL
[
3
]
[(HDEHP)
2
]
HDEHP)
[Ln(DEHP
6
n
⋅
+
⋅
+
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 
In sample La0.003, Guinier analysis indicates nw = 2.66 ± 0.32 for a sample containing 0.003 M 
La3+, 0.0048 M HLac, 0.1004 M HDEHP. The fluorescence and NMR results suggest that 
La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 should be the dominant metal complex in this lanthanide concentration 
range; iterative adjustment of the fit of the data to equation 12 (constrained by equations 9-11) 
                                                 
‡‡‡ Lumetta and coworkers 53 have recently reported results from vapor pressure osmometry and radiometric slope 
analysis studies that have been interpreted to indicate that the predominant lanthanide complex in HDEHP solutions 
in n-dodecane is Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)2(DEHP). The primary difference between that work and the present is the 
diluent, which likely accounts for this apparent difference in complex stoichiometry. In the interpretation of the 
present results, earlier NMR, ESI-MS, and lanthanide fluorescence results provide convincing evidence for the 
correctness of the Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 stoichiometry in the aromatic diluent used in the present work. 

 
36
results in nw = 2.65 with partitioning of La between La(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 (70%) and 
La(Lac)2(DEHP)4 (30%). In samples Yb0.005 (nw = 2.70 ± 0.33) and Gd 0.013 (nw = 3.50 ± 0.42), 
the metal ion partitioning is analogously 45% Yb(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 and Yb(Lac)2(DEHP)4 (30%) 
and Gd(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 (33%) and Gd(Lac)2(DEHP)4 (67%). Based on these analyses, 75% of 
the scattering particles are (HDEHP)2 in La003 and Yb005, 45% in Gd013. With abundant lactate 
available, Ln(Lac)2(DEHP)4 becomes increasingly important as the metal concentration increases. 
In the Gd0.013 sample the distribution of HDEHP among the projected species is 45% (HDEHP)2, 
26% Gd(DEHP·HDEHP)3, 17% Gd2(L)2(DEHP)4, and 12% HL(HDEHP)3. A balanced organic 
phase equilibrium constant expression can be suggested to define the relationship between these 
species, as follows:  
2 Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 + 2 HLac∙(HDEHP)3  ⇌ Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4 + 7 (HDEHP)2 
(13) 
however, this single expression does not produce a single equilibrium constant value for the three 
systems tested, suggesting that perhaps additional reactions contribute. The results of the fitting 
exercise are summarized in Table 9.  
TABLE 9 NEAR HERE 
For samples La0.023 and La0.031 much larger aggregation numbers are indicated thus it is 
reasonable to project that some degree of supramolecular ordering of these species is probable. 
Given the trends in the relative concentrations as the metal concentration increases, it is 
reasonable to assume that the dominant “monomer” species in these clusters is La2Lac2(DEHP)4 
and that the larger aggregates correspond to clusters of these species, each representing about 
four HDEHP monomer equivalents, perhaps [La2Lac2(DEHP)4]3-4.  
The scattering results demonstrate that the dominant HDEHP species in the absence of metal ions 
is the hydrogen bonded dimer, (HDEHP)2. Absent lanthanides, it appears that lactic acid is 
extracted as the 1:3 complex (HL·(HDEHP)3). Scattering in samples containing up to 0.005 M 
lanthanides (prepared by extracting lanthanides from aqueous media containing 1.0 M buffered 
lactic acid) indicate that the dominant metal complex is Ln(DEHP·HDEHP)3, but 
Ln(Lac)2∙(DEHP)4 is also important. At 0.013 M extracted lanthanide, the scattering results 
indicate lower Ln:DEHP stoichiometry and larger scattering particles. At higher metal 
concentrations, the SANS results indicate large aggregates, the largest aggregates achieving a 

 
37
size equivalent to up to 20 HDEHP monomers as the primary scattering entity§§§. Analysis of 
particle shapes indicate best fits with a uniform oblate spheroid particle. 
Phase Transfer Kinetics in TALSPEAK 
The second important issue impacting the design and eventual deployment of TALSPEAK 
chemistry at an industrial scale is that of the reported “slow” phase transfer kinetics. It has been 
noted by several authors that at lactate concentrations below 0.5, the rate of phase transfer is 
unacceptably slow in TALSPEAK. Nilsson and coworkers 54 investigated the effect of lactate on 
the pattern of phase transfer rates of lanthanides and americium using a standard protocol of 
vortex mixing combined with either radiometric or ICP-MS detection. The results shown in 
Figure 21 demonstrate that for the lightest lanthanides (La, Ce, Pr) and for the weakly extracted 
Am3+, lactate has minimal influence on the rate of phase transfer with the 30 minute mixing 
period. For Nd through Lu, extraction kinetics (under the conditions of these experiments) are 
extremely slow demonstrating poor extraction of these ions (and no separation from Am3+) in the 
absence of lactate. At 0.5 M lactate, the extraction of Eu through Lu is adequate to provide a 
group separation, but is far from reaching an equilibrium partitioning level, as represented by the 
1 M lactate data. The pattern of extraction seen in the 1 M lactate system closely approximates 
the predictions of the thermodynamic model described in the earlier review. Additional, more 
detailed studies of phase transfer kinetics in this system have been completed, 55 but the analysis 
of these studies is pending.  
FIGURE  21 NEAR HERE 
Because phase transfer kinetics experiments are moderately challenging to conduct, there is a 
comparatively limited base of experimental investigations relevant to TALSPEAK, though the 
book chapter by Danesi 56 provides a quality overview of the subject of solvent extraction 
kinetics. A recently developed approach to investigating the kinetics of phase transfer reactions 
in solvent extraction is the application of microfluidic devices to this task; an example of the 
latter will be described below.  
                                                 
§§§ There was no evidence of any tendency to form a second organic phase in any of these samples. 

 
38
Of course, the challenging phase transfer kinetics in TALSPEAK separations is not a recent 
observation. Though there have been multiple experimental examinations of TALSPEAK phase 
transfer kinetics, two earlier investigations of TALSPEAK phase transfer kinetics are of 
particular note. Kolarik 23 examined the kinetics of extraction in conventional TALSPEAK, 
noting the role of lactate as a phase transfer catalyst, but ultimately ascribing the slow phase 
transfer kinetics to the dissociation of a Ln(DTPA)2- complex in the interface.  
Danesi and Cianetti 26 investigated this system using a constant interface Lewis cell and 
developed the following mathematical expression (and parameters) to profile the extraction of 
Eu3+ by HDEHP. These authors concluded that  “…in a wide range of conditions,…mass transfer 
process is entirely controlled by the rate of interfacial chemical reactions.” In their mechanism, 
Eu3+, Eu-lactate complexes, Eu aminopolycarboxylate complexes and mixed Eu(Lac)(APC) 
species are considered to interact with HDEHPint. Numerous transient mixed (Eu-(Lac)-(APC)-
(DEHP)) complexes are proposed with (at least) ten rate constants as adjustable parameters. They 
do observe that HEDTA releases Ln3+ ions more readily than DTPA.  
Starting from comparatively simple observations on HDEHP extraction, Danesi developed 
increasingly complex equations to describe the extraction of lanthanides into HDEHP/dodecane 
solutions in the absence of aqueous complexing (four rate parameters), in the presence of 
aqueous lactate (four independent rate parameters and three complex formation equilibrium 
constants), in the presence of aminopolycarboxylic acid complexes but without lactate, and 
finally in the presence of both lactate and an aminopolycarboxylate (17 rate constants describing 
forward and reverse extraction reactions). Comparing experimental results for extraction from 
DTPA and HEDTA containing media a ternary (Ln(Lac)(APC)) complex is postulated, with 
acknowledgement that the crowded environment around DTPA may well inhibit this feature of 
the exchange, while the ternary complex is more relevant in the less crowded HEDTA system. 
Finally it was noted that a two times larger mass transfer rate could be achieved at a 2.5 times 
lower lactate concentration in HEDTA-lactate systems than in DTPA-lactate based equivalents. 
Kinetics investigations of this type are not frequently conducted due to the challenge of designing 
and executing meaningful experiments. Additionally, studies of TALSPEAK kinetics must at 
some point involve the use of radioactive materials, configured for study using conventional 
equipment potentially significant quantities of radioactive materials. Nichols and coworkers57 
have reported results of a test of a plug-based microfluidic system that uses flowing plugs 

 
39
(droplets) in microfluidic channels to determine absolute interfacial mass transfer rate constants 
under conditions of both rapid mixing and controlled interfacial area.  In this report, this system 
was used to determine the rate constants for interfacial transfer of all lanthanides, minus 
promethium, plus yttrium, under TALSPEAK process conditions. This development promises 
possible new inroads into understanding of phase transfer kinetics.  
Chemical Kinetics of TALSPEAK: the Role of Lactate 
It is clear from the results of these biphasic kinetics investigations that transient species existing 
at the phase boundary govern the rate of lanthanide cations crossing from the aqueous to organic 
phase in conventional TALSPEAK. It is also clear that lactate ion plays a central role in this 
phase transfer process, at least for TALSPEAK operated in the forward extraction mode (Reverse 
TALSPEAK in which Ln and An are extracted then the actinide ions selectively stripped using 
buffered aminopolycarboxylate complexants have received less detailed examination). Useful as 
they are in support of process development, these observations offer minimal opportunity for 
gaining insight into the molecular-scale details of the interactions. Because the phase-transfer 
process is inherently too complex to easily untangle details of the molecular-scale interactions, 
investigations have been completed of the ligand exchange dynamics of TALSPEAK-relevant 
organic and aqueous systems. Organic phase interactions have been approached using 31P NMR 
spectrometry while the aqueous systems have been examined using optical methods, (stopped-
flow spectrophotometry).  
Extractant phase dynamics and species. Marie et al 51 report the results of an investigation 
of ligand exchange dynamics of HDEHP solutions containing selected lanthanide cations with 
and without lactate being present. All samples investigated in that study were prepared by solvent 
extraction, hence the organic media were saturated with equilibrium amounts of extracted H2O 
(and lactic acid in the samples prepared by extraction from lactate buffer media). The methods of 
31P NMR spectrometry were used to investigate the rate of HDEHP exchange in the binary 
complexes Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 Ln = La and Sm****) that represent the predominant extracted 
complex at low metal loading, as described above in the spectroscopic and SANS; the diluent 
was 1,3-diisopropylbenzene (Figure 22). The rate data indicate considerably faster ligand 
                                                 
**** Samarium was selected for this observation because its low magnetic susceptibility allows NMR measurements 
to be made without significant paramagnetic line broadening or substantial shifts. 

 
40
exchange kinetics for La(AHA)3 than is seen for Sm(AHA)3, with a corresponding shift from a 
dissociative interchange to an associative process. The authors interpret these results to indicate 
that “…in the La(AHA)3 system ligand dimers are being exchanged, while in the more strongly 
interacting Sm(AHA)3 system monomers of HA might be exchanging. In this framework, the 
more weakly coordinated AHA- dimer is partially released to a monomeric configuration with 
concomitant monodentate coordination of a free (HA)2 dimer occurring in the opposite quadrant 
of the La(AHA)2
+ core {AHA∙∙∙∙∙La(AHA)2∙∙∙∙∙AHA}-‡. The comparatively large DH‡ would arise 
from the energetic expense of moving larger dimers through the non-polar 1,3-dipb medium. The 
alternative associative mechanism in the Sm(AHA)3 (with small DH‡) could be rationalized in 
terms of an expansion of the Sm3+  coordination sphere to accept a seventh monomer HDEHP 
{Sm(A)3(HA)4}‡ in the activated complex.” 
FIGURE 22 NEAR HERE 
NMR spectra of paramagnetic lanthanide ion complexes indicate the expected paramagnetic 
shifts of bound extractant 31P signals; for all lanthanide ions heavier than Sm, the 
Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complexes are substitution inert within the limits of the NMR relaxation 
timeframe (milliseconds) at ambient temperatures. With the introduction of lactate and at 
lanthanide concentrations above the stoichiometric limit of the Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complex, the 
metal complexes ultimately shift toward (Ln(Lac)(DEHP)2)n stoichiometry. These complexes are 
all substitution inert (on the NMR scale) and typically are represented by two or three distinct 
phosphorus environments (as indicated by variations in the δ - values), as has been noted and 
discussed above.  
Aqueous Complexation Kinetics. The results shown in Figure 21 clearly demonstrate the 
importance of lactate in the rate of the TALSPEAK phase transfer reaction. The TALSPEAK 
phase transfer mechanism of Danesi and Cianetti 26 establishes an empirical relationship between 
the rate of the phase transfer reaction and lactate concentration, but it provides little guidance 
regarding the chemical kinetic processes. To examine more directly the origins of this phase 
transfer catalysis from the perspective of the DTPA complexes that are formed (and dissociated), 
Nash and co-workers 58 have employed stopped-flow optical spectrophotometric methods to 
characterize the rate and mechanism of the reaction between lanthanide ions and DTPA (and for 
additional insight, EDTA) using stopped flow spectrophotometry. Following on from earlier 

 
41
investigations of actinide complexation by a variety of optically transparent ligands, this 
application requires mixing (from separate syringes) of a dilute solution of a (strongly colored) 
lanthanide complex with Arsenazo III ((2,2’-(1,8-dihydroxy-3,6-disulfonaphthylene-2,7-
bisazo)bis(benzenearsonic acid) with a lactate buffered solution of DTPA (or EDTA) at an 
appropriate pH. The lanthanide-Arsenazo III complex dissociates and the released lanthanide 
cation is then complexed by the stronger DTPA. The reaction is complete in the sub second(s) 
timeframe, as measured using an Olis RSM-1000 spectrophotometer. Determination of 
mechanistic details and patterns of kinetic stability across the lanthanide series are established by 
the systematic variation of solution properties. 
Experiments were conducted as a function of EDTA/DTPA ligand concentration, total lactic acid 
concentration, and pH. The equilibrium perturbation reaction proceeds as a first order approach 
to equilibrium over a wide range of conditions, allowing determination of complex formation and 
dissociation rate constants in the same experiment. The rate of the complexation reaction was 
reported for the entire lanthanide series (except Pm3+). The predominant pathway for lanthanide-
EDTA and lanthanide-DTPA dissociation is inversely dependent on the total lactate 
concentration; the complex formation reaction demonstrates an unusual direct dependence on 
[H+]. Unexpectedly, the rate of the complex formation reaction is seen to be fastest for Gd3+ 
(Figure 23).  Correlation of these results indicates that in 0.3 M lactate solutions the exchange of 
lanthanide ions between lactate complexes and the polyaminopolycarboxylate govern the process.  
TABLE 10 NEAR HERE 
 
FIGURE 23 NEAR HERE 
 
Correlations of rate data with thermodynamic equilibrium calculations lead ultimately to the 
conclusion that the primary reactants in the observed reaction are Ln(Lac)n
3-n species interacting 
with either H3DTPA2- or H2DTPA3-. In 0.3 M lactate buffer (pH 3.6), Gd3+ complex formation 
reactions are fastest for both ligand systems and Lu3+ is the slowest. This result appears to be 
most closely correlated with the equilibrium lactate-lanthanide complex stoichiometry, which is 
2.46 at Gd3+, 2.94 for Lu3+. This result is taken as an indication of reaction inhibition by the 
formally neutral Ln(Lac)3 complex. 

 
42
This research was continued with a detailed examination of the complexation kinetics of these 
same lanthanide ions with DTPA, EDTA and HEDTA in 1 M lactate buffer.59 In this 
investigation, it was discovered that the reaction describing the complex formation reaction of 
LnDTPA2- occurs under TALSPEAK conditions via the formation of an unidentified 
(Lac)Ln(DTPA)x- transient complex. At higher lactate concentrations the Ln-DTPA complex 
formation reaction slows. The activation entropy for this reaction is strongly positive, which is 
interpreted to require the dissociation of a lactate from a higher order Ln(Lac)n species. This 
observation leads to the postulation of a chemical kinetics mechanism to describe Ln extraction 
as follows (considering only secondarily the influence of inter-phase transport reactions): 
Ln(DTPA)2-  Ln3+ + DTPA5-                           (slow)         (dissociation)  (1) 
Ln3+ + DTPA5-   Ln(DTPA)2- 
                       (fast)           (association)   (2) 
(3 H+ + DTPA5-  ⇌ H3(DTPA)2-   
                          (fast)        (protonation))   (3) 
Ln3+ + Lac- ⇌ LnLac2+  
                            (faster)        (association)   (4) 
LnLac2+ + Lac- ⇌ Ln(Lac)2
+        
                     (faster)        (association)   (5) 
Ln(Lac)2
+ + Lac- ⇌ Ln(Lac)3 aq                                  (faster)       (association)   (6) 
Ln(Lac)3 aq ⇌ Ln(Lac)3 int                                  (slow ?)         (diffusion)   (7) 
Ln(Lac)3 int + HDEHPint ⇌ Ln(Lac)2∙DEHPint + HLac          (slow)    (displacement)   (8) 
Ln(Lac)2∙DEHPint + 2.5 (HDEHP)2 org ⇌ Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 org + 2 HLacaq       (extraction)   (9) 
In this hypothetical reaction sequence, the first rate limiting process (reaction 1) is the release of 
the lanthanide cation from the thermodynamically stable Ln(DTPA)2-; this reaction is typically 
accompanied by rapid recombination reaction (reaction 2) and diffusion-controlled protonation of 
DTPA5- (reaction 3). Such reactions have been reported in the prior literature as being subject to 
catalysis by H+ and acetate buffer; 24,25 the TALSPEAK-relevant work does not clearly establish 
H+ involvement, though lactate ion is certainly important. Reaction 3 is not rate-process relevant 
since these reactions occur rapidly and spontaneously at constant pH. The high concentrations of 
lactate anion in TALSPEAK drives the rapid formation of 1:1, 1:2, and 1:3 complexes (as 

 
43
dictated by equilibrium thermodynamics – the average ligand number varies across the series in a 
non-linear fashion).  
The tris-lactate complex presents a moderately hydrophobic outer shell (assuming that each 
lactate is bidentate, the residual hydration is 2-3 water molecules) thus it can more readily diffuse 
toward the less polar interface double layer (reaction 7). In the interface, the de-dimerized 
HDEHP monomer exchanges its H+ to a lactate ion (reaction 8) and “drags” the Ln(Lac)2(DEHP) 
deeper into the organic phase where the more abundant and more hydrophobic (HDEHP)2 
displaces the remaining lactate molecules forming the very stable and highly hydrophobic 
pseudo-octahedral Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complex (reaction 9). The ESI-MS, NMR, optical 
spectroscopy and SANS results indicate that more complex mixed ligand complexes become 
more important as the metal ion concentration increases to [Ln]:[HDEHP] ratios less than 1:6 
(HDEHP monomer equivalents) at which point apparently polynuclear, mixed-ligand complexes 
become more important. In this analysis, the increased hydrophobicity of Ln(Lac)3 and the 
lability (rapid ligand exchange) of these complexes would appear to represent a good 
combination for more rapid phase transfer kinetics. 
Adjustments to TALSPEAK 
Process Control. One approach to deployment of conventional TALSPEAK is as a component 
of a multiple unit operation nuclear fuel recycling program. In a modern, computer-controlled 
reprocessing facility, it is not unreasonable to project that the issue of pH control in TALSPEAK 
might be achieved by instituting a system of on-line monitoring and adjustment. Bryan and 
coworkers have developed a suite of on-line monitoring devices based on multiple spectroscopic 
techniques. 60 To translate static to flow measurements and monitor extraction processes, a 
centrifugal contactor has been equipped with Raman, UV/Vis/NIR spectroscopy and continuous 
data acquisition of temperature, flow, and density of aqueous and organic phases.  This system 
provides immediate chemical data and flow parameters of high-level radioactive waste streams.  
Testing has been performed under both PUREX- and TALSPEAK-like used nuclear fuel 
separation processes. In addition to monitoring target analytes, methods are being developed to 
measure free acid/pH spectroscopically (to overcome some of the issues arising from the fragility 
of conventional glass electrode methods). The primary drivers for on line monitoring and control 

 
44
capabilities is materials control and accountability for fissile material, but application of on-line 
control capability could address the pH control issues of conventional TALSPEAK. 
Effect of Elevated Temperature. To address the issue of slow phase transfer kinetics in 
TALSPEAK, one obvious factor to consider is the possible operation of the process at elevated 
temperature. The Arrhenius law teaches that the rates of chemical reactions increase with 
temperature. Diffusion processes are also impacted by changes in temperature. Of course, in a 
solvent extraction reaction there are numerous processes occurring (both driving and retarding 
extraction), each with a distinct activation energy. Thermal effects are of interest in TALSPEAK 
applications in any event, as deposition of radioactive decay byproducts in principle leads to 
elevation of the temperature as a natural effect of the ongoing radioactive decay of components. 
It is therefore quite reasonable to consider the effect of elevated temperature on operation of 
TALSPEAK. The cautionary note regarding the effect of temperature on TALSPEAK 
performance is that there are so many competing reactions relevant to TALSPEAK that the net 
effect of a temperature increase is not easily predicted.  
Tian and Rao 35 investigated the effect of temperature on the protonation equilibria of lactate and 
DTPA. The protonation constants at 10-70° were determined by titration. Potentiometry and the 
protonation enthalpies were determined at 25° by titration microcalorimetry. The protonation 
constants remain essentially unchanged (25-70°) within the experimental uncertainties, indicating 
that the effect of temperature on the protonation of lactate should be insignificant. In contrast, the 
protonation constants of DTPA generally decrease as the temperature is increased. Exothermic 
complexation heats discussed above suggest that it is likely that lanthanide/actinide complex 
stability will also decrease in parallel. These authors also have reported preliminary results on 
complex stability for Eu3+ and Cm3+ based on fluorescence spectroscopy.61 The smaller 
exothermic enthalpies associated with metal lactate complexes suggest that the competitive 
balance between lactate and DTPA might be altered at elevated temperature, but it is not clear 
how significant the impact on separation performance might be. Burns and Tokheim have 
conducted a series of lanthanide partitioning experiments at 50°C in lactate and citrate media, 
finding only slight improvements in phase transfer kinetics and under some circumstances larger 
uncertainties in experimental observations. 62   

 
45
Effects of Radiation Chemistry.  It is known from prior investigations of TALSPEAK that 
DTPA is damaged by radiolysis, but also that high concentrations of lactate exert a radiation 
protection effect (probably as a radical scavenger) that extends the effective life of DTPA. 11,63 In 
a recent addition to the knowledge base for radiolysis effects on TALSPEAK, Martin and co-
workers 64,65 have observed that OH∙ radicals oxidized lactic acid and sodium lactate to produce a 
different distribution of degradation products. Gamma radiolysis of a 1 M lactate buffer does 
cause an increase in pH, though Eu extraction remains relatively constant. Liquid 
chromatographic analysis establishes the presence of numerous degradation products, including 
possible condensation products of high mass. The degradation products did not interfere with 
Eu3+ stripping from the loaded organic phase. 
Application of TALSPEAK Chemistry in Extraction Chromatography. During the past five 
decades, TALSPEAK chemistry has been developed, adjusted and optimized for application in 
countercurrent liquid-liquid extraction applications. To gain additional insight to the role of 
diffusion processes and exchange kinetics on process application, Braley et al.66 chose to 
examine the potential for achieving improved TALSPEAK performance by substituting 
extraction chromatographic materials (Eichrom LN1 and LN2 materials) for the HDEHP – 1,4-
DIPB extractant. The effectiveness of alternative reagents, (HEH[EHP]) (immobilized on a 
support) and triethylenetetramine-N,N,N’,N’’,N’’’,N’’’-hexaacetic acid (TTHA) (in the mobile 
phase) was also considered in this investigation.  The results shown in Figure 24 indicate that the 
concentrated extractant in the EXC material behaves similarly to the lipophilic extractant system.  
It appears that, just as in the conventional TALSPEAK solvent extraction system, lactate 
partitioning into the resin phase consumes resin capacity. This effect reduces 
lanthanide/americium extraction efficiency of the HDEHP EXC material. The weaker hold-back 
reagent (under TALSPEAK aqueous conditions, pH ~ 3.6), TTHA, actually provides slightly 
improved Am3+/Ln3+ separations performance relative to DTPA. The ultimate conclusion of this 
study is that TALSPEAK chemistry works as designed in this system, but the application of 
TALSPEAK in a chromatographic mode offers minimal advantage over solvent extraction. 
Lactic acid partitioning into the LN1 resin phase (based on HDEHP) reduced Ln uptake capacity; 
the LN2 resin (based on the more basic extractant HEH[EHP] was less impacted by this 
phenomenon. This knowledge reinforced/inspired consideration of an Advanced TALSPEAK 
process based on this extractant, as will be discussed in the next section. 

 
46
FIGURE 24 NEAR HERE 
 
Advanced TALSPEAK/TALSQuEAK 
The results of the cumulative investigations described above indicated quite clearly that lactate 
partitioning into the extractant phase, at a minimum increasing the complexity of TALSPEAK, 
was most probably the key to resolving the enigmatic pH dependence of TALSPEAK. The initial 
thermodynamic modeling of the conventional TALSPEAK suggested that this system should not 
be plagued by a steep acid dependence. Application of various characterization methods 
established that, while lactic acid did serve an integral role in improving phase transfer kinetics 
and increasing DTPA solubility and radiolytic stability, it’s partitioning into the extractant phase 
also appeared to be the best candidate for explaining the steep pH dependence of TALSPEAK 
through this competition for the HDEHP. Weaver and Kappelmann considered a wide array of 
buffers, including glycolic and citric acid, but ultimately settled on lactate. In more recent years, 
citrate has become the preferred TALSPEAK buffer for fast-track application development 
studies. One rationale for choosing citrate is its increased buffering capacity.  
Expanding on the insights gained in these investigations of conventional TALSPEAK, Braley 
and co-workers 67 began an investigation of the possible advantages to be gained in TALSPEAK-
based separations by shifting to a “weaker” (more basic) extractant molecule balanced against a 
weaker actinide-selective holdback reagent. It was reasoned that the increased basicity of a 
phosphonic acid extractant HEH[EHP] would decrease the tendency of lactic acid (or other 
buffer) to partition into the extractant phase, eliminating HLac competition for the extractant and 
quite possibly relieving the steep acid dependence of conventional TALSPEAK systems based on 
HDEHP. Based on the knowledge gained in studying conventional TALSPEAK, it was clear that 
using a more basic (“weaker”) extractant like HEH[EHP] would demand a weaker actinide 
holdback reagent for process balance. If such a system might exhibit simultaneously reduced 
affinity for lactate, lactate might well remain an acceptable TALSPEAK buffering medium.  
As has been noted above, the trans-lanthanide pattern of stability of DTPA is an important 
feature of the separation pattern seen in conventional TALSPEAK. A search of the literature 
revealed that both TTHA and N-(2-hydroxyethyl) ethylenediamine-N,N’,N’-triacetic acid 

 
47
(HEDTA)  exhibited a DTPA-like pattern of increasing stability of lanthanide complexes from 
La to Eu followed by relative insensitivity to lanthanide cation radii for the heavy lanthanides. In 
the system based on a 0.2-1.0 M sodium lactate buffer matched to HEH[EHP], the undesirable 
partitioning of Na+, lactic acid, and water into the organic phase is greatly reduced relative to 
conventional TALSPEAK. TTHA appears to offer little advantage over DTPA in conventional 
TALSPEAK, but both DTPA and TTHA are too strong for use in combination with HEH[EHP]. 
The combination of HEDTA with HEH[EHP] achieves good balance and exhibits a nearly flat 
pH dependence between 2.5 and 4.5, in contrast with conventional TALSPEAK. This 
combination demonstrates more predictable performance than is seen in conventional 
TALSPEAK, while providing acceptable americium/lanthanide separation factors. The 
HEDTA/HEH[EHP] combination offers the additional advantage of more rapid phase transfer 
kinetics for the heavier lanthanides without the need for high concentrations of a lactate buffer.   
FIGURE 25 NEAR HERE 
FIGURE 26  NEAR HERE 
Mixed Ligand Complexes in Advanced TALSPEAK. In the Advanced TALSPEAK process, 
the replacement of DTPA as the actinide selective holdback reagent with HEDTA will result in a 
reduction of the total complexant denticity from 8 to5 coordination sites. As lanthanide ions do 
not exert orbital-based directional bonding interactions the reduced coordination environment of 
HEDTA leaves space for the addition of a secondary ligand, e.g., lactate. It is conceivable that 
this ability to form such ternary complexes could be employed to enhance group separations. 
Recognizing this potential, Braley and co-workers 68 investigated the role of carboxylic acids as 
supplementary ligands in TALSQuEAK separations. UV-Visible spectrophotometric studies of 
the Nd hypersensitive band indicates the presence of aqueous ternary Nd-Lac-HEDTA species. 
For the following reaction, Nd(HEDTA) + Lac−  Nd(HEDTA)Lac− an equilibrium constant of 
K111 = 1.83 ± 0.01 at 1.0 M ionic strength was reported. Such complexes reduce extraction of f 
element ions more-or-less across the board; compensation with higher concentrations of 
extractant could restore extraction, again without substantial effect on inter-group separation 
efficiency. There is little indication that the ternary complexes based on HEDTA-lactate 
combinations would have a positive effect on the group separation efficiency of Advanced 

 
48
TALSPEAK systems, however, adding an appropriately structures soft donor complexant could 
amplify group separation efficiency.   
 
Alternative Extractants, Complexants  Media and Buffers. Rudisill et al.69  measured the 
distribution of lanthanide and actinide elements between TALSPEAK-like aqueous and organic 
phases in the presence of complexants which were potentially less sensitive to pH control than 
DTPA. The complexants tested included aceto-, benzo-, and salicylhydroxamic acids (a class of 
reagents considered integral to the Pu/Np partitioning in the UREX+ Processes), N,N,N',N'-
tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl) ethylenediamine (TPEN), and ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN).  The 
hydroxamic acids were the least effective of the complexants tested.  The separation factors for 
TPEN and NH4SCN were higher, particularly for the heaviest lanthanides in the series. However, 
no conditions were identified which resulted in separation factors that approached those 
measured for the use of DTPA.  
Grimes and coworkers 70 have examined the potential for developing TALSPEAK systems based 
on amino acid buffers and operation at lower pH than conventional TALSPEAK. In this 
investigation the TALSPEAK aqueous phase was modified by replacing the lactic acid buffer 
with a variety of simple and longer-chain amino acid buffers.  The results show successful 
trivalent lanthanide/actinide group separation with the aqueous-modified TALSPEAK process at 
pH 2.  The amino acid buffer concentrations were reduced to 0.5 M (at pH 2), and separations 
were performed without any effect on phase-transfer kinetics.  Successful modeling of the 
aqueous-modified TALSPEAK process (p[H+] = 1.6-3.1) using a simplified thermodynamic 
model and an internally consistent set of thermodynamic data adequately models system 
performance. Introduction of an amino acid buffer does accomplish at least one significant 
improvement to TALSPEAK, as the zwitterionic amino acids resist partitioning into the 
extractant phase and their lanthanide complexes are notably weak, hence the chemistry is 
considerably simplified. 
During the past 15 years, the class of reagents known as room temperature ionic liquids have 
been extensively investigated for many different possible applications, including their possible 
use in solvent extraction for metal ion separations. Schrob and co-workers71 have recently 
reported the results of a study in which they claim to “re-invent” TALSPEAK, retaining the 

 
49
competitive ion binding but changing considerably the chemical implementation of the 
underlying general principles.  The DTPA moiety is integrated into a functionalized ionic liq. 
(IL) that is immiscible with an organic phase containing dialkyl phosphate ligands.  Choline and 
betainiumbistriflimides double as IL diluents and synthetic reagents.  A deprotonated DTPA-
betainium conjugate forms 1:1 complexes with trivalent f-element cations whereas these metal 
ions form 1:2 complexes with the DTPA-choline conjugates.  Large separation factors for Eu/Am 
partitioning between the two phases are observed approaching 120-150 for DTPA-betainium and 
250-270 for DTPA-choline.  In the latter system, the traditional TALSPEAK ''parabolic'' 
dependence of the phase distribution ratios as a function of ionic radius is reported. Dai and co-
workers72 have reported on studies investigating eight imidazolium ILs([Cnmim][NTf2] and 
[Cnmim][BETI], n = 4,6,8,10) and one pyrrolidinium IL ([C4mPy][NTf2]) ionic liquids as 
diluents using HDEHP as an extractant for the separation of lanthanide ions from aqueous 
solutions of 0.05 M glycolic acid or citric acid and 0.005 M DTPA.  The extraction efficiencies 
were studied in comparison with DIPB. 
 
Other Advanced TALSPEAK Concepts 
Broadly speaking, TALSPEAK chemistry can be considered to be any solvent extraction system 
that is based on the application of an aqueous medium composed of a moderately concentrated 
carboxylic acid buffer solution that also contains an actinide-selective complexing agent. Most 
such applications have been developed by using a representative TALSPEAK aqueous phase in 
contact with most any extractant that permits efficient extraction of trivalent f-elements – as the 
group selectivity arises from the soft-donor holdback/stripping reagent, most any extractant phase 
that exhibits a suitable lanthanide extraction patterns could be successfully coupled to a buffered 
aminopolycarboxylate aqueous phase. In reality, the task can be simplified, as it is (from the 
perspective of the nuclear chemistry/physics motivations for separating the groups) only really 
essential to gain separation of Am (or Am and Cm) from Pr through Gd; neutron capture cross 
sections for La and Ce are notably less than those of Nd-Gd and fission yields are quite low for 
lanthanides heavier than Tb. To achieve these separations of such fundamentally similar ions 
remains one of the most difficult challenges in metal ion separation science. Since the problem 

 
50
has not been solved and in industrial-scale production anywhere in the world, it must be 
considered as still an open challenge.  
Another driver for advanced TALSPEAK applications was developed as a result of attempts to 
“collapse” the UREX concept by combining extractant operations to reduce the number of unit 
operations in a reprocessing scheme. In UREX, it would clearly improve the economic outlook 
for eventual implementation of a process if unit operations (for example TRUEX separation of f 
elements from d-transition elements) in used fuel and the subsequent separation of lanthanides 
from trivalent actinides into a single combined process. A number of such concepts have 
appeared in the recent literature. Process development activities around the world investigating 
such processes have established a variation on a lesson learned from TALSPEAK studies, that is 
chemical reagents that are reactive will react, often in ways that were not anticipated. In 
combined process research development the lesson that has been learned is that extractant 
molecules sometimes do the unexpected.  In studies of TALSPEAK, we have learned that the 
unexpected extraction of lactic acid be HDEHP causes complications in process control. In the 
development of the TRUSPEAK process, Tkac and co-workers 73 discovered that the interactions 
between HDEHP and CMPO defeated the objective of selectively partitioning f elements. 
Perhaps the most important take home message from these experiences is that there is no 
substitute for direct examination of interactions. 
 
Conclusions 
TALSPEAK chemistry is at the same time one of the best established and most flexible methods 
known today for efficiently partitioning fission product lanthanides from transplutonium 
actinides, and an extremely complex solution chemistry challenge. The principle is simple, hold 
back one group while extracting a contaminant, not necessarily as efficient of an approach as 
selectively extracting the minor constituent (actinide) away from the major component 
(lanthanides), but still tractable and proven. It is in the execution of the chemistry that the process 
gets complicated. The complexity of solute interactions in the baseline TALSPEAK process 
(HDEHP in 1,4-DIPB, concentrated lactate buffer, DTPA actinide holdback reagent) leads to 
complications in process implementation; of particular importance are the long recognized issues 
of pH control and slow phase transfer kinetics. Numerous investigations of TALSPEAK and 

 
51
TALSPEAK-like applications have confirmed the reality of these issues, generated possible 
explanations, and even provided “work-around” solutions and adjustments to cope with the 
effects. Until recently, comparatively few investigations of TALSPEAK have addressed the 
value of understanding more completely the underlying chemistry that leads to these 
complications.  
During the past decade significant advances have been made in understanding the fundamental 
solution chemistry that underpins the TALSPEAK process through the application of a variety of 
standard analyses of conventional TALSPEAK systems. To maximize the value of the 
information developed, most of these experiments were designed to control those variables (ionic 
strength, temperature, pH) that enable the interpretation of fundamental data in terms of known 
principles of solution chemistry. Rather than rely on slope analysis as an analytical tool, 
techniques that directly interrogate the metal ions, buffer and complexing agents were employed. 
This approach has provided enough improved understanding of the underlying chemistry to 
support the possible application of TALSPEAK principles in new approaches to this difficult 
separation.  
Concerning the principal limitations of TALSPEAK chemistry, the following new information 
has been developed (focusing on the baseline TALSPEAK formulation): 
• Lactic acid partitioning into HDEHP/1,4-DIPB can occur independently of the 
extraction of lanthanides under all loading conditions, as Ln(Lac)2+ species only under 
conditions of high metal loading ([Ln]:[HDEHP] higher than 1:6); extraction of 
Ln(Lac)2+ had been implicated as the primary pathway to lactate partitioning in the prior 
literature 
• The primary extracted lactate species appears to be HLac∙HDEHP3 
• Lactate ion appears to exert a moderately strong specific ion activity (aqueous phase 
salting-out) effect, significantly impeding thermodynamic modeling efforts 
• Na+ is extracted, but it is not clear whether this is direct extraction of Na+ by (HDEHP)2 
or extraction of NaLac, or both; lactate ion activity effects complicate interpretations of 

 
52
Na+ extraction; Li+, Na+, K+, and NH4
+ exhibit different extraction efficiencies, but Na+, 
K+, and NH4
+ each show evidence of lactate salting out effects  
• Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 appears to be the primary extracted complex in TALSPEAK at 
[Ln]/[HDEHP] ratios below the stoichiometric limit of 1:6; as the metal concentration 
increases, an apparent HDEHP-bridged dinuclear complex (Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4) 
becomes increasingly important – at high lanthanide concentrations supramolecular 
organization of solutes occurs producing aggregates containing 12-20 HDEHP 
monomers  
• Ligand exchange kinetics studies of extractant phase lanthanide complexes indicate 
relatively labile Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 ligand exchange reactions, but (on the NMR time 
scale) slow exchange/substitution-inert polynuclear complexes involving lactate 
• Results of aqueous complexation kinetics studies suggest that the role of lactate as a 
phase transfer catalyst may arise from the transient presence of the electrically neutral 
Ln(Lac)3 complex on the aqueous side of the phase boundary 
• Thermodynamic modeling of conventional TALSPEAK indicates that the extraction 
equilibrium should exhibit a slightly increasing dependence on pH rather than the often-
observed strong negative dependence; though the system is difficult to model accurately 
due to the specific ion activity effects noted above, it is believed that competition by 
HLac for HDEHP reduces the effective extractant concentration which contributes to the 
pH dependence. 
• Lactic acid extraction by HEH[EHP] is significantly less than that of HDEHP; 
correspondingly, lanthanide extraction from a lactate/aminopolycarboxylate solution 
exhibits a pH dependence consistent with the predictions of a thermodynamic model, i.e., 
the strongly negative acid dependence of conventional TALSPEAK is eliminated 
• Using HEH[EHP] as a primary extractant for the Advanced TALSPEAK process 
requires the use of a matching weaker aminopolycarboxylate complexant; HEDTA and 
TTHA are viable actinide selective complexants in this application. 

 
53
• Both citrate and lactate buffered acceptably in Advanced TALSPEAK 
• Due to the reduced denticity of HEDTA, ternary complexes involving HEDTA and the 
buffer impact the separation efficiency of Advanced TALSPEAK 
• Most of the research done on TALSPEAK has focused on 1,4-DIPB (emphasized here) 
and n-dodecane; the primary observation of Weaver and Kappelmann that aromatic 
diluents favor selectivity while aliphatic diluents enhance extraction must still be 
considered the definitive guidance regarding the choice of diluents for TALSPEAK. 
With increased understanding of the fundamental interactions that drive and limit the utility of 
TALSPEAK, it would appear that recent advances should assist in efforts to improve the 
performance of conventional TALSPEAK applications. Perhaps more importantly, these new 
insights (and the natural evolution of progress in science and technology) have spurred extended 
applications of TALSPEAK-like chemistry to other separations platforms. One issue that has 
emerged from these extensions is that biphasic interactions increase with the number of 
component extractants, complexants, and buffers introduced. It would seem prudent to take 
advantage of modern analytical chemistry to probe the possible interactions between these 
species early-on in any process design exercise.  
Work performed at Washington State University with financial support provided 
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy Fuel Cycle Research 
and Development Program Sigma Team for Minor Actinide Separations 
 
 
 

 
54
References 
1. Weaver, B. Solvent Extraction in the separation of rare earths and trivalent actinides, in 
Ion Exchange and Solvent Extraction, Vol 6. eds. J. A. Marinsky and Y. Marcus, Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 1974. 
2. Wigeland, R. A.; Bauer, T. H.; Fanning, T. H.; Morris, E. E. Separations and 
transmutation criteria to improve utilization of a geologic repository. Nucl. Technol. 2006, 
154, 95–106. 
3. Kolarik, Z. Complexation and Separation of Lanthanides(III) and Actinides(III) by 
Heterocyclic N-Donors in Solution. Chem. Rev. 2008 108, 4208-4252.  
4. Ekberg, C., Fermvik, A., Retegan, T., Skaremark, G., Foreman, M.R.S., Hudson, M. J., 
Englund, S. Nilsson M. An overview and historical look back at the solvent extraction 
using nitrogen donor ligands to extract and separate An(III) from Ln(III). Radiochim. 
Acta 2008 96, 225-234. 
5. Hill, C. Overview of Recent Advances in An(III)/Ln(III) Separation by Solvent 
Extraction. In Ion Exchange and Solvent Extraction; Vol. 19; Moyer, B. A., Ed.; Taylor 
and Francis: Philadelphia, 2010; Chap. 3. 
6. Hill, C. Development of Highly Selective Compounds for Solvent Extraction Processes: 
Partitioning and Transmutations of Long-Lived Radionuclides from Spent Nuclear Fuels. 
In Advanced Separation Techniques for Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing and Radioactive 
Waste Treatment; Nash, K. L., Lumetta, G. J., Eds.; Woodhead Publishing: Oxford, 2011, 
pp 311–362. 
7. Weaver, B.; Kappelmann, F. A. TALSPEAK: a new method of separating americum and 
curium from the lanthanides by extraction from an aqueous solution of an 
aminopolyacetic acid complex with a monoacidic organophosphate or phosphonate 
United States Atomic Energy Commission [Unclassified and Declassified Reports 
Published by the Atomic Energy Commission and Its Contractors] (1964), ORNL 3559, 
61 pp. 
8. Gelis, A. V.; Vandegrift, G. F.; Bakel, A.; Bowers, D. L.; Hebden, A. S.; Pereira, C.; 
Regalbuto, M. Extraction behaviour of actinides and lanthanides in TALSPEAK, TRUEX 
and NPEX processes of UREX+ Radiochim. Acta (2009), 97(4-5), 231-232. 
DOI:10.1524/ract.2009.1601;  
9. Pereira, C., Vandegrift, G. F., Regalbuto, M. C., Bakel, A., Bowers, D., Gelis, A. V., 
Hebden, A. S., Maggos, L. E., Stepinski, D., Tsai, Y., Laidler, J. J. Lab-scale 
demonstration of the UREX+1A process using spent fuel WM’07 Symposium, February 
25, – March 1, 2007, Tucson, AZ paper 7425. 
10. Regalbuto, M. Alternative Separation and Extraction: UREX+ Processes for Actinide and 
Targeted Fission Product Recovery. In Advanced Separation Techniques for Nuclear Fuel 
Reprocessing and Radioactive Waste Treatment; Nash, K. L., Lumetta, G. J., Eds.; 
Woodhead Publishing: Oxford, 2011, pp 176–200. 
11. Choppin, G. R., Rydberg, J. Nuclear Chemistry, Theory and Applications, Pergamon, 
Oxford 1980, Chapter 20, Appendix H. 

 
55
12. Persson, G.; Svantesson, I.; Wingefors, S.; Liljenzin, J. O., Hot test of a TALSPEAK 
procedure for separation of actinides and lanthanides using recirculating DTPA-lactic 
acid Solution., Solvent Extr. .Ion Exch. (1984), 2(1), 89-113. 
DOI:10.1080/07366298408918438;  
13. Liljenzin, J. O.; Persson, G.; Bonnevie-Svendsen, M.; Michelsen, O. B. Equipment, 
operation and some results from a hot test of the CTH actinide separation process From 
Ber. Kernforschungsanlage Juelich [Conf.] (1981), (Juel-Conf-42 (Vol. 1), Proc. Int. 
Semin. Chem. Process Eng. High-Level Liquid Waste Solidification), 321-37. 
14. Tachimori, S.; Sato, A.; Nakamura, H. Separation of transplutonium and rare earth 
elements by extraction with diisodecyl phosphoric acid from DTPA solution J. Nucl. 
Science Technol. (1979), 16(6), 434-40. DOI:10.1080/18811248.1979.9730923 
15. Nash, K. L., Madic, C., Mathur, J. N., Lacquement, J. Actinide Separation Science and 
Technology, Chap. 24. In The Chemistry of Actinides and Transactinide Elements; Morss, 
L. R., Katz, J.J., Edelstein, N., Fuger, J., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
2006; pp. 2622–2798. 
16. Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. Review Article: A Review of the Development and Operational 
Characteristics of the TALSPEAK Process Solvent Extr. .Ion Exch. (2007), 25(6), 665-
701 DOI:10.1080/07366290701634636 
17. Martell, A. E., Smith, R. S., Motekaitis, R. J.: NIST Critically Selected Stability Constants 
of Metal Complexes. NIST Standard Reference Database 46 Version 8.0, Maryland, 2004. 
18. Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. Trans-lanthanide extraction studies in the TALSPEAK system: 
Investigating the effect of acidity and temperature. Solvent Extraction and Ion Exchange 
(2009), 27(3), 354-377. DOI:10.1080/07366290902821164 
19. Kosyakov, V. N.; Yerin, E. A., On the mechanism of trivalent actinide extraction in the 
system HDEHP-lactic acid with DTPA Journal of Radioanalytical Chemistry (1980), 
56(1-2), 93-104. DOI:10.1007/BF02516941; KOSYAKOV, V.N.; YERIN, E.A. 
Separation of transplutonium and rare-earth elements by extraction with HDEHP from 
DTPA solutions. J. Radioanal. Chem. 1978 43, 37-51.  
20. Svantesson, I.; Hagström, I.; Persson, G.; Liljenzin, J.O. Separation of americium and 
neodymium by selective stripping and subsequent extraction with HDEHP using DTPA-
lactic acid solution in a closed loop. Radiochem. Radioanal. Letters 1979 37(4-5), 251-
222. 
21. Leuze, R. E.; Baybarz, R. D.; Kappelmann, F. A.; Weaver, B. Behavior of the 
transplutonium elements in solvent extraction systems. United States Atomic Energy 
Commission [Unclassified and Declassified Reports Published by the Atomic Energy 
Commission and Its Contractors] (1965), ORNL-P-1577, 16 pp. 
22. Del Cul, G. D.; Toth, L. M.; Bond, W. D.; Davis, G. D.; Dai, S. Citrate-based 
"TALSPEAK" actinide-lanthanide separation process, Separation Science Technol. 
(1997), 32(1-4), 431-446 DOI:10.1080/01496399708003208 
23. Kolarik, Z., Kuhn, W. Acidic organophosphorus extractants – XXI. Kinetics and 
equilibria of extraction of Eu(III) by di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid from complexing 

 
56
media. Proc. Int. Solvent Extr. Conf., ISEC 74, Lyon; 8-14th September, 1974, 3, 2593-
2606. 
24. K. L. Nash, J. C. Sullivan Kinetics and Mechanisms of Actinide Redox and Complexation 
Reactions in Advances in Inorganic and Bioinorganic Reaction Mechanisms, V. 5 (ed. A. 
G. Sykes) Academic Press, New York (1986) pp. 185-213. 
25. K. L. Nash, J. C. Sullivan Kinetics of Complexation and Redox Reactions of the 
Lanthanides in Aqueous Solutions in Handbook for the Physics and Chemistry of the 
Rare Earths Vol. 15 Chapter 102, K. A. Gschneidner, Jr., L. Eyring (eds.), North Holland, 
Amsterdam, pp. 347-391 (1991).. 
26. P.R. Danesi and C. Cianetti, Kinetics and Mechanism of the Interfacial Mass Transfer of 
Eu(III). (TALSPEAK-dodecane conditions) Sep. Sci. Technol., 17, 969 (1982). 
27. Fidelis, I. Trends in thermodynamic functions associated with the extraction of 
lanthanides in the HDEHP-HNO3 system. IMR-Report, No. 1393/v/C (1972). 
28. Fidelis, I. Trends in Thermodynamic Functions of Complexation of the Lanthanide Ions 
with Different Ligands and the Double-Double Effect in the Enthalpy Changes. Bull. 
l’Acad. Pol. Des Sci., 1972, 20(6), 605-610. 
29. Zalupski, P.R.; Nash, K.L. Two-Phase Calorimetry. I. Studies on the Thermodynamics of 
Lanthanide Extraction by Bis(2-Ethyl(Hexyl)) Phosphoric Acid.. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch., 
2008, 26(5), 514-553. 
30. Grimes, T. S.; Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. The behavior and importance of lactic acid 
complexation in TALSPEAK extraction systems From Solvent Extraction: Fundamentals 
to Industrial Applications, Moyer, Bruce A. Ed. Proceedings of ISEC 2008 International 
Solvent Extraction Conference, Tucson, AZ, United States, Sept. 15-19, 2008 (2008), 1, 
563-568. 
31. Grimes, T. S.; Nash, K. L. Acid Dissociation Constants and Rare Earth Stability 
Constants for DTPA. J. Solution Chem. (2014), 43(2), 298-313. DOI:10.1007/s10953-
014-0139-6 
32. Grimes, Travis Shane, Coordination Chemistry of f-elements in the TALSPEAK Process 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington State University (2011), 180 pp. 
33. Stary, J. Separation of transplutonium elements. Talanta, 1966, 13(3), 421-437. 
34. Johnson, Gabriel Eugene, Studies of the Thermodynamics of DTPA Complexation of the 
Rare Earth Elements at High Ionic Strength: Applications to the TALSPEAK Process, 
M.S. Thesis, Washington State University, August, 2012. 
35. Gritmon, T.F., Goedken, M.P., Choppin, G.R.: The complexation of lanthanides by 
aminocarboxylate ligands─I: Stability Constants. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 39, 2021-2023 
(1977) 
36. Tian, G.-X.; Rao, L.-F.. Effect of Temperature on the Protonation of the TALSPEAK 
Ligands: Lactic and Diethylenetrinitropentaacetic Acids, Separation Sci. .Technol. (2010), 
45(12-13), 1718-1724. DOI:10.1080/01496395.2010.494712 

 
57
37. Thakur, P., Mathur, J.N., Moore, R.C., Choppin, G.R.: Thermodynamics and dissociation 
constants of carboxylic acids at high ionic strength and temperature. Inorg.Chim. Acta. 
360(12), 3671-3680 (2007) 
38. Moeller, T., Thompson, L.C.: Observations on the rare earths─LXXV: The stabilities of 
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid chelates. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 24, 499-510 (1962) 
39. Choppin, G.R.; Goedken, M.P.; Gritmon, T.F. The complexation of lanthanides by 
aminocarboxylate ligands─II: Thermodynamic parameters, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 39 
(1977) 2025-2030. 
40. Milyukov, P.M. Temperature dependence of heats of complexing of rare earth elements 
with diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid in an aqueous solution. Izv. Vyssh. Ucheb. Zaved. 
Khim. 1988, 31, 23-25. 
41. Leggett, C. J.; Liu, G.; Jensen, M. P. Do Aqueous Ternary Complexes Influence the 
TALSPEAK Process? Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. (2010), 28(3), 313-334. 
DOI:10.1080/07366291003684113 
42. Grimes, T. S.; Nilsson, M. A.; Nash, K. L. Lactic acid partitioning in TALSPEAK 
extraction systems. Separation Sci. Technol. (2010), 45(12-13), 1725-1732. 
DOI:10.1080/01496395.2010.493841 
43. Troy Robinson, Samuel A. Bryan and Tatiana G. Levitskaia TALSPEAK extraction 
system under variable loading conditions, part 2—speciation studies. ISEC 2011, 19th 
International Solvent Extraction Conference, Santiago, Chile September 3-7, 2011, paper 
number 97.  
44. McDowell, W. J.; Coleman, C. F. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1965, 27, 1117-1139. 
45. Kazuyoshi Uruga, Travis S. Grimes, Youichi Enokida, Kenneth L. Nash. Partitioning of 
Sodium and Lactate between Organic Di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric Acid solution and 
Aqueous Lactate Buffer Solution, manuscript in preparation for publication in Solvent 
Extraction & Ion Exchange 
46. Zalupski, P. R.; Nash, K. L.; Martin, L. R., Thermodynamic Features of the 
Complexation of Neodymium(III) and Americium(III) by Lactate in 
Trifluoromethanesulfonate Media Journal of Solution Chemistry (2010), 39(8), 1213-
1229. DOI:10.1007/s10953-010-9573-2  
47. Zalupski, P. R.; Nash, K. L.; Nakamura, Y.; Yamamoto, M.; Martin, L. R., Toward 
understanding the thermodynamics of TALSPEAK process. Medium effects on actinide 
complexation. From IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (2010), 9, 
012076/1-012076/8., DOI:10.1088/1757-899X/9/1/012076 
48. Gray, M.; Zalupski, P.; Nilsson, M. Activity coefficients of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric 
acid in select diluents. From Procedia Chemistry (2012), 7, 209-214 
DOI:10.1016/j.proche.2012.10.035 
49. Grimes, T. S.; Tian, G.; Rao, L.; Nash, K. L. Optical Spectroscopy Study of Organic-
Phase Lanthanide Complexes in the TALSPEAK Separations Process. Inorg. Chem. 
(2012), 51(11), 6299-6307.DOI:10.1021/ic300503p 
50. Peppard, D. F.; Ferraro, J. R. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1959, 10, 275-288. 

 
58
51. Marie, C.; Hiscox, B.; Nash, K. L., Characterization of HDEHP-lanthanide complexes 
formed in a non-polar organic phase using 31P NMR and ESI-MS, Dalton Trans. (2012), 
41(3), 1054-1064. DOI:10.1039/c1dt11534k 
52. Grimes, T. S.; Jensen, M. P.; Debeer-Schmidt, L.; Littrell, K.; Nash, K. L. Small-Angle 
Neutron Scattering Study of Organic-Phase Aggregation in the TALSPEAK Process, J. 
Phys. Chem. B (2012), 116(46), 13722-13730. DOI:10.1021/jp306451d 
53. Lumetta, G. J.; Levitskaya, T. G.; Latesky, S. L.; Henderson, R. V.; Edwards, E. A.; 
Braley, J. C., Sinkov, S. I. J. Coord. Chem. 2012, 65, 741-753. 
DOI:10.1080/00958972.2012.660626. 
54. Nilsson, M.; Nash, K. L. TALSPEAK Chemistry in Advanced Nuclear Fuel Cycles, 
Proceedings Atalante 2008, Nuclear Fuel Cycles for a Sustainable Future, May 19-23, 
2008, Montpelier, France, paper number 01_12. 
55. Nilsson M.; Nash, K. L. Studies of the influence of lactic acid concentration on 
extraction equilibria and kinetics in TALSPEAK chemistry Manuscript in 
preparation for publication in Solvent Extraction and Ion Exchange (2014)  
56. Danesi, P. R. Solvent Extraction Kinetics, Chapter 6, Solvent Extraction Principles and 
Practice, Second Edition, Revised and Expanded. J. Rydberg, M. Cox, C. Musikas, G. R. 
Choppin Eds. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 203-251. 
57. Nichols, K. P.; Pompano, R. R.; Li, L.; Gelis, A. V.; Ismagilov, R. F., Toward 
Mechanistic Understanding of Nuclear Reprocessing Chemistries by Quantifying 
Lanthanide Solvent Extraction Kinetics via Microfluidics with Constant Interfacial Area 
and Rapid Mixing. J. Am. Chem. Soc. (2011), 133(39), 15721-15729. 
DOI:10.1021/ja206020u 
58. Nash, K. L.; Brigham, D.; Shehee, T. C.; Martin, A. The kinetics of lanthanide 
complexation by EDTA and DTPA in lactate media. Dalton Trans. (2012), 41(48), 
14547-14556. DOI:10.1039/c2dt31851b 
59. Derek Brigham Lanthanide Polyaminopolycarboxylate Complexation Kinetics In High 
Lactate Media: Investigating The Aqueous Phase Of TALSPEAK. Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Washington State University, May, 2013 
60. Casella, A.; Bryan, S.; Levitskaia, T.; Peterson, J.; Robinson, T.; Rutherford, C.; 
Muzaffery, O.; Lines, A.; Nilsson, M. On-line monitoring techniques for spent fuel 
reprocessing International High-Level Radioactive Waste Management Conference , 13th, 
Albuquerque, NM, United States, Apr. 10-14, 2011 (2011), 1,138-143. 
61. Tian, G.; Rao, L., Fluorescence properties of Cm(III) and Eu(III) in D2O2O at elevated 
temperatures and the application in TALSPEAK process study. From Pacifichem 2010, 
International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies, Honolulu, HI, United States, 
December 15-20, 2010 (2010). 
62. Burn, A., Tokheim, B. Washington State University, Department of Chemistry, Personal 
Communication (2013). 

 
59
63. Tachimori, S., Nakamura, T.: Radiation Effects on the Separation of Lanthanides and 
Transplutonides by the TALSPEAK-Type Extraction. J. Radioanal. Chem. 52(2), 343-
354 (1979). 
64. Martin, L. R.; Mincher, B. J.; Mezyk, S. P.; Elias, G.; Tillotson, R. D. Effects of aqueous 
phase radiolysis on lactic acid under TALSPEAK conditions . ACS Symposium Series 
(2010), 1046(Nuclear Energy and the Environment, C.M. Wai, B. J. Mincher, Eds.), 243-
253. DOI:10.1021/bk-2010-1046.ch020 
65. Martin, L. R.; Mezyk, S. P.; Mincher, B. J. Determination of Arrhenius and 
Thermodynamic Parameters for the Aqueous Reaction of the Hydroxyl Radical with 
Lactic Acid Journal of Physical Chemistry A (2009), 113(1), 141-145. 
DOI:10.1021/jp806290s 
66. Braley, J. C.; McAlister, D. R.; Horwitz, E. P.; Nash, K. L. Explorations of TALSPEAK 
Chemistry in Extraction Chromatography: Comparisons of TTHA with DTPA and 
HDEHP with HEH[EHP]. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. (2013), 31(2), 107-121. 
DOI:10.1080/07366299.2012.735503 
67. Braley, J. C.; Grimes, T. S.; Nash, K. L. Alternatives to HDEHP and DTPA for simplified 
TALSPEAK separations. Industrial & Engineering Chem. Res. (2012), 51(2), 627-636. 
DOI:10.1021/ie200285r 
68. Braley, J.C., Carter, J.C., Sinkov, S.I., Nash, K.L., Lumetta, G.J. The role of carboxylic 
acids in TALSQuEAK separations. J  Coord Chem. 2012 65(16), 2862-2876. 
69. Rudisill, T. S.; DiPrete, D. P.; Thompson, M. C. Distribution of lanthanide and actinide 
elements between bis-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid and buffered lactate solutions 
containing selected complexants. J. Radioanal. .Nucl. Chem. (2013), 296(2), 631-638., 
DOI:10.1007/s10967-012-2086-2 
70. Grimes, T. S.; Tillotson, R. D.; Martin, L. R. Trivalent Lanthanide/Actinide Separation 
Using Aqueous-Modified TALSPEAK Chemistry. Solvent Extr. Ion Exch. (2014), Ahead 
of Print. DOI:10.1080/07366299.2013.877754 
71. Shkrob, I. A.; Marin, T. W.; Jensen, M. P. Ionic Liquid Based Separations of Trivalent 
Lanthanide and Actinide Ions. Industrial & Engineering Chem. Res. (2014), 53(9), 3641-
3653. DOI:10.1021/ie4036719 
72. Sun, X.; Bell, J. R.; Luo, H.; Dai, S. Extraction separation of rare-earth ions via 
competitive ligand complexations between aqueous and ionic-liquid phases. Dalton 
Transactions (2011), 40(31),8019-8023.,DOI:10.1039/c1dt10873e 
73. Tkac, Peter; Vandegrift, George F.; Lumetta, Gregg J.; Gelis, Artem V Study of the 
Interaction between HDEHP and CMPO and Its Effect on the Extraction of Selected 
Lanthanides Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research (2012), 51(31),10433-10444 
DOI:10.1021/ie300326d 
 

 
60
TABLES 
Table 1. Acid dissociation constants of DTPA in various ionic media. 
 
 
 
Ionic  
Strength 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.1 Ma 
0.5 Mb 
1.0 Mc 
2.0 Mc 
2.0 Mc 
2.0 Md 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NIST  
Database17 
Gritmon  
et. al.34 
Tian and 
Rao35 
Thakur  
et. al 36 
Grimes31 
Grimes31 
Species log Ka  
log Ka  
log Ka  
log Ka  
log Ka 
log Ka 
HL 
10.48 
9.86 
9.43 
9.46 
9.50 ± 0.01 
9.20 ± 0.01 
H2L 
8.60 
8.32 
8.26 
8.28 
8.31 ± 0.01 
8.06 ± 0.01 
H3L 
4.28 
4.12 
4.23 
4.13 
4.38 ± 0.01 
4.25 ± 0.01 
H4L 
2.60 
2.85 
2.56 
2.64 
2.53 ± 0.03 
2.68 ± 0.01 
H5L 
2.00 
1.95 
2.37 
2.12 
2.41 ± 0.01 
2.03 ± 0.03 
H6L 
1.6 
 
 
 
 
1.96 ± 0.02 
H7L 
0.7 
 
 
 
 
  
H8L 
-0.1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
aK+ salt used as background electrolyte. 
bKNO3 used as background electrolyte. 
cNaClO4 used as background electrolyte. 
dNaO3SCF3 used as background electrolyte. 
 

 
61
Table 2. Lanthanide-DTPA stability  constants log β101 and log K111 values for 
Ln(DTPA)2- and Ln(HDTPA)- complexes determined in 2.0 M NaClO4 and NaSO3CF3 
and in 0.1 M KNO3 at 25 °C.  
 
 
 
Ionic 
Strength  
 
 
 
 
 
a0.1 M37  
a2.0 M 31 
a2.0 M31  
Metal log β101  
log β101  
log β111  
Y 
22.05 
20.13 ± 0.02 
21.87 ± 0.04 
La 
19.48 
18.02 ± 0.02 
20.38 ± 0.03 
Ce 
20.50 
19.06 ± 0.01 
20.77 ± 0.02 
Pr 
21.07 
19.64 ± 0.01 
21.34 ± 0.02 
Nd 
21.60 
20.23 ± 0.01 
21.57 ± 0.05 
Sm 
22.34 
20.79 ± 0.01 
22.39 ± 0.02 
Eu 
22.39 
21.03 ± 0.01 
22.56 ± 0.03 
Gd 
22.46 
21.15 ± 0.02 
22.38 ± 0.02 
Tb 
22.71 
21.15 ± 0.01 
22.77 ± 0.02 
Dy 
22.82 
21.23 ± 0.01 
22.81 ± 0.02 
Ho 
22.78 
21.43 ± 0.02 
22.76 ± 0.05 
Er 
22.74 
21.41 ± 0.02 
22.66 ± 0.05 
Tm 
22.72 
21.10 ± 0.02 
22.45 ± 0.05 
Yb 
22.62 
20.96 ± 0.01 
22.53 ± 0.02 
Lu 
22.44 
21.14 ± 0.01 
22.21 ± 0.05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.0 M 
NaTriflate 
 
Eu 
  
20.74 ± 0.01 
22.48 ± 0.02 
 
aKNO3 used as background electrolyte. 
bNaClO4 used as background electrolyte. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
62
TABLE 3 Recommended log βlac and Kex values (HDEHP extraction) for conventional 
TALSPEAK modeling calculations (I – 2.0 M, T = 25.0°C) (based on information found in 
references 17 and 33) 
 
 Lanthanide Lactate complex stability 
 
 
Extraction Equilibria 
Ln 
1/r cn8 
log β1 log β2 log β3 
DGMLac3 
log Kex    DGex  DGLnDTPA 
La 
0.86199 
2.27 
3.95 
5.1 
-29.1  
-2.22 +12.7 -102.8 
Ce 
0.87497 
2.33 
4.1 
5.21 
-29.7  
-1.77 +10.1 -108.8 
Pr 
0.88802 
(2.36) (4.26) (5.40) 
-30.8  
-1.46   +8.3 -112.1 
Nd 
0.90204 
2.45 
4.37 
5.5 
-31.4  
-1.32   +7.5 -115.5 
Pm 
0.915 
(2.45) (4.49) (5.67) 
-32.4  
-0.98   +5.6 ------ 
Sm 
0.92704 
2.56 
4.58 
5.9 
-33.7  
-0.50      +2.8 -118.7 
Eu 
0.938 
2.53 
4.6 
5.88 
-33.6  
-0.22   +1.3 -120.0 
Gd 
0.95003 
2.53 
4.63 
5.91 
-33.7  
-0.06   +0.3 -120.7 
Tb 
0.962 
2.61 
4.73 
6.01 
-34.3  
+0.63    -3.6 -120.7 
Dy 
0.97399 
2.71 
4.76 
6.25 
-35.7  
+0.95    -5.4 -121.2 
Ho 
0.98503 
2.7 
4.93 
6.4 
-36.5  
+1.24    -7.1 -122.3 
Er 
0.99602 
2.77 
5.11 
6.7 
-38.2  
+1.59    -9.1 -122.2 
Tm 
1.00604 
(2.79) (5.17) (6.84) 
-39.4  
+1.99  -11.3 -120.4 
Yb 
1.01502 
2.85 
5.27 
6.96 
-39.7  
+2.48  -14.2 -119.6 
Lu 
1.02396 
(2.89) (5.47) (7.25) 
-41.4  
+2.75  -15.7 -120.6 
 
Values in parentheses are interpolated based on Figure 3. 
 

 
63
Table 4. Enthalpy values for the formation of Ln∙DTPA2- species in 0.1 M, 0.5 M, and 2.0 M 
ionic strength.  
 
 
Ionic         Strength 
 
 
 
 
 
a0.1 M39  
b0.5 M38 
c2.0 M 33 
Metal 
ΔH / 
kJ/mol 
ΔH / 
kJ/mol 
ΔH / 
kJ/mol 
Y 
-27 ± 0.4 
-36.3 ± 0.3 
-35.0  ± 0.6 
La 
-22 ± 1.6 
-25.3 ± 0.4 
-30.3 ± 0.2 
Ce 
-24 ± 1.6 
-29.9 ± 0.3 
-31.2 ± 0.2 
Pr 
-26 ± 0.8 
-35.5 ± 0.3 
-35.5 ± 0.5 
Nd 
-30 ± 0.4 
-38.4 ± 0.5 
-38.0 ± 2.0 
Sm 
-33 ± 0.8 
-44.2 ± 0.4 
-41.0  ± 1.0 
Eu 
-32 ± 0.8 
-47.8 ± 0.4  -42.6 ± 0.5 
Gd 
-31 ± 1.2 
-47.5 ± 0.4  -42.0 ± 1.0 
Tb 
-31 ± 0.4 
-44.1 ± 0.3  -42.2 ± 0.2 
Dy 
-31 ± 1.2 
-44.7 ± 0.5 
-42.6 ± 0.2 
Ho 
-30 ± 0.4 
-42.6 ± 0.4  -41.0 ± 0.6 
Er 
-30 ± 0.8 
-41.3 ± 0.4  -39.7 ± 0.4 
Tm 
-26 ± 0.4 
-36.6 ± 0.3 
-37.7 ± 0.9 
Yb 
-25 ± 0.8 
-34.9 ± 0.4  -34.6 ± 0.3 
Lu 
-21 ± 0.4 
-32 ± 0.5  
-30.8 ± 0.4 
aK+ salt used as background electrolyte. bNaClO4 used as background 
electrolyte. cNaNO3 used as background electrolyte. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
64
 
Table 5. Entropy values for the formation of Ln∙DTPA2- species in 0.1 M, 0.5 M, and 2.0 M 
ionic strength.  
 
 
Ionic         Strength 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a0.1 M39  
b0.5 M 38   
c2.0 M 33 
c 2.0 M 
 
Metal 
ΔS / 
J/mol∙K 
ΔS / 
J/mol∙K 
ΔS / 
J/mol∙K 
-TDS 
kJ/mol 
 
Y 
330 
269 ± 2 
268 ± 2 
79.9 ± 0.6 
 
La 
298 
264 ± 2 
243 ± 1 
72.4 ± 0.3 
 
Ce 
310 
265 ± 2 
260 ± 1 
77.5 ± 0.3 
 
Pr 
314 
257 ± 2 
257 ± 2 
76.6 ± 0.6 
 
Nd 
312 
256 ± 2 
261 ± 6 
77.8 ± 1.8 
 
Sm 
315 
248 ± 2 
260 ± 5 
77.5 ± 1.5 
 
Eu 
320 
239 ± 2 
260 ± 2 
77.5 ± 0.6 
 
Gd 
322 
238 ± 2 
263 ± 3 
78.4 ± 0.9 
 
Tb 
328 
263 ± 2 
263 ± 1  
78.4 ± 0.3 
 
Dy 
332 
254 ± 2 
264 ± 1 
78.7 ± 0.3 
 
Ho 
332 
259 ± 2 
273 ± 2 
81.4 ± 0.6 
 
Er 
333 
265 ± 2 
277 ± 2 
82.6 ± 0.6 
 
Tm 
345 
284 ± 2 
278 ± 3 
82.9 ± 0.9 
 
Yb 
349 
286 ± 2 
285 ± 1 
85.0 ± 0.3 
 
Lu 
357 
290 ± 2 
301 ± 1 
89.7 ± 0.3 
 
aCalculated from ΔH and ΔG experiments where a K+ salt is used as background electrolyte.b 
Calculated from ΔH and ΔG experiments where NaClO4 is used as background electrolyte. c 
Calculated from ΔH experiments where NaNO3 is used as background electrolyte and ΔG 
experiments where NaClO4 is used as background electrolyte. 
 
 
 

 
65
Table 6. Calculated enthalpy of an ideal TALSPEAK extraction of europium. The calculated 
enthalpy for the entire process (net extraction enthalpy) is the sum of the enthalpies of all 
reactions known to be involved in the process (dissociation of EuDTPA2- complex, extraction of 
Eu3+ to the organic layer, and reprotonation of DTPA5-). All experimental values were 
determined at 2.0 M ionic strength and 25°C. A large discrepancy is noted between the calculated 
and experimental values. 
 
Stage 
Reaction 
ΔH / kJ/mol 
Breaking of EuDTPA2- 
complex 33 
EuDTPA2- ⇌ Eu3+ + DTPA5- 
42.6 ± 0.5 
Extraction to organic 
layer (Zalupski et al.29 
Eu3+ + 3(HA)2,org ⇌ Eu(AHA)3,org + 3H+ 
-13.1 ± 1.2 
Reprotonation of 
DTPA5- 33 
DTPA5- + H+ ⇌ HDTPA4- 
-30.3 ± 0.1 
HDTPA4- + H+ ⇌ H2DTPA3- 
-24.6 ± 0.1 
H2DTPA3- + H+ ⇌ H3DTPA2- 
-9.8 ± 0.1 
Calculated net 
extraction 
EuDTPA2- + 3(HA)2,org ⇌ Eu(AHA)3,org + H3DTPA2- 
-35.2 ± 1.3 
Experimental net 
extraction 18 
-7.5 
  
 
 
 

 
66
 
 
 
Table 7. Organic Phase Samples Prepared for SANS Analysis at T = 22(±1)°C in p-Xylene-d10. 
 
sample†  extractant  
Ln3+ 
[HA,HB]†,  
M 
[Ln3+]org,  
M 
[HLac]org, 
M 
[H2O]org, 
M‡ 
HA0.1 
HDEHP 
― 
0.1004 
─ 
─ 
─ 
HA0.2 
HDEHP 
― 
0.2002 
─ 
─ 
─ 
HL0.1 
HDEHP 
― 
0.2002 
─ 
0.0005 
0.043 
HL0.5 
HDEHP 
― 
0.2002 
─ 
0.0032 
0.043 
HL1.0 
HDEHP 
― 
0.2002 
─ 
0.0095 
0.06 
HL2.0 
HDEHP 
― 
0.2002 
─ 
0.0408 
0.124 
HL1.0 
HEH[EHP] ― 
0.1992 
─ 
0.006 
0.002 
La0.003 
HDEHP 
La3+ 
0.1004 
0.003 
0.0048 
― 
Yb0.005 
HDEHP 
Yb3+ 0.1004 
0.005 
0.0049 
― 
Gd0.013 
HDEHP 
Gd3+ 0.1004 
0.013 
0.0127 
― 
La0.023 
HDEHP 
La3+ 
0.1004 
0.023 
0.02 
― 
La0.031 
HDEHP 
La3+ 
0.1004 
0.031 
0.0265 
― 
       † HA = HDEHP, HB = HEH[EHP] 
      ‡[H2O]org for the Ln3+ metal systems was estimated to be 0.030 M for the scattering length 
density calculations. 
 
 

 
67
Table 8. Summary of Guinier Analysis, Radius of Gyration, Weight Average Aggregation 
Number of HDEHP Extractant Samples in p-Xylene-d10. 
sample† 
 
 
nw 
 
R(spherical), 
 Å§ 
Mw, 
 g/mol 
nw calc 
HA0.1 
6.7 ± 0.5 
620.4 
1.92 ± 0.23 
- 
HA0.2 
6.7 ± 0.4 
647.8 
2.01 ± 0.23 
- 
HL0.1 
6.8 ± 0.1 
647.1 
2.01 ± 0.23 
2.1 
HL0.5 
7.1 ± 0.1 
659.4 
2.06 ± 0.24 
2.05 
HL1.0 
6.9 ± 0.1 
668.6 
2.08 ± 0.24 
2.14 
HL2.0 
7.9 ± 0.2 
847.4 
2.65 ± 0.31 
2.62 
HL1.0,HB 6.2 ± 0.1 
576.7 
1.86 ± 0.22 
-  
La0.003 
8.0 ± 0.2 
857.7 
2.66 ± 0.32 
2.65# 
Yb0.005 
7.8 ± 0.3 
871 
2.70 ± 0.33 
2.71# 
Gd0.013 
8.3 ± 0.2 
1130 
3.50 ± 0.42 
3.49# 
La0.023 
16.6 ± 0.4 4075.3 12.64 ± 1.50 macro 
La0.031 
16.4 ± 0.5 5152.3 15.98 ± 1.52 macro 
         All uncertainties are reported at the 95% confidence level. 
           † HA = HDEHP, HB = HEH[EHP]   
           §Rspherical values calculated from Rg assuming spherical particles for HDEHP and         
 
HEH[EHP]aggregates. 
        # Calculated using equations 9-12, as explained in the text. 
 

 
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10. Complex formation (kf) and dissociation (kd) rate constants for lanthanide interactions 
with  EDTA and DTPA in 0.3 M Na/H Lactate solutions at pH 3.6, I = 0.3 M (NaClO4), [Ln-
AAIII] = 5.0 x 10-5 M, [EDTA], [DTPA] = 1.0–6.0 x 10-4 M and 25.0°C. Values in parentheses 
represent ±1σ uncertainty limit.57 
 
 
Ln3+ 
EDTA 
kf (M-1s-1) 
(x 10-3) 
EDTA 
kd (s-1) 
 
DTPA 
kf (M-1s-1) 
(x 10-3) 
DTPA 
kd (s-1) 
La3+ 
15.9(0.2) 
5.72(0.02) 
28.2(1.0) 
9.83(0.30) 
Ce3+ 
12.5(0.2) 
4.92(0.20) 
22.1(1.1) 
8.99(0.36) 
Pr3+ 
16.4(0.5) 
4.46(0.06) 
22.4(0.8) 
5.88(0.22) 
Nd3+ 
15.8(0.4) 
3.52(0.16) 
21.9(1.6) 
4.06(0.22) 
Sm3+ 
17.7(0.6) 
6.45(0.14) 
23.4(1.4) 
2.82(0.40) 
Eu3+ 
20.9(0.7) 
6.76(0.15) 
21.0(1.7) 
4.23(0.23) 
Gd3+ 
33.0(1.6) 
6.10(0.40) 
30.5(2.0) 
1.69(0.56) 
Tb3+ 
27.0(1.2) 
3.31(0.24) 
22.4(0.9) 
1.61(0.24) 
Dy3+ 
22.9(1.1) 
0.75(0.31) 
24.1(0.7) 
0.77(0.18) 
Ho3+ 
22.7(0.9) 
0.58(0.25) 
21.6(0.2) 
- 
Er3+ 
19.6(0.8) 
0.51(0.25) 
19.1(0.9) 
- 
Tm3+ 
12.0(0.7) 
1.07(0.10) 
17.1(0.7) 
- 
Yb3+ 
8.9 (0.8) 
0.99(0.23) 
14.2(0.9) 
- 
Lu3+ 
8.3 (0.7) 
0.78(0.20) 
8.9(0.1) 
0.44(0.02) 
 
 
Table 9. Iterative fit of speciation results derived from Guinier analysis data for samples La003, 
Yb005, Gd013 using mass balance relationships and expression defining the size of the average 
scattering particle considering Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 (Ln(DHD)3), Ln2(Lac)2(DEHP)4 (Ln2L2D4), 
HLac∙(HDEHP)3 (HL(HD)3), and (HDEHP)2 ((HD)2) as the scattering particles. 
sample 
nw 
(Guinier) 
nw (fit) 
[Ln(DHD)3] 
M 
[Ln2L2D4] 
M 
[HL(HD)3] 
M 
[(HD)2] 
M 
La003 
2.66 ± 0.32 
2.65 
0.0021 
0.00045 
0.0039 
0.0743 
Yb005 
2.70 ± 0.33 
2.71 
0.00225 
0.00138 
0.00215 
0.0750 
Gd013 
3.50 ± 0.42 
3.49 
0.00429 
0.00436 
0.00398 
0.0453 

 
69
FIGURES 
La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
 
DM
 
 pH2
 pH2.4
 pH2.8
 pH3.2
 pH3.6
 pH4
Am
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Calculated vs. observed partitioning in conventional TALSPEAK. Adapted from 
reference 17. (left), Calculated lanthanide and Am3+ partitioning on conventional TALSPEAK 
(T=25°C, I = 2.0 M, 1.0 M Lactate, 0.05 M DTPA, 0.2 M HDEHP).  

 
70
 
Figure 2. Conditional enthalpies (based on van’t Hoff analysis of Dm for extraction of 
lanthanides and Am3+).18 Aqueous medium 1 M lactic acid, 0.05 M DTPA, 1 mM total Ln + Y, 
(4th run) 1 M total nitrate, p[H] 3.7, (5th run) 1 M total sodium, p[H] 4.1.Organic medium: 1,4-
DIPB containing 0.5 M HDEHP (4th run) or 0.2 M HDEHP (5th run). Results from the literature 
on the extraction of lanthanides from mineral acid solutions are for HDEHP in n-heptane 27, 28, n-
dodecane 29 

 
71
0.840.860.880.900.920.940.960.981.001.02
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
 
log β1,2,3
1/r (CN=8)
 

 
72
Figure 3. Correlation of experimental data on lanthanide-lactate complexes from NIST 17 and 
estimates of missing/inconsistent data describing lanthanide lactate stability constants I = 2.0 M, 
T = 25.0°C  
 
  
 
 
         
 
 
Figure 4. Predicted stability field diagrams for selected lanthanide DTPA and lactate complexes 
under TALSPEAK –relevant conditions ([DTPA]t = 0.01 M, [Na/HLac] = 2.0 M, T = 25°C, I = 2.0 
M, [Ln3+] = 0.001 M) (Adapted from reference 31) 
L a  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to La
La LaLac
LaLac2
LaLac3
LaDTPA
LaDTPAH
C e  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Ce
CeLac
CeLac2
CeLac3
CeDTPA
CeDTPAH
P r T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Pr
Pr
PrLac
PrLac2
PrLac3
PrDTPA
PrDTPAH
N d  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Nd
Nd
NdLac
NdLac2
NdLac3
NdDTPA
NdDTPAH
S m  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Sm
Sm
SmLacSmLac2
SmLac3
SmDTPA
SmDTPAH
E u  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Eu
Eu
EuLac
EuLac2
EuLac3
EuDTPA
EuDTPAH
G d  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Gd
Gd
GdLac
GdLac2
GdLac3
GdDTPA
GdDTPAH
Y b  T A L S P E A K
1 .0
2 .0
3 .0
4 .0
p H
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
% formation relative to Yb
Yb
YbLac
YbLac2
YbLac3
YbDTPA
YbDTPAH

 
73
 
 
 
 
 
LaCePrNd
SmEuGdTbDyHoErTmYbLu Y
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
 
 
 
-DG101, (kJ/mol)
a
LaCePr NdPmSmEuGdTbDyHoErTmYbLu Y
 DH / kJ/mol
 
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
 
 
b
 
Figure 5 a. Available free energy data for the Ln·DTPA2- complex from the literature at 
different ionic strengths () 0.1 M 34, (Δ) 2.0 M 33 adjusted with NaClO4, b. Available 
enthalpy data for the Ln·DTPA2- complex from the literature at different ionic strengths 
() 0.1 M (K+ salt) 39, (Δ) 2.0 M (NaNO3, 33) . 
 

 
74
 
 
 
 
 
Y
La
Ce
Pr
Nd
Sm
Eu
Gd
Tb
Dy
Ho
Er
Tm
Yb
Lu
-120 -110 -100 -90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
 
 
DG, DH, -TDS (kJ/mol)
DH
-TDS
DG
 
Figure 6.  Free energy, enthalpy, and entropy describing the formation of lanthanide tris-lactate 
complexes at 25°C, I = 2.0 M.17  

 
75
 
 
 
 
 
La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
Y
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 
DH / kJ/mol
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 
 
 
Figure 7. Enthalpies of: the extraction of the lanthanides by HDEHP alone (Δ) 29; the ideal 
TALSPEAK system as modeled by sum of the individual enthalpies of the extraction reaction, 
the M-DTPA complexation reaction, and all relevant protonation steps (); and the entire 
TALSPEAK system, as experimentally determined () 18. All values are at I = 2.0 M and 
25°C. Lines are included to guide the eye, and do not denote any mathematical fit. 

 
76
 
 
0.01
0.1
1
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
 
 
[Ln3+]org or [Lactate]org, M
[Lactate]total,aq, M
 
Figure  8.  Concentration of the Ln3+ and lactate in the organic phase at equilibrium. The 
metals are represented by the following symbols Y3+, La3+, Nd3+, Eu3+, the 
lactate and the accompanying metal system are denoted with  lacY
3+,  lacLa
3+,  
lacNd
3+,  lacEu
3+. [HDEHP] = 0.2 M, I = 2.0 M (NaLac/NaNO3), pH 3.6  (Adapted 
from reference 41) 
 
0.01
0.1
1
0.002
0.01
0.05
 
 
DLactate
[Lactate]total
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
 DNa+ or DLac
 
[Lactate]total
 
Figure 9 a  The extraction of lactate as a function of increasing total lactate (HL) at different 
pHs ( pH 3.0,  pH 3.6,  pH 4.2). [HDEHP] = 0.2 M, I = 2.0 M 
(NaLac/NaClO4), pH 3.6, b.  Comparison of  the distribution ratios of Na+ () and 
lactate ().  [HDEHP] = 0.2 M, I = 2.0 M (NaLac/NaNO3), pH 3.6  (Adapted from 
reference 41) 

 
77
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.01
0.1
1
2x10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
3x10
-1
 
 
DHL
[HDEHP], M
 
Figure 10.  Comparison of the extraction behavior of HL at 1 M () and 2 M () lactate as a 
function of HDEHP concentration in 1,4-di-isopropylbenzene, pH = 3.6, I = 2.0 M 
(NaLac/NaNO3).  Adapted from reference 41 

 
78
 
 
 
 
 

 
79
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.01
0.1
0.5
1
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
 
 
[HL]org or [H2O] org, M
[Lactate]total,aq, M
 
Figure 11. Comparison of organic phase H2O concentration (open symbols) compared to 
HLac concentrations (closed symbols) at different HDEHP concentrations. (HLac, H2O) 
1.0 M HDEHP, (HLac, H2O) 0.5 M HDEHP, (HLac, H2O) 0.2 M HDEHP (0.2 M 
HDEHP data previously reported in ref. 11). Water content in the organic phase was 
determined by Karl Fischer titration. The trend lines in the graph are only to guide the eye. 
 

 
80
 
Figure 12. Partitioning of Na+
  into 0.5 M HDEHP/1,4-DIPB from 2.0 M NaNO3 and from 1.5 M 
NaNO3/ 1.0 M NaLac at pH 3.6.44    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
81
 
 
 
 
 
0.01
0.1
1
0.003
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.1
1
0.003
0.01
0.04
DHLac
[HDEHP] = 0.02 M
pH 3.6
µ = 2.0 M
LiNO3
NaNO3
 
 
DHLac
[[Lac]tot, M
(a)
(b)
NH4NO3
KNO3
 
 
 
[Lac]tot, M
 
Figure 13. a) Distribution of lactic acid into 0.2 M HDEHP in 1,4-diisopropylbenzene from 
() LiNO3 and  () NaNO3. b) Distribution of lactic acid from () KNO3 and () NH4NO3. 
Aqueous phases were 0-2 M lactic acid, constant 2 M ionic strength (adjusted with MNO3) 
and a fixed pH 3.6. Adapted from reference 41 
 

 
82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Emission spectra for the extracted Eu3+ complexes of 0.1 M HDEHP and varying 
aqueous phase lactate concentrations. (Adapted from Reference 49). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Lac-]tot,aq,  
M 
0.2 M  
HDEHP 
0.5 M  
HDEHP 
1.0 M  
HDEHP 
 
kobs  (s-1) kobs  (s-1) kobs  (s-1) 
0 
339 ± 10 364 ± 9 
382 ± 8 
0.05 
338 ± 9 
359 ± 10 376 ± 9 
0.1 
337 ± 7 
  -  
  - 
0.5 
347 ± 11 359 ± 9 
378 ± 9 
1.0 
345 ± 12 
- 
- 
1.5 
355 ± 10 
- 
- 
2.0 
367 ± 11 389 ± 10 402 ± 7 
500
550
600
650
700
750
0
1
2
3
4
5
Normalized Intensity / Counts
Wavelength / nm
 0 M Lactate
 0.05 M Lactate
 0.1 M Lactate
 0.5 M Lactate
 1.0 M Lactate
 1.5 M Lactate
 2.0 M Lactate
[Eu3+]aq = 0.001 M
[HDEHP] = 0.1 M
DIPB Organic Phase
pH 3.6
µ = 2.0 M
5D0
7F1
5D0 7F2

 
83
 
 
550
600
650
700
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Normalized Intensity / Counts
Wavelength / nm
680
685
690
695
700
705
710
0.0
0.3
0.5
Normalized Intensity / Counts
Wavelength / nm
580
585
590
595
600
605
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Normalized Intensity / Counts
Wavelength / nm
 
Figure 15. Emission spectra for extracted Eu3+ complexes under loading conditions. La3+ was 
used to load the organic phase with a 0.001 M Eu3+ spike to promote fluorescence. Aqueous 
lactate concentration was 1.0 M, pH 3.6, I = 2.0 M (NaNO3).The La3+ concentrations for metal 
loading were, 0.001 M, 0.003 M, 0.010 M, 0.017 M, 0.025 M, and 0.037 M. (adapted from 
reference 49) 

 
84
 
 
20
40
60
80
2500
2000
1500
1000
20
40
60
80
a
% Transmittance
1680
b
 Frequency, cm
-1
% Transmittance
 
Figure 16. IR spectra for evaporated residues of HDEHP organic phases loaded with [La3+] = 
0.0 M, 0.003 M, 0.010 M, 0.017 M, 0.025 M  La3+. Panel a shows the effect of metal loading 
(same as lactate systems) with no lactate present in the aqueous phase. Nitric acid was used to 
adjust the acidity to a pH of 3.0. I = 2.0 M for both extraction systems. Panel b shows the 
effect of metal loading with lactate buffer present in the aqueous phase at 1.0 M. The acidity 
of the aqueous phase was adjusted to a pH of 3.6. (adapted from reference 49) 

 
85
 
 
 
Figure 17. 31P NMR spectra of HDEHP solutions in 1,3-dipb at 22°C; 
(1) HDEHP 0.1 mol/L in 1,3-dipb; (2) HDEHP 0.1 mol/L after equilibration with 
La(NO3)3 86 mmol/L at pH=3; (3) HDEHP 0.1 mol/L after equilibration with 
La(NO3)3 55 mmol/L at pH=3.6, [lactate]tot. = 0.5 mol/L, [NO3
-] = 1.5 mol/L; (4) 
HDEHP 0.1 mol/L after equilibration with Sm(NO3)3 0.112 mol/L at pH=3; (5) 
HDEHP 0.1 mol/L after equilibration with Sm(NO3)3 54 mmol/L at pH=3.4, 
[lactate]tot. = 0.5 mol/L, [NO3
-] = 1.5 mol/L; H3PO4 in d-acetone used as chemical 
shift reference (δ = 0.00 ppm) for spectra (1), (2) and (3) and Ph3P=O in d-DMSO 
(δ = 23.23 ppm) for spectra (4) and (5); (AH)2 = dimeric HDEHP; AHA- = singly 
deprotonated HDEHP dimer (Adapted from reference 50) 
H3PO4 
-22
-18
-14
-10
-6
-2
0
2
4
Chemical shift (ppm)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(AH)2 
(AH)2 + La(AHA)3 
fast exchange 
ternary species 
La3+-HDEHP-Lac- 
(AH)2  
Sm(AHA)3 
ternary species 
Sm3+-HDEHP-Lac- 

 
86
 
 
 
Figure 18  left 31P NMR spectra (T = 22°C) of HDEHP 0.1 mol/L in 1,3-dipb after equilibrium 
with an aqueous phase containing La(NO3)3 25 mmol/L at 2 mol/L of ionic strength (adjusted 
with NaNO3) and an increasing concentration of lactate: (1) no lactate, (2) [Lactate]tot = 0.5 
mol/L, (3) [Lactate]tot = 1.0 mol/L, (4) [Lactate]tot = 1.5 mol/L, (5) [Lactate]tot = 2.0 mol/L; 
H3PO4 in d-acetone was used as chemical shift reference (δ = 0 ppm); (left) Concentration of 
La3+ extracted in the organic phase in each sample as a function of the total lactate 
concentration, right  31P NMR spectra (T = 22°C) of HDEHP 0.1 mol/L in 1,3-dipb after 
equilibrium with an aqueous phase at pH = 3.6 containing La(NO3)3 at various concentrations; 
[lactate]tot = [NaNO3] = 1 mol/L. On the left side of the figure are reported the concentrations of 
lanthanum in the organic phase after equilibrium. H3PO4 in d-acetone was used as chemical 
shift reference (δ = 0 ppm). (Adapted from information in reference 51) 
 
10
20
30
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
[Lactate]tot (mol/L)
[La
3+]org (mmol/L)
A 
B C 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
IB/IC = 1.1 
IB/IC = 0.9 
IB/IC = 0.8 
IB/IC = 0.7 
A 
B C 
(1) 
(2)  
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
  3.3 ± 0.5 
12.8 ± 0.4  
17.4 ± 0.1 
34.4 ± 0.1 
37.1 ± 0.1 
42.5 ± 0.1 
[La
3+]org 
(mmol/L) 

 
87
 
 
Figure 19. Concentrations of lactate and La3+ extracted by HDEHP at 0.1 mol/L in 1,3-
dipb as a function of the total concentration of lactic acid. Aqueous phases were at pH = 
3.6 with trace amounts of 14C lactic acid, lanthanum nitrate (23 and 55 mmol/L) and 
constant 2 mol/L ionic strength (adjusted with NaNO3). (Adapted from reference 51) 
(c) 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 

 
88
  
 
 
Figure 20. (a) Structure of La(AHA)3 binary complex, (b) and (c) possible structures of the 
ternary complexes (LaA2Lac)n with n = 1 and 2 
 
          
 
 
O
-
HO
O
La3+
O
P
O
O
-
O
O P
O
O
-
O
La3+
O
P
O
O
O
-
-
O
OH
O
O
P
O
-
O
O
O- 
H O 
O
La3 
+
O
P 
O 
O- 
O
O
P O
O
-O
O P 
O
O R 
O
R
O-
P
O
O 
R
O 
R
H 
La3+
O
P 
O
O
R 
O
R 
-O P 
O
O
R
O 
R
H
O
P 
O
O
R 
O 
R
O-
P 
O
O
R
O
R 
H 

 
89
Figure 21. Experimental conditions, rates and activation parameters for the HDEHP exchange 
reaction in Ln(DEHP∙HDEHP)3 complexes (Ln = La and Sm) at 25°C in 1,3-DIPB. Quoted 
errors correspond to standard deviations obtained from the linear regression fit of experimental 
data to the Arrhenius equation. 
 
 
 
 
 
-20°C
-30°C
-40°C
-50°C
-60°C
(AH)2
La(AHA)3
H3PO4
90°C
70°C
50°C
30°C
22°C
0°C
(AH)2
Sm(AHA)3
Organic phase:  
 
0.1 M HDEHP in 1,3 DIPB 
Aqueous phase:  
 
0.1 M La(NO3)3, pH = 3 
[La3+] = 0.0089 M 
%HDEHP Complexed  = 53.5 (±1.1) 
HDEHP/La3+ in complex = 5.8 (±0.1) 
 
 
k1 = 1.3x105 s-1 (25.0°C) 
 
DH‡ = 48.3 ± 1.6 kJ/mol 
 
DS‡  = 15 ± 6 J/mol-K 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic phase:  
 
0.1 M HDEHP in 1,3 DIPB 
Aqueous phase:  
 
0.1 M Sm(NO3)3, pH = 3 
[Sm3+] = 0.0102 M 
%HDEHP Complexed  = 61.0 (±0.5)% 
HDEHP/Sm3+ in complex = 5.7 (±0.2) 
 
 
k1 = 1.8x103 s-1 (25.0°C) 
 
DH‡ = 17.0 ± 0.9 kJ/mol 
 
DS‡ = -126 ± 3 J/mol-K 
 
 

 
90
Figure 22. Results of extraction of Ln and Am under TALSPEAK conditions: 0.3 M HDEHP in 
n-dodecane, 0.05 M DTPA, 1 mM Ln3+, 241Am, 1.0 M Na+, pH 3.5, Contact time (vortex mixing) 
30 min. (Adapted from Reference 54). 
 
 
 
 

 
91
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
 
 
kf (M-1s-1)
1/r(Ln, CN8) (A
-1)
 kf EDTA
 kf DTPA
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
 
 
kf (M
-1s
-1)
Lactate:Ln ratio
 kfDTPA
 kfEDTA
 
Figure 23 top: Correlation of complex formation rate constants across the Ln series with 
inverse cation radius at pH 3.6, 25 °C, and [Lactot] = 0.3 M (EDTA (□), DTPA, bottom: Rate 
constant for formation of lanthanide EDTA and DTPA complexes in 0.3 M sodium lactate buffer, 
pH = 3.6, T = 25.0°C, I = 0.3 M as a function of the average equilibrium Lactate:Ln complex 
stoichiometry ( n LacLn). 
 

 
92
 
 
 
FIGURE 24. Optimized Am(III), Eu(III) elution curve separation LN2 S-grade (50-100 µm) 
Amberchrom GC71 resin. Flow rate: 1 mL / min.  Temperature: 50° C. Load: 5 mM TTHA, 
1 M NO3¯, pH 3.6, 1 mM Eu, Trace Am TALSPEAK Rinse: 5 mM TTHA, 1 M NO3¯, pH 
3.6 Wash: 0.001 M HNO3 Strip: 1 M HNO3. (Adapted from reference 64) 
 

 
93
 
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
HLac
H2O
 
 
[HLac]org or [H2O]org, (M)
[Lactate]total, (M)
H2O
HLac
HEH[EHP]
HDEHP
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
 
 
log D
pH, final
Eu-HDEHP
Am-HDEHP
Eu-HEH[EHP]
Am-HEH[EHP]
 
FIGURE 25 Left. Comparison of water and lactate partitioning into HDEHP or HEH[EHP]/n-
dodecane, Right. Comparisom of Am3+ and Eu3+ partitioning in Conventional TALSPEAK 
(HDEHP) and Advanced TALSPEAK (HEH[EHP] solvents  
Organic: 0.1 M HDEHP or HEH[EHP] 
Aqueous: 20 mM DTPA, 1.0 M nitrate, 1.0 M total lactic acid 
*1σ error indicated 
Adapted from reference 67. 

 
94
 
 
 
LaCePrNdAmSmEuGdTbDyHoErTmYbLu Y
-1
0
1
2
3
 
 1 M Lac
 0.1 M Lac
log D
 
 
 
FIGURE 26 Trans-lanthanide extraction pattern in Advanced TALSPEAK, 0.1 M 
HEH[EHP]/n-dodecane, 0.1 or 1.0 M Lactate, HEDTA. (Adapted from reference 67)