Structure based aggregation studies
reveal the presence of helix-rich
intermediate during a-Synuclein
aggregation
Dhiman Ghosh1, Pradeep K. Singh1, Shruti Sahay1, Narendra Nath Jha1, Reeba S. Jacob1, Shamik Sen1,
Ashutosh Kumar1, Roland Riek2 & Samir K. Maji1
1Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India 400076, 2Laboratory for Physical Chemistry,
Wolfgang-Pauli-Str. 10, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
Mechanistic understanding of nucleation dependent polymerization by a-synuclein (a-Syn) into toxic
oligomers and amyloids is important for the drug development against Parkinson’s disease. However the
structural and morphological characterization during nucleation and subsequent fibrillation process of
a-Syn is not clearly understood. Using a variety of complementary biophysical techniques monitoring entire
pathway of nine different synucleins, we found that transition of unstructured conformation into b-sheet
rich fibril formation involves helix-rich intermediates. These intermediates are common for all aggregating
synucleins, contain high solvent-exposed hydrophobic surfaces, are cytotoxic to SHSY-5Y cells and
accelerate a-Syn aggregation efficiently. A multidimensional NMR study characterizing the intermediate
accompanied with site-specific fluorescence study suggests that the N-terminal and central portions mainly
participate in the helix-rich intermediate formation while the C-terminus remained in an extended
conformation. However, significant conformational transitions occur at the middle and at the C-terminus
during helix to b-sheet transition as evident from Trp fluorescence study. Since partial helix-rich
intermediates were also observed for other amyloidogenic proteins such as Ab and IAPP, we hypothesize
that this class of intermediates may be one of the important intermediates for amyloid formation pathway by
many natively unstructured protein/peptides and represent a potential target for drug development against
amyloid diseases.
a-S
ynuclein (a-Syn) is a 140 amino acid soluble protein, which is abundantly expressed in brain1.
Although a-Syn is present in almost all the sub cellular pools of neurons, it is mostly localized in the
presynaptic terminals and nucleus2,3. The exact physiological function of a-Syn is not clearly
understood, however, several studies have shown the involvement of a-Syn in regulation of presynaptic vesicle
pool, neurotransmitter release, synaptic function as well as neuronal plasticity4,5. In contrast, a-Syn has been
shown to play a central role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD), a very common neurodegenerative
disorder in aged humans6. Aggregated a-Syn is the major component of the Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites
(LNs) in the brain of patients – the major pathological hallmarks of PD7. The discovery of several autosomal
dominant missense mutations as well as duplication and triplication of gene encoding a-Syn are associated with
rare familial forms of PD, further supporting that a-Syn aggregation is linked to PD pathogenesis8–16. Further,
overexpression of human a-Syn and its familial PD associated mutants in neuronal cells as well as in various
animal models results in toxicity and recapitulation of many symptoms of PD17,18.
Several in vitro studies have revealed that a-Syn is natively unfolded protein under physiological conditions
and can self-assemble into highly ordered amyloid fibrils upon incubation for a longer time19. The primary
sequence of a-Syn helps it to adopt many distinct local or global conformations. The N-terminus (1–60 residues)
of a-Syn has seven imperfect repeats (with conserved KTKEGV motif) characteristic of an amphipathic helix of
apolipoproteins1,20. The middle hydrophobic region of a-Syn (61–95 residues) has a high propensity for b-sheet
rich secondary structure and known to drive the amyloid formation by the protein20,21. The negatively charged C-
terminus (96–140 residues) has no secondary structure preference and is highly disordered and shown to regulate
the oligomerization and aggregation of a-Syn22.
OPEN
SUBJECT AREAS:
BIOPHYSICS
BIOPHYSICAL CHEMISTRY
Received
24 November 2014
Accepted
13 February 2015
Published
18 March 2015
Correspondence and
requests for materials
should be addressed to
S.K.M. (samirmaji@
iitb.ac.in)
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
1

a-Syn at the presynaptic terminals has shown to be associated with
the synaptic vesicles and this vesicle association is important for its
vesicular transport from cell body to synaptic terminals23. It was
suggested that alteration in the vesicle/membrane binding ability
of a-Syn might result in pathogenesis. However, there are reports,
which also suggest that aggregation ability of a-Syn in the vicinity of
membranes is a major contributing factor for compromised mem-
brane integrity associated with a-Syn pathogenesis. For example, it
has been recently shown that despite retaining the membrane bind-
ing affinity, an aggregation-defective a-Syn mutant was unable to
initiate damage in supported lipid bilayers24. However, amyloid-
mediated membrane disruption is a complex phenomenon and this
multistep cascade can be modulated by several factors, including
peptide topology in the membrane, presence of cationic switches
and degree of curvatures in membrane25–28. In vitro studies also
suggest that a-Syn binds strongly to negatively charged membrane
vesicles mostly through N-terminal ,1–100 residues and adopt a-
helical structure22. It has been also found that N-terminus is not only
important for monomer-membrane interaction, however, also cru-
cial for oligomer-membrane interactions29. Aggregation studies of a-
Syn in presence of membranes/lipids have suggested that moderate
membrane binding of a-Syn facilitates its aggregation. Along with
this observation, the partial helix promotion by 2, 2, 2-trifluoroetha-
nol (moderate concentration (v/v)) and sodium dodecyl sulphate
(SDS) also accelerates the amyloid formation of a-Syn30,31. The mem-
brane-mimicking detergent micelles has been used to characterize
the three-dimensional NMR structure of a stable helical intermediate
of IAPP, involved in type II diabetes32. Moreover, using SDS as a
model solvent it also has been demonstrated that a-Syn folding
involves multistates and in this lipid mimetic environment (SDS) it
adopts a partially folded thermodynamic intermediate with helix-
rich conformation33. However, amyloid aggregation process in solu-
tion and on membrane is quite different and might involve different
partially folded intermediates34,35. Therefore, elucidating the three -
dimensional structures of these oligomeric species and their mem-
brane/ligand interaction could be helpful for potential therapeutics
against neurodegenerative disorders36–39.
Previously it was shown that one of the intermediates a-Syn
aggregation possesses a-helical conformation40 raising the possibility
that a-Syn aggregation may involve helix-rich intermediate. The
helical intermediates also shown to appear during the aggregation
of the Ab protein41 associated with Alzheimer’s disease and IAPP
aggregation in type II diabetes (both in presence and absence of
glycosaminoglycan)42–45. Recently, it is reported that (IAPP) forms
soluble helix-rich oligomers that induce apoptosis in cultured pan-
creatic cells44. Based on these findings, it was suggested that natively
unstructured protein/peptides might form toxic helical intermediate
during their amyloid fibril assembly41,42,46–50, which could be targeted
for the drug development against these amyloid diseases51.
To study the structural and morphological transformation by a-
Syn during entire pathway of its aggregation, we monitored in vitro
a-Syn aggregation by time-dependent CD spectroscopy (for struc-
tural transition) along with ThT fluorescence (monitoring amyloid
kinetics) and morphological transformation by AFM. We also
included familial PD associated mutants of a-Syn (A30P, E46K
and A53T), a designed mutant E57K as well as other members of
synuclein family (b- and c-synuclein) in our aggregation studies. We
showed that all aggregating synuclein formed oligomeric helix-rich
state at the beginning of elongation phase before converting to the b-
sheet rich matured fibrils. This helix-rich state is the heterogeneous
mixture of various a-Syn species including helical oligomers, b-sheet
rich fibrils and soluble unstructured a-Syn. The helix-rich states are
more cytotoxic compared to higher order mature fibrils and alone
can convert to b-sheet rich fibrils. The multidimensional NMR study
using helix-rich intermediate revealed the involvement of N-ter-
minal and central hydrophobic segment for helical intermediate
formation. The helix-rich oligomeric state also catalyzes the aggrega-
tion and amyloid formation of soluble a-Syn, suggesting seeding
capacity of this intermediate similar to amyloid fibrils. Our data
therefore showed the complex aggregation mechanism with exist-
ence of novel intermediate in the aggregation pathway of a-Syn,
which might have significant value for drug design against PD.
Results
Observation of a-helix-rich intermediates during synuclein
aggregation. a-Syn aggregation is observed to follow classical
nucleation-dependent polymerization52 when its aggregation kine-
tics is measured by ThT (thioflavin-T) binding assay. ThT is a widely
used fluorescent dye that produces strong fluorescence at 480 nm
upon binding to amyloid fibrils when excited at 450 nm53, but does
not bind to monomeric protein. a-Syn aggregation process exhibits
three distinct phases with a lag phase, a subsequent rapid growth
phase (elongation phase), followed by a stationary phase. In order to
structurally characterize the pathway of a-Syn aggregation, CD (cir-
cular dichroism) and ThT binding was performed simultaneously
during aggregation for nine different synucleins including WT (wild-
type) and three familial disease-associated mutants (A30P, A53T and
E46K) as listed in Supplementary Figure 1. For this study, 300 mM
low molecular weight (LMW)54 form of all proteins were incubated at
37uC for monitoring the aggregation kinetics. Previous studies have
shown that this LMW preparation mostly contains monomers along
with some amount of low-order multimers of a-Syn54,55. The buffer
conditions were 20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide.
Following Figure 1A, the ThT binding data show insignificant ThT
fluorescence immediately after preparation, and during the initial
period of incubation, suggesting the lack of b-sheet rich structures
during the lag phase. After the lag phase, time-dependent increase in
the ThT fluorescence intensity (elongation or growth phase) was
observed for all synucleins (except for b-Syn) till they reach the
saturation level, i.e. the stationary phase. From these sigmoidal
curves, the lag times were calculated (Figure 1B) using a previously
published method56. This analysis showed that the lag time of [30–
110]a-Syn and mouse-synuclein was significantly shorter (10–12 hr)
than WT (,55 hr). Compared to WT, the two disease variants A53T
(lag time ,40 hr) and E46K (lag time ,30 hr) also aggregated faster.
We also included the cytotoxic oligomer-prone E57K variant54,
which also showed shorter lag time (,35 hr) compared to WT a-
Syn under the conditions studied. In contrast, the A30P mutant
showed slower aggregation kinetics (lag time ,210 hr) compared
to WT (Figure 1A–1B). The kinetics of aggregation by c-Syn was
significantly slower (lag time ,270 hr, Figure 1B) than the other
synuclein variants under study and b-Syn showed lack of
fibrillation as evident from ThT binding studies (Fig. 1A)19. The
accompanied CD data (Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure 2)
suggest that at the beginning of the aggregation kinetics all
synuclein variants were mostly in random coil (RC) conformation.
Continuous monitoring of the CD spectra revealed that major
conformational changes occurred for all these proteins (except b-
Syn). b-Syn remained in mostly random coil conformation even after
500 hr of incubation with a minor conformational change. All these
proteins showed aggregation process via a-helix-rich conformation
(exemplified with two distinct minima: one at ,205–208 nm and the
other at ,222 nm) before converting into a b-sheet-rich structure
with single minima at ,218–220 nm. A53T and E46K, which are
faster aggregating variants (Figure 1A), showed the appearance of a
helix-rich intermediate at 35 hr and 30 hr, respectively, while for
WT it was ,45 hr (Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure 2). The
slow aggregation variant A30P showed a delayed appearance of the
helical intermediate (,210 hr) (Figure 1C). The appearance of
helical intermediate for mouse synuclein was very fast (,15 hr)
compared to WT; whereas for c-Syn it was very slow (,270 hr).
The CD study of the a-Syn fibril core ([30–110]a-Syn) showed
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
2

appearance of this intermediate at 12 hr (Figure 1C and Supplementary
Figure 2). Interestingly, the simultaneous measurement of CD and ThT
data showed that the helix-rich intermediate appeared during the fibrils
growth
for
all
the
synucleins
aggregation
(except
b-Syn)
(Supplementary Figure 3). Further the conformational transition from
RC to b-sheet structure of fibril does not possess a single dichroic point
suggesting that the conformation transition for b-sheet rich fibril
formation by a-Syn is not a simple two state process.
It is worth mentioning here that the helix-rich state also appeared
when the aggregation kinetics of a-Syn was performed in PBS, pH
7.4. However, in PBS, set-to-set variation for the appearance of helix-
rich intermediate was observed (Supplementary Figure 4). Moreover,
the duration of helix-rich intermediate was also not consistent across
the different sets. Further, the duration of helical intermediate in
Gly-NaOH buffer was longer compared to PBS, which allowed us
to capture and characterize the helical intermediate in more details.
The deconvolution of the CD spectra of all synuclein variants using
CDPro software57,58 was consistent with the qualitative visual obser-
vation of helical intermediates in synuclein aggregation. The deconvo-
lution of the CD spectra of initial LMW synuclein showed mostly a RC
structure (.70%) with insignificant amounts of other secondary struc-
tures (Table 1 of the Supplementary Information, Supplementary Figure
5) for all the variants under study. In contrast, the deconvolution of
spectra possessing the highest helix-rich conformation showed ,38% of
helix, ,25% RC and ,15–20% b-sheet for most of the proteins
(Supplementary Figure 5). Only [30–110]a-Syn showed a smaller con-
tent of helix (,21%) in the helix-rich intermediate state. After conver-
sion to b-sheet, the deconvolution of the CD spectra showed ,5%
helical content, ,39% b-sheet, and 30% RC content for most of the
proteins with a high b-sheet content as expected (Supplementary Figure
5). Further the deconvolution of CD spectra during different time points
of aggregation suggests a gradual increase in a-helix content, which
reaches maxima consistent with the visual observation. After this point,
a-helix content decrease drastically due to the formation of b-sheet rich
fibrils (Supplementary Figure 6).
To study the morphology of the aggregates at the end of the
assembly reaction, electron microscopy was performed (Figure 2).
All synucleins formed amyloid-like fibrils that typically displayed a
helical ultra-structure and varying degrees of lateral association
except b-Syn. b-Syn formed small, low order globular oligomers.
Close inspection of the fibrils suggested that fibrils were largely
composed of multiple individual filaments (diameter ,3–4 nm),
resulting in overall diameters ranging from 15 to 25 nm.
Collectively, the ThT fluorescence and CD data measured during
the entire period of synuclein aggregation suggest that in the lag
phase, all the synucleins displayed mostly a random coil-like struc-
ture, that the helix-rich conformations appeared at the onset of fibril
growth and persisted till the mid-elongation phases of the aggrega-
tion kinetics followed by a b-sheet conformation at the end (Figure 1
and Supplementary Figure 2–3).
In this context, it is important to mention that helix initiation in
conformational transition during a-Syn aggregation is defined based
on the first observation of two minima in CD spectra; one at ,205–
208 nm and another at ,222 nm. Duration of helix is defined by the
time between the helix initiation and final helix observed (before the
first b-sheet appearance with CD spectra of single minima at ,218–
220 nm). However, the onset of helix conformation and duration of
helix is solely determined by visual inspection and are qualitative.
Since we performed CD spectroscopy at regular time intervals (not in
a continuous manner) the actual time for these conformational tran-
sitions might vary from the visual observation.
Duration of helix-rich intermediates is dependent on the aggrega-
tion propensity of a-Syn. The correlation plot (Figure 3A) of lag
time (extracted from ThT binding data) versus duration of helical
intermediates (observed by CD) of the various synucleins suggest
Figure 1 | Synucleins fibrillation through helix-rich intermediate. (A) Aggregation of synucleins was monitored by ThT fluorescence. All synucleins
(LMW) were incubated at 37uC with slight agitation at a concentration of 300 mM in 20 mM Gly-NaOH buffer, 0.01% sodium azide, pH 7.4. ThT
fluorescence was performed at regular intervals. ThT fluorescence intensities at 480 nm were ploted against incubation time for each protein. (B) Bar
diagram representation of lag time for the synucleins aggregation kinetics monitored by ThT fluorescence. (C) CD spectroscopy reveals synucleins were
initially random coil and converted to b-sheet conformation via a-helix-rich intermediate. The different colored numbers indicate the incubation times
(hrs). Selected CD spectra were shown.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
3

that synucleins with shorter lag time showed a shorter duration of
helical intermediates compared to synucleins with a longer lag time.
Supplementary Figure 7A and 7B also showed the linear correlation
between lag time and appearance of helix/saturation time of the
individual mutants. To rule out the possibility that the duration of
helical intermediates is not specific to individual synuclein variants,
but rather depend on the relative tendency of aggregation, the aggre-
gation of WT a-Syn was studied with two other different concen-
trations (600 mM and 1 mM) in 20 mM Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4,
0.01% sodium azide. The aggregation kinetics was studied simul-
taneously by ThT binding (Fig. 3B) and CD (Supplementary
Figure 8) spectroscopy. The lag time for 1 mM, 600 mM and
300 mM of a-Syn were of ,8 hr, ,21 hr and ,55 hr, respectively
(Figure 3B–3C). Moreover, for all these cases, the helical interme-
diates appeared at the beginning of the elongation phase (Figure 3B).
The correlation plot of the lag time versus duration of helix appea-
rance (Figure 3C) also suggest that under slow aggregation condi-
tions (i.e. 300 mM concentration), a-Syn shows the longest period of
helical intermediate, which shortens upon increase in protein con-
centration. The data indicates that under faster aggregating condi-
tions, both RC R helix and helix R b-sheet transitions are faster
resulting in a short duration of helical intermediate appearance.
Helix-rich intermediate of a-Syn identified by FTIR. To further
confirm that the aggregation of a-Syn involves a helix-rich
intermediate formation, WT a-Syn aggregation was monitored by
FTIR and CD spectroscopy. The LMW a-Syn at a concentration of
300 mM was incubated at 37uC with slight agitation (,50 r.p.m).
Simultaneously, FTIR and CD spectroscopy was performed at
regular intervals. The FTIR spectra in the range of 1600 cm21 to
1700 cm21 (amide-I band) were analyzed to determine the protein
secondary structure59. After immediate dissolution and preparation
(time point 0), FTIR spectra of soluble a-Syn showed a major
absorbance peak at 1649 cm21, indicating the presence of mostly
random coil-like structure. The deconvolution of FTIR spectra at
this point showed ,87% of random coil structure, consistent with
CD spectra (88% random coil by CD deconvolution using CDPro
software57 (Figure 4). With the progression of time when the
incubated solution showed helical conformation in CD, FTIR
spectra were measured. At 60 h, the intensity of the absorbance
peak at 1649 cm21 decreased and showed several other FTIR
absorption peaks with a major absorption peak appeared at
1656 cm21 indicating the formation of a helix-rich intermediate.
This absorption peak at 1656 cm21 was most prominent at 70 h.
The deconvolution of FTIR spectra at 60 h and 70 h showed
,28% and 50% helicity, respectively. The deconvolution of CD
spectra by CDpro57 showed 18% and 32% helix at 60 h and 70 h,
respectively. On further incubation, another major peak appeared at
1630 cm21 (as shown for 80 h) and intensity of the peak at 1656 and
1630 cm21 became almost equal suggesting a significant population
of both helix-rich intermediate and b-sheet-rich structure in the
mixture (,39% helix and ,34% b-sheet content). The decon-
volution of corresponding CD spectra at 80 h also revealed almost
equal amount of helix (,28.6%) and b-sheet (,25.3%) content. The
subsequent incubation at time point 95 h, for which the CD spectra
of the solution predominately showed b-sheet secondary structure
(Fig 4)), the FTIR study of the solution showed major absorption
peaks at 1635 cm21 corresponding to b-sheet-rich amyloid fibrils
(,62% b-sheet content). Therefore, the FTIR data confirmed the
Figure 2 | Electron microscope images of WT a-Syn and its variants. EM
images of WT a-Syn, its disease associated mutants (A30P, E46K and
A53T), E57K, Core, Mouse-Syn and c-Syn showed amyloid like fibrils
morphology at the end of assembly reaction. However b-Syn did not show
any fibrils morphology. It formed small globular oligomers. Scale bar
represents 500 nm.
Figure 3 | Duration of helix-rich intermediates is dependent on the
aggregation propensity of a-Syn. (A) Duration of helix and lag time for
different synucleins follows a linear correlation. (B) Concentration
dependent aggregation kinetics of WT a-Syn measured by ThT binding
assay. (C) Corelation plot for the lag time and duration of helix for WT a-
Syn at different concentration (1 mM, 600 mM and 300 mM). Duration of
helical intermediate is lowest for 1 mM and longest for 300 mM
concentration of a-Syn.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
4

findings of the CD data thereby strengthening the notion that a helix-
rich intermediate is formed during a-Syn fibrillation.
Temporal change in secondary structure and morphology during
a-Syn aggregation. To study and correlate the temporal changes in
secondary structure with morphology during a-Syn aggregation,
AFM and CD were performed simultaneously at regular intervals
during WT a-Syn aggregation in 20 mM Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4,
0.01% sodium azide at 37 uC. In line with other experiments
discussed, immediately after preparation, WT a-Syn was unstruc-
tured based on CD analysis, and the AFM showed mostly low order
oligomers/amorphous structure at 0 hr (Figure 5). With the progres-
sion of the assembly, WT a-Syn showed gradual transformation into
more ordered structure as h222 became more negative during aggre-
gation. Similarly, AFM showed a gradual increase in oligomers size
during incubation. At 48 hr, WT a-Syn transformed into a par-
tial helix-rich structure with two distinct minima at ,205
and ,222 nm, respectively, with small and twisted protofibrils
observed in AFM. The continuous CD studies further revealed a
gradual increase in the helical content in the CD spectra of a-Syn.
At the time of maximal population of the helix-rich intermediate (at
75–85 hr), a-Syn exhibited a heterogeneous mixture of oligomers,
protofibrils and short filaments in the AFM measurements
(Figure 5). The average heights of oligomers were of 5–8 nm. At
the end of the assembly reaction, a-Syn converted to mature and
thick b-sheet-rich amyloid fibrils (15–30 nm in height) as expected
(Figure 5).
Sequence segments of a-Syn critical for the formation of helical
intermediates. To understand the involvement of the N-terminal, C-
terminal and the NAC regions in the helical intermediate formation
and subsequent b-sheet formation, three Trp substituted WT a-Syn
(V3W, V71W and A140W) were studied. Similar to WT a-Syn, the Trp
substituted proteins also showed RC R helix R b-sheet structural
transition and formed amyloid fibrils (Supplementary Figure 9A–B).
We determined the microenvironment and solvent exposure of Trp
by
measuring
lmax
shifting
and
acrylamide
quenching
of
fluorescence, respectively at different stages of aggregation for
these Trp substituted WT a-Syn. Simultaneous measurement of
CD and Trp fluorescence showed the gradual blue shifting of lmax
of Trp fluorescence during the helical intermediate formation in all
the proteins (Figure 6A–B). From the data it is clear that although a
noticeable blue shift of lmax occurred during the helix R b-sheet
transition for V71W and A140W, lmax remained almost constant
during helix to b-sheet transition for V3W (Figure 6A–B). The
blue shifting of lmax for V71W was 3 nm, whereas for A140W was
2 nm on the helix to b-sheet transition. When lmax was determined
by a second order polynomial curve fitting rather than direct
inspection, we also find a similar trend for the blue shift of lmax
(Supplementary Figure 10). However, the absolute value for the
blue shift of lmax was slightly differed from visual observation. The
blue shift of lmax for V71W was of 2.6 nm (obtained from curve
fitting) instead of 3 nm (obtained from visual inspection) during
helix R b-sheet transition; whereas for A140W, the curve fitting
resulted 2.1 nm blue shift, which is almost identical (2 nm) with
visual observation. The data thus suggests changes in the
microenvironment of all the three Trp positions during random
coil to helix transition; whereas upon helix to b-sheet transition,
changes in the microenvironment occur only for V71W and A140W.
The microenvironment of V3W remained essentially unchanged
upon helix to b-sheet transition.
To study the Trp solvent exposure, acrylamide-quenching studies
were performed (Figure 6C). The quenching data showed that the
helical and b-sheet-rich species were more solvent protected com-
pared to their corresponding monomeric state of a-Syn. The data
were fitted with the modified Stern-Volmer equation60 and the Stern-
Volmer quenching constant (Ksv) was determined (Figure 6D). The
data for V3W indicate that the burial of the N-terminus occurred
during conversion from random coil (Ksv 7.4 M21) to a-helix (Ksv
3.8 M21), which does not further change during conversion to the b-
sheet (Ksv 3.7 M21), consistent with the lmax shift data. However, the
V71W and A140W showed a significant lowering of the Stern-Volmer
quenching constant both from random coil to helix and subsequently
to the b-sheet state (Figure 6D). The data further suggests that in the
helical intermediate, A140W is more solvent exposed (Ksv 7.8 M21)
compared to V71W (Ksv 4.5 M21) and V3W (Ksv 3.8 M21). Further,
on the conversion from the helix to b-sheet-rich structure, Ksv for
V71W becomes almost half. While for A140W, the Ksv changes from
Figure 4 | Secondary structural changes monitored by FTIR spectroscopy. Curve fitted FTIR spectra in the region corresponding to amide-I band
showing the different secondary structural content of a-Syn species at different stages of aggregation (Upper panel). FTIR spectral data suggest
predominate random coil structure at the beginning that eventually converted to b-sheet rich structure via a-helical intermediate during a-Syn
aggregation. Corresponding CD spectra of the identical samples were shown in lower panel.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
5

7.8 M21 at helix-rich state to 5.4 M21 at b-sheet state. The data
therefore indicates that gradual burial of central, N- and C-terminal
regions accompanied the random coil to helix conversion, whereas
significant conformational transition occurred during the helix to b-
sheet conversion in the central region and C-terminal segments of a-
Syn, respectively.
Segments responsible for helix formation determined by NMR. To
further confirm the formation of helical intermediates during
synuclein fibrillation and in order to further corroborate the
segment responsible for helix formation, 2D heteronuclear single
quantum coherence (HSQC) NMR spectroscopy was performed.
15N-labeled a-Syn was prepared as described in method section
and used for acquiring NMR spectra at 15uC. Figure 7A (Left
panel) shows well resolved [15N, 1H]-HSQC spectra of LMW a-Syn
with very sharp peaks and small chemical shift dispersion along the
proton dimension, indicating an intrinsically disordered protein
species as expected61. Next, the LMW 15N-labelled a-Syn sample
was incubated at 37uC for fibrillation in parallel to CD studies.
When helical intermediates were detected in the CD study
(,65 h), samples were taken for the NMR measurements. In this
state, numbers of visually observed peaks were found to be less
compared to LMW a-Syn (Figure 7A, right panel). We also
noticed that these peaks that appeared in the helix-rich states were
almost overlapping with the NMR peaks of LMW state.
We used 3D TOCSY-HSQC together with assignment transfer to
assign the NMR spectra of helix-rich state. It was found that the
sharp peaks in the helix-rich state were mostly originated from the
C-terminal amino acid residues (amino acid 100–140). These results
indicated the involvement of the N-terminus and hydrophobic cent-
ral region in helix formation, whereas, C-terminus remained flexible.
Importantly to mention, presence of structured N-terminus in a-Syn
oligomers has been also reported in many studies62. Further, our
NOESY-HSQC experiment showed few HN-HN connections origin-
ating from the low-intensity peaks (Figure 7B), substantiating the
possibility of helical conformation adopted by the N-terminus and/
or the central region of a-Syn. We further calculated the Ha second-
ary chemical shifts obtained from the helix-rich samples and com-
pared with the LMW Ha secondary chemical shifts. In the helix-rich
state, the C-terminal residues populate their w and y in the broad b-
region while the N-terminus residues adopt w and y corresponding
to helical conformation (Figure 7C). Although our current NMR
spectroscopic data is limited to the qualitative information about
the helix-rich state, the details structural characterization of this
intermediate may require further study with stabilized intermediate
and use of solid-state NMR spectroscopy.
Isolation and characterization of the helical intermediate. The
question arises whether the helical intermediate that appeared on
the onset of rapid growth phase is the mixture of different a-Syn
species (different aggregates with different secondary structure) or a
single structural/oligomeric entity. The latter scenario was hypothe-
sized for the helix-rich intermediate in IAPP fibrillation46,63.
However, our AFM study showed that different aggregates species
are present in the helix-rich state along with a few matured fibrils. If
the intermediate is a mixture of different a-Syn species, then it might
be possible to isolate it from the other a-Syn species. Following this
hypothesis, 300 mM WT a-Syn was incubated for aggregation at 37
uC. When the helical intermediate appeared as probed by CD
spectroscopy (Figure 8B), the solution was centrifuged (Figure 8A)
at 14000 g for 15 minutes at 4uC in order to remove the supernatant
from the fibrillar aggregates (in the pellet (P)). The resuspended
pellet fraction in solution showed predominately a b-sheet
conformation in the CD spectrum as expected (Figure 8C), while
the soluble supernatant (S) fraction showed a helix-typical CD
spectrum (Figure 8D). When the supernatant fraction was further
allowed to pass through a 100 kDa MWCO cut off filter, the retentate
(R) fractions showed a prominent helix-typical CD spectrum,
whereas the filtrate/flow through (F) showed a random coil-like
spectrum (Figure 8E–8F). The present data therefore suggest that
the helical intermediate appearing during synucleins aggregation is
a distinct oligomeric entity with a molecular weight more than
100 kDa. The concentration measurement of helix-rich state and
soluble a-Syn suggests that in the helix-rich state, the isolated
Figure 5 | Temporal changes in secondary structures and morphology of a-Syn during amyloid formation. CD and AFM study of a-Syn during
aggregation showing a transition from RC to b-sheet via a helix-rich intermediate. AFM study showing small oligomers/amorphous structures at the
beginning, the helix-rich state appears to be composed of a heterogeneous population of different species including spherical oligomers and small
filaments before assembled to mature fibrils (at 100 hr). AFM images are squares of 2.5 mm. Heights scales are depicted in individual AFM images.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
6

helical a-Syn was 50%, soluble a-Syn was 25% and rest 25% was
preformed fibrils.
The FTIR spectrum of the isolated helix species (i.e. fraction R)
strengthens the present finding of a distinct helical oligomeric species
by showing a major absorption peak at 1653 cm21, characteristic of a
helical conformation (Figure 8G). However, other less intense peaks
,1669 cm21, ,1620 cm-1 and 1680 cm21 that correspond to turn
and cross b-sheet structures are also identified, suggesting that either
the helix-rich intermediate may also possess subtle degree of other
secondary structural elements or the present purification protocol
for the helical species is unable to completely get rid of all the other
type of aggregates. The different species isolated were further mor-
phologically characterized by AFM. The pellet (P) fraction showed
mostly fibrillar morphology of ,15 nm in height, while the filtrate
(F) showed lower order assemblies of height ,3/4 nm. The isolated
helix-rich species (fraction R) showed oligomers and thin protofila-
ments-like structure of height ,5 nm (Figure 8H).
Fibril formation by isolated helix-rich intermediate. To study
whether isolated helix-rich intermediate alone can be matured to
b-sheet rich fibrils, we isolated the helix-rich state and incubated at
37uC for fibrillation. The conformational transition and amyloid
formation was monitored using CD and ThT fluorescence, respect-
ively. The CD data suggest that helix-rich state alone can get
converted to b-sheet rich structure upon incubation (Figure 9A).
The ThT fluorescence study with isolated helix-rich intermediate
during incubation suggests that this intermediate matured to fibrils
without any lag phase in contrast to a-Syn aggregation observed
from soluble, unstructured a-Syn (Figure 9B). The AFM study of
the fibrils formed from isolated helix showed mostly short filaments
in contrast to the long fibrils that are formed by soluble LMW a-Syn
(Figure 9C). The short filaments, which were formed from the helix
rich intermediate, did not further convert to long fibrils even after
long incubation (data not shown). However, the fibrils formed from
isolated helix showed slightly higher amount of ANS binding
(Supplementary Figure 11A) and almost similar toxicity (Supple-
mentary Figure 11B–C) as that of the fibrils formed by soluble
LMW a-Syn. We suggest that the presence of fibrils is required for
helix-rich state to mature to long fibrils. To study this, we incubated
isolated helix-rich intermediate in the presence of 10% (v/v) fibrils
and incubated for 2 days. The AFM data showed the formation of
long fibrils (Figure 9D) confirming that helix-rich intermediate
interacts with preformed fibrils in the early elongation phase for
the maturation of fibril formation.
The helix-rich intermediate catalyzed a-Syn fibrillation. In a-Syn
aggregation, preformed amyloid fibrils is known to accelerate the
aggregation kinetics of soluble a-Syn52. To examine whether the
helix-rich intermediate can template and accelerate a-Syn aggrega-
tion, 300 mM freshly prepared LMW a-Syn in 20 mM Gly-NaOH
buffer, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide was incubated in presence and
absence of 10% isolated helical intermediate (Figure 9E). 300 mM
Figure 6 | Sequence segments of a-Syn critical for the formation of helical intermediates probed by Trp fluorescence study. (A) Trp emission spectra
showing gradual blue shift of lmax of for V3W (left), V71W (middle) and A140W (right) during RC R a-helix R b-sheet transition. (B) Changes of Trp
fluorescence intensity maxima (lmax) during helix-rich intermediate and amyloid formation by Trp-substituted WT a-Syn. The large lmax change was
evident for V71W and A140W during helix R b-sheet transition. (C) Modified Stern-Volmer plots of Trp quenching for [V3W]a-Syn, [V71W]a-Syn and
[A140W]a-Syn using acrylamide. Quenching of site-specific Trp mutants at three different stages of incubation were carried out (freshly prepared low
molecular weight (LMW), helix-rich intermediate and at the time of first b-sheet appearance (b-sheet)). F indicates maximum Trp fluorescence intensity
in presence of different acrylamide concentrations and F0 stands for maximum Trp fluorescence intensity in absence of acrylamide. (D) Stern-Volmer
quenching constants of site-specific Trp variants of freshly prepared LMW, helix-rich intermediate and immediately after conversion to b-sheet.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
7

a-Syn in presence of 10% preformed fibrils was also studied as a
positive control. Important to note that, in contrast to traditional
seeding experiments, where fibrils were sonicated into broken fibrils,
we used unsonicated helical intermediate because the sonication may
affect its conformation. To keep appropriate control, we did not
perform sonication of fibrils as well. It was found that in the
presence of the isolated helix-rich intermediate, the lag time of
aggregation was significantly reduced (Figure 9E). The lag time of
freshly prepared LMW a-Syn in the absence of any seeds was
,55 hr, while the lag times were significantly reduced to ,43 hr
and ,38 hr in the presence of 10% preformed fibrils and isolated
helix-rich intermediate, respectively. It was shown recently that
aggregation kinetics in the presence of seeds (broken fibrils), which
are more compatible as nucleus for aggregation and work through
the bulk of the solution64. In contrast, the unsonicated fibrils were
found to be surface active and retained adsorbed at air-water
interface64 and accelerates the aggregation through the surface
(surface catalyzed reaction) of the solution64. Therefore, the
observed acceleration of a-Syn aggregation kinetics might be due
to the effect of surface of the species for templating the aggregation.
Hydrophobic surface exposure and toxicity of helical interme-
diates. It has been suggested that the extent of hydrophobic
surface exposure may play a significant role in cellular toxicity of
protein aggregates65,66. To determine the hydrophobic surface
exposure of the helical intermediate and other a-Syn species, 1-
anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate (ANS) binding study was per-
formed with different species of a-Syn. ANS is a traditional dye
frequently used for protein folding studies to detect a molten
globule state67. It binds to exposed hydrophobic surfaces of
proteins and, therefore, is able to monitor the relative hydrophobic
surface exposure during folding and aggregation. To do the ANS
binding, different species of a-Syn were isolated as described in the
method section. Freshly prepared LMW was used as a negative
control. The helix-rich state showed maximum ANS binding
followed by isolated fibrils from the pellet purification step and
fibrils collected at the end of the aggregation kinetics (Figure 10A
and Supplementary Figure 12). LMW a-Syn showed least ANS
binding. The increased hydrophobicity of the helix intermediate
must come either from the oligomer formation or/and a structural
rearrangement that brings together in closely space hydrophobic
amino acid side chains. The data suggest the isolated helical
intermediate contained more exposed hydrophobic surface area
compared to fibrils and exposed hydrophobic surface area is least
for the soluble protein (Figure 10A Supplementary Figure 12).
Further, to study the toxicity of the helix-rich intermediate, a cell-
based toxicity assay (MTT 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphe-
nyltetrazolium bromide)68) using SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line
was performed (Figure 10B). The isolated helical intermediate along
with the pellet fraction (P), the filtrate (F) (see Figure 8A), and non-
isolated sample that showed a helix-rich signal in the CD spectrum
(termed helix-rich mixture in the following section) were used for the
toxicity study (Figure 10B). Freshly prepared LMW a-Syn, a-Syn
fibrils (5 days old), and Ab fibrils were used as controls. The MTT
reduction data showed that isolated helix (R) showed lowest MTT
reduction ,35% followed by helix mix ,47% and fibrils ,55%.
However, pellet (P) and fibrils showed almost similar MTT reduc-
tion. The LMW a-Syn showed highest MTT reduction (,82%) as
Figure 7 | Segments responsible for helix formation determined by NMR. (A) 2D heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) NMR spectroscopy
of LMW (left panel), helix-rich state (right panel). (B) NOESY-HSQC experiment of helix-rich intermediate HN-HN connections originating from the
low-intensity peaks. (C) Ha secondary chemical shifts of resonances for LMW (left panel) and helix-rich state (right panel).
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
8

expected. The positive control of Ab (25–35) fibrils showed ,40%
MTT reduction. This suggests that the helix-rich intermediates are
highly cytotoxic compared to b-sheet-rich fibrils and LMW a-Syn.
The toxicity and hydrophobic exposure comparison plot of the helix-
rich materials (Figure 10C) reveal that there appears to be a correla-
tion between hydrophobic surface exposure and cytotoxicity.
Consistent with MTT data, a similar observation was also obtained
when cell morphology of SH-SY5Y cells that treated with different
species of a-Syn were imaged under phase contrast microscope. It
was found that almost similar cell morphology was observed when
cells were treated with LMW a-Syn compared to buffer control after
24 hr of incubation (Figure 10D). However, the cells treated with
helix-rich mixture and fibrils showed abundant cells with distorted
morphology (damaged cell body and neurites). Further, the cell
death was analyzed using calcein AM and ethidium homodimer
(Eth D1) staining. Calcein AM stains the live cells69,70 while Eth D1
detects the DNA of dead cells55,71. The calcein AM and Eth D1 stain-
ing reveals mostly normal status of cells when treated with LMW a-
Syn (Figure 10E). However, Eth D1 staining was mostly found when
cells were treated with the helical intermediate and less extent with
fibrils. Consistent with our MTT assay, phase contrast imaging, cal-
cein AM/Eth D1 staining also suggested that the isolated helix-rich
state is more cytotoxic compared to the matured fibrils (Figure 10E).
Finally to quantify the toxicity, cell death in the presence of dif-
ferent a-Syn species were analyzed by Annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining of the SH-SY5Y cells using flow cytometry ana-
lysis55. It was known that in an early apoptosis event, Annexin V
binds to the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PS) that is translo-
cated from the inner to the outer leaflet of plasma membrane
(Annexin V1). When staining of Annexin V-FITC is performed
along with the live/dead dye propidium iodide (PI), the analysis
allows identification of cells undergoing late apoptosis and/or nec-
rosis (Annexin V1, PI1). In contrast, binding of both Annexin V
and PI would be negative (Annexin V2, PI2), when cells were
Figure 8 | Isolation and biophysical characterization of helical intermediate. (A) Schematic showing the isolation of helical intermediate. Secondary
structure determined by CD spectroscopy for (B) helical mixture, (C) pellet, (D) supernatant, (E) retentate (isolated helix) and (F) flow through containing
soluble a-Syn. (G) FTIR spectroscopy of isolated helix showing most intensity peak at 1653 cm21 corresponding to helix conformation. (H) Morphological
analysis for various isolated a-Syn species. AFM images are square of 5 micron and height scales are shown in individual AFM images.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
9

completely viable. The dead cells, however, would bind mostly with
PI (Annexin V2, PI1). Therefore, staining with Annexin V-FITC
along with the live/dead dye propidium iodide (PI) allow differenti-
ating whether cells are viable or undergoing early/late apoptosis and/
or necrosis (Annexin V1, PI1)72,73. Importantly, as this study
requires the a-Syn species with higher concentrations, helix-rich
mixture (instead of isolated helix) was used. As a control, preformed
fibrils and freshly prepared LMW a-Syn were also used. The data
shown in Figure 10F suggests that 70% cells were undergoing early
apoptosis in presence of the helix-rich intermediate (helix mix) while
cells in presence of freshly prepared LMW a-Syn and fibrils thereof
showed only ,10% and ,7% early apoptosis (Figure 10F). In the
presence of buffer, most of the cells were viable. The data clearly
suggest that under the experimental conditions tested, helix-rich
material of WT a-Syn is cytotoxic.
Although all these different methods of toxicity clearly showed
higher toxicity of helix-rich state, the possibility of transformation
of this helical intermediate into higher order aggregates in cell culture
environment during experimental time period cannot be ruled out. It
is however quite difficult to evaluate directly the protein conforma-
tion responsible for cellular toxicity. However, the toxicity studies of
the helical intermediate along with appropriate controls of freshly
formed b-sheet rich fibrils and mature b-sheet fibrils indicate that the
higher toxicity observed for helix-rich state could be due to the
oligomeric helical intermediate rather than the higher order b-sheet
rich aggregates that may form in cell culture experiment.
Discussion
Aggregation of proteins into amyloid fibrils is a multistep process
where monomeric protein gradually gets converted into various oli-
gomeric forms before forming matured fibrils41,44,74–76. Several in
vitro aggregation studies have shown that natively unstructured
and folded proteins undergo large conformational transitions of
RC R b-sheet19 and helix R b-sheet, respectively upon amyloid
formation77–82. However, several studies have also suggested that
natively unstructured proteins may undergo structural transition
of RC R b-sheet through a helix-rich intermediate during amyloid
formation41,42,46,47,83,84. Teplow and co-workers for the first time
reported the existence of a helix-rich intermediate in the amyloid
formation pathway of Ab protein associated with AD41. This helix-
rich intermediate was mostly oligomeric in nature and was suggested
to be an on-pathway intermediate of Ab aggregation. Subsequently,
many studies showed the presence of a helical intermediate during
the aggregation of IAPP42–44 (associated with type 2 Diabetes) and
several other amyloidogenic proteins/peptides48–50. Raleigh and co-
workers have shown that helix-rich intermediate also populate dur-
ing fibril formation by Pro-IAPP in presence of glycosaminoglycans
such as heparan sulfate45.
Although most of the conformational studies of a-Syn aggregation
showed random coil R b-sheet structural conversion19 recent studies
have shown that condition that favored partial helix structure (using
organic solvents) of a-Syn facilitates amyloid formation30,31,85,86.
Anderson et al showed a-helix rich state also populates during
aggregation and fibrillation of a-Syn. However, its role in synuclein
fibrillation, mode of toxicity, and exactly where it appears in the
aggregation pathway is not known yet. Further biophysical and
structural characteristics of this intermediate have not been studied
yet. In the present study, we performed the structural and morpho-
logical characterization of the entire aggregation pathway of a-Syn in
vitro. Our in vitro aggregation studies using CD and FTIR combined
with ThT binding studies (Figure 1A, 1C, 4 and Supplementary
Figure 2) showed that a-Syn remains in an unstructured state imme-
diately after preparation. During aggregation, it transforms into an
oligomeric, partial helix-rich state, which subsequently converts to b-
sheet-rich fibrils (Supplementary Figure 13). The three familial dis-
ease-associated mutants (A30P, A53T and E46K) of a-Syn as well as
E57K, c-Syn, mouse-Syn and [302110]a-Syn also showed RC R
helix R b-sheet structural transitions during their aggregation
(Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure 2). We thus report here the
Figure 9 | ‘On pathway’ a-helical intermediate during synuclein fibrilization. (A) CD spectra during aggregation showing conversion from isolated
helix-rich state to b-sheet upon incubation. (B) Kinetics of aggregation of LMW a-Syn and isolated helix monitored by ThT.
(C) Morphological analysis of fibrils formed from isolated helix (left panel) and LMW a-Syn (right panel) by AFM. Scale bar are 500 nm. Height scales
(upper panel) and amplitude scales (lower panel) are shown in individual AFM images. (D) Morphological characterization of the fibrils formed by the
isolated helix in presence of externally added fibrils by AFM showing regular characteristic of thin and long fibrils morphology. Scale bar are 500 nm.
Height scales (left panel) and amplitude scales (right panel) are shown in individual AFM images. (E) Seeding capacity of isolated helical intermediate and
fibrils. The presence of 10% (v/v) helical intermediate and fibrils in a sample containing 300 mM LMW a-Syn reduced the lag phase of a-Syn fibril
formation. a-Syn without any seeds was used as a control.
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
10

Figure 10 | Hydrophobic surface exposure and toxicity of helix-rich intermediate. (A) ANS fluorescence of different a-Syn species indicate maximum
exposed hydrophobic surface for isolated helix-rich state. (B) MTT reduction by SH-SY5Y cells in presence of various a-Syn species showing higher
cytotoxicity (less MTT reduction) of isolated helix and material comprising helix-rich intermediates. LMW, matured fibrils (5 days aged sample) and Ab
(25–35) fibrils were used as controls. (C) Correlation plot of ANS binding (hydrophobic surface exposure) and MTT reduction-based cytotoxicity
indicates that species possessing larger hydrophobic exposed surfaces are more toxic. (D) Phase contrast images for SHSY-5Y cells treated with different
species of a-Syn indicating maximum cell death for isolated helix followed by fibrils. However the morphology of cells treated with LMW remained in
normal state similar to control cells (treated with buffer). Scale bar represents 100 micron. (E) The calcein and EthD-1 staining showing defective
morphology with damages of cell body/neuritis of cell treated with helix-rich intermediate. Cells treated with either LMW or buffer control showed no
significant of cell death/defective cell morphology. Scale bar represents 200 micron. (F) The flow cytometry analysis showing that induction of early
apoptosis by cells treated with helix-rich state. The cells treated with matured fibrils and LMW samples did not show significant toxicity. Buffer was used
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
11

existence of a- helix-rich intermediate (in the absence of any organic
solvent) during the aggregation of all synucleins (except b-Syn)
under study. We believe that careful removal of preformed seeds,
use of low ionic strength buffer (Gly-NaOH, pH 7.4) and regular
monitoring of the conformational transitions (3 to 5 days monitoring
and measuring CD spectra at regular intervals) enable us to observe
this a-helical intermediate during synuclein aggregation pathway.
Further, our aggregation study revealed that all synucleins form
helix-rich intermediate at the beginning of the elongation phase of
aggregation (Supplementary Figure 3) that extended up to mid-
elongation phase after which all proteins converted to b-sheet
structure.
Our AFM morphological characterization study during aggrega-
tion revealed that this helix-rich state is a mixture of oligomeric
species of various sizes as well as small fibrillar aggregates. Further,
the residue level structural characterization using NMR suggest that
first 100 residues containing N-terminus and central part of a-Syn
participate in the helix-rich intermediate formation, while C-ter-
minus remains flexible in this state. The Trp fluorescence and
quenching studies reveal that site-specific structural dynamics at
the N-terminus, NAC region and C-terminus are involved in the
formation of helix-rich state; however most drastic transition at
the NAC region mediate the helix maturation into fibrils. It is sug-
gested that N-terminus of a-Syn is amphipathic in nature and has a
propensity to assume helical conformation87. It has also been
reported that a-Syn binds to membranes in vitro forming helix-rich
structure composed of its first N-terminal 100 amino acid residue22.
It is possible that during the initial phase of aggregation, the inter-
molecular interactions between a-Syn N-terminal segments (having
helical propensity) may enhance the stability of the helix conforma-
tion (local energy minima). This may further increase the local con-
centration of a-Syn facilitating intermolecular interactions favoring
b-sheet rich amyloid fibril formation.
Since our morphological analysis revealed that the helix-rich
intermediate is a heterogeneous population of species, it follows that
a-Syn in this state possess multiple structural and oligomeric forms.
To characterize the individual components of this helix-rich state,
centrifugation was performed. It was observed that ,25% of the
helix-rich intermediate are pelletable fibrils having b-sheet con-
formation; whereas another ,25% soluble fraction are a-Syn species
having ,100 kDa mass and of random coil conformation. Rest
,50% are of helical conformation having .100 kDa mass. The iso-
lated helix-rich state is a homogeneous population of small oligo-
meric species, which alone can self-assemble into b-sheet rich fibrils
instantaneously without any lag phase suggesting that the helix-rich
intermediate is the on-pathway intermediate for fibril formation.
However, the morphology of the fibril formed from helix-rich state
alone showed thin and short fibrils (even after long incubation) in
contrast to long fibrillar network that matured from native helix-rich
state (mixture). The data suggest that during the elongation phase,
different a-Syn species formed in the nucleation phase might interact
with each other differently resulting in fibrils having distinct
morphologies. To probe this, we incubated isolated helix-rich state
with 10% fibrils and the data showed the formation of long fibrils
(morphologically similar to the fibrils matured from LMW).
Interestingly, our cell toxicity assays indicate that these helix-rich
states of a-Syn are more cytotoxic compared to soluble and fibrillar
a-Syn. This high cytotoxicity of helix-rich states could be attributed
to their higher exposed hydrophobic surfaces as suggested for oligo-
meric protein/peptides65,66.
We propose that the N-terminal regions of a-Syn, which has a
high propensity to assume helical structure, might mediate the slow
formation of helix-rich intermediate through intermolecular inter-
actions. However, this intermediate is formed in a low amount ini-
tially and, therefore, remains undetectable in the lag phase. The
intermolecular helix-helix interactions further facilitate aggregation
and once small amount of fibrils are formed; they may further auto
catalyze the a-Syn aggregation into fibrils, which may also involve
the helix-rich intermediate formation. Thus large amount of helix-
rich state accumulates at the beginning of elongation phase (25%)
and eventually most of the protein species get converted to the ther-
modynamically favorable state of b-sheet-rich amyloid fibrils at mid
elongation phase of aggregation. Moreover, during the elongation
phase, the helix-rich state may further interact with preformed fibrils
for their further conversion into b-sheet-rich fibrils. Overall our data
indicate that both nucleation and elongation phases comprise of a
complex aggregation reaction involving the interaction of multiple
species, which may be the responsible for the formation of morpho-
logically distinct amyloid fibrils. The present study, therefore,
provides valuable insights into the complex aggregation mechanism
and extensive characterization of the intermediates involved in the
amyloid forming pathway of a-Syn. This study would also contribute
in providing targets for therapeutics against Parkinson’s disease
and other neurodegenerative diseases where "a-helix-to-b-sheet"
transitions and a-helix-rich intermediates are linked to disease
pathogenesis41,42,46.
Methods
Chemicals and Reagents. Chemicals were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St.
Louis, MO) and were of the highest purity available. Water was double distilled and
deionized using a Milli-Q system (Millipore Corp., Bedford, MA). Cell culture stuffs
were purchased from Invitrogen (U.S.A.).
Multiple sequence alignment. For multiple sequence alignment ClustalW (http//
ebi.ac.uk/clustalw2) was used for all synucleins. The input sequences were in FASTA
format and the sequences were aligned using the default setting parameters.
Protein expression and purification. Site-specific Trp mutants were created by site-
directed mutagenesis as described by Sahay et al88. All synucleins were expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) strain according to the protocol described by Volles et al89
with slight modification55,90,91.
Isolation of LMW a-Syn. Lyophilized protein was dissolved in 20 mM Gly-NaOH,
pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide at a concentration 10 mg/ml. Since synucleins are acidic
in nature, the pH of the resulting solution was around 6.0 and it was not fully soluble.
To solubilize, few ml of 2 mM NaOH was added until the solution became completely
clear. The pH was adjusted to 7.4 by adding few ml of 1 M HCl. The pH of the final
solution was confirmed by micro pH meter (S20 Seven Easy, Mettler-Toledo,
Switzerland). The solution was then dialyzed in a mini dialysis unit of 10 kDa cutoff
(Slide-A-Lyzer Mini dialysis devices, Pierce, USA) for overnight against the same
buffer. For (302110) a-Syn, 3.5 kDa mini dialysis units were used. The solutions
were then collected, transferred to filters (100,000 molecular weight cut-off (MWCO)
Centricon YM-100, Millipore Corp., Bedford, MA). For (302110) a-Syn, the solution
was transferred to YM-50. Then filters were centrifuged for 30 min at 10,000 3 g
using a benchtop microcentrifuge (Eppendorf Model 5415C, Brinkmann
Instruments Inc., Westbury, NY). The resulting solution was clear and free of any
larger aggregates. The cutoff filters were washed three times with buffer before use. a-
Syn was shown to contain monomeric a-Syn in equilibrium with low-order,
unstructured oligomers. The concentrations of synucleins in the filtrates were
determined by absorbance at 280 nm, considering the molar absorptivity (e) is 5960
for a-Syn, its three disease mutants, mouse-Syn, b-Syn and 1490 for [302110] a-Syn
and c-Syn.
Amyloid fibril formation. The assembly reaction was initiated with LMW synuclein
at a concentration of ,300 mM in 1.5 ml eppendorf tube in 20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH
7.4, with 0.01% sodium azide. For morphological analysis of a-Syn species during
aggregation, aggregation reaction of WT LMW a-Syn at 250 mM concentration in
20 mM Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide at 37 uC with slight agitation
(,50 r.p.m) was initiated. The eppendorf tubes containing protein solutions were
placed into an Echo Therm model RT11 rotating mixture (Torrey Pines Scientific,
USA) with a speed corresponding to 50 r.p.m. inside a 37uC incubator. The fibril
formation was monitored by CD, ThT binding and confirmed by EM at the end of
assembly reaction.
ThT fluorescence assay. 1 mM ThT was prepared in Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.0, 0.01%
sodium azide. 2 ml of 1 mM ThT solution was added to the 7.5 mM protein solution in
200 mL Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide. Immediately after addition,
ThT fluorescence assay was done using Horiba-Jobin Yvon (Fluomax4) with
excitation at 450 nm and emission in the range of 4652500 nm. The slit width for
both excitation and emission were kept at 5 nm. ThT fluorescence obtained at
480 nm was plotted for all proteins against incubation time and the data were fitted to
a sigmoidal curve. The lag time (tlag) was calculated according to the published
protocol56 using equation y 5 y0 1 (ymax 2 y0)/(1 1 e-(k(t-t1/2
)), where y is the ThT
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
12

fluorescence at a particular time point, ymax is the maximum ThT fluorescence and y0
is the ThT fluorescence at t0 and tlag was defined as t lag 5 t K 2 2/k.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy (CD). 5 mL of protein solution was diluted to
200 ml in 20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH 7.4 with 0.01% sodium azide. The solution was
placed into a 0.1 cm path-length quartz cell (Hellma, Forest Hills, NY). Spectra were
acquired using JASCO-810 instrument. All measurements were done at 25uC. Spectra
were generally recorded over the wavelength range of 1982260 nm. Each spectrum
was scanned thrice (accumulation 3) and the average was taken. Raw data were
processed by smoothing and subtraction of buffer spectra, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Three independent experiments were performed with
each sample. Spectral deconvolution of CD data was performed using the CDPro
software57 package that consisted of three programs (viz. SELCON3, CDSSTR, and
CONTINLL) to determine relative quantities of random coil, a-helix, b-sheet and b-
turn. In the CDPro package, reference sets of proteins from different sources are
combined to create a large reference set of CD spectra and depending upon the
spectrum wavelength range of the experiment, the reference set (IBasis) can be
changed. We used either an IBasis of 7 (48 proteins reference set) or IBasis of 9 (50
protein reference set), depending upon the curve fitting with experimental CD spectra
that produced lower RMSD value. Wavelength was taken form (2402198) nm for the
deconvolution for all three programs in CDPro. If the data obtained were similar from
the three different programs, they were averaged to obtain the percentage of each
secondary structure element. In some cases, the results obtained from one program
were not consistent with those from the other two. Such cases averaging were done
with data set from two programs that produced similar results.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM). For atomic force microscopy, protein samples
were spotted on a freshly cleaved mica sheet followed by washing with double distilled
water. Immediate after addition, mica was dried in vacuum desiccator. AFM imaging
was done in tapping mode under a silicon nitride cantilever using Veeco Nanoscope
IV Multimode AFM. Minimum five different areas of three independent samples
were scanned with a scan rate of 1.5 Hz.
Electron microscopy (EM). The aged synuclein solutions in 20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH
7.4, 0.01% sodium azide were diluted in distilled water to a concentration of ,40 mM,
spotted on a glow-discharged, carbon-coated Formvar grid (Electron Microscopy
Sciences, Fort Washington, PA), incubated for 5 min, washed with distilled water,
and then stained with 1% (w/v) aqueous uranylformate solution. Uranylformate
solution was prepared freshly and filtered through 0.22 mm sterile syringe filters
(Milipore, USA). EM analysis was performed using an electron microscope (FEI
Tecnai G2 12) at 120 kV with nominal magnifications in the range of 26,000 to
60,000. Images were recorded digitally by using the SIS Megaview III imaging system.
At least two independent experiments were carried out for each sample.
Tryptophan fluorescence. LMW proteins were prepared for all Trp mutants and WT
protein and the concentrations of protein were determined by measuring absorbance
at 280 nm considering the molar absorptivity (e) as 11460 M21cm21 for single
tryptophan mutant of WT a-Syn. The LMW of Trp mutants and WT a-Syn at
300 mM concentrations in 20 mM Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide
were incubated with slight agitation at 37uC. During incubation, small aliquots of the
samples were taken at regular intervals and diluted with identical buffer with final
protein concentration of 6 mM for Trp fluorescence and 6 mM for CD spectroscopy.
Both CD and Trp fluorescence spectroscopy were performed simultaneously.
Fluorescence spectra were recorded using Horiba Jobin Yvon (Fluoromax 4) with
excitation at 290 nm and emission in the range 3002500 nm. The excitation as well
as emission slit widths were set to 5 nm. To monitor the site specific conformational
changes during aggregation, the emission maxima (lmax) was plotted against the time
course of incubation. Further, lmax of Trp emission spectra was determined using gnu
plot fitted to a second order polynomial equation. For that the value of the Trp
emission spectra from 335 to 375 was taken and fitted using the function f(x) 5 2a(x
2 b)2 1 C; Where ‘b’ corresponds to lmax for the corresponding Trp emission
spectra.
Acrylamide quenching. 300 mM LMW of Trp mutants of WT a-Syn in 20 mM Gly-
NaOH buffer, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide were incubated with slight agitation
(,50 r.p.m) at 37 uC. The CD study was performed at regular intervals to monitor the
aggregation as described in Trp fluorescence section. Site-specific solvent exposures
of Trp of a-Syn Trp mutants in LMW, helical intermediate and b-sheet-rich state
were performed using acrylamide quenching. For the quenching experiments,
aliquots of the protein solutions were mixed with increasing concentrations of
acrylamide (020.5 M) where final concentration of protein was 6 mM in each
preparation. The solutions were incubated in the dark for five minutes. Fluorescence
spectra were recorded with excitation at 290 nm and emission in the range of
3002500 nm. The fluorescence intensity maxima in absence (F0) and presence of
different acrylamide concentrations (F) were plotted against different acrylamide
concentrations and these plots were fitted using the modified Stern-Volmer
equation60; F0/F 5 (1 1 Ksv[Q])ev[Q]; where Ksv is the Stern-Volmer constant, [Q] is
the acrylamide concentration, V is the static quenching constant. These fitting yield
Stern-Volmer constants, which were plotted against different species studied.
NMR Spectroscopy. All NMR experiments were performed on a Bruker Avance
800 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with triple resonance gradient probe at
288 K. Data were processed using Topspin 2.1 version and analyzed with Sparky
3.114. Spectra of LMW and helical intermediates of a-Syn were collected at a
concentration of ,240 mM in the H2O/D2O (90510) in Gly-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4.
Backbone resonance assignments of LMW wt a-Syn were obtained using standard set
of triple resonance experiments (such as HNN, CBCANH, CBCACONH, HNCO)
together with previously published data (BMRB accession number 16543 and 5744).
For calculating Ha secondary chemical shift, 3D TOCSY-HSQC experiments with
MLEV-17 sequence and with a mixing time of 60 ms were recorded. To obtain
various through-space connection in helical intermediates, 3D NOESY-HSQC
spectra, with mixing time of 200 ms, were recorded. All 2D experiments were
acquired with 8232 scans having (2048 3 256) data matrix. The data were zero-filled
to give a (4096 3 1024) matrix and processed prior to Fourier transformation with
sine square bell. All proton chemical shifts were referenced with using DSS as an
external reference and other nuclei were reference indirectly using BMRB protocol.
Isolation of helical intermediate. To isolate the helical intermediate from the
reaction mixture, 300 mM LMW of a-Syn was prepared as described earlier54,55 and
incubated at 37uC with slight agitation (,50 r.p.m). Its secondary structural changes
were monitored by CD spectroscopy. When helical conformation appeared in CD
measurement (two negative minima one at ,2052208 nm and another at
,222 nm), the reaction mixture was taken out from the incubator. It was centrifuged
at 14000 g for 15 minutes at 4uC. This leads to the separation of pelletable fibrils (P)
and supernatant (S). The supernatant was passed through 100 kDa cut off filter. The
flow-through (F, MW less than 100 kDa) and the retentate (R, upper portion of cutoff
filter (more than 100 kDa)) were collected. From 300 mM reaction mixture, ,60 mM
pellet, ,80 mM flow-through and ,160 mM isolated helix were obtained.
Aggregation of synuclein in presence of isolated helix. 300 mM LMW (,100 kDa)
solution of a-Syn in 20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.01% sodium azide was incubated at
37uC with slight agitation (50 r.p.m) and the aggregation kinetics was monitored by
CD. When solution showed helix-rich conformation in CD spectroscopy, the protein
solution was taken out from the incubator and helix was isolated using 100 kDa cutoff
filter as described previously. Aliquots of this solution were added to freshly prepared
LMW a-Syn such that helical seeds become 10% (v/v). Only LMW a-Syn was also
used as a control. Similar experiments also were performed with preformed fibrils as
seeds instead of helical intermediate for the positive control. For seeding study with
helix-rich intermediate and fibrils, the protein concentration, and total volume were
kept constant with 300 mM and 400 ml, respectively. All solution mixture was
incubated at 37uC with slight agitation and during incubation ThT binding was
measured at regular time intervals. ThT was measured using spectrofluorometer
Horiba Jobin Yvon (Fluoromax-4) with excitation at 450 nm and emission in the
range 4602500 nm. Both excitation and emission slit widths used for the
fluorescence measurement was 5 nm.
FTIR study. FTIR is a powerful technique for the determination individual secondary
structural components of protein/peptides. For FTIR analysis, thin translucent pellet
of KBr was made by compressing the grounded KBr powder at the pressure of 7 ton
by using hydraulic pressure pump. The pellet was then kept under IR lamp and 5 ml of
the a-Syn solution was spotted on it and dried immediately. For background
spectrum 5 ml of the buffer was spotted on another KBr pellet and dried. The pellet
was then kept in a transmission holder and the IR spectra in the range of
180021500 cm21 were acquired by using BrukerVertex-80 instrument equipped
with DTGS detector. For each spectrum, 32 scans at the resolution of 2 cm21 were
recorded. Raw data corresponding to amide-I region (170021600 cm21) were
deconvoluted by Fourier self-deconvolution (FSD) method. The deconvoluted
spectra were then subjected to Lorentzian curve fitting procedure and integrated
using opus-65 software according to manufactures instruction.
ANS binding assay. 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulphonic acid (ANS) is a powerful dye
to measure the exposed hydrophobic surfaces of protein and its aggregates65–67. ANS
binding study was performed during aggregation of WT a-Syn. To determine the
ANS binding of the helix-rich intermediate, 300 mM freshly solubilized WT a-Syn in
20 mM Gly-NaOH, pH 7.4 was incubated at 37uC with slight agitation. When the
helical intermediate appeared in CD measurement, it was isolated as described
previously. 3 ml of 5 mM ANS was added to 5 ml of different species of a-Syn in
200 ml buffer. It was incubated for 10 min at dark. ANS fluorescence was measured
using Horiba Jobin Yvon (Fluoromax 4) spectrofluorometer exciting at 370 nm and
emission in the range of 4002600 nm with excitation and emission slit widths were of
5 nm. Buffer subtraction was done and fluorescence intensity at 475 nm was plotted
against different synuclein species.
MTT assay. LMW wt a-Syn at 300 mM concentration was incubated at 37uC with
slight agitation. When the helical intermediate was detected in CD, helix was isolated
as described previously. Fibrils and freshly prepared LMW were also used as controls.
Subsequently, similar toxicity assay were also performed with other mixture assembly
containing of helix-rich conformation. To do the toxicity, neuronal cell line of SH-
SY5Y were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Himedia,
India) supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen, USA), 100 units/mL penicillin and
100 mg/mL streptomycin in a 5% CO2 humidified environment at 37uC. Cells were
seeded in 96-well plates in 100 mL medium at a cell density of ,10,000 per well. After
24 hr of incubation, the old medium was replaced with fresh media containing 50 mM
of each a-Syn species. Cells were further incubated for 24 hr at 37uC. After this, 10 ml
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
13

of a 5 mg/ml MTT prepared in PBS was added to each well and the incubation was
continued for 4 hr. Finally, 100 ml of a solution containing 50% dimethylformamide
and 20% SDS (pH 4.7) was added and incubated for overnight. After incubation in a
5% CO2 humidified environment at 37uC, absorption values at 560 nm were
determined with an automatic micro titer plate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
USA). The background absorbance was also recorded at 690 nm and subtracted from
the absorbance value of 560 nm.
Cell viability assay. To check the cell viability in the presence of various a-Syn species
(LMW, helical intermediates, and fibrils) calcein and ethidium homodimer 1 staining
was used. To do that different species of a-Syn were isolated as described previously.
For cell culture, SHSY-5Y cells were cultured on glass cover slips of 12 mm diameter
with a density of 4 3 104. The cells were maintained in DMEM (HIMEDIA, India)
with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml
streptomycin in a 37uC incubator with a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 for
24 hrs. Next day, the old culture media was replaced with fresh media along with the
addition of various a-Syn species at a concentration of 10 mM per well and cells were
further incubated for 22 hours at 37uC. After this incubation, cells were washed once
with PBS and then treated with 2 mM calcein and 4 mM of ethidium homodimer 1
simultaneously for 10 mins at 37uC. After removal of staining solutions, cell were
washed once with PBS and fixed in 4% PFA, which then mounted for imaging under
fluorescence microscope (Axiocam, Zeiss).
Cell morphology analysis. To study the effect of various a-Syn species on the cell
morphology, neuroblastoma cell lines SH-SY 5Y, were seeded at a density of 4 3 104
on the coverslips and maintained for 24 hrs as previously mentioned. Next day, the
old culture media was replaced with fresh media along with the addition of various a-
Syn species at a concentration of 10 mM per well and cells were further incubated for
22 hours at 37uC. Further, the cells were fixed in 4% PFA then taken for imaging using
phase contrast microscopy (X 51, Olympus).
Fluorocytometry analysis. For relative quantification of cell death and apoptosis in
the presence of helix-rich intermediate, flow cytometry measurement was performed
using Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection kit (Sigma, USA). To do that,
undifferentiated cells were grown in T25 cell culture flask (Nunc, USA) until ,70%
confluency (,106 cells). The cells were then treated each with 50 mM each of helix-
rich intermediate, LMW and fibrils and only buffer for 24 hrs. After incubation, the
cells were trypsinized, centrifuged and used for cell death assay using Annexin V-
FITC Apoptosis detection kit (APOAF, Sigma, USA). The cell pellet was washed with
1 3 PBS and further resuspended in 1 3 binding buffer (Sigma, USA). Cells were
stained with Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Unstained cells (without Annexin V-FITC and PI) were
used as a control and cells stained with either Annexin V-FITC or PI was used as
fluorescent compensation controls. AnnexinV-FITC and PI staining were quantified
in a flow cytometer (FACSAria, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and analyzed using the
BDFACS Diva software. For each sample, 20,000 cells were analyzed. The upper left
quadrant (Q1) (in Fig. 6E) represents dead cells population (only PI positive), upper
right quadrant (Q2) represents the population of cells in the late stage of apoptosis
(Annexin V-FITC positive and PI positive), Lower left quadrant (Q3) represents the
population of viable/live cells (Annexin V-FITC negative and PI negative), lower right
quadrant (Q4) represents the population of cells in early stages of apoptosis (only
Annexin V-FITC positive)72,73. X-axis represents area of Annexin V-FITC
fluorescence and Y-axis represents PI fluorescence intensities.
Statistical analysis. The statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA
followed by Newman-Keuls Multiple Comparison post hoc test; *P , 0.05; **P ,
0.01; NS P . 0.05.
1. Clayton, D. F. & George, J. M. The synucleins: a family of proteins involved in
synaptic function, plasticity, neurodegeneration and disease. Trends Neurosci. 21,
249–254 (1998).
2. Iwai, A. et al. The precursor protein of non-Ab component of Alzheimer’s disease
amyloid is a presynaptic protein of the central nervous system. Neuron 14,
467–475 (1995).
3. Zhang, L. et al. Semi-quantitative analysis of a-Syn in subcellular pools of rat brain
neurons: an immunogold electron microscopic study using a C-terminal specific
monoclonal antibody. Brain Res. 1244, 40–52 (2008).
4. Abeliovich, A. et al. Mice lacking a-Syn display functional deficits in the
nigrostriatal dopamine system. Neuron 25, 239–252 (2000).
5. Cabin, D. E. et al. Synaptic vesicle depletion correlates with attenuated synaptic
responses to prolonged repetitive stimulation in mice lacking a-Syn. J. Neurosci.
22, 8797–8807 (2002).
6. Volles, M. J. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr. Zeroing in on the pathogenic form of a-Syn and
its mechanism of neurotoxicity in Parkinson’s disease. Biochemistry 42,
7871–7878 (2003).
7. Spillantini, M. G. et al. a-Syn in Lewy bodies. Nature 388, 839–840 (1997).
8. Polymeropoulos, M. H. et al. Mutation in the a-Syn gene identified in families
with Parkinson’s disease. Science 276, 2045–2047 (1997).
9. Kruger, R. et al. Ala30Pro mutation in the gene encoding a-Syn in Parkinson’s
disease. Nat. Genet. 18, 106–108 (1998).
10. Zarranz, J. J. et al. The new mutation, E46K, of a-Syn causes Parkinson and Lewy
body dementia. Ann. Neurol. 55, 164–173 (2004).
11. Singleton, A. B. et al. a-Syn locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science
302, 841 (2003).
12. Chartier-Harlin, M. C. et al. a-Syn locus duplication as a cause of familial
Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 364, 1167–1169 (2004).
13. Lesage, S. et al. G51D a-Syn mutation causes a novel parkinsonian-pyramidal
syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 73, 459–471 (2013).
14. Kiely, A. P. et al. a-synucleinopathy associated with G51D SNCA mutation: a link
between Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy? Acta. Neuropathol.
125, 753–769 (2013).
15. Proukakis, C. et al. A novel a-Syn missense mutation in Parkinson disease.
Neurology 80, 1062–1064 (2013).
16. Appel-Cresswell, S. et al. a-Syn p.H50Q, a novel pathogenic mutation for
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 28, 811–813 (2013).
17. Feany, M. B. & Bender, W. W. A Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. Nature
404, 394–398 (2000).
18. Hashimoto, M., Rockenstein, E. & Masliah, E. Transgenic models of a-Syn
pathology: past, present, and future. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 991, 171–188 (2003).
19. Uversky, V. N. et al. Biophysical properties of the synucleins and their propensities
to fibrillate: inhibition of a-Syn assembly by b- and c-Syn. J. Biol.. Chem. 277,
11970–11978 (2002).
20. Giasson, B. I., Murray, I. V., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. A hydrophobic stretch
of 12 amino acid residues in the middle of a-Syn is essential for filament assembly.
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 2380–2386 (2001).
21. Recchia, A. et al. a-Syn and Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J 18, 617–626 (2004).
22. Eliezer, D., Kutluay, E., Bussell, R., Jr. & Browne, G. Conformational properties of
a-Syn in its free and lipid-associated states. J. Mol. Bio. 307, 1061–1073 (2001).
23. Lee, S. J., Jeon, H. & Kandror, K. V. a-Syn is localized in a subpopulation of rat
brain synaptic vesicles. Acta. Neurobiol. Exp. (Wars) 68, 509–515 (2008).
24. Iyer, A., Petersen, N. O., Claessens, M. M. & Subramaniam, V. Amyloids of a-Syn
affect the structure and dynamics of supported lipid bilayers. Biophys. J. 106,
2585–2594 (2014).
25. Sciacca, M. F. et al. Two-step mechanism of membrane disruption by Ab through
membrane fragmentation and pore formation. Biophys. J. 103, 702–710 (2012).
26. Sciacca, M. F. et al. Cations as switches of amyloid-mediated membrane
disruption mechanisms: calcium and IAPP. Biophys. J. 104, 173–184 (2013).
27. Brender, J. R., Salamekh, S. & Ramamoorthy, A. Membrane disruption and early
events in the aggregation of the diabetes related peptide IAPP from a molecular
perspective. Acc. Chem. Res. 45, 454–462 (2012).
28. Nanga, R. P., Brender, J. R., Xu, J., Veglia, G. & Ramamoorthy, A. Structures of rat
and human islet amyloid polypeptide IAPP(1–19) in micelles by NMR
spectroscopy. Biochemistry 47, 12689–12697 (2008).
29. Lorenzen, N., Lemminger, L., Pedersen, J. N., Nielsen, S. B. & Otzen, D. E. The N-
terminus of a-Syn is essential for both monomeric and oligomeric interactions
with membranes. FEBS. Lett. 588, 497–502 (2014).
30. Anderson, V. L., Ramlall, T. F., Rospigliosi, C. C., Webb, W. W. & Eliezer, D.
Identification of a helical intermediate in trifluoroethanol-induced a-Syn
aggregation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 18850–18855 (2010).
31. Ahmad, M. F., Ramakrishna, T., Raman, B. & Rao Ch, M. Fibrillogenic and non-
fibrillogenic ensembles of SDS-bound human a-Syn. J. Mol. Biol. 364, 1061–1072
(2006).
32. Nanga, R. P. et al. Three-dimensional structure and orientation of rat islet amyloid
polypeptide protein in a membrane environment by solution NMR spectroscopy.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 8252–8261 (2009).
33. Ferreon, A. C. & Deniz, A. A. a-Syn multistate folding thermodynamics:
implications for protein misfolding and aggregation. Biochemistry 46, 4499–4509
(2007).
34. Kotler, S. A., Walsh, P., Brender, J. R. & Ramamoorthy, A. Differences between
amyloid b aggregation in solution and on the membrane: insights into elucidation
of the mechanistic details of Alzheimer’s disease. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 6692–6700
(2014).
35. Vivekanandan, S., Brender, J. R., Lee, S. Y. & Ramamoorthy, A. A partially folded
structure of amyloid-b1240 in an aqueous environment. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 411, 312–316 (2011).
36. Esposito, V., Das, R. & Melacini, G. Mapping polypeptide self-recognition
through 1H off-resonance relaxation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 9358–9359 (2005).
37. Milojevic, J., Raditsis, A. & Melacini, G. Human serum albumin inhibits Ab
fibrillization through a "monomer-competitor" mechanism. Biophys. J. 97,
2585–2594 (2009).
38. Ramamoorthy, A. & Lim, M. H. Structural characterization and inhibition of toxic
amyloid b oligomeric intermediates. Biophys. J. 105, 287–288 (2013).
39. Milojevic, J. & Melacini, G. Stoichiometry and affinity of the human serum
albumin-Alzheimer’s Ab peptide interactions. Biophys. J. 100, 183–192 (2011).
40. Apetri, M. M., Maiti, N. C., Zagorski, M. G., Carey, P. R. & Anderson, V. E.
Secondary structure of a-Syn oligomers: characterization by raman and atomic
force microscopy. J. Mol. Biol. 355, 63–71 (2006).
41. Kirkitadze, M. D., Condron, M. M. & Teplow, D. B. Identification and
characterization of key kinetic intermediates in amyloid b protein fibrillogenesis.
J. Mol. Biol. 312, 1103–1119 (2001).
42. Williamson, J. A. & Miranker, A. D. Direct detection of transient a-helical states in
islet amyloid polypeptide. Protein. Sci. 16, 110–117 (2007).
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
14

43. Yonemoto, I. T., Kroon, G. J., Dyson, H. J., Balch, W. E. & Kelly, J. W. Amylin
proprotein processing generates progressively more amyloidogenic peptides that
initially sample the helical state. Biochemistry. 47, 9900–9910 (2008).
44. Liu, G. et al. Mechanistic studies of peptide self-assembly: transient a-helices to
stable b-sheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 18223–18232 (2010).
45. Meng, F., Abedini, A., Song, B. & Raleigh, D. P. Amyloid formation by pro-islet
amyloid polypeptide processing intermediates: examination of the role of protein
heparan sulfate interactions and implications for islet amyloid formation in type 2
diabetes. Biochemistry 46, 12091–12099 (2007).
46. Abedini, A. & Raleigh, D. P. A role for helical intermediates in amyloid formation
by natively unfolded polypeptides? Phys. Biol. 6, 015005 (2009).
47. Williamson, J. A., Loria, J. P. & Miranker, A. D. Helix stabilization precedes
aqueous and bilayer-catalyzed fiber formation in islet amyloid polypeptide. J. Mol.
Biol. 393, 383–396 (2009).
48. Hauser, C. A. et al. Natural tri- to hexapeptides self-assemble in water to amyloid b
type fiber aggregates by unexpected a-helical intermediate structures. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 1361–1366 (2011).
49. Andreola, A. et al. Conformational switching and fibrillogenesis in the
amyloidogenic fragment of apolipoprotein a-I. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 2444–2451
(2003).
50. Klimov, D. K. & Thirumalai, D. Dissecting the assembly of Ab16-22 amyloid
peptides into antiparallel b sheets. Structure. 11, 295–307 (2003).
51. Nerelius, C. et al. a-helix targeting reduces amyloid b peptide toxicity. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 9191–9196 (2009).
52. Wood, S. J. et al. a-synuclein fibrillogenesis is nucleation-dependent. Implications
for the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 19509–19512
(1999).
53. LeVine, H., 3rd. Quantification of b-sheet amyloid fibril structures with thioflavin
T. Methods. Enzymol. 309, 274–284 (1999).
54. Winner, B. et al. In vivo demonstration that a-Syn oligomers are toxic. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 4194–4199 (2011).
55. Singh, P. K. et al. Curcumin modulates a-Synuclein aggregation and toxicity. ACS.
Chem. Neurosci. 4, 393–407 (2013).
56. Willander, H. et al. BRICHOS domains efficiently delay fibrillation of amyloid b
peptide. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 31608–31617 (2012).
57. Sreerama, N. & Woody, R. W. Estimation of protein secondary structure from
circular dichroism spectra: comparison of CONTIN, SELCON, and CDSSTR
methods with an expanded reference set. Anal. Biochem. 287, 252–260 (2000).
58. Sreerama, N. & Woody, R. W. On the analysis of membrane protein circular
dichroism spectra. Protein. Sci. 13, 100–112 (2004).
59. Barth, A. Infrared spectroscopy of proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1767,
1073–1101 (2007).
60. Lakowicz, J. R. Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy 2nd edn (Kluwer Academic,
1999).
61. Schwarzinger, S. et al. Sequence-dependent correction of random coil NMR
chemical shifts. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 2970–2978 (2001).
62. Lorenzen, N. et al. How epigallocatechin gallate can inhibit a-synuclein oligomer
toxicity in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 21299–21310 (2014).
63. Abedini, A. & Raleigh, D. P. A critical assessment of the role of helical
intermediates in amyloid formation by natively unfolded proteins and
polypeptides. Protein. Eng. Des. Sel. 22, 453–459 (2009).
64. Campioni, S. et al. The presence of an air-water interface affects formation and
elongation of a-Syn fibrils. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 2866–2875 (2014).
65. Bolognesi, B. et al. ANS binding reveals common features of cytotoxic amyloid
species. ACS. Chem. Biol. 5, 735–740 (2010).
66. Campioni, S. et al. A causative link between the structure of aberrant protein
oligomers and their toxicity. Nat. Chem. Biol. 6, 140–147 (2010).
67. Vamvaca, K., Vogeli, B., Kast, P., Pervushin, K. & Hilvert, D. An enzymatic molten
globule: efficient coupling of folding and catalysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
101, 12860–12864 (2004).
68. Behl, C., Davis, J. B., Lesley, R. & Schubert, D. Hydrogen peroxide mediates
amyloid b protein toxicity. Cell 77, 817–827 (1994).
69. Bharti, A. C., Takada, Y., Shishodia, S. & Aggarwal, B. B. Evidence that receptor
activator of nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B ligand can suppress cell proliferation and
induce apoptosis through activation of a NF-kappa B-independent and TRAF6-
dependent mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 6065–6076 (2004).
70. Wang, X. M. et al. A new microcellular cytotoxicity test based on calcein AM
release. Hum. Immunol. 37, 264–270 (1993).
71. Zhao, H. et al. Detection and characterization of the product of hydroethidine and
intracellular superoxide by HPLC and limitations of fluorescence. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 5727–5732 (2005).
72. Marimpietri, D. et al. Synergistic inhibition of human neuroblastoma-related
angiogenesis by vinblastine and rapamycin. Oncogene. 24, 6785–6795 (2005).
73. Vermes, I., Haanen, C., Steffens-Nakken, H. & Reutelingsperger, C. A novel assay
for apoptosis. Flow cytometric detection of phosphatidylserine expression on
early apoptotic cells using fluorescein labelled Annexin V. J. Immunol. Methods.
184, 39–51 (1995).
74. Uversky, V. N., Li, J. & Fink, A. L. Evidence for a partially folded intermediate in a-
syn fibril formation. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 10737–10744 (2001).
75. Lashuel, H. A., Overk, C. R., Oueslati, A. & Masliah, E. The many faces of a-Syn:
from structure and toxicity to therapeutic target. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 38–48
(2013).
76. Konno, T. Multistep nucleus formation and a separate subunit contribution of the
amyloidgenesis of heat-denatured monellin. Protein. Sci. 10, 2093–2101 (2001).
77. Borbat, P., Ramlall, T. F., Freed, J. H. & Eliezer, D. Inter-helix distances in
lysophospholipid micelle-bound a-Syn from pulsed ESR measurements. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 128, 10004–10005 (2006).
78. Kelly, J. W. Amyloid fibril formation and protein misassembly: a structural quest
for insights into amyloid and prion diseases. Structure. 5, 595–600 (1997).
79. Kelly, J. W. The alternative conformations of amyloidogenic proteins and their
multi-step assembly pathways. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8, 101–106 (1998).
80. Teplow, D. B. Structural and kinetic features of amyloid b protein fibrillogenesis.
Amyloid. 5, 121–142 (1998).
81. Pan, K. M. et al. Conversion of a-helices into b-sheets features in the formation of
the scrapie prion proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 10962–10966 (1993).
82. Rochet, J. C. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr. Amyloid fibrillogenesis: themes and variations.
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10, 60–68 (2000).
83. Anoop, A. et al. Elucidating the role of disulfide bond on amyloid formation and
fibril reversibility of somatostatin-14: relevance to its storage and secretion. J. Biol.
Chem. 289, 16884–16903 (2014).
84. Maji, S. K. et al. Amino acid position-specific contributions to amyloid b protein
oligomerization. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 23580–23591 (2009).
85. Munishkina, L. A., Phelan, C., Uversky, V. N. & Fink, A. L. Conformational
behavior and aggregation of a-Syn in organic solvents: modeling the effects of
membranes. Biochemistry. 42, 2720–2730 (2003).
86. Fezoui, Y. & Teplow, D. B. Kinetic studies of amyloid b protein fibril assembly.
Differential effects of a-helix stabilization. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36948–36954
(2002).
87. Vamvaca, K., Volles, M. J. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr. The first N-terminal amino acids
of a-Syn are essential for a-helical structure formation in vitro and membrane
binding in yeast. J. Mol. Biol. 389, 413–424 (2009).
88. Sahay, S., Anoop, A., Krishnamoorthy, G. & Maji, S. K. Site-specific fluorescence
dynamics of a-Syn fibrils using time-resolved fluorescence studies: effect of
familial Parkinson’s disease-associated mutations. Biochemistry. 53, 807–809
(2014).
89. Volles, M. J. & Lansbury, P. T., Jr. Relationships between the sequence of a-Syn
and its membrane affinity, fibrillization propensity, and yeast toxicity. J. Mol. Biol.
366, 1510–1522 (2007).
90. Ghosh, D. et al. The Parkinson’s disease-associated H50Q mutation accelerates a-
Syn aggregation in vitro. Biochemistry 52, 6925–6927 (2013).
91. Ghosh, D. et al. The Newly Discovered Parkinson’s Disease Associated Finnish
Mutation (A53E) Attenuates a-Syn Aggregation and Membrane Binding.
Biochemistry. 53, 1619–1621 (2014).
Acknowledgments
The work was supported by grants from DBT (BT/PR14344Med/30/501/2010), (BT/
PR13359/BRB/10/752/2009) and DST (SR/FR/LS-032/2009), Government of India.
Authors wish to acknowledge Central SPM Facility (IRCC, IIT Bombay) for AFM imaging
and SAIF (IIT Bombay) for electron microscopy. D.G. acknowledges UGC (Govt. of India)
for his fellowship.
Author contributions
S.K.M., R.R., P.K.S. and D.G. designed research. D.G., P.K.S., S.S., N.N.J., R.S.J. and A.K.
performed experiment. S.K.M., R.R., A.K., D.G. and S.Sen analyzed data. D.G. prepared
figures. S.K.M. and D.G. wrote the manuscript. All authors gave significant inputs on the
manuscript discussion. A.K. thanks Ramalingaswamy fellowship for financial support and
TIFR for the NMR facility.
Additional information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/
scientificreports
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Ghosh, D. et al. Structure based aggregation studies reveal the
presence of helix-rich intermediate during a-Synuclein aggregation. Sci. Rep. 5, 9228;
DOI:10.1038/srep09228 (2015).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if
the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need
to obtain permissionfrom the licenseholderin order toreproduce the material. To
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
www.nature.com/scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5 : 9228 | DOI: 10.1038/srep09228
15