What do we know about multicomponent
reactions? Mechanisms and trends for the Biginelli,
Hantzsch, Mannich, Passerini and Ugi MCRs
Haline G. O. Alvim,a Eufrˆanio N. da Silva J´uniorb and Brenno A. D. Neto*a
The current manuscript describes the importance, mechanism propositions, evidence and controversies
associated with multicomponent reactions (MCRs). The following multicomponent reactions are
presented and critically evaluated: the Biginelli, Hantzsch, Mannich, Passerini and Ugi reactions. The aim
of this review is to highlight what we already know about the mechanisms associated with these MCRs
and the evidence supporting the proposed reaction pathways. Controversies and prospects are also
discussed herein.
1.
Introduction
Multicomponent reactions (MCRs) are tools of paramount
importance as the central strategy to reach eco-friendly and
sustainable transformations in modern chemistry. MCRs have
many advantages over stepwise linear synthesis (Scheme 1) such
as atom economy, less waste generation, time and energy
economy, less human eﬀort, fewer resources required, easy
purication issues, and high convergence, among others.1
Reactions whereby at least three diﬀerent components are
brought together in a one-pot version, aﬀording a single
product, may be summarised under the term ‘multicomponent
reactions’. In an ideal MCR, however, the majority of the atoms
found in the reagents must be incorporated in the product
structure, otherwise this most important feature of MCRs will
be broken and the reaction should not be labelled as part of the
‘green’ MCR class. By-products from a MCR are well known to
be usually water.
Through MCRs, access to elaborate molecular scaﬀolds
combining both structural diversity and eco-compatible meth-
odologies becomes possible in a single step and in a one-pot
aLaboratory of Medicinal and Technological Chemistry, University of Brasilia
(IQ-UnB). Campus Universit´ario Darcy Ribeiro, P. O. Box 4478, CEP 70904970,
Brasilia-DF, Brazil. E-mail: brenno.ipi@gmail.com; Fax: +55 61 32734149; Tel: +55
61 31073867
bLaboratory of Synthetic and Heterocyclic Chemistry, Institute of Exact Sciences,
Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Minas Gerais, CEP 31270-901, Belo
Horizonte-MG, Brazil. Fax: +55 31 34095700; Tel: +55 31 34095720
Haline G. O. Alvim received her
degree in Chemistry from the
University
of
Brasilia
(UnB,
2011). In 2013, she completed
her Ms.C. in the same University
working in the group of Professor
B. A. D. Neto and Professor
Wender A. da Silva. She is
currently
working
under
the
supervision of Professor Neto
developing new catalytic systems
for
MCRs
and
mechanism
investigations to complete her
Ph.D.
Eufrˆanio N. da Silva J´unior
received his degree in chemistry
from the Catholic University of
Bras´ılia
(UCB).
In
2007,
he
completed his MSc at the Flu-
minense
Federal
University
(UFF) and in 2009 he concluded
his PhD at the University of
Brasilia
(UnB).
In
2010,
he
became Professor of Chemistry
at the Federal University
of
Minas
Gerais
(UFMG).
His
research interests are focused on
click chemistry reactions, mechanism investigation, asymmetric
organocatalysis and on the synthesis of heterocyclic and naph-
thoquinoidal bioactive compounds. Currently, he is also interested
in obtaining uorescent substances for the study of pharmacolog-
ical and DNA-binding properties.
Cite this: RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282
Received 17th September 2014
Accepted 9th October 2014
DOI: 10.1039/c4ra10651b
www.rsc.org/advances
54282 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
REVIEW
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

version. It is therefore natural to observe MCRs as the key steps
for the rapid and eﬃcient synthesis of simple or complex
products.
Although the origin of MCRs dates back to the middle of the
19th century, MCRs have experienced an exponential growth in
importance and usage especially in recent decades, becoming
an unsurpassed synthetic tool in a very prominent position. In
the search for multiple-bond-forming eﬃciency, MCRs may
indeed be labelled as the most promising strategy to reach an
outstanding combination of eﬃciency, atom economy and
sustainability.
The huge interest in MCRs lies not only in their green and
promising characteristics but also in the biological properties
commonly observed for the products synthesized straight from
multicomponent
methodologies.
MCRs
allow
direct
and
elegant access to bioactive compound libraries and meet the
need for never-ending biologically active compound syntheses
and discovery. Many MCR adducts have pronounced biological
activity even in their racemic mixtures, thus boosting the
interest in these compounds and making the process of their
obtainment easier and less costly. As one may expect, tests of
enantiomerically pure compounds are of huge importance2
because the isomers may have distinct activity and/or potency,
but for many MCR derivatives it has been proved that racemic
mixtures may be used3 with no harm.
Despite all the promising features and biological importance
of MCRs, harsh reaction conditions, reagent excesses, high
temperatures, toxic solvents, expensive catalysts, purication
issues, low yields, low selectivity and long reaction times are
drawbacks
still
commonly
observed
for
these
important
synthetic tools. The aforementioned shortcomings diverge,
however, with the benecial features associated with MCRs.
Deeper knowledge and comprehension of the mechanisms
(under catalysed or non-catalysed conditions) is therefore vital
to the development of new catalysts, improved and greener
reaction conditions, rational designs, innovative applications
and for synthetic predictions.
Intermediates from a MCR are typically not isolated,
although sometimes they can be isolated and properly charac-
terized, thus allowing a more precise mechanism proposition
for the transformation; and this issue will be better evaluated
herein in due course. What is really astonishing about MCR
mechanisms is that, independent of the preferred reaction
pathway, all mechanisms lead to the same nal product, as seen
in pictorial Scheme 2. In other words, it can be said that MCRs
proceed in an “all roads lead to Rome” fashion i.e. the main
product may be formed via various but convergent reaction
paths.
Among all MCRs already described, special attention must
be given to the Biginelli, Hantzsch, Mannich, Passerini and Ugi
reactions (Scheme 3). These MCRs are among the most popular,
studied
and
widely
used
in
the
synthesis
of
bioactive
compounds, therefore justifying their importance, practicality
and promising trends. All these aforementioned MCR types
Scheme 1
Pictorial view of a stepwise linear synthesis compared to a
multicomponent reaction (MCR) approach. The advantages of MCRs
are clear-cut in this illustration.
Scheme 2
Pictorial view for three possible reaction mechanisms
associated with multicomponent transformations. It is noteworthy that
even considering two or more reaction pathway possibilities, the ﬁnal
product in a MCR is always the same, independent of the mechanistic
pathway.
Brenno A. D. Neto was born on
December 9th in 1977 in Brazil.
He received his degree in Chem-
istry from the Federal University
of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS,
2000). In 2006, he completed his
Ph.D. in the same University.
Aer a period of postdoctoral
work at Tecnopuc (2007) and as a
Professor at PUCRS (2008), he
became a Professor of Organic
and Medicinal Chemistry at the
University of Bras´ılia (UnB, since
2009), the University located in the Federal Capital. His research
interests include the development of new catalysts and ionic liquids,
mechanistic investigation, MCRs and applications of rationally
designed selective uorescent cell markers. His independent career
began in the middle of 2006. Until then, he had published 10
articles and, aer that (2007–2014), he published more than 50
articles underpinning his research independence. Professor Neto
has received some national and international awards, among which
can be highlighted: BMOS/RSC Young Investigator Award (2013),
Honourable Mention for the Best Brazilian Thesis in Chemistry
2013 (Category: Advisor) and Petrobras Inventor Award for the best-
led patent in 2008.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54283
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

have
already
been
studied
by
diﬀerent approaches
and
spectroscopic/spectrometric
techniques
which
allowed
for
diverse mechanism propositions depicted from the data
generated for all of them.
As expected, all these MCRs have at least two possible reac-
tion pathways. The mechanism disclosed is therefore essential
towards rational design of catalysts, ligands, reagents, stereo-
and electronic controls and, most importantly, for the predic-
tion of new molecules which may be useful as bioactive
compounds or synthetic intermediates in total syntheses and
others. MCR mechanisms generally evoke a cascade of succes-
sive bimolecular reactions, although sometimes termolecular
steps, requiring the participation of at least three chemical
entities in the transition state, are also evoked to explain a
specic transformation to aﬀord a particular intermediate or
nal product during a MCR.
At this point it is important to limit the scope of this tutorial
review. In the present manuscript, it is intended that the focus
will be the mechanism propositions, the evidence and results to
support these propositions, the controversies and trends asso-
ciated with these ve widely used MCRs i.e. the Biginelli,
Hantzsch, Mannich, Passerini and Ugi reactions. In this
manuscript, only those articles with some contribution to the
comprehension of the evoked mechanisms for these ve
important MCRs are cited, independently of whether theoretical
or experimental data (or both) are presented. There are several
manuscripts available in the scientic literature with a simple
mechanistic description (or proposition or plausible mecha-
nism) without any supportive data. This kind of article will only
be cited as an exception and, in a general way, these publica-
tions are not the object of this review. A critical evaluation of the
evidence and propositions for each of those MCRs is to be given
and, nally, some trends are suggested, regarding the mecha-
nism investigation of the MCRs in question.
2.
The Biginelli multicomponent
reaction
The Biginelli MCR (Scheme 3) is a three-component reaction
(3CR) discovered in 1891 by Pietro Biginelli.4 This very elegant
and useful 3CR is widely used in the synthesis of 3,4-dihy-
dropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones (or -thiones), which are also referred
to as DHPMs. DHPMs are especially important because of their
commonly observed biological activities as calcium channel
modulators, mitotic Kinesin inhibitors, adrenergic receptor
antagonists, antibacterials, antivirals, and others, as reviewed
elsewhere.5 Interestingly, many DHPMs are successfully tested
in their racemic mixtures with impressive results.6 Today, there
are three (hotly) debated mechanism propositions accepted for
this MCR i.e. iminium-, enamine- or Knoevenagel mechanisms,
which will be analysed individually. For those readers interested
in a more detailed description of the evolution of the Biginelli
reaction mechanism, some helpful reviews are available.7,8
Interestingly, this elegant MCR was born to be controversial,
especially if one takes into account that the original structure
suggested for the Biginelli adduct was not a heterocycle, but an
open chain structure (an uramidocrotonate derivative as shown
in Scheme 4) from the reaction of a mixture of urea, salicy-
laldehyde, and ethyl acetoacetate at reux in absolute ethanol.
The structure initially assigned had to be later revisited by
Pietro Biginelli himself in 1893, the year the full account of the
Biginelli reaction was published.4
What today has become known as the Knoevenagel mecha-
nism (Scheme 5) is based on the ndings of Sweet and Fissekis.9
Although the Knoevenagel-based mechanism is still accepted as
a possible reaction pathway for the three-component Biginelli
reaction, it is unlikely, since further evidence indicates other
preferred reaction pathways, as will be shown in this section.
Scheme 4
The Biginelli MCR as originally reported by Pietro Biginelli in
1891.4 Two years later (1893), Biginelli published full accounts of the
reaction revisiting the original structure.4
Scheme 3
Five examples of MCRs. The Biginelli, Hantzsch, Mannich,
Passerini and Ugi reactions are among the most useful, used and
studied MCRs.
54284 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

The enamine mechanism (Scheme 6) has its origin in the
mechanistic investigation of Folkers and Johnson in 1933,10
which was indeed the rst attempt at a mechanistic rationale of
the Biginelli reaction transformation. In their work10 it was
suggested that this 3CR may proceed via one of the three
possible
primary
bimolecular
reaction
intermediates
(Scheme 7) aﬀorded by a combination of urea, benzaldehyde
and ethyl acetoacetate (usually referred to as the model Biginelli
reaction).
Interestingly, in 2007 Cepanec and coworkers11 presented a
series of experiments showing the Biginelli 3CR goes through
the enamine mechanism when catalysed by SbCl3 in anhydrous
MeCN. In the report, bimolecular reactions catalysed by SbCl3
are
described
to
depict
the
preferred
reaction
pathway
(Scheme 8). The mixture of ethyl acetoacetate and urea aﬀorded
the ureidocrotonate intermediate which could be isolated in 9%
yield aer a preparative chromatography. When treated with
benzaldehyde (even at room temperature) the ureidocrotonate
intermediate aﬀorded the expected DHPM in almost quantita-
tive yields. The other two possible combinations (ethyl acetoa-
cetate + benzaldehyde or urea + benzaldehyde) aﬀorded no
product under the tested conditions (Scheme 8).
Cepanec
and
coworkers11
also
suggested
that
many
described Biginelli reactions catalysed by Lewis acids in aprotic
solvents probably follow this reaction pathway; and that many
reports have only assumed a plausible mechanism according to
Folkers,10 Johnson10 and Kappe12 without any real proof. Further
work of Litvic and coworkers13 using [Al(H2O)6](BF4)3 as the
catalyst returned similar results, in accordance with Cepanec's
description.11
In 1997, Kappe12 reported a re-examination of the Biginelli
mechanism based on NMR experiments, providing therefore
strong evidence for the iminium mechanism (Scheme 9).
Mixtures of urea (or N-methylurea), benzaldehyde and ethyl
acetoacetate were monitored by 1H and 13C NMR (in CD3OH in
the presence of catalytic amounts of HCl). All evidence pointed
rmly
to
the
iminium
mechanism
and
discarded
the
Scheme 5
The Knoevenagel mechanism for the Biginelli reaction.
Scheme 6
The enamine-based mechanism for the Biginelli reaction.
Scheme 7
Three possible primary bimolecular reaction intermediates
which may aﬀord the Biginelli adduct. Scheme based on the original
work of Folkers and Johnson.10 Note that the bisureide derivative
(Possibility III) is evoked as the intermediate and not the iminium ion
(from the ﬁrst urea addition to the aldehyde). Two urea additions to the
aldehyde yield the bisureide intermediate.
Scheme 8
SbCl3 (20–100 mol%) as the promoter of the reaction in
anhydrous MeCN (room temperature to reﬂux). The experiments
allowed the determination of the enamine mechanism as the preferred
reaction pathway for the Biginelli reaction.11
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54285
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

Knoevenagel and enamine pathways. The results also indicated
the rst urea addition to the aldehyde as the rate-determining
step (slow). Interestingly, it is suggested that in the presence
of ethyl acetoacetate, the iminium ion undergoes an additional
reaction towards the Biginelli adduct formation, whereas in the
absence of the 1,3-dicarbonyl compound the second urea
addition
takes
place
furnishing
the
bisureide
derivative
(Scheme 10). Arguing that the equilibrium for the formation of
the intermediates from the Knoevenagel and enamine pathways
lies far to the side of the reactants, and based on the experi-
mental evidence, these two reaction pathways were discarded.
Lately, the mechanism of the Biginelli reaction was investi-
gated using Bronsted acid catalysis (formic acid) under the light
of both electrospray (tandem) mass spectrometry – ESI-MS(/MS)
– and DFT calculations.14 The online reaction monitoring
allowed interesting conclusions. In the absence of ethyl
acetoacetate, the authors were capable of detecting and char-
acterizing not only the iminium intermediate (m/z 149) but also
the protonated bisureide derivative (m/z 209) as well. Protonated
hemiaminal derivative (m/z 167) could also be intercepted
and characterized prior to its dehydration, aﬀording the
N-acyliminium derivative (m/z 149). The online monitoring of
the 3CR (1 mmol of each reagent of the model reaction in
aqueous methanol solution (1 : 1 v/v) and 0.1% of formic acid)
returned very elucidative results. By means of ESI-MS(/MS) it
was possible to follow the reaction for more than 24 h. Aer
5 min, however, the protonated Biginelli adducted (m/z 261)
could already be noted in the spectrum and subjected to
structural characterization by ESI-MS/MS. The addition of urea
to the 1,3-dicabonyl (Scheme 11) aﬀorded a postulated dormant
intermediate that reverts to reagents during the course of the
reaction. A mixture of ethyl acetoacetate and urea in the absence
of the aldehyde pointed to the same conclusions from the 3CR
(Scheme 11) and no protonated enamine (m/z 173) could be
detected.
The reaction of ethyl acetoacetate and benzaldehyde in the
absence of urea was conducted as well. Aer 24 h some inter-
mediates postulated from the Knoevenagel mechanism were
detected and characterized (Scheme 12). Except for the inter-
mediate of m/z 237 no other intermediate could be detected
during the monitoring of the 3CR version. In the bimolecular
version, however, the protonated product from the condensa-
tion reaction (m/z 219), and both the protonated benzaldehyde
(m/z 107) and ethyl acetoacetate (m/z 131) could be noted. The
MS data allowed the authors to suggest that the iminium
mechanism is highly favoured under Bronsted acid catalysis.
DFT calculations (including solvent eﬀects) have also indi-
cated that the iminium mechanism is the kinetically and ther-
modynamically favoured one. Curiously, DFT calculations for
the Knoevenagel mechanism revealed the highest energy
barrier in accordance with MS data. Based on the data obtained
by this landmark work,14 the authors could suggest that the
iminium pathway (as proposed by Kappe12) is highly favoured
and the enamine and Knoevenagel pathways could be kineti-
cally discarded.
A recent report questioned the conclusions that Lewis acids
may prefer the enamine-like reaction pathway.15 The mecha-
nism of the Lewis acid-catalysed Biginelli reaction has been
Scheme 9
The iminium mechanism for the Biginelli reaction.
Scheme 11
A postulated dormant intermediate formation from the
enamine
reaction
pathway
detected
and
characterized
by
ESI-MS(/MS).14
Those
intermediates
were
detected
in
the
three-component reaction or in the bimolecular reaction between
urea and ethyl acetoacetate in the absence of benzaldehyde.
Scheme 10
The iminium-based mechanism depicted from the reex-
amination of the Biginelli mechanism based on 1H and 13C NMR.12 The
use of N-methylurea instead of urea aﬀorded similar results. Note the
highly reactive N-acyliminium is the key intermediate instead of the
bisureide derivative.
54286 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

shown to be far more complex than Bronsted-catalysed versions
of the reaction. The report re-examined the mechanism of the
reaction catalysed by CuCl2 in the ionic liquid (IL) 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium hexauorophosphate (BMI$PF6). Based on
1H and 13C NMR, ESI-MS(/MS) and theoretical calculations
(DFT), the authors showed the role of the reagents in the
formation and stabilization of the reactive intermediates,
demonstrating, therefore, important features for the Lewis acid-
catalysed 3CR (Scheme 13).
Remarkably, the conclusion was that even through a more
complex mechanism, the authors could claim the preferred
reaction pathway is based on the iminium mechanism and
indicated that the conclusions drawn by Kappe12 were essen-
tially correct even considering a Lewis acid-catalysed version of
the Biginelli reaction. The NMR data proved to be in accordance
with the observed intermediates detected and characterized by
ESI-MS(/MS). DFT calculations helped in the comprehension of
the anion eﬀect ([PF6]) (from BMI$PF6) for the formation and
stabilization of the charged and polar intermediates. Indeed,
the IL eﬀect was seen to play a fundamental role in the success
of the catalytic system (Lewis acid catalysis in ILs). The main IL
eﬀects depicted by DFT calculations was the formation of ion
pairs (and larger supramolecular aggregates) and the orienta-
tion of the reagents in the proposed catalytic cycle. The authors
made a comment that the actual catalytic cycle is, indeed, more
complex than the usually presented “textbook” mechanism in
which a Lewis acid is shown interacting with the aldehyde to
activate its carbonyl towards a nucleophilic addition. NMR
experiments were found in accordance with DFT calculations
and a deshielding eﬀect of the C]O (of the aldehyde) was noted
in the presence of the Lewis acid and the IL.
An investigation into the mechanism of the Biginelli reaction
(model reaction) catalysed by a Bronsted acid-containing task-
specic
ionic
liquid
(TSIL)
incorporating
anionic
heteropolyacid ([PW12O40]3), and carried out in the IL 3-
methylimidazolium
(bis(triuoromethylsulfonyl)imide)
(BMI$NTf2), by means of ESI-MS(/MS) and DFT calculations,
indicated once more that the iminium pathway was preferred
over the enamine or Knoevenagel mechanisms.16 It is worth
noting that, just like De Souza et al.,14 the authors noted the
presence of a dormant intermediate of m/z 237 (see the struc-
ture in Scheme 12) which is in accordance with the Knoevenagel
reaction pathway. However, all other detected and characterized
intermediates were in accordance with the N-acyliminium
mechanism re-examined by Kappe;12 and no other Knoevenagel-
based intermediate could be detected during the reaction time
monitoring. Initial addition of ethyl acetoacetate to benzalde-
hyde was reversible, and a diﬀerent reaction pathway rather
than the iminium mechanism would be very unlikely.
At this point it is important to highlight to readers that until
recently, no actual quantitative kinetic study was available for
the Biginelli reaction. If one considers the three proposed
reaction mechanisms and the number of possible intermedi-
ates, it can be appreciated how diﬃcult the task of complete
kinetic investigation of the Biginelli reaction is. However, to
overcome this major problem, a global kinetic approach varying
the concentration of the three substrates was performed by Neto
and coworkers.17 This work was indeed the rst to show a
kinetic study on the Biginelli reaction supporting the proposed
mechanism. In the study the reaction was catalysed by a dual
Scheme 12
A postulated dormant intermediate from the Knoevenagel
reaction pathway detected and characterized by ESI-MS(/MS).14 The
intermediate of m/z 237 could be detected in the three-component
reaction, but the other key intermediate (m/z 219) could only be
detected after 24 h of reaction from a mixture of ethyl acetoacetate
and benzaldehyde in the absence of urea.
Scheme 13
Catalytic cycle for the Lewis acid-catalysed Biginelli
reaction (model reaction) based on the detected (and characterized)
intermediates monitored by ESI(+)-MS(/MS).15 The detected interme-
diates are indicated by their respective m/z. Note the reagents play a
role in the formation and stabilization of the copper complex deriva-
tives and are thus essential to further the reaction.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54287
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

activation mode TSIL as the catalyst, i.e. a TSIL with a Bronsted
acid in the cation and a Lewis acid in the anion. The study was
also based on the conclusions supported by ESI-MS(/MS), NMR
(1H and 13C) and DFT calculations. Based on all data obtained
from the kinetics and spectroscopic/spectrometric analyses, the
authors could prove a clear-cut preference for the iminium
mechanism and could (undoubtedly) discard the possibility of
the enamine or Knoevenagel pathways. The preferred mecha-
nism, promoted by the catalyst with dual activation mode,
basically followed the N-acyliminium pathway (Scheme 14) with
a specic role for the cation (Bronsted acid) and for the anion
(Lewis acid).
The mechanism, which is based on experimental data, is
the rst describing the cooperative catalytic eﬀect of a
Bronsted and Lewis acid in the synthesis of DHPM. The IL
eﬀect was disclosed for the reactions in the IL 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium tetrauoroborate (BMI$BF4), showing
the anion had a role not only in the stabilization of charge
and polar intermediates through ion-pairing eﬀect, but also
in the activation of the protonated aldehyde, as shown in
Scheme 15. Once the aldehyde is activated, the rst urea
addition is observed and, once more, this reaction step is in
accordance with the iminium mechanism for the Biginelli
reaction. A comment on the kinetic experiments is also
necessary. Although a global kinetic analysis was performed,
the kinetic constants returned interesting results. The anal-
yses revealed the only plausible mechanism is the iminium
mechanism and the other two could be discarded. Usually,
urea excess is used in most of the reported articles describing
the Biginelli synthesis. However, the authors proved that,
when the iminium mechanism is the preferential reaction
Scheme 14
Proposed catalytic mechanism promoted by a task-speciﬁc ionic liquid with dual activation mode, in which both the anion (iron
complex) and the cation (imidazolium) moieties play a role in promoting the reaction.17 Note that this proposed mechanism is compatible with
the iminium mechanism for the Biginelli reaction.
Scheme 15
Aldehyde activation by the cation of the task-speciﬁc
ionic liquid and ionic liquid eﬀect (ion-pairing formation) in BMI$BF4.17
The calculated Fukui functions of the indicated atoms are also shown.
Note that once the aldehyde is activated, the urea addition is more
prone to take place and the reaction will continue through the iminium
mechanism.
54288 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

pathway, the only reagent which should not be used in excess
is urea.
Solvent eﬀects are usually neglected issues with regard to the
Biginelli 3CR. Recently, Clark and coworkers18 described a
landmark investigation into catalytic and solvent eﬀects,
demonstrating their combined role. A vital contribution of the
article is the reactivity analysis of the 1,3-dicarbonyl compound
and how the solvent choice aﬀects its reactivity and the yields of
the reaction. The authors concluded that the solvent has a huge
inuence over the reaction, but they also demonstrated that the
quantity of available enol tautomer in the reaction mixture is
fundamental to further the reaction. As one can expect, the
quantity of the available enol tautomer is directly associated
with the solvent choice. It is also important to highlight that
authors tested the Biginelli mechanism using a classical
Bronsted acid (HCl) and a Lewis acid (ZnCl2). Based on their
analyses, it was possible to conclude that the mechanism
indicated by Kappe12 seems to be correct even with Lewis acids.
Conclusions proved to be also in agreement with those reported
by Neto15 for the reactions conducted in ILs, and in opposition
to those of Cepanec11 and Litvic.13
Despite the fact that the Biginelli reaction is typically cata-
lysed by a Bronsted or a Lewis acid, it is also possible to nd an
interesting mechanistic investigation by a Bronsted base-
catalysed version of the reaction.19 It has been shown that the
reaction pathway is mostly dependent on the use of urea or
thiourea. The authors' conclusions were based on reactions of
pre-formed compounds known as possible intermediates of the
Biginelli-like reaction (Scheme 16) with urea or thiourea.
In the original publication,19 the authors did not name the
two reaction pathways (shown in Scheme 16) as Knoevenagel-
and bisureide-based mechanisms; however, we would like to do
so now. In the Knoevenagel-based pathway it is noted that the
reaction proceeds almost quantitatively with thiourea, whereas
in the reaction with urea as the reagent, the observed yield of
the Biginelli adduct was very low. In the meantime, the reaction
of the bisureide intermediate with urea aﬀorded the Biginelli
adduct in almost quantitative yields. Based on the experimental
observations, the authors were able to propose a mechanistic
rationale for the Biginelli-like reaction under basic conditions
(Scheme 17).
Later, based on ESI-MS(/MS) analysis, a diﬀerent mecha-
nistic proposition for a base-catalysed Biginelli reaction showed
a preferred reaction pathway favouring the enamine-like
mechanism (Scheme 18).20
Curiously, the intermediate of m/z 279 was detected and
characterized in the positive ion mode, therefore in its
protonated form, despite the fact that the reaction was base-
catalysed.
One last and important feature of the Biginelli reaction is the
so-called ‘catalyst-free’ version. Very recently, it has been
demonstrated that reactions conducted without any catalyst,
and in a solvent-free versions, have a clear competition between
the three possible mechanisms.21 The conclusions were based
on NMR, DFT calculations and, mainly, on kinetics and high
resolution quantitative ESI-MS(/MS) analyses using a charge-
Scheme
16
Reaction
of
urea
and
thiourea
with
pre-formed
intermediates.19
Scheme 17
Mechanism rationale for the Biginelli reaction under basic
conditions.19 Note that, for the ﬁrst time, a Biginelli-type reaction had
two totally diﬀerent mechanisms based on a reagent selection (urea or
thiourea).
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54289
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

tagged aldehyde, which in turn, allowed an online monitoring
of the formation and consumption of the reagents, intermedi-
ates and the nal Biginelli adduct (Scheme 19) without the need
of protonation or deprotonation (the charge tag strategy22 for
MS). The strategy of using charge-tagged reagents proved to be
essential to a precise mechanistic analysis without any catalyst,
especially because protonation (or deprotonation) or coordina-
tion with any metal (to follow a residual charge from complex
formation) would result in a considerable change in the reac-
tivity of the reagents, therefore not representing the real
mechanism of a catalyst-free version of the reaction.
A very important conclusion from the study was that the role
of a catalyst is not only to improve yields and shorten reaction
times, but the promoter also plays a fundamental role in
improving the selectivity towards one reaction pathway, which
was severely compromised without any catalyst. This knowledge
is fundamental to the achievement of more eﬃcient catalysts
and greener reaction conditions, especially for the asymmetric
versions of the Biginelli MCR.
3.
The Hantzsch multicomponent
reaction
The Hantzsch synthesis is a 3CR announced in the 19th century
by Arthur Hantzsch (1882) and widely used for direct synthesis
of 1,4-dihydropyridine (DHPs) derivatives. Many DHPs are
commonly known for their biological activity as calcium
channel blockers, as well as many other pharmacological
activities such as antitumoral, bronchodilating, antidiabetic,
neurotropic, HIV protease inhibitors described for several
DHPs.6 Interestingly, because of DHPs' similarity with the
natural product enzyme co-factors NAD(P)H and their oxidized
forms NAD(P), the Hantzsch adducts (also referred to as
Hantzsch esters) proved to have a great potential as hydride (or
hydrogen) transfer reagents.6 These reactions include several
asymmetric versions of the H-transfer process with excellent
levels of enantioselectivities.6 The possibility of biological and
chemical application of DHPs has fostered interest in these
derivatives. As a consequence, many reports describing new
methodologies and conditions for the synthesis of these
important compounds have been described in the scientic
literature.6 Despite the large number of available methodologies
for the synthesis of DHPs, the mechanism of the Hantzsch 3CR
is still the object of scientic debates.
The Hantzsch 3CR has, perhaps, one of the most complexes
mechanisms among all MCRs. In a general way, the mechanism
of the Hantzsch reaction is not even appropriately discussed in
review articles. Depending on the reaction conditions and
substrates selected for the transformation, side reactions may
take place in competition with the Hantzsch ester formation.
Today, ve reaction pathways may be summarized for the
Hantzsch 3CR, as seen in Scheme 20. Once more, we do not
intend to describe the evolution of the mechanism proposi-
tions, rather preferring to focus on the evidence published to
support these ve possible mechanistic paths. Therefore,
although this topic is usually overviewed, the readers are urged
to peruse comprehensive surveys on the subject to understand
the history behind these propositions. Overall, these proposi-
tions are logical (Scheme 20) and have been evoked based on
the general knowledge of reaction mechanisms and in the
pioneering works dating back to the 19th century. With the
benet of hindsight, it now seems that a better critical evalua-
tion of these mechanisms is possible. Not surprisingly, only a
few reports describe a critical analysis of the Hantzsch
Scheme 18
Base-catalysed Biginelli reaction proposition based on
ESI-MS(/MS) analyses.20 Note that the intermediate of m/z 279 was
detected
and
characterized
by
ESI(+)-MS/MS,
therefore
in
its
protonated form (the proton has been omitted for clarity).
Scheme 19
The proposed mechanistic competition for the catalyst-
free (and solvent-free) Biginelli reaction.21 The charge-tagged inter-
mediates have been detected and characterized by ESI(+)-MS and
ESI(+)-MS/MS. Note the strategy allowed the online monitoring
without protonation or deprotonation of the intermediates.
54290 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

mechanism and suggest a preferred reaction pathway based on
solid evidences. A few reports also describe the mechanism for
side reactions, which in some cases, depending on the interest,
the sideproduct may be of note as well.
Based on 15N and 13C NMR spectroscopy, a study by Katritzky
and coworkers23 reported one of the most solid contributions
towards the understanding of this truncated mechanism. The
report also describes previously published evidence for these
ve propositions. Before this ground-breaking work,23 the
mechanistic evidences were mostly based on pH eﬀects on
substituted benzaldehyde derivatives and on the basis of
product composition, and are therefore not of interest to this
review. In the NMR study, it was observed that two intermedi-
ates are always formed i.e. the enamine (Scheme 20, Path I) and
the chalcone analogue (Scheme 20, Path II), which is formed
aer the rst water elimination. The dienamine intermediate
(Scheme 20, Path V) could be detected in the early stages of the
reaction, therefore indicating this compound was a metastable
sideproduct instead of an actual intermediate in the reaction.
Interestingly, depending on the nature of the 1,3-dicarbonyl
reagent, the dienamine was not observed. Preformed enamine
and chalcone (Scheme 20, Paths I and II) intermediates have
been used in the mechanism investigation and pointed to a
preferred reaction pathway such as Path IV shown in Scheme
20. This result was found in accordance with the NMR moni-
toring of the 3CR. The authors tested several 1,3-dicarbonyl
derivatives with similar results and the rate limiting step of the
Hantzsch reaction has also been suggested as the chalcone
analogue formation.
The Hantzsch MCR is highly sensitive to the reaction
conditions i.e. presence or absence of a solvent, catalysed and
non-catalysed versions, substituent eﬀects on the reagents,
Scheme 20
Possible mechanistic paths currently evoked for the Hantzsch MCR.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54291
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

reaction time, temperature, presence of a base or an acid and
etc. For this reason, side reactions have been noted and
described with improved conditions to select the formation of
other products rather than the Hantzsch ester. All these afore-
mentioned variants usually have pronounced eﬀects on the
Hantzsch 3CR. Considering however some of the side-products
observed during the reaction are of synthetic interest, and that
the competitive mechanisms are also important to understand
the mechanism of the Hantzsch reaction, we believe it is worth
looking closely at reports with a mechanistic contribution to
understand these side reactions.
Aromatized compounds from the oxidation of the Hantzsch
ester, 2-arylpyridine and 1,2-dihydropyridine derivatives have
been described to form competitively from the Hantzsch reac-
tion (Fig. 1)24 instead of the expected 1,4-dihydropyridine.
Improved conditions and the competitive mechanism to select
the formation of DHPs or 2-arylpyridine derivatives have been
summarized in the study and a mechanism was evaluated
(Scheme 21).24 Several parameters were tested to select one of
the possible products. Temperature, solvents, base presence (or
absence) and reaction time were among the investigated
parameters. The results showed that all of these parameters had
an important role for selecting the synthesis of one of these
products (Fig. 1). Remarkably, good selectivities could be
observed for the formation of the Hantzsch ester, the 1,2-dihy-
dropyridine and for the 2-arylpyridines. The product selection,
as one can expect, was closely associated with good control of all
described reaction conditions.
A compelling study demonstrated three competitive reaction
pathways for the condensation of 5-aminopyrazoles, aldehydes,
and 1,3-cyclic diketones (Scheme 22).25 The reaction could
aﬀord the Hantzsch-type ester (Scheme 22, Path A), the
Biginelli-type adduct (Scheme 22, Path B) or pyrazolo[4,3-c]
quinolizin-9-one products (Scheme 22, Path C). Temperature
and the nature of the catalyst also played a fundamental role in
the mechanism selection. At ambient temperature and under
neutral conditions the reaction preferentially proceeds via the
formation of a kinetically controlled intermediate, thus yielding
a Biginelli-type adduct, as shown in Scheme 23.
Upon increasing the reaction temperature and by adding
triethylamine to the mixture it was possible to demonstrate the
condensation undergone preferentially
through
a tricycle
compound, which is a common intermediate in the competi-
tion between the Hantzsch-type reaction and the formation of
pyrazoloquinolinone products (Scheme 23).
To select between the Hantzsch-type reaction and the
formation of pyrazoloquinolinone, not only does temperature
play a role, but the nature of the amine (catalyst) also had a
crucial role to further the transformation of the common
tricyclic
intermediate.
It
was
shown
that
tertiary
bases
(triethylamine or N-methylmorpholine) favoured the Hantzsch-
like pathway, whereas strong bases of relatively small size (e.g.
hydroxide, or methoxide) aﬀorded either mixtures or exclusively
pyrazoloquinolinones (depending on the reaction conditions)
because such bases could act as nucleophiles.
Later, two other important works26,27 described a side-reaction
from the Hantzsch(-like) reaction, and the mechanisms were
based on these already shown in Schemes 21 and 23.
Recently, a breakthrough was published by Garden, Eberlin
and coworkers28 describing a mechanistic investigation of the
Hantzsch reaction using charge-tagged reagents (the charge tag
strategy22) for ESI-MS(/MS) online monitoring of the reaction.
The study allowed the proposition of a comprehensive mecha-
nism and the equilibriums involved (Scheme 24). Moreover, the
results obtained by ESI-MS(/MS) were found to be in accordance
with some conclusions depicted by NMR analyses23 such as that
the Knoevenagel-like intermediate seemed indeed to participate
in the rate limiting step of the Hantzsch reaction.
4.
The Mannich multicomponent
reaction
The Mannich 3CR (discovered in 1912) is a very useful synthetic
tool applied in the synthesis of b-amino carbonyl compounds
(BAC). Among all MCRs, the Mannich 3CR has the least
controversial mechanism and its reaction pathway is almost
universally accepted. Interestingly, there are many asymmetric
catalysed versions of the Mannich MCR. The Mannich MCR is
also called ‘direct Mannich’ reaction. When preformed enolates
(or modied enolates) are used, the Mannich reaction is
referred to as the indirect Mannich reaction,29 and this version
is also widely used. The most controversial issue related to the
Mannich MCR is not the mechanism itself, but the chiral
induction step involved in this transformation. This is espe-
cially true for organocatalysed versions of the Mannich MCR
because the observed stereocontrol is not yet well understood,
but this issue has already been reviewed for the Mannich
reaction.30 As one can expect, any new chiral system has unique
transition states and stereocontrol associated with the trans-
formation. Even though the basic Mannich reaction mecha-
nism has the same sequence, that is, imine (or iminium)
formation followed by trapping the enol (or enolate), aﬀording
the b-amino carbonyl compound. The imine (or iminium)
Fig. 1
Products that could be observed in the Hantzsch reaction. (Top)
1,4-Dihydropyridine (Hantzsch ester, DHP). (Bottom) From left to right:
the aromatized compound, 2-arylpyridine and 1,2-dihydropyridine
derivatives. The formation of such compounds is highly dependent on
the reaction conditions and their formation can be tuned by using the
appropriate reactional condition.24
54292 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

intermediate
is
formed
from
the
condensation
reaction
between the aldehyde and the amine (primary or secondary)
and it is the rst step of the reaction.
The rst plausible attempt to understand the Mannich 3CR
mechanism was based on a kinetic approach using ethyl-
malonic acid with formaldehyde and dimethylamine as the
model reaction.31 It is interesting to highlight that, based on
their results, the authors could propose a very accurate mech-
anism for the transformation (Scheme 25) in 1949.
The study proposed that the Mannich 3CR follows third
order kinetics and, therefore, any further mechanistic consid-
eration should take this fact into account. Alternative routes
were also proposed32 and refuted,33 but with no signicant
diﬀerences from that shown in Scheme 25, that is, the basis for
the mechanism was that proposed by Alexander and Underhill
in 1949.31 Since then, some new approaches have been used in
the investigation of the direct Mannich mechanism, such as
isotopic labelling,34 infrared35 (also using organozinc reactants),
NMR36 (for a Mannich-type reaction) and ESI-MS(/MS) for the
Mannich-type a-methylenation of ketoesters.37 These contribu-
tions, like the studies of the indirect Mannich version, allowed
the consolidation of the iminium formation (from the aldehyde
and amine condensation) as the key intermediate for the
Mannich MCR. Interestingly, this is the main diﬀerence
observed in the current accepted mechanism for the direct
Scheme 21
Formation of 2-arylpyridine derivatives in competition with the Hantzsch reaction expected pathway.24 Note that 1,2-dihy-
dropyridines are formed prior to the formation of 2-arylpyridines and, depending on the reaction conditions used, this could be the major
product isolated.
Scheme 22
Three possible reaction pathways for the condensation of
5-aminopyrazoles, aldehydes, and 1,3-cyclic diketones.25
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54293
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

Mannich reaction when compared to the original proposition of
Alexander and Underhill.31
Except for asymmetric versions, which means that the cata-
lytic system has unique characteristics and requires specic
investigations (especially for the understanding of chiral
induction), a direct investigation of the Mannich 3CR has only
very recently been reported and the study was based on
ESI-MS(/MS) and DFT calculation,38 which also revealed the role
of ion-pairing eﬀects (ionic liquid eﬀect) for reaction success
(Scheme 26).
Despite the direct observation of the charged intermediates and
the contribution to the comprehension of the positive intervention
of ionic liquids, once again, the mechanism and the data sup-
porting it pointed to the accuracy of the original proposition.
Scheme 23
The proposed mechanism for the condensation of 5-
aminopyrazoles,
aldehydes,
and
1,3-cyclic
diketones
based
on
experimental evidence.25
Scheme 24
The Hantzsch 3CR mechanism proposition based on ESI-MS(/MS) analyses using the charge tag strategy for MS online monitoring.28
Scheme 25
The three-component Mannich reaction mechanism as
proposed by Alexander and Underhill.31 Note it is an acid-catalysed
version and no imine (or iminium) is noted in the reaction mechanism.
54294 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

5.
The Passerini and Ugi
multicomponent reactions
The Passerini (announced in 1921) 3CR and Ugi 4CR (described
in 1959) reactions are part of a class of MCRs called isocyanide-
based MCRs (also referred to as IMCRs). These two IMCRs are
intimately bonded and their mechanisms have many common
features. We therefore decided to discuss their mechanisms in a
single section. Variations for the Ugi and Passerini IMCRs and
the contributions from these variations to the understanding of
the mechanism involved with these two MCRs have been
already reviewed.39 The chemistry of isocyanide derivatives plays
a role as well, and the unique properties and reactivity of such
compounds have already been reviewed.40
Despite their many similarities, the diﬀerences are also
important. The Passerini reaction, for instance, is typically
accelerated in aprotic solvents, indicating a non-ionic mecha-
nism and thus contrasting with the Ugi reaction, as reviewed
elsewhere.40 A plausible mechanism for the Passerini 3CR is
shown in Scheme 27. The Passerini 3CR mechanism is based on
the isocyanide insertion in the loosely hydrogen-bonded adduct
aﬀorded from the acid and aldehyde interaction. The interme-
diate with the three components has not been isolated and
immediately undergoes a rearrangement, aﬀording the Passer-
ini adduct.
The importance of the hydrogen-bonded structure has been
evidenced by the work of Lamberth and coworkers41 of a highly
stereoselective Passerini reaction. Curiously, in 1951 a third-
degree reaction order was proposed based on kinetic data.42
The proposition already shown in Scheme 27 fulls this
hypothesis and was found to be in accordance with much
evidence.43
Breakthrough work was later published by Floriani and
coworkers44 describing the role of TiCl4 as a Lewis acid
promoter of the Passerini reaction (Scheme 28).
The study pointed to a major diﬀerence from Bronsted- and
Lewis-catalysed Passerini, which is, using titanium as the metal,
self-assembling properties are observed for the reagents around
the metal centre. In general, this may be the whole idea for
metal-catalysed Passerini reaction, especially for the d (transi-
tion metals) and f (lanthanide and actinide) metals. Some
asymmetric versions of the Passerini reaction have already been
described using chiral transition metal complexes45 and, in this
sense, the role of the reagents for the reactive intermediates
must also play a role during the chiral induction step.
A recent theoretical study46 provided a seminal contribution
based exclusively on theoretical calculations that helped
understand the Passerini reaction mechanism more fully.
Transition states with four-components were calculated, as
shown in Scheme 29. The role of an extra acidic component (the
Scheme 26
Mannich three-component catalytic cycle with ionic liquid eﬀect under Bronsted acid catalysis.38 Note the ion-pairing eﬀect (right)
stabilizes the charged intermediates from the catalytic cycle (left). Also note the iminium ion formation from the condensation of the aldehyde
treated with the amine.
Scheme 27
The proposed mechanism for the Passerini three-
component reaction based on the literature evidence.40
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54295
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

fourth component) to facilitate the observed rearrangements
before the nal adduct formation was demonstrated. Based on
the results, the authors suggested that the Passerini reaction
undergoes a pseudo-four-component reaction pathway to aﬀord
the desired product.
The Ugi four-component reaction is one of the most impor-
tant IMCRs to access peptide-like structures. The trans-
formation was rst reported in 1959 by Ivar Ugi,47 who also
brought to light many important features for understanding the
mechanism of his eponymous reaction. The Ugi reaction is
likely favoured in polar protic solvents, in contrast to the
Passerini reaction, but there are also many available examples
describing success with the reaction using polar aprotic
solvents.43
The
basic
mechanism
of
the
Ugi
reaction
(Scheme 30) was widely accepted with a few controversies, as
will be discussed.
The Ugi reaction begins with the in situ imine (or iminium)
formation followed by a three-component transition state. The
last step is the Mumm rearrangement (or Smile rearrangement,
depending on the substrate) leading to the Ugi adduct. The
general proposition shows a transition state bearing the imine
(or iminium), the acid and the isocyanide. The presence of three
components is the rst issue discussed regarding the Ugi
reaction mechanism. Instead, the iminium (or imine) would be
trapped by the isocyanide followed by addition of the acid
(Scheme 31).
Scheme 28
The proposed mechanism for the Passerini reaction
catalysed by TiCl4.44
Scheme 29
Passerini reaction mechanism based on theoretical
calculations. Note the occurrence of transition states with four
components.46
Scheme 30
The general (and accepted) Ugi four-component reaction
mechanism.
54296 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

Most synthetic development of the Ugi reaction relied on the
mechanistic proposition, with all its associated assumptions,
described in Scheme 31. Fleurat-Lessard and coworkers,48
however, have recently challenged y years of established
views on the Ugi reaction. In the seminal work based on theo-
retical calculations, the possibility of the acid being added to
the iminium intermediate followed by isocyanide insertion was
described (Scheme 32).
The detailed study showed the transition states associated
with each step for the Ugi-Mumm and Ugi-Smile rearrange-
ments and also the details for the possible isocyanide insertion
aer the acid addition.
A mechanistic study on the Ugi four-component reaction
based on the charge tag strategy22 using ESI-MS(/MS) and DFT
calculations was recently described.49 Interesting intermediates
could be eﬃciently detected and characterized by collision-
induced dissociation experiments (Fig. 2).
The experiments pointed to the accuracy of the classical
view of the Ugi reaction mechanism described in Scheme 31
and, curiously, no protonated isocyanide could be detected.
Some by-products from parallel reactions were also noted
during online monitoring of the reaction (Scheme 33) but
these reactions were only noted due to the high sensitivity of
MS technique and are indeed unlikely. The possibility of the
alternative route shown in Scheme 32, however, could not be
ruled out, as pointed out in the article.49 DFT calculations were
found to be in accordance with the importance of the solvent
eﬀect for the Mumm (or Smile) rearrangement.49,50
Scheme 31
Isocyanide addition to the iminium (or imine) intermediate
followed by acid addition before the Mumm rearrangement.
Scheme 32
Alternative mechanism by acid addition followed by iso-
cyanide insertion before the Mumm rearrangement. The proposition
was mostly based on theoretical calculations.48
Fig. 2
Charge-tagged reagents and intermediates from the Ugi
reaction detected and characterized by ESI-MS(/MS) during online
monitoring.49 Note the intermediates pointed to the accuracy of the
classical mechanistic view on the Ugi mechanism.
Scheme 33
Side reactions noted during ESI-MS(/MS) online moni-
toring of the Ugi four-component reactions with charge-tagged
reagents.49
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54297
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

6.
Summary and outlook
MCRs are, without doubt, a paramount and useful tool incor-
porated in the arsenal available in the modern synthetic toolbox
used by chemists around the world. Modern diversity-oriented
synthesis
is
somehow
inwardly
associated
with
MCRs.
Regarding green chemistry requirements, MCRs proved to have,
at least in theory, all the features needed for sustainable
syntheses. Unfortunately, the majority of the available reports
only use these principles as catchwords. Use of ‘buzzwords’
such as eco-friendly, sustainable and green should be strongly
avoided, unless the report brings real improvements for MCRs
as green tools. It is imperative to start an era of more compli-
cated and rewarding studies on MCRs and not to produce more
seemingly random catalyst screenings. Only then will MCRs
truly occupy the prominent position envisaged for this kind of
reaction. MCRs do indeed have much more to oﬀer on this
subject.
Real improvements certainly require deep knowledge on the
mechanism of the MCR transformation and, in general, ne
details of MCR mechanisms are only now starting to emerge.
Theoretical approaches have, therefore, much to oﬀer, and
many real developments are due to some exceptional theoretical
contributions. Only a few kinetic data are available in the MCR
literature; and this is mostly because of the high level of
complication associated with real-time monitoring (and quan-
tication) of all possibilities of intermediates and reaction
pathways involved in multicomponent transformations. NMR,
IR and MS have proved to be the most eﬀective techniques
applied so far in elucidating MCR mechanisms, with special
prominence of ESI-MS(/MS).
The Biginelli MCR is perhaps the most popular 3CR trans-
formation. This important transformation, however, lacks
actual improvements in its experimental condition. Reagent
excesses, high temperatures, large amounts of catalysts and
only a few eﬀective asymmetric versions are severe limitations
to further the syntheses and applications of DHPMs. It is still
not clear how to select a reaction pathway for the Biginelli
reaction and, to this end, much eﬀort is required to gain a deep
understanding of the key parameters for an eﬀective trans-
formation. Even so, the iminium-based mechanism is favoured
over the other possibilities for most of the reaction conditions
reported so far.
The Hantzsch 3CR is experiencing similar drawbacks asso-
ciated with the Biginelli reaction. The possibility of ve diﬀerent
reaction pathways is an additional complicating factor. Much is
still needed to understand how to select a mechanistic pathway
for the synthesis of DHPs using the Hantzsch MCR, especially
for asymmetric versions applied in the synthesis of bioactive
DHPs.
The Mannich MCR is one of the most ‘domesticated’ 3CRs
and there is not much doubt about the reaction mechanism. In
general, asymmetric versions and the role of chiral inductors
are discussed. The specic step of chiral induction and the
conditions for an eﬀective stereocontrol are the most important
issues under discussion for this transformation. Overall, the
Mannich MCR mechanism goes through an iminium interme-
diate followed by the addition of the other reaction partner.
The Passerini and Ugi IMCRs still have many issues to solve
in their respective mechanisms of transformations. Asymmetric
versions are highly controversial, especially because real ster-
eocontrol falls short. Chiral induction steps are still unclear.
The role of solvents and reagents for these IMCRs are hotly
debated and new evidence for alternative mechanisms has only
recent been reported and discussed in the scientic literature.
Despite the high atom economy associated with these two
reactions, preparative methods for isocyanides are imperative
for furthering the green issues associated with the Passerini and
Ugi IMCRs.
Overall, little is known about the mechanisms and chiral
induction of these ve most popular and important MCRs.
Considering that ne details have started to emerge only in
recent years, the possibility for innovation and creative appli-
cations is almost unlimited. The wide avenue for new ndings
regarding mechanisms and applications of MCRs is just waiting
to be travelled.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by CAPES, CNPq, FINEP-MCT,
FINATEC, FAPEMIG, FAPDF, INCT-Catalysis and DPP-UnB.
Notes and references
1 R. C. Cioc, E. Ruijter and R. V. A. Orru, Green Chem., 2014, 16,
2958–2975.
2 L. Ban, A. Basso, L. Moni and R. Riva, Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
2014, 2014, 2005–2015.
3 P. Slobbe, E. Ruijter and R. V. A. Orru, Med. Chem. Commun.,
2012, 3, 1189–1218.
4 G. C. Tron, A. Minassi and G. Appendino, Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
2011, 5541–5550.
5 C. O. Kappe, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2000, 35, 1043–1052.
6 A. Domling, W. Wang and K. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112,
3083–3135.
7 C. O. Kappe, Tetrahedron, 1993, 49, 6937–6963.
8 Suresh and J. S. Sandhu, ARKIVOC, 2012, 66–133.
9 F. Sweet and J. D. Fissekis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 8741–
8749.
10 K. Folkers and T. B. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1933, 55,
3784–3791.
11 I. Cepanec, M. Litvic, M. Filipan-Litvic and I. Grungold,
Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 11822–11827.
12 C. O. Kappe, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 7201–7204.
13 M. Litvic, I. Vecenaj, Z. M. Ladisic, M. Lovric, V. Vinkovic and
M. Filipan-Litvic, Tetrahedron, 2010, 66, 3463–3471.
14 R. De Souza, E. T. da Penha, H. M. S. Milagre, S. J. Garden,
P. M. Esteves, M. N. Eberlin and O. A. C. Antunes, Chem.–
Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9799–9804.
15 L. M. Ramos, A. Tobio, M. R. dos Santos, H. C. B. de Oliveira,
A. F. Gomes, F. C. Gozzo, A. L. de Oliveira and B. A. D. Neto, J.
Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 10184–10193.
54298 | RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Advances
Review
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online

16 H. G. O. Alvim, T. B. de Lima, H. C. B. de Oliveira,
F. C. Gozzo, J. L. de Macedo, P. V. Abdelnur, W. A. Silva
and B. A. D. Neto, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1420–1430.
17 L. M. Ramos, B. C. Guido, C. C. Nobrega, J. R. Corrˆea,
R. G. Silva, H. C. B. de Oliveira, A. F. Gomes, F. C. Gozzo
and B. A. D. Neto, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4156–4168.
18 J. H. Clark, D. J. Macquarrie and J. Sherwood, Chem.–Eur. J.,
2013, 19, 5174–5182.
19 Z. L. Shen, X. P. Xu and S. J. Ji, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 1162–
1167.
20 M. K. Raj, H. S. P. Rao, S. G. Manjunatha, R. Sridharan,
S.
Nambiar,
J.
Keshwan,
J.
Rappai,
S.
Bhagat,
B. S. Shwetha, D. Hegde and U. Santhosh, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2011, 52, 3605–3609.
21 H. G. O. Alvim, T. B. Lima, A. L. de Oliveira, H. C. B. de
Oliveira, F. M. Silva, F. C. Gozzo, R. Y. Souza, W. A. da
Silva and B. A. D. Neto, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 3383–3397.
22 J. Limberger, B. C. Leal, A. L. Monteiro and J. Dupont, Chem.
Sci., 2014, DOI: 10.1039/c1034sc02151g.
23 A.
R.
Katritzky,
D.
L.
Ostercamp
and
T.
I.
Yousaf,
Tetrahedron, 1986, 42, 5729–5738.
24 L. Shen, S. Cao, J. J. Wu, J. Zhang, H. Li, N. J. Liu and
X. H. Qian, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1414–1420.
25 V.
A.
Chebanov,
V.
E.
Saraev,
S.
M.
Desenko,
V. N. Chernenko, I. V. Knyazeva, U. Groth, T. N. Glasnov
and C. O. Kappe, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 5110–5118.
26 K. A. Undale, Y. Park, K. Park, D. H. Dagade and D. M. Pore,
Synlett, 2011, 791–796.
27 C. Allais, F. Lieby-Muller, J. Rodriguez and T. Constantieux,
Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 4131–4145.
28 V. G. Santos, M. N. Godoi, T. Regiani, F. H. S. Gama,
M. B. Coelho, R. O. M. A. de Souza, M. N. Eberlin and
S. J. Garden, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12808–12816.
29 B. List, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9336–9337.
30 R. Gomez Arrayas and J. C. Carretero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009,
38, 1940–1948.
31 E. R. Alexander and E. J. Underhill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949,
71, 4014–4019.
32 S. V. Lieberman and E. C. Wagner, J. Org. Chem., 1949, 14,
1001–1012.
33 T. F. Cummings and J. R. Shelton, J. Org. Chem., 1960, 25,
419–423.
34 A. V. Logan, J. L. Huston and D. L. Dorward, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 1951, 73, 2952–2953.
35 E. Le Gall, S. Sengmany, C. Haurena, E. Leonel and
T. Martens, J. Organomet. Chem., 2013, 736, 27–35.
36 M. B. Schmid, K. Zeitler and R. M. Gschwind, J. Org. Chem.,
2011, 76, 3005–3015.
37 C. D. F. Milagre, H. M. S. Milagre, L. S. Santos, M. L. A. Lopes,
P. J. S. Moran, M. N. Eberlin and J. A. R. Rodrigues, J. Mass
Spectrom., 2007, 42, 1287–1293.
38 H. G. O. Alvim, G. A. Bataglion, L. M. Ramos, A. L. de
Oliveira, H. C. B. de Oliveira, M. N. Eberlin, J. L. de
Macedo, W. A. da Silva and B. A. D. Neto, Tetrahedron,
2014, 70, 3306–3313.
39 A. Domling, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 17–89.
40 A. Domling and I. Ugi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3169–
3210.
41 R. Frey, S. G. Galbraith, S. Guel, C. Lamberth and M. Zeller,
Synlett, 2003, 1536–1538.
42 R. H. Baker and D. Stanonis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 699–
702.
43 G. Koopmanschap, E. Ruijter and R. V. A. Orru, Beilstein J.
Org. Chem., 2014, 10, 544–598.
44 T. Caroglio, P. G. Cozzi, C. Floriani, A. Chiesi-Villa and
C. Rizzoli, Organometallics, 1993, 12, 2726–2736.
45 U. Kusebauch, B. Beck, K. Messer, E. Herdtweck and
A. Domling, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 4021–4024.
46 S. Maeda, S. Komagawa, M. Uchiyama and K. Morokuma,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 644–649.
47 I. Ugi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1959, 71, 386.
48 N. Cheron, R. Ramozzi, L. El Kaim, L. Grimaud and
P. Fleurat-Lessard, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 1361–1366.
49 G.
A.
Medeiros,
W.
A.
da
Silva,
G.
A.
Bataglion,
D. A. C. Ferreira, H. C. B. de Oliveira, M. N. Eberlin and
B. A. D. Neto, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 338–340.
50 R. Ramozzi, N. Ch´eron, L. El Ka¨ım, L. Grima`ud and
P. Fleurat-Lessard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 9094–9099.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54282–54299 | 54299
Review
RSC Advances
Published on 09 October 2014. Downloaded on 2/5/2026 12:54:54 PM. 
View Article Online