ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
Physicochemical and Functional Comparability Between
the Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab GP2013 and Originator
Rituximab
Jan Visser • Isabel Feuerstein • Thomas Stangler •
Timo Schmiederer • Cornelius Fritsch •
Martin Schiestl
Published online: 7 May 2013
 The Author(s) 2013. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Background
Regulatory approval for a biosimilar product
is provided on the basis of its comparability to an originator
product. A thorough physicochemical and functional
comparability exercise is a key element in demonstrating
biosimilarity. Here we report the characterization of a
proposed biosimilar rituximab (GP2013) and originator
rituximab.
Objective
To compare GP2013 with originator rituximab
using an extensive array of routine analytical and extended
characterization methods.
Methods
Primary and higher order protein structures were
analyzed using a variety of methods that included high-per-
formance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS), peptide mapping with
UV and MS detection, circular dichroism (CD), Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, hydrogen deuterium
exchange (HDX) MS, 1D 1H nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC). Charge and amino acid modiﬁ-
cations were assessed using cation exchange chromatography
(CEX) and peptide mapping using reversed-phase (RP)
HPLC. Boronate afﬁnity chromatography was used to deter-
minetherelative amountofglycation.Glycanswereidentiﬁed
and quantiﬁed after 2-aminobenzamide (2-AB) labeling and
separation using normal phase HPLC with ﬂuorescence and
MS detection, respectively. Glycan site occupancy was
determined using reducing capillary electrophoresis with
sodium dodecyl sulfate (CE-SDS). Size heterogeneity was
determined using reducing and non-reducing CE-SDS, size
exclusion chromatography (SEC) and asymmetric ﬂow ﬁeld
ﬂow fractionation (AF4). Biological characterization inclu-
ded a series of bioassays (in vitro target binding, antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [ADCC], complement-
dependent cytotoxicity [CDC] and apoptosis) and surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) Fc receptor binding assays.
Results
Intact mass analysis of GP2013 and the heavy and
light chains using RP HPLC–ESI–MS revealed the expec-
ted molecular mass of rituximab. The amino acid sequence
was shown to be identical between GP2013 and the origi-
nator rituximab. Further sequence conﬁrmation using RP-
HPLC-UV/MS peptide mapping showed non-distinguish-
able chromatograms for Lys-C digested GP2013 and orig-
inator rituximab. The higher order structure of GP2013 was
shown to be indistinguishable from originator rituximab
using a large panel of redundant and orthogonal methods.
GP2013 and originator rituximab were comparable with
regard to charge variants, speciﬁc amino acid modiﬁcations
and the glycan pattern. GP2013 was also shown to have
similar purity, aggregate and particle levels when compared
with the originator. Functionally, and by using a compre-
hensive set of bioassays and binding assays covering a
broad range of rituximab’s functional activities, GP2013
could not be distinguished from originator rituximab.
Conclusion
GP2013 was shown to be physicochemically
highly similar to originator rituximab at the level of pri-
mary and higher order structure, post-translational modi-
ﬁcations
and
size
variants.
An
extensive
functional
characterization package indicated that GP2013 has the
same biological properties as originator rituximab.
J. Visser (&)
Sandoz Biopharmaceuticals, Hexal AG, Keltenring 1 ? 3,
82041 Oberhaching, Germany
e-mail: jan_marinus.visser@sandoz.com
I. Feuerstein  T. Stangler  T. Schmiederer  M. Schiestl
Sandoz Biopharmaceuticals, Sandoz GmbH, Kundl, Austria
C. Fritsch
Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland
BioDrugs (2013) 27:495–507
DOI 10.1007/s40259-013-0036-3

1 Background
Biosimilars are products that have been approved as being
comparable or highly similar to existing biopharmaceuti-
cals for which patents have expired. In Europe, the Euro-
pean Medicines Agency (EMA) has developed a speciﬁc
regulatory pathway and has approved a number of bio-
similars, including versions of human growth hormone,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and epoetin. The
EMA has also issued guidelines that describe non-clinical
and clinical requirements for the development of biosimilar
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) [1]. Other countries have
adopted similar regulatory frameworks containing the same
basic principles as the European guidelines. In the USA,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released draft
guidance for the regulatory review of biosimilars in early
2012 [2].
Biosimilar development involves an iterative target-
directed approach leading to a manufacturing process that
delivers a highly similar product. Subsequently, similarity
to the originator product is demonstrated by a compre-
hensive comparability program. The ﬁrst step and a key
element of this comparison is extensive physicochemical
and biological characterization, now possible using an
array of state-of-the-art analytical techniques. On the basis
of this characterization, a tailored pre-clinical and clinical
program is designed to demonstrate and conﬁrm biosimi-
larity. The regulatory process for the approval of biosimi-
lars was derived from the same scientiﬁc principles and
experiences with comparability exercises that manufac-
turers of originator drugs have to perform when imple-
menting manufacturing changes. In this regard, changes in
the manufacturing of originators have been shown to result
in comparable products despite shifts in certain quality
attributes. The resulting products were similar but not
identical to the originally approved product [3].
Biosimilar development begins with a comprehensive
characterization of the originator product to gain as much
product understanding as possible. Because originator
product characteristics can change over time, quality
attributes of different originator batches are assessed over
an extended period in order to deﬁne the originator product
range to be used as a development target (or goal posts).
Developing a biosimilar product is subsequently possible
through target-directed development and requires under-
standing of the relationships between manufacturing pro-
cess and product and between structure and function [4].
It is intended that the development of biosimilars will lead
to more affordable biological treatments and so increase
patient access to otherwise expensive therapies [5]. This may
be especially so for therapeutic mAbs, the increasing use of
which represents a major cost burden for health-care pro-
viders. One such treatment, rituximab [MabThera (EU)/
Rituxan (USA)], is currently indicated for the treatment of
patients with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and chronic lym-
phocytic leukemia, as well as rheumatoid arthritis and other
autoimmune conditions. Rituximab is a chimeric mouse/
human mAb consisting of a glycosylated immunoglobulin
with human IgG1 constant regions and murine light-chain
and heavy-chain variable region sequences. Here we report
the physicochemical and biological characterization of a
proposed biosimilar and originator rituximab.
2 Methods
Originator rituximab (Rituxan and MabThera 100 mg/
10 ml or 500 mg/50 ml) batches were purchased from
pharmacies and stored according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The proposed biosimilar product, GP2013,
was produced in-house at Sandoz Biopharmaceuticals.
GP2013 drug product (100 mg/10 ml or 500 mg/50 ml)
was used for all analyses shown, with the exception of the
glycan analysis where drug substance was used. The ref-
erence material used for the bioassays was manufactured
in-house to GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice) standard.
An array of routine analytical and extended character-
ization methods was used to compare rituximab originator
batches with GP2013. The comparability test program was
designed to ensure the detection of any physicochemical and
functional differences according to regulatory (draft)
guidelines [1]. X-ray crystallography and hydrogen deute-
rium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) were per-
formed
at
Proteros
Biostructures
AG
(Martinsried,
Germany) and ExSAR (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA),
respectively. DSC measurements were conducted at LEK
Pharmaceuticals d.d. (Menges, Slovenia). Bioassays and
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) binding analysis were
performed at Novartis AG (Basel, Switzerland). All other
analyses were performed at Sandoz GmbH (Kundl, Austria).
2.1 Chromatography Systems
All chromatographic analyses were performed on Agilent
1100 or 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) systems (Bo¨blingen, Germany) equipped with UV
and ﬂuorescence detection if not otherwise stated.
2.2 High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
(HPLC-ESI-MS)
Intact mass: The molecular masses of the GP2013 and
reference batches were determined using a Q-TOF mass
spectrometer (Synapt, Waters, Saint Quentin en Yvelines,
France) after the heavy chain C-terminal lysine had been
496
J. Visser et al.

enzymatically removed. The samples were desalted by
reversed-phase chromatography using an Acquity UPLC
(Waters, Manchester, UK) prior to MS analysis, and the
mass spectrometer was calibrated. Raw protein spectra
were deconvoluted before evaluation using the maximum
entropy algorithm in the MassLynx software.
2.3 Non-reduced and Reduced Peptide Mapping
with reversed-phase (RP)-HPLC-UV, -MS
and -MS/MS
Peptide mapping with UV was performed to identify the
primary sequences of tested products. Protein samples were
digested
using
endoproteinase
Lys-C
(Wako,
Osaka,
Japan). Before Lys-C digestion, samples were either
reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) or not reduced to run the
peptide map under reducing or non-reducing conditions,
respectively. After digestion, the peptides were separated
on a C18 reversed-phase column (KinetexTM 2.6 lm C18
50 9 2.1 mm column, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA).
Detection was carried out at 214 nm or using MS equipped
with electrospray ionization (Orbitrap, Thermo Scientiﬁc,
Waltham, MA, USA).
2.4 Ellman’s Assay
Free proteinogenic thiol groups were quantiﬁed by using
Ellman’s
reagent
(5,5
0-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic
acid)
[DTNB]). Ellman’s reagent forms a mixed disulﬁde with
thiols, liberating the chromophore 5-mercapto-2-nitrobenzoic
acid (absorption maximum 410 nm, e *13.600 cm-1 M-1).
Only thiol groups that are accessible to this water-soluble
reagent are modiﬁed. For calibration, the tripeptide glutathi-
one containingone freethiol group was used. Thisprinciple of
measurement was applied to denatured samples.
2.5 Circular Dichroism (CD) Spectroscopy
CD experiments were carried out on a JASCO J-815 spec-
trometer (Jasco, Easton, MD, USA) equipped with a Peltier-
type cell holder. Spectra were recorded at a temperature of
293 K, a scanning speed of 5 nm/min and a band width of
1 nm. Near UV CD spectra were recorded from 250 to
340 nm, and far UV CD spectra were recorded for the range
195–260 nm. For each sample, three scans were performed,
and baseline correction was applied. Noise reduction and
normalization of the spectrum was performed.
2.6 Fourier Transform Infra-Red (FTIR) Spectroscopy
FTIR measurements were performed using a CONFO-
CHECK system with an AquaSpec ﬂow-through transmis-
sion cell (Bruker, Rheinstetten, Germany). Resolution and
measurement time were set to 4 cm-1 and 50 s, respectively.
2.7 Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange Mass
Spectrometry (HDX-MS)
For HDX-MS, the GP2013 and originator rituximab sam-
ples were subjected to deuteration, after which the samples
were acidiﬁed at 30, 100, 300, 1,000 and 3,000 s to quench
the reaction. These samples were then passed over an
immobilized pepsin column for digestion. For further MS
analysis, peptic fragments were desalted on a reversed
phase trap column and separated on a C18 column.
2.8 1D 1H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
(NMR)
1D proton NMR spectra were acquired at 298 K on a
Bruker Avance III 500 MHz NMR system (Rheinstetten,
Germany). The protein buffer was changed to 0.15 mM
NaCl, 20 mM Na2HPO4, 20 mM NaH2PO4 and 150 mM
NaCl, pH 6.7, by molecular ﬁltration. The Watergate
sequence was used to suppress residual water signal. The
protein samples used for NMR had a protein concentration
of 0.15 mM. Spectra were recorded with a spectral width
of 20 ppm; 8k scans were accumulated and then processed
with Topspin 2.1 software.
2.9 X-Ray Analysis
For crystallization, GP2013 and the originator rituximab
were digested with papain to separate the Fab and Fc part
of the antibody. Fabs were isolated using anion exchange
chromatography and protein A chromatography, and sub-
sequently concentrated to 31 mg/ml. Crystallization trials
were performed with approximately 1,200 different con-
ditions and optimized for temperature, protein concentra-
tion, drop ratio, pH and precipitant concentrations. After
crystallization, crystals were ﬂash-frozen and measured at a
temperature of 100 K. The X-ray diffraction data were
collected from crystals of both Fab samples at the Swiss
Light Source (Villigen, Switzerland) using cryogenic
conditions. Data were processed using the XDS and
XSCALE programs.
2.10 Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
DSC measurements were performed using an Auto Cap-DSC
calorimeter (MicroCal, Northampton, MA, USA). Scans
were recorded at a rate of 60 C/h. Samples were diluted to
1 mg/ml with reference buffer and scanned from 30 to 95 C.
2.11 Cation-Exchange Chromatography (CEX)
CEX separates protein variants based on their different
charge and is highly selective with regard to product-
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
497

related variants of rituximab, being able to separate ritux-
imab main compound from acidic and basic variants.
Samples were either treated or untreated with carboxy-
peptidase B (CPB; Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Before
injection, samples were cleaned and the concentration
adjusted. CEX separation was performed using a weak
CEX resin (ProPac WCX-10, 4 9 250 mm, Dionex, Ger-
mering, Germany), and samples were eluted using a linear
gradient. UV detection took place at 280 nm.
2.12 Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC), Capillary
Electrophoresis with Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate
(CE-SDS) and Asymmetric Flow-Field Flow
Fractionation (AF4)
SEC, CE-SDS and AF4 were used to separate lower and
higher molecular mass variants. SEC was performed using
a TSK-Gel G3000SWXL column (Tosoh Bioscience,
Stuttgart, Germany). Samples of rituximab (7.5 lg) were
injected and UV detection carried out at 210 nm. CE-SDS
under non-reducing conditions was performed on a Beck-
man PA800 Enhanced (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA).
Samples were denatured, and any free sulfhydryl group
from the cysteine side chain was alkylated with iodoacet-
amide to prevent disulﬁde shufﬂing before analysis. Sam-
ples
were
pressure-injected,
and
the
separation
was
performed with -15 kV. UV absorbance was recorded at
214 nm. AF4 of GP2013 and reference batches was per-
formed using a liquid chromatography system equipped
with a UV detector from Agilent (Boeblingen, Germany)
and a light-scattering and refractive detector from Wyatt
(Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Separation was performed in a
short channel using a 10 kDa regenerated cellulose mem-
brane and 490 lm W spacer.
2.13 Boronate Afﬁnity Chromatography
Separation of unglycated and glycated variants of GP2013
samples and reference material was performed employing
an Agilent HPLC system equipped with a ﬂuorescence
detector. Samples were injected onto a TSK Boronate-5PW
column (Tosoh Bioscience, Stuttgart, Germany) at 42 C.
Fluorescence excitation was monitored at 280 nm and
emission at 345 nm.
2.14 Glycan Analysis
N-glycans were released from the Fc part of the mAbs
using N-glycosidase F (Roche, Mannheim, Germany).
Subsequent separation and concentration were performed
by ultracentrifugal ﬁltration and centrifugal evaporation.
Excess
2-aminobenzamide
(2-AB,
Sigma-Aldrich,
Steinheim, Germany) was used to label the glycans. Free
2-AB label from derivatized glycans was removed by gel
ﬁltration using Sephadex G10 (GE Healthcare, Little
Chalfont, UK). Normal phase chromatography, using a
TSK-Gel Amide80 150 9 2.0-mm, 3-lm column (Tosoh
Bioscience, Stuttgart, Germany), was employed to separate
the 2-AB labeled glycans. A ﬂuorescence detector, set at an
excitation wavelength of 250 nm and emission wavelength
428 mm, recorded the eluting 2-AB labeled glycans.
2.15 SPR Fc Receptor Binding
The afﬁnity to recombinant human Fcc and FcRn receptors
was determined by using a Biacore T200 (GE Healthcare,
Freiburg, Germany). Recombinant Fcc receptors of the
FccRI, FccRII and FccRIII families were immobilized
covalently on carboxymethyl dextran-coated CM5 sensor
chips using standard amine coupling chemistry. Analysis
was then performed according to the manufacturer’s rec-
ommendations. For FcRn binding, recombinant human
FcRn was biotinylated enzymatically using a C-terminal
Avi-tag sequence. Biotinylation was performed using
recombinant biotin protein ligase (Avidity, Aurora, CO,
USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The solutions were injected on a previously untreated ﬂow
cell of a Series S SA sensor chip.
2.16 Functional Bioassays
Bioassays were developed as relative potency assays in
which the activity of test samples was determined by
comparison to an in-house reference standard. Relative
potency was calculated using a parallel line assay design
according to European (EP) and US Pharmacopoeia (USP)
recommendations. In order to achieve highly meaningful
data sets, all bioassays were developed for high precision
with coefﬁcients of variation of less than 10 %.
Binding of rituximab to CD20 was determined using a
cell-based competitive binding assay in which test samples
were used to displace a ﬂuorescently labeled rituximab
from the CD20 expressed on the surface of the human Raji
B cell line. Binding of the ﬂuorescently labeled agent to the
cell surface is evaluated by ﬂow cytometry. Binding to
CD20 is a key prerequisite for subsequent downstream
effects, including Fc-dependent effector functions and
direct induction of target cell apoptosis.
In order to assess Fc-effector functions, antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and com-
plement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) bioassays were
developed. To
quantify
ADCC
activity, ﬂuorophore-
labeled Raji B cells were incubated with rituximab in the
presence of a human NK cell line. Fluorophore release
498
J. Visser et al.

from dying target cells was quantiﬁed and used for calcu-
lation of relative potency. To assess CDC activity, Raji B
cells were incubated with rituximab in the presence of
rabbit complement, and target cell depletion was monitored
by determining viable cell densities at the end of the
incubation with a luminescent substrate.
The apoptosis bioassay measured the rituximab-induced
externalization of phosphatidylserine on Raji B cells using
Annexin V-FITC, while dead cells with permeabilized cell
membranes were stained with propidium iodide.
3 Results and Discussion
GP2013 is produced in a genetically modiﬁed Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cell line, which is a main work horse
in the biopharmaceutical industry. The gene sequences for
the mAB heavy and light chains were reverse-engineered
from the amino acid sequence of the originator. During an
extensive clone selection process, a production clone was
chosen based on genetic stability, productivity and its
quality attribute proﬁle. The subsequently developed
upstream process, which required many iterative cycles in
order to obtain a quality attribute proﬁle as close as possible
to the originator, is performed in fed-batch mode. The
downstream process, consisting of industry standard chro-
matographic puriﬁcation and viral inactivation methods to
manufacture the drug substance, was further optimized for
the removal of process-related impurities. The process-
related impurities in the drug substance (e.g., host cell pro-
tein, DNA) were not part of the comparability exercise
because they are speciﬁc to the individual process. However,
their residual levels comply with existing guidelines, com-
pendia and other regulatory requirements, reﬂecting the fact
that a state-of-the-art manufacturing process was developed.
The drug substance is formulated to the ﬁnal drug product
using the same drug product formulation as the originator.
As comparability at the physicochemical and functional
level is a prerequisite for establishing biosimilarity, an
extensive state-of-the-art analytical toolbox (Table 1) was
employed to characterize the proposed biosimilar ritux-
imab GP2013 and show its comparability to originator
rituximab.
A comprehensive selection of GP2013 quality attributes
was analyzed and compared to the ranges of the originator
quality attributes. The originator range was obtained by
measuring several batches of the originator sourced in the
EU (MabThera) and the US (Rituxan). When comparing
MabThera and Rituxan batches, it was found that they
were analytically indistinguishable. We also found that
certain quality attributes of the originator (e.g., CEX and
glycan proﬁle) revealed a shift at one time point, which can
most likely be attributed to a shift in the manufacturing
process [3]. The shift was observed for both MabThera
and Rituxan, which, together with being analytically
indistinguishable, provides strong evidence that Rituxan
and MabThera are derived from the same drug substance
manufacturing process. The shift in quality attributes also
means that reference material was on the market with pre-
shift and post-shift quality, and has been used inter-
changeably. Because the label of the originator was not
changed, the pre- and post-shift batches were obviously
rated as comparable by the company and/or the regulators,
which allows for the use of the combined quality attribute
range for comparison. This approach is generally accepted
by regulators as long as interactions between quality
attributes are taken into account.
3.1 Physicochemical Characterization
3.1.1 Primary Structure
The conﬁrmation of the primary structure is the corner-
stone in the veriﬁcation of the identity of GP2013 as rit-
uximab. Intact mass analysis of intact GP2013 and the
heavy and light chains using RP-HPLC-ESI-MS revealed
the expected molecular mass of rituximab. Also the RP-
HPLC-UV/MS peptide maps for Lys-C digested GP2013
and originator rituximab resulted in non-distinguishable
chromatograms (Fig. 1). Final conﬁrmation for the same-
ness of the amino acid sequence was obtained by using
reduced peptide mapping followed by RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/
MS
sequencing,
which
resulted
in
100 %
sequence
coverage.
3.1.2 Higher Order Structure
As structural elements of a protein determine its function, it
is important that the higher order or 3D structure of a pro-
posed biosimilar is thoroughly investigated by using a
number of redundant and orthogonal methods. The disulﬁde
bridging pattern of a mAb is one of the elements determining
the higher order structure. Non-reducing RP-HPLC–ESI–
MS peptide maps showed the expected disulﬁde bridging
pattern in the originator product as well as GP2013. The
following disulﬁde bridges were identiﬁed: intrachain
[Cys(L23)-Cys(L87),
Cys(L133)-Cys(L193),
Cys(H22)-
Cys(H96),
Cys(H22)-Cys(H96),
Cys(H148)-Cys(H204),
Cys(H265)-Cys(H325), Cys(H371)-Cys(H429)] and inter-
chain
[Cys(L213)-Cys(H224),
Cys(H230)-Cys(H230),
Cys(H233)-Cys(H233)]. In addition, the total number of free
thiols in both GP2013 and originator product was compa-
rable and in the range of 0.3 mol/mol.
CD spectroscopy, measuring differences in the absorp-
tion of left-handed versus right-handed polarised light, was
used to obtain information on the folding state of the
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
499

protein. CD spectroscopy in the far and near UV spectral
regions provides insight into the secondary structure (a-
helix, b-sheet, random coil) and tertiary structure, respec-
tively. CD spectra from GP2013 and the originator were
shown to overlap indistinguishably. FTIR is an orthogonal
method to CD, which provides information on the vibra-
tional states of molecules. The protein backbone amide
groups generate a number of characteristic IR bands that
can be used to determine protein backbone conformation.
Again, GP2013 and originator FTIR spectra overlapped
with no indication of structural differences.
A disadvantage of spectroscopic methods (e.g., CD,
FTIR) is that they provide information of the folding state of
proteins that are a global average of the entire structure.
Table 1 An overview of the analytical toolbox used for the physicochemical and functional characterization of the proposed biosimilar GP2013
and originator rituximab
Category
Quality attribute
Methods
Physicochemical characterization
Primary structure
Amino acid sequence
Red. RP-HPLC–ESI–MS peptide mapping, intact mass of
whole mAB, HC and LC by RP-HPLC–ESI–MS, Red. RP-
HPLC-UV peptide mapping
Higher order structure
Disulﬁde bridging
Non-red. RP-HPLC–ESI–MS peptide mapping
Free thiols
Ellman’s assay
Secondary and tertiary structure
CD, FTIR, HDX-MS, X-ray
Thermodynamic stability
DSC
General charge
heterogeneity and
amino acid
modiﬁcations
0K variant, acidic variants, basic variant, Gln-variant,
Lys-variant, amidated proline
CEX digested/undigested
Glycation
Boronate afﬁnity
Oxidation/deamidation/C-terminal variants
RP-HPLC-UV/MS peptide mapping
Glycosylation
Galactosylation, sialylation, mannosylation,
afucosylation, bisecting GlcNAc, NGNA, a-galactose,
qualitative glycosylation pattern
NP-HPLC-FL
Size heterogeneity
Monomer, low-molecular weight (LMW) and high
molecular weight (HMW) variants (aggregates)
SEC, AF4
Heavy chain (HC), light chain (LC), aglycosylated HC,
clipped variants
Red. CE-SDS
Monomer, LMW (e.g., half antibodies (HL) and HHL
variant) and HMW variants
Non-red. CE-SDS
Subvisible particles
Light obscuration (PhEur, C10 lm and [25 lm)
Visible particles
Visual inspection (PhEur)
Functional characterization
Target and receptor
binding
FcRn binding
SPR
FccR binding (FccRIa, FccRIIa, FccRIIb,
FccRIIIa(F158), FccRIIIa(V158), FccRIIIb)
SPR
Bioactivity
CD20 target binding
Cell-based binding assay
CDC potency
Cell-based CDC assay
ADCC potency
Cell-based ADDC assay
Apoptosis
Cell-based apoptosis assay
Fig. 1 Comparison of UV
chromatograms of Lys-C
digested GP2013 and originator
rituximab
500
J. Visser et al.

Protein-labeling methods such as HDX-MS can be used to
localise small differences in higher order structure at the
level of peptides as the exchange process between deuterium
and hydrogen is highly dependent on the local structural
environment [6, 7]. Using HDX-MS, the same deuterium
exchange-rate dynamics were observed for GP2013 and the
originator product. In addition, 1D 1H NMR spectroscopy
was employed to compare GP2013 and originator rituximab.
The principle of NMR is based upon the spin of nuclei with
odd mass numbers in an external magnetic ﬁeld. In a protein
molecule, the individual electron environment of every
proton is a direct consequence of the 3D fold of the protein.
Unfortunately, mAbs are too large for complete structural
determination of unlabeled proteins by routine NMR tech-
niques. However, NMR can be used to obtain structural
ﬁngerprints, thereby providing information on the sameness
of the 3D structure of the originator and the proposed bio-
similar. GP2013 and rituximab originator NMR spectra were
shown to be superimposable, with zooms of the aliphatic and
amide region shown in Fig. 2.
To obtain even further insight into the protein’s struc-
ture, X-ray crystallography was employed and the structure
elucidated at the atomic level for GP2013 and originator
product Fab fragments. The structures were solved and
reﬁned to a ﬁnal resolution of 2.02 and 1.85 A˚ for the
GP2013 Fab and originator rituximab Fab, respectively.
For both structures the crystals were shown to contain two
monomers of the respective Fab in the asymmetric unit.
The model comprises residues Gln1 to Lys222 of the heavy
chain (HC) and Gln1 to Gln212 of the light chain (LC). A
superposition of the structures solved for both Fabs showed
no signiﬁcant deviations in the secondary and tertiary
structures of the proteins. A root mean square deviation of
0.12 A˚ for the Ca atoms between the compared structures
are within the experimental variants, and the structures can
be considered identical (Fig. 3).
The thermodynamic stability of GP2013 and originator
rituximab was compared by using DSC, a thermodynamic
tool measuring the heat energy uptake that occurs in a
sample with a regulated increase in temperature. Changes
in the heat capacity of a sample result from the disruption
of forces that stabilize the native protein structure, with the
thermal transition temperatures (Tm) being indicative of a
conformational change [8]. The DSC thermograms were
found to be superimposable, with three partially overlap-
ping transitions with Tm values of 71, 75 and 83 C for
both GP2013 and originator product. The three transitions
are believed to be linked to the unfolding of the CH2, Fab
and CH3 domain, respectively [9]. In addition, head-to-
head stability studies at intended storage conditions
(2–8 C) revealed a comparable stability proﬁle for
GP2013 and originator.
By using a large panel of redundant and orthogonal
methods, the higher order or 3D structure of GP2013 was
shown to be indistinguishable from originator rituximab.
3.1.3 Charge Heterogeneity and Amino Acid Modiﬁcations
Charge variants may substantially affect the in vitro and
in vivo properties of antibodies [10]. A highly sensitive and
high-resolution CEX method was employed to separate
protein variants based on their surface charges. The method
is sensitive for the detection of C-terminal lysine hetero-
geneities as well as other acid and basic variants. The main
charge variant in both GP2013 and originator product is the
‘‘0K’’ variant, an isoform with missing C-terminal lysine
residues at the heavy chain and with N-terminal pyroglu-
tamic acid residues. Acid and basic variants can be formed
by chemical and enzymatic modiﬁcations [11], with the
acidic fraction typically containing a variety of protein
species such as deamidated, sialylated and glycated forms,
while the basic fraction contains, e.g., oxidated and
Fig. 2 Comparison of 1D 1H NMR spectra of GP2013 and originator rituximab. Blue line GP2013; red line originator rituximab. a Zoom of the
amide region of the NMR spectra. b Zoom of the aliphatic region of the NMR spectra
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
501

C-terminal lysine variants. The sum of the GP2013 basic
peaks was within the originator range, while the sum of the
acid peaks was found to be slightly below the originator
range (Fig. 4a).
Deamidation was further investigated by comparing
deamidation of the Asn393 and Asn394 containing L28H
peptide representing the prominent PENNYK deamidation
hot spot [12] by using a RP-HPLC-UV peptide map.
Deamidation was quantiﬁed by reporting the relative area
percentage of the L28H isoaspartate peak relative to all
L28H peptides and revealed approximately 0.5 % of
deamidated L28H in GP2013 versus 1 % of deamidated
L28H in originator rituximab (MabThera). However, as a
light increase in deamidation can be expected during DP
shelf life, a lower level of deamidation may be desirable.
The same peptide map was used to investigate oxidation of
amino acid residue Met256 in more detail. Met256 is
known to be easily oxidized [13] and is contained within
the L17H peptide. The oxidized peptide L17Hox can be
easily separated from the other peptides, and it was shown
that both GP2013 and originator rituximab contained values
\0.2 % relative to the total L17H peptide.
Treatment of mAbs with CPB removes C-terminal
lysine heterogeneity and allows for more easily interpret-
able CEX chromatograms. However, CEX chromatograms
of CPB-digested GP2013 and originator product suggested
the
presence
of
a
basic
C-terminal
modiﬁcation
at
t = 22 min in GP2013, which is not present in the origi-
nator product (Fig. 4b). Indeed, and by using peptide
mapping MS, this particular modiﬁcation was identiﬁed as
amidated proline (AP; P-NH2) and quantiﬁed to be present
at a level\2 % in GP2013, while being below the limit of
detection in originator rituximab. AP is formed when the
C-terminal lysine and glycine residues are removed and the
exposed proline residue amidated. AP was ﬁrst detected on
a mAb by Johnson et al. [14], who showed no effect on Fab
binding and Fc effector function. The latter is also to be
expected as AP is located at the C-terminus of the mAb and
therefore far removed from any binding or effector func-
tion relevant part. However, and in order not to solely rely
on the literature data, GP2013-speciﬁc data were generated
showing that (1) GP2013 AP-enriched material had the
same functional properties as originator rituximab when
tested in bioassays (binding, ADCC and CDC), (2) the use
of 9 % AP-containing GP2013 material in an animal
pharmacokinetic study resulted in AUC and Cmax values
comparable to the originator and (3) a repeated-dose tox-
icity study in cynomolgus monkeys comparing 9 % AP-
containing GP2013 material with originator rituximab
revealed no detectable differences in safety proﬁle between
the test and reference items. This step-wise approach is in
line with the approach advocated by regulators and justiﬁes
the small qualitative difference.
Another amino acid modiﬁcation is glycation. Glycation
is the chemical modiﬁcation of lysine residues by glucose,
which is a reducing sugar and reacts with free amines, after
which the reaction product undergoes rearrangement to
form a stable ketoamine [15]. Boronate afﬁnity chroma-
tography, which retains fractions containing cis-hydroxyl
groups found in the stable ketoamine, was used to deter-
mine the relative amount of glycated mAbs. Both GP2013
and reference product were found to contain approximately
2–3 % glycated species.
When looking at charge variants in general and speciﬁc
amino acid modiﬁcations in particular, it can be concluded
that GP2013 and originator rituximab are comparable.
Fig. 3 Super-positioned view on the complementarity determining
regions (CDRs) of GP2013 and originator rituximab. a Ribbon
representation of the CDRs. The heavy chain and light chain
structures of Fab GP2013 are colored in blue and orange, respec-
tively. The structure of Fab originator rituximab is colored in gray.
b Ribbon representation of the CDRs with the side chains shown as a
stick model, colored according to the chemical atom type (C GP2013
in blue and orange, C MabThera in gray, O in red, and N in blue).
CDR loops are labeled
502
J. Visser et al.

3.1.4 Glycosylation
Glycans can play an important role in determining the
efﬁcacy and in vivo half-life of mAbs [16]. Peptide map-
ping conﬁrmed the glycosylation site of GP2013 and the
reference product to be at Asn(301), while reduced CE-
SDS revealed that in both molecules[99 % of Asn301 was
glycosylated. Glycans were enzymatically released from
the mAbs by the enzyme PNGaseF and identiﬁed by 2-AB
labeling followed by normal-phase HPLC with ﬂuores-
cence detection. Using MS, 25 glycan species were iden-
tiﬁed on GP2013, all of which are also present on the
reference product. No potentially immunogenic glycoforms
[17] such as NGNA [18] or Gal-a-1,3 Gal [19, 20] could be
identiﬁed. The glycosylation pattern of the major abundant
glycans, such as the bG0, bG1 (1,6_bG1 and 1,3_bG1) and
bG2 isoforms, was very comparable between GP2013 and
the reference product (Fig. 5a). When looking at the low-
abundant glycan structures, small differences could be
identiﬁed (Fig. 5b).
The heterogeneity of low-abundant glycans was lower in
GP2013 when compared to originator, with the minor
glycans bNG1 and bG1S1 only being identiﬁed in origi-
nator rituximab. GP2013 was also shown to contain
slightly lower amounts of mannose structures (Man 5, M7,
M8, M9) of around 1 %, while the originator values ranged
between 1.7–5.4 %. Unfucosylated glycan structures are
known to inﬂuence ADCC activity [21–23], with the un-
fucosylated bG0 structure playing a major role. As ADCC
represents one of the main modes of action of rituximab,
signiﬁcant attention was paid to the unfucosylated bG0
structure during cell line and process development. The
originator range was shown to vary between 0.3–1.8 %.
However, GP2013 was designed to contain approximately
1.4 % of unfucosylated bG0, which resulted in an ADCC
activity in the middle of the originator range (see Sect. 3.2).
Overall, and despite some minor differences in some
low-abundant glycan species, it can be concluded that the
glycan pattern of GP2013 is comparable to the reference
product.
3.1.5 Size Heterogeneity
Size matters in biological medicinal products, especially as
aggregates have been implicated in enhancing immunoge-
nicity and affecting safety and efﬁcacy [24, 25]. Reducing
CE-SDS resolved the light chain, heavy chain and non-
glycosylated heavy chain from impurities by size. Similar
chromatographic proﬁles and purity values of[98 % were
found for GP2013 and originator product. Non-reducing
CE-SDS was used to separate monomers from fragments
and higher molecular weight variants. In the electrophero-
grams of GP2013 and originator products, a number of
minor variants were resolved and detected. The amounts of
free light chain (L), free heavy chain (H) and of half anti-
body (HL) were below the quantitation limit. A variant with
one missing light chain (HHL) was detected at values of
around 1.5 % for both GP2013 and originator (Fig. 6).
SEC under native conditions separates monomeric
mAbs from other variants of lower or higher molecular
Fig. 4 Cation exchange chromatograms of GP2013 and originator
rituximab (a) and after carboxypeptidase B (CPB) digest (b). As at
one point in time changes in originator CEX-proﬁles were observed,
both pre-shift and post-shift material is depicted
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
503

weight by differential exclusion from the pores of the
packing material. The retention times of monomeric
GP2013 and originator product were the same, while purity
results were [98 % for the originator product and [99 %
for GP2013. There was also no indication of different types
of higher molecular weight variants. Based on the potential
importance of aggregates, AF4 was used as an orthogonal
method to SEC. Within AF4, high-resolution separation of
size variants is achieved using a very thin ﬂow against
which a perpendicular force ﬁeld is applied. The AF4
results were found to be comparable with the SEC results,
conﬁrming that GP2013 and originator rituximab have the
same purity and level of aggregates.
Compendial limits for the number of sub-visible parti-
cles per container are deﬁned at 6,000 for particles C10 lm
and 600 for particles C25 lm as measured by light
obscuration (EP 2.9.19 and USP \788[). GP2013 was
found
to
meet
the
regulatory
criteria
with
values
of \200/container and \5/container for particles of C10
and C25 lm, respectively. In line with originator ritux-
imab, GP2013 was also found to be practically free of
visible particles as assessed by visual inspection according
to the EP 2.9.20 monograph.
Overall it can be concluded that GP2013 has a similar
purity, aggregate and particle level when compared to the
originator.
3.2 Functional Characterization
Rituximab binds the CD20 antigen on the surface of B cells
and has three main elements that contribute to its mode of
action of killing the targeted B-cell once binding to CD20
has been achieved [26]. These main contributors are (1)
CDC, (2) ADCC and (3) direct induction of apoptosis
Fig. 5 Glycosylation pattern of
GP2013 and originator
rituximab—extended view
(a) and zoomed view (b). As at
one point in time changes in
originator glycan proﬁles were
observed, both pre-shift and
post-shift material is depicted
504
J. Visser et al.

through binding of CD20. Since it is not fully established
how these main mechanisms of action of rituximab con-
tribute to safety and efﬁcacy in vivo, a comprehensive set
of potency bioassays was developed to provide a complete
picture of GP2013’s functional integrity and comparability
to the originator.
3.2.1 Bioassays
A prerequisite for all further downstream actions that
combine to cause B cell depletion in vivo, the binding of
GP2013 to its target CD20 was assessed in a cell-based
competitive binding assay and was found to be well within
the originator range (Table 2). This was expected given that
GP2013 has not only the same primary and higher order
structure as the originator product, but also a highly similar
proﬁle with respect to post-translational modiﬁcations.
The activity of GP2013 was further compared to origi-
nator rituximab in CDC and ADCC assays, which depend
on a fully functional Fc domain in addition to target
binding. GP2013 was seen to be comparable to originator
rituximab in CDC and ADCC assays (Table 2). It is known
that variable Fc glycosylation can inﬂuence the activity of
mAbs in both CDC and ADCC assays, with the latter assay
typically showing a high sensitivity to the presence of
defucosylated glycans. Interestingly, the variability of
originator rituximab in the ADCC assay was signiﬁcantly
higher than its variability in the CDC assay.
Finally, the direct induction of apoptosis caused by the
binding of rituximab to CD20 was quantiﬁed in a bioassay
based on the rituximab-induced externalization of phos-
phatidylserine on Raji B cells. Also in this assay, the activity
of GP2013 was comparable to the originator (Table 2).
The results from all potency bioassays were assessed for
bioequivalence using the two-sided test procedure (TOST)
and applying the usual bioequivalence limits of 0.8–1.25.
The corresponding p values were all highly signiﬁcant
(\0.0001) conﬁrming bioequivalence between GP2013 and
the reference product.
3.2.2 SPR binding assays
SPR was used to determine the afﬁnity of GP2013 and
reference product to recombinant human Fcc and FcRn
receptors. The neonatal Fc receptor for IgG is expressed by
endothelian cells and monocytes, which recycle IgG into
circulation, and therefore impacts serum half-life [27].
FccRs are mostly expressed on leukocytes and are relevant
for the function of therapeutic antibodies [28]. Three types
of FccR are present in humans (FccRI, FccRII and FccRIII),
and they differ in the type of signaling pathway they trigger
and their afﬁnity to IgGs [29]. Especially FccRIIIa is
implicated in inducing ADCC, and patients with follicular
lymphoma who carried the higher afﬁnity variant FccRIIIa
V158 have been shown to have higher response rates to
rituximab [30]. The afﬁnity constants obtained for the
different types of FccRs (Table 3) are in line with what is
Fig. 6 Electropherograms of
non-reduced GP2013 and
originator rituximab. Zoomed
view of the electropherograms
on the rituximab-related subunit
corresponding to light chain (L),
heavy chain (H), heavy-light
chain (HL), heavy-heavy chain
(HH), heavy-heavy-light chain
(HHL) and high molecular
weight variants (HMW)
Table 2 GP2013 potency values as measured in the in vitro target
binding, ADCC, CDC and apoptosis bioassay in comparison to the
originator range. Bioassays are performed in duplicate. The originator
range reﬂects the minimum and maximum value of 59 batches for the
ADCC, 62 batches for the CDC bioassay, 48 batches for target
binding and 7 batches for the apoptosis bioassay, which was devel-
oped later. The range stated for GP2013 reﬂects the minimum and
maximum value of 11 clinic batches for binding, ADCC and CDC and
5 batches for the apoptosis assay
Target
binding
ADCC
CDC
Apoptosis
GP2013 (%)
97–108
86–105
99–111
88–97
Reference range (%)
96–110
70–132
95–127
88–102
p value (TOST)
\0.0001
\0.0001
\0.0001
\0.0001
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
505

typically found in the literature [31–33]. Even more
importantly, it was shown that the afﬁnity of GP2013
towards FcRn and FccRs was very comparable to the
afﬁnity the originator product displayed.
By using a comprehensive set of bioassays and binding
assays, covering rituximab’s possible mode of actions,
GP2013 could not be functionally distinguished from the
reference product.
4 Conclusions
MAbs are large and complex proteins, but it is possible to
characterize them in great detail by using an extensive set
of state-of-the-art analytical technologies. The use of
orthogonal methods minimizes the risk of missing relevant
modiﬁcations, while the combination of all analytical
techniques provide a very comprehensive picture of the
molecule. Physicochemically, GP2013 was shown to be
highly similar to originator rituximab at the level of pri-
mary and higher order structure, post-translational modi-
ﬁcations
and
size
variants.
An
extensive
functional
characterization package, including SPR-based binding
assays and in vitro cell-based bioassays, revealed that
GP2013 has the same biological properties as the originator
rituximab. Despite not knowing the originator process and
using a different CHO cell line and different upstream and
downstream manufacturing process, it was possible to
create a mAb (GP2013) highly similar to originator ritux-
imab at the level of individual quality attributes and
indistinguishable from a functional perspective. This
demonstrates that target-directed biosimilar development
of complex molecules such as mAbs is possible.
A thorough physicochemical and functional compara-
bility exercise serves as a foundation for the subsequent
demonstration of biosimilarity in further pre-clinical and
clinical trials. A high level of structural and functional
similarity provides conﬁdence that tailored pre-clinical and
clinical studies will also reveal a comparable safety and
efﬁcacy proﬁle. Indeed, a subsequent pre-clinical compa-
rability exercise conﬁrmed that GP2013 and originator
rituximab are pharmacologically comparable with regard to
anti-tumor activity, PK exposure (AUC and Cmax) and
B-cell depletion. As such, it can also be anticipated that
GP2013 will show comparable potency and safety as the
reference product in ongoing clinical trials (ClinicalTri-
als.gov NCT01274182 and NCT01419665), bringing the
availability of more affordable biologics a step closer.
Acknowledgments
Sandoz, a Novartis company, funded all analy-
ses. The analytical program set-up, management and/or execution of the
analyses and the subsequent interpretation of analytical data were done
by the authors and members of the GP2013 project team. The entire
GP2013 project team is acknowledged for their contribution to the
development of GP2013. The authors also would like to acknowledge
Dr. Jacki Kornbluth, St. Louis University, for providing the NK cell line
NK3.3. Medical writing support was provided by Andy Bond of Spirit
Medical Communications Ltd., supported by Sandoz.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
The exclusive right to any commercial use of the article is with
Springer.
References
1. European Medicines Agency, Committee for Medicinal Products
for Human Use (CHMP). Guideline on similar biological medicinal
products containing monoclonal antibodies—non-clinical and
clinical issues. London: European Medicines Agency; 2012. http://
www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientiﬁc_
guideline/2012/06/WC500128686.pdf.
2. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER). Guidance for Industry. Scientiﬁc considerations
in demonstrating biosimilarity to a reference product. Rockville:
Food
and
Drug
Administration;
2012.
http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
Guidances/UCM291128.pdf.
3. Schiestl M, Stangler T, Torella C, et al. Acceptable changes in
quality attributes of glycosylated biopharmaceuticals. Nat Bio-
technol. 2011;29(4):310–2.
4. McCamish M, Woollett G. The state of the art in the development
of biosimilars. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012;91(3):405–17.
5. Cornes P. The economic pressures for biosimilar drug use in
cancer medicine. Target Oncol. 2012;7(Suppl 1):S57–67.
6. Engen JR. Analysis of protein conﬁrmation and dynamics by
hydrogen/deuterium exchange MS. Anal Chem. 2009;81(19):
7870–5.
7. Houde D, Berkowitz SA, Engen JR. The utility of hydrogen
deuterium exchange mass spectrometry in biopharmaceutical
comparability studies. J Pharm Sci. 2011;100(6):2071–86.
8. Van Holde KE, Curtis Johnson W, Shing Ho P. Thermodynamics
and biochemistry. In: Principles of physical biochemistry. 2nd ed.
Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall; 2006. p. 72–105.
9. Andersen CB, Manno M, Rischel C, Tho´ro´lfsson M, Martorana
V.
Aggregation
of
a
multidomain
protein:
a
coagulation
Table 3 GP2013 afﬁnity constants (KD) for binding to the FcRn and
FcR receptors in comparison to the originator range as determined by
surface plasmon resonance. Per sample the afﬁnity to each receptor
was determined four times. The data shown were performed head to
head and reﬂect the minimum and maximum value of seven originator
batches and ﬁve GP2013 clinical batches
Reference KD
GP2013 KD
FcRn
0.55–0.58 lM
0.54–0.58 lM
FccRIa
10.4–11.8 nM
10.9–12.4 nM
FccRIIa
2.4–2.7 lM
2.4–2.7 lM
FccRIIb
11.4–12.8 lM
11.0–12.7 lM
FccRIIIa F158
7.4–10.3 lM
8.5–10.9 lM
FccRIIIa V158
3.5–4.9 lM
4.2–5.0 lM
FccRIIIb
9.2–11.7 lM
9.9–12.4 lM
506
J. Visser et al.

mechanism governs aggregation of a model IgG1 antibody under
weak thermal stress. Prot Sci. 2010;19:279–90.
10. Du Y, Walsh A, Ehrick R, et al. Chromatographic analysis of the
acidic and basic species of recombinant monoclonal antibodies.
MAbs. 2012;4(5):578–85.
11. Khawli LA, Goswami S, Hutchinson R, et al. Charge variants in
IgG1: isolation, characterization, in vitro binding properties and
pharmacokinetics in rats. MAbs. 2010;2(6):613–24.
12. Chelius D, Rehder DS, Bondarenko PV. Identiﬁcation and
characterization of deamidation sites in the conserved regions of
human immunoglobulin gamma antibodies. Anal Chem. 2005;77
(18):6004–11.
13. Chumsae C, Gaza-Bulseco G, Sun J, et al. Comparison of
methionine oxidation in thermal stability and chemically stressed
samples of a fully human monoclonal antibody. J Chromatogr B
Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2007;850(1–2):285–94.
14. Johnson KA, Paisley-Flango K, Tangarone BS, et al. Cation
exchange-HPLC and mass spectrometry reveal C-terminal ami-
dation of an IgG1 heavy chain. Anal Biochem. 2007;360(1):
75–83.
15. Zhang B, Yang Y, Yuk I, et al. Unveiling a glycation hot spot in a
recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody. Anal Chem.
2008;80(7):2379–90.
16. Hossler P, Khattak SF, Li ZJ. Optimal and consistent protein
glycosylation in mammalian cell culture. Glycobiology. 2009;
19(9):936–49.
17. Beck A, Wagner-Rousset E, Bussat MC, et al. Trends in glyco-
sylation, glycoanalysis and glycoengineering of therapeutic
antibodies and Fc-fusion proteins. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2008;
9(6):482–501.
18. Ghaderi D, Taylor RE, Padler-Karavani V, et al. Implications of
the presence of N-glycolylneuraminic acid in recombinant ther-
apeutic glycoproteins. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;28(8):863–7.
19. Macher BA, Galili U. The Galalpha1,3Galbeta1,4GlcNAc-R
(alpha-Gal) epitope: a carbohydrate of unique evolution and
clinical relevance. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008;1780(2):75–88.
20. Chung CH, Mirakhur B, Chan E, et al. Cetuximab-induced ana-
phylaxis and IgE speciﬁc for galactose-a-1,3-galactose. N Engl J
Med. 2008;358(11):1109–17.
21. Shields RL, Lai J, Keck R, et al. Lack of fucose on human
IgG1N-linked oligosaccharides improves binding to human
Fcgamma RIII and antibody-dependent cytotoxicity. J Biol
Chem. 2002;277(30):26733–40.
22. Niwa R, Natsume A, Uehara A, et al. IgG subclass-independent
improvement of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity by
fucose removal from Asn297-linked oligosaccharides. J Immunol
Methods. 2005;306(1–2):151–60.
23. Chung S, Quarmby V, Gao X, et al. Quantitative evaluation of
fucose reducing effects in a humanized antibody on Fc receptor
binding
and
antibody-dependent
cell-mediated
cytotoxicity
activities. MAbs. 2012;4(3):326–40.
24. Rosenberg AS. Effects of protein aggregates: an immunologic
perspective. AAPS J. 2006;8(3):E501–7.
25. den Engelsman J, Garidel P, Smulders R, et al. Strategies for the
assessment of protein aggregates in pharmaceutical biotech
product development. Pharm Res. 2011;28(4):920–33.
26. Weiner GJ. Rituximab: mechanism of action. Semin Hematol.
2010;47(2):115–23.
27. Roopenian DC, Akilesh S. FcRn: the neonatal Fc receptor comes
of age. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007;7(9):715–25.
28. Jiang XR, Song A, Bergelson S, et al. Advances in the assessment
and control of the effector functions of therapeutic antibodies.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10(2):101–11.
29. Nimmerjahn F, Ravetch JV. Anti-inﬂammatory actions of intra-
venous immunoglobulin. Annu Rev Immunol. 2008;26:513–33.
30. Cartron G, Dacheux L, Salles G, et al. Therapeutic activity of
humanized anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody and polymorphism in
IgG Fc receptor FcgammaRIIIa gene. Blood. 2002;99(3):754–8.
31. Mimura Y, Sondermann P, Ghirlando R, et al. Role of oligo-
saccharide residues of IgG1-Fc in FccRIIb binding. J Biol Chem.
2001;276(49):45539–47.
32. Masuda K, Kubota T, Kaneko E, et al. Enhanced binding afﬁnity
for FccRIIIa of fucose-negative antibody is sufﬁcient to induce
maximal antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Mol Immunol.
2007;44(12):3122–31.
33. Lee CH, Choi DK, Choi HJ, et al. Expression of soluble and
functional human neonatal Fc receptor in Pichia pastoris. Prot
Expr Purif. 2010;71(1):42–8.
Characterization of a Proposed Biosimilar Rituximab
507