1711
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 8, pp. 1711–1713, 2013.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1351/PAC-REC-12-05-10
© 2013 IUPAC, Publication date (Web): 10 July 2013
Definition of the halogen bond
(IUPAC Recommendations 2013)*
Gautam R. Desiraju1, P. Shing Ho2, Lars Kloo3, Anthony C. Legon4,
Roberto Marquardt5, Pierangelo Metrangolo6,‡, Peter Politzer7,
Giuseppe Resnati6,‡, and Kari Rissanen8
1Solid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
560 012, India; 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1870, USA; 3Department of Chemistry,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden; 4School of
Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK; 5Laboratoire de Chimie
Quantique, Institut de Chimie, Université de Strasbourg, 4, rue Blaise Pascal -
CS90032, 67081 Strasbourg, France; 6Laboratory of Nanostructured Fluorinated
Materials (NFMLab), Department of Chemistry, Materials, and Chemical
Engineering “Giulio Natta”, Politecnico di Milano, Milano 20131, Italy;
7CleveTheoComp, 1951 W. 26th Street, Suite 409, Cleveland, OH 44113, USA;
8Department of Chemistry, Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä,
P.O. Box 35, 40014 JYU, Finland
Abstract: This recommendation proposes a definition for the term “halogen bond”, which
designates a specific subset of the inter- and intramolecular interactions involving a halogen
atom in a molecular entity.
Keywords: halogen bond; IUPAC Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division; nomencla-
ture; noncovalent inter actions; self-assembly; supramolecular chemistry. 
1. PREAMBLE
This recommendation proposes a definition for the term “halogen bond”, which designates a specific
subset of the inter- and intramolecular interactions involving a halogen atom in a molecular entry. (A
“molecular entity” is defined as “Any constitutionally or isotopically distinct atom, molecule, ion, ion
pair, radical, radical ion, complex, conformer etc., identifiable as a separately distinguishable entity”,
see p. 1142 in ref. [1]). Consistent with their relatively high electronegativity, halogen atoms can behave
as electron-rich (nucleophilic) sites and form net attractive interactions with electron-poor (electro -
philic) partners. A halogen atom functioning as hydrogen bond acceptor is a typical example of such
interactions. Halogen atoms can also function as electron-poor (electrophilic) sites and attractively
interact with electron-rich (nucleophilic) sites. The two sets of interactions differ for their electronic
features and several other characteristics, e.g., their directionality relative to the covalent bond(s)
formed by the halogen atom. The term “halogen bond” identifies the latter set of noncovalent inter -
actions described above. After a short definition of the term, a list (not exhaustive) of common halogen
bond donors and acceptors is given. A list of experimental and/or theoretical features, which, although
*Sponsoring body: IUPAC Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division: see more details on p. 1713.
‡Corresponding authors: E-mail: P.M.: pierangelo.metrangolo@polimi.it; G.R.: giuseppe.resnati@polimi.it

not exhaustive, can be used as evidence for the presence of a halogen bond concludes this recommen-
dation.
A comprehensive technical report, to be published, has been prepared by the task group in order
to relate the proposed definition with the past work on halogen bond and provide the rationale for the
proposed definition.
2. DEFINITION
A halogen bond occurs when there is evidence of a net attractive interaction between an elec-
trophilic region associated with a halogen atom in a molecular entity and a nucleophilic region in
another, or the same, molecular entity [1].
A typical halogen bond is denoted by the three dots in R–XY. R–X is the halogen bond donor,
X is any halogen atom with an electrophilic (electron-poor) region, and R is a group (see p. 1118 in
ref. [1]) covalently bound to X. In some cases, X may be covalently bound to more than one group (see
p. 1118 in ref. [1]). It may also form more than one halogen bond. Y is the halogen bond acceptor and
is typically a molecular entity (see p. 1142 in ref. [1]) possessing at least one nucleophilic (electron-
rich) region. Some common halogen bond donors and acceptors are itemized below.
The evidence for the occurrence of a halogen bond may be experimental or theoretical, or better,
a combination of both. Some features that are useful as indications for the halogen bond, not necessar-
ily exhaustive, are listed below. The greater the number of features satisfied, the more reliable the char-
acterization of an interaction as a halogen bond is.
2.1 List of some common halogen bond donors and acceptors
R–X can typically be a:
dihalogen molecule (e.g., I2, Br2, ICl, ClF)
haloalkane (e.g., CBr4, CHI3, CnF2n+1I)
haloarene or haloheteroarene (e.g., iodobenzene, halopyridinium
and haloimidazolium cations) 
1-haloalkyne (e.g., diiodoacetylene)
halonium ion (e.g., diphenyliodonium or bromonium derivatives) 
haloimide (e.g., N-bromo- or N-iodosuccinimide)
Y can typically be a:
lone pair possessing atom (e.g., N atom of a pyridine or an amine,
O atom of a carbonyl group)
π system (e.g., double or triple bonds, arene moiety)
anion (e.g., halide anion, oxyanion)
2.2 List of features
In a typical halogen-bonded complex R–XY:
•
The interatomic distance between X and the appropriate nucleophilic atom of Y tends to be less
than the sum of the van der Waals radii.
•
The length of the R–X covalent bond usually increases relative to the unbonded R–X.
•
The angle R–XY tends to be close to 180°, i.e., the halogen bond acceptor Y approaches X
along the extension of the R–X bond.
• 
The halogen bond strength decreases as the electronegativity of X increases, and the electron-
withdrawing ability of R decreases.
•
The forces involved in the formation of the halogen bond are primarily electrostatic, but polar-
ization, charge transfer, and dispersion contributions all play an important role. The relative roles
of the different forces may vary from one case to the other.
G. R. DESIRAJU et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 8, pp. 1711–1713, 2013
1712

• 
The analysis of the electron density topology usually shows a bond path (a “bond path” and a
“bond critical point” are defined as “Within the topological electron distribution theory, the line
resulting from the addition of two gradient paths of the electron density function emanating from
the bond critical point located between each two neighbouring atomic basins” and “Within the
topological electron distribution theory, a (3, –1) critical point (the point of the gradient field of
the electron density within a given neutral configuration in which ∇ρ(r,q) = 0) which is a local
maximum in two directions and is a local minimum in the third, i.e. a saddle point in the three
directions”, see pp. 1928 and 1927, respectively, in ref. [2]) connecting X and Y and a bond crit-
ical point (see pp. 1928 and 1927, respectively, in ref. [2]) between X and Y.
• 
The infrared absorption and Raman scattering observables of both R–X and Y are affected by
halogen bond formation; new vibrational modes associated with the formation of the XY bond
are also observed. 
• 
The UV–vis absorption bands of the halogen bond donor usually shift to shorter wavelengths.
• 
The XY halogen bond usually affects the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) observables (e.g.,
chemical shift values) of nuclei in both R–X and Y, both in solution and in the solid state.
•
The binding energies of the peaks associated with X with the X-ray photoelectron spectrum
(XPS) of the complex shift to lower energies relative to unbonded X.
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODY
Membership of the IUPAC Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division Committee for the period
2012–2013 is as follows: 
President: K. Yamanouchi (Japan); Vice President: R. Marquardt (France); Secretary: A. Wilson
(USA); Past President: A. McQuillan (New Zealand); Titular Members: K. Bartik (Belgium);
A. Friedler (Israel); A. Goodwin (USA); R. Guidelli (Italy); A. Russell (UK); J. Stohner (Switzerland);
Associate Members: V. Barone (Italy); A. Császár (Hungary); V. Kukushkin (Russia); V. Mišković-
Stanković (Serbia); Á. Mombrú Rodríguez (Uruguay); X. S. Zhao (China); National Representatives:
K. Bhattacharyya (India); J. Cejka (Czech Republic); S. Hannongbua (Thailand); M. Koper
(Netherlands); A. J. Mahmood (Bangladesh); O. Mamchenko (Ukraine); J. Mdoe (Tanzania); F. Quina
(Brazil); N. Soon (Malaysia); V. Tomišić (Croatia).
This document was prepared in the frame of IUPAC Project #2009-032-1-100, Categorizing
Halogen Bonding and Other Noncovalent Interactions Involving Halogen Atoms. Chairs:
P. Metrangolo and G. Resnati; Members: G. R. Desiraju; P. Ho; L. Kloo; A. Legon; R. Marquardt;
P. Politzer; K. Rissanen. 
See the following web site for more details: http://www.halogenbonding.eu.
REFERENCES
1.
P. Muller. Pure Appl. Chem. 66, 1077 (1994).
2.
V. I. Minkin. Pure Appl. Chem. 71, 1919 (1999).
Republication or reproduction of this report or its storage and/or dissemination by electronic means is permitted without the
need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an acknowledgment, with full reference to the source, along with use of the
copyright symbol ©, the name IUPAC, and the year of publication, are prominently visible. Publication of a translation into
another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the relevant IUPAC National Adhering
Organization.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 8, pp. 1711–1713, 2013
Definition of the halogen bond
1713