SYMPOSIUM: THE RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR IN MEDICINE AND HEALTH
Death’s Broker: the Ethics Consultant in the ICU
David Schenck1
Published online: 2 September 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
Modern Western medicine may be seen as an effort to wrest
the phenomenon of healing away from religious communities.
Peter Berger and Jonathan Imber have proposed that it might
be especially fruitful to investigate the encounter of the reli-
gious pluralism that has persisted thorough the modern period
with the full-blown secularization as both are found in the
contemporary Western hospital.1
Speaking as someone who does what is called Bethics
consultation^ in such an institution, I offer four clusters of
ideas to further this investigation. I will present them as
follows:
1)
The ethicist’s role as consultant in hospital is best un-
derstand as brokering the progress of technical death
and bodily death in challenging cases, conducting a
variety of interlocking negotiations, so that the two
deaths occur at the same time, to the degree that that
is possible;
2)
From that standpoint, built out of dozens (or hundreds) of
such negotiations, the ethicist who is looking2, will be in a
unique position to see and say useful things about secu-
larization and religion in the hospital. This is in significant
part because a working knowledge of both religious and
secular pluralism is essential for one to succeed as a
broker of a Bgood death^ in a tertiary care medical
facility. And what might these Buseful things^ be?
3)
Secular pluralism
a.
There is a pluralism of secular discourses in our hos-
pitals, such that, for instance, people speaking
Brespiratory therapy^ cannot be guaranteed to under-
stand people speaking Baccounting^—and vice versa.
b.
Even so, we can identify Btechnical body talk^ as the
most privileged secular language of hospital.
4)
Religious pluralism
a.
Religious practice and belief enter the hospital with
and through the physical body;
b.
There exists a phenomenon I will call Bnegotiated
transcendence^, which is often the only shareable
route to the sacred within the confines of the hospital.
And that the ethicist may be called on to negotiate this
as well.3
As death’s broker, the ethics consultant must perforce
be multi-lingual, in a rough-and-ready way, because so
much of negotiation takes place at the sticking point of
secular languages (and their various dialects) with one
another, religious languages (and their various dialects)
with one another, and the tongues of secularization and
religion with one another—all of which one finds, all
the time, in tertiary level hospitals.4
3 Wendy Cadge’s comments on negotiation and spirituality helped me
refine the formulation of Bnegotiated transcendence^. (Cadge 2012: 14–
17 et passim.)
4 I deliberately say negotiator or broker, and not translator, because the
latter would obviously be impossible—too many languages, way too
many dialects. True enough, negotiation does involve translation in some
sense—but I would argue, mostly by way of pidgin variants of the major
secular and religious languages commonly found in hospitals.
* David Schenck
schenck@musc.edu
1
Ethics Program Medical University of South Carolina, 169 Ashley
Ave, Suite 260 MH, MSC 332, Charleston, SC 29425, USA
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
DOI 10.1007/s12115-015-9928-9

that each of these three stakeholders will likely have interests
distinct from those of the other two.
Likewise, we could speak of the patient’s body as a cluster
of interests, and bodily dying as something accomplished by
multiple agents. For the patient’s body, the Bseen^ body, fam-
ily and friends, the readers of the signs of bodily dying (wheth-
er lay or professional), along with religious communities,
could be seen as primary stakeholders—and in turn all of these
understood as acting in concert to accomplish a bodily dying.
And we would recognize that each of these stakeholders is
likely to have interests that diverge from those of all the others.
Extrapolating from this further analysis, we come to realize
that, for a fully satisfactory Bnatural death^ to occur, all the
interests of all members of these groups must be aligned. The
family must be Bready^, the primary team and the critical care
team must be in agreement, and all religious expectations
addressed.6
What then constitutes the Bnatural death^ that is so de-
sired—not just by medical teams, but by families and com-
panions of the dying as well? How can we tell that a Bnatural
death^ has been achieved? Seymour once again:
. . . firstly, that the process of dying was neither too
prolonged nor too precipitate.
The patient can linger on and on, well past the time the
critical care team (the team running the ICU) thinks appropri-
ate—in spite of the fact that the primary team (for example,
Bsurgery^, or Bmedicine^, or Bneurology^) responsible for the
patient’s hospital course Bisn’t ready.^ The patient can die
before anyone is ready—family or team.
Secondly, that Btechnical death^ could be aligned to the
Bbodily death^, thereby legitimating the medical control
of events and ensuring that death only occurred once all
avenues of possible treatment were exhausted.
The body may be on technical grounds Bvery near death^,
when the patient’s body itself doesn’t yet show many or any of
the common clinical signs of Bactive dying^: changing
5 In this vein, we might say that the technical body is presented in partic-
ularly pure form in the daily rounds that take place in ICU’s.
6 My colleague Joe Fanning has pointed out that families have their own
interpretations of the Btechnical body^, though talk about it is likely not to
be (in his felicitous phrase) Btheir preferred nor predominant idiom^. One
might adduce as evidence this scene in a children’s hospital: The dad is
sitting in that severe kind of recliner found in hospitals watching the
numbers and the graphs on the monitor as if he were at home in front
of the TV. Meanwhile the mom is in the rocking chair studying her tablet,
researching terms and numbers that have been thrown at her by the teams
during the day.
In terms of the argument I am developing in the text: Does this make
the family a potential Binterested party^ in technical dying—just as a
clinician who knows a patient personally might be an Binterested party^
in bodily dying? Yes. But lesser shareholders, if you will—on each side.
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
449
I
Recent ethnographical work has provided rich insights into
the working of intensive care units (ICUs). Key texts include
the works of Renée Anspach (1987, 1993), Bosk (2003),
Cadge (2012); Chapple (2010); Kaufman (2005), Mesman
(2008); Seymour (1999, 2000, 2001), and Zussman (1992).
While I am going to draw heavily on two papers by Seymour
to frame my discussion, all these studies lie in the background
of what follows.
In her papers BNegotiating natural death in intensive care^
(2000) and BRevisiting medicalisation and ‘natural’ death^
(1999), Seymour makes a distinction between bodily dying
and technical dying.
. . . complex strategies [are] employed by medical staff
during the withdrawal of medical treatment in intensive
care to ensure that alignment is achieved between the
potentially divergent trajectories of the Bseen^ bodily
dying, which is recognized on the basis of clinical ex-
perience; and the discursive negotiation of Bknown^
technical dying, which is informed by data from blood
results, monitoring equipment, and investigations.
And she argues that a Bgood death^ in the ICU occurs when
the death of the one body Bcoincides^ with the death of the
other.
Containing and preventing divergence between Bbodily^
and Btechnical^ dying are represented as Bnature taking
its course^ and Bnatural death^ by medical staff in inten-
sive care. (Seymour 1999: 694)
Seymour works with this basic dichotomy to characterize
negotiations medical teams make essentially with themselves
to understand and achieve Bnatural death^. But to capture the
involvement of those parties interested primarily in the patient
as a person into these negotiations towards Bnatural death^ in
a full way, we have to take this analysis several steps further.
Despite appearances, neither bodily death nor technical
death is a discreet Bevent^. Despite appearances, neither the
Bseen^ body of the patient nor the Bknown^ body of the tech-
nicians is a singular Bobject^. Both pairs are themselves com-
plex and negotiated entities.
We might, for example, speak of the technical body as a
cluster of interests, and technical dying as something accom-
plished by multiple agents. In the ICU, one might list the
primary team, critical care team, and respiratory therapists as
primary stakeholders in the Bknown^ or Btechnical body^—as
well as agents in the technical dying.5 And recognize in turn

breathing patterns, temperature changes, altered skin color and
tonality.
Thirdly, that [the patient’s] awareness of dying was
suppressed and her family’s acceptance of death
facilitated.
Medication is given to prevent anxiety, relieve pain and
Breduce suffering^. At times patient may appear to the team
to be suffering but seems to be improving to the family—or
vice versa. The family is often, in the teams’ language, Bnot
ready^.
Lastly, technological control engendered an environ-
ment in which the family was able to witness a gradual,
quiet and dignified event. (Seymour 1999; 697–698)
Yet sometimes death is not gradual, not quiet, not dignified.
And this can be hard on everyone.
Given the complexity of these criteria, it is not hard to see
that things will often go awry. How then is the convergence of
bodily dying and technical dying engineered by medical teams
and their consulting services? Seymour:
However, the data suggest that Bnatural death^ is pri-
marily constructed during medical work by means of
four interactional strategies.
. . . firstly, the establishment of a Btechnical^ definition of
dying—based on blood results, monitoring evidence and
investigation—over and above Bbodily^ dying, based on
the habitual recognition of the senses informed by clinical
experience. Such definition occurs across a variable time
period and involves the active negotiation and re-
negotiation of the meaning of medical-technical data.
A given medical team focused on one organ system will
interpret the significance of a sequence of lab values differently
from another. The liver numbers may be improving as the kid-
neys fail. The severity of brain damage shown in an MRI can be
read very differently by the neurology team, the trauma team
and the critical care team. Nurses at the bedside work diligently,
hour- by-hour, to correlate the numbers they recite at rounds and
the target values established then, with what their clinical expe-
rience tells them about the body they take care of all day long.
Secondly, the alignment of the trajectory of Bknown^
technical dying with the development of Bseen^ and
Bfelt^ bodily dying. It is this alignment which ensures
that the events of treatment withdrawal are seen to have
no directly causative link to death.
BThere is nothing else we can do.^ BShe is showing us what
we need to do next.^ The technical activities associated with
dying—procedures, vent settings or extubation, medications
withdrawn and medications introduced, whether or not to intro-
duce antibiotics or begin dialysis—are not just to be coordinat-
ed with the bodily Bactivities^ of dying—changes in breathing
and heart function, in skin color and temperature. Their conver-
gence will also preferably occur in such a sequence and such a
manner that the technical can be experienced and shown to be
following the lead of the bodily as death approaches.
Thirdly, the problem of causation is further dealt with by
a strategic balancing of medical action with medical
non-action. This allows for a diffusion of responsibility
for death to the body of the ill person.
A transition from the dominance of the language and ac-
tivities that constitute technical dying to those that constitute
bodily dying takes place as aggressive care (i.e., those inter-
ventions guided largely by specialized, technical information)
take a backseat to those of comfort care (i.e., those interven-
tions keying off the bodily dying process). One kind of action
is gradually substituted for another.
Lastly, medical work is directed, where circumstances
allow, towards the incorporation of patients’ compan-
ions and nursing staff into the decision making process.
(Seymour 2000; 1245)
BYou are the ones who finally have to make the decision.^
BOnly you know what your father would want us to do now.^
The medical teams which have drafted and directed the hos-
pital course, as death nears, step back to share responsibility
with the families and companions of the dying.
All these strategies serve to bring together all the
Binterests^ that enact the technical body and the patient’s body
together in such a way that all can agree that the death is
occurring ought to be taking place—in two senses of Bought^,
the moral as well as the consequential. This Bought^ in turn
allows everyone to take up confidently their responsibility for
their part in orchestrating the event.
Given the very high desirability of a Bnatural death^, a Bgood
death^ for medical teams and for families, it will be prudent, if
not essential, to identify before crises occur who it is that can
best help engineer Bnatural death^ in cases where technical dy-
ing and bodily dying appear to be diverging rather than converg-
ing. Who to call when the best efforts of the medical teams
involved to pull them back together are failing? In larger hospi-
tals and tertiary medical centers there are increasingly two pri-
mary options: the palliative care team and the ethics consultation
service. Let us call the latter BEthics^ for short.7
7 It is not uncommon to hear as one walks onto a unit: BEthics is here.^
How bizarre. And unsettling. Further: It is customary in our service to
sign our notes in the EMR with BThank you for calling Ethics.^
450
Soc (2015) 52:448–461

Why, we should ask, these two services and not other long-
standing ones? We give Palliative Care and Chaplaincy their
own treatments below. But why not Social Workers, Nurse
Practitioners, Nurse Managers, Charge Nurses, Bedside
Nurses? The people in these roles are constantly moving back
and forth between medical teams and families, interpreting the
relationship of the technical body to the patient’s body. Why
are these clinical roles not the ones designated to conduct
these types of ICU negotiations? Why is this sort of negotia-
tion not in their Bscope of practice^? Here we want the light
sociology and history can shed on these roles. Each has typi-
cally involved education that was considered less Bformal^
and Bscientific^; had assignments that were considered Bless
prestigious^; had lower pay; and were held by women.8 These
roles also had fairly established institutional identities and
functions by the time the need for the negotiations we are
talking about became so necessary.
Let’s take a stab at answering the question of why BEthics^
is a consulting service at all, and along with it Palliative Care.
Put as succinctly as possible: BThe Vent invented Ethics.^
That is: My proposal for the etiology of ethics consultation
is that the medical ventilator’s capacity to sustain life made the
ICU possible. And that the ICU itself—and its attendant phe-
nomenon, Bnegotiated death^—created the ethics consultant.
The ICU called forth the role out of law, medicine and chap-
laincy.9 Not primarily because big decisions have to be made
there, though some certainly are. But rather because a very
specific type of negotiation has to take place in ICUs and no
existing services were in a position to provide it.10
This novel situation has called forth the roles of both Ethics
and Palliative Care. In theory, people filling these roles can
approach physicians roughly as peers, and have a back- and-
forth function that is still being shaped. They both operate
outside clear expectations.11
This relatively free rein is at once advantageous and not.
For, as the briefest amount of time in the ICU demonstrates, a
significant portion of attending physicians does not consider
palliative care teams or ethics consultants to be peers. We are
convenient in bad spots, perhaps in large part because we are
fresh to the scene. Our authority remains a function more of
charisma than institutional anchoring—as yet.12 Where I am
employed, Ethics and Palliative Care work hand in glove.
These negotiations as the end of life approaches are so often
so convoluted, so messy, the stakeholders so diverse, that
frankly one needs all the help one can get. (BWhy did you call
Ethics for this case?^ I say to my colleagues in Palliative Care.
Often enough the answer is: BTo share the love.^) Some in-
terested parties respond better to the white coats of Palliative
Care, others to the street-dress of Ethics. Some to the bias
towards technical death of Palliative Care; some towards the
bias towards physical death of Ethics. Sometimes we play
good-cop, bad-cop. It will be interesting to watch the evolu-
tion of this. As far as this negotiation function goes, it may
well be that Palliative Care displaces Ethics in the next decade
or so.
What does the back-and-forth of a representative ethics
consultation look like? Consider the fact that BEthics^ is com-
monly consulted to assist teams in the implementation of the
Bfour interactional strategies^ Seymour delineates and that we
discussed just above. To wit:
1)
Differing interpretations and constructions of Bknown^
data and Bseen^ signs and their relationship to one another
result in disputes within or between or among medical
teams that in turn can spur a call to BEthics^.
2)
BEthics^ may be called in to lead or participate in a dis-
cussion of what is called Bgoals of care^. This phrase may
be translated as: How what is being done by clinicians to
the Btechnical^ body fits with what anyone can see is
happening to the patient’s body.
3)
BEthics^ is often called in to facilitate discussions about
balancing medical action and medical non-action, about
withholding or withdrawing care.
4)
BEthics^ may be called to weigh in on who should be
involved in shared decision-making, by helping assess
who appropriate surrogates are and what their role ought
to be. Especially as regards Bthe preferences of the
patient^ and her or his perceptions of Bquality of life^.
Both of which the surrogates presumably (hopefully!)
share with the patient. BEthics^ is also often called on to
facilitate the discussions necessarily involved in such
8 I would hasten to add that I consider the people filling these roles in the
hospitals where I have worked to be the heroes of the healthcare these
institutions offer.
9 For a brief look at the history of the ICU see Reiser (1985). The idea that
a technological space might Bcreate^ a role, might Benact^ a feature of the
social, is drawn from Actor-Network Theory. See especially: Latour
(2002, 2011); Law (1992); and Mol (2003).
10 This perspective on negotiation has at least as much explanatory power
for the rise of ethics consultation as do the Borigin myths^ propagated by
bioethicists’. See Gains and Juengst (2008). I would see my account as
supplementing sociological and historical perspectives on the field. Re-
quired reading here for bioethicists being of course the works of Renée
Fox and Judith P. Swazey. Essential would be BMedical morality is not
bioethics—medical ethics in China and the United States^. 1984. (And
then also Fox and Swazey 2005, 2008).
11 People with many kinds of training and experience can fill the role of
ethicist: M.D.’s, nurse practitioners, nurses, social workers, lawyers,
chaplains and philosophers. There is every reason to be skeptical that this
last group will have any special advantages over the others when it comes
to filling the Ethics role successfully. Indeed, there is much reason to
suspect the contrary.
12 Not that there isn’t formal institutional structure for ethics consulta-
tion—there is. But the range of approaches, the shifting expectations, and
the wide variety of training and backgrounds mean that much of the
purchase one has walking into a unit is local and situational, rather than
bureaucratic. The classic treatment of charisma and instituationalization is
of course Max Weber’s.
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
451

shared decision-making processes, particularly when
such discussions are stalled or acrimonious.
I adduce all the above in service of the first part of my
cluster of ideas: BThe ethicist’s role as consultant in hospital
as best understand as brokering the progress of technical death
and bodily death in challenging cases so that they occur at the
same time, to the degree that that is possible.^13
So now the question is, if you grant that the above is the case,
why should we as students of religion and secularization care
about this? First of all, for my immediate purpose, the argu-
ment is this that Bfrom her standpoint, built out of dozens and
dozens of consultations, the ethicist who is looking (that is to
say, the ethicist schooled in social science), will be in a unique
position to see and say useful things about secularization and
religion in the hospital.^ The only way to substantiate this
claim is to go ahead and say useful things. But it is worth
adding that if her position is unique, it is because of the wide
variety of conversation partners consulting ethicists will have
doing consultations all across the hospital. As will be evident
in the anecdotes related below, I am speaking here of a wide
variety of conversation partners, a wide variety of topics, and,
if you will, a wide range of Burgencies^—from policy ques-
tions that may unroll only through months and months of
excruciatingly endless committee meetings to terse conversa-
tions with surgeons in emergent situations.
Secondly, the development of the role of ethicist indicates a
setting aside, or a more precise specialization of chaplaincy.
Let me put it this way: Why isn’t the chaplain called in to
negotiate the convergence of technical dying and bodily dy-
ing? My argument would be the simple-minded one that the
chaplain, representing religious interests, is tied inextricably to
the interests of bodily dying. And is, by definition, excluded
from assessing the process of technical dying by virtue of
being associated with religion.14 The ethicist on the other
hand, being neither fish nor fowl, can go back and forth be-
tween the technical and the bodily. The ethicist has no stake in
either side, supposedly. The ethicist is a broker.15
However: The organization that makes technical dy-
ing possible does, in the last analysis, pay the ethicist.
Provides, if you will, the broker’s commission. So, to
that degree, the ethicist has a stake in the ongoing en-
terprise of producing technical death. But in a given
case—unlike the medical teams treating the patient or
those friends and family accompanying the patient—
the ethicist (theoretically, ideally) has no special interest
in the outcome going either way.16
This unusual positioning of Ethics is not, one wants to em-
phasize, due to the ethicist having some special expertise—or
wisdom (!)—as regards right and wrong, good or bad; or some
unique authority in the presentation of ethical judgments; or
some distinctive capacity to make sound ethical decisions.17
In this way, the ethics consultant is not the direct heir of the
priest or the minister or the imam or the spiritual master. If we
consider the ethicist a negotiator, a commentator, a broker, we
might expect (or hope . . .) to find a certain practical wisdom.
But only such limited wisdom as is involved in getting people
together, getting them to talk to one another—getting people to
look at what is right in front of them.
Now then, what sort of useful observations might the ethicist
have to make about secularization in the hospital, especially as
regards the secular discourse, as it is practiced in the hospital?
The primary one is that as an ethicist, one talks to many
13 It would not be too much of a stretch to say that roughly 95 % of ethics
consultation cases in the hospital where I work involve negotiations back-
and-forth between those with interests in the technical body and those
with interests in the patient’s body. More specifically, 100 % of end-of-life
decision-making, DNR/DNI, and Bmedical futility^ cases count here.
And roughly 80% of goals-of-hospital-care and surrogacy decision-
maker cases as well.
14 In terms of being drafted for ICU negotiations, chaplaincy is hampered
by the same constraints noted in the text for nursing and social work. And
then there is the scorn on the part of many physicians for the Bcrying and
dying^ service. Here again I recommend Cadge (2012).
In this vein: After my first or second official consultation, my super-
visor told me that offering and then giving a hug to an obviously distress-
ed family member after a family conference was Bthe sort of thing a
chaplain does, and not appropriate for an ethics consultant.^
15 DeVries and Conrad have argued that ethics consultation is essentially
social work (1998). But the problem with this is two-fold. 1) Social
workers have a vast array of technical knowledge ethics consultants can’t
begin to match. They know stuff; we don’t. They have skills to which we
should consistently defer. 2) As argued in the text, ethics consultants
engage in negotiations that social workers are not called into. In our many
hospitals, social workers are mostly delighted to turn those situations over
to Ethics. And in others, social work sees Ethics as competition. Studies
of these dynamics would be most instructive.
16 There is extensive discussion of this topic. But see especially Sharpe
(2007). And then also BDeVries and Bosk (2004), DeVries and Keirns
(2008) and Elliott (2007).
Going further: BBioethics is the public relations division of modern
medicine, whether physicians (or bioethicists) like it or not.^ (Imber
1998). And then, from a conversation with a private investigator who
has much experience researching complex malpractice and workman’s
compensation cases, of necessity a Blay ethnographer^ of considerable
talent: BYou’re in risk management. That’s what you are—risk
management.^
17 With this argument in mind, I remain terribly skeptical of efforts to
delineate Bcore competencies^ for consultant/negotiators like that found
in Ausilio et al. (2000).
452
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
II
III

different tribes in the hospital: surgeons and intensivists; nurses
and social workers; lawyers and discharge planners. And the
impression one gets is not that of a single secular language, not
that of a Bdefault discourse^, that doesn’t reference the Divine
as its foundational term, as Berger (2012) has it, but of a Babel
of modernity’s languages.18 Here are four examples.
1)
Whose body is it? A care conference is taking place at the
bedside of a patient who has had major heart surgery for
coronary artery disease with two vessels with more than
50 % blockage. Course complicated by cardiac arrest and
significant stroke 10 days after the surgery. At the time of
the conference, he is sedated and with continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP), and all agree he is not competent
to make medical decisions even when unsedated. There
are the interpretations of the status of the technical body:
Cardiac surgery says the CPAP settings are minimal, the
expected rehabilitation period at the skilled nursing fa-
cility is less than 6 months, the stroke not catastrophic.
BAll is going as anticipated,^ he says. BWe should stay
the course.^
Neurology says that while last Thursday things looked
very grim, this Tuesday there is some improvement in
reflexes and perhaps a bit of tracking. They conclude
that the situation is more ambiguous than it has seemed
5 days before and recommend that we wait and see.
Critical Care says the CPAP settings are maximal, the
rehabilitation period will be at least a year, that the pa-
tient will most likely never leave the nursing home, that
the stroke is a major one. They want us to consider
taking the patient off respiratory support, in keeping
with wishes expressed in his Advanced Care Plan.
And then there are the understandings of the activity
surrounding the patient’s body:
Social Work has in hand said Advanced Care Plan that
the patient signed 2 days before the surgery. It says that
he does not want to be kept alive by artificial respiratory
support and does not want to be dependent on others for
daily care. But it also names the patient’s sister as his
healthcare decision-maker. The social worker feels the
Advance Care Plan should be honored and respiratory
support withdrawn.
The sister says she will take care of the patient, whether
he wants to be taken care of or not. She says he wants to
live, even if he does not know it.
Ethics is very puzzled, and is dealing with what may
best be called a Bjumbled^ body—one that is in desper-
ate need of negotiation if there is to be any coherent
body at all. All these discourses are secular. Perhaps
the medical teams are speaking the same language, but
at best three strikingly different dialects of it. Social
work is speaking legal language and patient advocacy.
And the family has taken the imperious speech of family
care and togetherness.
2)
The individual vs the aggregate. The nurse versus the
physician. N: BWe are torturing this patient. The feeds
make her miserable. She’s aspirating. She’s always agi-
tated and is inconsolable.^ P: BIn cases like this, when we
see numbers like the lab is giving us here, we know that
40 % will go on to have such-and-such capacity. And the
literature suggests that the this condition is not irrevers-
ible. Clearly the prognosis is not good. But we can’t rule
out recovery. I’m not ready to give up on this baby.^
Anspach (1987, 1993) has done a brilliant job illuminat-
ing the differences in perception by those caregivers who
work with individual instances, case-by-case (bedside
nurses), and those who work by aggregates, with percent-
ages, studies, and cohorts (attending physicians). Both
secular languages concerned with the Btechnical body.^
But ones with, if you will, different grammars.
3)
Law and Medicine. A patient with gangrene in her lower
leg has been ruled not to have capacity to make her own
medical decisions. No family is available to serve as a
surrogate decision-maker. The patient is refusing surgery,
even though the surgery team feels sepsis will likely kill
her in the next 24–48 h. Here we have medical language
and legal language over-lapping. Ethics is called, a phy-
sician is appointed surrogate, the surgery is done, the
patient survives and is very pleased to be going back to
her favorite nursing home.
4)
Administration and Bureaucracy. Ethics is constantly on
the phone with the General Counsel’s office and occa-
sionally with the Risk Management team. But almost
never on phone with insurance or accounting, whose only
interest is in the technical body, insofar as it is the
Bbillable body^. We are not privy to discussions in ac-
counting about insurance, fee structures and the like.
(Though one does occasionally hear rumors about billing
codes being negotiated: BNow Dr. X, couldn’t you con-
sider re-coding that?^) But Ethics is regularly in meetings
with social workers and discharge planner meetings
where these discourses are regnant.
The four anecdotes I move to next will illustrate this phe-
nomenon of secular Babel as it encounters religious pluralism.
Or, if you will, aspects of secular dying versus religious dying.
But I believe there is sufficient detail here to give initial
18 B. . . there now exists a powerful discourse which operates without
recourse to religious definitions of reality. . . . I am not sure if this is the
most felicitous phrase, but I would call it the default discourse: It is, as it
were, the first call, made ‘naturally’ even by religious individuals before
they deliberately switch to their particular ‘supernatural’ discourse.^
Berger (2012: 315, his emphasis)
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
453

plausibility to my third cluster of points concerning secular-
ized language in the hospital.
a)
There is a pluralism of secular discourses in our hospitals,
such that, for instance, people speaking Brespiratory
therapy^ cannot be guaranteed to understand people
speaking accounting—and vice versa.
b)
Even so, we can identify Btechnical body talk^ as the most
privileged secular language of hospital.
I want now to talk through four ethics consultations where bodi-
ly dying was engaged primarily as a religious matter. A typical
chart note, preceding such a consultation request would be:
BFamily opposed to withdrawal of care for religious reasons.^
This will be a ground-eye view—the view of the person
taking cases as they come. This is not about an ideal or theo-
retical picture of religious pluralism and ethics. It is not about
policy, or even training. It’s about what one consultant did
when faced with the human need for transcendence when
confronting dying and death. Little or no time for study; no
chance to call in the experts. (Whoever they might be.) Just do
it as best you can and hope for a human connection, if nothing
else. Pluralism and secularity on the ground, if you will.19
I would add, though, that born of necessity as it was, this
approach has become for me a deliberately chosen, pragmatic
stance. Even an existential one. The fewer theories, the less cri-
tique I carry into ethics consultations, the better they seem to go.
So my plan has become: Stay still; pay attention; be there.20
As a reminder—what I hope to do through these four an-
ecdotes is support my contention that:
a.
Religious practice and belief enters the hospital with and
through the physical body;
b.
There exists a phenomenon I will call Bnegotiated
transcendence^, which is often the only shareable route
to the sacred within the confines of the hospital. And that
the ethicist may be called on to negotiate this as well.
In each of the four anecdotes below the technical dying
process is being managed alongside bodily dying as understood
by a family with strong ties to a religious community or tradi-
tion.21 The divergence from the technical dying that threatened
the convergence of interests and factors towards Ba natural
death^ was in each of these cases perceived by the medical
teams and by the families as explicitly and specifically reli-
gious. In each case the consultant brokered or was part of
brokering a solution that brought the technical body in align-
ment with the religious body, such that a death occurred that
was acceptable to the medical teams, the families, and (where
indicated) religious authorities as well. More specifically, the
technical dying and the bodily dying of the patients in question
were coordinated with one another and, at the same time, a
place was made for actions that preserved, confirmed or
established the Breligious body^, the body itself as sacred.22
When speaking of religious families and religious commu-
nities having an interest, a stake, in bodily dying and a party to
negotiations towards a Bnatural death^, as we are here, we
need to keep reminding ourselves that religion is fluid, and
complex beyond imagining. That practices vary from church-
to-church, denomination-to-denomination, sect-to-sect,
mosque-to- mosque, synagogue-to-synagogue—much less
tradition-to-tradition, region-to-region, country- to-country. It
is not as though an attending physician saying a family has
Breligious reasons^ gets us very far at all, as negotiators.
Most of the back-and-forth in these negotiations is between
frustrated teams and adamant families. So one says to the
team: BBack off a bit. They need more time.^ BHere is what
the family is actually asking for.^ Saying to the family: BWhat
do you see when you look at her today?^ BThis is what the
team is saying.^ BWhat do you need that is not being done?^
In the languages and practices of the hospital there is so
little footing for religious language and practice that we end up
groping around for shards of shared speech for acknowledging
transcendence. In an essentially secular setting with a plurality
of religions, how can we get enough Bpurchase^ to complete a
sacred act—to act in any way to honor a body as sacred? I am
saying that this space has to be negotiated, it has to be claimed,
it has to be enacted.23
It is too easy to assume, when thinking of religious plural-
ism, that what must be negotiated are beliefs or convictions:
BWhat counts a miracle?^ BHow do you read this passage
from Genesis?^ But I would propose that just as often, and
more fundamentally, we are negotiating proper action: BHow
shall this body be washed?^ Or a fitting place: BWill my
19 For an account that captures the inherent messiness of the consultation
enterprise see Andre (1998).
20 Have we thought enough about the ethical responsibilities of ethics
consultants to develop healing skills?
21 In keeping with the conventions of the modest genre of Bconsultation
anecdote^, I shall use a combination of chart-note language and cadence,
and commentary sentences. This being a rhetorical mode that has certain
assets here. Cf. Bosk (2003: 229–235) on the different kinds of stories
told by Binsiders^ and Boutsiders^. The anecdote is an Binsider^ genre.
See Chambers (1999) and Montgomery (2006) for very thorough treat-
ments of the Bcase study^ as a literary strategy and thinking method.
22 BThe medical profession was the mediating institution between these
sacred traditions of respect for the body, on the one hand, and the palpa-
ble, often painful realities of bodily living, on the other.^ Imber (1998:
18).
23 We have to keep asking ourselves: BWhat are we doing here? How
does this work?^ Whatever it is, it is not theology, not witnessing, not
interpreting the law. See Engelhardt’s penetrating assessment of what he
calls Bthe ordination of bioethicists (2002). More pointedly: BAre we
simply manipulating sacred tongues in service of hospital agendas?^
454
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
IV

Soc (2015) 52:448–461
455
baby’s body be sent to the morgue?^ So much power resides
in these acts, and in the presence of the body seen and body
touched, the body heard and smelled. We have to keep in mind
not only the evidence constantly in front of us in the hospital,
but the ritual practices of all of human history. The patient’s
body is the site where we look and wait, the site where miracle
would be confirmed. The body born, as gift and miracle; the
body restored, as gift and miracle.
The Sovereignty of God: Taking Back His Own
The Divergence of the Technical and the Bodily The pa-
tient’s parents request that the child be nursed by her mother
and be discharged home to die in her mother’s lap. The med-
ical team is uncomfortable with both of these requests.
Negotiation One Carefully measured feedings and tracking of
weight gained and lost over against the mother and father’s
sense of the child’s misery and of how much feeding is needed.
Negotiation Two Dying in hospital or in hospice care (med-
icalized death) as opposed to dying at home in mother’s lap
(understood in the light of the Hadith—God gives; and God
takes back).
Negotiating Transcendence BYou spoke beautifully about
your child.^ BIt is right you want your baby to die at home.^
8/26. Consulted by team during morning rounds about Af-
rican parents wanting to take their baby home Bagainst med-
ical advice^ (AMA). Mother speaks no English and the fa-
ther’s English is rudimentary. Father and mother of patient
concerned about baby’s nasogastric tube (NG) feedings,
which they feel are causing baby unnecessary suffering. Team
on the other hand concerned about amount feeding and nutri-
tion needed for appropriate weight gain at this age—and this
child is not gaining but losing weight. They are likewise con-
cerned about the child going home without hospice support to
monitor the tube feeds. The team asked for Ethics to come talk
with parents about these issues.
I had met the father 3 weeks earlier at a family care confer-
ence. While he was translating for his wife over the phone, the
highly unusual and terribly awful syndrome the child had was
explained. At the end of the conference the father said, BThank
you for taking care of my baby. I appreciate what medicine
can do, and what all of you are doing for her. But God has
given us this baby—and when he is ready, God will take this
baby back, no matter what you do.^
The attending physician thanked him for talking with us about
his child. To close the meeting I said, BI would also like to thank
you for speaking so beautifully about your baby.^ He passed me
on the way out and gave me this most beautiful smile.
This was the man who wanted to take his baby home.
The full sense of the miracle, spoken and manifest, was the
gift of the child. The power of God lived in the gift—and in
God’s corresponding ability and prerogative to take the child
back, regardless of what secular medicine might try to do. The
technical body was understood by the parents to be subordi-
nate to the body given by God.24
The parent’s concern—quite legitimate as it turned out
(confirmed by various members of the nursing staff and the
Fellow on the case)—was that the forced tube feedings were
causing the child to be miserable. When the father asked that
the feedings be stopped or the amount in a given feeding
24 Sahih Muslim. Chapter 20: THE MERITS OFABU TALHA ANSARI
Anas reported that the son of Abu Talba who was born of Umm
Sulaim died. She (Umm Sulaim) said to the members of her family:
Do not narrate to Abu Talha about his son until I narrate it to him.
Abu Talha came (home) ; she presented to him the supper. He took
it and drank water. She then embellished herself which she did not
do before. He (Abu Talha) had a sexual intercourse with her and
when she saw that he was satisfied after sexual intercourse with her,
she said: Abu Talha, if some people borrow something from another
family and then (the members of the family) ask for its return, would
they resist its return? He said: No. She said: I inform you about the
death of your son. He was annoyed, and said: You did not inform
me until I had a sexual intercourse with you and you later on gave
me information about my son. He went to Allah’s Messenger (may
peace be upon him) and informed him what had happened. There-
upon Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) said: May Allah
bless both of you in the night spent by you! He (the narrator) said:
She became pregnant. Allah’s Messenger (may peace he upon him)
was in the course of a journey and she was along with him and
when Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him) came back to
Medina from the journey he did not enter (his house) (during the
night). When the people came near Medina, she felt the pangs of
delivery. He (Abu Talha) remained with her and Allah’s Messenger
(may peace be upon him) proceeded on. Abu Talha said: O Lord,
you know that I love to go along with Allah’s Messenger when he
goes out and enter along with him when he enters and I have been
detained as Thou seest. Umm Sulaim said: Abu Talha, I do not feel
(so much pain) as I was feeling formerly, so better proceed on. So
we proceeded on and she felt the pangs of delivery as they reached
(Medina) and a child was born and my mother said to me: Anas,
none should suckle him until you go to Allah’s Messenger (may
peace be upon him) tomorrow morning. And when it was morning
I carried him (the child) and went along with him to Allah’s Mes-
senger (may peace be upon him). He said: I saw that he had in his
hand the instrument for the cauterisation of the camels. When he
saw me. he said: This is, perhaps, what Umm Sulaim has given birth
to. I said: Yes. He laid down that instrument on the ground. I
brought that child to him and placed it in his lap and Allah’s Mes-
senger (may peace be upon him) asked Ajwa dates of Medina to be
brought and softened them in his month. When these had become
palatable he placed them in the mouth of that child. The child began
to taste them. Then Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon him)
said: See what love the Ansar have for dates. He then wiped his face
and named him‘Abdullah. (my emphasis)
Sahih Muslim, by Imam Muslim, translation by Abdul Hamid
Siddiqui , Book 31: The Book Pertaining to the Merits of the Com-
panions (Allah Be Pleased With Them) of the Holy Prophet (May
Peace Be Upon Him) (Kitab Al-Fada’il Al-Sahabah), Number:
6013.
Accessible at: http://www.usc.edu/org/cmje/religious-texts/hadith/
muslim/031-smt.php.

456
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
reduced, the nurse on duty told him that the doctor had ordered
what they were giving, and that she could not change the
order. Only the doctor could do that and, no, he was not avail-
able. Technical body trumps patient’s body.
I spent 20–25 min talking with father. Urged him not to
leave the hospital until we could clarify the question of nutri-
tion and tube feeds, and until we could make sure that hospice
would be able to get the equipment necessary for medically
appropriate home care. Acknowledged desirability of having
their child die at home and endorsed their preference for this.
Also discussed potential financial consequences of taking pa-
tient out of hospital AMA. Promised to advocate to get feed-
ing plan changed and to try to speed up process of setting up
home hospice. Father accepted these points and agreed that it
is best for child to remain on the unit. Went with father into
waiting room while he explained to mother. She gave her
assent to this plan. At that point he said, BAll we want is for
our child to come home so she can die in her mother’s lap.^
8/27. Arrived in the NICU for morning rounds. The attend-
ing confided in me that he was concerned that the child was
losing weight and that he did not want to Bstarve the child to
death^. Patient’s father and I met with attending and patient’s
bedside nurse. We reviewed our conversation of the day be-
fore. Father re-stated his agreement with plan to keep baby on
unit. He said he was Bconfused^ the day before, but today sees
reasons for keeping baby here.
Attending explained the team’s concern about feeding and
nutrition. In reply, the father said, BWait. Let me show you.
Big cup, your feedings. Small cup, baby’s stomach. You pour
big cup into small cup and it overflows. But mother’s feeding
is small cup into baby’s small cup. No overflowing. Just many
small cups.^ Ah!
Attending agreed to order 5–10 min feeds by mouth before
proceeding to NG feeds. Nurse also given discretion about
how much NG feed to push, this order to be placed immedi-
ately. Father very happy with this. Attending also assured
father that team is working hard to get hospice in line for
discharge home ASAP. Father pleased with meeting.
8/28. Received page from NICU Case Manager asking me
to come meet with patient’s father regarding today’s discharge
of patient home with hospice support. Met with father for
25–30 min. Discussed plan for discharge. Talked over na-
ture of hospice services. Fellow and then attending came in
and reviewed pertinent aspects of home medical care for child.
Nurse provided father training in tube feeding. (Though nei-
ther fellow nor nurse nor I were under any illusion that the
parents would actually do this once home.) The parents took
the child home that day. The team was relieved, as was the
family. The father expressed great appreciation for the care
their child had received.
Approximately 2 weeks after their services were en-
gaged, the home hospice nurse called to say that the
child had died at home, apparently very peacefully.
She had been taken directly to the mosque to be prop-
erly prepared by the imam for burial.
The Sovereignty of God: Awaiting a Miracle
The Divergence of the Technical and the Bodily The place-
ment of a BDo-Not-Resuscitate/Do- Not-Intubate^ (DNR/
DNI) order as a religious issue. Two members of the family
see accepting the medical team’s decision to place the DNR/
DNI order as a sign that they are giving up on the possibility of
a miracle, and in so doing giving up on God. For the team,
placing the order is justified by the clear progression towards
death of both the technical body and the perceptible body.
Negotiation One The body as the site of a possible healing
miracle as opposed to both the technical and perceptible body
understood by the team to be dying.
Negotiation Two The medical team as decision-maker about
the body’s care versus the family as decision-maker.
Negotiating Transcendence Bible discussion about suffering
and miracles. Conversation about brutality of fate and not
understanding what God was doing. About the limits of hu-
man power and release from the fury of suffering.
12/30. Page from a Nurse Practitioner (NP) in the Medical
ICU (MICU). Three issues identified by the medical team: 1)
code status; 2) communication with family about goals-of-
care and possible shift to palliative track; and 3) clarify surro-
gate status. Team believes strongly that patient needs to be
DNR/DNI given multiple co-morbidities, declining condition,
and imminent onset of active dying process. Family resisting
this move and reported by the team to be consistently conten-
tious. Team unsure whether the father or the daughter is actu-
ally making the decisions about the patient’s care. Thus on
grounds of technical dying and clinical signs of bodily dying,
the team Bis ready^. But the family Bis not ready.^ The hus-
band is not ready to let go of his wife. Their children are
waiting for a miracle. BGod can do miracles. Even when med-
icine can’t save and says all is over. God rules over medicine.^
Affect of the patient’s husband experienced by members of
the medical team as Bthreatening^, Bhostile^, Baggressive^.
Husband is a very large man, who has had difficult and angry
life. Not necessarily angry at staff but angry at the world and
hurt by his life. (But then easy for Ethics to say, as I’m not
there all day long dealing with him, like the nurses and house
staff and NP’s are.) Loss of his wife cutting very deep. BMy
wife went back to school 20 years ago at age 36 to get her
bachelor’s so she could teach. After seeing all kinds of people
struggle in Job Corps.^ How much he loved her; how remark-
able she was. He could see she was suffering and had little

Soc (2015) 52:448–461
457
strength left, and knew she would not want to live in anything
near this condition.
Team is saying technical body is dying. Dad is stuck be-
tween his wife who he sees is suffering (patient’s body, clin-
ical signs) and his children who are counting on a miracle
(patient’s body, religious body), with daughter in lead and
son a second. She especially vociferous about this. Daughter
goes as far as to tell Ethics that she is worried that witnessing
her mother’s illness and suffering is weakening her father’s
faith, because he didn’t seem to believe they should wait on
(or count on) God to perform a miracle.
1/2: Talked with father about tough decisions and need to
give his daughter guidance. Had discussion with daughter and
son about times in Bible when God called on people to suffer
and witness suffering. Not always miracles. Which were they
being called to do now? Discussion moving back-and-forth
between technical dying and bodily dying, with bodily death
approached primarily through religious practices: praying for
healing; and praying for the strength to keep hope alive and
faith strong.
1/3: Visited for 15–20 with patient’s son. Re-iterated that
options for adjusting components of patient’s care are getting
more and more limited. And that her condition is terminal.
Once more placed comfort care on the table. Again, back-
and-forth between technical dying and bodily dying, but here
observation of clinical signs has preeminence.
1/4: Checked in with MICU team. Vasopressor support for
patient in place. Renal condition worsening. Spent 35–40 min
with patient’s daughter. Urged her to recall that beneath all her
concerns about her mother’s treatments and conditions lies the
cancer that, fundamentally, will end her life. Urged her to
consider that re-intubating her mother could be just as cruel
as chest compressions and full heart resuscitation efforts, giv-
en mother’s current condition. Urged her to talk with her fa-
ther about the patient’s level of suffering and quality of life.
Her grasp of futility and of patient’s suffering increases in each
conversation, as does her brother’s. Put hospice option on the
table. More back-and-forth between technical dying and bodi-
ly dying, approached now through clinical signs and in the
light family dynamics and perceptions.
1/6: Late afternoon: 60 min conversation with husband of
patient in patient’s room. Emphasized futility of further treat-
ment for patient, her continuing suffering, and the need for
DNI order. Urged explicit choice of palliative care. Talked
about his children and his job and his marriage. About brutal-
ity of fate and not understanding what God was doing. At end,
emphasized need for him to actively engage his daughter on
these questions. Still more back-and-forth between technical
dying and bodily dying, approached through clinical signs and
family perceptions. But with the religious frame now explic-
itly re-engaged.
1/6, Evening: DNI placed by medical team. In light of both
technical indicators and clinical signs.
Daughter switched over to chief mourner when code status
changed. Continuing her role as chief spokesperson for
family’s religious interests, now as orchestrator of the death-
bed vigil. Last time I saw the family, she was poised at pa-
tient’s bedside with many family members present, including
patient’s mother, one sister and two grandchildren. Son func-
tioning as greeter at the door—torn apparently between his
sister and his mother. Dad lying in the dark on visitor’s bed
in back of room, his feet towards the patient’s bed, blanket
over his head.
1/9: Patient dies.
The Body as Sacred: Caring for the Gift
The Divergence of the Technical and the Bodily Team be-
lieves extubation is called for while the parents want to take
the baby home on a ventilator. Parents want body only washed
at their mosque by the imam, but team feels need to do some
minor preparation of the body before it leaves the hospital.
Negotiation One Breath as a machine-driven and bodily phe-
nomenon versus breath as sacred and given by God.
Negotiation Two Reconciling the Bhospital body^ and the
sacred body.
Negotiating Transcendence 1) Beauty of the belief about the
Divine Breath acknowledged, even though acknowledged it
was not shared belief. Agreement that life is miracle. 2) Wash-
ing body under supervision of family. Not sending the body to
the morgue, but keeping it in the room until the imam arrived.
Background Team has had ongoing conversations with par-
ents about end-of-life and goals of care. Baby with multiple
system failures. Parents have allowed the team to place a
DNR/DNI order. But don’t want him off vent, Bfor religious
reasons^ the attending’s chart note says.
4/27. Met with parents at 10:00 a.m., after conversations
over last 2 days with attending and medical team. Consult
request came because team uncertain how to proceed with
care because of the parents’ religious beliefs. The parents have
told the team that they are Muslim and that they have been
talking with their imam. When the child dies, they plan to take
him to the mosque for the preparation of the body for burial.
Can’t get interpreter because telephone translator speaks a
dialect of primary language that is less comprehensible than
English to the father of the child. So we proceed—father,
mother and aunt. Began to review situation, and talk with
parents about their religious beliefs and child’s limited care
options. Parents do not want the child removed from the vent,
and make it clear they want to take child home on the vent. I
point out child receiving other forms of support—not just

25 This passage from the Qur’an 15:28–29 (in from Pickthall’s transla-
tion) was pointed out to me later:
And (remember) when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am
creating a mortal out of potter’s clay of black mud altered,
So, when I have made him and have breathed into him of My spirit,
do ye fall down, prostrating yourselves unto him.
Accessible at: http://www.usc.edu/org/cmje/religious-texts/quran/
verses/015-qmt.php.
26 I understand now that it is the custom for a same-sex member of the
family to wash the body of the newly dead, but that this does not apply to
younger children and infants. A ready-to-hand if rudimentary resource,
which I only came upon well after the case above was resolved:
Tanenbaum/Center for Interreligious Understanding (2009: 78–95, espe-
cially 94). It also turns out, to my considerable surprise, that similar
though more abbreviated information is found in the Policies and Proce-
dures manuals of a number of medical centers under the heading of
“Pastoral Care.^.
27 I had likewise assumed teachings concerning the desecration of the
dead, and that these teachings would address autopsy and organ removal,
too. (Tanenbaum 2009: 94).
458
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
respiratory. At this point in the conversation, I speak of life
and breathe as sacred—and that this is miraculous and can be
understood as gift of God. Say that though I do not share their
faith, I understand the beauty and the power of this idea, and
that I honor it.25
What I am told later by their imam is that they were op-
posed to withdrawal because the heart was still beating, not
because of any special sacred aspect of the breath. But what
was going on in that moment was that we were reaching to-
gether for some shared language to speak about transcen-
dence. This is what I mean by negotiated transcendence.
10:20: Nurse knocks on door of conference room, sticks
her head in and says, BWe need the parents in the child’s room.
He is in crisis.^ When we get to the baby’s room, bagging
going on, but obviously futile. Aunt sits down and holds baby
as he is dying. At 10:40 Fellow verifies death with stethoscope
on the patient’s chest.
Family does not want the child’s body washed at all.26 But
we needed to remove peripherally inserted central catheter
(PICC line)—and get basic hospital grunge off baby, who is
sticky from tape and yellow with disinfectant, before releasing
the patient’s body. Bedside nurse and consultant wash the
baby, very briefly and very lightly, as family watched. Re-
moved PICC line from heel, small amount of blood oozing
out. Told them to let us know if they see anything being done
they have problems with. Aunt covers child’s face. BWe be-
lieve it is best not to look at the dead. It keeps us connected to
them.^ Baby swaddled with face covered.
Family did not want baby’s body going to the morgue. Very
concerned that this not happen.27 Ethics: BOK I will stay and
hold baby here in this room until you return.^ Imam arrives.
Nurse takes baby downstairs and out front to his waiting car.
The Body as Sacred: Baptism and Release
The Divergence of the Technical and the Bodily Technical
body and patient’s body read clinically are in sync, so the team
sees the child as dying and ready for extubation. The parents,
on the other hand, are able to speak directly of not being ready
to let their child go.
Negotiation One Clinical signs of the patient’s body being
ready for death that the teams are seeing side-by-side with the
parents’ ignorance of those signs and their desire to hold on to
their child for as long as possible.
Negotiation Two When parents request that their baby be
baptized, finding out how to make this happen in the NICU.
Negotiating Transcendence Performing the baptism.
Background There had been a long series of conversations
among teams and with parents about the desirability of doing a
tracheotomy, and about the kinds of breathing support avail-
able and advisable. Parents had also been, over prior 10–
12 days, been very reluctant to agree to DNR/DNI order. Par-
ents were struggling to grasp the technical body of their child
as presented to them by the medical team. And also, in turn,
trying to grasp the bodily dying of their baby. And trying to
translate how that would relate to the technical death of the
technical (intubated) body.
The consultant received a call from the Neonatal ICU
(NICU) critical care team reporting that the patient had self-
extubated. Patient had been re-intubated in crisis and resusci-
tated. Parents were present when the consultant arrived. They
were in obvious and appropriate distress over these develop-
ments, and yet unwilling to consider deliberate extubation,
even though they could see for themselves that the child was
declining rapidly. As commonly happens, their eyes were go-
ing back and forth between the monitor and their baby,
watching the oxygen saturation numbers drop, despite maxi-
mum respiratory support.
As the afternoon goes on, they finally agree to extubation,
should the team think that appropriate. And then about 15 min
later they change their minds. Mother: BNo, we can’t let him
go. Maybe there is a small chance.^ Ethics: BI know this is the
most terrible position parents can be in. You can see that he is
ready; you have said that. I know you aren’t ready. But you
can’t keep him here just for yourselves.^ M: BI know. OK, I
see. But we want him baptized. Once that is done, we will
agree to have the tube taken out.^ Here all faced the necessity
of balancing the technical body and the technical death with
the creation of the sacred body by the rite of baptism.
Unfortunately, however, no chaplain will be available in
timely fashion, given the child’s rapid decline. Ethics: BIn
the church where I grew up, anyone was allowed to baptize,

28 And, with an element of what might be called Bresidual piety^ (fol-
lowing the lead of Philip Rieff), the consultant did not say BIn the Name
of . . .^, thinking that ritual formulation only for priests to speak, but rather
BIn the presence of . . .^). See Rieff (1972: all Index entries for BPiety^
and BPietist(s)^).
29 Berger (2012: 316).
30 There are those who feel that these two factors together result in infe-
rior care for some Amish families. But such a conclusion would depend
on sorting out with some precision what the goals are of the care of which
we are speaking. In terms of certain technical goals, perhaps the care is
not Bas good.^ But doesn’t the very existence of Amish communities
constitute an intentional challenge to the assumption that the technical
can guarantee the achievement of goals that are suitable final ones for
human life?
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
459
especially in an emergency. What about your church?^ Moth-
er: BYes. It’s the same in mine.^
E: BOk, we are going to baptize this baby.^ Asks for water
in small container. Nurse (who has not been aware of the
conversation): BWhat kind of water? How much do you
need?^ E: BAny kind. Just a small vial will do.^ (The consul-
tant being an Episcopalian by upbringing, he did not feel
much water was required. Besides, immersing an intubated
child would have been far beyond his ken.)28 Together the
consultant and the parents put their hands on the child, water
was poured on his forehead and the three gave thanks for the
baby’s life, offering a blessing on the baby’s death.
The child was then extubated and died within the hour,
lying between his parents in a hospital bed with them curled
around him. In our terms, the technical death, the bodily death
and the religious death coinciding as well as they possibly
could have. Not just a natural death, but a beautiful one.
V
We derive four major lessons from the above discussion of the
encounter of the religious pluralism with secularization within
the contemporary Western hospital.
Lesson One We are inclined to think of religious pluralism in
terms of varieties of belief, in terms of claims about that which
is true and that which is false: BI believe in a Higher Power.^
BI believe miracles can happen.^ BWe are waiting on a
miracle^. (BAre you a Christian?^ Where this means BWhat
do you believe?^, not BDo you love your neighbor?^) But this
focus on belief, and what is true and false, is a decidedly
intellectualized approach to religion, which yields a manifest-
ly inaccurate view of pluralism. I would argue, instead, that
religious pluralism manifests in hospital especially around ac-
tions focused on the body. Religion enters the hospital in the
body, not in doctrine. Religious pluralism means there are
many religious ways to understand body, as can be seen quite
clearly in divergent funerary practices, as the dead body itself
is passed from the hospital into the care of families and reli-
gious communities.
Lesson Two Despite the pluralism of secular discourses in
hospital, we are justified in saying that the language of tech-
nical body is the shaping discourse. We claim this all the while
acknowledging that there are many Bdialects^ of technical
body talk, depending on which tests or machines or proce-
dures are involved, and whatever data or imagery they
produce. Likewise, we recognize that technical body talk is
distinct from the secular tongues of physiology, organic chem-
istry and the basic sciences. In ethics consultation negotiations
we always have to have the technical body included, though
many other languages—secular and religious—may come and
go as the back-and-flow proceeds.
Lesson Three We cannot but be impressed, as Peter Berger
has emphasized, by the durability of religion in face of mo-
dernity and secularization.
Here I just want to propose a significant addendum to a
theory of pluralization: A default secular discourse co-exists
with a plurality of religious discourses, both in society and in
consciousness.^29
But the fact that there is a wide variety of secular discourses
in the hospital carries an implication that is important for ad-
ditional understanding of the encounter of religion and the
secular, both in general and in the hospital in particular. The
hospital ought to be of interest not so much as a temple of
modernity, reflecting the monism of modernity’s self-image,
but as Babel with its confusion of tongues and perpetually
falling, without ever quite hitting the ground.
Modernity was miscast and misunderstood, by its own the-
oreticians and historians, as monolithic and inevitable. But the
situation was and is far more complicated than secularization
theory depicted. (Berger 2012) Indeed, it could be argued that
a significant factor in the long-term and unexpected survival
of religious life in the face of modernity and secularization is
the existence of this plurality of secular discourses. That is, it
turns out that the secular is as plural as the religious.
Consider two quick examples of this encounter of plural-
isms. In our area Amish families have distinct impact on sec-
ular accounting discourse in the hospital, as well as on secular
medical discourses. The communities in our area prefer to
carry no debt and refuse health insurance. Additionally, they
seek to avoid Bhigh technology^, though the definition of this
tends to fluctuate, especially, for instance, as a child gets sicker
and sicker.30 On the other hand, Jehovah’s Witnesses have
here, as they do most places, very precise specifications for
interactions with the secular legal system and the secular
healthcare system. In both cases, distinct religious discourses
and a plurality of secular discourses interact and influence one
another in a myriad of ways secularization theory could not
have predicted.

31 This being but one among many efforts to secularize death. (Actuarial
tables and automotive safety tests being others, e.g.)
32 BThe medical profession—insofar as it remains a mediating institution
between sacred acknowledgment of the body and scientific uses of it—is
constantly tested in how it makes connections between means and ends,
creating the many forms of public ambivalence about medical practice in
its wake.^ Imber (1998: 25).
33 Berger (1967: 51). BThe power of religion depends, in the last resort,
upon the credibility of the banners it puts in the hands of men as they
stand before death, or more accurately, as they walk, inevitably, toward
it.^
Also Berger (1967: 80). BTo repeat, every human order is a commu-
nity in the face of death. Theodicy represents the attempt to make a pact
with death. Whatever the fate of any historical religion, or that of religion
as such, we can be certain that the necessity of this attempt will persist as
long as men die and have to make sense of the fact.^
460
Soc (2015) 52:448–461
Lesson Four The hospital collects discourses and practices
around death, and thebodies of the dead. BBodily death^ has
long been the province of religious language and practice—
forever as far as we can tell. BTechnical death^, on the other
hand, may be thought of as an aspect of Bmodernization^, as
an effort to exclude religion from the province of dying.31 But
the obvious presence of a plurality of religions in the hospital
shows that this effort to have Btechnical death^ reign over
Bbodily death^ has failed here, as elsewhere. The hospital sits
on the boundary of the sacred and profane necessarily.32 So let
us close with a straightforward thesis: Religion will remain in
the hospital as long as the hospital is a place where bodily
dying and death occur.33
Further Reading
Andre, J. 1998. BThe Week of November 7: Bioethics as Practice.^. In C.
Ronald & B. Chester (Eds.), Philosophy and Medicine Series (pp.
153–172). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Anspach, R. 1987. Prognostic Conflict in Life-and-Death Decisions: The
Organization as an Ecology of Knowledge. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 28(September), 215–231.
Anspach, R. 1993. Deciding Who Lives: Fateful choices in the intensive
care nursery. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ausilio, M. P., et al. 2000. Health Care Ethics Consultation:
Nature, Goals, and Competencies. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 133, 59–69.
Berger, P. L. 1967. The Sacred Canopy. NY: Random House.
Berger, P. L. (Ed.). 1999. The Desecularization of the World: Resurgent
Religion and World Politics. Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans.
Berger, P. L. 2012. Further Thoughts on Religion and Modernity. Society,
49, 313–316.
Berger, P. L. 2014. The Many Altars of Modernity: Toward a Paradigm
for Religion in a Pluralist Age. Boston: Walter de Gruyter.
Bosk, Charles L. 2003 [1979]. Forgive and Remember: Managing
Medical Failure. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Bosk, C. L. 2008a. Professional Ethicist Available: Logical,
Secular, Friendly. In his What Would You Do?: Juggling
Bioethics and Ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 3–20.
Bosk, C. L. 2008b. What Would You Do?: Juggling Bioethics and
Ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cadge, W. 2012. Paging God: Religion in the Halls of Medicine.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chambers, T. 1999. The Fiction of Bioethics: Cases as Literary Texts.
NY: Routledge.
Chapple, H. S. 2010. No Place for Dying: Hospitals and the Ideology of
Rescue. Walnut Creek CA: Left Coast Press.
DeVries, R. G. 2003. How Can We Help? From ‘Sociology in’ to
‘Sociology of’ Bioethics. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 32,
279–292.
DeVries, R. G. 2009. Why can’t we all just get along? A comment on
Turner’s plea to social scientists and bioethicists. Cambridge
Quarterly of Health Care Ethics, 18(1), 43–46.
DeVries, R. G., & Bosk, C. L. 2004. The Bioethics of
Business: Rethinking the Relationship between Bioethics
Consultants and Corporate Clients. Hasting Center Report,
34, 28–32.
DeVries, R. G., & Conrad, P. 1998. Why Bioethics Needs Sociology. In
R. G. DeVries & S. Janardan (Eds.), Bioethics and Society:
Constructing the Ethical Enterprise (pp. 233–257). NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
DeVries, R. G., & Keirns, C. C. 2008. Does Money Make Bioethics Go
‘Round? American Journal of Bioethics, 8(8), 65–67.
Elliott, C. 2007. The Tyranny of Expertise. In L. A. Eckenwiler
& F. G. Cohn (Eds.), The Ethics of Bioethics: Mapping the
Moral Landscape (pp. 43–46). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Engehardt, H. T., Jr. 2002. The Ordination of Bioethicists as Secular
Moral Experts. Social Philosophy & Policy, 19, 59–82.
Fox, R., & Swazey, J. P. 1984. Medical morality is not bioethics – medical
ethics in China and the United States. Perspectives in Biology &
Medicine. Spring, 27(3), 336–360.
Fox, R., & Swazey, J. P. 2005. Examining American Bioethics: Its
Problems and Prospects. Cambridge Quarterly of Health Care
Ethics, 14(4), 361–373.
Fox, R., & Swazey, J. P. 2008. Observing Bioethics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gains, A., & Juengst, E. T. 2008. Origin Myths in Bioethics: Constructing
Sources, Motives and Reason in Bioethic(s). Culture, Medicine &
Psychiatry, 32, 303–327.
Imber, J. 1998. Medical Publicity before Bioethics: Nineteenth
Century Illustrations of Twentieth Century Dilemmas. In R.
G. DeVries & S. Janardan (Eds.), Bioethics and Society:
Constructing the Ethical Enterprise (pp. 16–37). NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Kaufman, S. K. 2005. B. . . and a time to die^: How American Hospitals
Shape the End of Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Latour, B. 2002. Morality and Technology: The End of the Means.
Theory, Culture & Society, 19(5–6), 247–260.
Latour, B. 2011. Networks, Societies, Spheres: Reflections of an Actor-
Network Theorist. International Journal of Communication, 5,
796–810.
Law, J. 1992. Notes on the Theory of the Actor-Network: Ordering,
Strategy and Heterogeneity. Systems Practice, 5, 379–393.
Mesman, J. 2008. Uncertainty in Medical Innovation: Experienced
Pioneers in Neonatal Care. NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mol, A. 2003. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice (Science
and Cultural Theory). Durham: Duke University Press.
Montgomery, K. 2006. How Doctors Think: Clinical Judgment and the
Practice of Medicine. NY: Oxford University Press.
Reiser, S. J. 1985. Critical Care in an Historical Context. In J. C. Moskop
& K. Loretta (Eds.), Ethics and Critical Care Medicine (pp. 215–
224). Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing.
Rieff, P. 1972. Fellow Teachers. NY: Harper & Row.

Soc (2015) 52:448–461
461
Seymour, J. E. 1999. Revisiting medicalisation and ‘natural’ death. Social
Science & Medicine, 49, 691–704.
Seymour, J. E. 2000. Negotiating natural death in intensive care. Social
Science & Medicine, 51, 1241–1252.
Seymour, J. E. 2001. Critical Moments: Death and Dying in Intensive
Care. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Sharpe, V. A. 2007. Strategic Disclosure Requirements and the Ethics of
Bioethics. 170–80. In L. A. Eckenwiler & F. G. Cohn (Eds.), The
Ethics of Bioethics: Mapping the Moral Landscape (pp. 43–46).
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Tanenbaum /Center for Interreligious Understanding. 2009. The Medical
Manual for Religio- Cultural Competence: Caring for Religiously
Diverse Populations. New York: Tanenbaum/ Center for
Interreligious Understanding.
Zussman, R. 1992. Intensive care: Medical ethics and the medical
profession. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
David Schenck, PhD is Director of the Ethics Program at the Medical
University of South Carolina. He is co-author with Larry R. Churchill of
Healers: Extraordinary Clinicians at Work (Oxford University Press,
2011,) and its sequel (with Larry R. Churchill and Joseph B. Fanning)
What Patients Teach: The Everyday Ethics of Healthcare (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2013). After 20 years as a professor of philosophy and
religion, Schenck served as the founding executive director of a free
medical clinic, as a counselor and healthcare advocate for the homeless,
and as a consultant to community-based nonprofit organizations in the
Southeast. He has volunteered and worked for many hospices over the
last 25 years. This symposium is based on a conference held on October
10 and 11, 2014 under the auspices of the Institute on Culture, Religion,
and World Affairs at Boston University. Grateful acknowledgment is
made to the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation for its generous support
in making the conference possible.