SECURITY and PRIVACY


SECURITY and PRIVACY
Global Standards for Ethical Identity Management 
in Contemporary Liberal Democratic States
John Kleinig • Peter Mameli • Seumas Miller • Douglas Salane     
Adina Schwartz

Centre for
Applied Philosophy
andPublic Ethics
An Australian Research Council Funded Special Research Centre
Practical Ethics and Public Policy Monograph 2
Series Editor: Michael J. Selgelid
THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
E  P R E S S

E  P R E S S
Published by ANU E Press
The Australian National University
Canberra ACT 0200, Australia
Email: anuepress@anu.edu.au
This title is also available online at http://epress.anu.edu.au
National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication entry 


Title:	
	
Security and privacy : global standards for ethical
	
	
identity management in contemporary
	
	
liberal democratic states / John Kleinig ... [et al.]
ISBN:	
	
9781921862571 (pbk.) 9781921862588 (ebook)
Notes:	
	
Includes bibliographical references.
Subjects:	
	
Terrorism--Moral and ethical aspects.
	
	
Transnational crime--Moral and ethical aspects.
	
	
Terrorism--Political aspects.
	
	
Transnational crime--Political aspects.
Other Authors/Contributors:
                    	
	
Kleinig, John, 1942-
Dewey Number:	363.325
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publisher.
Cover design and layout by ANU E Press
Printed by Griffin Press
This edition © 2011 ANU E Press

v
Contents
Preface . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  vii
Contributors. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ix
Acknowledgments. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xi
I.      Crime Scenes and the Terroir of Terror . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
II.     Security and the Challenge to Liberal Values . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
III.    The Blessing and Bane of the Liberal Democratic Tradition. .  .  .  .  .  11
IV.    Divergent Formalities . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19
V.    When the Rubber Hits the Road. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  77
VI.    Securitization Technologies . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  89
VII.  Surveillance Technologies and Economies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  129
VIII.  The Underlying Values and their Alignment . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  151
IX.    The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  225
X.     Recommendations . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  241
Appendix: Security and Privacy Institutional Arrangements: 
Australia and India. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  247
References. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  263


vii
Preface
This study is principally concerned with the ethical dimensions of identity 
management technology – electronic surveillance, the mining of personal data, 
and profiling – in the context of transnational crime and global terrorism. The 
ethical challenge at the heart of this study is to establish an acceptable and 
sustainable equilibrium between two central moral values in contemporary 
liberal democracies, namely, security and privacy. Both values are essential 
to individual liberty but they come into conflict in times when civil order is 
threatened, as has been the case from late in the twentieth century, with the 
advent of global terrorism and transnational crime.
We seek to articulate legally sustainable, politically possible and technologically 
feasible global ethical standards1 for identity management technology and 
policies in liberal democracies in the contemporary global security context. 
Although the standards in question are to be understood as global ethical 
standards potentially to be adopted not only by the United States (US) but also 
by the European Union (EU), India, Australasia and other contemporary liberal 
democratic states, we take as our primary focus the tensions that have arisen 
between the US and the EU.
This tension provides a good example of the kinds of challenges involved in 
developing global standards. It is exemplified by the 2006 disclosure concerning 
the US government’s access to SWIFT transactions and the controversy that 
has followed it, as well as the earlier and ongoing controversy over the 2004 
US–EU Passenger Names Records (PNR) agreement. It also makes itself known 
in the ongoing debate over national identity cards. The first two conflicts 
make it clear that, however difficult it may be to develop global standards for 
the management of personal data, such standards are needed and that every 
effort should be made to develop them or at least to implement procedures for 
addressing conflicts among them.
Naturally, authoritarian states do not share the liberal values underlying this 
project – values such as individual autonomy and privacy. Nevertheless, to the 
extent that such authoritarian states are evolving or are likely to evolve toward 
some form of liberal democracy, the results of this study will also be relevant to 
these states. Our purpose is to articulate standards and institutional initiatives 
that are sufficiently specific to determine – or at least substantially constrain – 
the requisite detailed security and privacy policies and prescriptions in national 
as well as international and transnational jurisdictions.
1  Gijs de Vries, “Terrorism, Islam and Democracy”, EurActiv.com, March 4, 2005, at: http://www.euractiv.
com/en/security/gijs-vries-terrorism-islam-democracy/article-136245.

Security and Privacy
viii
The project distinguishes itself from other work in this field in two major 
respects. Firstly, the multi-disciplinary team of experts brought together for 
this project has enabled the integration of: (a) ethical principles, (b) national 
and international legal considerations, (c) effective law enforcement practices, 
(d) oversight and accountability concerns and (e) knowledge of existing and 
emerging technology, such as database mining and knowledge discovery 
technology, in the development of a framework of determinate and feasible 
ethical standards for identity management technology in the global security 
context.
Secondly, the study has drawn on an international team of experts and focuses on 
common international standards and solutions, as befits the trans-jurisdictional 
and transnational nature of the problems to be addressed. Specifically, the 
project involves not only US personnel and institutions but also EU, Indian, and 
Australasian expertise.

ix
Contributors
John Kleinig is Professor of Philosophy in the Department of Criminal Justice 
at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, and teaches in the PhD Programs in 
Philosophy and Criminal Justice at the Graduate Center, City University of New 
York. He is also Professorial Fellow in Criminal Justice Ethics at the Centre for 
Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics, Charles Sturt University, Canberra.
Peter Mameli is Associate Professor in the Department of Public Management 
at John College of Criminal Justice and is part of the PhD Program in Criminal 
Justice at the Graduate Center, CUNY.
Seumas Miller is Foundation Director for the Centre for Applied Philosophy 
and Public Ethics (an Australian Research Council Special Research Centre) at 
the Australian National University and Charles Sturt University, and a senior 
research fellow in the Centre for Ethics and Technology at Delft University of 
Technology, Netherlands.
Douglas Salane is Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics and 
Computer Science and in the graduate program in Forensic Computing at John 
Jay College of Criminal Justice. He is also Director of the Center for Cybercrime 
Studies.
Adina Schwartz is Professor of Law in the Department of Law, Police Science, 
and Criminal Justice Administration at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and 
the Masters Program in Forensic Computing at John Jay College of Criminal 
Justice. She is also the Assistant Director of the Center for Cybercrime Studies.


xi
Acknowledgments
The initial impetus for this study was a US National Science Foundation 
grant (#0619226) awarded in 2006 to several researchers at John Jay College 
of Criminal Justice, some of whom were also associated with the Centre for 
Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics, Charles Sturt University, Canberra. We 
are particularly appreciative of the support of John Jay College and CAPPE, 
and for the assistance at different stages of this project of Nick Evans, Jamie 
Levy, Richard Lovely, Richard Lucas, Vincent Maldonado and Vincenzo 
Sainato. Richard Lucas was particularly helpful in reviewing and updating the 
technical data. Until his untimely death, one of our original grant members, 
Brian O’Connell, from Central Connecticut State University, brought to the early 
stages of this project not only his enthusiasm but also his combined expertise in 
philosophy, law, and computing. Our loss, along with that of others, was great.
In preparing this material for publication, we are grateful for the extensive 
comments of two reviewers, including Leslie Francis of the University of Utah. 
James Spence provided valuable editorial assistance.
During the course of this study, several items have been prepared for other 
venues, including: John Kleinig “Humiliation, Degradation, and Moral Capacity: 
A Response to Hörnle and Kremnitzer”, Israel Law Review 44; and John Kleinig, 
“Liberty and Security in an Era of Terrorism”, in Criminologists on Terrorism and 
Homeland Security, ed. Brian Forst, Jack Greene & James Lynch (NY: Cambridge 
University Press, 2011), ch. 15.
Acknowledgment is also made of permission to use material first published 
in Peter Mameli, “Tracking the Beast: Techno-Ethics Boards and Government 
Surveillance Programs”, Critical Issues in Justice and Politics, 1, no. 1 (2008): 
31–56, 
available 
at: 
http://www.suu.edu/hss/polscj/CIJP.htm. 
Professor 
Mameli's research benefitted from time spent as a visiting scholar at the 
National Policing Improvement Agency, Bramshill, in the United Kingdom 
during 2006. In addition, elements of his work were originally presented at the 
2006 “Soft Law, Soft Regulation?” conference of Anglia Ruskin University.
We also acknowledge permission to publish in Chapter VII (pages 131–51) 
material from Douglas Salane, “Are Large Scale Data Breaches Inevitable?”, 
Cyber Infrastructure Protection, ed. Tarek N. Saadawi and Col. Louis H. Jordan, 
Jr. (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College, 
forthcoming), ch. 4.


1
I. Crime Scenes and the Terroir of 
Terror
The latter decades of the twentieth century and now the first decade of the 
twenty-first century have seen considerable changes in the ethical challenges 
we face. Many of those changes have been technologically driven. Technologies 
that enable people to be kept physiologically alive have posed new and difficult 
questions about the time, timing and circumstances of the end of life. Other 
technological developments have posed new questions at the beginning of life 
concerning the potential use of gene enhancement therapies, cloning and the 
emergence of personhood. Technological developments have also done much 
to overcome what the historian Geoffrey Blainey spoke of as “the tyranny of 
distance”. Blainey wanted to argue that Australia’s distance (from Europe in 
particular) had dramatically shaped its history, but his artfully chosen phrase 
also characterizes a wider phenomenon that has been largely eliminated. We 
can travel between countries in a matter of hours rather than days, weeks or 
even months. We can also communicate almost instantaneously with those in 
far places. The means for rapid travel and communication have, moreover, made 
possible the development of multinational corporations, cartels, and networks 
that are more powerful than the countries in which they are situated – posing 
distinct regulatory and ethical challenges to national and global governance 
structures.
With such developments have come the transnationalization and globalization 
of some of the less-attractive aspects of human society – crime and terrorism. 
The events of September 11, 2001 (9/11) did not occur in a vacuum, but they 
managed – for reasons that we need not pursue here – to refocus attention on 
the transnational and global character of much that is problematic in Western, 
liberal democratic societies. Although we might legitimately wonder whether 
there are really any “good guys” in our present global situation, the simple fact of 
the matter is that much of crime and terrorism is no longer local or multinational 
but transnational and international. Even though Westphalian borders remain 
in place, and indeed function as critical and oftentimes problematic elements 
in global politics, they no longer present impenetrable or controlled barriers to 
outsiders.1 For many purposes, the passport that needs to be shown if A travels 
1  Contemporary doctrines of national sovereignty tend to go back to the Peace of Westphalia, 1648. State 
sovereignty is one of the factors that makes the problem of developing global standards so difficult. See 
Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars (1977). For a few recent contributions to the debate, see Omar Dahbour, 
“Advocating Sovereignty in an Age of Globalization”, Journal of Social Philosophy 37, no. 1 (2006): 108–26; 
Joelle Tanguy, “Redefining Sovereignty and Intervention”, Ethics and International Affairs, 17, no. 1 (2003): 
141–48; Michael Dusche, “Human Rights, Autonomy and National Sovereignty”, Ethical Perspectives, 7, no. 
1 (2000): 24–36.

Security and Privacy
2
to X from Y to see B can be circumvented by the Skype call, email or other 
online transaction that A can make with B. The bomb or weapons that need to 
be physically transported across borders may not cause as much devastation as 
the computer virus or hacked website that is remotely controlled. Crime and 
terrorism have exploited the porosity of borders, along with the opacity that 
encryption and other technological advances have made available.
The advent of global terrorism has created an additional problem to that posed 
by porous boundaries. Global terrorism, like all terrorism, stands somewhere 
between crime and war. Countries that have been confronted by it have had 
to make difficult decisions about how to deal with it. Those involved in the 
first terrorist attack on the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in 1993 
were treated as though they had committed a number of serious crimes – 
including seditious conspiracy, explosive destruction of property and interstate 
transportation of explosives. Their intentions were to topple one of the towers 
against the other, with a view to bringing both down – arguably a more radical 
plan than that adopted by the terrorists on September 11, 2001, who appear to 
have seen the actual collapse of the towers as an unexpected bonus. However, 
what occurred on September 11 was treated as something much closer to an 
act of war, leading to the US invasion of Afghanistan. Given that there was 
some connection between those who plotted the first attack on the Twin Towers 
and those who were involved in the second, what made for the difference? 
Was it that the second attack included other targets besides the Twin Towers? 
Was it the death toll? Admittedly, the events of 1993 already raised questions 
about the sufficiency of law enforcement strategies for dealing with terrorism.2 
Nevertheless, terrorism seems to occupy a broad space between crime and war, 
intersecting with each and thus blurring once-clear conceptual boundaries. We 
tend to think of crimes as serving the personal interests of those who perpetrate 
them; war, on the other hand, is politically motivated as one state seeks to take 
control of the affairs of another. But Timothy McVeigh’s (and Terry Nichols’s) 
terroristic destruction of the Alfred P. Murrah Building in Oklahoma City, 
though politically motivated, was treated as a crime, as was the first World Trade 
Center bombing. Terrorism does not clearly constitute war either, even though 
it is usually politically motivated. If we generally think of war as armed conflict 
between states, terrorism does not clearly constitute an act of war. There is no 
standing army to fight or head of state with whom to negotiate.
2  See Dale Watson, “Foreign Terrorists in America: Five Years After the World Trade Center“ (Senate 
Judiciary Committee), February 24, 1998, available at: http://fas.org/irp/congress/1998_hr/s980224w.htm. 
See also Seumas Miller, Terrorism and Counter-terrorism: Ethics and Liberal Democracy (Oxford: Blackwell, 
2010), ch. 5.

I. Crimes Scenes and the Terroir of Terror 
3
This is not the place to engage in an extended discussion of what constitutes 
terrorism.3 Perhaps it is enough for our purposes to say that terrorism seeks 
to further some political or politico-religious end, using, as the name implies, 
indiscriminate violence to intimidate a people. Unlike war, which may also 
involve terror – though not generally as a strategy – terrorism does not usually 
constitute armed conflict between jurisdictionally bound political communities.4
What we designate as crimes are generally jurisdictionally defined. That is, the 
designation of “doing φ” as a crime applies only in country P, though country Q 
may in some cases also designate “doing φ1”, an act similar to φ, as a crime. That 
will commonly be the case with respect to crimes that are said to be mala in se, 
but less frequently so with respect to mala prohibita crimes. The firearm whose 
possession is illegal in jurisdiction P may be permitted in Q. Technological 
advances, however, may enable A, who wishes to do what is criminalized in P, 
to accomplish it by transacting it in Q. Secret offshore bank accounts can hide 
the proceeds of criminal activity or avoid tax requirements (or both). Of course, 
a jurisdiction may choose to make illegal acts that would move doing φ offshore, 
but it is much more difficult if the evidence of an offense in P is hidden in Q. 
This is only one of many possible options and a particularly simple one. A may 
not be in P when the offense takes place. If A is in Q and by means of a computer 
transaction defrauds C in P, A may be beyond the reach of investigatory 
authorities unless there is some agreement between the authorities in P and Q. 
Such agreements are frequently absent, but even when such an agreement exists 
it may take time and effort to implement it if there are local sensitivities to be 
negotiated5 and, if there are significant differences in the legal understandings 
of P and Q, it may be impossible for C to get redress. Although Westphalian 
boundaries are sometimes flouted or quietly subverted,6 they continue to pose 
3  Some of the diversity of definitions and complexities involved are discussed in Alex P. Schmid, A.J. 
Jongman, and Irving Horowitz, Political Terrorism: A New Guide to Actors, Authors, Concepts, Data Bases, 
Theories, and Literature (Amsterdam: Transaction Books, 1998); Bruce Hoffman, “Defining Terrorism”, in 
Terrorism and Counterterrorism: Understanding the New Security Environment, ed. Russell D. Howard, Reid L. 
Sawyer, Natasha E. Bajema, third ed. (NY: McGraw-Hill, 2009), 4–33; Miller, Terrorism and Counter-terrorism, 
ch. 2.
4  However, we leave to one side what is often referred to as state terrorism (as was evident in Stalin’s Soviet 
Union) as well as terrorism used in the course of war (say, British carpet bombing of German cities during 
World War II) and state support for terrorism (say, Syrian support for Hezbollah).
5  A recent case concerned the extradition of a permanent resident of Australia (of 37 years) to the US for 
cracking copy-protected software and then distributing it free of charge over the internet. Although the scale 
of the offense was not great, because there was an extradition treaty between the US and Australia it still 
raised eyebrows. Some felt that extraditing “simply” to protect US commercial interests gave the US excessive 
influence in Australia. See Kenneth Nguyen, “Australia Hands over Man to US Courts”, The Age (Melbourne), 
May 7, 2007; P.W. Young, “Extradition to the US”, Australian Law Journal 81 (April, 2007): 225. On June 22, 
2007, he was sentenced to 51 months imprisonment in the US, though because of the time served in Australia 
during extradition proceedings he served less than 15 months. See http://www.sys-con.com/read/393715.
htm. He returned to Australia in March, 2008. 
6  There is evidence of both subversion and flouting in the so-called extraordinary renditions of suspected 
terrorists that were carried out by US authorities. See Association of the Bar of the City of New York & 
Center for Human Rights and Global Justice, Torture by Proxy: International and Domestic Law Applicable to 

Security and Privacy
4
major obstacles to the effective control and prosecution of much criminality. 
When transactions become more complex than the simple ones noted, as indeed 
they often do, then the problems of investigation, prosecution and, perhaps, 
recovery can become even more difficult. If A, in P, steals B’s identifiers from Q 
(either by hacking or phishing or some other ruse), opens an account under B’s 
name in R, transfers B’s assets to R and then arranges for them to be cashed out 
by an accomplice in R, the task of investigation and prosecution may become 
almost impossibly intricate. Moreover, actual criminality, especially at the high 
end, may be much more complex than this. The point is simply that technology 
has made possible forms of criminality that challenge the traditional means for 
their control, creating ethical quandaries as those committed to their control 
find that time-tested tools are no longer sufficient.
ATM card fraud is an example of the type of fraud that is becoming increasingly 
international in nature. ATM card numbers and even complete track 2 
information7, as well as card security codes, are available for purchase on websites 
that have been located in former eastern bloc countries, Russia, China, and other 
nations that often do not cooperate with US and European law enforcement 
authorities.8 Access to this contraband is available to cyber thieves throughout 
the world who frequently work in highly organized groups and make use of 
the information to withdraw funds at ATMs located in various nations before 
financial institutions can detect the fraud and invalidate the cards. Access to 
contraband sites often requires a password or a cryptographic key available 
only to cyber thieves who establish a trust relationship with the criminal 
organization that sponsors the site.9 Sensitive personal financial information, 
including social security and bank account numbers, captured in major data 
breaches at American retailers, banks and card processors have frequently 
turned up on these foreign sites.10 Although the current discourse consistently 
weighs privacy against national security needs, the widespread availability of 
personally identifiable financial information puts individuals at risk for fraud.
“Extraordinary Renditions”, New York: ABCNY & NYU School of Law, 2004; available at The Record (of the Bar 
Association of the City of New York) 60 (2005): 13–193; David Weissbrodt and Amy Bergquist, “Extraordinary 
Rendition: A Human Rights Analysis”, Harvard Human Rights Journal, 19 (Spring, 2006): 123–60; idem, 
“Extraordinary Rendition and the Torture Convention”, Virginia Journal of International Law, 46 (Summer, 
2006): 585–650; idem, “Extraordinary Rendition and the Humanitarian Law of War and Occupation”, 
Virginia Journal of International Law, 47 (Winter, 2007): 295–356; Michael V. Sage, “The Exploitation of Legal 
Loopholes in the Name of National Security”, California W. International Law Journal 37 (Fall, 2006): 121–42.
7  Track 2 information is the information contained on the card’s magnetic strip and can be used to fabricate 
a duplicate card.
8  K. Perreti, “Data Breaches: What the Underground World of Carding Reveals”, Santa Clara Computer and 
High Tech Law Journal 25, no. 2 (2009): 375–413.
9  Statement of Rita Glavin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division, US Department of Justice, 
before the House of Representatives Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and 
Technology, March 31, 2009.
10  Douglas Salane, “Are Large Scale Data Beaches Inevitable?”, Cyber Infrastructure Protection Conference 
’09, City College and SSI US Army War College, the City University of New York, June 2009. Available at: 
http://www.jjay.cuny.edu/centers/cybercrime_studies/D_SalaneLargeScaleDataBreaches.pdf.

I. Crimes Scenes and the Terroir of Terror 
5
Terrorism has also moved across territorial boundaries. Although localized 
terrorism still occurs (in places such as Egypt and Spain, and until recently 
in Northern Ireland and Sri Lanka), the attacks of 9/11 were a sharp reminder 
that terrorist activity does not need to be grounded in local discontent but may 
reflect disaffection from afar. The attacks of 9/11, moreover, were not the work 
of another “state” but of a much more amorphous group with no clear political 
identity. Whatever we may think of the responses to those events, they posed a 
challenge that had not been clearly thought through – attackers from afar and 
an operational center or centers that could not be identified with a government 
or country (even though an insurgent Taliban gave cover in Afghanistan). 
Furthermore, it was clear that the coordination required for the attack was 
possible only because it had become technologically feasible to move money 
and messages electronically. For the US authorities, it presaged things to come.
Reactive responses
Political authorities have responded to these transnational, international, and 
global challenges in a number of ways. One obvious response has been to 
try to increase border security (fences, patrols, etc.), but important as border 
interceptions have been, it has been argued that these have not been sufficient. 
Westphalian constraints have for the most part required that intergovernmental 
agreements are sought. Agreements between and among sovereign states have 
ranged from extradition treaties to exchanges of salient information. They have 
operated at a number of levels, sometimes through international organizations 
such as Interpol or through high-level memoranda of understanding.
As well as monitoring the incoming, outgoing and through-passing movement 
of human beings, there have also been efforts to monitor incoming, outgoing 
and through-passing transactions such as phone calls, internet communications 
and financial wire dealings. Indeed, these activities are increasingly conducted 
by specialized agencies set up for this very purpose. For example, AUSTRAC in 
Australia monitors international financial transactions of AU$5,000 or above.11 
These monitoring activities have sometimes proved problematic. In the US, for 
example, certain legal constraints have traditionally been applicable to many 
of these transactions. Most significantly for the contemporary era – at least 
until quite recently – the Foreign Intelligence Security Act of 1978 (FISA) was 
set up to ensure that any monitoring of cross-border communications satisfied 
a range of conditions. FISA was introduced to place stringent – though not 
insuperable – conditions on governmental monitoring of communications, 
generally communications between the US and foreign countries. It provided for 
11  See Appendix.

Security and Privacy
6
a special court to handle requests for monitoring. These conditions, however, 
were relaxed in cascading fashion by both the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 and 
the FISA Amendments Act of 2008. In addition, as we see later, widespread 
commercial collection and mining of digitalized data has also been accessed by 
government agents.
Although Westphalian constraints have for the most part required that 
intergovernmental agreements are sought, more has been thought necessary. 
Agreements that allow for exchanges of information or other actions that enable 
the interception and prosecution of criminal or terroristic enterprises have not 
always been thought adequate. If the security of borders cannot be achieved at 
the borders they can perhaps be achieved by unilateral actions taken beyond 
the borders. Sovereign states have instituted their own means of monitoring 
communications and transactions in their efforts to curb transnational, 
international and global criminal and terrorist activity.
To counter both crime and terrorism, technology is being turned to. In itself, this 
is not intrinsically inappropriate. But warring on crime and counter-terrorism 
strategies may overreach and the values of those in whose defense they are 
employed may be in danger of being undermined. No less problematic is that 
we may find that the coordination of effort that is required is jeopardized by 
jurisdictional differences.
The purpose of this study is to address such counter-crime and counter-terrorism 
concerns and offer some best practice recommendations.

7
II.  Security and the Challenge to 
Liberal Values
Security is valuable to any society. For each society, security offers a form of 
stability in the face of vulnerability, but within liberal democratic polities, 
security also provides – at least in theory – a social environment within which 
individual citizens and other dwellers can flourish. That is, security offers to 
citizens and others a stable framework for the pursuit of the various goods that 
they seek to realize for themselves. Henry Shue speaks of individual security as 
a basic right – indeed, as a right that underwrites all other rights, including, in 
his view, other basic rights such as subsistence and liberty.1
How security is to be understood and how it is most appropriately achieved are 
questions that we will address in the course of this study (especially in Chapter 
VIII). What is to be noted here, however, is the impact that the events of 9/11 
had on conceptions of security and the ways of achieving it, as well as on the 
relations between security and other important liberal values such as liberty, 
autonomy, privacy, dignity and the maintenance of one’s identity.
It is indisputable that the events of 9/11 constituted a massive failure of security 
– not only of security procedures at various US airports but also of larger federal 
security processes directed against terrorism and threats to national security. 
Such failures naturally raised questions concerning the adequacy of security at 
both local and federal levels.
More than one response to such circumstances might be proffered:
1.	 It might be argued that the security measures in place were as good as 
they could have been expected to be and that the breaches that occurred 
represented a cost that needed to be borne. That is, it might be argued 
that even with our best efforts it could not be expected that we would be 
impervious to all breaches. Relatively few have been willing to argue that 
(and even fewer since the Christmas 2009 bombing attempt). The benefits of 
hindsight have made it clear that even though we might expect there to be 
unanticipated and unpreventable breaches of security, the particular failures 
that occurred were realistically preventable and should not have happened. 
We need not have accepted what occurred as the cost of remaining a decent 
society.
1  Henry Shue, Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and U.S. Foreign Policy, second ed. (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1996), ch. 1.

Security and Privacy
8
2.	 It might be argued that although the security measures already in place 
could have been utilized to prevent the particular attacks from occurring 
they occurred as a result of technical or human failings. No more was needed 
except for what already existed to have worked better than it did.2 Although 
this position was taken by some, and might indeed have much to be said for 
it, it was not a politically popular one.3 In part, dissatisfaction with such a 
position was associated with the view that the magnitude of the threat had 
been underestimated and that for such threats heightened measures need to 
be in place.
3.	 Although many accepted that some failures of otherwise adequate security 
procedures had occurred, they argued that what was really called for was 
not simply that the existing system be made to work but also that security 
measures needed to be dramatically increased. We needed much tighter 
security to ensure such events would not happen again.
One significant cost of giving most weight to the third of these responses was 
that ramping up security placed pressure on other values also held dear within 
liberal democratic polities. In particular, it was argued that an “imbalance” had 
occurred between liberty and security and that this needed rectification.4 We 
would need to give up some liberty in order to bring our security to an acceptable 
level, but liberty – in the sense of social freedom – was not the only value placed 
under pressure. Privacy was also compromised and along with it autonomy, or 
the inner freedom that is so greatly prized within liberal democratic theory. 
Furthermore, insofar as certain people were more heavily targeted than others as 
a result of enhanced security measures, issues of identity, dignity and equality, 
or non-discrimination, were brought to the fore.
We will later have occasion to question the metaphor of “balance” to characterize 
the relations between security and other values, such as liberty. For one thing, 
increased security does not necessarily imply a trade-off in terms of a significant 
reduction in freedom or privacy; it might simply involve greater expenditure 
of resources on security without any lessening of legal and ethical constraints 
on the powers of security agencies. For another thing, where trade-offs do 
actually occur the metaphor can mask them by misleadingly implying that the 
rectification of an imbalance was a costless process, as though the resulting 
liberty were not significantly impaired. But it is more relevant at this juncture 
2  There are numerous white papers, news articles, podcasts and webinars that suggest ways of doing this. 
See, for example, the webinar of Patrick Howard, Chief Information Security Officer, Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission, “Creating a Culture of Security – Top 10 Elements of an Information Security Program”, available 
at: www.govinfosecurity.com/webinarsDetails.php.
3  The point was made just as plausibly – though hardly more popularly – with respect to the Christmas Day 
2009 bombing. See: http://i.cdn.turner.com/cnn/2010/images/01/07/summary.of.wh.review.pdf.
4  Here the term “imbalance” was often implicitly understood in terms of a trade-off.

II. Security and the Challenge to Liberal Values
9
to note some of the ways in which the ramping up of security has impinged 
on these other values. We confine ourselves here to cases involving the use of 
digital technologies.
There has, first of all, been a growth in the use of surveillance technologies. This 
is no doubt partly a function of the increased availability and greatly enhanced 
power of these technologies. After all, they are being used in a wide variety of 
settings for reasons other than security, such as in the workplace.5 However, 
security concerns have been a key driver. The uses of these technologies 
have included the proliferation of closed-circuit television (CCTV) and other 
visual surveillance devices, along with their greater centralization. Increased 
use has been made of wiretapping and other measures designed to access 
communications between people. The use of X-ray-type devices to scan persons 
and their possessions has also greatly expanded.
Secondly, increasing use has been made of data gathering and data mining 
activities. Vast numbers of public – and not so public – documents that once 
needed to be sought on an as-needed basis, often with some effort, have now 
been digitalized and their data centralized in huge databases where they 
are available for access or purchase (by commercial, private and government 
organizations). Such data have enabled the construction of identity narratives 
for the purpose of investigation or profiling.
Thirdly, data mining has enabled the development of profiles for various 
purposes, including the investigation (and even perpetration) of crime and 
terrorism. Although profiling (especially where race was implicated) came 
under heavy criticism during the latter years of the twentieth century it made 
a powerful comeback after the events of 9/11. Aspects of this issue pose serious 
challenges for liberal democratic values.
In this study we seek to outline the development of these technologies in order 
to identify the ethical, social and legal risks associated with them, to examine 
possible responses to those risks and to make some recommendations concerning 
best practice.
5  See Seumas Miller and John Weckert, “Privacy, the Workplace and the Internet”, Journal of Business 
Ethics 28, no. 3 (2000): 255–65, and John Weckert (ed.), Electronic Monitoring in the Workplace: Controversies 
and Solutions (Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 2005).


11
III.  The Blessing and Bane of the 
Liberal Democratic Tradition
One of the important virtues of liberalism – and, by extension, a liberal 
democratic polity – is that, in theory at least, it acknowledges the diversity 
of human goods and ends. A liberal democratic polity seeks to accommodate 
within its social order a recognition of this diversity and to enable the realization 
of differing ends. A liberal democratic polity will therefore include among its 
important goals the fostering of – or at least a decision not to inhibit – the 
diversity of ways in which humans can flourish. No doubt there will be limits 
or at least challenges to such support – when, for example, the form that human 
flourishing appears to take requires the suppression of others’ flourishing (what 
is sometimes referred to as the paradox of liberalism). Even so, there will be the 
recognition and promotion of a broad range of human possibilities along with 
the conditions for their social and associational realization.
The acute challenge that liberalism poses is of incompatible diversity or at least of 
diversity in tension. Although we commonly see such tensions at the individual 
level – say, between the libertarian and social democrat – these tensions may 
also be manifest at a macro-level. One country’s liberal democratic tradition may 
develop in one direction whereas another liberal democratic polity may develop 
in a different direction. Consider, for example, the contrast between the US and 
the Netherlands, or the even greater contrast between both of these countries 
and India. These differences may manifest themselves not only with respect 
to, say, forms of governance and social institutions but also in the traditions of 
understanding that underpin shared values, such as those of liberty, autonomy, 
privacy and dignity.
There is no guarantee, even, and perhaps especially within liberalism, that 
central concepts will be understood in exactly the same way. Liberals are 
themselves divided on this. There are those who are committed to the univocity 
of liberalism’s central concepts but who recognize diversity in the ways in which 
they may be realized. However, there are others who see the diversity reaching 
to its core concepts, liberalism itself being seen as at best an overlapping 
consensus of traditions.1
It is this latter challenge that we must confront in this study, for although the 
polities with which we will be concerned – primarily those of the US and the 
EU but also those of Australia and India, albeit to a much lesser extent – can 
1  See P.F. Strawson, “Social Morality and Individual Ideal”, Philosophy 36 (January, 1961): 1–17.

Security and Privacy
12
reasonably be characterized as liberal democratic, their traditions have diverged 
in important ways that have come to a head in the response to international 
crime and global terrorism.
The possibility of intractable diversity within liberalism has long exercised its 
theorists. In 1956, W. B. Gallie published his influential essay on the essential 
contestability of many – perhaps most – social concepts, and then in 1987 John 
Rawls, in response to objections made to his classic political treatise, A Theory of 
Justice (1971), published his paper on the idea of an overlapping consensus. Here 
we summarize a few of the main contentions of these two papers to illustrate 
some of the challenges created by the liberal commitment to diversity.
First, Gallie.2 In his original paper, Gallie argued that many and perhaps most 
concepts employed in social life are not merely contested, but “essentially 
contested”. He gives as examples art, democracy, social justice, religion and 
championship, but other writers have added to the list with medicine, education, 
music, liberty, power, rule of law, rhetoric, security, the Christian tradition, 
justice, academic freedom, privacy and so on. It would not be too much of 
an exaggeration to claim that almost any social concept that is likely to be of 
importance to us will be contested, though whether it is contested in Gallie’s 
sense remains to be seen. Gallie articulates and develops several conditions that 
will qualify a concept as “essentially contested”. They include the following:
1.	 They are appraisive. That is, although they characterize an activity, they are 
also normative characterizations. “Art” is not simply a human activity but 
one that we value. “Disease”, on the other hand, is something we disvalue. 
What constitutes art or a disease will depend on the kinds of normative 
considerations that we allow to inform our understanding of each. Similar 
claims might be made about privacy or security. To characterize a matter as 
private is not simply to identify it but also to indicate certain claims that are 
made on us – that we respect and not intrude on what is deemed private. 
Security no less implies the appropriate provision or protection of that which 
is valued.
2  W.B. Gallie, “Essentially Contested Concepts”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 56 (1955–56), 167–
98 (also in Essentially Contested Concepts and the Historical Understanding, London: Chatto and Windus, 
1964, ch. 8). The idea has also been taken up and discussed by others – e.g. A.C. MacIntyre, “The Essential 
Contestability of Some Social Concepts”, Ethics 84 (October, 1973), 1–9; Norman S. Care, “On Fixing Social 
Concepts”, Ethics 84 (October, 1973), 10–21; Steven Lukes, “Relativism: Cognitive and Moral”, Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society, Supp. Vol. 48 (1974), 165–89; A.P. Montefiore (ed.), Neutrality and Impartiality: The 
University and Political Commitment (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1975), Part I; John N. Gray, 
“The Contestability of Concepts”, Political Theory 5 (1977), 330–48; John N. Gray, “On Liberty, Liberalism, 
and Essential Contestability”, British Journal of Political Science 8 (1978), 385–402; Christine Swanton, “On 
the ‘Essential Contestedness’ of Political Concepts”, Ethics 95 (July, 1985), 811–27; Andrew Mason, “On 
Explaining Political Disagreement: The Notion of an Essentially Contested Concept”, Inquiry 33 (1990), 81–98; 
William E. Connolly, The Terms of Political Discourse (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993).

III. The Blessing and Bane of the Liberal Democratic Tradition
13
2.	 They denote an essentially complex activity. What makes something a piece 
of music or a religion is not a single feature but a complex of features of 
varying importance, and it may be that not all are necessarily present if 
other features are present. One might be inclined to think that worship of a 
god is essential to a religion but in the case of certain other belief traditions 
this might be less important as long as other features are present. We do 
not usually deny that Buddhism is a religion, even though some of its main 
strands are nontheistic. Should Marxism also be seen as a religion? In the case 
of security we meet some of these complexities in the debate about whether 
(national) security is to be thought of in terms of territorial integrity or the 
integrity of a way of life, whether any threat to national security interests 
is, ipso facto, a threat to national security or whether an attack on a national 
symbol can be seen as an attack on the nation, and so on. No less complex is 
the idea of privacy, a chameleon-like concept that yields the possibility that 
what takes place in private is not therefore private.3
3.	 They are initially variously describable, and differences are likely among 
their users about the relative importance of different elements in the 
complex activity. This is clearly the case in matters of religion and art but 
applies equally when a broad enough group of people start talking about 
what philosophy or democracy is. Sometimes the gulf between Western and 
Eastern philosophy can seem pretty broad, almost unbridgeable. Those of us 
who still remember the DDR, the German Democratic Republic, know that 
what counts as democratic is a matter of contestation. Notions of privacy 
and security are not immune to such variations and, certainly in the case of 
privacy, such variability has been of critical importance.
4.	 They are open ended and subject to considerable modification in the light of 
changing times, and such modification cannot be predicted or prescribed in 
advance. What Gallie has in mind here are the historical changes to which 
such concepts are susceptible. What forty years ago was encompassed by 
the term “medicine” has changed, not merely because we have learned 
more about what does and what does not fulfill our criteria for medicine, 
but also because our criteria for what constitutes something as medicine 
have changed (consider acupuncture, homeopathy etc.). We see this in the 
discussion of (national) security in the shift from border security to a variety 
of challenges to a state’s equanimity, such as pandemics, economic crises and 
threats of war. Our conception of privacy has also evolved as our capacity to 
integrate information, previously considered as public, has grown.
5.	 Each party to a dispute recognizes that its own use of the concept is contested 
by those of other parties. To use an essentially contested concept means to 
3  See S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus, “Public and Private – Concepts in Action”, in Public and Private in Social Life, 
ed. S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus (NY: St. Martin’s Press, 1983), 3–27.

Security and Privacy
14
use it against other users. To use such a concept means to use it aggressively 
and defensively. This was very clear in debates during the seventies over the 
(often feminist) slogan, “the personal is the political”, but it is also true in 
the case of terms such as “terrorism”, which can be used not only as a term 
of criticism but also to distinguish one’s own activity from that of terrorists. 
The ongoing conflict between Israelis and Palestinians is in part a contest 
of characterizations. What Israelis have often viewed as acts of terrorism 
Palestinians have characterized as acts of retaliation, and vice versa. Privacy 
is viewed rather differently by the United States and Europe. Members of the 
EU consider all personal data as private, accessible by others only under fairly 
stringent conditions. In the US, however, privacy is construed primarily as 
a shield against governmental intrusion, not against the data gathering and 
mining activities of commercial enterprises. In contrast with both the US 
and the EU, individual privacy in a developing country such as India is not a 
very high priority, whether vis-à-vis government or private sector intrusion. 
Even within a culture there may be variable recognitions. Arguably, the upper 
and middle classes in India are more likely to be concerned about individual 
privacy than the members of lower socio-economic groups. Although we 
have appealed unabashedly to “liberal values”, that which is deemed liberal 
is often spoken of disparagingly in the US political context, to the point 
where their advocates now often speak of themselves as “progressive.”
6.	 Such concepts must be derived from an original exemplar (or exemplars) 
whose authority is acknowledged by all the contestant users of the concept. 
This condition is required to ensure that we are dealing with a single concept 
and not two or more distinct or confused concepts. Nobody disputes that 
a Rembrandt painting is art or that Christianity is a religion. Few would 
dispute that what happened on 9/11 was a terrorist act or that the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons by other countries is likely to constitute a challenge to 
national security. The problems arise as we move out from acknowledged 
cases to more problematic ones – say, to Ron Hubbard’s scientology in the 
case of religion, or to the British area bombing of Dresden during World War 
II or the atom bombing of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the case 
of terrorism.
7.	 Use of these concepts requires the probability or plausibility of the claim 
that the continuous competition for acknowledgment among contesting users 
enables the original exemplar’s achievement to be sustained and/or developed 
in optimum fashion. The contestation does not split the original exemplars 
of the concept from ongoing inclusion or from conceptual evolution. What 
is contested is how that evolution is to be appropriately constructed. So it is 
with security and many other social concepts – an overlapping of underlying 
considerations that has evolved in somewhat divergent ways.

III. The Blessing and Bane of the Liberal Democratic Tradition
15
Gallie’s position has not gone unchallenged. Nor, according to some writers, is it 
altogether clear what Gallie’s exact thesis is or is intended to reflect. Is he saying 
that concepts such as security are characterized by multiple and evaluatively-
charged criteria and that there is no settled priority among them? Is he saying 
that terms such as security arise within and express particular and competing 
moral positions or outlooks? Is he arguing that there is no way of extracting 
oneself from some particular normative position so that one can, sub species 
aeternitatis, determine one account to be better than others? It would take us 
too far afield to explore and seek to resolve these possibilities at any length. 
(Swanton offers a useful overview.) Our point here is simply that Gallie’s thesis 
helps to provide some understanding of the problems that we encounter as we 
seek to articulate an account of security and other concepts that will be central 
to our discussion: privacy, autonomy and identity. Definitions do not simply 
precede justificatory discussions – to some extent they already embody and 
reflect them.
Now, Rawls.4 In A Theory of Justice Rawls argued for the priority of justice as a 
principle of social organization, a principle that he subsequently articulated in 
terms of a number of other principles arrived at through the artifice of what was 
called “the original position”, a strategy designed to devise social principles 
untainted by the particularities of their collective architects. Rawls later came to 
accept that the strategy he devised and the principles at which he arrived were 
not as immune from partisan values as he had hoped. Contributing to this was 
the liberal recognition of diversity of ends and of the justificatory structures 
grounding them. The diversity is too deep for Rawls’s original strategy to work 
as it was intended.
And so, in a later development of his position, Rawls argues that stability within 
a liberal society may be achieved not because of shared principles derived from 
reflections on an original position, nor from some general and comprehensive 
moral doctrine, but from an overlapping consensus in which a sufficient core 
of political principles is shared, albeit grounded in diverse frameworks or 
comprehensive doctrines. Rawls argues that the political conception of justice 
that constitutes this overlapping consensus will have three features. It will 
first of all be a moral or normative conception tailored explicitly to the basic 
political, social and economic institutions of society (whether or not it can later 
be extended more broadly to international relations5). Second, the principles 
constitutive of this overlapping consensus will not be derivable from or be 
articulations of a general and comprehensive moral or political doctrine such 
4  John Rawls, “The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus”, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 7, no. 1 (1987): 
1–25. The material was later incorporated into his Political Liberalism (1993).
5  Clearly, however, the possibility of extending a political conception of justice to relations between states 
is of importance to the present study. For discussion at the level of interstate relations see Thomas Pogge, 
Realizing Rawls (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989), Part III.

Security and Privacy
16
as utilitarianism, for it is precisely about such general and comprehensive 
doctrines that liberal democratic societies are pluralistic. Such pluralism is 
endemic to liberal democracies. Third, the political conception of justice will 
be formulated “in terms of certain fundamental intuitive ideas viewed as latent 
in the public culture of a democratic society.”6 By means of this strategy, Rawls 
hopes (though without guarantee) that the resulting conception of justice will 
garner the support of an overlapping social consensus. It is not Rawls’s purpose 
here to argue for the relevant substantive principles, though he offers his own 
conception of “justice as fairness” as one such candidate along with Ronald 
Dworkin’s liberal conception of equality.
Rawls seeks to distinguish his idea of an overlapping consensus based on a 
political conception of justice from that of a modus vivendi based on self 
interest, and to argue for the superiority of the former. A modus vivendi (of the 
kind advocated by Hobbes) lacks any principled basis and as such is inherently 
unstable: it will be abandoned in the event that one of the parties to it thinks it 
advantageous to do so. The principles that comprise the consensus, however, are 
moral principles, ultimately grounded in internally affirmed moral doctrines, 
and adherence to them is likely to persist in the face of shifting advantage.
Both Gallie and Rawls confront the difficulties that must be acknowledged in 
any attempt to develop global standards across a number of issues (e.g. ethical 
identity management), and though they are optimistic that it is not a lost cause 
they do not underestimate the problems that may be involved. The difficulties 
they confront are not precisely the same difficulties; they occur at different 
levels of the socio-political process. Rawls confronts basic structural difficulties 
that may need to be addressed whereas Gallie is concerned for the most part 
with divergences that occur among seemingly shared social concepts that are 
likely – much more than Rawls’s – to be reflective of general and comprehensive 
doctrines. In both cases, however – and this is perhaps characteristic of a liberal 
approach – there is a willingness to engage in ongoing reflection and deliberation 
concerning the issues at stake. It may not be quite true that liberal societies do 
not war against each other, but there are deep social, political and intellectual 
resources within those societies for addressing such differences.
An illustration
An apposite instance of this contestability is privacy, for which we will draw 
upon James Q. Whitman’s provocative paper, “The Two Western Cultures of 
6  “The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus”, 6.

III. The Blessing and Bane of the Liberal Democratic Tradition
17
Privacy: Dignity versus Liberty.”7 The history of the development of privacy in 
Europe and in the US nicely illustrates the divergence from a common history 
(prior to US Independence) as well as the possibilities for rapprochement.
It is Whitman’s contention that European (by which he tends to mean German 
and French) conceptions of privacy view it as an aspect of dignity whereas the 
US conception of privacy tends to see it as an aspect of liberty. Whitman argues 
that the European tradition informing privacy has its origins in late eighteenth 
century notions of honor and dignity (in France) and Kantian notions of 
personality (in Germany) and places great store on control over one’s public 
image. Much of European privacy consists in “our right to a public image of our 
own making, as the right to control of our public face.” Whitman draws attention 
to what he sees as European wariness about allowing the free market to be the 
umpire on privacy matters. To illustrate this he looks at credit reporting and 
consumer data protection. Europeans, he writes, believe that “one’s financial 
information is information ‘of a personal character,’ over which one must have 
control just as one must have control over one’s image.”
It is Whitman’s contention that the seminal article by Samuel Warren and 
Louis Brandeis on “The Right to Privacy”8 attempted to import a European 
conception of privacy into the US. However, influential though their article has 
been it was an unsuccessful transplant. Although privacy eventually made its 
way into American constitutional values through Griswold v. Connecticut9, it 
did so in a different form and with a different rationale. Whitman does not want 
to argue that “Americans don’t understand the moral imperative of privacy in 
the creation of ‘personhood’”, an idea that is central to European conceptions. 
Rather, what is central to the US conception of privacy is liberty: “Suspicion of 
the state has always stood at the foundation of American privacy thinking, and 
American scholarly writing and court doctrine continue to take it for granted 
that the state is the prime enemy of our privacy.” And so privacy is seen as 
something that protects individuals from state intrusion – hence the sanctity of 
the home in American privacy law.
We have, then, two different frameworks for thinking about privacy which clearly 
overlap but do not coincide. Though they are hard to reconcile at a political 
level – reflecting “local social anxieties and local ideals” – at a conceptual and 
normative level they can be brought into much closer alignment. As Whitman 
puts it: “There is no logical inconsistency in pursuing both forms of privacy 
protection: it is perfectly possible to advocate both privacy against the state 
7  James Q. Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity versus Liberty”, Yale Law Journal, 
113 (2004): 1151–1221.
8  Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy”, Harvard Law Review 4, no. 5 (1890): 
193–20.
9  Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 US 479 (1965).

Security and Privacy
18
and privacy against non-state information gatherers to argue that protecting 
privacy means both safeguarding the presentation of self, and inhibiting the 
investigative and regulatory excesses of the state.”
No doubt Whitman’s account can be questioned in a number of respects.10 To 
talk, as he does, as though there are only two cultures, is somewhat tendentious, 
especially as his accounts of German and French conceptions of privacy point 
to rather different roots. Nevertheless, Europeans appear to have developed 
a unified public policy on privacy that now stands in serious tension with 
American public policy. We might take some comfort from this, however, for 
despite the differences between Germany and France they were able to develop 
a unified public policy. Perhaps the same can be achieved in relation to the US 
and even globally within liberal democratic communities.
10  See, for example, Francesca Bignami, “European versus American Liberty: A Comparative Privacy 
Analysis of Anti-Terrorism Data-Mining”, Boston College Law Review, 48 (May 2007): 609.

19
IV.  Divergent Formalities
There is wide divergence in the ways that liberal democracies view and protect 
individual privacy and identity. A recent multinational report sponsored by 
the European Commission compares legal and regulatory measures to enhance 
privacy and trust in the European Union, the United States, Japan, South Korea 
and Malaysia.1 For each jurisdiction, the report examines self-regulatory and 
co-regulatory arrangements, enforcement mechanisms and the effectiveness of 
privacy and trust practices. Jurisdictions in which privacy is considered an 
inherent human right and is constitutionally protected tend to have a uniform 
regulatory framework that limits the way in which a data controller can collect 
and process information. These jurisdictions typically have statutory regulations 
that apply to all economic sectors and types of activities.2 Jurisdictions in 
which personal information is not recognized in constitutional guarantees, 
even though privacy rights may be inferred from court decisions, tend to lack a 
uniform regulatory framework for privacy and identity protections. Typically, 
legal protections arise to address some demonstrated harm and protections tend 
to apply only to a given economic sector. Thus a complex tapestry of laws and 
regulation arises in these jurisdictions and, as the report notes, it often includes 
significant gaps in protection. Enforcement is scattered across a range of agencies, 
often with no strong original mandate to enforce privacy legislation. The report 
also found that even in jurisdictions in which constitutional privacy provisions 
exist, a prominent security threat such as that posed by South Korea’s northern 
neighbor has a profound influence on the regulatory framework.
Nations such as Australia and India (see Appendix), which have no constitutional 
privacy provisions, have developed a diverse array of laws, regulations and 
other institutional mechanisms to accommodate privacy concerns. In part this is 
because they have close commercial ties to nations that do have these provisions. 
India in particular has developed a very large IT, software and associated 
international outsourcing industry that has led it to address privacy concerns 
above and beyond those emanating exclusively from domestic sources.
1  “Comparison of Privacy and Trust Policies in the Area of Electronic Communications”, July 20, 2007. 
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/doc/library/ext_studies/privacy_trust_
policies/final_report_20_07_07_pdf.pdf.
2  As will be seen in Section (B) below, however, limits on the European unification project mean that, 
despite the explicit recognition of a right to privacy in EU law, the EU statutory framework has thus far 
provided individuals with very little protection against intrusions on their privacy by governmental, as 
opposed to private, entities.

Security and Privacy
20
In India, the right to privacy derives from the Constitution as well as the common 
law of torts. The Constitution does not explicitly recognize the right to privacy 
but Article 21 provides for personal liberty,3 and in various cases this has been 
taken by the Supreme Court to include the right to privacy against the state.
Although data protection is not explicitly provided for in India’s Constitution, 
under its constitutional right to legislate in relation to matters not enumerated 
in the relevant lists, the central government has taken it to be an appropriate 
matter for its involvement. In 2009, the Information Technology (Amendment) 
Act 2008 was enacted in part to address domestic and regional security issues, 
including cybercrimes and cyberterrorism, but also, and importantly, the 
security concerns of foreign companies with respect to India’s huge outsourcing 
industry. The Act provides penalties for various new cybercrimes (for example, 
cyberterrorism and identity theft), the recognition of new electronic documents 
(for example, electronic documents with e-signatures) and enhanced data 
security (for example, for intermediaries (any person who receives, stores, or 
transmits data for another person such as internet service providers)).
The establishment by the National Association of Software and Services 
Companies (NASSCOM) of the Data Security Council of India (DSCI) is part of 
the broader institutional response – in this instance, a self-regulatory part for 
the DSCI represents software companies and the business process outsourcing 
(BPO) and related IT industries. The function of DSCI is to establish, disseminate, 
monitor and enforce privacy and data protection standards for India’s IT and 
outsourcing industry. Obviously, enforcement is the key challenge for DSCI – it 
is difficult to see how what is essentially a voluntary organization can effectively 
enforce the standards it establishes other than by the threat of expulsion.
The Information Technology Act 2000 and the Information Technology 
(Amendment) Act 2008 do not set out a comprehensive set of specific privacy 
and data protection principles in the manner of, say, the EU Directive or the 
OECD Guidelines. Rather, they require the use of “reasonable security practices 
and procedures”, defined in terms of practices and procedures designed to 
protect sensitive personal information from unauthorized access, damage, 
use, modification, disclosure etc. The DSCI has recommended that companies 
implement one of the available industry-recognized standards such as the OECD 
Privacy Principles for Information Management Systems. Nevertheless, there 
is no requirement that companies undergo an audit to verify the existence and 
efficacy of the controls they have in place to meet any such industry standards.
3  This also enables India to partially fulfil its international obligations under the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights, in which a basic right to privacy is recognized.

IV. Divergent Formalities
21
In India there is thus a heavy reliance on self-regulation and contractual 
provisions to protect individual privacy and identities, particularly for foreign 
citizens whose data are processed in that country.
Although Australia, like India, has no constitutional protection of privacy, it 
provides for a greater degree of privacy protection than does India. The key 
piece of Australian legislation pertaining to privacy is the Privacy Act 1988. 
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner is the federal agency responsible for 
overseeing the operation of the Privacy Act. Most law enforcement agencies 
in Australia are covered by the Privacy Act. The intelligence and defense 
intelligence agencies are, however, partially or completely exempt from it.
The Privacy Act gives effect to Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights and the OECD’s Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and 
Trans-border Flows of Personal Data. The Privacy Act regulates the collection, 
use, storage, disclosure and correction of personal information. The requirements 
of the Act include the National Privacy Principles (NPP) (applying to private 
sector organizations) and the Information Privacy Principles (IPP) (applying to 
Australian government agencies).
The Office  of the Privacy Commissioner's (OPC) responsibilities  include 
overseeing and monitoring compliance with the Privacy Act, investigating 
breaches of the Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 
and monitoring compliance with record-keeping requirements of the 
Telecommunications Act 1997. As a consequence, the OPC conducts audits and 
examines records, receives and investigates privacy complaints and enforces the 
Act through determinations and court proceedings.4
Although the Privacy Act applies to private sector organizations as well as 
Australian government agencies, the OPC does not have the power to conduct 
audits of organizations in the private sector. Moreover, there are various public 
sector agencies that are exempt from the Privacy Act and, therefore, from 
oversight and monitoring by the OPC. Further, the Privacy Act does not cover 
businesses with less than AU$3 million annual turnover (that is, the majority of 
businesses in Australia).
The federal Privacy Act does not cover state public sector agencies and the OPC 
does not have jurisdiction with respect to state public sector agencies. These 
come under the jurisdiction of the various state privacy commissioners – for 
example, the Office of the Victorian Privacy Commissioner – and are covered 
by state legislation. Not all the states have privacy legislation or privacy 
commissioners.
4  See The Operation of the Privacy Act: Annual Report 2008-2009 (Canberra: Office of the Privacy 
Commissioner, 2009).

Security and Privacy
22
In Australia, other than the Victorian Commissioner for Law Enforcement Data 
Security, there is no statutory body concerned exclusively with data security. At 
the federal level and in other states data security – specifically, law enforcement 
data security – is simply one of the functions of oversight agencies with a wider 
remit. Thus the Crime and Conduct Commission in Queensland oversees the 
Queensland Police (and other Queensland public sector agencies) and has a 
concern with data security.
Accordingly, although it does not have a constitutional protection of individual 
privacy and there are various gaps in its privacy legislation and enforcement 
mechanisms, Australia does have statutory protection of privacy from 
both government and non-government intrusion and it does have a range 
of enforcement mechanisms. Moreover, as will become evident, Australia 
affords a greater degree of privacy for individuals, notably from intrusion by 
corporations, other organizations and individuals in the private sector, than a 
country such as the US which has constitutional guarantees that do not apply 
to non-government intrusion.5
For our present purposes we will provide a detailed treatment of the particularities 
of liberal disagreement as they manifest themselves in differences between the 
US and the EU. In this chapter we endeavor to provide:
(A)	An overview of US constitutional and statutory protections of the privacy 
of personal data and telephone and internet communications. We will 
also include some discussion of how US post-9/11 law “on the books” 
(primarily FISA and the Patriot Act) dealt with the tensions between 
national boundaries, cyberspace and globalization; how these statutes were 
contravened by the executive branch’s post-9/11 surveillance of phone and 
cybercommunications; the lawsuits brought to remedy these violations 
and the barriers raised in response (e.g. telecommunications immunity and 
assertions of state secrets privilege); and, finally, brief general reflections 
on the (in)efficacy of the separation of powers in reining in surreptitious 
government abuses of power;
(B)	 An overview and comparison of EU data protection law with US law.
In Chapter V we provide an explanation of how the differences between EU and 
US law underlie the PNR and SWIFT disputes, and a discussion of the national 
identity card issue within the framework of EU law’s weaker concern with data 
protection from government rather than from private parties (the reverse of the 
priorities of US law).
5  As will be explained in Section (A) below, however, some protections against intrusions on individual 
privacy are contained in the statutory law of the United States.

IV. Divergent Formalities
23
(A) United States of America
The basic structure of United States law
Three basic principles underlie the legal system of the United States: (i) the 
existence of constitutional, statutory and common law, (ii) federalism and (iii) 
the separation of powers. Under federalism, each of the fifty states has its own 
legal system which is separate and distinct from the federal legal system. The 
autonomy of state law is limited, however, by the Supremacy Clause of the US 
Constitution, which provides that the federal constitution is “the supreme law 
of the land”.6 The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment places a 
further major limit on the autonomy of state law by providing that no state 
“shall deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due process of 
law.”
The basic American principle of judicial review, as first enunciated by the 
United States Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison,7 provides that as part of 
its power to “say what the law is” the judicial branch of the US government, as 
opposed to the executive or legislative branch, has the final say in interpreting 
the Constitution. This in turn means that the federal courts have the power to 
decide whether federal or state legislation or actions by federal or state officials 
conform to the Constitution’s commands. Under the common law tradition 
of the United States, the meaning and application of various constitutional 
provisions is determined by precedent; that is, previous case law. As the highest 
federal court, the United States Supreme Court is the ultimate authority on the 
meaning and application of the Constitution; its interpretations are binding 
on the lower federal courts and the state courts. The Supreme Court and the 
lower federal courts also have the power to interpret and apply federal statutes 
and regulations. However, absent a determination of unconstitutionality, the 
legislature or executive has the power to rewrite statutes or regulations to 
counter judicial interpretations with which it disagrees.
In contrast with federal legislation and regulations, state law is not within the 
power of the federal courts to interpret or apply. The highest court of each 
state is the ultimate authority on the meaning and application of the state’s 
constitution, legislation, regulations, and common law. Although a state’s 
constitution and enacted laws cannot deprive its citizens of the rights guaranteed 
by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, or other provisions of 
the Constitution, a state court can interpret its state constitution to provide its 
citizens with greater rights than the federal Constitution, as interpreted by the 
6  United States Constitution, Article VI, 2.
7  5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803).

Security and Privacy
24
Supreme Court, provides.8 A state’s legislature and executive can also issue laws 
and regulations that expand individual rights beyond the floor provided by the 
Supreme Court’s interpretation of federal constitutional rights.
The protection of privacy under the United States 
Constitution
Although the word “privacy” is absent from the United States Constitution, 
rights to privacy are implicit in the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition of 
unreasonable searches and seizures and the First Amendment’s protection of 
freedom of speech and association.9 These rights, like all those in the Bills of 
Rights, protect individuals only against the federal government. The United 
States Supreme Court has held, however, that the Due Process Clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment incorporates both First and Fourth Amendment rights; 
in other words, it makes these rights effective against the governments of the 
states.10 Individual rights under the United States Constitution are exclusively 
rights against government action; the federal Constitution does nothing to protect 
individuals against intrusions on their privacy by corporations, associations or 
private individuals.11
The protection of privacy under the Constitution has been importantly shaped 
by the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule and the Sixth Amendment’s right 
to counsel. The exclusionary rule, which the Supreme Court made effective 
against the federal government in Weeks v. United States (1914) and effective 
against the states in Mapp v. Ohio in 1961, makes evidence obtained through 
violations of the Fourth Amendment inadmissible in criminal prosecutions.12
8  Justice William Brennan was a vigorous advocate of interpreting state constitutions to expand individual 
rights. See, e.g., Justice William F. Brennan, Jr., “The Bill of Rights and the States”, New York University 
Law Review 61 (1986): 535. For another view of the relations between judicial interpretations of the federal 
and state constitutions of the United States, see Paul W. Kahn, “Interpretation and Authority in State 
Constitutionalism”, Harvard Law Review, 106 (1993): 1147.
9  The Ninth Amendment, which provides that the “enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall 
not be construed to deny or disparage other rights retained by the people”, has also been interpreted to 
protect individual privacy. See e.g. Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 486 (1965) (Goldberg, J., concurring); 
Charles Black, Decision According to Law (New York: Norton, 1981).
10  See e.g. Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652 (1925) (Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Clause incorporates 
First Amendment right to free speech); National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama, 
357 U.S. 449 (1958) (freedom of expressive association applied against the states); Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 
643 (1961) (incorporating Fourth Amendment protections into the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment).
11  See Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 351 (1967) (stating that “the protection of a person’s general right 
to privacy – his right to be let alone by other people – is, like the protection of his property and of his very 
life, left largely to the law of the individual States” (footnotes omitted)).
12  Weeks v. United States, 232 U.S. 383 (1914); Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961). Although the subject is 
beyond the scope of this study, it should be noted that the US Supreme Court has carved out increasingly 
severe exceptions to the exclusionary rule. See e.g. United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984); Hudson v. 
Michigan, 547 U.S. 586 (2006); Herring v. United States, 129 S.Ct. 695 (2009).

IV. Divergent Formalities
25
As a practical matter, criminal defendants are unlikely to obtain the suppression 
remedy unless they are represented by attorneys. In Johnson v. Zerbst (1938) 
the Supreme Court established that the Sixth Amendment entitles all indigent 
criminal defendants in federal court to government-provided attorneys.13 In 
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963) the Supreme Court extended the Sixth Amendment 
right to government-provided counsel to indigent defendants in state courts.14 
Since the overwhelming majority of criminal defendants in the US are indigents,15 
the joint effect of these Fourth and Sixth Amendment cases was to increase 
the number of motions by criminal defendants to suppress evidence on Fourth 
Amendment grounds. This, together with the paucity of civil law suits brought 
to vindicate Fourth Amendment rights,16 means that Fourth Amendment claims 
are typically brought by factually guilty people. Unless a criminal defendant 
was caught red handed there is no incriminating evidence to suppress. The 
case law interpreting the protection of privacy under the Constitution has been 
importantly shaped by the typical Fourth Amendment litigant’s dual status as 
both (i) an apprehended criminal who seeks to suppress incriminating evidence 
and (ii) an assertor of the people's rights against government.17
The Katz expectation of privacy test and Fourth Amendment 
protections of telephone communications
Since the Fourth Amendment protects people from “unreasonable searches or 
seizures” a government intrusion must count as a search or seizure for Fourth 
Amendment requirements to apply. In Katz v. United States (1967) the United 
States Supreme Court was faced with the question of whether Charles Katz had 
been subject to a search or seizure when by means of a device attached to the 
outside of a public telephone booth law enforcement agents listened in to his 
side of telephone conversations transmitting illegal gambling information. In a 
departure from existing precedent, the Supreme Court reasoned that whether 
there had been a Fourth Amendment search or seizure did not depend on 
whether a public telephone booth was “a constitutionally protected area”, 
13  304 U.S. 458.
14  372 U.S. 335.
15  See e.g. Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Public Defender Offices, at: http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/
index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=215 (“Publicly financed counsel represented about 66% of federal felony defendants 
in 1998 as well as 82% of felony defendants in the 75 most populous counties in 1996.”).
16  Civil actions seeking damages for Fourth Amendment violations by federal and state agents are 
respectively available under Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 
388 (1971) and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. See Anthony G. Amsterdam, “Perspectives on the Fourth Amendment”, 
Minnesota Law Review, 58 (1974): 349, 428–34, and Yale Kamisar, “Remembering the Old World of Criminal 
Procedure: A Reply to Professor Grano”, University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform, 23 (1990): 537, 562–65, 
for discussions of why such suits are difficult to win and seldom brought.
17  For an extended discussion of how these two views of the criminal defendant have shaped Fourth 
Amendment case law, see Adina Schwartz, “Homes as Folding Umbrellas: Two Recent Supreme Court 
Decisions on ‘Knock and Announce’”, American Journal of Criminal Law, 25 (1998): 545–94.

Security and Privacy
26
as “the Fourth Amendment protects people, not places.”18 Further departing 
from precedent, the Supreme Court reasoned that the fact that the wiretap was 
effected without physical penetration of the telephone booth did not mean 
that there was no Fourth Amendment search or seizure. “[T]he reach of [the 
Fourth] Amendment cannot turn upon the presence or absence of a physical 
intrusion into any given enclosure.”19 The Supreme Court replaced those tests 
with the test that Fourth Amendment protections apply only when government 
action intrudes on (i) a person’s “actual (subjective) expectation of privacy” and 
(ii) the subjective expectation is “one that society is prepared to recognize as 
‘reasonable.’”20 Under this test, Katz was subject to a Fourth Amendment search 
or seizure when the agents listened in to his side of the conversations because he 
had sought to keep his conversations private by closing the door of the phone 
booth. Moreover, Katz’s subjective expectation that his conversations would be 
kept private was objectively reasonable because of “the vital role that the public 
telephone has come to play in private communication.”21
The consensual wiretap exception
Four years later in United States v. White, the United States Supreme Court carved 
out the so-called “consensual wiretapping” exception to Fourth Amendment 
protections of the privacy of telephone conversations. White dealt with the 
technique of third party bugging, wherein informants engage in conversations 
with suspects and simultaneously transmit those conversations to law 
enforcement agents who record them. The justices in White acknowledged that 
third-party bugging was possible only because suspects subjectively expected 
that their conversations would be kept private. “Our problem is not what the 
privacy expectations of particular defendants in particular situations may be 
or the extent to which they may in fact have relied on the discretion of their 
companions. Very probably, individual defendants neither know nor suspect 
that their colleagues have gone or will go to the police or are carrying recorders 
or transmitters. Otherwise, conversation would cease . . .”22 The Supreme 
Court reasoned, however, that third-party bugging does not count as a Fourth 
Amendment search or seizure because it is not reasonable for criminals to expect 
that their conversations with their cohorts will remain private. “Inescapably, 
one contemplating illegal activities must realize and risk that his companions 
18  Katz v. U.S., 389 U.S. 347, 351 (1967).
19  Ibid., 353.
20  This classic formulation of the Katz test is in Justice Harlan’s concurrence. Interestingly, Harlan departed 
from the majority in reasoning that a person’s location will usually determine whether he or she has a 
subjective expectation of privacy that counts as reasonable and is, accordingly, subject to Fourth Amendment 
protections. Ibid.,361 (Harlan, J., concurring).
21  Ibid., 352.
22  United States v. White, 401 U.S. 745, 751–52 (1971).

IV. Divergent Formalities
27
may be reporting to the police. If he sufficiently doubts their trustworthiness, 
the association will very probably end or never materialize. But if he has no 
doubts, or allays them, or risks what doubt he has, the risk is his.”23
In this assumption of risk analysis, the Supreme Court assumed that the only 
people who may be subject to third-party bugging are those who are, in 
fact, engaged in crime. The language about the risks that “one contemplating 
illegal activities” assumes contrasts interestingly with the language that the 
Supreme Court used in the Katz case in holding that Katz was entitled to Fourth 
Amendment protections. “No less than an individual in a business office, in a 
friend's apartment, or in a taxicab, a person in a telephone booth may rely upon 
the protection of the Fourth Amendment. One who occupies it, shuts the door 
behind him, and pays the toll that permits him to place a call is surely entitled 
to assume that the words he utters into the mouthpiece will not be broadcast to 
the world.”24 No mention is made of the fact that Katz (like White) was seeking 
to suppress conversations that revealed he was engaged in crime.
The pen register exception
In Smith v. Maryland in 1979, the United States Supreme Court carved out a further 
exception to the Fourth Amendment protections of telephone communications. 
There, at the behest of the police, a telephone company had used a pen register 
to record the numbers dialed from the defendant’s home telephone. In reasoning 
that the use of the pen register did not constitute a search under the Fourth 
Amendment, the Supreme Court expanded on the idea, implicit in White, that 
one has no reasonable expectation that information one reveals to a third party 
will not, in turn, be revealed to the government. Since, under this analysis, one 
is entitled either to expect privacy against everyone or to expect it against no 
one, and telephone company employees have access to the numbers one dials 
from one’s phone, the government’s use of a pen register cannot infringe on any 
privacy one can reasonably expect.25 However, the application of the Katz test 
to deny Fourth Amendment protections to information revealed to third parties 
would seem to be inconsistent with the holding that Katz was entitled to Fourth 
Amendment protections. Telephone company employees cannot only access 
numbers dialed; they can listen in on conversations as well. The Smith Court 
distinguished Katz away on the ground that “a pen register differs significantly 
from the listening device employed in Katz, for pen registers do not acquire the 
contents of communications.”26
23  Ibid., 752.
24  Katz, 389 U.S. at 352.
25  The Smith Court also reasoned that “people in general [do not] entertain any actual expectation of privacy 
in the numbers they dial.” 442 U.S. 735, 742 (1979).
26  Ibid., 741.

Security and Privacy
28
Fourth Amendment protections of email and internet 
communications
Thus far, the United States Supreme Court has avoided the question of 
whether individuals enjoy reasonable expectations of privacy and, hence, 
Fourth Amendment protections in regard to internet and other electronic 
communications. City of Ontario v. Quon (2010) is the Supreme Court’s only 
Fourth Amendment decision on electronic communications.27 The issue there was 
whether a police officer’s Fourth Amendment rights were violated when police 
department officials requested from the service provider and read transcripts of 
text messages that the police officer had sent with a two-way pager provided by 
the department over the wireless service to which the department subscribed. 
In his opinion for the majority, Justice Kennedy avoided the question of whether 
the officer had reasonable expectations of privacy and hence Fourth Amendment 
rights in regard to his text messages, holding that even if this were the case, 
the department officials’ acts of requesting and reading the transcripts of his 
text message were reasonable, and thus did not violate any Fourth Amendment 
protection that the officer might have enjoyed. Despite holding that the issue of 
the reasonableness of the officer’s expectations of privacy need not be reached, 
Justice Kennedy dwelt at length on the difficulty that emerging changes in 
communications technology create for determining the reasonable expectations 
of privacy that individuals have today.
The Court must proceed with care when considering the whole 
concept of privacy expectations in communications made on electronic 
equipment owned by a government employer. The judiciary risks error 
by elaborating too fully on the Fourth Amendment implications of 
emerging technology before its role in society has become clear. In Katz, 
the Court relied on its own knowledge and experience to conclude that 
there is a reasonable expectation of privacy in a telephone booth. It is 
not so clear that courts at present are on so sure a ground. . .
Rapid changes in the dynamics of communication and information 
transmission are evident not just in the technology itself but in what 
society accepts as proper behavior. As one amici brief notes, many 
employers expect or at least tolerate personal use of such equipment by 
employees because it often increases worker efficiency. Another amicus 
points out that the law is beginning to respond to these developments, 
as some States have recently passed statutes requiring employers to 
notify employees when monitoring their electronic communications. At 
present, it is uncertain how workplace norms, and the law's treatment 
of them, will evolve.
27  30 S.Ct. 2619.

IV. Divergent Formalities
29
. . . [T]he Court would have difficulty predicting how employees' privacy 
expectations will be shaped by those changes or the degree to which 
society will be prepared to recognize those expectations as reasonable. 
Cell phone and text message communications are so pervasive that 
some persons may consider them to be essential means or necessary 
instruments for self-expression, even self-identification. That might 
strengthen the case for an expectation of privacy. On the other hand, 
the ubiquity of those devices has made them generally affordable, so one 
could counter that employees who need cell phones or similar devices 
for personal matters can purchase and pay for their own.
A broad holding concerning employees' privacy expectations vis-à-vis 
employer-provided technological equipment might have implications 
for future cases that cannot be predicted. It is preferable to dispose of 
this case on narrower grounds.28
The Supreme Court’s decision in City of Ontario v. Quon reversed the decision 
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit’s in Quon v. Arch 
Wireless.29 There, the Ninth Circuit had faced the question that the Supreme 
Court subsequently avoided, holding both that the officer enjoyed reasonable 
expectations of privacy, and hence Fourth Amendment rights in regard to his 
text messages, and that the officer’s Fourth Amendment rights were violated 
because department officials acted unreasonably in accessing and reading the 
transcripts of his text messages. In deciding in Quon in 2008 that reasonable 
expectations of privacy apply to text messages, the Ninth Circuit built on its 
decision in regard to email communications in United States v. Forrester (2007), 
reasoning that there is “no meaningful difference between the emails at issue in 
Forrester and the text messages at issue here.”30 The Forrester Court had applied 
the Katz test, as further developed in Smith v. Maryland, to hold that neither 
email addressing information nor the IP addresses of websites accessed from 
a particular email account were subject to Fourth Amendment protection.31 
Building on the principle articulated in Katz, Smith v. Maryland, and Forrester 
that Fourth Amendment protections apply to the contents of communications 
but not to addressing information on communications, Quon reasoned that 
users have reasonable expectations of privacy and hence Fourth Amendment 
protections in regard to the content of text or email messages. Quon further 
28  130 S.Ct. at 2629-30 (citations omitted). Cf.City of Ontario v. Quan, 130 S.Ct. 2633, 2634–35 (Scalia, J., 
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (severely criticizing J. Kennedy’s discussion of reasonable 
expectations of privacy).
29  529 F.3d 892 (9th Cir. 2008).
30  United States v. Forrester, 512 F.3d 500; Quon v. Arch Wireless, 529 F.3d 892, 905.
31  In a footnote (512 F.3d 500, 510 n.6), the Forrester Court indicated that since URLs provide more 
information than IP addresses about the information a person accesses on the web, Fourth Amendment 
protections might apply to surveillance techniques that enabled the government to determine the URLs of the 
web pages a person visited.

Security and Privacy
30
reasoned that the police department’s formal policy of auditing officers’ use 
of communications facilities provided by the department did not abrogate the 
officers’ reasonable expectations of privacy because the department’s informal 
policy was not to audit text messages so long as officers paid for any messages 
they sent beyond the quota allocated to their accounts.
The Katz test and the protection of personal records
In United States v. Miller (1976) the United States Supreme Court extended the 
notion that privacy is possessed by everyone or no one to imply that a person 
has no Fourth Amendment rights with regard to documents or records that he 
or she stores with a third party. The specific issue was whether Mitch Miller 
was subject to a search or seizure when, in response to a subpoena, his bank 
delivered his bank records to agents from the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms 
Bureau. In holding that Miller had no reasonable expectation of privacy and 
thus no Fourth Amendment rights in regard to his bank records, the Supreme 
Court cited White for the proposition that whenever one reveals information 
to a third party one assumes the risk that the information will in turn be 
conveyed to the government. “The depositor takes the risk, in revealing his 
affairs to another, that the information will be conveyed by that person to the 
Government. United States v. White, 401 U.S. 745, 751-752 (1971). This Court 
has held repeatedly that the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit the obtaining 
of information revealed to a third party and conveyed by him to Government 
authorities, even if the information is revealed on the assumption that it will 
be used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the third party 
will not be betrayed.”32 In other words, if Miller did not want the government to 
learn of his financial affairs he should have kept his money under his mattress.
Although the Supreme Court has not considered the issue, lower courts have 
applied the Katz test to hold that a subscriber’s Fourth Amendment rights are 
not implicated when an ISP responds to a government request by providing the 
subscriber information corresponding to a particular email address, including 
the subscriber’s name, address, telephone number, billing and account 
information and any other email addresses that he or she has with the ISP. In 
Freedman v. America Online, Inc. the United States District Court for the District 
of Connecticut applied Smith v. Maryland’s distinction between contents of 
communications and non-content information to conclude that a person has 
no reasonable expectation of privacy with regard to his or her subscriber 
information. In so reasoning, the District Court did not so much as advert to 
the possibility of disagreement with its classification of an individual’s credit 
card number and other financial information as “non-content information”.33 
32  United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435, 443 (1976) (footnotes and some citations omitted).
33  Freedman v. America Online, Inc., 412 F.Supp.2d 174, 181 (D.Conn. 2005).

IV. Divergent Formalities
31
In addition, the Freedman Court relied on the notion that one has no reasonable 
expectation of privacy in regard to information revealed to a third party: “He 
[the subscriber] provided his name, address, credit card number, and telephone 
number to AOL when he registered to obtain internet access from AOL. That 
information was exposed to AOL employees in the normal course of business 
. . .”34 In other words, anyone who subscribes to an ISP enjoys no Fourth 
Amendment protection in regard to the information he or she must provide in 
order to obtain an account.
The Fourth Amendment rights of record keepers
By contrast to the total absence of Fourth Amendment protection that 
an individual enjoys with regard to personal records in the possession of 
corporations or other entities, record-keeping entities have limited Fourth 
Amendment rights. Although the Fourth Amendment protects an entity that 
is subpoenaed for records, the United States Supreme Court has reasoned that 
because a subpoena is only a “figurative search” neither a warrant nor probable 
cause is required for its issuance. Rather, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that after a subpoena is issued, the party to whom it is addressed is able to 
obtain judicial review of the reasonableness of the subpoena’s demands.35 The 
reasonableness requirement for a subpoena is much less stringent than the 
probable cause requirement for a full-blown search. The requirement is met so 
long as an administrative subpoena is (1) “within the authority of the [issuing] 
agency”; (2) its demands are “not too indefinite”; and (3) the information sought 
is “reasonably relevant” to a proper inquiry.36
The Fourth Amendment and domestic and foreign threats to national 
security
In Katz, Justice White concurred separately for the purpose of insisting that, 
despite the decision’s extension of the Fourth Amendment warrant requirement 
to wiretapping, the President or the Attorney General was still empowered to 
authorize warrantless wiretaps for national security purposes.37 Justice Douglas, 
joined by Justice Brennan, wrote a separate concurrence in response to Justice 
White, asserting that a national security exception to the warrant requirement 
would violate the Fourth Amendment.38 The Katz majority disposed of the issue 
34  Ibid., 183.
35  See v. Seattle, 387 U.S. 541, 541–45 (1967); Oklahoma Press Pub. Co. v. Walling, 327 U.S. 186, 217 (1946).
36  United States v. Morton Salt Co., 338 U.S. 632, 652 (1950); Oklahoma Press, 327 U.S., 208.
37  Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 363 (White, J., concurring). In his concurrence, Justice White also 
insisted that the Katz test did not impinge on the government’s right to use informants to obtain information, 
including through third-party bugging.
38  Ibid., 359-60 (Douglas, J., concurring).

Security and Privacy
32
in a footnote that stated that the facts of the case did not present the question of 
whether the Fourth Amendment would allow warrantless wiretaps for national 
security purposes.
In United States v. United States District Court (1972), commonly known as the 
Keith case, the United States Supreme Court held that the Fourth Amendment 
does not allow the President to authorize warrantless wiretaps of domestic 
organizations for national security purposes. The Court emphasized, however, 
that the case did not require a “judgment on the scope of the President's 
surveillance power with respect to the activities of foreign powers, within or 
without this country.”39 While acknowledging that the distinction between 
domestic and foreign threats to national security might sometimes be difficult to 
draw, the Court stated that it was not faced with the issue. “No doubt there are 
cases where it will be difficult to distinguish between ‘domestic’ and ‘foreign’ 
unlawful activities directed against the Government of the United States 
where there is collaboration in varying degrees between domestic groups or 
organizations and agents or agencies of foreign powers. But this is not such a 
case.”40
The Supreme Court has yet to decide whether there is a foreign intelligence 
exception to the warrant requirement. However, on January 12, 2009 the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review (the FISA Court of Review) 
released a redacted version of a decision made on August 22, 2008, which 
held that under the Fourth Amendment there is an exception to the warrant 
requirement for surveillance directed at a foreign power or agent of a foreign 
power, where such person(s) are reasonably believed to be outside the United 
States and where foreign intelligence (as opposed to criminal investigation) is a 
significant purpose of the surveillance.41
Federal statutory protections of privacy
Federal statutes and state constitutions, statutes and case law expand on the 
protection of privacy that individuals are afforded under the Fourth Amendment. 
Neither state law nor such important federal statutes as the Right to Financial 
Privacy Act (RFPA), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996 (HIPPA), the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Cable Act), 
the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (VPPA), the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act (FCRA) or the Privacy Act of 1974 will be discussed here. The statutes 
to be discussed will be the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA), 
39  407 U.S. 297, 308 (1972).
40  Ibid.
41  In re Directives [Redacted] Pursuant to 105B of Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 551 F.3d 1004 
(Foreign Int. Surv. Ct. Rev. 2008). This is one of only two published decisions by the FISA Court of Review.

IV. Divergent Formalities
33
which applies to surveillance of phone and internet communications by both 
government and private entities, and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
(FISA), which regulates foreign intelligence surveillance. Also to be discussed 
are some of the post-9/11 amendments to ECPA and FISA and the US Federal 
Government’s systemic evasion of the statutory limits on wiretapping.
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA)
Enacted in 1986, ECPA is the successor to Title III of the Omnibus Crime 
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. Whereas Title III dealt with private as 
well as government wiretapping of oral (face-to-face) and wire (telephone) 
communications, in response to changing technology Congress made the 
purview of ECPA extend to electronic (roughly, internet) as well as oral and wire 
communications. The protections of communications privacy in ECPA include 
not only those in its Wiretap Act but also those in its Stored Communications 
and Pen/Trap Acts. The Wiretap Act applies to the contemporaneous acquisition 
of the contents of communications and updates the protections provided 
in Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. The 
Stored Communications Act deals with subscriber records and subscriber 
communications stored by communication service providers (telephone 
companies and ISPs), while the Pen/Trap Act deals with “to” and “from” 
(addressing information) on telephone and electronic communications (roughly, 
phone numbers, email addressing information, URL’s and IP addresses of 
websites and ISP subscriber accesses). As noted above, FISA, not ECPA, governs 
foreign intelligence wire taps and pen/traps.
The Wiretap Act of ECPA
The Wiretap Act prohibits wiretapping by the government or any individual 
or private entity, subject to three major exceptions. Firstly, a communications 
services provider may intercept communications where this is necessary for 
providing its services or for protecting its rights or property. A communications 
service provider may also record the fact that a communication was initiated 
or completed in order to protect itself, another provider providing services 
toward the completion of the communication, or someone using its services 
from fraudulent, unlawful or abusive use of the communication service.
Secondly, there is an exception for consensual wiretapping where the requisite 
consent is that of only one party to a communication. Thus, the ECPA, like 
the Fourth Amendment, does not protect individuals against the government’s 
use of informants, including third-party bugging. Moreover, under the ECPA 
a person may be deemed to have implicitly consented to the interception of 
communications. For example, the consent exception may apply if an employer 
“banners” employees’ computers so that when they log on a screen informs 

Security and Privacy
34
them that their use of the computer is exclusively for business purposes and that 
internet communications will be periodically screened. Consent to interceptions 
may also be inferred if telephone callers are informed that their calls may be 
monitored and recorded.
Thirdly, state and Federal Government officials may intercept communications 
either by obtaining a warrant from a judge or magistrate or without a warrant 
in exigent circumstances. To obtain a warrant, the government must provide 
probable cause to believe that (i) a particular person(s) has committed or is about 
to commit one of certain enumerated crimes,42 (ii) communications pertaining to 
the offense will be obtained through the interception and (iii) the facilities from 
which or the location at which the oral, wire or electronic communications are 
to be intercepted are being used or are about to be used to commit the particular 
offense, or are leased or commonly used by the suspect(s). A showing must also 
be made that other techniques besides wiretapping for investigating the crime 
have failed or would be too dangerous or unlikely to succeed. Judicial orders 
authorizing interceptions must specify that the interception is to last no longer 
than necessary to achieve the objectives of the interception and, in any event, 
no longer than thirty days, subject to an extension by the court for another 
such period. In addition, interceptions are to be conducted so as to minimize 
the acquisition of communications other than those specified in the warrant. 
A judicial order may direct a communications services provider or landlord to 
provide information, facilities or technical services to assist government officials 
in the authorized interception, subject to compensation for reasonable expenses.
The Stored Communications Act of ECPA
As a result of its definitions of “electronic storage”, “electronic communication 
service” and “remote computing service”43 the Stored Communications Act (SCA) 
protects only voicemail or email stored on a public ISP once it is opened; it does 
not protect opened emails stored on a university or other non-public ISP. The 
SCA does, however, protect unopened voicemail or email regardless of whether 
it is stored on a public or private system.44 In addition, the SCA accords some 
protection to records or other information that telecommunications services and 
communications storage facilities hold about subscribers.
The SCA criminalizes unauthorized access to a telecommunications service 
for purposes of obtaining, altering or preventing access to unopened email or 
voicemail, with exceptions for the provider of the service or a user of the service 
42  The PATRIOT Act expanded the list of enumerated crimes.
43  The terms are defined, respectively, in 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2510 (17), 118 U.S.C. Sec. 2510 (15) and 18 U.S.C. 
Sec. 2711 (2).
44  The PATRIOT Act amended ECPA so that the acquisition of voicemail was no longer governed by the 
stricter requirements of the Wiretap Act. 

IV. Divergent Formalities
35
with regard to his or her own communications. Telecommunication services and 
communications storage facilities are prohibited from disclosing the contents 
of their subscribers’ wire or electronic communications, whether opened or 
unopened, to private individuals or entities, with exceptions for (i) addressees 
or intended recipients of the communications and their agents, (ii) employees 
or persons whose facilities are used to forward communications, (iii) disclosures 
that are necessary for rendition of the service or for protecting the rights and 
property of the service provider and (iv) disclosures with the consent of one of 
the parties to a communication. By contrast, telecommunication services and 
facilities are free to disclose records or information about their subscribers or 
customers to “anyone other than a governmental entity”, so long as the records 
or information do not include the contents of communications.45
Under the SCA, the government must meet escalating requirements in order to be 
entitled to have telecommunications services and computer storage facilities disclose 
(i) subscriber records, (ii) opened email stored with a provider of computer services or 
facilities to the public or email or voicemail that the addressee or intended recipient 
has not opened for more than 180 days or (iii) email or voicemail that the addressee or 
intended recipient has not opened for 180 days or less.
To obtain records, including the subscriber’s name, address, local and long 
distance telephone connection records or records of session times and durations, 
length of service (including start date) and types of service utilized, telephone 
or instrument number or other subscriber number or identity, including any 
temporarily assigned network address, and means and source of payment 
for such service (including any credit card or bank account number), the 
government need present the telecommunications company or communications 
storage facility with only a federal or state administrative, grand jury or trial 
subpoena.46 Notice need not be provided to the subscriber.
To obtain opened email or voicemail from a communications storage facility or 
unopened email or voicemail that has been stored with a telecommunications 
provider for more than 180 days, the government may use either a federal or state 
administrative, grand jury, or trial subpoena or obtain a court order for such 
disclosure by presenting “specific and articulable facts” that provide “reasonable 
grounds to believe that the contents of a wire or electronic communication . . 
. are relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation.”47 In either 
case, prior notice to the subscriber is necessary. However, if it uses a subpoena, 
the government may delay giving notice for up to ninety days, subject to a 
further period of ninety days, if the prosecutor or other officials in charge of an 
45  18 U.S.C. Sec. 2702 (c)(6).
46  The PATRIOT Act added “records of session times and durations” and “any temporarily assigned network 
address” to the information that the government can obtain with a subpoena under 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2703 (c) (2).
47  18 U.S.C. 2703(b), (d).

Security and Privacy
36
investigation certifies that the delay is necessary to avoid endangering a person’s 
life or safety, jeopardizing the investigation or unduly delaying a trial. If the 
government obtains a court order for the emails, similar delays in notification 
may be obtained if the court finds them necessary to avoid endangering a 
person’s life or safety, jeopardizing the investigation or unduly delaying a trial.48 
The requirement of notice does not apply, however, if the government obtains 
a warrant using the procedures described in the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure.
By contrast to the more lax requirements that apply to records and voicemail and 
email that is either opened or unopened for more than 180 days, the government 
may require a telecommunications provider to disclose unopened email that has 
been stored with it for 180 days or less only if it obtains a warrant using the 
procedures described in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.49
Does the SCA violate the Fourth Amendment by allowing the 
government to access opened emails or emails stored for more than 
180 days without a warrant?
In United States v. Warshak (2011), the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Sixth Circuit confronted the question that the Supreme Court had declined to 
resolve in City of Ontario v. Quon, holding that “a subscriber enjoys a reasonable 
expectation of privacy in the contents of emails ‘that are stored with, or sent or 
received through, a commercial ISP.’”50 On this basis, the Warshak Court further 
held that the Fourth Amendment requires the government to obtain a warrant 
backed by probable cause before it can compel a commercial ISP to turn over 
the contents of a subscriber’s emails. As the Warshak decision recognized, this 
reasoning implies that it is unconstitutional for the SCA to provide that the 
government need only obtain a warrant in order to obtain emails that have been 
stored for 180 days or less: “[T]o the extent that the SCA purports to permit the 
government to obtain . . . emails warrantlessly, the SCA is unconstitutional.”51
An unresolved controversy: Is email in transit covered by the wiretap or 
the stored communications provisions of ECPA?
Unless the Warshak decision results in a change in the Stored Communications 
Act, the Wiretap Act requires that the government meet more stringent conditions 
to obtain a warrant than the government is required to meet in order to obtain 
emails under the Stored Communications Act. The unresolved controversy over 
48  18 U.S.C. Sec. 2705.
49  18 U.S.C. Sec. 2703(a).
50  631 F.3d 266, 288 (citation omitted).
51  Ibid.

IV. Divergent Formalities
37
whether the interception of an email before it reaches its intended recipient’s 
mailbox counts as a wiretap or as access to a stored communication therefore has 
major implications regarding the protection of email from government intrusion.
This controversy arises because the Wiretap Act applies to “intercepts” 
or disclosures of intercepts of “electronic communications.” An electronic 
communication is defined as “any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, 
sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by 
a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photo-optical system that 
affects interstate or foreign commerce.”52 Although this definition does not 
mention “electronic storage” of communications, in the course of traveling 
between their senders and recipients emails are broken into packets and 
then passed from one computer to another on the internet. “[E]ach computer 
along the route stores the packets in memory, retrieves the address of their 
destination, and then determines where to send it next based on the packet’s 
destination.”53 This implies that, as they travel between sender and recipient, 
emails are in “electronic storage”, which ECPA defines in part as “any temporary, 
intermediate storage of a wire or electronic communication incidental to the 
electronic transmission thereof.”54 The question is whether the absence of the 
term “electronic storage” in the definition of “electronic communication” means 
that an interception of an email as it travels between sender and receiver cannot 
count as an “interception of an electronic communication” and thus cannot be 
subject to the provisions of the Wiretap Act. In other words, does the fact that 
emails are temporarily stored in the course of their transition over the internet 
mean that they are stored communications subject to the lesser protections of 
ECPA’s Stored Communications Act?
In United States v. Councilman (2005), the United States Court of Appeals for the 
First Circuit held in an en banc decision that the Wiretap Act applies to email 
messages that are temporarily stored in the course of transit.55 In United States 
v. Szymuszkiewicz (2010) the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh 
Circuit adopted Councilman’s position.56
The Pen/Trap Act of ECPA
The Pen/Trap Act includes a general prohibition of the installation and use of 
“pen registers” and “trap and trace devices”. These are defined respectively as 
devices that record or decode the “to” and “from” addressing information, but 
not the contents, of wire and electronic communications (e.g. telephone numbers, 
52  18 U.S.C. 2510 (15).
53  United States v. Councilman, 373 F.3d 197, 205 (1st Cir. 2004) (Lipez, J., dissenting), rev’d on rehearing en 
banc, 418 F.3d 67 (1st Cir. 2005).
54  18 U.S.C. 2510 (17) (A).
55  418 F.3d 67, 79.
56  622 F.3d 701, 706.

Security and Privacy
38
email addresses, IP addresses of websites).57 An exception to this prohibition 
exists for telecommunications providers with the consent of a subscriber, or 
in connection with providing, operating or testing their services, protecting 
their rights or property or protecting their users from unlawful or abusive use 
of their services. In addition, telecommunications providers may record the 
initiation and completion of communications in order to protect themselves, 
their users or other providers involved in the completion of a communication 
from fraudulent, illegal or abusive use of the service.
Federal and state courts may issue orders authorizing federal or state 
government officials to install and use pen/trap devices either on their own 
or with the assistance of telecommunication service providers. To obtain an 
order, an attorney for the Federal Government or a state law enforcement or 
investigative officer must certify “to the court that the information likely to 
be obtained by such installation and use is relevant to an ongoing criminal 
investigation.”58 Although courts are to take such certifications at face value 
and not independently assess their veracity, the Pen/Trap Act does not allow 
the government to engage in dragnet surveillance. An order authorizing the 
installation and use of a pen/trap must specify (i) the offense to which the 
information likely to be obtained from the pen/trap relates, (ii) the identity, if 
known, of the person who is the subject of the investigation, (iii) the number 
or other identifier and, if known, the telephone line or other facility to which 
the pen/trap is to be attached and (iv) the identity, if known, of the person who 
leases or in whose name is listed the telephone line or other facility to which the 
telephone line is to be attached. A court is not to order the installation and use 
of a pen/trap for more than sixty days, though an order may be extended, upon 
application, but for no more than sixty days. In addition, the government is to 
use reasonably available technology to ensure that its recording or decoding of 
addressing information does not capture the contents of communications.
An exception to the requirement of a court order exists where the principal 
prosecuting attorney of a state, or various high level officials in the United 
States Attorney General’s Office, “reasonably determines” that an emergency 
involving an immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury, conspiracy 
characteristic of organized crime, an immediate threat to national security or an 
ongoing attack on a “protected computer” (roughly, a computer connected to 
the internet) requires a pen/ trap to be installed and used before a court order 
57  The PATRIOT Act expanded the definitions in ECPA so that pen registers and trap and trace devices 
include devices recording internet addressing information as well as telephone numbers. Pub. L. 107–56, Sec. 
216 (c)(2) and (3) (2001).
58  18 U.S.C. Sec. 3123 (a) (1) and (2).

IV. Divergent Formalities
39
can be obtained. The use of the pen/trap must immediately terminate if a court 
order approving the installation or use is not obtained within forty-eight hours 
from the beginning of the installation.
Penalties for violations of ECPA
There are civil and criminal penalties for violations of the Wiretap, Stored 
Communications, and Pen/Trap acts of ECPA. Government wiretaps of oral and 
wire (telephone) communications are subject to a strong suppression remedy 
which prohibits the use of any illegally intercepted communication or part 
thereof “in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any court, grand 
jury, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, legislative committee, or 
other authority of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof.”59 
The suppression remedy does not extend to illegal wiretaps of electronic 
communications or to violations of the Stored Communications or Pen/Trap acts.
FISA
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (FISA) established a secret court 
to hear applications for warrants to conduct foreign intelligence surveillance. 
The FISA Court’s hearings are closed to the public, and records of proceedings 
have been made available to the public only with classified information redacted.
The target of a FISA warrant must be a “foreign power” or an “agent of a foreign 
power”, where a foreign power is defined as a foreign government or component, 
faction or entity directed by such or a group engaged in international terrorism 
or preparations for such. To obtain a warrant to wiretap telephone or internet 
communications, a national security or defense executive designated by the 
President must certify that the information sought is “foreign intelligence 
information”. This is defined as information that is relevant to protection against 
foreign attacks, sabotage or international terrorism, or to the conduct of the 
national defense or foreign affairs. Information concerning a United States 
citizen or legal resident counts as “foreign intelligence information” only if it 
is necessary for the protection of the US against foreign attacks, sabotage or 
international terrorism, or for the conduct of national defense or foreign affairs. 
To issue a FISA warrant, a judge need find only probable cause to believe that 
the target of the surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power 
and that the facilities or places at which the surveillance is directed are being 
used or about to be used by a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power. 
Activities protected by the First Amendment to the US Constitution cannot be 
the sole basis for a judicial finding of probable cause to believe that a citizen or 
permanent resident of the US is an agent of a foreign power.
59  18 U.S.C. Sec. 2515.

Security and Privacy
40
Instead of using FISA warrants for the purpose of obtaining foreign intelligence 
information, government officials might be tempted to use them to circumvent 
the stricter requirements that ECPA places on the use of wiretaps for criminal 
investigations. In 2001 the Patriot Act increased this danger by amending FISA 
so that the government no longer needs to certify in a warrant application 
that obtaining foreign intelligence information is “the primary purpose” of 
the surveillance. The designated government official need only certify that 
“a significant purpose” of the surveillance is obtaining foreign intelligence 
information. In 2002, in a decision considering the first appeal ever from a FISA 
court’s decision on a warrant application, the FISA Court of Review held that 
the court had wrongly imposed the condition that the “primary purpose” of the 
surveillance could not be criminal prosecution of foreign agents for their foreign 
intelligence activities.60 According to the court, the “primary purpose” test 
and its mandated wall between foreign intelligence and criminal investigations 
misinterprets FISA, especially as amended by the “significant purpose” language 
of the Patriot Act. The FISA Court of Review further held that the amendment 
did not violate the Fourth Amendment.
The Terrorist Screening Program
Debates about the legitimacy of the Patriot Act’s extension of surveillance powers 
may be tantamount to debates about a distracting side show. On December 16, 
2005, the New York Times reported for the first time that since 2001 the Bush 
Administration had engaged in massive, warrantless surveillance of telephone 
and email communications. In response to the article, Attorney General Gonzales 
confirmed the existence of a Terrorist Screening Program (TSP), conducted by 
the National Security Agency, and claimed that the FISA warrant requirements 
had been superseded by the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against 
Terrorists Act that Congress had passed on September 18, 2001. The Attorney 
General further claimed that the warrantless intercepts had been conducted 
only where the government had a reasonable basis to conclude that at least 
one party to the communication was outside the United States and that at least 
one party was affiliated with al-Qaeda or a related organization, or working in 
support of al-Qaeda. This claim was belied, however, when whistle blower Mark 
Klein informed the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) that in its Folsom Street 
facility in San Francisco AT&T had given the NSA access to the contents of all 
of its subscribers’ communications with subscribers of other ISPs.
60  In re Sealed Case, 310 F.3d 717 (FISC Rev. 2002).

IV. Divergent Formalities
41
Separation of powers and the difficulty of preventing surreptitious 
violations of the law by the executive power
This information about the massive evasion of the requirements of ECPA 
and FISA by the government and AT&T was brought to the attention of the 
Federal Court system in Hepting v. AT&T, a law suit in which the EFF sought 
damages against AT&T. This and other law suits were mooted, however, when 
Congress provided retroactive immunity to telecommunications providers who 
had participated in the Terrorist Screening Program. The FISA Amendments 
Act of 2008 required the dismissal of lawsuits against telecommunications 
providers if the government secretly certified to the court that the surveillance 
did not occur, was legal or was authorized by the President. In response to 
Congress’ passage of the telecommunications immunity provision, EFF sued the 
government and named government officials directly in Jewel v. NSA, filed in 
September 2008. Jewel sought to stop the warrantless wiretapping and to hold 
the government officials behind the TSP accountable. On January 21, 2010, a 
federal district judge dismissed the Jewel case on the ground that the plaintiffs 
lacked standing to bring the lawsuit because they had not alleged an injury 
sufficiently peculiar to themselves or the class they represented: “[T]he harm 
alleged is a generalized grievance shared in substantially equal measure by all or 
a large class of citizens.”61 In other words, the judge held that legal redress was 
precluded by the enormous extent of the Executive’s violation of the limits on 
surveillance that the Fourth Amendment, ECPA and FISA mandated. Although 
EFF plans to appeal the decision, the judge’s interpretation of federal standing 
law may be correct.62
(B) European Union
The desire to remove barriers to commerce has been the primary impetus 
towards European unification since World War II. At the same time, state 
sovereignty has continued to be valued, particularly in the areas of national 
security and protection against crime. Reflecting these two aspects of the 
European unification project, EU law comprehensively and strictly regulates the 
collection, transmission and use of data about individuals by private entities, 
but its regulation of such activity by states is much less strict and much less 
comprehensive. In addition, private parties’ obligations to protect data may be 
weakened for state purposes.
61  Jewel v. NSA, No. C 08-cv-4373, 2–3 (N.D.Cal. Jan.21, 2010).
62  EFF Plans Appeals of Jewel v. NSA Warrantless Wiretapping Case, January 21, 2010, at: http://www.eff.
org/press/archives/2010/01/21.

Security and Privacy
42
Constitutional protections
The privacy of EU citizens is constitutionally protected by both the Convention 
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the European 
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)) and the Charter of Fundamental Rights 
of the European Union. The constitutions of some of the individual states of the 
EU also give individuals rights to privacy, but the constitutional law of multiple 
member states cannot be given detailed treatment here. Instead we will provide 
only passing discussion of member states. However, at the end of this section 
on the EU we provide a somewhat more extensive discussion of the protection 
of individual privacy rights in one of the EU's member states, namely, the 
Netherlands. Accordingly, the Netherlands serves as an exemplification of the 
institutional embodiment of the EU's privacy rights.
The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)
The ECHR, which opened for signature in 1950 and went into effect in 1953, 
established rights that are incorporated in both EU law and the laws of each 
of the individual states of the EU. The ECHR also established the European 
Court of Human Rights, before which cases may be brought by any person who 
claims that a state party to the ECHR (including the EU states, other European 
states that belong to the Council of Europe and EU bodies such as the European 
Commission, the Council or the European Parliament) has violated his or her 
rights under the ECHR. State parties to the ECHR may also bring cases against 
other parties before the European Court of Human Rights, but this power is 
rarely used.
By contrast to the United States Constitution, the ECHR provides an explicit 
right to privacy. Article 8 states that:
Right to respect for private and family life
1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his 
home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise 
of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary 
in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety 
or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder 
or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of 
the rights and freedoms of others.
Unlike the right to privacy that courts have inferred from the First, Fourth, 
Ninth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, the right 
to privacy that Article 8 of the ECHR confers is not merely a negative right 

IV. Divergent Formalities
43
against state interference but also a positive right to the enjoyment of privacy. 
The ECHR right to privacy does, however, resemble the right to privacy that 
courts have inferred from the US Constitution in not being an absolute right, but 
one that may be restricted for legitimate state purposes. National security, public 
safety and the prevention of disorder or crime are among the listed purposes for 
which Article 8, Section 2 of the ECHR allows states to interfere with privacy, 
subject to the requirements that such interference be in “accordance with law 
and . . . necessary in a democratic society” for furthering a listed purpose(s).
As discussed above, in City of Ontario v. Quon the United States Supreme Court 
explicitly declined to decide whether reasonable expectations of privacy and 
hence Fourth Amendment rights extend to electronic communications.63 By 
contrast, the European Court of Human Rights has held that the protections 
of “private life” and “correspondence” in ECHR Article 8, Section 1 extend to 
emails and other internet communications as well as telephone calls, regardless 
of whether such communications take place in the workplace or at home.64
In a further contrast with US law, the European Court of Human Rights 
has reasoned that “information relating to the date and length of telephone 
conversations and in particular the numbers dialled . . . constitutes an ‘integral 
element of the communications made by telephone’” that Article 8, Section 1 of 
the ECHR protects, and has extended that principle to email and other internet 
communications.65  This contrasts with the US Supreme Court’s position in Smith 
v. Maryland that reasonable expectations of privacy and Fourth Amendment 
protections extend to the contents of telephone communications but not to the 
numbers dialed, and with lower courts extensions of the distinction between 
protected contents and unprotected addressing information to email and other 
internet communications.66
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the “EU Charter”), 
which was adopted in 2000 and went into effect with the Lisbon Treaty on 
December 1, 2009, applies to EU institutions. Individual countries of the EU are 
also subject to the Charter, but only insofar as they are implementing EU law, as 
opposed to matters on which the EU either has failed or lacks the competence 
to legislate.
63  130 S.Ct. 2619 (2010).
64  Copland v. United Kingdom, 45 Eur. Ct. H.R. 253, Section 41 (citing Halford v. the United Kingdom, Reports 
of Judgments and Decisions 1997–III, Section 44, and Amann v. Switzerland, 2000–II Eur. Ct. H.R. 247, Sec. 43).
65  Ibid., Sec 43 (quoting Malone v. the United Kingdom, 82 Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A) Sec. 84).
66  See e.g. Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979); United States v. Forrester, 512 F.3d 500 (9th Cir. 2007); 
Quon v. Arch Wireless, 529 F.3d 892 (9th Cir. 2008).

Security and Privacy
44
The Charter’s protections of privacy include Article 7 of the Charter, which is 
identical to the Article 8, Section 1 of the ECHR, and a special provision for 
protection of personal data in Article 8 of the Charter. The Charter provisions are:
Article 7
Respect for private and family life
Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family life, 
home and communications.
Article 8
Protection of personal data
1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning 
him or her.
2. Such data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the 
basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate 
basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to data which 
has been collected concerning him or her, and the right to have it 
rectified.
3. Compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an 
independent authority.
The interpretation of articles 7 and 8 of the Charter is guided by the European 
Court of Human Rights’ interpretation of the right to privacy in the ECHR. The 
preamble to the Charter reaffirms the rights granted by the ECHR and by the 
case law of the European Court of Human Rights. Article 52(3) of the Charter 
indicates that the ECHR provides a floor, but not a ceiling, for interpreting the 
rights that the Charter provides.
The Lisbon Treaty entitles individuals to bring claims about an EU country’s 
violation of their Charter rights in the courts of that country. The European 
Court of Justice can also rule on individual countries’ obligations under the 
Charter, but only if a case is referred to it by the European Commission or a 
national court. Individuals may bring claims as to the violation of their Charter 
rights by an EU institution or body before the General Court (court of first 
instance) of the European Court of Justice, but only if a measure adopted by the 
EU institution or body has directly and individually affected them.

IV. Divergent Formalities
45
EU legislation
EU legislation on the collection, use and transmission of personal data is 
principally composed of three directives and one framework decision. These 
set forth goals that are binding on all EU states and that require each state 
to legislate forms and methods for achieving the goals. The directives and 
framework decision are:
• Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the 
processing of personal data and the free movement of such data (the “Data 
Protection Directive”);67
• Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the 
protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on 
privacy and electronic communications) (the “e-Privacy Directive”),68 as 
updated by Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council;69
• Directive 2006/24/EC on the retention of data generated or processed in 
connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications 
services or of public communications networks and amending Directive 
2002/58/EC (the “Data Retention Direction”);70 and
• Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA on the protection of personal 
data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in 
criminal matters.71
Before turning to the specifics of the Directives and Framework Decision, 
it is crucial to note that although it is often claimed that EU law provides 
comprehensive standards for data protection, this is true only in regard to 
the collection, use and transmission of personal data by private parties for 
private purposes.72 Until the Lisbon Treaty went into effect on December 1, 
2009, policing and criminal justice in individual EU countries were outside 
the purview of EU law.73 In a policy review of EU data protection law issued 
67  Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/95-46-ce/dir1995-46_part1_en.pdf and 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/95-46-ce/dir1995-46_part2_en.pdf.
68  Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32002L0058:EN:HTML.
69  Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:337:0011:0036:En:PDF.
In addition to updating the e-Privacy Directive, the 2009 Directive updated Directive 2002/22/E on universal 
service and users’ rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and Regulation (EC) 
N. 2006/2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer 
protection laws.
70  Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32006L0024:EN:HTML.
71  Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:350:0060:01:EN:HTML.
72  For the notion that EU data protection law is comprehensive see e.g. Monique Altheim, “The Review 
of the EU Data Protection Framework v. The State of Online Consumer Privacy in the US”, EDiscoveryMap, 
March 17, 2011, available at: http://ediscoverymap.com/2011/03/the-review-of-the-eu-data-protection-
framework-v-the-state-of-online-consumer-privacy-in-the-us; “Data Protection in the European Union”, 
available at: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/guide/guide-ukingdom_en.pdf
73  This limitation of the scope of EU law resulted from the three-pillar structure which the Lisbon Treaty 
abolished. For a brief overview of the relations between the three pillars, the Lisbon Treaty and data 

Security and Privacy
46
in November 2010 the European Commission stated that the Lisbon Treaty 
provided an opportunity “to lay down comprehensive and coherent rules on 
data protection for all sectors, including police and criminal justice. Under the 
review, data retained for law enforcement purposes should also be covered by 
the new legislative framework.”74 In particular, the Commission’s policy review 
recognized, as will be discussed below, that in order to protect individuals’ 
privacy, amendments are needed to Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA 
on Personal Data and Police and Judicial Cooperation.75
The Data Protection Directive
Scope
As discussed above, United States constitutional law limits only government 
activity, and the only further limits that federal law places on the collection, use 
and transfer of personal data consist of legislation and regulations that apply 
only to certain types of data collected by certain types of private or governmental 
entities (e.g. the Right to Financial Privacy Act (RFPA), the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPPA), the Cable Communications 
Policy Act of 1984 (Cable Act), the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (VPPA), 
the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) and the Privacy Act of 1974 (applying only 
to federal agencies)).76 By contrast, the EU Data Protection Directive regulates 
protection in the EU, see Daniel Cooper, Henriette Tielemans, and David Fink, “The Lisbon Treaty and 
Data Protection: What’s Next for Europe’s Privacy Rules?” The Privacy Advisor, at http://www.cov.com/
files/Publication/44dd09f7-3015-4b37-b02e-7fe07d1403f4/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/8a89a612-
f202-410b-b0c8-8c9b34980318/The%20Lisbon%20Treaty%20and%20Data%20Protection%20
What%E2%80%99s%20Next%20for%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20Privacy%20Rules.pdf
74  EUROPA Press Releases Rapid, “European Commission Sets Out Strategy to Strengthen EU Data Protection 
Rules”, IP/10/1462, Brussels, November 4, 2010, available at http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.
do?reference=IP/10/1462. The full text of the Commission’s policy review, Communication from the Commission 
to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, 
“A Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection in the European Union”, IP/10/1462, Brussels, November 
4, 2010 (“Commission, ‘A Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection”) is available at http://ec.europa.
eu/justice/news/consulting_public/0006/com_2010_609_en.pdf. On the basis of the policy review and public 
consultation, the Commission intends to propose legislation in 2011 revising EU data protection law.
The European Commission, comprising Commissioners from each EU country, has the function of representing and 
upholding the interests of the EU as a whole by proposing new laws to Parliament and the Council, managing the 
EU’s budget and allocating funding, enforcing EU law (together with the Court of Justice) and representing the EU 
internationally, for example, by negotiating agreements between the EU and other countries. See Europa, “European 
Commission”, at http://europa.eu/about-eu/institutions-bodies/european-commission/index_en.htm.
75  Such amendment of the Council Framework Decision might assuage one scholar’s concern that “[i]n the 
field of data-related police cooperation the importance of the EU is increasing. . . These developments on 
[sic] intelligence-led policing create enormous problems of legal protection, privacy and control as the legal 
framework of the EU does not focus on the rule of law questions in regard to police cooperation.” Konrad 
Lachmayer, “European Police Cooperation and its Limits: From Intelligence-led to Coercive Measures”, in The Outer 
Limits of European Union Law, ed. Catherine Barnard and Okeoghene Odudu (Oxford: Hart Publishing 2009), 106–07.
76  For an interesting discussion of how the development of the regulatory state under the New Deal may 
have led to diminished Fourth Amendment protections for records kept by third parties, see William J. Stuntz, 
“Privacy’s Problem and the Law of Criminal Procedure”, Michigan Law Review 93 (1995): 1016.

IV. Divergent Formalities
47
the collection, use and distribution of all records about individuals by private 
parties, except when this is done “by a natural person in the course of a purely 
personal or household activity.”77
The broad scope of the Data Protection Directive comes from its application to 
all automatic processing of personal data and to all non-automatic processing of 
personal data that are contained or intended to be contained in filing systems 
that are structured so as to make personal data readily accessible. Processing 
is defined as any automatic or non-automatic operations on data, “such as 
collection, recording, organization, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, 
consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making 
available, alignment or combination, blocking, erasure or destruction.”78 Under 
the Directive, personal data include any information pertaining to an identified 
person or to a person who can be directly or indirectly identified, “in particular 
by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors specific to his 
physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity.” 79
Although the data controllers on whom the Directive imposes obligations 
include public authorities and agencies as well as natural persons and private 
legal entities, the Directive does not apply to data processing in connection 
with government activity that the EU was not empowered to regulate before 
the Lisbon Treaty. Accordingly, the Directive does not regulate “processing 
operations concerning public security, defence, State security (including the 
economic well-being of the State when the processing operation relates to State 
security matters) and the activities of the State in areas of criminal law.”80 Nor 
does the Directive apply to the “processing of sound and image data, such as . 
. . video surveillance” where this is done “for the purposes of public security, 
defence, national security, or in the course of State activities relating to the 
area of criminal law.”81 Even where the Directive applies, governments may 
enact legislation limiting the rights to access data and gain information that 
the Directive grants to individuals and restricting the obligations in regard to 
the quality of data that the Directive imposes on data controllers when such 
legislation is necessary to safeguard a broad variety of state functions. Article 
12 of the Directive lists the state functions that may justify restrictions on 
the Directive’s protections as national security, defense, public security, the 
prevention, investigation and prosecution of crime or professional breaches of 
ethics, important economic or financial interests of a State or the EU (including 
77  Data Protection Directive, Article 3, Section 2. See also ibid., Recital 12.
78  Ibid., Art. 2(b).
79  Ibid., Art. 2(a).
80  Ibid., Art. 3, Sec. 2.
81  Ibid., Recital 16. The video-surveillance that the Directive fails to regulate includes the use of CCTV in 
the United Kingdom which, with three million cameras in use, was the most extensive in the world as of 2009. 
See Alan Travis, “Lords: CCTV is Threat to Freedom”, The Guardian, Feb. 9, 2009, available at: http://www.
guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/feb/06/surveillance-freedom-peers.

Security and Privacy
48
monetary, budgetary and taxation matters) and monitoring, inspection, or 
regulatory functions that are connected, even occasionally, to the state’s exercise 
of its powers in regard to public security and the preventing, investigating or 
prosecuting of crime or professional breaches of ethics or the state’s or EU’s 
important economic or financial interests. States may also limit data subjects’ 
rights to information and access, and data controllers’ obligations in regard to 
the quality of data in order to protect data subjects or the rights and freedoms 
of others.
Where it applies, the Directive requires EU countries to enact legislation that 
grants data subjects the following principal protections.
When can personal data be processed?
Sensitive data
The Directive imposes especially stringent conditions on the processing of 
sensitive data “revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or 
philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, [or] concerning health or sex 
life.”82  States are to prohibit the processing of sensitive data without the explicit 
consent of the data subject except where such processing is necessary for the 
fulfillment of the data controller’s rights and obligations under employment law, 
for the vital interests of the data subject or another where the data subject 
is physically or legally incapable of consenting to the data processing, or for 
health-related reasons where the processing is done by persons who are legally 
obligated to confidentiality. Trades unions, political and religious groups and 
other non-profit entities with religious, political or philosophical aims may also 
process sensitive data about their members without the members’ consent if this 
is done in the course of their legitimate activities with appropriate guidelines 
and if the data are not disclosed to third parties without the data subject’s 
consent.
States are empowered to enact additional exceptions to the requirement that 
sensitive data not be processed without the subject’s consent for “reasons of 
substantial public interest”, subject “to the provision of suitable safeguards”,83 
and they are also free to determine when “a national identification number or 
any other identification of general application may be processed.”84 States may 
also enact exceptions, subject to specific legally established safeguards, to the 
rule that the processing of data relating to criminal offenses, convictions or 
security measures is to be controlled by official authorities.85
82  Ibid., Art. 8.
83  Ibid., Art.8, sec.4.
84  Ibid., Art.8, sec.7.
85  Ibid., Art.8, sec.5.

IV. Divergent Formalities
49
Other personal data
For other personal data, there are much broader exceptions to the requirement 
that data processing occur only with the subject’s unambiguous consent.86 Data 
may be processed in order to enable a data subject to enter into a contract, 
if necessary for the execution of a contract to which he or she is a party or 
if necessary to fulfill the data controller’s legal obligations or to protect the 
data subject’s vital interests. In addition, processing may occur where this is 
necessary for the public interest or for the exercise of official authority by the 
data controller or a third party to whom the data is disclosed. The legitimate 
interests of either the data controller or third party may also allow data to 
be processed without the subject’s consent so long as these interests are not 
overridden by the data subject’s rights to privacy or other fundamental rights.
However, the processing of non-sensitive personal data is limited by the data 
subject’s right to object. Article 14 of the Directive provides that at least 
with regard to data whose processing is justified by the public interest or the 
legitimate interests or official functions of data controllers or third parties, a 
data subject has the right to object “on compelling legitimate grounds relating 
to his particular situation” at any time, and the processing must stop if the 
objection is justified.87 Although the right to object does not apply where states 
have “otherwise provided by national legislation”, the Directive prohibits 
states from limiting data subjects’ right to object to the processing of personal 
data for direct marketing purposes on request and free of charge whenever 
data controllers anticipate such use of their data.88 Data subjects must also be 
informed before their data are disclosed for the first time to third parties or used 
on these parties’ behalf for direct marketing purposes, and explicitly offered the 
right to object free of charge to such disclosures or uses.89
The quality of data
The obligations of data controllers under Article 6 to ensure the quality of data 
include ensuring that processing is lawful and fair, that data are accurate and 
up-to-date and that reasonable steps are taken to rectify or erase inaccurate or 
incomplete data. In addition, data are to be collected only for specified, explicit 
and legitimate purposes and are not to be further processed for purposes that 
are incompatible with the original purpose of collection. The data controller’s 
86  Ibid., Art. 7. Under the Directive, a data subject is deemed to consent only if there is a “freely given 
specific indication of his wishes by which the data subject signifies his agreement to personal data relating 
to him being processed.” Ibid., Art. 2 (h). This requirement of explicit consent contrasts with the notion of 
implicit consent that underlies much of United States law, including, among other instances, the lack of legal 
protection for information revealed to third parties, the notion of consensual wiretapping and the notion that 
people consent to certain uses of their data unless they opt out.
87  Ibid., Art. 14 (a).
88  Ibid., Art. 14 (a) and (b).
89  Ibid., Art. 14(b).

Security and Privacy
50
obligations with regard to the quality of data also include ensuring that data 
be relevant and adequate to the stated purpose for collection and/or further 
processing, and that no more data than are needed for the stated purpose are 
collected or processed. Moreover, data are to be kept in a form that permits the 
identification of data subjects for no more time than is necessary to fulfill the 
stated purposes for collection and/or processing.
Data subjects’ rights to information and access
Articles 10 and 11 of the Directive provide that, in regard to personal data 
obtained from either data subjects themselves or other sources, data subjects 
have the right to be informed of the purposes of the intended processing of the 
data and the identity of the data controller and any of his or her representatives. 
Where fairness to the data subject requires, he or she is also entitled to be 
informed of the recipients of the data and of his or her rights to access and to 
rectify data. Where the data subject is the source of personal data, he or she may 
also be entitled to learn whether replying to questions is mandatory, as well as 
the possible consequences of not replying. Where data is collected from sources 
other than the data subject, the subject may be entitled to learn the categories 
of data that the controller possesses or intends to disclose to a third party if this 
is required for the data processing to be fair.
Under Article 12, data subjects also have the right to obtain confirmation, at 
reasonable intervals and without undue expense or delay, of whether a data 
controller is processing data about them and, if so, to learn what data are being 
processed for what purposes and for what recipients. They are also entitled to 
any available information about the source of the data being processed and to 
be apprised of the logic underlying any automatic data processing operations 
that result in decisions that subject them to legal or other significant effects, 
such as determinations of creditworthiness or evaluations of their work. This 
right of access to one’s personal data is linked to a right to correct the data held 
on one. Data subjects are entitled to have incomplete or inaccurate data, or data 
whose processing does not otherwise conform to the Directive’s requirements, 
rectified, erased or blocked as appropriate and to have third parties notified of 
such changes.
Security and confidentiality of processing
Article 16 of the Directive provides that data processors and anyone acting 
under their authority or the authority of the data controller are not to process 
personal data except on the authority of the data controller.
Under Article 17, states are to mandate that data controllers “implement 
appropriate technical and organizational measures” to protect personal data from 
being accidentally or unlawfully destroyed, lost, altered, disclosed or accessed 

IV. Divergent Formalities
51
without authorization or otherwise unlawfully processed.90 Data controllers’ 
obligations to ensure the security of data apply “in particular where processing 
involves the transmission of data over a network.”91 The security provided must 
be “appropriate to the risks represented by the processing and the nature of 
the data to be protected”, taking account of “the state of the art and the cost of 
their implementation.”92 Even if they choose to have external providers perform 
the processing, data controllers remain obligated to ensure the security of data.
Transfer of data to non-EU countries
The Directive provides, in Article 25, that personal data may be transferred from 
an EU country to a third country only if the third country “ensures an adequate 
level of protection” for personal data. Adequacy is to be assessed by both the 
European Commission and individual EU countries, and beyond stating that 
adequacy should be assessed “in the light of all the circumstances surrounding 
a data transfer operation”, the Directive provides no standards for assessing 
whether a third country’s level of data protection is adequate.93
Article 26 provides a broad list of conditions under which states may allow data 
to be transferred to a third country even if the adequacy requirement is not met, 
including with the consent of the data subject, for contractual reasons, if “the 
transfer is necessary or legally required on important public interest grounds” 
and if the transfer is made from a register that is legally intended to provide 
information to the public and the legal conditions for consulting the register are 
met. In addition, individual states may authorize transfers of personal data on 
the basis of contractual obligations that data controllers impose on the entities to 
whom the data are transferred, and the Commission is empowered to decide that 
certain standard contractual clauses provide sufficient safeguards for transfers 
to countries whose overall level of data protection is inadequate.94
The Commission’s criticisms of the Data Protection Directive’s 
provisions for transfers to third countries
In its policy review of EU data protection law in November 2010, the European 
Commission opined that the ever-increasing globalization of data processing 
created a “general need to improve the current mechanisms allowing for 
international transfers of personal data, while at the same time ensuring that 
personal data are adequately protected when transferred and processed outside 
the EU and the EEA.”95 According to the Commission, “the Internet makes it 
90  Ibid., Art.17, sec. 1.
91  Ibid.
92  Ibid.
93  Ibid., Art. 25, secs. 1 and 2.
94  Ibid., Art. 26 (2) and (4).
95  Commission, “A Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection,” supra, at 2.4.1, available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/news/consulting_public/0006/com_2010_609_en.pdf.

Security and Privacy
52
much easier for data controllers established outside the European Economic 
Area (EEA) to provide services from a distance and to process personal data 
in the online environment; and it is often difficult to determine the location 
of personal data and of equipment used at any given time (e.g., in ‘cloud 
computing’ applications and services).”96
Among other things, the Commission criticized the lack of standards in 
the Directive for assessing the adequacy of a third country’s level of data 
protection, stating that “the exact requirements for recognition of adequacy 
by the Commission are currently not specified in satisfactory detail in the 
Data Protection Directive.”97 In addition, the Commission criticized the lack of 
procedural guidelines for individual states’ determinations of adequacy: “This 
situation may lead to different approaches to assessing the level of adequacy of 
third countries, or international organisations, and involves the risk that the 
level of protection of data subjects provided for in a third country is judged 
differently from one Member State to another.”98 In accord with its view that 
the Lisbon Treaty provides an opportunity for the extension of data protection 
principles to government operations, the Commission criticized “the current 
Commission standard clauses for the transfer of personal data to controllers and 
to processors [in third countries whose level of data protection is inadequate on 
the ground] that they are not designed for non-contractual situations and, for 
example, cannot be used for transfers between public administrations.”99
Enforcement mechanisms in the Data Protection Directive
Under Article 28, each EU state is required to appoint an independent 
supervisory authority (or authorities) with the power to monitor compliance 
with the Directive within its territory, including investigative powers and 
effective powers of intervening to prevent the illegal processing of data or to 
order the blocking, erasure or destruction of illegally processed data. States’ 
data supervisors are also to be empowered to bring legal proceedings when 
their state’s laws implementing the Directive are violated and to hear claims 
concerning the protection of people’s rights and freedoms with regard to 
All European Economic Area (EEA) countries, including both the EU countries and the non-EU countries of 
Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland, adhere to the Data Protection Directive. Strictly speaking, the Directive’s 
provisions for data transfers to third countries are therefore provisions for transfers to non-EEA, as opposed 
to non-EU, countries. See School of African and Oriental Studies, University of London, “Transfer Outside the 
EU”, available at: http://www.soas.ac.uk/infocomp/dpa/policy/outside.
96  Commission, 2.2.3. For an illustration of the tensions between the globalized nature of data processing 
and the EU’s attempt to protect the privacy of its citizens, see Zach Whittaker, “Microsoft Admits Patriot 
Act Can Access EU-Based Cloud Data”, ZDNet, June 28, 2011, available at: http://www.zdnet.com/blog/
igeneration/microsoft-admits-patriot-act-can-access-eu-based-cloud-data/11225.
97  Ibid., 2.4.1.
98  Ibid.
99  Ibid.

IV. Divergent Formalities
53
the processing of personal data, including claims about the lawfulness of the 
abridgement of rights under the Directive for reasons of national security or 
other state purposes.
Although a state’s supervisory authority may provide individuals with 
administrative remedies, each EU state is also required, under Articles 22–24, to 
provide individuals with judicial remedies for violations of their rights under 
the state’s laws implementing the Directive, including the right to have data 
controllers compensate them for damages.
The Article 29 Working Party
Article 29 creates a Working Party comprising one representative each 
of the data supervisory authority (or authorities) of each EU state, the data 
supervisory authority (or authorities) established for EU institutions and bodies 
and the European Commission, for the purpose of contributing to the uniform 
implementation of the Data Protection Directive in the EU. Under Article 30, 
the Working Party is empowered to provide the Commission with opinions on 
the levels of protection of personal data in the EU and in third countries, to 
advise the Commission on amendments to the Data Protection Directive or other 
measures to safeguard individuals’ rights and freedoms regarding personal data 
and to make recommendations on its own initiative on all matters relating to the 
protection of personal data. The Working Party is to present publicly available 
annual reports to the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council on 
the processing of personal data in the EU and third countries.
The e-Privacy Directive
Scope and relation to the Data Protection Directive
The principal United States legislation on telecommunications privacy, the Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 1986, is widely criticized for being based on 
outmoded assumptions about the technology it regulates.100 By contrast, in enacting 
the e-Privacy Directive in 2002, the European Parliament and the Council recognized 
that the “development of the information society is characterised by the introduction 
of new electronic communications services.”101 It went on to say, “New advanced 
100  See e.g. Mike Masnick, “Privacy: Senator Leahy Wants to Update Digital Privacy Law: Some Good, Some 
Bad”, TechDirt, May 17, 2011, available at: http://www.techdirt.com/blog/?tag=ecpa; IAPP (International 
Assoc. of Privacy Professionals), “House Subcommittee Hears Call for ECPA Updates”, June 25, 2010, available 
at: https://www.privacyassociation.org/.../2010_06_25_house_subcommittee_hears_call_for_ecpa_updates.
101  Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 
communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (the “e-Privacy Directive”), Recital 5, 
available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32002L0058:EN:HTML.

Security and Privacy
54
digital technologies are currently being introduced in public communications 
networks in the Community, which give rise to specific requirements concerning the 
protection of personal data and privacy of the user.”102
The provisions of the e-Privacy Directive apply to personal data processed in 
connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications 
services and networks. Thus its protections of privacy extend to telephone calls 
and any voice, text, sound or image messages sent over public communications 
networks and capable of being stored in the network or on recipients’ 
terminals, and also apply to users’ terminal equipment and information stored 
therein.103 However, when communications are made over non-public electronic 
communications services and networks (e.g. university or corporate networks) 
the Data Protection Directive applies. In addition, the Data Protection Directive 
applies to any matters pertaining to the processing of personal data in connection 
with publicly available services or networks that the e-Privacy Directive does 
not specifically address.104
Like the Data Protection Directive, the e-Privacy Directive does not protect 
individuals’ privacy against any government action that the EU was not 
empowered to regulate before the Lisbon Treaty. Therefore, the e-Privacy 
Directive does not limit individual states’ power to intercept or otherwise 
limit the privacy of electronic communications when this is “necessary for the 
protection of public security, defence, State security (including the economic 
well-being of the State when the activities relate to State security matters) 
and the enforcement of criminal law.”105 However, as indicated above, and as 
the Directive recognizes, the ECHR as interpreted by the European Court of 
Human Rights limits government power to restrict the privacy of electronic 
communications. The Directive states that any government restrictions “must 
be appropriate, strictly proportionate to the intended purpose, and necessary 
within a democratic society.”106
The most important provisions of the e-Privacy Directive can be summarized 
as follows.
Confidentiality of communications
As discussed above, the Wiretap Provision of the ECPA accords individuals more 
protection against real-time interception of communications than the Stored 
102  Ibid. In recognition of the continuing need for the law to keep abreast of technological changes, the 
e-Privacy Directive was amended by Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 
available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:337:0011:0036:En:PDF.
103  Ibid., E-Privacy Directive, Articles 2(e) and (h) and 3(1), and Recital 14.
104  Ibid., Recital 10.
105  Ibid., Recital 11.
106  Ibid. See also ibid., Art. 15(1).

IV. Divergent Formalities
55
Communications Provision provides against access to communications stored 
on terminals or other telecommunications equipment. By contrast, Article 5 
requires EU states to enact laws prohibiting “listening, tapping, storage, or 
other kinds of interception or surveillance of communications and related traffic 
data” by anyone other than the parties to communications, unless they receive 
the consent of all the parties. This prohibition of all kinds of “interception or 
surveillance of communications” seems broad enough to cover both real-time 
interceptions and access to stored communications.
Article 5’s prohibition of interception or surveillance of communications extends 
to “traffic data”, defined in Article 2 as “any data processed for the purpose of 
the conveyance of a communication on an electronic communications network or 
for the billing thereof”. Thus, the term “traffic data” in the e-Privacy Directive 
includes, but is not limited to, what US law counts as addressing information: 
the telephone numbers between which calls are made, the IP addresses of 
accessed websites and the “to” and “from” information on email headers. This 
implies that, in contrast to the US Constitution and the ECPA and in accordance 
with the European Court of Human Rights’ interpretation of the ECHR, the 
e-Privacy Directive accords equal protection to the contents of communications 
and associated addressing information.
Exceptions to the e-Privacy Directive’s limits on interception or 
surveillance
As implied above, the e-Privacy Directive’s broad prohibition of interception 
or surveillance does not limit a state’s power to authorize interception or 
surveillance of communications and traffic data for national security, criminal 
defense and related state purposes.107
The only other exceptions to Article 5’s prohibition of interception or 
surveillance are for technical storage or access to information stored in a user or 
subscriber’s terminal by a telecommunication provider for the sole purpose of 
transmitting communications.108  In addition, people may be legally authorized 
to record communications and related traffic data in the course of lawful business 
practices for the purposes of providing evidence of business transactions and 
communications.109
Retention of traffic data
Article 6 of the e-Privacy Directive limits telecommunication service or network 
providers’ use of the information that Article 5 allows them to store and access 
by requiring providers to erase or make anonymous traffic data when they are 
107  Ibid., Art. 5(1) and 15(1).
108  Ibid., Art. 5(1) and (3).
109  Ibid., Art.5(2).

Security and Privacy
56
longer needed for the transmission of a communication, for billing purposes or 
for marketing purposes to which the user or subscriber has consented. Article 
15(1) carves out a major exception, however, to the Article 6 limits on the 
retention of data, providing that member states may “adopt legislative measures 
providing for the retention of data for a limited period justified on the grounds 
laid down in this paragraph”, namely, “to safeguard national security (i.e. State 
security), defence, public security, and the prevention, investigation, detection 
and prosecution of criminal offences or of unauthorised use of the electronic 
communication system.”
Although the e-Privacy Directive thus permits individual states to enact data 
retention legislation, the Data Retention Directive requires all EU states to 
mandate the retention of traffic data by telecommunications providers. The 
Data Retention Directive’s provisions for the retention of traffic data are highly 
controversial.
Location data
The e-Privacy Directive defines location data as “any data processed in an 
electronic communications network, indicating the geographic position of the 
terminal equipment of a user of a publicly available communications service.110 
While some location data are part of the traffic data needed for transmitting or 
billing electronic communications (e.g. the location of a mobile phone vis-à-vis 
cell phone towers), Article 9 applies to processing of location data that are not 
part of traffic data. Subject to a state’s decision to legislate an exception for law 
enforcement or other purposes under Article 15(1), location data other than 
traffic data can be processed only if made anonymous, or if the subscriber or user 
of the electronic communications service or network consents to the processing 
after being informed of the purposes of the processing, the types of data that 
will be processed and any third party to whom data will be transmitted. The 
user or subscriber must also be able to withdraw consent at any time.
Security of processing and data breach notification
Like Article 17 of the Data Protection Directive, Article 4 of the e-Privacy 
Directive contains provisions for the security of personal data. However, unlike 
the Data Protection Directive provision, the e-Privacy Directive provides 
for notifying individuals in the case of breaches of personal data. The 2009 
Amendment to the e-Privacy Directive considerably strengthened its data breach 
notification requirements by providing that not only affected individuals and 
subscribers but also a competent national authority must be notified without 
110  Ibid., Art. 2 (c).

IV. Divergent Formalities
57
delay. The national authority may adopt guidelines for notification and for 
security practices and will audit the adequacy of providers’ measures to notify 
individuals and mitigate the effects of the breach.111
The need for more comprehensive data breach notification
In its policy review of EU data protection law in November 2010, the European 
Commission recognized the importance of data breach notification and suggested 
that the 2009 Amendment’s provisions for notifications of data breaches in 
telecommunications services and networks need to be extended to other fields.
It is . . . important for individuals to be informed when their data 
are accidentally or unlawfully destroyed, lost, altered, accessed by or 
disclosed to unauthorised persons. The recent revision of the e-Privacy 
Directive introduced a mandatory personal data breach notification 
covering, however, only the telecommunications sector. Given that risks 
of data breaches also exist in other sectors (e.g. the financial sector), the 
Commission will examine the modalities for extending the obligation to 
notify personal data breaches to other sectors.112
The need for comprehensive and uniform standards for data breach notification 
may be even greater in the US than in the EU. An article on the Citigroup data 
breach in June 2011 reported that, “Security is . . . hampered by a patchwork of 
data protection laws and regulatory agencies, each with limited mandates. ‘We 
need a uniform national standard for data security and data breach notification,’ 
said Representative Mary Bono Mack, a California Republican who is pushing 
for legislation on better consumer safeguards.”113
The Data Retention Directive
The Data Retention Directive was issued in 2006 in response to the 2004 Madrid 
terrorist bombings and the 2005 London terrorist bombings.114
111  See Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Article 2(4).
112  Commission, “A Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection”, 2.1.2.
113  Eric Dash, “City Data Theft Points Up a Nagging Problem”, NY Times, June 10, 2011, B1 and 7. See also 
Editorial, “The Cloud Darkens: As Online Security Threats Grow, Companies and Government Are Scarily 
Unprepared”, NY Times, June 30, 2011, A26.
114  Data Retention Directive, Recitals 8, 10, available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=CELEX:32006L0024:EN:HTML. See also European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS), “Opinion of 
the European Data Protection Supervisor on the Evaluation Report from the Commission to the Council and 
the European Parliament on the Data Retention Directive (Directive 2006/24/EC)”, May 31, 2011, I.2, para. 
4, available at: http://www.edps.europa.eu/EDPSWEB/webdav/site/mySite/shared/Documents/Consultation/
Opinions/2011/11-05-30_Evaluation_Report_DRD_EN.pdf

Security and Privacy
58
Scope
The Directive requires EU states to enact laws requiring providers of publicly 
available telecommunications services and networks to retain traffic and 
location data that they generate or process in the course of providing their 
communications services, as well as related data needed to identify the 
subscriber or user of the service. Article 5 of the Directive lists the data to be 
retained as: data identifying the source and destinations of communications, 
including telephone numbers, user IDs and IP addresses and names and 
addresses of associated subscribers or registered users; data identifying the 
date, time, and duration of communications; data necessary to identify the type 
of communication (i.e. the ISP or telephone service used); data necessary to 
identify the users’ equipment (e.g. the International Mobile Subscriber Identity 
(IMSI) and International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) for both parties to 
a mobile phone conversation); and data necessary to identify the location of 
mobile communications equipment. By contrast, data revealing the contents of 
communications are not to be stored.
Article 6 of the Directive requires individual states to enact legislation requiring 
the listed data to be retained for a period, to be selected by each state, of between 
six months and two years from the time of a communication.
Access to the data
States have broad discretion as to the conditions for government officials’ access 
to the retained data. Although the Directive specifies that the retained data be 
available only “for the purpose of the investigation, detection and prosecution 
of serious crime”, each state may provide its own legal definition of a serious 
crime.115 In addition, if a state’s law so provides, data may be retained for any or 
all of the further purposes beyond the investigation, detection and prosecution 
of serious crimes for which Article 15(1) of the e-Privacy Directive allows states 
to order the retention of data.116
Article 4 further provides that only “competent national authorities in specific 
cases and in accordance with national law” are to access retained data and 
that the procedures and conditions for access are to accord with necessity 
and proportionality requirements. However, each state is left to define the 
requirements of necessity and proportionality in its own laws “subject to the 
relevant provisions of European Union law or public international law, and in 
particular the ECHR as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights.”
115  Ibid., Recital 21 and Art. 1. See also EDPS, II, para. 24.
116  Data Protection Directive, Recital 12 (“Article 15(1) of Directive EC 2002/58/ED continues to apply to 
data . . . the retention of which is not specifically required under this Directive and which therefore falls 
outside the scope thereof, and to retention for purposes, including judicial purposes, other than those covered 
by this Directive”). See also EDPS, IV.3, paras. 71 and 72.

IV. Divergent Formalities
59
States’ resistance to implementing the Directive
Although EU states were required to enact laws implementing the Directive 
by September 15, 2007, as of April 2011 Austria and Sweden had not enacted 
such laws. After the European Court of Justice ruled against Austria on July 29, 
2010, for failing to implement the Directive, Austrian authorities transmitted 
drafts of implementing legislation to the Commission. By contrast, although the 
European Court of Justice issued a similar ruling against Sweden on February 
4, 2010, the Swedish Parliament voted on March 16, 2011, to defer a vote on 
proposed implementing legislation for twelve months. The Commission then 
brought proceedings against Sweden in the European Court of Justice for a 
second time.117
In addition, the laws that Germany, Romania and the Czech Republic issued to 
implement the Directive were struck down by each of their constitutional courts 
as unconstitutional.118 Although none of the courts found that the Data Retention 
Directive was unconstitutional per se, the German Constitutional Court found 
that the German law was unconstitutional because it did not contain sufficient 
protections for the security of the retained data or sufficient limitations on law 
enforcement access to the data. The German Court further reasoned that since 
data retention created a perception of surveillance that could interfere with 
people’s exercise of fundamental rights, six months was the maximum period 
for which data could be retained.
Relying on decisions of the European Court of Human Rights, the Romanian 
Constitutional Court found that the Romanian law’s imposition of an obligation 
to retain all traffic data for a continuous period of six months was too ambiguous 
in its scope and purpose and had too few safeguards to be compatible with 
Article 8 of the ECHR.
The Czech Constitutional Court found that the Czech law’s definitions of the 
officials who were competent to access data and its procedures for access and 
use of data were not sufficiently clear to protect people’s fundamental rights 
against abuse of power by government officials.
117  EUROPA – Press Releases – Frequently Asked Questions: Evaluation Report of the Data Retention 
Directive, April 18, 2011, available at: http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/11
/251&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en.
118  Ibid. See also European Commission, Evaluation Report on the Data Retention Directive (Directive 
2006/24/EC), April 18, 2011 (“Commission Evaluation of Data Retention”), Sec. 4.9, available at: http://
ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/malmstrom/archive/20110418_data_retention_evaluation_en.pdf.
The decisions of the Romanian, German and Czech Constitutional Courts are Decision No. 1258 from 8 October 
2009 of the Romanian Constitutional Court, Romanian Official Monitor No 789, 23 November 2009; judgement 
of the Bundesverfassungsgericht 1 BvR 256/08, of 2 March 2010; Official Gazette of 1 April 2011, Judgment of 
the Constitutional Court of 22 March on the provisions of section 97 paragraph 3 and 4 of Act No. 127/2005 
Coll. on electronic communications and amending certain related acts as amended, and Decree No 485/2005 
Coll. on the data retention and transmission to competent authorities.

Security and Privacy
60
On May 5, 2010, the Irish High Court granted a civil rights group the right to 
refer the question of the legality of the Data Retention Directive’s requirement 
of blanket and indiscriminate retention of individuals’ traffic, location and 
subscriber data to the European Court of Justice.119
The European Commission’s evaluation report
In accord with Article 14 of the Data Retention Directive, the Commission 
issued an evaluation report on the Directive to the Council and European 
Parliament on April 18, 2011. Despite acknowledging that the “evidence, in the 
form of statistics and examples, provided by Member States is limited in some 
respects”, the Commission concluded that the EU should continue to require the 
retention of traffic, location and subscriber data. According to the Commission, 
the evidence established “the very important role of retained data for criminal 
investigation. These data provide valuable leads and evidence in the prevention 
and prosecution of crime and ensuring criminal justice.”120
The Commission voiced its intent to propose revisions in the data retention 
framework on the basis of a thorough assessment of “the implications for 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the criminal justice system and of law 
enforcement, for privacy and for costs to public administration and operators, 
of more stringent regulation of storage, access to and use of traffic data.”121 The 
possible changes whose impact the Commission deemed particularly worthy of 
assessment were:
• consistency in limitation of the purpose of data retention and types of crime 
for which retained data may be accessed and used;
• more harmonisation of, and possibly shortening, the periods of mandatory 
data retention;
• ensuring independent supervision of requests for access and of the overall 
data retention access regime applied in all Member States;
• limiting the authorities authorised to access the data;
• reducing the data categories to be retained;
• guidance on technical and organisational security measures for access to data 
including handover procedures;
• guidance on use of data including the prevention of data mining; and
• developing feasible metrics and reporting procedures to facilitate comparisons 
of application and evaluation of a future instrument.122
119  Commission Evaluation of Data Retention, 7.2.
120  Ibid., 8.1.
121  Ibid., 8.5 and 8.6.
122  Ibid., 8.5.

IV. Divergent Formalities
61
The Commission also proposed to consider how data retention might be 
complemented by data preservation or, in other words, court orders that 
obligate operators to retain data prospectively on specific individuals who are 
suspected of being engaged in crime.
The opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor
The European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) issued an opinion on May 
31, 2011, that was highly critical of both the Data Retention Directive and the 
Commission’s Evaluation Report. Contrary to the Commission’s exclusion of the 
possibility of repealing the Data Retention Directive, the EDPS claimed that 
the quantitative and qualitative data the Commission had obtained from EU 
states were not sufficient to show that data retention was necessary for law 
enforcement purposes. In particular, the EDPS criticized the Commission for 
only assessing data from states that had implemented the Directive and not 
comparing the criminal justice outcomes there with outcomes in states in which 
the Directive either had not been implemented or had been annulled.123
Furthermore, according to the EDPS, the Commission had not adequately 
considered whether data retention could be replaced by data preservation or 
some other less intrusive method of providing law enforcement with data.
[I]t is unfortunate that in the conclusions of the report the Commission 
commits itself to examining whether – and if so how – an EU approach 
on data preservation might complement (i.e. not replace) data retention. 
. . the EDPS recommends the Commission during the impact assessment 
also to consider whether a system of data preservation, or other 
alternative means, could fully or partly substitute the current data 
retention scheme.124
The EDPS also faulted the Commission for failing to recognize that even if a 
data retention regime is necessary the Directive’s restrictions on privacy were 
not proportionate to the purposes served. In particular, the EDPS claimed that 
the Directive left individual states too much discretion over the purposes for 
which retained data can be used and as to the authorities with access to the 
123  EDPS, IV.1, para. 50. In accord with the EDPS’s recognition of the need to compare crime control 
outcomes in EU countries that had and had not implemented the Directive, a recent study by the Scientific 
Services of the German Parliament of the effects of data retention on crime clearance rates in EU Member 
States concluded that, “In most States crime clearance rates have not changed significantly between 2005 and 
2010. Only in Latvia did the crime clearance rate rise significantly in 2007. However, this is related to a new 
Criminal Procedure Law and is not reported to be connected to the transposition of the EU Data Retention 
Directive.” See A.K. Vorrat, “Police Statistics Prove Data Retention Superfluous”, EDRI-gram, Number 9.12, 
June 15, 2011, http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number9.12. Statistics published by Germany’s Federal Crime 
Agency show that after the Constitutional Court’s annulment of the German law implementing the Data 
Retention Directive on March 3, 2010, “registered crime continued to decline and the crime clearance rate was 
the highest ever recorded (56.0%).” Vorrat, supra.
124  EDPS, IV.1, para.57.

Security and Privacy
62
data.125 Pointing to statistics in the Commission’s evaluation report showing that 
86% of requests were for access to data that had been retained for no more 
than six months, 12% were for access to data retained between six and twelve 
months and two per cent were for access to data retained for more than one year, 
the EDPS further concluded that the Directive allowed states to retain data for 
longer periods than necessary.126 The requirement of proportionality was also 
violated, according to the EDPS, because the absence of adequate measures for 
the security of data in the Directive caused the privacy of personal data to be 
unnecessarily threatened.127
Further, the EDPS opined that the Directive failed to conform to the requirement, 
established by the European Court of Human Rights, that intrusions on privacy 
be foreseeable or, in other words, that they “have a legal basis in law and . . . 
be compatible with the rule of law.”128 The absence of predictability was created 
by the Directive’s leaving states free to determine which officials are entitled to 
access retained data, and by the Directive’s leaving individual states to define 
what counts as a serious crime and whether data can be accessed, under Article 
15(1) of the e-Privacy Directive, for purposes other than combating serious crime.
Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA on Personal Data and 
Police and Judicial Cooperation129
Scope
Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA is the first EU legislation that 
establishes common standards for all EU states with regard to personal data 
processed as part of policing and criminal justice operations. The Decision 
governs the processing, “for the purpose of the prevention, investigation, 
detection, or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal 
penalties”, of personal data exchanged between EU states.130 The Decision also 
125  Ibid., IV.2, para. 59.
126  Ibid., IV.2, para. 60 and n.51.
127  Cf. Lukas Feiler, “The Legality of the Data Retention Directive in Light of the Fundamental Right to 
Privacy and Data Protection”, European Journal of Law & Technology 1, no. 3 (2010), available at: http://ejlt.
org//article/view/29/75 (arguing that the Directive’s restrictions on privacy conform to the requirement of 
necessity, but are not proportional to the stated purpose of combating serious crime, therefore violating the 
rights to privacy and data protection in articles 7 and 8 of the EU Charter); Lachmayer, “European Police 
Cooperation and its Limits”, 108–09 (“The scope of the directive is very broad as the categories of data to 
be retained are manifold and the retention period is ‘not less than six months and not more than two years 
from the date of the communication.’ Its effects on the general human rights situation are dramatic.”). But see 
Francesca Bignami, “Privacy and Law Enforcement in the European Union: The Data Retention Directive”, 
Chicago Journal of International Law 8 (2007): 233 (finding that “privacy – as guaranteed under Article 8 of 
the European Convention on Human Rights and the Council of Europe’s Convention on Data Protection – is 
adequately protected in the Directive”).
128  EDPS, IV.3.
129  Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:350:0060:01:EN:HTML.
130  Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA, Article 1(2)(a).

IV. Divergent Formalities
63
applies to individual EU states’ transmission of personal data received from other 
EU states to private parties for criminal justice purposes and the prevention of 
serious threats to public safety or serious harm to human rights.131
The scope of the Framework Decision is limited by the fact that it does not 
replace “various sector-specific legislative instruments for police and judicial 
co-operation in criminal matters adopted at the EU level, in particular those 
governing the functioning of Europol, Eurojust, the Schengen Information 
System (SIS) and the Customs Information System (CIS).”132
In addition, the Framework Decision only partially governs EU states’ transfers 
to non-EU states or international bodies of data received from other EU states. 
Article 13 requires EU states to provide that such transfers will occur only for 
criminal justice purposes and that data will be given only to non-EU authorities 
responsible for those purposes. In addition, personal data are to be transferred 
only to non-EU states or international bodies that ensure adequate levels of data 
protection and only with the consent of the EU state that originally provided 
the data. However, Article 13 of the Framework Decision leaves individual states 
to decide on the conditions under which they will consent to such transfers 
of data. In addition, the adequacy of the level of data protection in a non-EU 
country or international body is left up to the laws of the state that provided 
the data, and the conditions for waiving the requirement of an adequate level 
of data protection are left up to the laws of the state that transferred the data.
EU regulation of the use of personal data for policing and criminal justice is 
further limited as the Framework Decision does not apply to the collection, 
use or transmission of personal data within the confines of individual EU 
states, or to an EU state’s transmission of data received from another EU state to 
private parties, such as defense lawyers and victims, in the context of criminal 
proceedings.133 Nor does the Framework Decision apply to data received by 
an EU state from a non-EU country or to the processing of data for “essential 
national security interests and specific intelligence activities in the field of 
national security.”134
Requirements for the processing of data
The Framework Decision’s principal requirements for the processing of data 
exchanged between EU states for criminal justice purposes can be compared 
131  Ibid., Article 14.
132  Commission, ‘A Comprehensive Approach on Personal Data Protection”, 2.3; Council Framework 
Decision 2008/977/JHA, Art. 1(2)(b) and (c), Recitals 39-41.
133  Ibid., Recitals 9 and 18.
134  Ibid., Article 1 (4); Information Policy Division, UK Ministry of Justice, Circular 2011/01, “Council 
Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters 2008/977/JHA”, Jan. 25, 2011, 2, available at: http://www.justice.gov.uk/
publications/docs/data-protection-framework-decision-circular.pdf.

Security and Privacy
64
with those that the Data Protection Directive imposes for the processing of 
personal data for other purposes. While the Framework Decision agrees with 
the Directive in imposing especially stringent conditions for the processing of 
sensitive data “revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious 
or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership, [or] concerning health or 
sex life”, it does not follow the Directive in making the data subject’s consent 
the principal requirement for such processing.135 Instead, Article 6 of the 
Framework Decision allows sensitive data to be processed “only when this is 
strictly necessary and when the national law provides adequate safeguards.”
With regard to other personal data, Article 3 of the Framework Decision 
provides, similarly to Article 6 of the Data Protection Directive, that data are to 
be collected only for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes, are not to be 
further processed for purposes that are incompatible with the original purpose 
for collection and are to be relevant and adequate to the stated purpose for 
collection and/or further processing. In addition, no more data than are needed 
for the stated purposes are to be collected or processed. Under Article 11 of the 
Framework Decision, the permissible purposes for which data can be further 
processed beyond those for which they were originally transmitted are broad, 
extending to additional criminal justice purposes and related judicial and 
administrative proceedings, the prevention of serious and immediate threats to 
public security and any other purpose to which the EU state that transmitted 
the data consents in advance or to which the data subject consents in accord 
with national law.
Although the Framework Decision also resembles the Data Protection Directive in 
requiring that personal data be kept accurate and up-to-date and providing data 
subjects with rights to information and access, these protections are weaker than 
those in the Directive. Under Article 8 of the Framework Decision, competent 
authorities are to verify the accuracy of personal data “as far as practicable” and 
to take “all reasonable steps” to ensure that inaccurate, incomplete or outdated 
personal data are not transmitted. Article 4 requires rectifying inaccurate data 
or updating or completing them where “possible and necessary”, and erasing, 
making anonymous or blocking data that are no longer needed for the original 
purposes or further purposes for which they were lawfully processed. Although 
Article 16 of the Framework Decision provides data subjects with the right to be 
informed of the collection or processing of their personal data, this right may be 
limited by the laws of both their own state and any other EU state with which 
their data are exchanged. Similarly, although Article 17 grants data subjects 
rights to receive confirmation that their personal data have or have not been 
transmitted, as well as information as to the recipients of the data and the data 
being processed, the right to access may be limited by individual EU states 
135  Data Protection Directive, Art. 8; Council Framework Decision, Art. 6.

IV. Divergent Formalities
65
where this is necessary and proportional to avoid obstructing judicial or police 
procedures, to protect public or national security or to protect data subjects or 
the rights and freedoms of others.
Perhaps reflecting increasing awareness of the risk of data breaches, the 
Framework Decision’s provisions in Article 22 for the security of data are more 
elaborate than those in the Data Protection Directive.
Enforcement
The Framework Decision requires each EU state to appoint an independent 
supervisory authority (or authorities) which may or may not be same as the Data 
Protection Supervisor appointed in accord with the Data Protection Directive.136 
Under Article 25 of the Framework Decision, each state’s supervisory authority 
(or authorities) is to have the power to advise and monitor the application of 
the Framework Decision within its territory, including investigative powers and 
effective powers of intervening to deliver opinions before the processing of data 
or to order the blocking, erasure or destruction of processed data. States are also 
to empower data supervisors to bring legal proceedings when the state’s laws 
implementing the Framework Decision are violated, and to hear individuals’ 
claims concerning the protection of their rights and freedoms regarding the 
processing of personal data.
Although Article 20 of the Framework Decision grants data subjects rights to 
judicial remedies for breaches of the rights provided to them by their state’s 
law implementing the Framework Decision, these rights may be limited by 
administrative remedies.
Criticisms of the Council Framework Decision by the EDPS and the 
European Commission
The European Data Protection Supervisor and the European Commission 
separately opined that the Council Framework Decision is an important – 
though only a first – step toward the goal of adequately protecting personal 
data in the context of policing and criminal justice.137 In regard to cross-border 
exchanges of personal data within the EU, the EDPS and the Commission agreed 
that more limits are needed on the purposes for which the Framework Decision 
allows data to be further processed. In addition, both agreed on “the need to 
136  Council Framework Decision, Recitals 33 and 34, Art. 25.
137  European Data Protection Supervisor Press Release, “EDPS Sees Adoption of Data Protection Framework 
for Police and Judicial Cooperation Only as a First Step”, Nov. 28, 2008, available at http://www.edps.europa.
eu/EDPSWEB/webdav/shared/Documents/EDPS/PressNews/Press/2008/EDPS-2008-11_DPFD_EN.pdf; 
Commission, 2.3.

Security and Privacy
66
distinguish between different categories of data subjects, such as suspects, 
criminals, witnesses and victims, to ensure that their data are processed with 
more appropriate safeguards.”138
More fundamentally, the Commission and EDPS both criticized the limitations 
on the scope of the Framework Decision, stressing the need for common EU 
law to govern exchanges of data with non-EU countries and for EU legislation 
to extend to domestic policing and criminal justice operations. Notably, 
the Commission recognized that the distinction between cross-border data 
exchanges and domestic processing of data “is difficult to make in practice and 
can complicate the actual implementation and application of the Framework 
Decision.”139
Institutional arrangements in an EU Member State: 
The Netherlands
It is now time to exemplify the institutional embodiment of the EU's privacy 
rights in a member state. We have selected the Netherlands for this purpose.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy and a representative 
parliamentary democracy. It has territory in the Caribbean (the former colonies 
of Aruba and Netherlands Antilles) as well as in Europe (the Netherlands). 
The Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands provides for the autonomy of 
the Caribbean territories. The Constitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 
provides for the regulation of the government of the Netherlands (but not of 
the government of the territories). It grants citizens an explicit right to privacy.
The monarch and the Council of Ministers of the Netherlands are the government 
of the Kingdom. The Dutch Prime Minister chairs the Council of Ministers of 
the Kingdom. Under Article 14 of the Charter, the Netherlands can conduct 
kingdom affairs if this does not affect Aruba or Netherlands Antilles; neither 
of the latter has this right. The Parliament is known as the States-General of 
the Netherlands and has two houses, the House of Representatives (which can 
propose legislation, as can the monarch) and the Senate (the upper house). 
The Netherlands is divided into twelve provinces. The Supreme Court of the 
Netherlands is the highest court. However, it cannot rule on the constitutionality 
of laws passed by the States-General or on treaties. In contrast to some countries 
in the EU, the Netherlands has no constitutional court. (There is a council 
of state that advises the government on serious judicial matters, including 
issues relating to international law.) However, the Dutch Constitution obliges 
the courts to review all domestic legislation, including acts of parliament, in 
138  EDPS, see also Commission.
139  Ibid. (footnote omitted).

IV. Divergent Formalities
67
respect of their compatibility with relevant parts of the international treaties 
to which the Netherlands is a party (for example, the European Convention 
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950). Where 
there is incompatibility, the domestic legislation must give way. In particular, it 
must give way to conventions and directives that bind all member states of the 
EU, such as the 1995 directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of Europe on the protection of personal data.
The Dutch Criminal Code defines many but not all criminal offenses. Various 
other statutes complement criminal law legislation – for example, the Economic 
Offenses Act 1950, the Narcotic Drug Offenses Act 1928 and the Military 
Criminal Code 1991. The Computer Crime Act 1993 allowed for the interception 
of all forms of telecommunications, including by means of long-distance target 
microphones.
Criminal procedure in the Netherlands has two phases: investigation by the 
police (under the direction of a public prosecutor – see below) and judicial 
investigation by an examining judge. The purpose of the police investigation is 
simply to gather evidence. Although the police have a right to ask questions of 
suspects, no one is required to answer questions put by the police. Under Dutch 
law there needs to be reasonable suspicion before a criminal investigation may 
be started. Police are able to use covert policing methods, such as surveillance, 
undercover operatives and the use of informants, under the Special Powers of 
Investigation Act 2000.
The Dutch police system is based on the Police Act of 1993. Law enforcement 
in the Netherlands is provided by twenty-five regional police forces and the 
Dutch National Police Agency (KLPD). The latter is responsible for the transport 
systems of the Netherlands (e.g. motorways and waterways). The National 
Criminal Investigation Department (responsible for serious and organized crime 
and cross-regional crimes) comes under the KLPD. The KLPD also has its own 
intelligence service, the National Criminal Intelligence Service (NRI). Each 
regional police force has a Criminal Intelligence Service (CIS). However, the 
establishment of communication systems and the processing and availability of 
information obtained from investigations is done at a national level. Currently, 
the records services are converting to a fully computerized system that will 
comprise criminal records, photographs of crime scenes and offenders, 
fingerprints etc.
The States-General generates the regulations governing the police while the 
Minister of the Interior is responsible for their central administration and the 
mayor of the largest municipality in the region for their regional administration 
(except in the case of the directly centrally administered KLPD). The regional 
police chiefs are responsible for day-to-day management. However, the relevant 

Security and Privacy
68
public prosecutor (belonging to the Public Prosecution Service (OM) which is 
managed by the Board of Procurators General within the Ministry of Justice) 
is responsible for the police with respect to crime investigation. Although the 
police actually conduct most investigations, sometimes the public prosecutors 
take direct control of investigations into serious crimes. The OM is responsible 
for investigating and prosecuting criminal offenders and is the only body in the 
Netherlands that may prosecute criminal suspects. Accordingly, no single body 
in the Netherlands has sole authority over the police.
The prosecution office attached to the Supreme Court is not part of the OM. It is 
an independent statutory body concerned with the prosecution of the members 
of Parliament and the ministers in relation to criminal matters.
The duties and powers of the intelligence and security services in the Netherlands 
are set forth in the Intelligence and Security Services Act 2002. The General 
Intelligence and Security Service (AIVD) focuses on domestic intelligence and 
non-military threats including, in recent times, Islamic fundamentalism. It 
collects and assesses information and monitors suspected terrorists and the like. 
The Ministry of the Interior is responsible for the AIVD (see below). The Military 
Intelligence and Security Service (MIVD) focuses on foreign intelligence and 
international threats, specifically military- and government-sponsored threats 
such as espionage. It collects and assesses information. The MIVD works closely 
with NATO. The Minister of Defense is responsible for the MIVD. The MIVD is 
overseen by a committee appointed by the Committee for the Intelligence and 
Security Services and comprising the leaders of the four main political parties 
represented in the House of Representatives of the States-General.
The National Coordinator for Counter-terrorism (NCTb) exists to ensure 
coordination between these and other relevant agencies.
The Information and Communications Technology Agency is an agency of 
the Ministry of the Interior and is responsible for the provision of reliable 
and secure ICT services and for information management in the security and 
criminal justice sectors.
Under the Treaty of Lisbon (2009), the Treaty of Amsterdam (1999) and other 
treaties, the Netherlands is required to cooperate with other EU countries 
in criminal matters, including corruption, organized crime, terrorism, arms 
trafficking, trafficking in drugs and trafficking in human beings. Europol (based 
in The Hague) is the central police office for sharing and analyzing information 
on criminal matters among EU members. The Schengen Information System 
has been established to facilitate EU information sharing. Under the Europol 
Convention (1999), EU countries have agreed to share information and to 

IV. Divergent Formalities
69
institute measures for data protection. As of 2010, Europol functions on the 
basis of a Council Decision that gives it Community status and subjects its 
budget to control by the European Parliament.
Post-9/11 cooperation on security among EU states and between the EU, 
including the Netherlands, and the US has increased. Within the EU, extradition 
processes have been simplified and expedited, agreement has been reached on 
the definition of the constituent elements of terrorism and the minimum sentences 
to be applied, and Europol’s Terrorism Task Force has been established and thereby 
enables the exchange of information between the various counter-terrorism 
authorities. A cooperation agreement exists between Europol and the US.
These attempts at cooperation notwithstanding, the EU and the US standpoints 
on privacy and data protection are somewhat different. Thus in the US the 
approach to regulation in the private sector is essentially self-regulation whereas 
in the EU there is comprehensive privacy and data protection legislation as 
well as oversight bodies. In the case of the Netherlands, the Data Protection 
Authority has oversight and investigative powers, including with respect to the 
private sector (see below).
Privacy rights and data protection
As noted above, Dutch citizens have an explicit right to privacy under the 
Constitution of the Netherlands. Article 10 of the Constitution states:
1.	 Everyone shall have the right to respect for his privacy, without prejudice to 
restrictions laid down by, or pursuant to, Act of Parliament.
2.	 Rules to protect privacy shall be laid down by Act of Parliament in connection 
with the recording and dissemination of personal data.
3.	 Rules concerning the rights of persons to be informed of data recorded 
concerning them, of the use that is made thereof, and to have such data 
corrected shall be laid down by Act of Parliament.
Article 12 states:
1.	 Entry into a home against the will of the occupant shall be permitted only in 
the cases laid down by, or pursuant to, Act of Parliament, by those designated 
for this purpose by, or pursuant to, Act of Parliament.
2.	 Prior identification and notice of purpose shall be required in order to enter 
a home under the preceding paragraph, subject to the exceptions by Act of 
Parliament. A written report of the entry shall be issued to the occupant.

Security and Privacy
70
Article 13 states:
1.	 The privacy of correspondence shall not be violated, except in the cases laid 
down by Act of Parliament or by order of the courts.
2.	 The privacy of the telephone and telegraph shall not be violated, except in 
the cases laid down by Act of Parliament, by or with the authorization of 
those designated for this purpose by Act of Parliament.
The Dutch Data Registration Act 1988, which preceded the EU Data Protection 
Directive, protects personal data files and, speaking generally, requires consent, 
accuracy of data, use of data only for the purpose for which they were originally 
collected, security of data, disclosure only by consent or by statute and so on.
The Data Registration Act established the Dutch Data Protection Authority, which 
advises the government, deals with complaints and undertakes investigations.
The Decree on Sensitive Data under the Data Registration Act sets out the 
limited circumstances under which data on an individual’s political and sexual 
persuasion, religious beliefs, race and medical and criminal history may be 
included on a personal data file. The Decree on Regulated Exemption under the 
Data Registration Act exempts certain organizations from the requirements of 
the Data Registration Act.
The Dutch Personal Data Protection Act of 2000 supersedes earlier legislation, 
including the Data Registration Bill 1998 and the Data Registration Act 1988. 
It brings Dutch law in line with the European Data Protection Directive; inter 
alia it regulates the disclosure of personal data to countries outside of Europe.
As noted above, interception of communications is regulated by the Criminal 
Code and requires a court order. The intelligence services (e.g. the AIVD and 
the MIVD) do not need a court order for interception of communications; their 
authorization comes from the Minister of the Interior.
The Telecommunications Act 1998 requires all internet service providers to have 
the capacity to intercept all traffic in the event of a court order.
The Intelligence and Security Services Act authorizes the interception, search 
and keyword scanning of satellite communications. Intelligence services can 
store intercepted communications for up to one year.
As noted above, the Netherlands has ratified the European Convention for the 
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950, which recognizes 
a right to privacy. Article 8 states: “Everyone has the right to respect for his 
private and family life, his home and his correspondence.” As a member of 
the Council of Europe in 1993 the Netherlands ratified the Convention for the 

IV. Divergent Formalities
71
Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal 
Data. Moreover, the Netherlands is a member of the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development and has adopted the OECD Guidelines for the 
Protection of Privacy and Trans-border Flows of Personal Data.
The 2006 directive (Directive 2006/24/EC) on retention of data generated or 
processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic 
communication services or of public communication networks is highly 
controversial in the Netherlands. The directive allows the retention for lengthy 
periods – twelve months in the Netherlands, longer than the Directive’s minimum 
requirement of six months – of so-called traffic data, including not simply who 
has been communicated with and when but also a person’s movements (based 
on, for example, location of a mobile phone caller) and patterns of internet use. 
The claim of the authorities who have passed this legislation is that the data in 
question are not communicative of content and, therefore, that the legislation 
respects privacy. Moreover, the data are held to be useful in counter-terrorism 
initiatives and in combating organized crime. However, the counter-claim is that 
the traffic data are sufficiently rich and comprehensive to enable the creation of 
a map of the human associations and activities of any individual with respect to 
whom it has been retained – a profile of sorts – and their retention is, therefore, 
an infringement of the privacy of ordinary citizens.
The Netherlands has recently passed legislation that introduces biometric 
passports with an RFID-microchip containing digital information about the 
passport holder. The passport holder’s fingerprints and a digital facial image are 
stored on the microchip for identification. Although this increases security by, 
for example, reducing the possibility of fraudulent use, the data on all biometric 
passports is stored in a central database accessible by law enforcement agencies 
in relation to criminal investigations and counter-terrorist activities. Because 
this central database contains information about all citizens who are passport 
holders it contains data about virtually every Dutch citizen irrespective of their 
criminality or suspected criminality. Accordingly, this new law would appear to 
breach the right to privacy and, arguably, Dutch privacy legislation.
Another controversy that has recently arisen is the decision by the Dutch 
government to direct Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport to install full-body scanners 
and to use them to scan passengers traveling to the US. The decision comes in 
the wake of a Nigerian man carrying a non-metallic explosive device undetected 
through airport security at Amsterdam on Christmas Day 2009 before boarding 
a US plane and traveling to Detroit. His attempt to trigger the device was 
unsuccessful. There are privacy concerns – including from a legal perspective 
– about the intrusive nature of the images and the possibility of these images 
being stored, transferred or accessed without authorization.

Security and Privacy
72
Agencies
Dutch Data Protection Authority
The Data Protection Authority (DPA) is an independent statutory authority that 
supervises compliance with the legislation that regulates the use of personal 
data. The legislation in question includes the Personal Data Protection Act, the 
Police Data Act and the Municipal Database (Personal Records) Act.
The DPA makes recommendations regarding legislation, receives complaints, 
conducts audits and official investigations and initiates prosecutions. Appeals 
can be made against the DPA’s decisions to the administrative law court and 
complaints can be made to the National Ombudsman.
In the past, the DPA has: conducted random investigations of the practices 
of Criminal Intelligence Service Units to determine the extent to which the 
regulations governing data processing were actually being observed; conducted 
an investigation in 2004 into the privacy aspects of data processing in police 
wiretapping rooms; conducted random checks on municipalities to see whether 
they had complied with their notification obligations in respect of the collection 
of personal data; approved in 2004 the Code of Conduct for processing personal 
data of the Netherlands Association of Business Information Agencies; and 
conducted in 2003 an investigation into a business information agency, finding 
that it had processed personal data illegitimately and informing the Public 
Prosecutor, with the result that a criminal investigation was conducted leading 
to prosecution of members of the agency.
General Intelligence and Security Service 
The General Intelligence and Security Service (AIVD) is responsible for non-
military intelligence gathering and assessment, conducting threat analyses, 
issuing warnings of risks to national security and monitoring individuals 
suspected of involvement in organized crime, cybercrime, terrorist activities 
(including radicalization) and the like. It passes information that is relevant to 
the investigation or prosecution of offenses in the form of official reports to the 
police and/or the relevant judicial authorities within the Public Prosecutions 
Service. The regional intelligence services conduct activities on behalf of 
the AIVD and for which the AIVD has ultimate responsibility. It also has 
an investigative capacity, for example, of terrorist incidents and it conducts 
background checks on individuals in sensitive positions, including public 
offices and important positions in industry.
The AIVD makes use of covert methods, including undercover operatives, use of 
informants and interception of electronic communications. As noted above, the 
AIVD intercepts telephone and internet communications and does so under the 

IV. Divergent Formalities
73
authorization of the Minister of the Interior (rather than judicial warrant). It has 
unrestricted access to police intelligence and works closely with Dutch police 
intelligence agencies, other EU intelligence agencies and foreign intelligent 
agencies such as the CIA.
The Minister of the Interior is responsible for the AIVD. However, the Council 
for National Security, which is a Cabinet sub-committee comprising the Prime 
Minister, two Deputy Prime Ministers and the ministers of the Interior, Justice, 
Defense and Foreign Affairs, gives general direction to the AIVD and delegates 
much of the tasking of the AIVD to other bodies, such as the Joint Intelligence 
Services Committee (CVIN) (chaired by the Intelligence and Security Services 
Coordinator and various public servants) and the Joint Counter-terrorism 
Committee (GCT).
The AIVD is overseen by the Intelligence and Security Supervisory Committee 
(CTIVD), which is appointed by the Committee for the Intelligence and Security 
Services (CIVD). The CIVD comprises the leaders of all the political parties 
represented in the House of Representatives of the States-General (with the 
exception of the Socialist Party, which opted not to join). The Minister of the 
Interior is accountable to Parliament via the CIVD. When AIVD matters cannot 
be publicly disclosed, the CIVD meets in closed sessions.
The AIVD publishes an annual report including its budget. Sensitive information 
is omitted.
Under the freedom of information rules, the AIVD can be required by the 
courts to provide any records held on a private citizen to that citizen unless it is 
relevant to a current case. Moreover, even outdated material cannot be provided 
if it would compromise the AIVD’s sources or methods.
Conclusions
Returning to the framework for data protection that is provided by EU law and 
is binding on all EU member states, and to a comparison of EU and US law, the 
criticisms of the Council Framework Decision by the EDPS and the European 
Commission highlight two crucial unresolved issues about the protection 
of privacy in the twenty-first century. First, how can state sovereignty be 
reconciled with the globalized nature of personal data and the concomitant 
globalized nature of threats to both individual privacy and national security? 
Second, what, if any, differences in restrictions on the collection, use and 
transfer of personal data are justified by differences between state and private 
entities and state and private purposes?

Security and Privacy
74
With regard to the second question, the preceding discussion has shown that 
the United States lags behind the EU in recognizing the need for comprehensive 
restrictions on the collection, use and transfer of personal data by private 
entities. There is a clear need for additional legislation in the US to protect the 
individual's privacy rights from intrusion by private entities. However, the EU 
has yet to face the major challenge of extending its legislative framework for 
data protection to policing and criminal justice within the individual EU states. 
The difficulty of doing this is evident in the Commission’s statement that “the 
notion of a comprehensive data protection scheme does not exclude specific 
rules for data protection for the police and the judicial sector within the general 
framework, taking due account of the specific nature of these fields.”140 In the 
opinion of the authors, neither the US nor the EU has arrived at an adequate 
understanding of what it means for data protection safeguards to take “due 
account of the specific nature” of policing and criminal justice.
Nonetheless, our discussion suggests that the EU may be aided in answering this 
question by the expertise on technological and legal issues about data protection 
that its law has created through the institutions of the Article 29 Working Party, 
the European Data Protection Supervisor and the Data Protection Supervisors of 
the individual states. By contrast, although some governmental bodies in the US, 
such as the Federal Trade Commission, have become interested in questions of 
data protection, these bodies are interested in data protection only as it impacts 
on some other governmental function, for example, protecting consumers or 
advancing commerce.141 Unlike the European Data Protection Supervisor, no 
American governmental body has the power or institutional competence to 
advocate and argue for a data protection framework that extends to both public 
and private entities and functions and that accounts for the globalized nature of 
personal data in the twenty-first century.
Given increasing inroads on personal privacy in the US, it seems unreasonable 
to advocate not only additional privacy legislation (both federal and state) 
in relation to intrusions by private sector entities but also, and related, the 
creation of a National Office of Data Protection that would seek to provide a set 
of national guidelines for the protection of personal data. This has occurred in a 
number of other countries and even if, as was the case with the American Law 
Institute’s (ALI) projects,142 such guidelines could not be enforced in the absence 
of relevant legislation, they would at least constitute a respected benchmark for 
140  Ibid.
141  See e.g. The Department of Commerce Internet Policy Task Force, “Commercial Data Privacy and 
Innovation in the Internet Economy: A Dynamic Policy Framework”, 2010, available at: http://www.
commerce.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2010/december/iptf-privacy-green-paper.pdf; 
Federal 
Trade 
Commission, “Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change”, December 2010, available at: http://
www.ftc.gov/os/2010/12/101201privacyreport.pdf.
142  See The American Law Institute web site at: http://www.ali.org/.

IV. Divergent Formalities
75
the review and revision of existing privacy protections as well as the initiation 
of others. Although we envisage a federally funded agency, the analogy with 
the ALI indicates that we also believe that it should be heavily populated by 
those who have an expertise in privacy issues: conceptual, moral, legal and 
political. Such a body would not only be charged with the development of 
privacy guidelines for consideration by both commercial and governmental 
bodies, and of recommendations for legislation, but it would also have a public 
responsibility to communicate its findings to a wide audience.143 We further 
suggest that there is a need for a statutory body (whether the National Office 
of Data Protection and/or some other body or bodies) with the responsibility to 
oversee and monitor compliance with privacy legislation. Such a body should 
conduct audits and examine records as well as receive privacy complaints. 
It should also have the power to conduct investigations of breaches of the 
legislation.
We advocate that the process of developing a National Office of Data Protection 
for the US begin with a national public discussion concerning the legitimate 
extent and limits of privacy and of ways of protecting it. Such a debate would 
need to take into account not only the governmental collection, retention and 
use of personal data but also its collection, retention and use by commercial 
organizations. We believe that once it is widely recognized that the division 
between governmental and commercial collection, retention and use of personal 
data has been all but eroded under the current regulatory arrangements, such a 
national office will be seen as both reasonable and feasible.
It is our hope that in advocating a National Office of Data Protection we will see 
the development of a graduated series of guidelines and associated legislation 
for the oversight of personal data collection, use and retention by private and 
public agencies, including but not limited to soft law self-regulatory measures, 
privacy enhancement of software and administrative measures designed to 
protect privacy, along with recommendations concerning situations in which 
criminal penalties ought to be levied. The National Office of Data Protection 
should also have a communicative responsibility to ensure that the American 
public is aware of current concerns about the privacy of personal data as well as 
its recommendations concerning protection enhancements. Moreover, there is a 
need for an oversight body (perhaps the National Office of Data Protection) with 
statutory powers to monitor, receive complaints, conduct audits and investigate 
infringements of privacy rights.
143  We imagine some sort of parallel – inexact, to be sure – with the Law Reform Commission of Australia. 
The latter has produced impressive reviews of existing privacy regulations as well as conceptually rich 
accounts of privacy. See http://www.alrc.gov.au/media/2008/mr11108.html. A better understanding of how 
this adjustment to the US system may be achieved is provided in Chapter IX.

Security and Privacy
76
We further believe that it would be essential for a National Office of Data 
Protection to confer regularly with the EDPS of other similar institutions in 
other countries in order to develop a set of standards that can be generally 
implemented within such societies. As the EDPS and European Commission have 
recognized, the globalized nature of data in the twenty-first century means that 
no country can effectively protect its citizens’ privacy on its own. A globalized 
problem demands globalized solutions.

77
V.  When the Rubber Hits the Road
What Gallie had in mind when articulating the idea of essential contestability 
were comprehensive normative traditions and ideologies that range across 
the whole spectrum of social and political belief. His observations about 
social conceptualization might be applied equally to variations within the 
liberal tradition and, even more relevantly to our purposes in this inquiry, to 
differences in liberal cultural traditions. Indeed, what Rawls aspires to as an 
overlapping consensus is grounded in liberal diversity rather than the whole 
range of normative difference.
Although this study could have attempted to explore the wide range of 
differences among liberal polities – and it will indeed advert to a reasonably 
broad group of such polities, including those in Australia and India – it will 
most conveniently and manageably serve our purposes if it focuses primarily on 
differences that have come to notice in relations between the countries that form 
the EU and the US. Of course, even that is a simplification, because both the EU 
and the US embody a variety of traditions and understandings, and what we 
refer to as the views of each are but prominent and shifting expressions within 
each rather than an exhaustive characterization.
This has already been presaged in our brief comparative discussion of the 
roots of privacy in Europe and the US (Chapter III) and in our account of the 
regulatory traditions found in each (Chapter IV). The different constructions 
of privacy have played a large part in the ongoing debates between the EU and 
the US regarding digital technologies and the access to and use of digital data. 
In addition there are larger socio-political concerns that have informed their 
divergences.
Three cases will serve to illustrate the problems addressed by this study. They 
are: (A) the Passenger Name Record (PNR) controversy that has for several years 
dogged EU–US relations; (B) the US subpoenaing of SWIFT data; and (C) the 
National Identity (ID) card debate.
(A) The PNR Controversy
The PNR (Passenger Name Record) controversy began after 9/11 when the US 
began demanding certain personal information of passengers traveling to or 
from the United States, information that the EU considered to be private and 
therefore not appropriately demanded except under much narrower conditions 
than the US observed. Here we trace its main outlines.

Security and Privacy
78
Whenever a person books a flight from country A to country B,1 a Passenger 
Name Record (PNR) is created. That record contains various data; it has a 
location; and it acquires a history.2
Data. The PNR will contain a lot of personal data that the traveler is asked to 
provide – formal data such as name, address, date of birth, credit card information, 
frequent flyer numbers and billing and approval codes (if relevant), as well as 
informal data concerning preferences such as meals or religious preferences, 
sleeping preferences if the traveler is also booking a hotel or even notes from 
the agent if they are thought pertinent.3 There will also be various ancillary 
data about the agent who is making the booking or about some other person if 
that person is making the booking for the person who is traveling. All told, over 
thirty different fields are usually represented.
Location. This information is then stored – not usually on the airline or travel 
agent’s computer system but in the centralized database of a Computerized 
Reservation System (CRS) or Global Distribution System (GDS) such as Sabre, 
Galileo/Apollo, Amadeus or Worldspan. These CRSs are owned by private- or 
publicly-traded companies. Amadeus, a Spanish corporation with its primary 
operations in Germany, is largely owned by the airlines that use it. The others 
are based in the US and are used but not owned by US-based airlines.
History. As travelers make changes or buy additional tickets, and even if they 
cancel, the information is updated and to some extent consolidated. An audit 
trail is created, and though data can be changed they are not expunged. An 
approximation of such a procedure is as follows:
When a travel agent makes a reservation, they enter data on a CRS/GDS 
terminal, and create a PNR in that CRS/GDS. If the airline is hosted in a 
different CRS/GDS, information about the flight(s) on that airline is sent 
to the airline's host system, and a PNR is created in the airline's partition 
in that system as well. What information is sent between airlines, and 
how, is specified in the Airline Interline Message Procedures (AIRIMP) 
manual, although many airlines and CRS's/GDS's have their own direct 
connections and exceptions to the AIRIMP standards.
If, for example, you make a reservation on United Airlines (which 
outsources the hosting of its reservations database to the Galileo CRS/
GDS) through the Internet travel agency Travelocity.com (which is a 
division of Sabre, and uses the Sabre CRS/GDS), Travelocity.com creates 
1  It need not be an international flight, but we are restricting the example to those.
2  See Edward Hasbrouck, “What’s in a Passenger Name Record (PNR)?” at: http://hasbrouck.org/articles/
PNR.html.
3  Most airline bookings are made through travel agents and so PNRs will often contain other details 
concerning car hires, hotel rooms, companions, special requests etc.

V. When the Rubber Hits the Road
79
a PNR in Sabre. Sabre sends a message derived from portions of the 
Sabre PNR data to Galileo, using the AIRIMP (or another bilaterally-
agreed format). Galileo in turn uses the data in the AIRIMP message to 
create a PNR in United's Galileo “partition.” 
If a set of reservations includes flights on multiple airlines, each airline 
is sent the information pertaining to its flights. If information is added 
later by one of those airlines, it may or may not be transmitted back to 
the CRS/GDS in which the original reservation was made, and almost 
never will be sent to other airlines participating in the itinerary that are 
hosted in different CRS's/GDS's. So there can be many different PNR's, 
in different CRS's/GDS's, for the same set of reservations, none of them 
containing all the data included in all of the others.4
The relevance of this is that there is little control over the uses to which these 
private companies can put their data. They may make commitments about how 
they will use it and share it, but there is little effective oversight.5
In addition, as the US government’s Secure Flight Program6 (formerly CAPPS II) 
becomes operational, these PNRs will be accessed and fed into the Passenger 
and Aviation Security Screening Records (PASSR) database of the Transportation 
Security Agency (TSA), which is a division of the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS). The information will be used by the US government (along with 
other information) to fill out passenger profiles, including “selectee” and “no-
fly” watch lists, as well as to match passenger data with existing lists.7 Although 
Secure Flight was expected to be operational in 2005, its full implementation 
was significantly delayed – partly for privacy-related reasons – until 2009, when 
4  Hasbrouck, “What’s in a Passenger Name Record (PNR)?”, 3.
5  Recognizing these weaknesses, we have undertaken to provide a means by which the companies 
themselves, along with external oversight bodies, can query the state of accountability in a given organization 
and identify where shortcomings exist. The Surveillance Technology Accountability Assessment Tool 
(STAAT) in Chapter IX of this study allows those interested in exercising greater control over questions of 
data construction, data mining and data sharing a means for grounding their efforts to improve these and 
other areas of digital technology use. The application of this tool is available to any entity engaged in digital 
technology surveillance.
6  See http://www.tsa.gov/what_we_do/layers/secureflight/editorial_1716.shtm. CAPPS II (Computer 
Assisted Passenger Prescreening System) was to be the successor of CAPPS I, developed in 1997. Opposition 
to the proposed CAPPS II led to its “demise” and reconstitution as Secure Flight.
7  Security lists were first developed in 1990 (and were originally administered by the FBI) to keep an eye on 
people “determined to pose a direct threat to U.S. civil aviation”, but they moved to center stage only after 
9/11. Being on a “selectee” list will heighten the security that a person will be required to undergo; being on 
a “no fly” list will lead to a person’s being prevented from flying. “No-fly” lists are also distributed to other 
agencies concerned with visas, border crossings and law enforcement. It is thought that well over 300,000 
names are on the lists, though information is not readily available on either numbers or the criteria used to 
make determinations.

Security and Privacy
80
it began to be implemented in stages.8 Until now, the airlines themselves have 
been charged with matching names to the existing lists (which have been drawn 
up using other data).9
There appears to be no legal barrier to the US government using PNR data for 
security purposes.10 However, in the case of German citizens based in Europe who 
wish to fly to the US, the US does not have jurisdiction over them at that point 
and there may even be laws against some of that data being transmitted without 
authorization. Indeed, as we have already noted, the European Parliament has a 
directive that severely limits the circumstances under which such data may be 
shared and used.11 After 9/11 an interim agreement between Europe and the US 
was reached regarding access to PNR data for security purposes. That agreement 
was subsequently determined to be incompatible with European law and work 
then proceeded on a new agreement that was supposed to be concluded by 
July 2007, when the sun set on an interim arrangement. Controversy continues, 
though temporary understandings have been in place, allowing EU–US traffic 
to continue.
The proposed agreement reduced the number of pieces of PNR data to which US 
authorities could get access to nineteen, though some of the reduction involved 
combining data that had otherwise been kept discrete. Data concerning ethnicity, 
however, could not be accessed. It was further proposed that the US could store 
the data “actively” for a period of seven years, with the possibility of “dormant 
storage” for a further eight years. Although this involved a significant extension 
of the storage period (from three years), it was argued that better safeguards 
had been put in place. Significantly, the July 2007 bombings in Glasgow and 
London prompted PNR data-gathering initiatives in Europe similar to those in 
the US.
However, the proposed agreement ran into trouble with the European 
Parliament, with an overwhelming majority of its members determining that it 
was “substantively flawed”. The main objections were that: (a) the agreement on 
8  “Secure Flight was implemented in two phases. The program initially assumed the watch list matching 
responsibility for passengers on domestic flights from aircraft operators beginning early 2009. In a second 
stage of implementation, begun in late 2009, the Secure Flight program assumed, from Customs and Border 
Protection and the international air carriers, the watch list matching function for passengers on international 
flights.” See “TSA to Assume Watch List Vetting with Secure Flight Program” http://www.tsa.gov/press/
releases/2008/1022.shtm. The program has now been fully implemented.
9  If a “no fly” match occurs, the airline agent is required to call a law enforcement officer to detain and 
question the passenger. In the case of a “selectee”, the boarding pass will be marked and the person given 
additional screening by security.
10  49 U.S.C. § 44909 (c) (3). However, there may be more than “actual passenger” data in a PNR, and the 
statute does not require the data in advance.
11  Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data: ec.europa.eu/
justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/95-46-ce/dir1995-46_part1_en.pdf. This led, in 2000, to an EU/US agreement 
on “safe harbor” privacy principles: http://www.epic.org/privacy/intl/EP_SH_resolution_0700.html.

V. When the Rubber Hits the Road
81
the collection, use and storage of PNR data was constituted simply by the non-
binding assurances contained in a letter (that could be unilaterally changed); 
(b) there were no assurances that the data would be used only for counter-
terrorism (though allowance was made for its use by the US Government for 
“unspecified additional purposes”); (c) in exceptional cases, information on 
travelers’ ethnicity, political opinions or sexual orientation could be accessed; 
(d) that the reduction of fields was “largely cosmetic due to the merging of data 
fields instead of actual deletion”; and (e) retention of data under the proposed 
agreement was inordinate and raised the possibility of massive profiling. At the 
same time, the Parliament raised concerns about the proposed European data-
gathering initiative.12
Even so, an agreement was reached with the European Union on July 23, 2007,13 
followed by a Letter (July 26) explaining how the US Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) intended to collect, use and store the data it gained.14 A DHS 
Report released in December 2008 came to an irenic conclusion about DHS 
compliance with the Agreement. However, it was an internal report including 
no EU representatives and, according to some reviewers, had failed to be 
adequately responsive to requests by travelers to see data (or all the data) held 
concerning them.15
The PNR controversy raises a number of important ethical questions, some 
specific and some general. The most general question relevant to the focus of this 
study is whether it is possible to develop standards for personal data collection, 
use and management that can be accepted by all the parties. Although we are 
concerned fairly specifically here with the EU and the US, the question can 
be cast to range over liberal democratic polities generally. More specifically, 
there are issues raised by the PNR controversy narrowly but which are also 
transferable to other contexts in which data are gathered. Here is a sample:
• Ever since “selectee” and “no-fly” watch lists have been compiled, errors 
have occurred and innocent passengers have been inconvenienced, sometimes 
quite seriously. It has not proven easy to rectify such errors.
12  However, the European Commission introduced such a plan – very similar to that which was so roundly 
criticized in the European Parliament – on November 6, 2007.
13  See: Agreement Between the United States of America and the European Union on the Processing and Transfer 
of Passenger Name Record (PNR) Data by Air Carriers to the United States Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) (2007 PNR Agreement), http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/pnr-2007agreement-usversion.pdf.
14  Appended to A Report Concerning Passenger Name Record Information Derived from Flights between the 
U.S. and the European Union, http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_pnr_report_20081218.
pdf.
15  See EDRI-gram January 14, 2009, http://www.edri.org/edri-gram/number7.1. By June, 2010, provisional 
agreement appeared to have been reached, pending further negotiations. However, as of June 30, 2011, a 
further draft agreement was criticized for many of the same reasons as previously – not being limited to 
terrorism and serious crime, unnecessarily long data retention, lack of judicial redress for data subjects and an 
absence of any guarantees of independent oversight. See “EU-US PNR Agreement Found Incompatible with 
Human Rights”, EDRI-gram, 9, no. 3 (June 29, 2011), available at: http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number9.13.

Security and Privacy
82
• Especially from the side of the EU, there has been a concern about personal 
data being collected for one reason – to combat terrorism – and then being 
used or being available to be used for other reasons (say, tax evasion or 
money laundering). Apart from such data being used for purposes to which 
consent has not been given, there are serious issues of disproportionality in 
collecting personal data for less serious social concerns.
• There is very little transparency with national security data collection. For 
example, it is not known or disclosed how many people are on watch lists. 
There is secrecy about the numbers of people on watch lists, or whether the 
personal data of some citizens is as likely to be surveilled as that of others.
• The lack of transparency extends to information about who is responsible for 
the compilation, protection and correction of watch lists.
• The lack of transparency further extends to the criteria used to compile 
watch lists and to disclosures concerning their effectiveness. For example, is 
Secure Flight really needed or will it simply add to the amount of information 
that government may amass about individuals? Transparency is an important 
liberal democratic value, and though it is recognized that security interests 
may sometimes require secrecy of data and strategies, the limits to such 
secrecy ought to be determined in the light of public debate.16
• Although transparency is typically a necessary condition for accountability 
it is not sufficient. So what oversight and accountability mechanisms are in 
place to ensure regulatory and ethical compliance?
Behind these more specific questions about the collection of PNR data there 
stand some more general ethical questions. For example:
• What privacy, if any, do we have a right to, and why? What are the limits to 
such a right?
• What security do we have a right to, and how should it best (ethically and 
practically) be enabled/protected?
• What is the appropriate role of government in ensuring security and what 
constraints should be placed on its security activities?
• To what extent may one government legitimately make demands of another 
government or on those under the jurisdiction of another?
16  These issues of practical policy implementation have led us to consider recommending that an internal 
body be developed within law enforcement and intelligence organizations that would be responsible for aiding 
surveillance practitioners in sorting out such problems. The creation of Techno-ethics Boards, discussed in 
Chapter IX, offers one means to build capacity within government agencies engaged in surveillance operations 
of this and other types (see Peter Mameli, “Tracking the Beast: Techno-Ethics Boards and Government 
Surveillance Programs”, Critical Issues in Justice and Politics 1, no. 1 (2008): 31–56).

V. When the Rubber Hits the Road
83
These are large questions – perhaps too large to be adequately resolved within 
the framework of the present study. Yet they cannot be wholly sidestepped. We 
will take some steps toward addressing them in later chapters.
(B) The Terrorist Finance Tracking Program and 
SWIFT Controversy
The events related to this second controversy came to light with a New York 
Times article on June 23, 2006, in which it was revealed that not long after 9/11 
the CIA, through the US Treasury Department, secretly put (via administrative 
subpoena17) pressure on a Belgian cooperative – SWIFT – that routes over 11 
million international financial transactions per day (amounting to US$6 trillion) 
to give it access to its records.18 The US Government claimed that the emergency 
powers granted by Congress soon after 9/11 allowed it to do so and that it was 
not prevented from doing so by “American laws restricting government access 
to private financial records because the cooperative was considered a messaging 
service, not a bank or financial institution.”19
Exactly what was looked at is not known, though US authorities have naturally 
argued that the data reviewed were limited and that they focused on terrorism, 
not tax fraud or drug trafficking. It appears that the primary tool used on the 
subpoenaed data was “link analysis”, whereby those who had suspected ties 
then had all wired financial transfers tracked in which they were involved. It 
was claimed that the analyses had yielded positive results (though this has been 
disputed).20
When the US actions were made public (initially by a whistle blower), the Belgian 
Government immediately protested and a European Parliament resolution (July 
7, 2006) alleged that “the SWIFT transfers were undertaken without regard to 
legal process . . . and . . . without any legal basis or authority.” Although the 
17  Unlike other subpoenas, administrative subpoenas do not have to be reviewed by judges or juries. They 
are issued under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act 1977. For discussion, see Charles Doyle, 
Administrative Subpoenas and National Security Letters in Criminal and Foreign Intelligence Investigations 
(Congressional Research Service, 2005), http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL32880.pdf.
18  Eric Lichtblau and James Risen, “Bank Data is Sifted by U.S. in Secret to Block Terror,” The New York 
Times, June 23, 2006, A1. Other articles appeared in the Wall Street Journal and Los Angeles Times on the same 
day. SWIFT is an acronym for the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication: “SWIFT is 
the industry-owned co-operative supplying secure, standardised messaging services and interface software to 
nearly 8,100 financial institutions in 207 countries and territories.” It was founded in 1973. http://www.swift.
com/index.cfm?item_id=43232.
19  Stuart Levey, Under Secretary, Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, US Treasury. This was backed up by 
reference to US v. Miller, 425 US 435 (1976).
20  The claim is that it was helpful in the tracking of Hambali, the Indonesian leader of the al-Qaeda-related 
terrorist organization, Jemaah Islamiyah. Other suggestions about its usefulness were reported in the original 
New York Times and Wall Street Journal articles.

Security and Privacy
84
Belgian Privacy Protection Commission sympathized with the US’s concern 
about terrorism and security, it argued that the requests were not focused on 
individuals suspected of terrorist activities and involved the transfer of massive 
amounts of data. Moreover, SWIFT was not a mere “messenger” but a “controller” 
in the processing of personal data. It concluded that European law concerning 
personal data was more stringent than US law with respect to “the principle of 
proportionality, the limited retention period, the principle of transparency, the 
requirement for independent control and an adequate protection level.”21 SWIFT 
had, furthermore, failed to get assurances that were required under European 
law concerning data of the kind involved.22 Talks subsequently commenced to 
try to work out a common framework for the sharing of data.
US authorities argued that disclosure of the SWIFT actions had been very 
damaging to the fight against terrorism. In addition there was a back story about 
pressure that was placed on the New York Times to refrain from publishing the 
results of its journalistic investigation.
Here, too, a whole series of questions emerged, some specific and others more 
general. The specific questions focused on:
• the degree of specificity that desired disclosures of private financial 
information ought to have;
• whether those whose financial transactions were disclosed to US authorities 
ought to have been informed;
• whether SWIFT ought to have informed European authorities about its 
actions;
• whether the differences between European law and US law were significant 
and, if so, why;
• whether the privacy invasions had, in fact, yielded any information of 
significance, assuming that it would have been of justificatory value;
• whether a measure that might have been justified in emergency terms could 
still be justified five years later (since the gathering of such data had been 
ongoing);
• what controls US authorities placed on the program and the data it received, 
and whether those controls were enforced;
21  “Summary of the Opinion on the Transfer of Personal Data by SCRL SWIFT Following the 
UST 
(OFAC) 
Subpoenas”, 
http://www.privacycommission.be/communiqu%E9s/summary_opinion_
Swift_%2028_09_2006.pdf. A non-official translation of the whole opinion can be found at: http://www.
privacycommission.be/communiqu%C3%A9s/opinion_37_2006.pdf. See also Dan Bilefsky, “Data Transfer 
Broke Rules, Report Says”, The New York Times, September 28, 2006.
22  Embarrassed, SWIFT tried to wriggle out of the rebuke by claiming that because it had offices in the US 
it was required to obey the subpoenas.

V. When the Rubber Hits the Road
85
• whether the newspapers that published the articles revealing the program 
were justified in doing so (in the face of US Administration opposition); and
• whether the whistleblower who disclosed what was going on was justified 
in doing so.23
No doubt there are other questions. As with the PNR data controversy, the 
SWIFT one generated similar broad questions concerning the scope of privacy, 
what constitutes private data, what kinds of actions compromise privacy, 
the ethical demands that appeals to security can make, issues of efficacy and 
probability and the trade-off between security and privacy.
In the follow up to the SWIFT controversy there were, as in the case of PNR 
data, further negotiations between the EU and the US regarding European 
financial transactions operated through SWIFT, with an agreement reached on 
June 28–29, 2007.24 The US committed itself to using SWIFT data exclusively 
for counterterrorism purposes and to retaining the data for no longer than five 
years. For its part, SWIFT was to observe privacy requirements according to 
EU principles promulgated in 2000. Banks using SWIFT were to inform their 
customers about any transfers of data to US authorities. Moreover, the EU 
gained a right to inspect US investigators’ use of European data, given that US 
laws regarding the use of data are not as stringent as those of the EU.
But even these concessions have not stilled the controversy and there has been 
continuing debate within the EU over their adequacy. An agreement signed 
on November 30, 2009, was possible only because of a politically necessary 
German abstention.25
(C) The Controversy over National Identity (ID) 
Cards26
One might infer, from an examination of the PNR and SWIFT debates, that 
the European Union has a much stronger and better developed concern for 
privacy than the US. That inference would seem to be justified. However, 
23  As with the PNR, we believe that by forcing deeper consideration of the accountability questions at hand 
prior to action being taken the utilization of both STAAT and Techno-ethics Boards could aid in mitigating 
abuses in the areas that we noted when discussing the SWIFT case.
24  Reported in EDRI-gram (biweekly newsletter about digital civil rights in Europe), Number 5.13, 4 July 
2007. See also: http://www.statewatch.org/news/2007/jul/eu-usa-pnr-agreement-2007.pdf.
25  See text of the Agreement between the European Union and the United States of America on the Processing and 
Transfer of Financial Messaging Data from the European Union to the United States for the Purposes of the Terrorist 
Finance Tracking Program (30.10.2009), at: http://eur-lex.europa/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:008:00
10:0016:EN:PDF. For further follow-up see EDRI-gram Newsletter 8, 3 (Feb 10), 2010, available at: http://www.edri.
org/edrigram/number8.3. Since then, the European Parliament has (2/11/2010) rejected the latest agreement (http://
www.privacyinternational.org/article.shtml?cmd[347]=x-347-565959) and the discussions continue.
26  For some of the early research on this section, we are grateful to Vincenzo Sainato.

Security and Privacy
86
the situation becomes rather more complicated when we shift our focus to a 
different controversy – that concerning the issuing of National Identity (ID) 
cards. Such is the strength of feeling against them in the US that there is at 
best a perfunctory discussion about the use of ID cards – it is, by and large, 
a political non-starter.27 Australians are also largely opposed to ID cards. The 
Labor government of Bob Hawke attempted to introduce the Australia Card in 
the late 1980s but abandoned the attempt in 1987 (largely as a result of concerns 
about the accuracy and security of data). However, most countries within the 
EU have mandated ID cards for years and make considerable use of them for 
access to a variety of government services as well as for security measures. India 
is set to introduce an ID card for similar reasons. Needless to say, aside from 
privacy concerns, there are prodigious logistical and other problems in a large 
developing country such as India.
In this context, it is worth tracing some of the recent contours of the ID card 
controversy in the United Kingdom (UK) – a controversy that puts it at some 
odds with its fellow European Unionists. Some ten European countries have 
compulsory ID cards, another ten have voluntary ones while four, including the 
UK, as yet have none.
Though mooted in 2002, the UK Identity Cards Bill was first presented to 
Parliament in 2004. It contained a number of components, one of which was the 
development of a National Identity Card. The card was supported as a “public 
interest” measure, where the public interest was understood to encompass 
“national security”, “the prevention and detection of crime”, “the enforcement 
of immigration controls”, “the enforcement of prohibitions on unauthorized 
working or employment” and the securing of “efficient and effective provision 
of public services”. In later discussions, considerable weight was given to its 
supposed benefits in countering identity theft. The card was not required to be 
carried at all times.
Following a general election in early May 2005, a revised Bill was presented 
on May 25, 2005, to a Labour government with a reduced majority.28 It gained 
narrow approval in the House of Commons in October but criticism in the 
House of Lords led to significant amendments in 2006. The amendments were 
27  Although some have argued – at least in the context of health care, that some system of patient ID 
numbers would be more protective of privacy (as well as more efficient and less mistake-prone) than the 
present system for matching health data, there is strong opposition even to this. For the argument in favor 
of such see the RAND study, Richard Hillestad, James H. Bigelow, Basit Chaudhry, Paul Dreyer, Michael D. 
Greenberg, Robin C. Meili, M. Susan Ridgely, Jeff Rothenberg, Roger Taylor, Identity Crisis: An Examination 
of the Costs and Benefits of a Unique Patient Identifier for the U.S. Health Care System (Santa Monica, CA: 
Rand, 2008), available at: http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monographs/2008/RAND_MG753.
pdf. In the UK, NHS members already have an identifying number which entitles them to a European Health 
Insurance Card.
28  The Bill is available at: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmbills/009/2006009.htm.

V. When the Rubber Hits the Road
87
not passed and the Bill shuttled back and forth between the House of Lords 
and House of Commons. After five renditions the Bill was finally passed by 
both houses in March 2006. The agreement reached made the card voluntary 
(provided a passport was held) and delayed its implementation, though 51 
types of individual data including fingerprints, iris scans and face scans would 
still be entered into a National Identity Register (NIR), one of the Bill’s other 
components. The major parties declared that it would be an election issue 
in 2010, with the Labour Party indicating that, if it won, it would make the 
card mandatory. The new Conservative leader, David Cameron, indicated his 
opposition to the card on principle. The Conservatives now govern in a coalition 
with the Liberal Party and, for a time, the ID card issue is dead.
In consequence, the cards have not been introduced (though some were slated 
to be issued in 2009), and if they had been it would have taken several years for 
most people to have them (or an upgraded passport). As it is, practical difficulties 
plagued both the development of the NIR and the introduction of the cards, and 
if in the future there is any end product it may not exactly match the legislation. 
The debate about the cards was particularly vigorous, some opposing the cards 
altogether and others focusing on particulars associated with the UK card. Major 
concerns included the following:
• that the cards would be no more (or not significantly more) effective than 
measures already in place to achieve what they were intended to achieve;
• the huge cost involved in introducing them – a cost for the government as 
well as for individuals;
• that the card would provide a pretext for discrimination against minorities, 
a problem that had arisen in other European countries that have identity 
cards;
• that, as with all governmental data gathering initiatives, government misuse 
of data would increase its control of individuals – such initiatives were 
viewed as further encroachments of the so-called surveillance society29; and
• the possible vulnerability of data either gathered for the NIR or inscribed 
on cards. Several notorious cases in which data have been lost or stolen have 
shaken confidence that personal data will be secure. Although it was argued 
that a National ID Card would help to counteract rising identity theft, it was 
also argued that a national register or card would, in fact, make it easier by 
providing a “one stop” opportunity for the theft of salient data.
29  Once again, the inescapable need for useful accountability mechanisms comes to the fore of the 
discussion. Although the existence of the “Surveillance Society” means different things to different people, 
what seems to be generally accepted is that the means for retaining control of its growth is accomplished 
through increasing transparency and monitoring of actions in a better lit environment. We believe that the 
utilization of tools such as STAAT and internal oversight bodies such as Techno-ethics Boards could satisfy 
part of this requirement.

Security and Privacy
88
What the three foregoing cases illustrate is the great complexity involved in 
developing appropriate standards for security and privacy both between and 
within liberal democratic societies. They constitute the practical challenge of 
the present study.

89
 VI.  Securitization Technologies 
We noted in Chapter III that the ratcheting up of security has created a number 
of problems for important liberal democratic values – in relation to security 
itself as well as with respect to liberty, autonomy, privacy, identity and dignity.
Here our focus will be on various securitization technologies concerned with 
surveillance, data mining and matching/integration, and profiling. We provide 
descriptions of some of the main technologies in use, indicating briefly how 
they impact on and challenge the values identified in Chapter III (and articulated 
at greater length in Chapter VIII). Our concern will not be to determine the 
actual and potential contribution of these technologies to security. Accordingly, 
this chapter should not be understood as even implicitly offering an all-things-
considered evaluation of the securitization technologies described.
(A) Electronic Surveillance1
Surveillance technology takes many forms. Whereas some are familiar, others 
pass unnoticed. Examples of both include: closed circuit television (CCTV), 
X-ray and similar devices at airports, thermal sensors, temperature screening 
(for SARS), keyloggers, wiretaps, bugs, parabolic microphones, Radio Frequency 
Identification Devices (RFID) and Global Positioning Systems (GPS).2,3 Why 
should we worry about them and in what ways do they compromise, or threaten 
to compromise, privacy, liberty and the like?
In the US, the use of electronic surveillance to enhance security has a long 
history that began soon after the invention of the telegraph in 1844. As 
newer technology was invented it was co-opted in the name of security. These 
technologies have included the telephone and computers as well as the many 
and multiplying electronic encroachments on public space.
1  For background on surveillance and its theory, See David Lyon, Surveillance Studies: An Overview 
(Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2007).
2  It is not possible to cover all these technologies and their ethical implications in a single chapter. For more 
information see, for example, M.G. Michael, Sarah Jean Fusco, and Katina Michael, “A Research Note on Ethics 
in the Emerging Age of Überveillance”, Computer Communications 31 (2008): 1192–99. Also, see Roger Clarke, 
“Person-Location and Person-Tracking: Technologies, Risks and Policy Implications”, Information Technology 
& People 14, no. 2 (Summer 2001): 206–31; Christopher S. Milligan, “Facial Recognition Technology, Video 
Surveillance, and Privacy”, Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal 9 (2000): 295–334.
3  There is always new technology being developed that can be pressed into action. For example, see H. 
Schneider, H. C. Liu, S. Winnerl, O. Drachenko, M. Helm, and J. Faist, “Room-temperature Midinfrared Two-
photon Photodetector”, Applied Physics Letters 93, no. 101114 (2008): 1–3.

Security and Privacy
90
As far as government surveillance is concerned, the checks provided by the 
Fourth Amendment have been of critical historical importance, though the 
Fourth Amendment’s value has become marginalized in the face of increasing 
non-governmental surveillance and, even in those cases, because of problematic 
re-drawings of the public–private distinction and persisting (legal) doubts 
about the applicability of the Fourth Amendment to public space.
Recent years have seen the development of a range of strategies encompassed 
(more or less) by the general term “electronic surveillance”. Included among 
these have been, most ubiquitously, closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras, 
more potent and prevalent in the UK than in the US, though increasingly used 
in the US in a more coordinated fashion.4 Such electronic surveillance may 
take many other forms. We have already noted the use of X-ray-type devices 
at airports that penetrate clothing to the skin, and thermal sensors that can 
be used to detect activity in buildings (such as movement and marijuana 
growth). To these we might add wiretaps,5 bugs6 and parabolic microphones.7 
Moreover, so far as networked computers are concerned, electronic surveillance 
has taken a number of increasingly intrusive and sophisticated forms. There 
are, for example, programs developed by the FBI for scanning email traffic 
through particular servers. One such program, originally named Carnivore, 
with a later version renamed as DCS 1000, had both trap and trace8 and full 
access capabilities.9 The latest version of this is the Communications Assistance 
for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA), which the FBI is using “as a virtual blank 
check to force the communications industry to build surveillance capabilities 
. . . into every modern means of communication. This includes cellular and 
digital communications technology never even contemplated when CALEA 
was drafted in the early 1990s.”10 The latter are much more intrusive than the 
former. There are also keylogging devices that can record every keystroke made 
by an individual. However, data on FBI and DHS email surveillance are not easy 
to come by.
4  It has been estimated that there are several thousand CCTV cameras in Manhattan public spaces. For 
articles, see Anon., “A History of Surveillance in New York City”, available at: http://www.notbored.org/nyc-
history.html; Kareem Faheem, “Surveillance Will Expand To Midtown, Mayor Says”, The New York Times, 
October 4, 2009, available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/05/nyregion/05security.html; and Al Baker, 
“Police Seek a Second Zone of High Security in the City”, The New York Times, March 31, 2009, available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/01/nyregion/01kelly.html.
5  For information, see the Electronic Information Privacy Center (EPIC) links: http://www.epic.org/privacy/
wiretap/.
6  For general information, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covert_listening_device.
7  See e.g. http://www.espionageinfo.com/Nt-Pa/Parabolic-Microphones.html.
8  See http://www.cdt.org/security/000404amending.shtml.
9  See the EPIC links at http://www.epic.org/privacy/carnivore/foia_documents.html. Note that use of 
Carnivore was abandoned in 2003.
10  Wayne Madsen, “FBI’s Communications Surveillance Capabilities Widen”, Computer Fraud & Security, 
no. 10 (October 2000): 16–17.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
91
We will briefly outline several of these electronic surveillance strategies along 
with the ethical problems they raise. As noted previously, US policy is officially 
governed primarily by two documents: the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Act of 1978 (FISA)11 and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 
(ECPA).12 They have been supplemented and modified by a number of other acts, 
most notably the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate 
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (USA PATRIOT 
Act, as revised),13 the Protect America Act of 2007 and the FISA Amendment 
Act of 2008.
Video surveillance14
CCTV camera surveillance predated the events of 9/11 by well over twenty years; 
their use is well-established. However, the growing and accelerating ubiquity 
of surveillance cameras, particularly in large urban areas, has created the 
theoretical possibility that almost all our daily movements in public space can 
now be reconstructed into a continuous visual narrative.15 There are, of course, 
various practical and other impediments to this theoretical possibility. For one 
thing, it would be hugely expensive to have continuous human monitoring of 
all such cameras. What is feasible is that the footage of all cameras be available 
after some particular event. For another thing, there are practical limits on the 
extent of coverage, for example, in rural or semi-rural areas, and the availability 
of unsurveilled areas gives rise to the possibility of displacement. On the other 
hand, many current practical problems in densely populated urban areas (e.g. 
Manhattan), such as lack of coordination, integration and (often) preservation, 
look to be relatively easy to overcome. The UK is much closer to constructing 
a coordinated CCTV network, as evidenced by follow-up to the 7/7 and later 
bombings. IRA terrorism preceded the jihadist variety.
The everyday security concerns that initially provided public support for the use 
of surveillance cameras have been taken by authorities, both private and public, 
as justification for something of a carte blanche (given the lesser protections that 
exist for privacy in public) for their installation in many public places. Aided 
11  See http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/fisa/. FISA’s main purpose is to regulate the surveillance of those 
who are believed to be foreign agents.
12  See §§ 2510, 2511 http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode18/usc_sup_01_18.html. ECPA’s main 
purpose is to regulate domestic surveillance.
13  See http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d107:h.r.03162. Also see http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/
cpquery/R?cp109:FLD010:@1(hr333) and http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d110:s.01927:.
14  For a survey of the latest in video surveillance see Niels Haering, Péter L. Venetianer, and Alan Lipton, 
“The Evolution Of Video Surveillance: An Overview”, Machine Vision and Applications 19 (2008):279–90.
15  A city council is likely to be seen as “out of step” if it does not follow the trend. We can also add to CCTV 
various other “tracking” possibilities, from things such as EZ-Pass to cell phones (that now function as global 
positioning systems).

Security and Privacy
92
by the myth that what happens in public is public, the proliferation of such 
cameras now raises possibilities similar to those created by data mining on the 
internet: the development of narratives rather than simple profiles.
We can accept that what we do in public may not have as great a claim to privacy 
as what we do in private, but even in public we ought to have some control over 
personal data. For example, we should not have to conduct every conversation 
in public sotto voce – or wait until we have found some private space. The 
self-censoring effect of denying privacy in public would be considerable. Our 
freedom is not constituted simply by the absence of constraints but also by a 
sense of security in what we do. Should we then limit the installation of cameras 
and/or otherwise constrain their use?
To the extent that a CCTV unit often constitutes an unobserved observer, there 
is additional reason to be cautious about it, for in those cases we are not given 
a fair opportunity to structure our behavior/self-presentation in the knowledge 
that the unit is present. It does not function like the uniformed police officer. 
Should its use, therefore, always be accompanied by a sign to the effect that it 
is present?16 In other words, should the primary use of CCTV be deterrent even 
as it also protects privacy? Should there also be some indication as to whether a 
CCTV camera is controlled by an operator who can swivel, zoom in, and focus? 
Should there be some contact information in the event that a person wishes to 
inquire about the gathered data’s use, retention, security etc.? Should there be 
rules about data use, retention and security independent of those who might 
wish to inquire about such matters? The questions go on.
One problem with CCTV cameras concerns simple observability and the threat 
to privacy that may be involved either with live operators or later reviews of 
the tapes. Even our awareness of a camera’s presence can be unsettling if we 
reflect that it may be recording and making a permanent record of what we 
think of as fleeting. In such cases, we cannot presume on our normal ability 
to blend anonymously into the situational landscape. Cameras challenge our 
presumption of anonymity. As Alan Westin puts it:
[A]nonymity [as a form of privacy] occurs when the individual is in public 
spaces or performing public acts but still seeks, and finds, freedom from 
identification and surveillance. He may be riding a subway, attending a 
ball game, or walking the streets; he is among people and knows that he 
is being observed; but unless he is a well-known celebrity, he does not 
expect to be personally identified and held to the rules of behavior and 
role that would operate if he were known to those observing him. In 
16  This is suggested by Andrew von Hirsch, “The Ethics of Public Television Surveillance”, in Andrew 
von Hirsch, David Garland, and Alison Wakefield (eds.), Ethical and Social Perspectives on Situational Crime 
Prevention (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2000), 68.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
93
this state the individual is able to merge into the “situational landscape.” 
Knowledge or fears that one is under systematic observation in public 
places destroys the sense of relaxation and freedom that men [and 
women] seek in open spaces and public arenas.17
The point reaches a bit deeper. Unlike targeted searches that focus on specific 
items, CCTV surveillance functions more like a dragnet. It makes no distinction 
between those items that might be of interest, say, to law enforcement, and 
other items that are and ought to be regarded as private. It records them all. 
Daniel Solove links this electronic promiscuity with old discussions concerning 
general warrants and writs of assistance – practices to which the framers of 
the US Constitution were deeply opposed because they were undiscriminating. 
He quotes from Patrick Henry’s opposition to writs of assistance: “They may, 
unless the general government be restrained by a bill of rights, or some similar 
restrictions, go into your cellars and rooms, and search, and ransack, and 
measure, everything you eat, drink, and wear. They ought to be restrained 
within proper bounds.”18 The point is simply that because CCTV cameras 
record everything that occurs within their range, and therefore fail to “filter 
out” matters that ought to be considered private, their use imposes a significant 
moral burden on those who install them and, potentially, a different burden on 
those who have to live under their eye.
However, it is not simply a matter of our observability and subsequent capture 
by camera that is worrisome. Also of concern is the use to which the data are 
put. If, for example, what is captured is preserved in some large database (along 
with information gleaned from other public sources), or if the captured images 
are used as part of some film compilation (say, a kind of “Candid Camera”), 
we would also have reason to be deeply disturbed. What has been set up for 
one purpose may, absent controls, be used for other purposes. The principle 
of contextual integrity (to which we will return) will have been violated. No 
doubt some of those other purposes may be relatively innocent, but unless we 
can exercise some control over them, they may not be. In other words, we have 
not only an issue of privacy but also of confidentiality.
And so the main concern of CCTV’s critics has been to develop adequate controls 
over what is gathered about us in public space. One important aspect of this 
control might include identification of the controller of the CCTV camera:
Being able to identify who is watching us is crucial if we are to be able 
to make decisions about how to adjust our behavior (or not) in the 
light of such observation . . . Knowing that we are being watched by 
17  Alan F. Westin, Privacy and Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 1967), 31.
18  Quoted in Daniel J. Solove, “Restructuring Electronic Surveillance Law”, George Washington Law Review 
72 (2004): 1706.

Security and Privacy
94
a camera is not the same as knowing the identity of who is watching 
us. All that we know is that we are being watched, but it is impossible 
for us to know why or by whom. This is the reason that we draw a 
distinction between being watched by a visible police officer and a 
CCTV camera mounted on the side of the building. Seeing, identifying, 
and attempting to understand the motives of whoever is watching us is 
an essential precursor to deciding how we feel about being observed, 
and to deciding on how to respond to such observation.19
But identification of the observer is only one step in the process of retaining 
some control over one’s public self. More is needed if we are to ensure adequate 
recognition of privacy. We need to know in detail the purposes that the 
cameras are intended to serve and we also need to assess the weight of these 
purposes. That will involve some assessment of the stakes, the risks (including 
probabilities) and the likely effectiveness of CCTV measures. We need, in other 
words, to know whether the loss of privacy effected by CCTV cameras (and other 
surveillance technologies) is morally outweighed by gains in security (and/or 
other socially valued outcomes for which they are intended). The latter question 
can be complicated by the potential that there is for public misperception – on 
the one hand, an underestimation of the intrusiveness of CCTV cameras and, on 
the other hand, an overestimation of the risks of, say, terrorism. For many of us, 
the ubiquity of CCTV cameras has dulled us to what they may be recording. At 
the same time, our fears of terrorism have been exploited by those for whom the 
presence of additional CCTV cameras (inter alia) is desired. We also need to take 
account of the fact that whereas the threat of terrorism is said to be “to America” 
or “to Australia”, the burden of CCTV tends to fall on people unequally.
Assuming that we have successfully defended particular uses of CCTV, we then 
need to address several other questions at whose existence we have already 
hinted. Some concern the storage and dissemination of information: How 
timely? How safely? For how long? Who has access? Another set of questions 
relates to the issues of implementation and oversight: Who ensures that answers 
to the previous questions are implemented and adhered to?
Useful, though obviously not decisive, is the American Bar Association’s 
Standards for Criminal Justice: Electronic Surveillance, B: Technologically-
Assisted Physical Surveillance.20 What is required is some assurance that these 
standards will be observed, that they are worth more than the paper on which 
they are written. Some, such as Benjamin Goold, doubt whether an oversight 
agency could provide the requisite assurance, given the huge proliferation of 
19  Benjamin Goold, “Privacy Rights and Public Spaces: CCTV and the Problem of the ‘Unobservable 
Observer’”, Criminal Justice Ethics 21, no. 1 (2002): 24.
20  Third ed. (Washington, D.C.: ABA 1999). See http://www.abanet.org/crimjust/standards/electronicb.pdf.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
95
CCTV cameras. He thinks that the kind of spot checks that an oversight agency 
is likely to provide (given the funding that could be expected) would not be 
sufficient to assure us that significant abuses were not occurring.21 Goold’s own 
solution takes the form of an appeal to Bentham’s Panopticon22:
As Bentham himself puts it:
The final application of the inspection principle was of the whole of the 
prison by the whole of the outside world. The central tower would enable 
judges and magistrates to inspect the prison quickly and safely . . . The 
design of the building would also enable any member of the public 
safely to enter the prison and to view every prisoner in it: “I take it for 
granted, as a matter of course, that . . . the doors of these establishments 
will be, as, without very special reasons to the contrary, the doors of 
all public establishments ought to be, thrown wide open to the body 
of the curious at large – the great open committee of the tribunal of the 
world.23
Taking his cue from Bentham, Goold wants to argue that all CCTV scans should 
be publicly available – available to all, so that those who are responsible for 
them can be scrutinized at any time.
21  Benjamin Goold, “Open to All? Regulating Open Street CCTV”, Criminal Justice Ethics 25, no. 1 (2006): 11–12.
22  Bentham spelled out his views in an eponymous series of letters written in 1787, though he also referred 
to it elsewhere in his writings (see http://www.cartome.org/panopticon2.htm). See Jeremy Bentham, The 
Panopticon Writings, ed. Miran Bozovic (London: Verso, 1995). Most of the contemporary discussion takes as 
its point of departure Michel Foucault’s discussion of Bentham in Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison, 
trans. Alan Sheridan (NY: Vintage Books 1977), 195–228.
23  Jeremy Bentham, The Works of Jeremy Bentham, ed. John Bowring (London: W. Tait, 1838–43), vol. 4, 46.

Security and Privacy
96
We are not so sanguine about Goold’s solution, even though we are also 
troubled by the frequent inadequacies of oversight agencies. There is just too 
much out there, and the likelihood that improper use of CCTV data will go 
undetected or unpenalized is substantial. Moreover, as we have learned with 
the doctrine of caveat emptor, we cannot presume that people in general will 
have the energy, inclination or ability to police such matters. The mere capacity 
to review material, though important, is not enough. Nor can we presume that 
complaints will be appropriately addressed any more than we can presume that 
oversight mechanisms will work effectively. Moreover, there is a danger that the 
availability of such materials could provide yet another resource for those whose 
perverted tastes would review, rework and distribute materials in such a way 
as to constitute an unacceptable invasion of privacy. True, some technological 
safeguards might be provided (for example, barriers on cut, paste and print 
options), but even these would not be foolproof. At best – and maybe it is the 
best – we can hope that the possibility of misuse being uncovered because of 
a policy of transparency might operate to deter those who would otherwise be 
inclined to misuse such data. As in other cases, however, the effectiveness of a 
policy of deterrence will depend significantly on perceptions of the likelihood 
of being caught and, if so, the actual penalties for misuse.24
To some extent, Goold’s solution seems to move in exactly the wrong direction. 
We do wish to maintain some measure of privacy in public and surveillance 
technology threatens that. Making such information available to all exacerbates 
the problem by enabling whatever private acts took place in public to be 
communicated even more widely than might have been presumed when they 
took place. The values that informed confidentiality as well as privacy – the 
values of contextual integrity as well as agency – would be compromised.
The next issue we need consider is the quality of the technology itself and our 
reliance on its apparent infallibility.25 In an attempt to examine the claims of 
facial recognition software using CCTV footage, James Meek, a journalist from 
the Guardian,26 had his mugshot taken and then challenged the CCTV system on 
the streets of the east London borough of Newham to identify him. However, 
the software used, FaceIt, failed to recognize him. Although official results 
are secret, the system has, according to the Newham police, never recognized 
a person from its database of faces. The value of the system is apparently in 
24  To this end, we think it is important that those engaged in surveillance operations know that they are, in 
fact, subject to reviews of ongoing accountability. The implementation of performance management systems, 
audits, program evaluations, inspections and the use of Techno-ethics Boards to address emerging concerns 
will put practitioners on notice that transparency is valued and, more importantly, actively pursued.
25  See Peter Kovesi, “Video Surveillance is Useless”, Presentation at the 18th International Symposium of the 
Australia and New Zealand Forensic Society, April 2–7, 2006, Fremantle Western Australia. Also Peter Kovesi, “Video 
Surveillance: Legally Blind”, presentation at DICTA 2009, Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications, 
December 1–3, 2009, Melbourne, Australia, http://dicta2009.vu.edu.au/, viewed December 31, 2009.
26  James Meek, “Robo Cop”, The Guardian, 13/06/2002.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
97
its deterrence effect, though even this is disputed. Indeed, according to the 
article that Meek wrote in Tampa, Florida, fourteen false positives and no true 
positives were recorded on one day. If this result is typical, perhaps we need 
not worry about any imminent actual infringement upon our privacy. Maybe 
we should be more concerned about government agencies spending enormous 
sums of money on systems that do not work! We will return to the issue of the 
quality of technological systems later in this study.
Even if the quality of the technology of video surveillance improves, there are 
some practical difficulties with serious consequences. The practical difficulties 
are volume and human error. The sheer volume of stored video information 
is overwhelming. Human evaluation capability is simply not up to the task of 
viewing all that information. The other problem, human error, applies to both 
stored and real-time video monitoring. According to the US National Institute 
of Justice, “Monitoring video screens is both boring and mesmerizing.”27 
Smart Surveillance is being proposed as a solution to these problems.28 Smart 
surveillance, of which IBM’s S329 is but an example, offers the technological 
capability of providing real-time alerts (such as user-defined, generic, class 
specific, behavioral and high-value video capture), automatic forensic video 
retrieval and situation awareness. Although the current state of this technology 
faces challenges (both technical and evaluative), should these difficulties be 
resolved significant implications present themselves. The first is that these 
systems need to be able to prove their reliability by having few or no false 
positives. Another is the unprecedented challenge to privacy posed by the 
use of this technology to enhance privacy! The point is not that the challenge 
could not be met, but that it would be met only if its use could be adequately 
overseen, something that already constitutes a major issue.
Scanning devices30
Along with watch lists, there has been increased scrutiny not only of luggage 
but also of persons. Following the Richard Reid incident, shoes must now be 
27  Mary W. Green, The Appropriate and Effective Use of Security Technologies in U.S. Schools, A Guide for 
Schools and Law Enforcement Agencies, Sandia National Laboratories, September 1999, NCJ 178265.
28  Arun Hampapur, Lisa Brown, Jonathan Connell, Sharat Pankanti, Andrew Senior, and Yingli Tian, 
“Smart Surveillance: Applications, Technologies and Implications”, available at: http://domino.research.ibm.
com/comm./research_projects.nsf/pages/s3.pubs.html/$FILE$/PCM03.pdf.
29  See Ying-li Tian, Lisa Brown, Arun Hampapur, Max Lu, Andrew Senior, and Chiao-fe Shu, “IBM Smart 
Surveillance System (S3): Event Based Video Surveillance System with an Open and Extensible Framework”, 
Machine Vision and Applications 19 (2008):315–27, DOI 10.1007/s00138-008-0153-z. The article claims that 
such systems provide “not only the capability to automatically monitor a scene but also the capability to 
manage the surveillance data, perform event based retrieval, receive real time event alerts thru standard web 
infrastructure and extract long term statistical patterns of activity” (315).
30  For further discussion of the law and ethics relating to the use of this technology, see Julie Solomon, “Does 
the TSA Have Stage Fright? Then Why are they Picturing you Naked?”, Journal of Air Law and Commerce 
73, no 3 (2008): 643–71; Tobias W. Mock, “Comment: The TSA’s New X-Ray Vision: The Fourth Amendment 

Security and Privacy
98
routinely removed for X-ray inspection and, following another incident, carry-
on liquids have been banned or restricted. Computers are sometimes checked for 
traces of explosives. To try to ensure that weapons etc. do not escape the metal 
detectors through which passengers must pass, some passengers are subjected 
to a further level of scrutiny using a wand or pat-down search.31 However, 
the latter has led to complaints of sexual touching or acute anxiety, and so 
efforts have been made to develop technologies that will achieve the same effect 
without touching.
A few years ago, an X-ray backscatter imaging system was developed to detect 
weapons or explosives concealed on the body. The system penetrates clothing 
and reveals anything on the body surface (though it cannot pick up items that 
may be hidden in body folds).32 It was trialed in a number of airports in the US 
(e.g. Orlando) and elsewhere. The technology has now developed further and 
the current system of choice is called an Active Millimeter Wave body scanner.33 
It uses high-frequency millimeter waves and not radiation.
Devices such as these are already in use in the UK, Netherlands, Japan and 
Thailand. They were tested at Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport and trialed in LA 
and New York34 before becoming standard equipment in many airports around 
the world.
Implications of ‘Body-Scan’ Searches at Domestic Airport Security Checkpoints”, Santa Clara Law Review 
49 (2009): 213–51; TSA website http://www.tsa.dhs.gov/approach/tech/castscope.shtm. In addition, the 
technology is being considered for use in other contexts via mobile units; see Glen W. Fewkes, “New Public 
Surveillance Technologies May Alter Fourth Amendment Standards”, Government Security News, March 6, 
2009, available at: http://www.gsnmagazine.com.
31  However, as the recent case of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab has shown, the problems may not be with 
technologies but with the humans who administer them. See Eric Lipton and Scott Shane, “Questions on 
Why Terror Suspect Wasn’t Stopped”, The New York Times, December 2, 2009: http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/12/28/us/28terror.html?_r=1&scp=2&sq=Umar%20Farouk%20Abdulmutallab%20&st=cse.
32  See Austin Considine, “Will New Airport X-Rays Invade Privacy?”, The New York Times, October 9, 
2005, TR3; also the Rapiscan website: http://www.rapiscansystems.com/sec1000.html and, more graphically, 
http://www.electromax.com/rapiscan%20secure%201000.html.
33  Although a number of companies are using this technology, most of the ones being trialed at present 
are manufactured by L3 Communications for the Transportation Security Agency (Department of Homeland 
Security), http://www.l-3com.com/products-services/productservice.aspx?id=533&type=b. For technical 
data and assessments, see Committee on Assessment of Security Technologies for Transportation, National 
Research Council, Assessment of Millimeter-Wave and Terahertz Technology for Detection and Identification 
of Concealed Explosives and Weapons (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007). http://books.
nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=11826&page=R1. For the latest in such technology, see S. Oka, H. 
Togo, N. Kukutsu, and T. Nagatsuma, “Latest Trends in Millimeter-Wave Imaging Technology”, Progress In 
Electromagnetics Research Letters 1 (2008): 197–204. For discussion of ethical issues see http://www.mindfully.
org/Technology/2007/Active-Millimeter-Wave11oct07.htm.
34  See Calvin Biesecker, “TSA to Test Additional Personal Imaging Systems at Airports”, Defense Daily, 
8/21/2007. For further updates, following the Christmas Day 2009 terror attempt, see “UK Introduces Full-
body Screening in Heathrow Airport”, available at: http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number8.3/uk-introduces-
naked-body-scanners; “EU Considers Full Body Screening in Airports”, available at: http://www.edri.org/
edrigram/number8.1/airport-body-scanners-europe.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
99
Critics of devices such as Rapiscan also raise the specter of X-Ray contamination, 
though the amounts to which people are exposed fall well below allowable levels 
and, as we have noted, do not constitute a problem in the case of more recent 
technologies.
Source: http://www.thetechherald.com/media/images/200826/Provision_1.jpg; http://www.mytvmoments.
com/view.php?v=14579
Nevertheless, the problem with such devices is that even though they seem35 to 
avoid the privacy concerns associated with pat downs they create privacy issues 
of their own: screen images showing genital areas can be viewed as well as medical 
information that people may wish to keep private (such as colostomy bags or 
physiological oddities). In theory, the images may be saved and downloaded, 
though it appears that the machines do not need to have a save/download 
function.36 New machines can also obscure the head, so that the passenger is 
not identifiable (though this is a feature that can be easily changed and may 
be not much of a hindrance to identification). A further privacy-enhancing 
feature is the stationing of monitors some distance from the device itself. A 
partial technological solution to the privacy problem is available: instead of the 
screen image being “what the machine sees”, the raw data can be projected onto 
a generic outline so that all that appears are any metallic, plastic or otherwise 
dense objects. Although this important further step appears not to have been 
taken with many of the machines currently in use and under review, it has been 
taken in many settings, including a number of international airports. However, 
it should be noted that this is not sufficient for some civil liberties groups, who 
35  It has been claimed that, because the machines cannot always disambiguate images, subsequent pat-
downs are still sometimes required. Nevertheless, surveys suggest that people are more willing to have a 
“virtual strip search” than a pat-down.
36  There have, however, been cases in which images have been improperly saved and distributed. See Jeanne 
Merserve and Mike M. Ahlers, “Body Scanners Can Store, Send Images, Group Says”, CNN News, January 11, 
2010, available at: http://edition.cnn.com/2010/TRAVEL/01/11/body.scanners/index.html.

Security and Privacy
100
take the view that unless there is some other, compelling reason to think that a 
particular person could have terrorist connections (say, the appearance of his/
her name on a watch list), no person should be subjected to such searches. This 
replication of pat-downs is also not without its problems. Recently the latest 
in body-scanning technology has raised a new problem; the seeming creation 
of child pornography.37 The graphic nature of the latest technology scanning 
children means that the resulting images may breach child protection laws of 
the UK. The result is that, at the moment, individuals under the age of eighteen 
are exempt from scanning.38 The problem with this is obvious: children could 
easily be carriers of the very objects that the scanning was devised to detect.
A further complaint concerning scanning devices has to do with their cost-
effectiveness. The machines currently cost about US$200,000, have high 
support requirements and are time-consuming to operate and maintain. Do 
the gains in security match the expenditure involved? Might the money and 
human resources be better invested elsewhere? James Carafano of the Heritage 
Foundation takes the view that “where you want to spend your money is [where 
you have a prospect of] getting the terrorists long before they get to the TSA 
checkpoint.”39
Wiretaps, bugs, and parabolic microphones
In the US, the tapping of telegraph lines goes back to the Civil War, with 
telephone tapping beginning in the 1890s, soon after the development of 
the telephone recorder. Tapping is covered primarily by FISA, ECPA and the 
Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (CALEA),40 and is 
supplemented by the other acts that we have already referred to. CALEA requires 
telecommunications providers to ensure that upgrades to their technologies do 
not exclude the possibility of governmental tracking and interception.
Whereas wiretaps generally involve some external interception of 
telecommunications, bugging devices are usually located within the premises 
that are being monitored. They mostly take the form of microphones, often 
disguised as objects whose real function is unlikely to be detected: fountain 
pens, desk calculators, clock radios etc. Sometimes they are video-capable as 
well. The planting of bugs will frequently require unauthorized entry into 
private premises. ECPA has important provisions regarding the sale and use of 
bugging devices.
37  See Alan Travis, “New Scanners Break Child Porn Laws”,The Guardian, Monday, January 4, 2010 22.14 
GMT.
38  Ibid. See also Leonora LaPeter Anton, “Airport Body Scanners Reveal All, but What About When It’s 
Your Kid?”, St Petersburg Times, July, 17, 2010.
39  See http://www.cnsnews.com/ViewNation.asp?Page=/Nation/archive/200710/NAT20071015a.htm.
40  Available at http://www.epic.org/privacy/wiretap/calea/calea_law.html.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
101
Parabolic microphones use satellite dish technology to focus sounds from up 
to about 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. There are stereo versions that give even 
better quality sound. Along with bugging and wiretap devices, they are easily 
available for purchase online. Indeed it is relatively simple to obtain product 
reviews of monitoring software (with a view to purchasing the most effective for 
one’s own special purposes).41
Because of its invasiveness, wiretapping has always been contentious. As Justice 
Brandeis famously remarked:
The evil incident to invasion of the privacy of the telephone is far 
greater than that involved in tampering with the mails. Whenever a 
telephone line is tapped, the privacy of the persons at both ends of the 
line is invaded, and all conversations between them upon any subject, 
and although proper, confidential, and privileged, may be overheard. 
Moreover, the tapping of one man's telephone line involves the tapping 
of the telephone of every other person whom he may call, or who 
may call him. As a means of espionage, writs of assistance and general 
warrants are but puny instruments of tyranny and oppression when 
compared with wire tapping.42
As we have already noted, FISA has undergone various modifications since 
9/11 and there is some evidence that its provisions have been circumvented.43 
The strength of that controversy is largely expressive of Brandeis’s concerns, 
though in the US it also taps into the ongoing controversy about the reach of the 
president’s authority under the Constitution.44
In light of the potential threats to privacy posed by electronic and other 
interception and scanning devices, in most liberal democracies their use is legally 
permissible by law enforcement agencies only in the case of serious crimes. 
Moreover, such use is typically subject to oversight and accountability, including 
the requirement for independently adjudicated warrants. Nevertheless, here, as 
elsewhere, as a consequence of rapid technological development, there remain 
gaps in relevant legislation and accountability.
41  See, for example, the “Internet Activity Monitoring Software Consumer Guide”, with recommendations 
on the top products reviewed, at: www.monitoringsoftwarereviews.org.consumerguide.html. This guide 
covers such topics as remote data access, accessibility of information, stealth, key logging (hardware and 
software versions), blocking, data filtering and screen shots.
42  Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438 (1928).
43  See “NSA Warrantless Surveillance Controversy”, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NSA_warrantless_
surveillance_controversy.
44  This also connects with the subsequent controversy (November, 2007) about holding responsible those 
companies that acquiesced in executive requests while knowing FISA requirements.

Security and Privacy
102
Online surveillance
Even before 9/11, the US Government was developing technologies capable of 
scrutinizing (“sniffing”) internet traffic (IP packets) and recording those that met 
certain security-related criteria. The main instrument for this was a software-
based tool known initially as Carnivore, later to become the less predatorily-
named Digital Collection System 1000 (DCS 1000). The story of Carnivore’s 
development was broken by the Wall Street Journal in 2000.45 In response to 
concerns inter alia about communicative privacy, Carnivore was tendered for an 
“independent” review, which was completed in September 2000.46 This did not 
allay the worries of critics, though the renamed version was for a time placed 
on some servers. It appears that DCS 1000 was able to function in either pen-
register/trap and trace (compare to the recording of outgoing phone numbers 
and incoming phone numbers) or full intercept (compare to wiretapping) mode. 
How it operates in either mode depends on what it is asked to do by way of 
recognizing keywords or strings. DCS 1000 is no longer used, having been 
abandoned in favor of commercially available technology.47
A key issue for the kind of technology involved in DCS 1000 (and its surrogates) 
has been one of accountability. Accountability can be incorporated by building 
into the search software constraints that will make violations of privacy or other 
abuses less likely and/or by ensuring (using various forms of oversight48) that 
data collected will be used only for limited, approved purposes.
Unlike telephone communications, in which the content of the call and the 
identifying number calling/called are quite separate, or mail, in which the 
envelope and its contents are clearly differentiated,49 the IP packets that are 
sniffed by programs such as DCS 1000 are more closely integrated. Transactional 
45  Neil King, Jr., “FBI’s Wiretaps to Scan E-Mail Spark Concern”, Wall Street Journal, 7/11/2000, A3. At the 
time, the primary purpose of Carnivore was not terrorism but crime, particularly financial crimes and child 
pornography.
46  The review was carried out by a Research Institute at the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT). The terms 
of the review were constrained in a number of ways (critics spoke of it as a whitewash), and several prestigious 
institutions reputedly refused approaches to conduct it. The review, largely technical, can be found at http://
www.dojgov.net/carnivore-iitri.pdf. An official public (censored) version is also available on the web at: 
http://www.usdoj.gov/jmd/publications/carnivore_draft_1.pdf. Nevertheless, the IIT review found that “it 
is not possible to determine who, among a group of agents with the password, may have set or changed filter 
settings. In fact, any action taken by the Carnivore system could have been directed by anyone knowing the 
Administrator password. It is impossible to trace the actions to specific individuals.”
47  FoxNews, “FBI Ditches Carnivore Surveillance System”, available at: http://www.foxnews.com/
story/0,2933,144809,00.html. One of the supposed strengths of Carnivore was its capacity to track only what 
was authorized by court order.
48  Some of these will necessarily be internal FBI procedures along with legislative provisions and/or 
judicial powers. Others no doubt will take the form of external monitors such as EPIC, the Electronic Privacy 
Information Center (http://www.epic.org). The latter form of monitoring is made somewhat difficult because 
the software, its capabilities and some of its uses are classified.
49  This is not to say that envelope details are unimportant. How often A communicates with B, and how 
large the packets, may reveal quite a bit. One can presume some degree of anonymity in this context as well.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
103
and substantive data are not easily separable, and that raises a problem. Whereas 
access to the former does not require a search warrant, access to the latter does. 
In addition, because of the “packet switching” that occurs (in which packets 
of information take the most efficient route to their destinations, where they 
are reassembled) a search program is likely to sniff a lot of innocent and private 
communications. And so, “a simple search to see if two people are emailing 
each other – which can be approved without a search warrant – requires that 
Carnivore digest the private correspondence of millions of people.”50 It is not 
like putting an intercept device on a particular phone number to see who is 
being called.
The disanalogy with telephone records has been magnified by the USA PATRIOT 
Act,51 which has extended permissible searches to include IP (Internet Protocol) 
addresses and URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) visited. Once someone has 
access to an IP address (i.e. an address that refers uniquely to an internet-
accessed computer) it is possible to track where that user has been. Similarly, 
URLs can show what content the person accessed on the internet (e.g. whether 
pornographic or jihadist sites were visited and, if so, how often).
Of course, the interception of communications is just one dimension of online 
vulnerability. There is also the issue of stored communications – say, emails on 
a server waiting to be read, or the inbox storage of emails. What protections 
should these have against the intrusions of others? Are they adequate? Do they 
have teeth?
Another piece of controversial software – a keystroke logging program known as 
Magic Lantern – embeds itself (usually via a technique known as a Trojan horse) 
50  Joseph Goodman, Angela Murphy, Morgan Streetman, and Mark Sweet, “Carnivore: Will it Devour 
Your Privacy?”, Duke Law & Technology Review (2001): 0028 http://www.law.duke.edu/journals/dltr/
articles/2001dltr0028.
51  These are contained in sections 201–225 of the USA PATRIOT Act. The Act included a number of 
provisions relating to surveillance, including the interception of wire, oral or electronic communications. 
Many of its surveillance-related provisions predated the Act, but were extended to cover various terrorism-
oriented investigations. Some provisions relate to the sharing of information gathered under the aegis of 
the Act (always a problem area, not only because of cracks in the security of data but also because such 
data are sometimes of questionable accuracy, de-contextualized and may be put to expanded uses). The 
expansion of provisions previously available under FISA to engage in extended “roving wiretaps” has also 
generated some controversy: normally (limited) wiretap requests require explicit detailed specifications before 
they are granted. Under the USA PATRIOT Act these requirements, as well as geographical requirements 
for warrant service, have been loosened. The use of pen registers/trap and trace devices is also made easier 
under the Act, it being no longer required that the person whose communications are targeted is “an agent of 
a foreign power”. It is enough that the gathering of intelligence be a significant purpose of interception and 
surveillance. The focus may be domestic as well as international terrorism. Most controversial of all has been 
sect. 215, which allows the FBI (under FISA or through the issue of a “national security letter”) to compel the 
handing over of any item or record that it requests and to forbid the party from whom it seeks the item from 
disclosing such requests to others. Libraries have been particularly reluctant to disclose loan records. The 
major problem with a number of these provisions is that the government is not first required to establish why 
some particular person is a legitimate object of its surveillance powers.

Security and Privacy
104
on a target’s hard drive and then records all that computer’s keystrokes. One of 
the main purposes has been to access various passwords.52 Magic Lantern (and 
its predecessor, Key Logging System) also circumvents the problems/safeguards 
created by encryption (whereby communications are coded in such a way that 
only recipients with a “key” are likely to be able to read them). Again, there are 
significant issues of accountability, encompassing targeting, data review, data 
retention, data security and so on.53
WWWveillance
Beyond the scope of this study is the importance54 for surveillance of the emerging 
trend of more and more information about individuals being available on the 
internet, including their social activities and private musings. This opens a new 
field of surveillance activities that are even harder for the individual to detect. 
Entire categories of new surveillance tools, such as web crawlers, cookies, bugs 
and webcams, have emerged. These provide surveillance agents with a plethora 
of new information with which to carry out new patterns of surveillance. Colin 
Bennett identifies glitch, default, design, possession and subject as examples 
of such patterns of surveillance.55 Note that this sort of surveillance is subtly 
different from the online surveillance described previously.
Digitizing surveillance
Already hinted at in the previous section is the change from simple video 
and audio taping, which then has to be watched by humans, to the so-called 
digitizing of analogue recordings.56 Indeed, with the latest technology the 
analogue step is bypassed completely in favor of direct digital recording. This 
is relatively common: these days how many do not have a digital camera with a 
hard drive or flash card? These “digitized” recordings can then be examined by 
software.57 According to Stephen Graham and David Wood, this is important for 
several reasons, including widening geography and real-time monitoring. This 
is compounded by the increasing use of automated systems that require little or 
52  See US v. Scarfo, 180 F. Supp. 2d 572 (DNJ 2001).
53  Chapter IX of this study offers accountability options to be considered when addressing these concerns.
54  For an example of the importance of this, see Tamara Dinev, Paul Hart, and Michael R. Mullen, “Internet 
Privacy Concerns and Beliefs about Government Surveillance – An Empirical Investigation”, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems 17 (2008): 214–33. See also Ian Brown, “Terrorism and the Proportionality of 
Internet Surveillance”, European Journal of Criminology 6, no. 2 (2009): 119–134.
55  Colin J. Bennett, “Cookies, Web Bugs, Webcams and Cue Cats: Patterns of Surveillance on the World 
Wide Web”, Ethics and Information Technology 3 (2001): 197–210.
56  See the James Meek article on facial recognition software applied to CCTV footage introduced earlier.
57  Stephen Graham and David Wood, “Digitizing Surveillance: Categorization, Space, Inequality”, Critical 
Social Policy 23, no. 2 (2003): 227–48.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
105
no human intervention: what Jones calls the “digital rule”.58 On the one hand, 
this automated processing can be used to overcome biases of human decision 
makers; on the other hand, the systems can be designed and built to exclude 
whole classes of persons with there being no overt acknowledgement that such 
exclusion is occurring.
Of course, these digitized recordings are stored in databases (which can be 
combined with other related databases and so on) which can then be further 
combed through in a secondary process called “dataveillance”.
Dataveillance
Although not discussed in detail in this study the notion of monitoring not 
individuals but rather data about individuals is important.59 Here, dataveillance 
is understood as the monitoring of data systems rather than of persons directly. 
While the ultimate end of this monitoring is to keep track of individuals it 
does so indirectly, making it less intrusive, more covert and less likely to be 
known by the individual(s) being monitored. It is important also because of the 
increasing acceptance of the notion that the identity of a person being watched 
is nothing but what is recorded about that person.
An important new development is the use of syndromic surveillance. This is 
the use of dataveillance techniques to track patterns in (nondiagnostic health 
information60) symptoms. Although originally intended to aid early intervention 
in the outbreak of potentially catastrophic pandemics (a worthwhile enterprise), 
its techniques can also be used to track patterns of any kind in any population, 
all without the permission or knowledge of the members of that population.61
RFIDs
A little-recognized form of surveillance, Radio Frequency Identification Devices 
(RFIDs), is beginning to be understood as a serious threat to privacy. Originally 
developed to manage warehouse inventories, the use of these short range devices 
58  R. Jones, “Digital Rule: Punishment, Control and Technology”, Punishment and Society 2, no. 1 (2001): 
5–22.
59  For a history of the transition from conventional electronic surveillance to dataveillance see Mun-Cho 
Kim, “Surveillance Technology, Privacy and Social Control: With Reference to the Case of the Electronic 
National Identification Card in South Korea”, International Sociology 19, no. 2 (2004): 193–213. For more recent 
attempts see Yuval Elovici, Bracha Shapira, Mark Last, Omer Azzfrany, Menahem Friedman, Moti Schneider, 
and Abraham Kandel, “Content Based Detection of Terrorists Browsing the Web Using an Advanced Terror 
Detection System”, in Terrorism Informatics: Knowledge Management and Data Mining for Homeland Security, 
ed. Hsinchun Chen, Edna Reid, Joshua Sinai, Andrew Silke, and Boaz Ganor (Springer, 2008), 365–384.
60  See Lyle Fearnley, “Signals Come and Go: Syndromic Surveillance and Styles of Biosecurity”, Environment 
and Planning A, 40 (2008): 1615–1632.
61  Leslie P. Francis, Margaret P. Battin, Jay Jacobson, and Charles Smith, “Syndromic Surveillance and 
Patients as Victims and Vectors”, Bioethical Inquiry 6 (2009): 187–195.

Security and Privacy
106
has expanded to include tracking of employees while at work.62 RFIDs can be 
read without the wearer’s knowledge or permission. Indeed, some RFIDs can 
be placed on employee work badges, clothing or other work-specific apparel. 
According to Jeremy Gruber, once confined simply to location information they 
have in recent times been expanded to include information such as “fingerprints, 
social security number, driver’s license number”. Also, according to Gruber 
(and others), there are no legal constraints on the use of RFIDs in the workplace.
Participatory surveillance
Most of the discussion of surveillance so far has concerned covert practices or 
compulsory surveillance. Here we discuss a new and often overlooked form of 
surveillance: consensual or buying-in technology. This is technology that users 
must have in order to carry out their work/social activities but implicit in the 
technology is the ability to use it as a surveillance tool.
In the workplace, the use of “consent to be surveilled” as a means of claiming 
that the employee is “OK” with surveillance is used by employers to meet their 
moral obligations of “informed consent” and similar concepts. However, this 
consent frequently amounts to nothing more than coercion: no agreement to 
surveillance, no job. This is morally problematic, as the consent involved is at 
best superficial.63
In the context of ordinary society, twittering, tweeting and blogging are part 
of a new phenomenon, known as social networking or social media,64 that has 
enormous potential for surveillance. In these technologies, people voluntarily 
post (hence the term participatory) information (often intensely personal) on 
websites that they believe (indeed hope) are accessible to millions. Although it 
is a social phenomenon of interest in its own right, we are interested here mainly 
in the ethical implications of such activity.
Many of the subscribers are teens and young adults with little experience in the 
adult world. One of the problems they face is that employers can, and do, check 
a prospective employee’s activity on these social sites. Exuberant and youthful 
outbursts appropriate for the time may be seen in a less-than-favorable light. 
62  For an example of this, see Jeremy Gruber, “RFID and Workplace Privacy”, on the National Workrights 
Institute website, http://www.workrights.org/issue_electronic/RFIDWorkplacePrivacy.html, December 23, 
2009, and Paul Roth, “Workplace Privacy Issues Raised by RFID Technology”, Privacy Issues Forum, March 
30, 2006, University of Otago, New Zealand.
63  For a more detailed treatment see, Jo Ann Oravec, “Secret Sharers: Consensual and Participatory 
Surveillance Concerns in the Context of Network-Based Computer Systems”, ACM SIGOIS Bulletin 14, no. 1 
(July 1993): 32–40.
64  For an excellent examination of the issues see Anders Albrechtslund, “Online Social Networking as 
Participatory Surveillance”, First Monday 13, no. 3 (March 2008). Note that this omits sites such as Facebook 
from consideration.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
107
Thoughts once divulged to close friends in a cloak of intimacy and presumed 
secrecy are now broadcast to millions of subscribers. Such disclosures can 
be damaging to the individual and their friendships.65 Friendships that are 
physically and emotionally close can be harder to develop as a result of a loss 
of a sense of whether the blogger/tweeter can be trusted with confidential 
information.
However, as Anders Albrechtslund says, it can be empowering: “participatory 
surveillance is a way of maintaining friendships by checking up on information 
that other people share. Such a friendship might seem shallow, but it is a 
convenient way of keeping in touch with a large circle of friends, which can 
be more difficult to handle offline without updates of personal information – 
untold and unasked.”66
So what is the problem for surveillance/security? As Albrechtslund puts it, 
although the original intention of such sites was “mutuality, empowerment and 
sharing”, this unprecedented level of disclosure makes possible fraud, social 
sorting and identity theft.67 Surveillance by anyone with an account (which can 
be gained with little verification of the subscriber’s identity) is automatic and 
easy.
Some social commentators have said that, taken to its extreme, where others 
post information about us on their sites, this saturation of information about the 
everyday and mundane is not big brother but rather little sister.68
65  For a recent review, see Jeffrey Rosen, “The End of Forgetting”, The New York Times Magazine, July 
25, 2010, 30 et seq. One of the difficulties here is that privacy settings can be difficult to understand and 
control and, on some social networking sites, privacy policies change with some regularity and it can be 
difficult to keep up with the changes. Although it is arguable that young people have very different privacy 
expectations from those of an earlier generation, this might be questioned, see Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Jennifer 
King, Su Li, and Joseph Turow, “How Different Are Young Adults from Older Adults When it Comes to 
Information Privacy Attitudes and Policies?”, available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=1589864. See also, “In the Matter of Google, Inc.” (March 30, 2011), available at: http://www.ftc.gov/os/
caselist/1023136/index.shtm.
66  See also Dean Cocking and Steve Matthews, “Unreal Friends”, Ethics and Information Technology 2, no. 
4 (2001): 223–31.
67  For another excellent list of worries see Christian Fuchs, Social Networking Sites and the Surveillance 
Society (Salzburg: Förderung der Integration der Informationswissenschaften, 2009).
68  It is difficult to be certain of the origin of the phrase “little sister”. Here is one claim: “The 
Reverend and Doctor Omed, We Are Little Sister and We Are Watching Us”, http://www.dailykos.com/
story/2009/4/16/720852/-We-Are-Little-Sister-and-We-Are-Watching-Us, viewed 20 January 2010: 
I would like to suggest a new meme as an overlay and even a successor to Big Brother: Little Sister. 
Little Sister is everyone who carries a cellphone with a digital camera that can upload pics and viddy 
to the intertubes. Little Sister is whoever cops a feed off Fox News, and everyone who posts it online. 
Little Sister is the “Macaca” who provided now former Senator George Allen an opportunity to destroy 
his political career. Little Sister is the 3 or more BART riders who viddied BART policeman Johannes 
Mehserle shooting Oscar Grant as Grant lay prone on the floor of the car. Little Sister is an emergent 
property of people interacting via the ever-faster global communications grid and all the technologies, 
software, and infrastructure that make, extend, and connect it.

Security and Privacy
108
Resisting surveillance69
Also called privacy-enhancing techniques, resisting surveillance has a history 
as long as surveillance itself. There are many ways in which individuals 
and privacy-seeking groups have sought to respond to the aforementioned 
surveillance techniques. Gary Marx identified some eleven ways of resisting by 
neutralizing the effect of surveillance.70 In discussing ways of resisting online 
profiling, Ira Rubinenstein et al. mention multiple identities, cookie-blocking 
settings and commercially available tools such as the Anonymizer,71 as well as 
techniques including onion-routing, unlinkable pseudonyms and anonymous 
credentials.72 Some additional examples of resisting-surveillance technologies 
are: encryption (the most well-known being public key cryptography) and 
steganography (the art/science of secret writing. In the modern context this 
most commonly amounts to embedding information within images). Indeed, for 
almost every piece of surveillance technology there is a counter technology.
Onion-routing is the routing of a message through a series of proxies, each of 
which has an unpredictable path with limited information about where the 
message has come from or is going to.73 Unlinkable pseudonymy is the creation 
of multiple pseudonyms for a single identity, each of which cannot be linked to 
any of the other pseudonyms. This allows a person to sign up anonymously to 
several websites without revealing that he or she is the same person. Credentials 
are needed to satisfy sign-on requirements for loyalty programs, website 
registration and the like. These are requested to ensure that the person signing 
on is genuine and not, for example, a web-crawler. Anonymous credentials have 
the feature of providing verification information without revealing the identity 
of the real or genuine person.
69  For a general theory of resisting surveillance, see Aaron K. Martin, Rosamunde van Brakel, and Daniel 
Bernhard, “Understanding Resistance to Digital Surveillance: Towards a Multi-Disciplinary, Multi-Actor 
Framework”, Surveillance & Society 6 no. 3 (2009): 213–32.
70  Gary T. Marx, “A Tack in the Shoe: Neutralizing and Resisting the New Surveillance”, Journal of 
Social Issues 59, no. 2 (2003): 369–90. The eleven ways are: discovery, avoidance, piggybacking, switching, 
distorting, blocking, masking, breaking, refusal and cooperative and counter-surveillance.
71  See http://www.freeproxy.ru/en/free_proxy/cgi-proxy.htm (viewed 20 January 2010) for an extensive 
list of anonymizing tools. To quote from the web page (http://www.online-proxy.net/), “Online-Proxy.net 
is a free web based anonymous proxy service, which allows anyone to surf the web privately and securely.”
72  Ira S. Rubinstein, Ronald D. Lee, and Paul M. Schwartz, “Data Mining and Internet Profiling: Emerging 
Regulatory and Technological Approaches”, University of Chicago Law Review 75, no. 1 (2008): 261–85, esp. 
274–80.
73  This belongs to a class of technology called anonymous remailers. See, for example, Wayne Madsen, 
“FBI’s Communications Surveillance Capabilities Widen”, Computer Fraud & Security, 2000, no. 10, (October 
2000): 16–17; George F. du Pont, “The Time Has Come For Limited Liability For Operators of True Anonymity 
Remailers in Cyberspace: An Examination of the Possibilities and Perils”, Journal of Technology Law & Policy 
6, no. 2 (2001): 175–218, available at: http://grove.ufl.edu/~techlaw/vol6/issue2/duPont.pdf.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
109
Not only do these technologies protect the privacy of individuals but they are 
also indiscriminate in that they serve to block (or at least make more difficult) 
both commercial surveillance as well as police efforts to track or uncover 
criminals, terrorists and the like.
Although the above discussion has focused on ways of avoiding surveillance, 
there are also methods used by surveillance technology to limit its own reach. 
Yu et al. describe a method whereby visual surveillance technology can limit its 
access into personally identifying information.74 Through the use of abstraction 
operators, the system known as PriSurv can limit the degree and kind of 
information the system can display, though the authors note that “excess 
visual abstraction makes video surveillance meaningless.”75 There are other 
techniques, such as pixelization, blurring and blacking out that also achieve 
the aim of making sensitive information unavailable. Of course, the use of all of 
these techniques is at the discretion of the operator/programmer.
Steganography76 usually refers to the use of covert or hidden writing but can be 
expanded to include any form of communication. As Gary Kessler points out, this 
is different from cryptography, which makes the communication unreadable but 
does not seek to hide the communication itself. Combining the two technologies 
can make for a very powerful way of resisting digital surveillance. Steganography 
can take many forms – from the microdots of B-grade spy movies to more ancient 
techniques such as invisible ink (so-called technical steganography). This method 
of avoiding communications being surveilled has received renewed interest 
recently with the increased sophistication of digital technologies. With these 
new technologies communications can be hidden in image or audio files. Data 
can be hidden in unused file space or file headers. All digital communications 
are packaged into some form through protocols. The most commonly known 
and used protocols are Internet Protocol (IP) and Transmission Control Protocols 
(TCP). Information can be hidden inside segments of these carriers. Finally, hard 
disks can be divided into secret partitions which are undetected by normal 
surveillance or scanning technologies. Of course steganography is available to 
terrorists as well as others.77
74  Xiaoyi Yu, K. Chinomi, T. Koshimizu, N. Nitta, Y. Ito, N. Babaguchi, “Image Processing, 2008”, ICIP 2008, 
15th IEEE International Conference, October 12–15, 2008, 1672–75.
75  Ibid., 1673.
76  See Gary C. Kessler, “An Overview of Steganography for the Computer Forensics Examiner” (an edited 
version), Forensic Science Communications (Technical Report) 6, no. 3 (July 2004), available at: http://www.fbi.
gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/july2004/research/2004_03_research01.htm; 
http://www.garykessler.net/library/
fsc_stego.html.
77  See Rebecca Givner-Forbes, Steganography: Information Technology in the Service of Jihad (Singapore: The 
International Centre for Political Violence and Terrorism Research, a Centre of the S. Rajaratnam School of 
International Studies, Nanyang Technical University, 2007).

Security and Privacy
110
(B) Second Data Mining78,79 and Integration/Matching80
By way of introduction .  .  .  
If you order many of your books from Amazon.com and use the Amazon 
web site as a convenient way to check on book data (authors’ initials, exact 
titles, publishers, dates of publication, editions etc.), you will also be aware 
that you subsequently receive emailings from Amazon indicating that people 
who have shown interest in your book have also shown interest in other books 
that Amazon is now happy to let you know about. Amazon has applied an 
algorithm to the large amount of data that it amasses/warehouses as a result of 
site visits, which is used to gauge your purchasing proclivities. It then dangles 
before you the possibility of additional purchases in line with “interests” you 
have shown. The overall process of determining what data is to be retained, 
amassing it, patterning it and acting on it is often referred to in literature as 
knowledge discovery; within that knowledge discovery process data mining is 
the application of algorithms to enable predictions or judgments to be made.81 
78  The term “data mining” is somewhat of a misnomer. It conventionally means sifting through large 
amounts of information, usually held in one database, in search of specific pieces of information or data. 
Traditional mining is always held to have a reason for believing that mining a specific location will likely 
result in the discovery of a particular mineral. Gold mining is looking for gold using a body of knowledge that 
says that certain geographical formations are likely to contain deposits of gold. Data mining does not work like 
this. Usually there is scant or little information that even so much as implies that specific information looked 
for is contained in the database being searched. In the case of Amazon, described below, the intent of the data 
mining is not so much to find information but to create information using the available database. Using the 
gold mining example at its best, the Amazon activity is like using the surrounding minerals in a deposit to 
create gold and then calling this activity/process gold mining. At its worst, what Amazon is doing is more like 
taking whatever materials can be found in a given location, combining them using the laws of chemistry and 
calling whatever is produced an intended result. This is hardly mining in the traditional sense.
79  Of course, data mining for national security or policing is not the only use. Perhaps of even more 
importance and worry for privacy is data mining by corporations in which, according to John Soma et al., 
there is an equating of information with financial value. See John T. Soma, et al., “Corporate Privacy Trend: 
The ‘Value’ of Personally Identifiable Information (‘PII’) Equals the ‘Value’ of Financial Assets”, Richmond 
Journal of Law & Technology 15, no. 4 (2009), available at: http://law.richmond.edu/jolt /v15i4/article11.pdf.
80  A note on terminology: in some countries the common term for the aligning of information across a 
number of disparate sources is termed “data integration” and in others it is termed “data matching.” Matching 
is the more correct term when discussing the use of collected information to be used as a predictive tool. 
Integration implies the simple putting together of information whereas matching implies the more important 
(in this context) putting together of information that, when put together, adds value or is said to “match”.
81  Kim Taipale offers the following useful differentiation and breakdown: “The steps that compose the 
knowledge discovery process are (1) pre-processing (including goal identification; data collection, selection, 
and warehousing; and data cleansing or transformation), (2) ‘data mining’ itself, and (3) post-processing 
(including interpretation, evaluation and decision-making or action)” (see “Data Mining and Domestic 
Security: Connecting the Dots to Make Sense of Data”, Columbia Science and Technology Law Review 5 (2003): 
24–25). In 2005, the Department of Homeland Security Privacy Office used the following definition: “Data 
mining involves the use of sophisticated data analysis tools to discover previously unknown, valid patterns 
and relationships in large data sets. Data mining consists of more than collecting and managing data; it also 
includes analysis and prediction.” In 2006, as the result of a House demand, the definition was changed to: “a 
query or search or other analysis of 1 or more electronic databases, whereas – (A) at least 1 of the databases 
was obtained from or remains under the control of a non-Federal entity, or the information was acquired 

 VI. Securitization Technologies
111
Although such predictions can show an uncanny ability to track books that 
might be of interest to you, they can also be a bit irritating if some of the books 
you purchased were purchased for other people or if the tracked volume was 
simply a footnote reference for which you needed a publisher. The algorithm 
should be sophisticated enough to screen out “casual” visits that do not say 
anything – or anything accurate – about your reading interests.
Such is one use of data mining. There are many others. Data mining can be used 
to provide an understanding of human behavior,82 forecast trends and demands, 
track performance or transform seemingly unrelated data into meaningful 
information.83
The importance of data mining and integration was highlighted by the events 
of 9/11, when it subsequently turned out that a number of those involved in 
the attacks were already on the radar screens of security officials and that there 
were even data to suggest that a terrorist attack was imminent. One of the things 
the attack revealed was that government agencies charged with responsibility 
for preventing such occurrences were not adequately equipped to analyze, 
evaluate and integrate the data available to them. Nor, as it subsequently turned 
out, were they equipped to tackle the information in a manner consistent with 
the values of a liberal society – that is, with due regard for privacy and other 
civil liberties. Outcries stemming from this lack of attention to liberties resulted 
in the proposed Total/Terrorist Information Awareness (TIA)84 program being 
abandoned and the updated Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening (CAPPS 
II) program (now Secure Flight) being delayed by a number of years.
Ethical questions arise at every step of the data mining process. In what is 
referred to as the “pre-processing” stage, for example, decisions must be 
initially by another department or agency of the Federal Government for purposes other than intelligence 
or law enforcement; (B) a department or agency of the Federal Government or a non-Federal entity acting 
on behalf of the Federal Government is conducting the query or search or other analysis to find a predictive 
pattern indicating terrorist or criminal activity; and (C) the search does not use a specific individual’s personal 
identifiers to acquire information concerning that individual.” The change had consequences: some “data 
mining” activities discussed in the 2005 report were not reviewed in the 2006 report, and some reviewed in 
the 2006 report had not been considered in the 2005 report.
82  In an unusual take on the problem, Andrew McClurg, “A Thousand Words Are Worth a Picture: A 
Privacy Tort Response to Consumer Data Profiling”, Northwestern University Law Review 98, no. 1 (2006): 
63–143, claims that a serious concern is that data mining by businesses could result in complete dossiers of 
individuals that would give businesses a better understanding of an individual’s purchasing patterns than 
the individual themselves is consciously aware of. According to McClurg, this better profile could then be 
appropriated without permission and used to target similar in-profile persons.
83  The algorithms used for data mining vary considerably in kind and sophistication. There are many 
commercial packages available, often directed at or customized for niche concerns (marketing, law enforcement 
etc.), and purpose-oriented institutions (e.g. Google) often develop their own. Organizations concerned with 
tracking terrorist activity (e.g. the FBI, the CIA) may draw on commercial as well as internal databases in 
seeking to identify links and patterns that warrant further investigation. See Chapter VII.
84  For an overview of TIA see Leslie Regan Shade, “The Culture of Surveillance: G-Men Redux and Total 
Information Awareness”, Topia 9 (2003): 35–45.

Security and Privacy
112
made about the goals to be served by the data mining. Is it simply to identify 
(potential) terrorists or are other goals also contemplated (e.g. organized crime, 
money laundering, tax fraud)? The moral worthiness of the goals will obviously 
have some bearing on the privacy risks that might be justified. “Potential” also 
operates as something of a weasel word: what level of probability will satisfy 
that?85 Goals will also need to be tempered by ethical considerations (for example, 
those mandated by liberal democratic values).86 When it comes to data collection, 
decisions will need to be made about where the data are to come from and whether 
their sources avoid illegitimate breaches of privacy. Data given to institutions for 
certain limited purposes should not normally be used for other purposes.
The Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) 
helpfully classifies data mining activities into two groups; commercial and 
government. In this security context we are interested primarily in those of 
the government.87 These include: monitoring employee expenditures; speeding 
up employees’ security clearance investigation process; identifying improper 
payments under federal benefit and loan programs and helping to detect 
instances of fraud, waste, and abuse; ranking government programs quickly; 
and assisting law enforcement in combating terrorism.
Government data mining is more or less coincident with the development of data 
mining technologies. Prior to 9/11 it was employed to combat various kinds of 
criminal activities, (such as money laundering, drug trafficking and tax fraud) but 
since 9/11 significant data mining efforts have also been directed at the prevention 
of terroristic acts and the apprehension of aspiring terrorists. An array of software 
has been developed and/or used to discover patterns and relationships and to 
make predictions or define rules that can be used in the so-called war on terror.
In August 2006 the OIG released its Survey of DHS Data Mining Activities, in 
which it described 12 data mining activities carried out under the aegis of the 
DHS. The list was not meant to be exhaustive, nor was it confined to operational 
data mining activities – it included several that were “under development”, 
85  Cf. the old feminist slogan: “All men are potential rapists.”
86  As with any means-end reasoning, the use of data mining techniques must satisfactorily respond to the 
relevant questions that such reasoning generates.
87  The commercial uses are given as: to analyze and segment customer buying patterns and identify potential 
goods and services that are in demand; to identify and prevent fraudulent and abusive billing practices; 
to analyze sales trends and predict the effectiveness of promotions; to predict the effectiveness of surgical 
procedures, medical tests and medications; to search information from a number of documents and written 
sources on a particular topic (text mining); and to identify trends and present statistics in ways that are easily 
understood and useful. From the Office of Inspector General, Department of Homeland Security, Survey of 
DHS Data Mining Activities, OIG-06-56 (Washington, DC: Office of Information Technology, August 2006), 
6, http://www.dhs.gov/xoig/assets/mgmtrpts/OIG_06-56_Aug06.pdf. Although the survey distinguishes 
commercial and government uses, it does not as clearly say that government purposes are outsourced to 
commercial data miners. See Chapter VII.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
113
and there may well have been others that were “classified”. Nevertheless, it is 
interesting to review some of the kinds of data mining activities because of the 
different ethical challenges that they provide.
The OIG survey distinguished several types of analytical processes that arguably 
come under the umbrella of data mining:
• Expert systems: programs designed to analyze information about a specific 
class of problems, analyze the problems themselves and, usually, to 
recommend courses of action (e.g. the Automated Commercial Environment 
Screening and Targeting Release S1 (ACE S1) that, from a centralized data 
base, identifies high risk cargo shipments for further detailed examination).
• Association processes:88 processes which link two or more variables (e.g. 
persons and place), for example, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
Pattern Analysis and Information Collection System (ICEPIC) that works 
with various DHS databases to detect patterns and relationships and enable 
investigators to conduct targeted checks of non-resident aliens.
• Threat and risk assessment tools: tools that identify, prioritize and help to 
reduce risks. These include the Risk Management Reporting System (RMRS) 
that collects information and scores it based on the level of risk posed to 
national assets (such as maritime facilities, airports and mass transit).
• Collaboration and visualization processes: processes that collect, tag, classify, 
organize and apply appropriate material and expertise and then represent 
it in an illuminating visual form (e.g. Numerical Integrated Processing 
System (NIPS), a web-based tool that assists agents in identifying anomalies 
indicative of criminal activity – immigration violations, customs fraud, drug 
smuggling and terrorism).
• Advanced analytics: analytics that ingest information and facts from diverse 
types of data, both structured and unstructured, and then provide simulation 
and modeling tools for analysts (e.g. Analysis, Dissemination, Visualization, 
Insight and Semantic Enhancement (ADVISE), a meta-tool that had not been 
implemented at the time of the report but which was intended to incorporate 
and integrate comprehensive chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and 
explosive threat and effects data).
Means and ends
What privacy and other ethical issues are raised by such data mining activities? 
Because data mining is a purposive activity – a means employed to achieve 
88  This is also known as relational surveillance. See, for example, Katherine J. Strandburg, “Freedom of 
Association in a Networked World: First Amendment Regulation of Relational Surveillance”, Boston College 
Law Review 49, no. 1 (2008): 1–81.

Security and Privacy
114
certain ends – it is important to keep in mind the following questions: Are the 
ends good or good enough? Are the ends proportionate to the means? Can the 
ends be secured in a less-invasive manner? Will the means secure the ends? Is 
there something intrinsically problematic about the means? Will the means have 
deleterious consequences making their use inappropriate?
These questions, which are overlapping rather than completely discrete, can 
more or less arise at every step of the data mining process: definition of the 
problem to be solved, data identification and collection, data quality assessment 
and data cleansing and, finally, data modeling (building, validation and 
deployment). Such a process is iterative, because information learned in later 
steps may lead to a clarification of and adjustments to earlier steps.89
Good (enough) ends
It needs to be determined that the purposes for which data are being gathered 
and manipulated are legitimate, both ethically and legally. So data that are 
oriented more to the detection of political dissent than to the prevention of 
clearly defined national disasters are likely to be problematic just because the 
legitimacy of the ends to be served is questionable. Legitimate ends, moreover, 
will need to be sufficiently important to warrant the devotion of the government 
resources that will be required. There may also need to be a determination of 
whether the interest of a particular agency is legitimate – that is, whether it falls 
within its authority to gather and analyze such data. That may be problematic 
for cases in which (for reasons of efficiency) different agencies jointly gather 
data. Connected with this requirement (and touching on others as well) will 
be questions about confining the use of data to the purposes for which they 
were originally gathered; there are often memoranda of understanding between 
agencies that allow information that is gathered for one purpose (say, terrorism) 
to be shared with other agencies concerned with another (say, financial crime). 
Are such extensions justified? “Mission creep” is a common problem; although 
it seems cost-efficient, it may violate important privacy protections. Apart from 
any impropriety that may be involved, it is also possible that data collected for 
one purpose are not in a form that is well-suited (or of adequate quality) for 
another purpose. Moreover, as data are shared, control over the uses to which 
they are put and security controls on the data themselves are often lost.
89  Useful documents are Maureen Cooney, Report to Congress on the Impact of Data Mining Technologies on 
Privacy and Civil Liberties (Washington, DC: DHS, July 6, 2006), available at: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/
assets/privacy/privacy_data_%20mining_%20report.pdf; and Hugo Teufel III, 2007 Report to Congress on 
the Impact of Data Mining Technologies on Privacy and Civil Liberties (Washington, DC: DHS, July 6, 2007), 
available at: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_rpt_datamining_2007.pdf.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
115
Proportionate means/ends
Ends may be legitimate without being important enough to justify the kinds of 
means that are contemplated or employed to achieve them. Data mining, given 
the risks to civil liberties associated with it, is likely to be justifiable only if 
important ends are at stake. Some – but not all – crime is likely to qualify, and 
a judgment needs to be made about the legitimacy of using scarce government 
resources to mine data for particular purposes, given the seriousness of the 
issues and the available alternatives.
Restrictive means/ends
As well as some proportionality of means and ends, the means should be as 
little restrictive/invasive as possible. Could anonymized data be used rather 
than identifiable data? – a critical question when data might be shared among 
agencies. Ceteris paribus, other ways of achieving the ends, if less invasive, 
should be chosen. Such a requirement impacts on the issue of data retention: are 
the data to be kept permanently or should they be discarded after a determinate 
period of time? Agencies are strongly tempted to hold onto data “just in case” 
they turn out to be useful at some future date. However, the longer data are 
kept the more likely it is that they will become outdated. The principle of the 
least restrictive alternative may also have an important bearing on the target 
data: whether the software should operate dragnet style or be more tightly 
circumscribed.
Calibrated means/ends
The means have to be appropriately calibrated to the ends so that they are likely 
to be effective in achieving the ends for which they are employed. It needs 
to be established that accessing a particular raw data set is appropriate to the 
investigation at issue – that is, that it is likely to contain relevant information – 
and that the software used is likely to capture it and process it in a way that will 
enable the ends to be realized.
The ethics of scientific/experimental design
This is also important with regard to the “cleansing” of raw data – that is, 
the removing of inaccuracies and coping with incompleteness in such a way 
that patterns, relationships and rules will be accurately depicted. The issue 
of reliability is important not only when developing the modeling software 
but also at the point of its application to actual data, lest false positives lead 
to unwarranted invasions of rights. (False negatives can be a problem too.) 
Furthermore, the kinds of patterns that software tracks do not ipso facto 

Security and Privacy
116
constitute meaningful or causal relationships, and so caution needs to be 
exercised with respect to the kinds of conclusions that are drawn from them. 
They should be seen as investigative tools rather than probative techniques.
Appropriate means/ends
Although some data sets are likely to be public and involve no breaches of 
privacy that is not always the case. The privacy-invasive character of the means 
will have to be taken into account along with more instrumental questions 
about the suitability of the means to achieving the ends. These are not simple 
“balancing” issues – they require attention to the trade-offs involved. Where 
collected data are privacy-invasive there should be sufficient transparency and 
oversight for there to be effective means of redress in the event that privacy is 
improperly invaded or inappropriate conclusions are drawn.
Unintended consequences
Finally, unintended side effects will need to be addressed, for example, the 
augmentation of governmental power and the increased vulnerability of a 
(particular) population should governmental policies shift in a demagogical 
direction. Other side effects might include the vulnerability of a population to 
other threats as a result of inadequately secured data. Hackers, spies and others 
may have reasons for wanting to access data that has now been conveniently 
gathered for them.90
As we have already noted by implication, conceptions of privacy and formulations 
of privacy law have not developed in vacuo but have been significantly influenced 
by historical circumstances. Consider a few salient ones. Americans, because 
of their founding history, have always had an issue with the power of central 
government and hence with activities – such as surveillance – that would 
appear to enhance governmental power. At the same time, American dedication 
to the market as a distributor of social goods has often left it less concerned 
with the private mining and assembling of data. Offsetting this has been the 
concern that Warren and Brandeis expressed about the growth of the media 
and telecommunications, and the potential that they had for both governmental 
and private intrusions into space/activities that should be left alone. European 
countries have similarly been affected by historical events. In 1944, during the 
Nazi occupation of Norway, the Nazis decided that the German army needed a 
further infusion of soldiers. It was decided to conscript Norwegian men based 
on factors such as their age, using government files. Unable to destroy the 
files and thus to thwart this initiative, the Norwegian resistance succeeded in 
90  In each of the scenarios of means/ends relationships and unintended consequences the value of Techno-
ethics Boards is clear. As bodies charged with unpacking these problems, the insight and guidance that 
emerge would, it is hoped, clear away many thickets early rather than forcing retroactive action.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
117
destroying the two machines used to sort the files, so the conscription plan had 
to be dropped. The lesson about the vulnerability of innocently centralized data 
was, however, imported into European privacy law.91 Combine this with the 
accusation that IBM was instrumental in assisting the genocide program of the 
Nazis through allowing them access to their sorting machines, and it can be seen 
why there is a special nervousness about privately gathered data in the EU.92
Overall, Americans seem more complacent than Europeans93 about the centralized 
gathering of certain kinds of data about its citizens. Although it caused an 
uproar when discovered in May 2006, the revelation that the National Security 
Agency (NSA) database contained at least five years’ worth of the call records of 
tens of millions of US citizens – calls that had been routed through AT&T and 
Verizon/MCI – indicated the ease with which governmental authorities were 
able to get access.94 The NSA may have acted illegally, though the activity was 
probably not as dicey as the earlier-discovered warrantless wiretapping that 
the US government subsequently made efforts to kosher.95 In the European 
context, the mining of such data would have required a public law reviewed by 
an independent privacy agency and, even if access could have been gained by 
an intelligence agency, the data would not have been able to be retained for as 
long as the NSA had retained its data.
The NSA data gathering occurred shortly after 9/11, when it approached the 
major telecommunications carriers for customer call records (from one number to 
another, giving time and duration of call) and for regular updates of such. Some 
91  It would have been interesting to see whether the recent loss of data in the UK would have derailed 
plans for a national ID card. See Eric Pfanner, “Data Leak in Britain Affects 25 Million”, The New York Times, 
November 22, 2007. However, the change of government has rendered this moot.
92  Edwin Black, IBM and the Holocaust (New York: Time Warner Paperbacks, 2001).
93  “Europe” is somewhat ambiguous. It may refer – more narrowly – to those countries that constitute the 
European Union (currently comprising twenty-seven states: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_
member_state) or – more broadly – to those forty-seven countries that comprise the Council of Europe (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Council_of_Europe). The discussion here will (primarily) concern the second, though 
it generally encompasses the first.
94  See Leslie Cauley, “NSA Has Massive Database of Americans’ Phone Calls”, USA Today, May 11, 2006, 
A1; Susan Page, “Lawmakers: NSA Database Incomplete”, USA Today, June 30, 2006, A1.
95  See “Legal Authorities Supporting the Activities of the National Security Agency Described by the 
President”, Indiana Law Journal 81 (2006): 1374. With regard to the call records, most of the current debate 
concerns whether the telecommunications companies involved should be granted immunity if it turns out 
that they acted contrary to legal requirements. ECPA (1986), which bears on the NSA initiative, requires – 
in its Stored Communications Act (U.S.C. §§2701 – 2711) – that companies can disclose their records to the 
government only under certain conditions, for example, if the government obtains a warrant, court order 
or administrative subpoena such as a national security letter (18 U.S.C. §2702 (c)). In the present instance, 
the information was handed over without any warrant. However, if it can be established that the President’s 
inherent constitutional power takes precedence, that may relieve the telecommunications companies from 
liability. With regard to the warrantless wiretapping, however, FISA almost certainly required a warrant 
– hence the koshering activity of the Protect America Act of 2007. Given FISA’s explicitness, the appeal 
to Article II of the Constitution was not very convincing (see Youngstown Tube & Sheet, Co. v. Sawyer, 343 
U.S. 579, 635–38 (1952, J. Jackson, concurring), for the president’s powers are at their “lowest ebb” when 
exercised contrary to “the expressed or implied will of Congress”.

Security and Privacy
118
companies complied; others (Qwest, BellSouth) did not. This information was 
subsequently mined, though exactly how is not clear. Were they, for example, 
used to generate certain hypotheses about who might be engaged in terrorist 
activities, or were they used to target those who had previously been suspected 
of terrorist sympathies?
However the data were (or are) being used, the situation in the US is markedly 
different from what is possible in Europe for a number of reasons. Firstly, in 
the US a distinction is drawn between content and incidents, that is, between 
the substance of a communication between A and B and date-time stamps of 
communication between A and B (i.e. between the “letter” and the “envelope”). 
The former is generally well-protected in the US, but in Europe both kinds of 
data are protected (though even there it is recognized that content deserves 
greater protection than incidents). Secondly, there is a distinction that functions 
more stringently in Europe than in the US between personal and other kinds of 
communication data. European countries are far more protective (with respect to 
both government and private actors) of a broad category that encompasses “all 
types of personal data”, whereas US law focuses on specific kinds of personal 
data, such as health and financial information, video-store records etc. Thirdly, 
a further distinction concerns the purposes for which data are collected, 
whether for law enforcement or national security. In both Europe and the US, 
constraints on law enforcement data gathering are more stringent than those 
on national security data gathering. In part this is because law enforcement has 
more dramatic consequences for individuals than national security intelligence 
gathering. Finally, as far as national security interests are concerned, European 
agencies pay attention to domestic as well as foreign threats to national security, 
whereas the US has until recently viewed national security in terms of foreign 
threats (covered by the CIA and NSA) regulated by FISA. The FBI, which covers 
both federal criminal investigations and domestic intelligence, is covered by 
regulations mostly attuned to law enforcement matters. It was the lack of an 
assigned domestic national security agency that led to the NSA taking it on.
Fourth Amendment jurisprudence allows the mining of call records. It is argued 
that because the records are available to the phone companies themselves they 
are not private in the way that the content of a phone conversation is.96 Rather 
than doing the mining itself the NSA simply requested the information from 
telecommunications providers. The failure of such jurisprudence to provide for 
the comprehensive protection of personal data constitutes a major difference 
between US and European law on data protection/privacy.
96  Compare Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979) with Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967). Cf. also 
United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976), where it is argued that users of certain services “assume the risk” 
that their information will be made known to others.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
119
Nor does the Privacy Act of 1974 provide much solace. True, it imposes several 
duties on government agencies: to alert the public to the existence of a records 
system; to reveal its purposes; to collect data that are relevant to those purposes 
only; to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of the mined data; to not transfer 
information to other agencies without the consent of those whose data are being 
mined; to guarantee the security and confidentiality of the acquired data; and 
to give those concerned a right to check and have corrected the data concerning 
them. This sounds pretty good, but closer inspection suggests otherwise. The 
Act has few teeth and it provides for many exceptions that cover most of the 
current contested uses, provided that notice is given to that effect (for example, 
unless secrecy is in the interest of national defense).
In Europe, the situation is significantly different. Data mining of the kind 
indicated by call records requires a law to permit it that explicitly specifies 
the purposes for which the data are being gathered and the limits that will be 
observed in their gathering, use and retention. Because data mining requires 
a specific law allowing it, there is likely to be public debate over its purposes 
and the kinds of data that will be aggregated and mined. It is most likely that 
only anti-terrorist purposes would be legitimated and then only in the event 
of a “concrete danger.” Even an intelligence agency would have to conform to 
the latter expectation, in which there is some individualized suspicion,97 and 
would not be permitted to retain the data for as long as the NSA has had it: 
three years is about the European limit (though between six months and two 
years is more common). In European law, individuals also have a right to check 
on the accuracy of information gathered about them, something that is denied 
to Americans.
Data mining has the potential to provide many legitimate benefits, especially to 
law enforcement agencies. However, data mining, in many of its forms and with 
the right sort of technology,98 can also represent a serious threat to democratic 
values such as privacy and autonomy. Accordingly, there is a need to determine 
the ethical constraints that should apply to data mining and to devise and 
implement appropriate accountability mechanisms.
Of course, data mining can be an important tool in profiling.99
97  German law, however, does permit strategic surveillance of international phone calls as part of an anti-
terrorism initiative.
98  Such technologies are being developed all the time. For a recent example of such technology see N. 
Memon, H.L. Larsen, “Investigative Data Mining Toolkit: A Software Prototype for Visualizing, Analyzing 
and Destabilizing Terrorist Networks”, in Visualising Network Information (2006), 14-1–14-24. See also the so-
called Investigative Data Mining techniques, Nasrullah Memon, “Detecting Terrorist Activity Patterns Using 
Investigative Data Mining Tool”, IFSR 2005: Proceedings of the First World Congress of the International 
Federation for Systems Research: The New Roles of Systems Sciences For a Knowledge-based Society, Nov. 
14–17, 2123, Kobe, Japan.
99  As an example of this crossover, see Ira Rubinstein, Ronald D. Lee, and Ira Schwartz, “Data Mining 
and Internet Profiling: Emerging Regulatory and Technological Approaches”. Other technologies can also be 

Security and Privacy
120
(C) Profiling100, 101
The process of reaching out to foreign nationals and their communities 
fostered new trust between law enforcement and these communities.102
In the introduction to Profiles, Probabilities and Stereotypes, Frederick Schauer 
states that his purpose is to challenge “the primacy of the particular” – that 
is, the view that our decisions have to be guided exclusively or primarily by 
the particulars of a case rather than by generalities that we can bring to it. As 
he puts it, he seeks to “defend the morality of decisions by categories and by 
generalizations, even with its consequent disregard for the fact that decision-
making by generalization often seems to produce an unjust result in particular 
cases.”103 He makes it very clear, however, that what follows from this is not that 
all generalizations (in the form of stereotypes or profiles) will pass ethical muster 
– even when they have a sound statistical basis – only that some may.
The notorious profiled New Jersey Turnpike stops were almost certainly based 
on spotty evidence. Schauer compares the profiling involved there with that 
developed by Bob Vogel, the Florida Highway Patrol officer who became famous 
for his drug interdiction work. Vogel’s profile was based on his thirty biggest 
drug arrests; it was not meshed with the experience of others or moderated by 
the experience of stops that yielded nothing. New Jersey’s profiling was hardly 
better grounded and, Schauer writes, “the original New Jersey procedure ought 
not to be glorified by referring to it as a ‘profile,’ for it would be more accurate 
to call it a ‘guess’.”104
difficult to classify according to the standard grouping such as surveillance and profiling. See, for example, 
Sudhir Saxena, K. Santhanam, and Aparna Basu, “Application of Social Network Analysis (SNA) to Terrorist 
Networks”, Strategic Analysis 28, no.1 (January–March 2004): 84–101.
100  Although this study focuses on profiling in military and criminal contexts, its uses in the commercial 
sector can be just as worrying, morally speaking. See, for example, Axiom software’s DISC system, in which 
they offer commercial, personal, reselling, and hosting and profiling services at http://www.axiomsoftware.
com, viewed December 10, 2009.
101  An emerging technology for profiling (and other security issues) is translation technology. Roughly, this 
is the use of computers to translate documents, audio and sundry foreign (i.e. not English) language sources 
used in profiling. It is justified as a way of speeding up the processing of such sources. For Érika Nogueira de 
Andrade Stupiello, there is the fundamental problem of “the illusion that the machine is able to translate”, in 
“Ethical Implications of Translation Technologies”, Translation Journal, 2007, at http://translationjournal.net/
journal/43ethics.htm, viewed January 3, 2010.
102  Attorney General John Ashcroft, commenting (March 20, 2002) on the “voluntary” interview program 
initiated by the US government on November 9, 2001 http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/sept_11/
ashcroft_018.htm. Some 5,000+ young men who had recently entered the United States on visas from 
“countries with suspected terrorist links” were individually “invited” to talk with government agents about 
their reasons for visiting, past movements, knowledge concerning 9/11 and feelings about the same. Few felt 
able to refuse. A follow-up group of a further 3,000+ was indicated in the March 20 announcement.
103  Frederick Schauer, Profiles, Probabilities and Stereotypes (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2003), ix.
104  Schauer, 192. This irks David Harris, who sees the kind of profiling that the New Jersey state police 
engaged in as exactly what the public thinks of as profiling. It might have been smarter for Schauer to have 

 VI. Securitization Technologies
121
A far more sophisticated example, one that Schauer holds up as something of a 
model, is the FBI’s serial killer profile. The people who constructed this profile 
studied everything they could on serial killings, interviewed serial killers where 
they were able and gathered whatever other information they could that would 
be relevant, before painstakingly analyzing it in the process of developing a 
profile of “serial killer indicators”. These, however, were to be used only after 
a field of suspects had been narrowed in order to determine who might be 
the most likely one. As we saw several years ago, however, in the case of the 
Washington snipers, too great a dependence on a profile, even a well-developed 
one, can lead one astray. On more than one occasion, John Muhammad and Lee 
Malvo were “passed over” by searching police because the profile had pointed 
them in the direction of a lone white male.105 Indeed, Simon Cole and Michael 
Lynch suggest that “the construction of DNA databases in Britain, the United 
States, and elsewhere shifts criminal investigation toward suspect populations 
and statistical suspects.”106
CAPPS
Since 9/11 there has been an upsurge in the profiling of airline passengers.107 
Early profiling was done by way of CAPPS (Computer-Assisted Passenger 
Prescreening System), developed initially in 1997 by a White House Committee 
chaired by Al Gore.
The first CAPPS profile made no reference to race or ethnicity except to exclude 
it (without providing reasons). It focused on factors such as gender, age, form 
of purchasing the ticket (cash or credit card, last minute or well in advance, 
direct or through a travel agent), membership of a frequent flyer program, 
time of check-in, type of luggage, presence or absence of a hotel or rental car 
reservation at destination, demeanor etc.108 Even so, it was shown that CAPPS 
could be easily circumvented through such algorithms as Carnival Booth.109
seen it as a profile informed more by prejudice or guesswork than by careful development, rather than not 
seeing it as a profile at all. See Harris’s review of Schauer in “Profiling: Theory and Practice”, Criminal Justice 
Ethics 23, no. 2 (2004): 51–57.
105  Jennifer Daw Holloway, “The Perils of Profiling for the Media: Forensic Psychologists Speak Out on the 
Lessons Learned from the Washington-Area Sniper Case”, APA Online http://www.apa.org/monitor/jan03/
perils.html.
106  Simon A. Cole and Michael Lynch, “The Social and Legal Construction of Suspects”, Annual Review of 
Law and Social Science 2 (December 2006): 39–60 (doi: 10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.2.081805.110001).
107  A practice that was upheld by the Supreme Court in US v. Sokolow, 490 US 1 (1989).
108  Schauer, 184.
109  Samidh Chakrabarti and Aaron Strauss, “Carnival Booth: An Algorithm for Defeating the Computer-
Assisted Passenger Screening System”, Electrical-Engineering-and-Computer-Science (2002), available at: 
http://www.mit.strathmore.edu/NR/rdonlyres/Electrical-Engineering-and-Computer-Science/6-805Fall-
2005/4E484655-6947-4D60-B789-32F2FFE6199A/0/caps.pdf, viewed December 18, 2009.

Security and Privacy
122
The events of 9/11 prompted calls for the revision of CAPPS, one that would 
provide a “risk score” for air travelers. As we have already had occasion to 
observe, the proposed revision – CAPPS II – came to grief in 2004 over civil 
rights and privacy issues, and the new system, Secure Flight, was frequently 
delayed by privacy concerns.110
Geographic profiling
Geographic profiling is the use of “knowledge about the relative locations of 
an offender’s crime sites to predict the highest probable location of his or her 
residence (or some other anchor point, such as a work place).”111 Although this 
technology has its origin in domestic serial crimes, recent work has attempted to 
use it to find the home base of other kinds of offenders, particularly terrorists.112 
Such profiling uses several assumptions about the criminal/terrorist/insurgent 
(here we shall refer to them as offenders). These assumptions are: multiple 
offenses by a single offender; the relative closeness of the offenses to the home 
base of the offender; the distribution of the offenses; and a stationary home base. 
The profile identifies an area within which the probability of an offender’s home 
base is measured. This then allows those using the profile to target locations 
with the highest probability. Further it is used to prioritize probable offenders 
based on how closely their home base is to the site of the offense.
This form of profiling is highly dependent upon the accuracy of the underlying 
assumptions. If any of the assumptions is inaccurate then the profile is useless. 
However, as has been observed:
An analysis of such factors was not possible within this chapter because 
of a lack of detailed data, but such an analysis must be carried out before 
any firm conclusions can be reached about whether geographic profiling 
techniques have the potential to be effective [for profiling terrorists].113
110  For official materials, see http://www.tsa.gov/public/display?theme=5&content=09000519800cf3a7.
111  Craig Bennell and Shevaun Corey, “Geographic Profiling of Terrorist Attacks”, in Criminal Profiling: 
International Theory, Research, and Practice, ed. R. N. Kocsis (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2007), 190.
112  National Technology Alliance, Geographic Profiling and the Hunt for Insurgents (2007), available at: 
http://www.nta.org/docs/Geoprofiling.pdf, accessed on February 15, 2007.
113  Bennell and Corey, “Geographic Profiling of Terrorist Attacks,” in Criminal Profiling: International 
Theory, Research, and Practice, 201.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
123
(D) Limitations of Technology114
All this discussion of the use of technology in trying to secure our society may 
incline us to the conclusion that all technology does is cloud the security issue 
with both certainty (though this, as it turns out, is false) for those ignorant of 
the actual capabilities and limitations of technology, and pessimism in those who 
are not.115 John Gentry succinctly summarizes the systemic problems stemming 
from the US military’s approach to technology.116 According to him, these 
problems are: narrow applicability; vulnerable infrastructure; easy counter-
measures; and institutional impediments.
The efficacy of technology can be assessed on (at least) two fronts: the quality of 
the technology and the information needed to make it useful; and the way the 
technology is used.
Quality of information and quality of technology
There is a common phrase in the information technology field – “garbage in, 
garbage out”117 – which is both a swipe at the unwarranted trust that people 
put in the output of computers and a succinct way of saying that the quality 
of the output is absolutely dependent upon the quality of the source of the 
information used. Although the military does not reveal the nature or extent 
of the quality of its information or information technology, we can, given its 
record in the rest of technology development and use, deduce that its record is 
similar to commercial systems and that there are significant problems with its 
114  The point of this is not to deny that technology, especially information technology, can be used 
effectively in the military or security fields. See Nicholas S. Argyres, “The Impact of Information Technology 
on Coordination: Evidence from the B-2 ‘Stealth’ Bomber”, Organization Science 10, no. 2 (1999): 162–80 
for an example of where it has assisted the development of a significant piece of military (and surveillance) 
technology. Our point here is that this is not always the case. Indeed, as the following examples show, the 
success of IT is more the exception than the rule. The GOA regularly issues reports on the failure of US 
government agencies and departments to adhere to proper IT project management techniques. This failure 
costs billions of dollars, according to the GOA. See, for example, David A. Powner, Director, United States 
Government Accountability Office, Information Technology Management Issues, Management and Oversight of 
Projects Totaling Billions of Dollars Need Attention, Testimony before the Subcommittee on Federal Financial 
Management, Government Information, Federal Services, and International Security, Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs, US Senate, April 28, 2009.
115  In a recent simulation exercise, “Mr. Lynn, one of the Pentagon’s top strategists for computer network 
operations, argues that the billions spent on defensive shields surrounding America’s banks, businesses and 
military installations provide a similarly illusory sense of security.” John Markoff, David E. Sanger and Thom 
Shanker, “In Digital Combat, U.S. Finds No Easy Deterrent”, The New York Times, January 26, 2010.
116  See John A. Gentry, “Doomed to Fail: America’s Blind Faith in Military Technology”, Parameters (2002–
03): 88–103.
117  For the origin of this phrase see the Free Online Dictionary of computing at http://foldoc.org/
garbage+in, viewed January 30, 2010.

Security and Privacy
124
information quality. According to Barbara Klein: “Data stored in organizational 
databases have a significant number of errors. Between one and ten percent of 
data items in critical organizational databases are estimated to be inaccurate.”118
Much of the work of terrorists is planned in third world countries. However, it is in 
just these places that the quality of data in information systems is most suspect.119 This 
deficiency in data quality severely compromises efforts to monitor terrorist activities.
In a recent US government report “Cyberspace Policy Review” a review team 
of government cybersecurity experts concluded that “the architecture of the 
Nation’s digital infrastructure, based largely upon the Internet, is not secure or 
resilient. Without major advances in the security of these systems or significant 
change in how they are constructed or operated, it is doubtful that the United 
States can protect itself from the growing threat of cybercrime and state-
sponsored intrusions and operations.”120
An example of the weakness of various securitization technologies is biometric 
national identity systems.121 These systems depend for their usefulness upon the 
quality of (low-security) documents such as drivers licenses, birth certificates and 
the like. Such documents are relatively easy to (falsely) obtain. Once this has been 
achieved, NIDs (falsely) authenticate individuals, thus generating false negatives.
An aspect of the quality of technology that is often overlooked is its own 
security – that is, how well does it prevent unauthorized users from getting 
access to its information and decision-making process? A military example of 
this is the recent newspaper article by Siobhan Gorman et al., which reported 
that $26 worth of commercial software is able to “intercept live video feeds 
from U.S. Predator drones.”122 In 2009 more than 285 million data records were 
compromised in the business field.123 Although military and security agencies are 
secretive about the safety of their systems, there is little to make one confident 
that their systems comprise any better technology.124
118  Barbara D. Klein, “Data Quality in the Practice of Consumer Product Management: Evidence from the 
Field”, Data Quality 4, no. 1 (1998).
119  David W. Chapman and Roger A. Boothroyd, “Threats to Data Quality in Developing Country Settings”, 
Comparative Education Review 32, no. 4 (1988): 416–29. Although this report is dated, the situation in 
developing countries has not changed in twenty years.
120  White House, Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient Information and Communications Structure 
(May, 2009), available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/Cyberspace_Policy_Review_final.pdf.
121  For a detailed examination of this phenomenon, see See Bijon Roy, “A Case against Biometric National 
Identification Systems (NIDS): ‘Trading-off’ Privacy Without Getting Security”,Windsor Review of Legal & 
Social Issues 19 (March 2005): 45–84.
122  Siobhan Gorman, Yochi J. Dreazen, and August Cole, “Insurgents Hack U.S. Drones, $26 Software Is Used 
to Breach Key Weapons in Iraq; Iranian Backing Suspected”, The Wall Street Journal, December 17, 2009, A1.
123  Wade H. Baker, Alex Hutton, C. David Hylender, Christopher Novak, Christopher Porter, Bryan Sartin, 
Peter Tippett, M.D., Ph.D. and J. Andrew Valentine, 2009 Data Breach Investigations Report, Verizon Business, 
available at http://securityblog.verizonbusiness.com, viewed December 14, 2009.
124  There are many examples of technology failures in the military and security fields. See, for example, the 
U.S. Navy’s Smart Ship technology of the late 1990s that failed so spectacularly, Gregory Slabodkin, “Software 
Glitches Leave Navy Smart Ship Dead in the Water”, Government Computer News, 13 July 1998.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
125
In another example, Stephen Feinberg makes the point that data mining’s 
success “depend[s] heavily on matching and record-linkage methods that are 
intrinsically statistical in nature and whose accuracy deteriorates rapidly in 
the presence of serious measurement error. Data mining tools cannot make up 
for bad data and poor matches.”125 It is absolutely essential that securitization 
technologies have quality data.
Another difficulty with measuring the quality of information comes through 
quantity: if the quantity is large enough then it is not possible to measure 
the quality of a given set of information. According to Minnesota Internet 
Traffic Studies (MINTS), the total known digital content is roughly 500 billion 
gigabytes, or 500 exabytes (with more than 60 exabytes produced every year).126 
With current technology it is not possible to process this much information.127 As 
a result new theories for information processing (especially concerning money 
laundering and terrorist financing) are being developed, but researchers are not 
yet optimistic about the possibilities.128 This is an especially acute problem for 
the military use of spy drones. In a recent article, Christopher Drew of the New 
York Times reported that the military was recording video data at a greater rate 
than can be analyzed.129
The quality of technology is underpinned by the quality of the assumptions 
made. In the section on surveillance we pointed out that much of the technology 
is not of sufficient quality to be useful. This can be seen in facial recognition 
software (an issue visited earlier in this discussion, reviewing James Meek’s 
experiment) that depends upon the “idea that certain anatomical characteristics, 
facial configurations, gestural expressions and behaviors are universal, rather 
than specific or framed by the context in which they appear.”130 According to 
Andrew Speirs, this is a flawed notion that consistently fails to deliver suspects. 
Here it is the quality of the design (underlying assumptions) of the technology 
that fails to deliver. Also underpinning the quality of technology is the quality 
of the personnel employed by agencies to develop the technology. In a recent 
125  Stephen E. Feinberg, “Privacy and Confidentiality in an e-Commerce World: Data Mining, Data 
Warehousing, Matching and Disclosure Limitation”, Statistical Science 21, no. 2 (2006): 143–54.
126  An exabyte is 10246 or approximately one billion gigabytes. See Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies 
(MINTS), at http://www.dtc.umn.edu/mints/home.php, viewed February 1, 2010.
127  David S. Alberts made just this point and called it information swamping. See David S. Alberts, The 
Unintended Consequences of Information Age Technologies: Avoiding the Pitfalls, Seizing the Initiative (Diane 
Publishing Co. 1996), especially pp. 16, 31, 34, 38. The legal profession refers to the term “information 
inflation” to describe this phenomenon/problem: see George L. Paul and Jason R. Baron, “Information 
Inflation: Can the Legal System Adapt?”, Richmond Journal of Law & Technology 13, no. 3 (2007), at http://law.
richmond.edu/jolt/v13i3/article10.pdf, viewed January 25, 2010.
128  Dionysios S. Demetis, “Data Growth, the New Order of Information Manipulation and Consequences for 
the AML/ATF Domains”, Journal of Money Laundering Control 12, no. 4 (2009): 353–70.
129  Christopher Drew, “Military Is Awash in Data from Drones”, The New York Times, January 11, 2010.
130  Andrew Speirs, “The Individual and the Stereotype: From Lavater to the War on Terror”, Australian 
Council of University Art and Design Schools (ACUADS) ACUADS 2003 Conference, Hobart 1–4 Oct 2003, 
http://www.acuads.com.au/conf2003/papers_refereed/speirs.pdf.

Security and Privacy
126
job advertisement for a business consultant, the National Security Agency 
(NSA) specified in the job requirements that the successful candidate would 
“perform various types of business analyses (e.g. Business Case, Cost/Benefit, 
Cost Effectiveness, etc.), as well as analysis of special topics that will be used by 
Senior Leadership to make better-informed decisions.”131 Yet the qualifications 
asked for stated: “The successful candidates should possess at least 2+ years 
of related experience and a Bachelor's degree in engineering, mathematics, 
operations research, business, or economics.” There was not a word about 
information technology qualifications, especially analysis and design. How can 
such agencies be confident of their employees’ ability successfully to complete 
complex information technology tasks without any professional qualifications? 
This is not a new problem. In 1996, Alberts noted the US government’s inability 
to “maintain the expertise required to adapt” commercial software for military 
use.132
In another example of flawed assumptions, Geoff Dean found the idea of profiling 
terrorists as persons to be “neither simple nor necessarily helpful and could 
in fact be dangerously misleading. It is argued that it is more fruitful to shift 
the focus of the profiling paradigm by engaging in profiling the ‘process’ of 
terrorism rather than the ‘person’.”133 This can be seen in the results of the NSA’s 
domestic spying program. According to the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
(EFF) this program is next to useless: “Reports have shown that the data from 
this wholesale surveillance did little more than commit FBI resources to follow 
up leads, virtually all of [which], current and former officials say, led to dead 
ends or innocent Americans.”134
More directly addressing the quality of technology itself is the doubt cast on the 
quality of many technologies. For example, in the geographic profiling software 
referred to earlier, Derek Paulson found that his “study casts doubt . . . on the 
overall accuracy of profiling strategies in predicting the likely home location of 
an offender.”135 A final example of the worry that technology is not up to the 
task is steganography. Kessler points out that “there are few hard statistics about 
the frequency with which steganography software or media are discovered by 
law enforcement officials in the course of computer forensics analysis. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests, however, that many computer forensics examiners do not 
131  This job was posted on CareerBuilder.com on January 6, 2010, viewed January 10, 2010.
132  See Alberts, The Unintended Consequences of Information Age Technologies: Avoiding the Pitfalls, Seizing 
the Initiative, 44.
133  Geoff Dean, “Criminal Profiling in a Terrorism Context”, in R. N. Kocsis (ed.), Criminal Profiling – 
International Theory, Research and Practice (Humana Press, 2007).
134  Electronic Frontier Foundation FAQ, at http://www.eff.org/nsa/faq, viewed 2 January 2010.
135  Derek J. Paulsen, “Connecting the Dots: Assessing the Accuracy of Geographic Profiling Software”, 
Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 29, no. 2 (2006): 306–34.

 VI. Securitization Technologies
127
routinely search for steganography software, and many might not recognize 
such tools if they found them.”136 He further points out that “it is impossible to 
know how widespread the use of steganography is by criminals and terrorists”.
The quality of technology can also be measured by the degree to which it meets 
its stakeholders’ expectations. A recent Standish Report found that “in 1995, 
U.S. government and businesses spent approximately $81 billion on cancelled 
software projects.”137 Most of these projects were cancelled due to difficulties in 
specifying and meeting user requirements.
The use of information (and its) technology
Much of the technology described in this study creates an enormous amount of 
information that would be useful in the right hands. Indeed, the use of technology 
to gather and process information has led to significant improvements in many 
areas, including law enforcement. However, in some cases that information has 
gone not into the right hands but, indeed, into the wrong hands (as seen in the 
drone article above).
One of the criticisms of the various government agencies in the aftermath of 9/11 
was the failure to share information.138,139 This failure points to a general lack 
of protocols, procedures and governance defining the importance, scope and 
circumstances of information sharing. Stewart Baker, in his testimony before 
Congress, said that “the government’s failure to find the hijackers was caused in 
the first instance by a lack of information technology tools.”140
Of course, much of the foregoing discussion offers an implicit evaluation from a 
privacy perspective of existing information technology systems. Nevertheless, 
we should not forget those projects that did not get even as far as being 
implemented. The most outstanding example of this is the FBI’s Trilogy Project 
136  See Gary C. Kessler, “An Overview of Steganography for the Computer Forensics Examiner”( edited 
version), Forensic Science Communications (Technical Report) 6, no. 3 (July 2004), available at: http://www.fbi.
gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/july2004/research/2004_03_research01.htm; 
http://www.garykessler.net/library/
fsc_stego.html.
137  The Standish Group, “Chaos”, 1995, at http://www.standishgroup.com/chaos.html, viewed December 
30, 2009. See also Lorin J. May, “Major Causes of Software Project Failures”, at http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/
crosstalk/1998/07/causes.asp, viewed November 20, 2009.
138  In the information field, information sharing is called information transparency. See Peter P. Swire, 
“Privacy and Information Sharing in the War on Terrorism”, Villanova Law Review 51 (2006): 951–80; 
and Matteo Turilli and Luciano Floridi, “The Ethics of Information Transparency”, Ethics and Information 
Technology 11 (2009): 105–12.
139  The Christmas 2009 attempt to bomb a commercial airliner highlights the fact that information sharing 
has not improved. See Eric Lipton, Eric Schmitt and Mark Mazzetti, “Jet Bomb Plot Shows More Missed 
Clues”, The New York Times, January 18, 2010.
140  Testimony of Stewart Baker before the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States 
December 8, 2003.

Security and Privacy
128
(better known as the Virtual Case File Project).141 It is estimated to have cost 
at least $100 million (cost estimates vary from $100 to $400 million) with no 
return for the investment. This system was intended to overcome the problem of 
sharing of information between those who ought to have had access to and those 
who actually had access to critical information. Fundamentally, it failed because 
of the FBI’s reluctance to engage professional IT project managers, preferring 
to use its own (unqualified, in IT terms) agents. Although this example may 
seem to be an outlier, in fact it is consistent with normal commercial industry 
practice.142
141  There is an enormous amount of literature examining this failed software project. See, for example, 
Harry Goldstein, “Who Killed the Virtual Case File?”, IEEE Spectrum, at http://lrv.fri.uni-lj.si/~franc/
COURSES/VP/FBI.pdf, viewed 5 July 2009, and T. Frieden, “Report: FBI Wasted Millions on ‘Virtual Case 
File’”, CNN (2005, February 3), at http://www.cnn.com, viewed September 7, 2009. See also,http://www.
sdtimes.com/link/28788, viewed 16 November 2009.
142  Robert N. Charette, “Why Software Fails”, IEEE Spectrum, at: http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/
why-software-fails, viewed January 3, 2010.

129
 VII.  Surveillance Technologies and 
Economies
Introduction
Thus far this work has been concerned extensively with the way liberal 
democracies attempt to balance individual privacy with the need for collective 
security. Government collection of data on individuals, along with its ethical 
and legal underpinnings, has been our main concern. In Chapters V and VI, 
for example, we described surveillance technologies and systems increasingly 
used by governments for security purposes – passenger name records, data 
mining to create terrorist profiles and National Identity Cards to name a few. 
In those sections we touched briefly upon current, widely accepted modern 
communication and information systems, such as social networks that now result 
in unprecedented collection of data on individuals by the private sector, often 
through what is characterized as “participatory surveillance”. Here we examine 
those systems, their use and their impact on individual privacy in more detail. 
Much of what we describe in this chapter applies more directly to the United 
States than to the European Union. This is no accident, because we believe that 
in many important respects the EU offers greater privacy protection than the 
US.1 In other liberal democracies we have reviewed (see Appendix) the picture 
is somewhat mixed; speaking generally, there is a lack of privacy protection in 
the private sector. India, as noted above, has an implied right to privacy and 
is motivated to protect privacy and confidentiality in the private sector in part 
because of its large international IT outsourcing industry. However, in practice, 
self-regulation is the norm in the private sector. Australia's Privacy Act applies 
to private sector organizations as well as Australian government agencies. 
However, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner – the agency responsible for 
ensuring the Act is complied with – does not have the power to conduct audits 
of organizations in the private sector. Moreover, the Privacy Act does not cover 
businesses with less than AU$3 million annual turnover (that is, the majority of 
businesses in Australia).
During the first decade of the twenty-first century there has been an 
unprecedented rise in the collection, analysis and dissemination of information 
on individuals. As we have noted, privacy advocates and civil libertarians 
have long expressed concern over government-sponsored data acquisition and 
1  This is not to idealize the EU. Compliance with EU directives has not been wholehearted, as individual 
member states have developed and implemented legislation in response to EU directives.

Security and Privacy
130
collection activities, which have increased markedly since 2001 as part of efforts 
to combat terrorism. Concern regarding government use of data is prompted 
by the fact that government has the ultimate power to limit freedom – it can 
prosecute. Thus, privacy regulation in the US often focuses on restricting the 
government’s ability to collect and use personal data. Yet, as Garfinkel2 and 
others3,4 have pointed out for some time, in the US the greatest source of data on 
individuals is collected by the private sector, where it enjoys few constitutional 
or other statutory protections, often because this personal information is part of 
the public record or because individuals have been deemed to have consented 
to the release of their personal information as part of a transaction with another 
party.5 Much of the current impetus for collection and analysis comes not 
from security needs but from commercial needs for information on consumers 
and consumer behavior in order to offer novel, attractive services, gain new 
efficiencies or develop new revenue sources. Increasingly, US government 
agencies, particularly law enforcement agencies such as the FBI, rely on major 
commercial data brokers such as Acxiom6 or the Accurint division of LexisNexis7 
for both data collection and analysis.
Continued advances in computer storage and processing, computer networks 
and information retrieval methods have made possible a range of scalable 
internet-based services that provide numerous benefits to consumers, but these 
increasingly require the collection of personal information and its dissemination 
to numerous parties. The widespread acceptance of and now reliance on 
internet-based services such as social networking sites, web-based email and 
search engines, along with the gradual trend to make public and other records 
containing personal information readily available online, has dramatically 
increased the types of personal information available on individuals. Most 
importantly, these trends have significantly lowered the cost of obtaining that 
information. Moreover, we now live in what was billed in the 1990s as the 
age of “ubiquitous computing”.8 Networked digital technologies such as cell 
phones, surveillance cameras and other smart devices make possible constant 
data collection and surveillance systems that provide location and even detailed 
behavioral information. In the US, a highly effective industry for aggregating, 
2  Simson Garfinkel, Database Nation: The Death of Privacy in the 21st Century (O’Reilly Media, December 
2000).
3  Daniel Solove and Chris J. Hoofnagle, “A Model Regime of Privacy Protection”, University of Illinois Law 
Review 2006 (February, 2006): 357–404.
4  Ari Schwartz, written supplement to testimony before the Data Privacy and Integrity Committee, 
Department of Homeland Security, June 15, 2005. Available at: http://www.netdemocracyguide.net/
testimony/20050718schwartz.pdf.
5  By contrast, consent needs to be explicit in the EU context.
6  Available at: http://www.acxiom.com/Pages/Home.aspx.
7  Available at: http://www.accurint.com/.
8  Mark Weiser coined the term “ubiquitous computing” for where computers are embedded in all types 
of devices and everyone interacts with them for their daily needs. See Mark Weiser, “The Computer for the 
Twenty-First Century”, Scientific American (September 1991): 94–10.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
131
analyzing and disseminating information on individuals is in place with the 
capability to search terabytes of both structured and unstructured data for 
relevant items.
Most will agree that the ability to share and discover information as well as 
communicate inexpensively on a worldwide scale offers tremendous opportunities 
to businesses, consumers and governments.9 For example, the online availability 
of personal medical records improves health care by making records readily 
available for diagnosis, and can lower costs by eliminating unnecessary tests. 
Knowledge collections are now at our fingertips and not confined to obscure 
locations. Current internet-based systems provide a two-way communication 
channel between a service provider and a consumer. Thus, organizations such 
as retail chains, colleges and libraries can deliver highly personalized content 
to consumers, students and researchers that addresses their needs or interests.10 
The ability to search vast record collections and retrieve relevant information, 
a highly active and fruitful area of research in computer science, has allowed 
both individuals and organizations to utilize knowledge and research.11 Indeed, 
many of the systems common today have created opportunities for productive 
work and socialization that would have been unimaginable fifteen years ago.
This study has been concerned with the significant risks that the release of 
personal information poses for individual well-being, autonomy and dignity. 
The systems upon which we now rely for much of our social and economic 
activity result in the unprecedented release of personal information and raise 
many questions (albeit somewhat different ones in the EU than in the US). What 
are the risks associated with just about anyone, including the government, 
being able to know just about anything about anybody for a nominal cost? As 
we have noted, many of the legal protections for individual liberties arose in 
an environment in which physical world restrictions on data limit the flow of 
information. Such restrictions gave rise to situations of privacy and expectations 
of privacy. Legal scholars are still unclear how these protections extend to the 
current era, where there are few practical constraints on the flow of data or 
what can be known and by whom. In the hope of gaining immediate benefits 
from internet-based systems, are we revealing too much personal information 
to too many different parties? Many claim that, in the new information age, 
information is never lost. What is the impact on individual well-being when 
possibly outdated information is still available and used to make decisions as to 
9  Again, we focus here on the US context. Within the EU, personal data are to be kept and used only for the 
purposes for which they are originally collected, unless there is explicit consent by the data subject, subject 
to broad exceptions for government purposes.
10  There has, nevertheless, been concern about the way in which Google’s personalizing of responses to 
research requests tends to confirm “detected” biases.
11  W. Fan, L. Wallace, S. Rich, and Z. Zhang, “Tapping the Power of Text Mining”, Communications of the 
ACM 49, no. 9 (September 2006): 77–82.

Security and Privacy
132
a person’s work ethic and employability? Moreover, how do individuals correct 
information that is incorrect if it is held in unknown data repositories and not 
tethered to any authoritative data source? A key feature of Web 2.0 systems 
is the ability for just about anyone to post information that then can be made 
available to anyone. How do systems in which anyone can publish information 
about anyone else and make it widely available impact human dignity?
Within the US, the focus has primarily been on the risks that government data 
collection pose for liberal democracies. However, as has been realized in the EU, 
aggressive collection of personal data in the private sector, along with advancing 
capabilities for data synthesis and analysis, now offer not only governments 
but unwanted others the opportunity to obtain information on individuals 
that was heretofore unavailable. In Chapter IV, we examined the Supreme 
Court decision in United States v. White that (in the US) severely limits Fourth 
Amendment protections for data provided to third parties.12 In current, widely 
used internet-based systems such as social networks and search engines, third 
party data controllers typically obtain personal information through consent 
and terms-of-use agreements. The information is often no longer subject to 
the usual Fourth Amendment restrictions if sought by government as part of 
a criminal investigation. Often, law enforcement authorities can quickly obtain 
information on individuals from data controllers with a subpoena instead of a 
warrant, which requires authorities to demonstrate probable cause. In addition, 
restrictions on government collection of information do not apply to information 
that has been made publicly available – for example, information posted on a 
blog or personal website.
In the remainder of this chapter we examine recent technologies and 
organizational practices enabled by those technologies that make it very difficult 
– particularly in the US – for both individuals and organizations to control 
the exposure of sensitive personal information. Trends we examine include the 
following:
• Widespread acceptance and reliance on network-enabled digital devices 
and services to which users continually provide personal and often highly 
sensitive information.
• Organizational models and practices employed by service providers such 
as social networking sites, web-based email hosts, and other application 
service providers that require users to allow personal information to be made 
available to third parties.13
• Emergence in the US (but outlawed in the EU) of an efficient data aggregation 
and brokerage industry, with exceptional capabilities to gather, store, 
12  The EU, as noted earlier, places much more stringent restrictions on third-party transmissions of data.
13  Broadly speaking, whereas the US has tended to favor opt-out models, the EU has mandated opt-in ones.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
133
synthesize and make information on individuals, available for a range of 
specific purposes, e.g. targeted marketing, employment screening or law 
enforcement investigation.
• The inability of parties holding personal information to secure it properly 
(though increased legal liability would incentivize increased security).
We also comment on the impact that these trends are having on commonly 
accepted notions of privacy (focusing in this chapter largely on the US situation).
Technologies, organizational practices and 
information exposure
Today, an array of technologies – as well as business practices enabled by 
those technologies – allow aggregators to build a detailed personal profile of 
just about anyone. Recent advances in the knowledge-discovery technologies, 
data-clustering and link analyses now make it possible to group together 
related records in a transactional database of billions of records and establish 
connections among the groups. Thus it is often possible to find information on 
associations, relatives, past addresses and related items with little difficulty from 
large-scale transactional databases.14 Furthermore, the continued development 
of information storage and retrieval systems, increasing levels of surveillance 
made possible by rapidly improving camera technologies, and the constant 
collection of personal information by third parties provide the information 
needed to establish a detailed picture of an individual that includes current 
interests, recent purchase history, recent whereabouts and health and financial 
information.
Peter Fleischer, global privacy counsel for Google, in an address to Google’s 
employees characterized what Google considers to be the new reality concerning 
concepts of personal privacy.15 Mr. Fleischer stated that historical concepts of 
privacy depended on forgetfulness, incompetence or laziness. Information was 
simply lost, or nobody bothered to find it. Mr. Fleischer claimed that those 
conditions have protected individual privacy for millennia. He further stated 
that we now live in a world in which we can remember everything and find 
everything. He conjectured that such an environment considerably changes 
expectations of privacy, especially those derived from a physical world in which 
information can become obscure. He further pointed out that the internet readily 
14  The credit industry maintains a large-scale transactional database of credit applications that is mined 
using these techniques to detect fraudulent credit applications. See the report, “US Identity Fraud Rates by 
Geography”, San Diego, CA: I.D. Analytics Inc. (February 2007).
15  Peter Fleischer, “Protecting Privacy on the Internet”, December 19, 2007, available at http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=2IKBke1puFw.

Security and Privacy
134
allows data to cross national boundaries and that systems such as Google’s cannot 
be architected to stop at an international border. He concluded, therefore, that 
having different privacy regimes in different countries is out of touch with the 
modern reality. He noted that, historically, in phone conversations there was 
a “sense of evanescence” to the conversation. However, with email and chat, 
data are stored by third parties and the data remain. He thus concluded that 
expectations of privacy must change.
(i) Social networking
In the past decade, social networking websites, which began as a niche 
phenomenon to support hobbies and other specific interests, have become for 
many the de facto mode of communication, especially among young adults and 
teens. Facebook, the current leading social networking site, reports that it now 
has 500 million active users worldwide, and that over 50% of active users log 
on to their Facebook account daily.16 According to a recent Pew Internet study, 
internet usage among Americans is currently 93% for teens and young adults 
(ages 12–29), over 70% for adults (ages 30–64) and just under 40% for adults 
over sixty-five.17 The study also reports that 73% of online teens and 47% of 
online adults now use social networking sites, a 50% increase during the last 
five years. Of those who have profiles, 73% have a profile on Facebook,18 48% 
have one on MySpace19 and 14% have a LinkedIn20 profile. Thus a significant 
portion of the American population uses social networking sites and most of 
their profiles are posted on one or more of the three top websites.
Given the growing reliance on social networks, there has been considerable 
research into the impact on privacy. Most information posted on the three 
major social network websites is associated with the user’s real identity. In 
social networks such as Facebook, pseudonymity is discouraged through site 
usage norms and the need to provide a valid email address to register. Following 
usage norms, most users do provide a real identity, but as many have noted it is 
very easy to set up an account using a pseudonym.21 When social networking 
first became popular, Facebook was considered a more secure environment 
than MySpace because a Facebook user was associated with a physical world 
16  Facebook: pressroom statistics. Available at http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics.
17  Pew Internet and American Life Project, “Social Media & Mobile Internet Use Among Teens and Young 
Adults, Pew Research Center”, Feb 3, 2010, available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-
Media-and-Young-Adults.aspx. For country-by-country Facebook usage (including the EU), see: http://www.
nickburcher.com/2009/07/latest-facebook-usage-statistics-by.html.
18  http://www.facebook.com.
19  http://www.myspace.com.
20  http://www.linkedin.com.
21  For this reason Japanese social network users patronize Gree or Mixi rather than Facebook. See Hiroko 
Tabuchi, “Facebook Wins Relatively Few Friends in Japan”, The New York Times, January 9, 2011.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
135
institution such as the user’s high school or university. There was some 
expectation that information revealed would be limited to members whom the 
users knew from the offline world. Social networking sites allow users to define 
a group of friends who can view the user’s profile information. Default settings 
will often expose the information posted to anyone associated with the user’s 
institution, but users can opt to limit exposure to a group of friends and user-
adjustable controls enable even finer-grained control of the information exposed. 
In many ways, Facebook and other social network sites give the impression that 
they offer an intimate setting in which friends can communicate and the privacy 
of the group is protected.
Gross and Acquisti have examined the potential for information revelation in 
social networks in which the use of a real account name is typically connected 
to an account profile.22 They point out that the term “friends” used on a social 
networking website is quite different from the idea of a friend in the physical 
world. On a social networking site, a friend is determined by a binary setting, 
yes or no, while in the real world friends are associated with various degrees 
of trust. On a social networking site people are often included as friends even 
if the user does not know the person and has no established trust relationship. 
The number of a user’s friends is much higher on a social networking site. 
Although physical world friendships typically number between fifteen and 
twenty, Gross and Acquisiti found that on a college campus in 2004 the average 
number of social networking friends was over sixty, all of whom enjoyed the 
same level of trust. Currently, the average US Facebook user has 130 friends.23 
The ease of joining and extending a friend network on most sites means that 
users must exert considerable effort to control the membership of the group. 
Research indicates that most users are apt to accept friends they do not know 
well as long as they do not have a previous dislike for the person.24 Another 
difficulty is that the composition of the friends group changes over time. When 
friend groups start, they are often small groups in which the members are 
intimately acquainted. As the groups grow the relationships frequently become 
looser. Thus information intended for the smaller, original group can find its 
way to members of the larger group. In addition, users may find it difficult to 
limit the group by denying access to someone who requests membership. Social 
networking sites provide numerous incentives for prospective users to join the 
site and become a current member’s friend.25
22  Ralph Gross and Alessandro Acquisti, “Information Revelation and Privacy in On-line Social Networks 
(The Facebook Case)”, Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Privacy in Electronic Society (WPES), November 
2005, available at: http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/~acquisti/papers/privacy-facebook-gross-acquisti.pdf.
23  Facebook, Press Room, Statistics. Available at http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics.
24  Danah Boyd, “Friendster and Publicly Articulated Social Networking”, Conference on Human Factors 
and Computing Systems, April 24–29, Vienna, Austria, 2004, available at: http://www.danah.org/papers/
CHI2004Friendster.pdf.
25  Facebook’s homepage presents a “find friends” option. Nonmembers can look for a member’s name and 
are then offered an opportunity to register and join the current member’s group of friends.

Security and Privacy
136
Leading privacy organizations and the Federal Trade Commission are increasingly 
scrutinizing Facebook’s approach to privacy protection. The Electronic Frontier 
Foundation (EFF) has praised Facebook’s recent decision to introduce privacy 
controls that allow users to restrict access to content on a per-post basis.26 Users 
can limit access to a post to a particular subset of friends selected from a drop 
down menu. At the same time the EFF and other privacy organizations were 
highly critical of Facebook’s default settings in a new privacy tool released in 
December 2009. In a complaint filed with the Federal Trade Commission27 the 
EEF noted that the new settings give all Facebook users and possibly anyone 
on the internet access to a user’s friend list, profile, photos, gender, geographic 
region and pages they favor. Previously only a user’s name and network were 
available. The new settings were applied to all Facebook users, unless the user 
took the trouble to make the settings more restrictive.
Besides friends making personal information available, there are many other 
ways in which information propagates in a social networking site. In the US, 
the basic business model of a social networking site requires that information 
on users be made available to third parties for targeted marketing and other 
commercial purposes.28 The importance of having unfettered access to user data 
is evidenced in the Facebook terms of use agreement:
By posting User Content to any part of the Site, you automatically 
grant, and you represent and warrant that you have the right to grant, 
to the Company an irrevocable, perpetual, non-exclusive, transferable, 
fully paid, worldwide license (with the right to sublicense) to use, 
copy, publicly perform, publicly display, reformat, translate, excerpt 
(in whole or in part) and distribute such User Content for any purpose 
on or in connection with the Site or the promotion thereof, to prepare 
derivative works of, or incorporate into other works, such User Content, 
and to grant and authorize sublicenses of the foregoing. You may remove 
your User Content from the Site at any time. If you choose to remove 
your User Content, the license granted above will automatically expire, 
however you acknowledge that the Company may retain archived copies 
of your User Content.29
26  Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Facebook’s New Privacy Changes: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly”, 
December 9, 2009. Available at: http://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2009/12/facebooks-new-privacy-changes-
good-bad-and-ugly.
27  In the Matter of Facebook, Complaint and Request for Injunction, Request for Investigation and 
Other Relief, before the Federal Trade Commission (December 17, 2010). Available at: http://epic.org/
privacy/inrefacebook/EPIC-FacebookComplaint.pdf. For the fallout from this, see: http://epic.org/privacy/
inrefacebook/.
28  On November 9, 2009, an addition to the EU’s e-privacy Directive, Directive on Privacy and Electronic 
Communications, 2002/58/EC, mandated an opt-in rather than opt-out requirement that included Facebook 
and other US-based social networking sites. Implementation has been lax, however. See: http://www.pcworld.
com/businesscenter/article/235985/eu_orders_member_states_to_implement_cookie_law_or_else.html.
29  Taken from the term-of-user agreement available at: http://facebook.com/policy.php, February 7, 2007. 
This would almost certainly violate EU law.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
137
Facebook also informs users that it collects information not only from what 
they post but also from newspapers, blogs, instant messaging services and other 
users of Facebook in order to provide a more personalized experience. Privacy 
settings on social network sites usually default to allow for as much information 
sharing among users and third parties in order to maximize the utility of user 
data. Chris Kelly, Facebook’s privacy officer, noted that about 20% of Facebook’s 
users reset privacy controls from their default values. Thus the vast majority of 
users do not.
Facebook allows third-party developers to write software programs that 
users can install on their Facebook sites to give the site various capabilities 
similar to those provided by java scripts used on websites. The top twenty-five 
Facebook applications (referred to as Apps) have about 5.5 million active users 
per month.30 Most applications do not have a privacy policy and the Facebook 
terms-of-service agreement provides the following warning:
ALL PLATFORM APPLICATIONS ARE PROVIDED AS IS [and that] YOU 
UNDERSTAND AND AGREE THAT YOU DOWNLOAD, INSTALL AND/
OR USE ANY PLATFORM APPLICATIONS AT YOUR OWN DISCRETION 
AND RISK.
The Washington Post reports that the applications have become so popular that 
there are now venture capital firms devoted entirely to funding Facebook App 
development.31 Felt and Evans32 report that when a user installs a Facebook 
App under the default privacy settings, the App has access to all of the user’s 
information even if it does not need it. The App can collect information and 
copy it to a third-party server, which may then use it for a targeted marketing 
campaign or other purposes. Once the information has been harvested, neither 
Facebook nor the user has any control over its use.
Rosenbloom examined why social networking site users are apt to post such 
intimate details of their personal lives in an environment in which they have 
so little control.33 He states that the “porous nature of the Net has radically 
redefined the arena in which individuals are willing to disclose personal 
information . . . the comfort zone is much larger and the circle of friends more 
broadly defined.” At the time Rosenbloom was referring primarily to college 
students and those who grew up using the internet. However, this general 
30  ReadWriteWeb, “Does That Facebook App Have a Privacy Policy? Probably Not”, July 29, 2009. 
Available at: http://www.readwriteweb.com.
31  The Washington Post, “A Flashy Facebook Page at a Cost to Privacy”, June 12, 2008.
32  A. Felt and D. Evans, “Privacy Protection for Social Networking APIs”, presented at Web 2.0 Security and 
Privacy 2008, Oakland, Ca, May 22, 2008. Available at: http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~afelt/privacybyproxy.
pdf. New EU laws have limited access, though not yet with full effect.
33  David Rosenblum, “What Anyone Can Know: The Privacy Risks of Social Networking Sites”, IEEE 
Security and Privacy 5, no. 3 (May/June 2007): 40–49.

Security and Privacy
138
tendency appears in all groups who use the sites. Acquisti has noted that in 
using online systems users can seldom strike an adequate balance between the 
immediate benefit of providing information and the long-term risks of revealing 
it.34 In addition, with the social network phenomenon there is the tremendous 
force of peer pressure to participate, as well as the confidence inspired by using 
a well-known website.
The impact of social networks on individual well-being is an open question. 
Given the inability to control who has access to information posted on a social 
networking website, it is important not to assume that privacy expectations in 
the physical world carry over to the world of social networking. James Rachels 
observed that privacy is valuable because it enables us to form varied and intimate 
relationships with other people.35 This is precisely how social networking sites 
are used. However, the intimacy needed to protect communications within small 
groups is an illusion.
(ii) Highly dynamic systems
US businesses have long collected data on customers, but information on the 
activities of specific individuals was not the primary interest. When scanning 
devices were introduced into supermarkets and other stores in the early 1970s 
it became possible to collect detailed data on items being purchased, monitor 
inventory more effectively and reduce the costs of marking each item.36 By 2006, 
the retailer Wal-mart had amassed a 586-terabyte data warehouse that included 
sales and inventory data.37 Wal-mart records every item sold to every customer 
in every store on a daily basis. For most consumer goods purchased in retail 
outlets like Wal-mart, the retailer does not care exactly who bought what. Mass-
market retailers are more concerned with questions such as how many tubes of a 
certain toothpaste were sold and what item was most often purchased with the 
toothpaste. Data analysis is often done to determine why certain goods may or 
may not be selling and how item placement can improve sales. Wal-mart claims 
to keep the data for only two years and also claims not to track the purchases of 
individual customers.
For over ten years companies like comScore Networks38 have monitored the 
behavior of millions of internet users to gain insights into consumer behavior. 
Data are collected to try to spot trends in consumer purchases and interests. 
34  Alessandro Acquisti, “Privacy in Electronic Commerce and the Economics of Immediate Gratification”, 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 2004, 21–29.
35  James Rachels, “Why is Privacy Important”, Philosophy and Public Affairs 4 (Summer, 1975): 323–33.
36  James Sinkula, “Status of Company Usage of Scanner Based Research”, Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science 14 (1986): 63–71.
37  C. Babcock, “Data Data Everywhere”, Information Week Global CIO, January 9, 2006.
38  comScore, Inc., http://www.comscore.com.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
139
The company enlists about two million internet users (who are compensated) 
and claims that user privacy is protected. For most of the company’s activities, 
individuals are not the main concern; general trends are. The company monitors 
users in order to assess the effectiveness of ad campaigns, the use of web sites 
and to develop detailed profiles of users who might be purchasing certain kinds 
of goods or visiting particular websites. comScore clients rely on the company’s 
research to build customer profiles and target consumers based on those profiles. 
In this type of targeted advertising the user’s recent behavior or contextual 
information is used to present targeted ads. Although this type of marketing 
has raised privacy concerns, an identity is not required and is typically not 
associated with a behavioral pattern.
What is dramatically changing the picture is a collection of technologies often 
referred to as highly dynamic systems (HDS) that allow personalized services 
and products to be delivered to a particular consumer.39 Like the client server 
computing paradigm upon which e-commerce is based, HDS provide a one-
to-one communication channel with a customer. Such systems are built with 
wireless technologies, sensor networks, RFID tags, smart cards, cell phones, 
surveillance systems, easy pass cards, surveillance cameras and internet-
connected televisions. All these technologies are used to establish a one-to-one 
communication channel between customer and provider which enables the 
provider to deliver content appealing to the customer. Of course, the provider 
is constantly changing; many different entities have the opportunity to provide 
content and many different entities need access to personalized data. Often 
the user simply makes a selection and obtains a desired product or service. 
However, the more the provider knows about the individual on the other end of 
the channel, the more likely something appealing can be presented, for example, 
an ad the customer might click on, a movie the customer might download or a 
restaurant the consumer might visit if a location-enabled cell phone indicates 
that he or she is in a particular area.
HDS provide a host of opportunities to collect data. They frequently need both 
personal and contextual information (e.g. a person’s current location or recent 
purchase history) to provide personalized services. Extensive and unobservable 
data collection is inherent in these systems and loss of control of the data 
collected is inevitable. An analysis of HDS summarizes the privacy issues for 
the US:
• data are collected without any indication;
• data collection takes place without a predefined purpose;
• data, once collected, persist in a variety of locations; and
39  K. Srikumar and B. Bashker, “Personalized Recommendations in E-commerce”, International Journal of 
Electronic Business 3, no. 1 (2005): 4–27.

Security and Privacy
140
• different devices record multiple events simultaneously, leading to various 
possible interpretations of logged raw data and making the assignment of a 
valid privacy policy impossible.40
These systems certainly allow much finer levels of data collection. For example, 
an RFID tag in clothing and a surveillance camera in a store could be used to 
indicate your presence in a store, how much time you spent there and even (in 
the US) what aisles you visited.
Research suggests that most current privacy-enhancing technologies, which are 
based on concealing data, are not compatible with HDS. These systems typically 
involve continuous collection of data from multiple sources, usually for a variety 
of purposes. It is difficult, if not impossible, to build systems that would limit 
data collection at the source. Anonymity would prevent personalized services 
from being delivered. Pseudonymity would allow personalized services but 
would require the controlled release of personal data, which might impede 
personalization or limit the types of services that could be offered. Finally, 
data are frequently collected from so many different sources that it would 
be difficult, if not impossible, to guarantee that a real identity could not be 
discovered. Nonetheless, researchers are currently exploring techniques for 
developing privacy-policy-aware HDS collection devices in an effort to make 
“upfront notices of data collection” available to consumers.41 Consumer privacy 
preferences would determine data collection parameters and consumers would 
be able to inspect their privacy state in a connected world.
(iii) Cell phones and targeted advertising
Cell phones provide unique opportunities to present customized content to 
consumers, but raise many privacy questions. A popular idea is to make banner 
ads appear when a user is close to a particular store or restaurant. Of course, 
now the user location must be tracked and revealed to a third party. In the US, 
companies are already developing browsers for cell phones that are location 
aware.42
The business model for most websites is click-through advertising. In other 
words, the website gains revenue when a visitor clicks on an ad displayed on the 
site. Google, for example, uses your search term to decide what ads to display in 
40  S. Sackmann, J. Struker and R. Accorsi, “Personalization in Privacy-aware Highly Dynamic Systems”, 
Communications of the ACM 49, no. 9 (September 2006): 32–38. Some of these issues are covered by the EU 
e-Privacy Directive.
41  Marc Langheinrich, “Personal Privacy in Ubiquitous Computing – Tools and System Support”, PhD 
dissertation, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, May 2005. Available at: http://www.vs.inf.ethz.ch/res/papers/
langheinrich-phd-2005.pdf.
42  Marin Perez, “Opera Add Locations Awareness”, Information Week, March 9, 2009.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
141
the hope of presenting something interesting and relevant that will elicit a click 
on the ad and perhaps a purchase. Thus there is tremendous incentive to know 
as much as possible in order to present highly relevant ads.
Cell phones and communications devices are ideal for targeted advertising 
because the content of the conversation or text message and the user’s location 
can be used to determine relevant content. For example, a company called 
Pudding Media plans to offer extremely low-cost internet phone service.43 Users 
have only to agree to have the content of their calls monitored. Essentially this 
is the same model that Google uses to provide targeted advertising to its Gmail 
users. Both companies claim that their systems target ads only contextually 
and do not employ any demographic or identity information in the process. 
Both claim that the content of the communications is not saved. In tests of the 
Pudding Media service, the company reports that the targeted ads presented 
often influence the content of the conversation, causing the participants to 
focus on the ads.
Both services exemplify a basic business model that pervades the modern 
internet – free or low-cost services are provided in exchange for access to personal 
information. Jonathan Sackett, chief digital officer for Arnold Worldwide, a unit 
of the advertising company Havas, summed up the current concerns of internet 
marketers: “Still, it makes me caution myself and caution all of us as marketers. 
We really have to look at the situation, because we’re getting more intrusive 
with each passing technology.”44
(iv) A sample of Web 2.0 technologies
Unlike the static pages of the early web, the Web 2.0 environment provides 
various mechanisms for uploading content to websites and making it available to 
a wide audience. One of the most successful websites to emerge in the Web 2.0 era 
(the past five years) is YouTube.45 Originally started to foster the communication 
and sharing of musical ideas and techniques among musicians, the site rapidly 
expanded to include all types of video and is now the world’s preeminent video 
sharing site. According to the internet research company Alexa,46 YouTube is 
the world’s third most popular website behind Google and Facebook. Google 
purchased YouTube, a company with only sixty-five employees, for 1.65 billion 
in Google stock in 2006.
YouTube videos can be uploaded by anyone who has a YouTube account, which 
requires only a valid email address. Videos can be made available to all on the 
43  Louise Story, “Company Will Monitor Phone Calls to Tailor Ads”, The New York Times, Sept. 24, 2007.
44  Ibid.
45  http://www.youtube.com.
46  Alexa, Top 500 Sites on the Web, http://www.alexa.com/topsites/global.

Security and Privacy
142
site or restricted to friends and family. Videos are usually followed by posts of 
texts from users who are either anonymous or frequently use pseudonyms. The 
uploader of a video can control whether posts are permitted or not and only the 
person who uploaded the video can remove it; others must appeal to YouTube.
Numerous privacy issues arise in relation to YouTube. The company does little 
monitoring of uploaded video; so almost anyone can upload just about any 
video. Copyright infringement has resulted in a major federal lawsuit against 
the company by Sony Viacom.47 YouTube now has a department that routinely 
removes videos of copyrighted materials upon complaints from copyright 
holders. For others, the process of having an objectionable or harmful video 
removed can require considerable time, and there are frequent complaints that 
the company is unresponsive. Web 2.0 technologies scale only when any work 
to be done is spread over the user base not relegated to the site operator. In 
addition, YouTube collects the following information: each occasion on which 
a video is watched; the unique “login ID” of the user who watched it; the time 
at which the user started to watch the video; the Internet Protocol (IP) address 
and other information needed to identify the user’s computer; and the identifier 
for the video. As with Google, this information is used to present targeted 
advertising each time the user logs into the site. In the Viacom vs. YouTube 
judgment, YouTube was ordered to release the logged information to Viacom for 
each Viacom video viewed.48
Privacy issues with YouTube also center on users uploading videos intended 
for only a small group of individuals but made available to anyone on the 
internet. Business organizations can suffer when the intimacy they require 
in conversations with clients or employees is compromised. A recent video 
involving the law firm of Cohen and Grigsby offers an example.
An extremely contentious practice, especially in the information technology 
industry, is the hiring of foreign workers on H1 visas. The Department of 
Labor (DOL) issues a permanent labor certification (PERM) to an employer that 
allows the employer to hire a foreign worker to work permanently in the US.49 
Among other requirements, the employer must demonstrate that there are no US 
workers with the appropriate skills available for the job at the prevailing wage. 
Cohen and Grigsby is a law firm that advises corporate clients on how to meet 
47  Viacom Intern. Inc. v. YouTube Inc., 253 F.R.D. 256 (SDNY 2008). However, the Southern District Court 
of New York (trial level court) granted summary judgment against Viacom and the case is currently on appeal 
before the Second Circuit, with the parties expecting that the fate of the appeal will turn on the Supreme 
Court’s decision in Global-Tech Appliances v. SEB. See e.g. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/how-
an-obscure-supreme-court-207972.
48  However, YouTube’s compliance was connected with its victory in a copyright suit by Viacom. See: http://
www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/google-prevails-in-viacom-youtube-copyright-lawsuit-appeals-on-deck/36229.
49  United States Department of Labor, Permenant Labor Certification, available at http://www.
foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/perm.cfm.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
143
the PERM requirements of DOL. In a frank presentation, firm representatives 
describe ways of placing want ads in newspapers in a manner that meet DOL 
requirements but which make the ads unlikely to attract qualified US applicants 
for the position. The firm obviously intended the presentation for current and 
prospective clients and certainly did not want the recorded sessions to be open 
to public viewing, where they would engender a wave of negative publicity and 
unwanted attention. Someone posted the recorded presentation on YouTube, 
where it was viewed over 155,000 times during the first week of posting. It 
attracted so much attention it eventually found its way onto CNN where it 
reached an even wider audience.
Data aggregators and processors50
During the past fifteen years a highly developed data brokerage industry has 
arisen that not only makes information on individuals available at relatively low 
cost but also can perform custom analyses of individuals or groups for various 
purposes, including law enforcement, employment background checks and 
targeted marketing campaigns. Companies such as ChoicePoint,51 Acxiom and 
LexisNexis employ the latest algorithmic tools, along with computing power 
once reserved for large-scale scientific computation, to synthesize personal 
information from numerous sources and make a detailed profile of an individual 
available to either businesses or government. Due to the sensitivity of making 
personally identifiable information available to end consumers, these larger 
brokers today prefer to offer services only to larger, established businesses. 
Government agencies, particularly law enforcement agencies such as the FBI, 
are increasingly turning to these major data brokers for both data and analysis.
By 2005, largely through acquisitions of smaller data management companies, 
Acxiom, ChoicePoint and LexisNexis had grown to be the world’s three largest 
aggregators and providers of data on individuals, each with annual revenues 
of over $1 billion. These organizations leveraged their significant analysis and 
processing capabilities, gleaned over many years of managing data for large 
corporate clients, to provide detailed information on and profiles of individuals 
to insurers, collection agencies, direct marketers, employment screeners and 
government agencies, including state and local law enforcement agencies. The 
website of Accurint,52 the information subsidiary of LexisNexis, indicates the 
detailed information held and made available. For example, one product provided 
50  It should be emphasized again that EU law prevents the existence of an industry as outlined in this 
section.
51  In 2008, Reed Elsevier, the parent company of LexisNexis, purchased ChoicePoint for $3.6 billion and 
merged it with LexisNexis.
52  Accurint, http://www.accurint.com/, last visited May 5, 2009.

Security and Privacy
144
by the company, People at Work, holds information on 132 million individuals 
including addresses, phone numbers and possible dates of employment. The site 
advertises the ability to find people, their relatives, associates and assets. In the 
next section we discuss some of the capabilities that data aggregators have for 
establishing detailed individual profiles.
Securing data repositories
To owners of large central repositories of valuable personal data, security is of 
paramount concern. However, given the large number of business partners and 
clients who require access to the data, protecting the sensitive information in 
these repositories is not an easy task. Large-scale breaches at both ChoicePoint 
and Acxiom earlier this decade generated a great deal of attention from 
privacy advocates and prompted calls for regulation of the activities of the 
data aggregation industry.53 In May 2009, LexisNexis disclosed a breach that 
exposed the personal information of 40,000 individuals and compromised 
names, birthdates and social security numbers.54 The breach appears to have 
taken place from June 2004 to October 2007. The company breach letter said 
the thieves, who were once legitimate LexisNexis customers, used mailboxes 
at commercial mail services and information taken from LexisNexis to set up 
about 300 fraudulent credit cards.55 The breach letter indicated that LexisNexis 
learned of the breach from the United States Postal Inspection Service, which 
was investigating the fraudulent credit cards.
Other industries that maintain large central repositories of sensitive personal 
information are the retail and card payment processing industries. Each has 
suffered notable large-scale breaches during the past five years.56 Unlike the 
data aggregation industry, breaches in these industries appear to have involved 
malware on servers that collected data and transmitted it outside the company. 
These breaches, however, also involved individuals with detailed insider 
knowledge of the systems that were compromised. Although the credit card 
industry and retail industries have not reported significant rises in the rates 
of credit card fraud,57 the scope of recent payment card breaches, the rapidity 
with which stolen credit information has been used and the geographical 
53  Solove and Hoofnagle, “A Model Regime of Privacy Protection”.
54  Amy Westfeldt, “LexisNexis Warns 32,000 People about Data Breach”, San Francisco Chronicle, May 1, 
2009, 22.
55  LexisNexis 
Breach 
Notification 
Letter. 
Available 
at: 
http://privacy.wi.gov/databreaches/pdf/
LexisNexisLetter050509.pdf, visited May 1, 2009.
56  Douglas Salane, “Are Large Scale Data Breaches Inevitable?”, Cyber Infrastructure Protection ’09, City 
University of New York, June 2009.
57  CyberSource Corporation, “Online Fraud Report: Online Payment Fraud Trends, Merchant Practices and 
Benchmarks”, available at http://www.cybersource.com, visited May 1, 2009.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
145
scope of the fraud raise concerns that data thieves are now taking advantage 
of the capabilities afforded by worldwide crime organizations to monetize vast 
collections of breached financial information. Loss by aggregators and data 
processors of sensitive personal data, especially financial data, poses significant 
risks to individual security.
Breaches in the data aggregation industry involved insiders such as contractors 
who extended their authorized access. Breaches in the payment processing 
industry made use of malware that relayed sensitive personal financial 
information to data thieves. However, regardless of the industry, basic privacy 
policies that (1) limit the amount of data collected, (2) limit where data are stored 
and the time for which they are stored and (3) restrict the use of data to the task 
for which they are collected play a critical role in preventing and mitigating 
breaches. Large-scale breaches are expensive, especially if the information lost 
involves sensitive personal financial data. Breaches in the payment industry 
can exact extremely high costs, particularly to organizations such as card 
processors, whose businesses depend on the trust of partners and customers. 
Breached notification laws, which keep both consumers and business partners 
aware of what is happening with their data, are changing the way all industries 
and organizations view information security.
Impact on basic notions of privacy
Modern information and communications systems are having a tremendous 
impact on basic, long-held notions of privacy. Although we offer an extended 
account of privacy in the next chapter, it is useful to relate some of the foregoing 
discussion to Alan Westin’s differentiation of the four states of privacy: solitude, 
intimacy, anonymity and reserve.58 In Chapter VI we examined the impact of 
recent securitization technologies on both intimacy and anonymity. Here is how 
modern information and communications systems can impact each of these states. 
Solitude is a state in which an individual is isolated and does not expect to be 
observed by others in any manner. Intimacy is the state in which an individual 
interacts with a small group and expects that his actions will be observed and 
limited to members of that group, for example, the interaction between spouses, 
among family members or among partners in a firm. Anonymity occurs when a 
person enters the public arena but surveillance does not result in identification. 
Thus the person has the freedom of action and expression that he or she might 
not have in other venues. The fourth state of privacy – reserve – may be the 
most important. Reserve is simply the ability to withhold information. We show 
reserve when we exercise discretion in the release of information, or in the 
58  Alan Westin, Privacy and Freedom (New York Atheneum, 1967).

Security and Privacy
146
thoughts we convey, because these may be deemed either inappropriate for the 
occasion, offensive to another’s sensibilities, to give an adversary an advantage 
or to have unknown, possibly negative, consequences. Yet Herman Tavani 
and James Moor think that privacy should not be defined in terms of what 
information individuals can control because they can control so little.59 Instead, 
they stress that in order for individuals to have the freedom to function and 
prosper they must have the opportunity to limit access to personal information 
even if they do not have control of that information. Yet such privacy is an 
essential requirement for realizing the core values.60
The systems upon which we now rely for both business and social interactions 
can compromise each state of privacy. Analysis of a search history can reveal a 
person’s innermost thoughts, fears, fantasies, aspirations or health concerns and 
thus undermine reserve. Online sites have replaced the usual meeting places for 
small groups, for example, the local tavern, club, mall or street corner. There is 
frequently a presumption that data posted or communications will be limited to 
a small circle of friends. Yet social networking site users cannot predict who will 
have access to their communications or how they will be used. For example, Pre-
employ.com, an employment screening service, reports that in 2009 over 40% 
of employers obtained information on job candidates from social networking 
sites.61 Although people have communicated online for years, prior to the 
social networking era they usually did so with a pseudonym, and data were 
held for only short periods. With current widely used systems a real identity is 
associated with a profile, and anything posted on major social networking sites 
may be archived indefinitely. As we have noted, most site owners state clearly 
in their terms-of-service agreements that the data may be used in any way the 
site deems reasonable. The situation is complicated by online privacy policies 
that are difficult to read, indicate little protection for personal data and are 
often considered to be simply legal disclaimers for protecting the site owner.62 
Furthermore, most terms-of-service agreements examined in this review 
indicate that information posted becomes part of the company’s assets and, if 
the company is sold, those assets may be subject to a different privacy policy.
59  Herman T. Tavani and James H. Moor, “Privacy Protection, Control of Information, and Privacy-
Enhancing Technologies”, Computers and Society 31, no. 1 (March 2001): 6–11.
60  James H. Moor, “Towards a Theory of Privacy in the Information Age”, Computers and Society (September 
1997): 27–32.
61  Pre-employ.com, “Background Checks and Social Networking Sites”, February 24, 2009.
62  Irene Pollach, “What’s Wrong with On-line Privacy Policies?”, Communications of the ACM 50, no. 9 
(September 2007): 103–108.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
147
Protecting consumer privacy
In Chapter IX we examine the complexity of oversight and accountability, 
largely with regard to government sector surveillance. That section makes the 
point that, “as liberal writers from as far back as John Locke realized, good 
social order requires more than reliance on individual good will and good 
judgment. Structural supports and incentives are needed.” Yet in determining 
how information is protected by those who control data in the modern internet, 
particularly social networks, search engines and sites that share information 
with third-party advertisers, there is exceptional reliance on the individual 
good will and judgment of the data controllers. Most users count on the data 
controllers to protect their information and not use it in a way that would cause 
them harm. A recent letter63 to the US Committee on Commerce, Science and 
Transportation by a coalition of fifteen major American privacy and consumer 
groups representing millions of Americans notes that internet users face the 
following choice – “either stay off-line and ignore the benefits of new technology, 
or plug in and run extraordinary risks to privacy and security.” The letter states 
that current privacy laws are inadequate and that self regulation has failed. The 
letter further states there is nothing in US law similar to the National Do Not 
Call Registry64 to protect consumers from unwanted advertising and profiling 
by internet firms.
In the US, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is the primary government 
agency responsible for protecting consumers from harm that results from the 
collection and sharing of their personal information.65 This role grew out of 
the FTC’s longstanding mission as the enforcer of the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act, which mainly protects consumer credit information. Since the 1990s the 
FTC has increasingly concerned itself with privacy issues beyond the scope 
of consumer credit, with authorization derived primarily from specific sector 
statutes enacted during the past fifteen years and Section 5 of the FTC Act, 
which gives the commission authority to take action against deceptive or unfair 
trade practices.66 For protecting consumer privacy outside of specific sector 
legislation the FTC relies heavily on Section 5 of the FTC Act, which allows it 
to bring actions against organizations that misrepresent the way in which they 
collect and use consumer information.
63  “Congress needs to act on privacy”, Coalition Letter of Consumer and Privacy Orangizations, July 1, 
2011. Available at http://epic.org/privacy/consumer/Privacy_Groups_to_US_Congress_final.pdf.
64  National Do Not Call Registry, https://www.donotcall.gov/default.aspx.
65  However, it should be noted that even if the FTC could enact and enforce a more rigorous privacy program 
(as suggested below) it would do nothing to regulate government intrusions. This is markedly different from 
what is happening in the EU, in which both the Commission and the European Data Supervisor are calling for 
an extension of data protection laws to policing and criminal justice as well as the private sector.
66  15. U.S.C. § 1681.

Security and Privacy
148
The FTC is in the process of conducting a thorough examination of its enforcement 
practices in the area of privacy protection.67 Up to now the FTC has employed 
two approaches as guides to protecting consumer information: (1) the notice 
and choice approach; and (2) the harm-based approach. As part of the notice 
and choice approach the FTC has brought actions against organizations that 
engage in unfair and deceptive practices by using or collecting information in 
ways which violate stated privacy policies and terms-of-use agreements. Under 
the harm-based approach the FTC has taken action when organizations handle 
data in ways likely to cause physical or economic harm, or result in unwanted 
intrusions. The harm-based approach triggers FTC action when organizations 
fail to protect consumer information adequately, for example, by exposing 
consumer information that might result in economic loss through identity 
theft. Aside from the approaches being used as guides for enforcement actions, 
the FTC uses them to promote industry self-regulatory practices. The agency 
encourages organizations to put in place systems that inform consumers about 
privacy issues and give them the choice as to whether or not to release their 
personal information. The FTC also promotes industry practices that protect 
consumer data.
In its current review, the FTC has cited limitations with both approaches. It 
claims that the notice and choice approach is unworkable because typical 
privacy policies have now become long, complex documents that consumers 
cannot possibly read. The agency also notes that an increasing number of 
privacy policies are simply legal disclaimers. According to the FTC, the harm-
based approach is too narrow as it limits harm to specific areas, often indicated 
by sector specific legislation. The approach does not address the wide array of 
harms that result from making sensitive personal information available to many 
different parties. The agency notes that it has little authority to address situations 
that lead to reputational harm, a common occurrence when, for example, social 
networks fail to regulate what users post regarding other users.68 The agency 
can also do little when consumers agree to surveillance without being aware 
of the consequences. Overall, the FTC has relied extensively on promoting 
industry best practices as part of a self-regulatory approach to privacy. The FTC 
chairman, Jon Leibowitz, recently remarked, “Despite some good actors, self-
regulation of privacy has not worked adequately and is not working adequately 
for American consumers.”69
67  FTC Preliminary Staff Report, “Protecting Consumers in an Era of Rapid Change: Proposed 
Framework for Business and Policy Makers”, December 2010, available at: http://www.ftc.gov/
os/2010/12/101201privacyreport.pdf.
68  Daniel J. Solove, The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy on the Internet (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2007).
69  Edward Wyatt and Tanzina Vega, “FTC Honors Plan to Honor Privacy of Online Users”, The New York 
Times, December 1, 2010.

 VII. Surveillance Technologies and Economies
149
In its attempt to protect consumers in the modern internet environment the 
FTC is largely trying to promote industry-wide practices that follow the Fair 
Information Practice Principles that it presented in 2000.70 The FTC 2000 
framework arose from classic work done at HEW in the early seventies to derive 
a general privacy framework.71 The proposed new FTC framework emphasizes 
privacy by design, simplified choice and greater transparency, and embodies 
its Fair Information Practices Principles. In order to implement the framework 
in view of specific technologies and current business practices the FTC has 
sought input from consumer and industry groups through a series of roundtable 
meetings.72 Although the FTC does not seek a legislative mandate for its new 
proposed framework, as part of its privacy by design initiative the agency 
has called for an effective and enforceable Do Not Track Tool that would give 
consumers the technical means to protect their online behavior from unwanted 
intrusion.73
In Chapter IV we discussed the dramatically different approaches to privacy 
protection in the US and EU and examined some of the cultural and historical 
factors that account for these differences. We noted that privacy protection 
in the US, unlike in the EU, is highly fragmentary and sector based. Often 
privacy legislation arises in response to a specific harm caused to consumers by 
existing data use practices. As we have noted, lack of an enforceable uniform 
privacy framework creates numerous gaps and results in a complex array of 
legislation to close the gaps. Although the public increasingly looks to the FTC 
to force organizations to protect consumer data, the agency does not have a 
broad legislative mandate for privacy protection. Given the rising consumer 
alarm over online privacy issues and the threat of increased legislative remedies, 
many organizations that provide internet-based services are now increasingly 
open to an overarching privacy framework. The FTC approach, however, still 
relies heavily on self-regulation to protect consumer data. Without a mandated 
framework to protect consumer privacy it appears that the FTC and Congress are 
in a never-ending game of plugging holes in a dyke as new harms surface that 
cannot be predicted in advance.
The FTC’s recent reexamination of its consumer privacy protection policies 
provides additional impetus for a national data protection authority with a 
70  FTC, Privacy Online: Fair Information Practices in the Electronic Marketplace (2000), available at: http://
www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy2000/privacy2000.pdf.
71  US Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare, Records, Computers and the Rights of Citizens: Report of the 
Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems (July 1973), available at: http://aspe.hhs.
gov/DATACNCL/1973privacy/tocprefacemembers.htm
72  FTC Press Release, FTC to Host Public Roundtables to Address Evolving Privacy Issues (Sept. 15, 2009), 
available at: http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2009/09/privacyrt.shtm.
73  Testimony of David Vladeck, Director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection, Federal Trade Commission, 
before the Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade and Consumer Protection, US House of Representatives, Dec. 2, 
2010, available at: http://www.ftc.gov/os/testimony/101202donottrack.pdf.

Security and Privacy
150
mandate to oversee privacy protection. Given the FTC’s extensive history of 
privacy protection and current mandates through a range of legislation, the 
agency would certainly play a critical role in such an authority. We spoke 
earlier of a grassroots movement that could be a motivating force for a national 
data authority. Indeed, in response to widespread consumer outrage over the 
handling of sensitive personal data and the inability of organizations to secure 
it, a strong group of highly effective privacy advocacy organizations has arisen 
to represent consumer privacy interests. In addition, a number of industries 
now have an interest in a uniform privacy framework that would eliminate 
high compliance costs of a severely fragmented legislative regime of privacy 
protection. Without a uniform framework in place the nation faces continued 
proliferation of legislation and regulation, which makes oversight, enforcement 
and compliance extremely difficult and costly. The challenge is not only to put 
in place an adequate privacy protection framework but also to implement it 
in a way that provides adequate consumer protections and at the same time 
promotes innovation and development.

151
 VIII.  The Underlying Values and their 
Alignment
We have made repeated references to the liberal democratic values at stake 
in contemporary digital technologies. It is now time to attempt to articulate 
them in greater detail and, in particular, to offer accounts that might have some 
claim to broad, if not universal, acceptance within liberal polities. We focus 
initially on security, a value in any society, but distinctively construed within a 
liberal polity, before reviewing the ways in which strategies for assuring it may 
come into tension with other important liberal values – privacy, autonomy and 
dignity – and thus impinge on liberal identity.
Security
Both crime and terrorism threaten our security, and it is in the name of security 
that some of the controversial measures identified in earlier chapters have been 
deployed. But “security” is a slippery term. It may be individual or collective, 
and we need to be clearer about what is to be secured. Is it security against a 
physical threat, a threat to a way of life, a threat to a particular regime . . . ?1
Background
Traditional liberal democratic political theory is nicely represented by John 
Locke’s Second Treatise of Civil Government, where he argues that human beings 
are endowed – by God, as he puts it – with certain fundamental rights that he 
characterizes as life, liberty and property.2 The purpose of the Second Treatise is 
to argue that although humans should not view themselves as being under the 
tutelage of an absolute sovereign – a position that he had vigorously attacked 
in the First Treatise – they nevertheless still need the firm hand of central/
1  Our focus here will be on the threats to security that are posed by others – in particular as a result of 
crime and terrorism. Although the account we provide will highlight threats posed by these, it is not meant 
to exclude – and occasionally adverts to – non-personal threats to security, such as those posed by infectious 
disease. More generally on the ideas of individual and collective security, see Allen Buchanan, Justice, 
Legitimacy, and Self-Determination: Moral Foundations for International Law (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004).
2  John Locke, Second Treatise of Civil Government, available at: http://www.constitution.org/jl/2ndtreat.
htm. The Lockean account is usually secularized by seeing in the capacity for rational thought and action 
an alternative foundation for fundamental rights. There has been a lively dispute over whether Locke can be 
so secularized. See e.g. Jeremy Waldron, God, Locke and Equality: Christian Foundations of Locke’s Political 
Thought (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Jeffrey Reiman, “Towards a Secular Lockean 
Liberalism”, Review of Politics, 67 (2005): 473–93. Although, for convenience, we focus on Locke, our 
discussion might well have started, as it does in Waldron, with Hobbes.

Security and Privacy
152
civil government. Locke’s attempt to reconcile this with the individual rights 
he has been advocating takes the form of what is known as the social contract 
in which, in exchange for certain benefits (the ability to exercise their rights), 
individuals see it to be to their advantage to cede some small portion of their 
rights to those who will secure those benefits for them.
How so? Although the occupants of a Lockean state of nature (pre-civil society) 
possess basic rights to life, liberty and property, such a state of affairs offers 
little security. The possession of rights is not sufficient for their enjoyment.3 
The rights must also be exercisable, and for this the state of nature does not and 
cannot provide. Those who inhabit a state of nature cannot be entirely trusted 
to acknowledge the rights of others, some preferring instead to aggrandize 
themselves in various ways. As Locke puts it, although a person in a state 
of nature has – by right – dominion over himself, “the enjoyment of [that 
dominion] is very uncertain, and constantly exposed to the invasion of others: 
for all being kings as much as he, every man his equal, and the greater part no 
strict observers of equity and justice, the enjoyment of the property he has in 
this state is very unsafe, very unsecure.”4
Security, in other words, is a security against X so that we can be secure to Y. 
This can be easily forgotten, but is implicit in debates about security and liberty. 
If security removes or seriously compromises liberty (and/or autonomy, privacy, 
and dignity) then one might wonder whether it retains its foundational value.
In social contract reasoning, to effect their security rational occupants of a state 
of nature would choose to enter into a “civil society” – that is, one characterized 
by institutions that are designed to secure for its members conditions that enable 
the exercise of their rights.5 Security is therefore no peripheral social condition 
but central to the prosecution of a life that is able to realize its potential. Some 
level of security will be needed not only to ensure the social conditions of our 
rights (various critical social institutions) but also to foster the conditions for 
our individual human flourishing (through enforceable criminal law).
3  “Enjoyment” may be a particularly apt term. The Latin term securitas referred, “in its classical use, to a 
condition of individuals, of a particular inner sort. It denoted composure, tranquillity of spirit, freedom from 
care, the condition that Cicero called ‘the object of supreme desire’, or ‘the absence of anxiety upon which a 
happy life depends’”, E. Rothschild, “What is Security?”, Daedalus 124, no. 3 (1995): 61.
4  Locke, Second Treatise, §123.
5  In the Second Treatise, ch. 9, Locke identifies these as legislative, judicial, and executive. The critical 
importance that security has for the enjoyment of rights is argued at greater length in Henry Shue, Basic 
Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and U.S. Foreign Policy, second ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1996), esp. ch. 1. The text of ch. 1 is the same as in the first edition. See also Seumas Miller, The Moral 
Foundations of Social Institutions: A Philosophical Study (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 
chapters 1, 9 and 12, and also Seumas Miller and John Blackler, Ethical Issues in Policing (Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2005), ch. 1.
 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
153
Personal security
Henry Shue refers to personal (or physical) security as a basic right; that is, 
a right whose enjoyment “is essential to the enjoyment of all other rights”.6 
If personal physical security is at risk, non-basic rights can be sacrificed in 
order to secure the basic right. Assault, rape, torture and murder disenable us 
(temporarily or permanently) from exercising our rights to education or free 
association. Even though the right to personal security may not have in itself the 
rich human possibilities presaged by the rights to education or free association 
it is nevertheless prior to them because it is the precondition of our ability to 
enjoy the benefits of education and free association.
The point here is that humans are ineluctably embodied, and if their physical 
selves are endangered then so is everything that depends on those physical 
selves. Given our physicality, it is not surprising that Shue also argues for a 
basic right to subsistence. Shue thus draws attention to something that is only 
implicit in Locke (though barely below the surface), whose focus on the rights 
to “life, liberty, and property” may tend to obscure the underlying right to 
security.
Although physical security (against bodily harm and death) is critical to any 
valuable personal security, mere physical security (which Jeremy Waldron 
usefully designates as (pure) safety7), does not comprehend the whole of what 
is intended by “personal security”. As Waldron puts it, spending one’s days 
huddled in a bomb shelter is not the kind of security that we wish to promote 
or ensure.
What is envisaged in the Lockean tradition (and Shue8) is individual security – 
the security of fundamental rights. Although Locke sees the state as a vehicle 
6  Shue, Basic Rights, 19.
7  Useful, though stipulative. Waldron quotes from Hobbes (ever a stickler for words): “by safety one should 
understand not mere survival in any condition, but a happy life so far as that it possible”, De Cive; see Jeremy 
Waldron, “Safety and Security”, Nebraska Law Review 85 (2006): 458.
8  Shue does not specifically align himself with Locke, though he draws attention to a very similar passage 
in Mill, whose overarching position is utilitarian rather than contractarian:
To have a right, then, is, we conceive, to have something which society ought to defend me in the 
possession of. If the objector goes on to ask, why it ought? We can give him no other reason than 
general utility. If that expression does not seem to convey a sufficient feeling of the strength of 
the obligation, nor to account for the peculiar energy of the feeling, it is because there goes to the 
composition of the sentiment, not a rational only, but also an animal element, the thirst for retaliation; 
and this thirst derives its intensity, as well as its moral justification, from the extraordinarily important 
and impressive kind of utility which is concerned. The interest involved is that of security, to every 
one’s feelings the most vital of all interests. All other earthly benefits are needed by one person, 
not needed by another; and many of them can, if necessary, be cheerfully foregone, or replaced by 
something else; but security no human being can possibly do without; on it we depend for all our 
immunity from evil, and for the whole value of all and every good, beyond the passing moment; 
since nothing but the gratification of the instant could be of any worth to us, if we could be deprived 
of anything the next instant by whoever was momentarily stronger than ourselves. Now this most 

Security and Privacy
154
for that – primarily through the promulgation of protective laws that are 
impartially applied and enforced – the Lockean state does not take its eye too 
far off the individualistic ball. To be sure, the Lockean state is probably too 
individualistic, since it tends to overlook the extent to which the capacity to 
exercise our rights is dependent on a plethora of social institutions that sustain 
us in various ways. Some later liberal writers – especially those with somewhat 
Hegelian leanings, such as T.H. Green, D.G. Ritchie and L.T. Hobhouse – were 
much more communitarian.9
An important dimension to Shue’s discussion of the right to personal security is 
his claim that it should not be understood as a negative (in contrast to a positive) 
right. Although he does not object to talk of the negative as well as the positive 
features of rights such as to security (or liberty etc.) – a distinction that often 
tends to track the distinction between acting and omitting/refraining – the right 
to security is not merely a (negative) right that others not interfere with one by 
way of assault, rape or murder but also and just as importantly a (positive) right 
to be protected from assaults on and other threats to one’s person.10 It is the 
latter that the Lockean state provides through its law enforcement (executive) 
activities.11
What this means is that to ensure our security we will also need to contribute 
in some way – either by means of taxation or service – so that the structures 
needed for our protection can be sustained. Without the capacity to exercise 
our rights they count for little, and so the right to security that is supposed 
to enable us to exercise our rights to liberty etc. will need to be such that it 
includes the means for its enforcement.
Before turning to various kinds of collective security, let us note some additional 
features of personal and individual security. Although dependent on physical 
security, individual security includes rather more than that. We talk about 
the security of an historical way of life and its various social, cultural and 
institutional supports. Thus Waldron talks usefully of a “deepening” of the 
indispensable of all necessaries, after physical nutriment, cannot be had, unless the machinery for 
providing it is kept unintermittedly in active play. Our notion, therefore, of the claim we have on our 
fellow-creatures to join in making safe for us the very groundwork of our existence, gathers feelings 
around it so much more intense than those concerned in any of the more common cases of utility, 
that the difference in degree (as is often the case in psychology) becomes a real difference in kind.
Utilitarianism, ch. 5: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/11224/11224-h/11224-h.htm#CHAPTER_V.
9  For a useful if flawed overview, see Gerald Gaus, The Modern Liberal Theory of Man (New York: St Martin’s 
Press, 1983). See also Miller, Moral Foundations of Social Institutions, ch. 1.
10  Shue, Basic Rights, 37–39. This tracks an important and longstanding debate about negative and positive 
liberty. See Gerald C. MacCallum, Jr., “Negative and Positive Freedom”, Philosophical Review 76 (July, 1967): 
312–34.
11  Of course, it may also violate the former right through its executive activities (as Robert Mugabe’s 
Zimbabwe currently illustrates).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
155
notion of individual security to accommodate these things,12 including freedom 
from fear (and provision of assurance).13 With the metaphor of depth, Waldron 
associates a metaphor of breadth to which we will return.
Because the right to security is a basic right it is a right that each human 
being has, insofar as human beings have any rights. It may not be a right 
that we value particularly for its own sake; its value may reside more 
in what it makes possible. Nevertheless we should not be altogether 
skeptical of seeing security as something that we also value for its own 
sake.14 
True, Waldron is reluctant to move in this direction: “security is not so much a 
good in and of itself, but . . . something ‘adjectival’ – a mode of enjoying other 
goods, an underwriting of other values, a guarantor of other things we care 
about.”15 At the same time, he is also cautious about casting the alternatives too 
starkly, especially as the security in question might be seen as security in the 
enjoyment of our liberties.16 We believe that Waldron may slightly shortchange 
security by focusing too much on its “adjectival” qualities.
Insofar as security is a right and insofar as a right provides someone with a 
justified claim, it provides others – the state, in Locke’s case, though others 
may also be implicated – with a reason to address whatever is threatening their 
security.
National security
When political formulas such as “national interest” or “national security” 
gain popularity they need to be scrutinized with particular care. They may 
12  “An adequately deep conception of security should aim to protect people’s individual and familial modes 
of living themselves, and not just the life, health, and possessions that are necessary for it.” (466). This 
discussion continues at length from pp. 461–73, esp. 466 et seq.
13  Waldron has a nice discussion of freedom from fear (negative) and assurance (positive) that indicates 
some of the complexities involved in building them into our conception of security (467–71).
14  In fact, Mill warned against valuing it (only) as an end: “A man who has nothing which he cares about 
more than he does about his personal safety is a miserable creature who has no chance of being free, unless 
made and kept so by the existing of better men than himself”, “The Contest in America”, in J.M. Robson 
(ed.) The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984), vol. XXI, 141–42. 
This passage occurs in the context of the necessity, sometimes, of going to war (and thus jeopardizing one’s 
safety): “war to protect other human beings against tyrannical injustice; a war to give victory to their own 
ideas of right and good, and which is their own war, carried on for an honest purpose by their own free 
choice – is often the means of their regeneration.” (A copy of its early reprinting in Harper’s New Monthly 
Magazine (1862) from Fraser’s Magazine (1862) can be found at: http://cdl.library.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/moa/
moa-cgi?notisid=ABK4014-0024-103.)
15  Waldron, 471; cf. 458.
16  And people will fight for their survival in and for itself. Nevertheless, on pp. 472–73 Waldron offers some 
valuable caveats in relation to Henry Shue’s argument in ch. 1 of Basic Rights.

Security and Privacy
156
not mean the same thing to different people. They may not have any precise 
meaning at all. Thus, while appearing to offer guidance and a basis for 
broad consensus, they may be permitting everyone to label whatever policy 
he favors with an attractive and possibly deceptive name.17
What Waldron speaks of as a “depth” to security is helpfully juxtaposed with 
“breadth”, in which the question of whose security is encompassed (all equally, 
or some more than or at the expense of others). One of the helpful aspects of 
Waldron’s depth/breadth distinction is that it enables us to grapple with their 
connections as well as their differences. Insofar as a suitably deep conception 
of security embodies something we might want to call “the American way of 
life” or “liberal democratic values”, a “narrowed” implementation of security 
measures that severely disadvantages one segment of the population to ensure 
the security of another segment would violate the expectations of depth.18 The 
depth/breadth nexus gets additional discussion toward the end of his paper: we 
cannot separate our conception of the security that is worth having from the 
way in which it is distributed, as a matter of identity as well as achievement.19
The issue of breadth also provides an entrée for Waldron’s discussion of the 
large question – the fundamental political question, perhaps – of whether the 
security of a population should be construed aggregatively or distributively (or 
even in both ways). He takes issue with Hobbesian and Benthamite accounts that 
tend toward a largely aggregative conception and he leans toward an account of 
breadth that is underlain by a notion of “equal protection”.20 He suggests that 
the legitimacy of a state that does not provide or seek equal protection (“or at 
least a minimum security for everyone”) is called into question.21
A review of the current debate about security indicates that the focus is not 
primarily on personal security. The focus is generally on some form of collective 
security – such as public safety or, more commonly, national security – and the 
latter in particular is said to justify a significant number of constraints on our 
individual liberty interests (including privacy). In other words, the constraints 
17  Arnold Wolfers, “‘National Security’ as an Ambiguous Symbol”, in Discord and Collaboration: Essays on 
International Politics (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1962), 147.
18  Waldron also warns about trying to build so much into depth that legitimate security measures are ruled 
out (463). Consider the absolutizing of freedom of speech, association, religion or privacy that would see any 
constraints on them as a compromise of its depth dimension. By the same token, each constraint needs to be 
argued for and not simply accepted because proposed by the incumbent regime.
19  Waldron, 494-502.
20  See the discussion on pp. 474 et seq. This does not mean that distributive considerations will always/
necessarily trump aggregative considerations – a kind of “let justice be done though the heavens fall” position 
– but it gives a special weighting to distributive assumptions, sufficient to require falling heavens (and not 
simply conjectures about terrorist attacks and weapons of mass destruction).
21  Ibid., 491–94.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
157
on our liberty interests that are said to be justified by the need for individual 
security are now imposed for the sake of some collective or national security to 
which individual security is tied.
At first blush, that may not seem all that problematic, just because, in a liberal 
society, we can anticipate that the two will be linked in some way. It is arguable 
that collective security will generally be structured to enhance the security of 
the individual. Public safety will be correlated with individual safety. Indeed, 
that is the message behind Lockean social contract theory: if individual security 
is to be assured there needs to be a secure state to ensure it. But whether or to 
what extent that is the case is an issue to which we will need to return.
As presaged above, although we have said that collective security commonly 
translates into the language of national security, it has, in fact, a number of 
intermediate forms that – in day-to-day matters – might be of more critical (and 
certainly of more immediate) importance to individual security. There will, for 
example, be the collective security provided by local or state police departments 
or by private security organizations. National security,22 on the other hand, will 
tend to comprehend institutions of the larger society – the state or country. In 
the US, the military, National Guard and various federal agencies (e.g. FBI, CIA, 
DHS) will (in theory) work together to secure nationally critical institutions 
against outside and even some inside threats. In so doing, it is argued, such 
national security institutions will also secure us individually against threats.
On Waldron’s account, however, collective security is not the natural complement 
to personal or individual security but “concerns security as among the nations 
of the world (or various subsets of them) determined by institutions, alliances, 
and the balance of power.”23 This he contrasts not only with individual security 
but also the security of “populations”, “the people of the nation” or “whole 
population” (which we have included in our category of collective security). 
What we have referred to as national security Waldron views as the security 
of the state or of governmental institutions, which provide a form of security 
that he considers to have a somewhat problematic connection to the security 
of individuals and populations: “the integrity and power of the state itself as 
an institutional apparatus . . . is something which may or may not be related to 
ordinary citizens’ being more secure.”24
22  State security might seem a bit more accurate, since we are usually referring to political jurisdictions 
rather than nations or nationalities. Sometimes, of course, a nation-state will be involved. However, as we will 
suggest, it is probably no accident that we speak of national rather than simply state security, since it is not 
simply jurisdictional integrity that is at stake but also institutional and cultural integrity. The more recent 
notion of homeland security seems to focus mainly on domestic or geographically localized threats to national 
security.
23  Ibid., 459.
24  Ibid., 460; cf., 474.

Security and Privacy
158
In fact, there appear to be at least three related distinctions in play here. Firstly, 
there is the security of the individual person in relation to other persons and 
collective entities, including the state. Secondly, there is the (so to speak, 
internal and external) collective security of a population of such persons, for 
example, of the members of the Australian community in relation to some 
of their own number (internal) and in relation to other communities and, in 
particular, nation-states other than Australia (external). Thirdly, there is the 
(internal) collective security of a population of collective entities in relation to 
some of their own number, for example, the community of nation-states. Note 
that qua community, the community of nation-states does not have a need for 
external collective security; there is no external collective entity (for example, 
invading Martians). There are, of course, transnational entities, including crime 
organizations, which constitute a security threat to nation-states, but these are 
not, in the required sense, external to the community of nation-states; rather 
they are to be understood as enemies within.
The differences with respect to adjectival and more substantive conceptions 
of security reflected in the above discussion may indicate more about where 
Waldron – and we – stand on the individualist–communitarian axis and on 
policy preferences than some difference over deep theory. True, some of 
Waldron’s writing is quite cosmopolitan, and we do not think he has too much 
time for patriotism.25 Although states/governments may be quite toxic as far 
as the security of those who populate them (both individuals and groups) is 
concerned – so that national security in his sense is not the kind of security 
about which we should be primarily concerned – we tend to think that, for the 
time being at least, states/governments (not regimes) represent our best shot 
at securing what needs to be secured. We may be wrong about that. It may be 
that we should qualify our support for national security with some reference 
to accountability mechanisms that would check the state’s power (though our 
references to a liberal democratic state may have been idealized by presuming 
some system of checks and balances).
Nevertheless, there could still be a more far-reaching difference. The distinction 
that Waldron makes between individuals and populations may be intended to 
reflect the view – or at least to show some partiality toward the view – that 
populations are simply aggregates of individuals and have no identity over 
and above the individuals who make them up. If that is so then our implicit 
conception of collectivities as having a distinctive identity and even, perhaps, 
a distinctive mode of action and responsibility may differ from his.26 Here we 
25  Jeremy Waldron, “Minority Cultures and the Cosmopolitan Alternative”, University of Michigan Journal 
of Law Reform 25 (1992): 751–793.
26  This is a large issue, some of whose outlines are traced in Marion Smiley’s Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy article, “Collective Responsibility”, at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/collective-responsibility/. 
For a relational account of collective action and collective responsibility see Seumas Miller, “Collective 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
159
note the possibility of relational accounts of collective action, identity and 
responsibility as well as the atomistic individual accounts (typically assumed to 
be required by individualism) and the supra-individualist accounts (typically 
associated with communitarianism). We are not absolutely sure about all of this,27 
in part because there is some ambiguity in Waldron’s discussion at this point. 
For example, one of his complaints about the pure safety conception of security 
is that it is “a purely individual measure” and does not provide a basis for our 
“talking critically about the security of the whole community.”28 And he talks 
about “securing the security of society as a whole.”29 True, he notes that we 
should not abandon the individualistic pure safety conception for “some more 
amiable notion of communal solidarity”,30 though of course we need not think 
in terms of either/or; indeed, relational accounts are framed in part precisely 
to avoid this dilemma. Perhaps the closest he comes to a more individualistic 
conception is when he argues that the legitimacy of a state security apparatus 
is determined by its significance for individuals: “the basic theory of political 
legitimacy is individualistic, not collective. Its starting point is that political 
regimes make demands on individuals one-by-one.”31 This probably ties in with 
his reluctance – near the end of the essay – to view security as a “collective 
good”, despite his showing some sympathy for it.32 Our sense, however, is that 
it is better to construe his argument as one against viewing security solely as a 
collective good rather than it also being considered a collective good:
It would be wrong to exaggerate the communal element or pretend that 
it exhausted the concept. Much of the work in this Essay has sought to 
deepen and broaden what is called the pure safety conception of security. 
From the beginning, however, it has been said that it is important for 
the concept of security to remain anchored in the safety of individual 
men and women. That anchoring is irreducible and non-negotiable.33
This is not really a point with which we disagree. However, once we begin to 
deepen our concept of security to encompass more than physical security, then 
we enter the world of collective as well as individual goods. It is not (as Waldron 
tends to cast it) a matter of either/or.34
One possibility that Waldron canvasses – but which we do not – is that security 
may be viewed as a public good, something to which all are entitled, thus 
Responsibility: An Individualist Account”, in Midwest Studies in Philosophy 30 (2006): 176–93.
27  It may be the case that Waldron has elsewhere expressed himself more clearly on this matter.
28  Waldron, “Safety and Security”, 462.
29  Ibid., 474.
30  Ibid., 463.
31  Ibid., 493.
32  Ibid., 500–02.
33  Ibid., 501–02.
34  “. . . most of the complications here have attempted to show that security is a complex and structured 
function of individual safety, not an amiable communal alternative to it” (502).

Security and Privacy
160
setting aside the distributive question.35 He canvasses and critiques different 
understandings of this option, though he concludes that even if it is a public 
good there remains a question about how that good is in fact distributed.
With this excursus on Waldron’s valuable discussion, we return to the dominant 
collective idea of national security. Although often appealed to, the idea of 
national security has never been entirely clear cut, and a number of commentators 
have argued that it is “essentially contestable”.36 If that is so, as is likely to 
be the case, then its articulation is not going to be a neutrally characterizable 
enterprise such as might be involved in measuring the dimensions of a physical 
object.37
In addition, national security is rarely defined in legislation or elsewhere 
and, when it is, it tends to be defined extremely broadly.38 Traditionally and 
most simply – at least until the collapse of the Soviet Union – it referred first 
and foremost to the security of borders and to the conditions for insuring 
a state against conquest or serious attack. Its primary agent was a standing 
army ready to defend those borders against an invading army (or weapons of 
mass destruction). As some writers (especially those working in peacemaking 
studies39) have put it, often as a prelude to its criticism, national security has 
traditionally had a militaristic ring to it.
But even in that traditional sense, national security referred to something more 
than merely uncontested or secure borders. There was the associated idea of an 
absence of threat.40 That is, there was also an implicit subjective dimension – an 
absence of fear or, as we might put it, of a sense of insecurity.41 And the threat 
35  Ibid., 482–85. Miller offers this kind of account in his Moral Foundations of Social Institutions, chapters 
2 and 9.
36  See Steve Smith, “The Contested Concept of Security”, Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies, 
Singapore, May 2002, at: http://www.ntu.edu.sg/idss/publications/WorkingPapers/WP23.PDF.
37  On essential contestability, see Chapter IV.
38  Thus the US Intelligence community defines “national security” as: “The territorial integrity, sovereignty, 
and international freedom of action of the United States. Intelligence activities relating to national security 
encompass all the military, economic, political, scientific, technological, and other aspects of foreign 
developments that pose actual or potential threats to US national interests”, see: http://www.intelligence.
gov/0-glossary.shtml. Clearly this allows national security to cover almost anything. For other discussions of 
the conceptual issues, see the editorial introduction, “A Conceptual Framework”, in Daniel J. Kaufman, Jeffrey 
S. McKitrick, and Thomas J. Leney (eds), U.S. National Security: A Framework for Analysis, (Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1985), 3–26; Robert Mandel, The Changing Face of National Security: A Conceptual Analysis 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1994).
39  Such writers see development and the reduction of invidious inequalities, not the possession of strong 
borders, as the key to national security. To be honest, we are not sure why authors have to think – or so often 
tend to think – in terms of either/or, but the debate already points to contested issues.
40  The notion of a threat might well repay attention. See Daniel Lyons, “Welcome Threats And Coercive 
Offers”, Philosophy 50 (1975): 425–36; Theodore Benditt, “Threats and Offers”, Personalist 58 (1977): 382–
84; Martin Gunderson, “Threats and Coercion”, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 9 (1979): 247–59; Andrew 
Hetherington, “The Real Distinction between Threats and Offers”, Social Theory and Practice 25 (1999): 211–
42; Claire Finkelstein, “Threats and Preemptive Practices”, Legal Theory 5 (1999): 311–38.
41  “Security, in an objective sense, measures the absence of threats to acquired values, in a subjective 
sense, the absence of fear that such values will be attacked”: Wolfers, “’National Security’ as an Ambiguous 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
161
in question was not simply to borders. It usually included the threat to a way of 
life – to institutional and cultural traditions and values.42 Borders do not mark 
out the boundaries of a sovereign state alone but also a sphere within which an 
historical narrative is unfolding – a richly textured institutional and cultural 
history, characterized by distinctive memories and myths. In other words, 
national security secures not only geographical borders but also a complex set 
of traditions and ways of living.43
Territorial border issues remain significant, though for many countries 
they have been transformed from a concern with armed conquest to a 
concern with terrorism and the influx of illegal immigrants and refugees. In 
response, internationally recognized but porous borders have sometimes been 
strengthened or even supplemented by “smart borders” that do not provide 
a fixed or internationally recognized geographical but rather a politically 
expedient demarcation of territorial boundaries.44 At the same time – indeed, 
as part of that transformation – the idea and element of threat has increasingly 
encompassed actual and potential hazards to domestic tranquility and stability 
other than those posed by simple conquest.45
Threats to national interests46 may take many forms and, if sufficiently dire, such 
threats may be considered threats to national security. Pandemic or contagious 
disease (both human and agricultural), environmental conditions (such as 
Symbol”, in Discord and Collaboration, 150. Zedner also draws attention to a tradition in which a sense of 
security is not seen as desirable but as a form of complacency (“The Concept of Security: An Agenda for 
Comparative Analysis”, Legal Studies 23 (2003): 157).
42  Cf. Hans Morgenthau: “National security must be defined as integrity of the national territory and its 
institutions”, Politics Among the Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, third ed. (NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1960), 562; and Richard Ullman: “A threat to national security is an action or sequence of events that (1) 
threatens drastically and over a relatively brief span of time to degrade the quality of life for the inhabitants 
of the state or (2) threatens significantly to narrow the range of policy choices available to the government of 
a state or to private non-government entities (persons, groups, corporations) within the state”, “Redefining 
Security”, International Security 8 (Summer, 1983): 129. The last phrase in Ullman’s account strikes us as 
overbroad.
43  That can be true not only of free societies but also of oppressive ones. One of the volatile issues 
confronting Iraqis has been the preservation of the “character” of Iraqi society – no small feat in a country 
that encompasses at least three major traditions. Borders may change, and with the change in borders also 
comes internal change – sometimes like adding another patch to a quilt, at other time seeking some form of 
assimilation.
44  See Leanne Weber, “The Shifting Frontiers of Migration Control”, in Borders, Mobility and Technologies 
of Control, ed. Sharon Pickering and Leanne Weber (Springer, 2006), ch. 2.
45  The most influential developments seem to be associated with what is called the Copenhagen School (at 
the Copenhagen Peace Research Institute), primarily – though not exclusively – in the work of Barry Buzan. 
See B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde, and O. Waever, Security: A New Framework for Analysis (Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1997). Its members employ the language of “securitization” to indicate ways in 
which various social phenomena (political, economic, societal and environmental) are marketed as relevant to 
national security. (Securitization requires only the successful portrayal of these phenomena as threats.)
46  We consider interests to be those matters in which one has a stake, particularly the ingredients of well-
being. However, there is some ambiguity here between “national interests” and what is sometimes spoken of 
as “the national interest”. See further, Hans Morgenthau, In Defense of the National Interest (New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1951).

Security and Privacy
162
pollution and global warming) and extra-territorial economic circumstances 
and decisions (such as trade barriers and currency decisions) are now frequently 
spoken of as impinging on national security interests. Whether they also 
constitute threats to national security simpliciter will depend on how damaging 
they are. Moreover, threats to national security need not necessarily be external. 
Internal dissension and poverty may also rise to the level of threats to national 
security. Therefore,  not only outside dangers posed to a national collectivity 
will be seen as threats to national security but also internal challenges – perhaps 
those arising from a failure to create or secure conditions for a significant 
segment of the local population.
Even beyond these considerations, national security has recently been broadened 
to include the establishment of or support for a variety of international initiatives 
– most critically, broadly democratic or rights-based polities.47 It was the success 
of this expansion that enabled a switch from “weapons of mass destruction” 
threatening American freedom to “forces of undemocratic tyranny” threatening 
American freedom or, even more broadly, to honoring the “nonnegotiable 
demands of human dignity”. The thought here has been that national security 
requires, if not anything as universal as global security, then some commonality 
or sharing of concern for societal integrity. Thus a number of writers have tried 
to focus on what is called “common security” or “cooperative security”.48 
For them, national security has become, if not secondary to a broader form 
of interstate or international security, then equal with it.49 These writers are 
concerned with what we referred to above as the internal collective security of 
the community of nation-states.
47  The assumption here is that such polities are less likely to threaten each other. For discussions of this old 
chestnut, see Matthew White, “Democracies Do Not Make War on One Another. . . Or Do They?”, at: http://
users.erols.com/mwhite28/demowar.htm; and Per Ahlmark, “How Democracy Prevents Civic Catastrophes”, 
at: http://www.unwatch.org/speeches/demcat.html. See also the speech of President George W. Bush to the 
United Nations General Assembly: “In this young century, our world needs a new definition of security. 
Our security is not merely found in spheres of influence, or some balance of power. The security of our 
world is found in the advancing rights of mankind.” (September 21, 2004, at: http://www.cbsnews.com/
stories/2004/09/21/world/main644795.shtml.)
48  Some of these have argued that national security concerns should give way to broader cooperative 
security arrangements. Alternatively, other writers have pushed for the replacement of a concern for national 
security with one for human security.
49  One other movement and countermovement should be noted. Whereas Lockean thinking places the 
focus of security on individuals (i.e. needing their rights secured against predatory others, leading to the 
formation of a protective/securing state) a number of contemporary writers have shifted their attention almost 
completely from the security of the individual to that of the state. The state and its interests are not seen as the 
sum of those of the individuals who make it up, neither is its security reducible to the security of its citizens. 
It has its own identity and interests, and what secures it is not determined by what secures the interests of 
these or those individuals who inhabit it. In the opposite direction, there have been those who believe that 
the state is secondary only to the individuals who make it up and who have therefore asserted the claims of 
what they call human security, in which state relevance consists simply in the fact that, in a global human 
order, it is the actor “with the greatest relative power” (Francisco Rojas Aravena, “Human Security: Emerging 
Concept of Security in the Twenty-First Century”, Disarmament Forum 2 (2002), at: http://www.unidir.ch/
pdf/articles/pdf-art1442.pdf).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
163
Tensions
Even though we shall return to it, it is appropriate at this point to note how 
different kinds of security may stand in some sort of tension. We have already 
referred to a possible tension between state security and individual security, 
depending on whether the individual or state is seen as security’s primary 
object.
Another tension of particular relevance to the present project has been 
magnified by 9/11, and that is a tension between national and computer security. 
Security has become an important concern in computer technology – hackers 
may steal or destroy one’s data and viruses may infect one’s system and disable 
one’s computer or otherwise ruin one’s data. In response, devices of increasing 
sophistication have been developed to secure computer systems – for example, 
firewalls have been developed and data have been encrypted.
At the same time, however, computer technology has become a tool for terrorist 
activities, whether as a simple communication device or as a means of disabling 
target systems. National security concerns have thus come into conflict with 
those of computer security: at some level, the more effective computer security 
has become, the better it has been able to serve the purposes of terrorism: 
terrorists can communicate using encryption, steganography (digital camouflage) 
or otherwise deceptive communicative techniques; money can be electronically 
and covertly transferred;50 and our increasing dependence on networked digital 
technology exposes ever larger portions of our infrastructure to sabotage.
In response, governmental technologies have been developed (in the name of 
national security) that have made our individual or personal security less secure.
The importance of national security
Salient to an assessment of the moral force of appeals to national security will be 
not only what is embodied in our understanding of it but also what, given that 
understanding, is then taken to constitute a (significant) threat to it. It is almost 
always in the interest of those in power to give national security the widest 
possible interpretation as well as to overestimate the actual threat posed by what 
they consider will endanger it. In the US, the communist witch-hunts of the 
1950s were justified in terms of national security and, as noted previously, we 
have more recently seen the issue of “weapons of mass destruction” exploited 
50  Online payment processing systems (OPPS) such as Paypal are making such transfers harder to trace. 
They allow for informal transfer of monies across the globe and, unlike the other international transfer 
systems (banks etc.) are subject to little or no regulation. See Holger Bϋrk and Andreas Pfitzmann, “Digital 
Payment Systems Enabling Security and Unobservability”, Computers & Security 8, no. 5 (1989): 399–416; 
Kim-Kwang, Raymond Choo, and Russell G. Smith, “Criminal Exploitation of Online Systems by Organized 
Crime Groups”, Asian Journal of Criminology 3, no. 1 (June 2008).

Security and Privacy
164
to similar effect. Not only that, it is often in the interests of those in power 
to clothe their more partisan concerns in the language of national security.51 
License may be an enemy of liberty but, because national security is often made 
to bear more moral weight than it can reasonably bear, it may also be its own 
enemy.52 It is important, then, in considering arguments grounded in appeals to 
national security, to look at both its scope and substance.
What we consider to be a particular problem in the discussion of national 
security is the tendency (hinted at earlier) to slide from threats to “national 
security interests” to threats to “national security.” Although national security 
is concerned with the protection of various state interests – for example, in 
secure borders, the preservation of cultural traditions, the perpetuation of key 
civil institutions – it does not follow that whenever some national interest is 
threatened, compromised or damaged “national security” will also be at risk. It 
will depend on the nature, magnitude and imminence of the threat/risk. Even 
threatening national security will not necessarily put it at risk. There may be 
those who believe that the “Great Satan” needs to be put down – at least, that 
is their stated ambition – but if their resources cannot match up to their desires 
it can hardly be argued that they place national security at risk. If national 
security is to be placed at risk, the risk must be dire, imminent and real.53
Furthermore – and this is no small matter – we must link national security to 
the kind of security that figures in discussions of the conditions under which 
our human rights (including our liberty rights) may be expressed. Although we 
believe that this can and must be done there are some problems to be resolved 
and arguments to be made. On the one hand, we need to confront arguments 
for forms of cosmopolitanism that seek to diminish if not erode the significance 
of national boundaries for human flourishing. On the other hand, we need to 
address arguments that move in libertarian, anarchist or anarcho-syndicalist 
51  In the run-up to the 2004 US elections, it was frequently claimed that electing John Kerry would endanger 
national security. Thus, Vice-President Dick Cheney stated, “It’s absolutely essential that eight weeks from 
today, on November 2nd, we make the right choice, because if we make the wrong choice then the danger is 
that we’ll get hit again, that we’ll be hit in a way that will be devastating from the standpoint of the United 
States, and that we’ll fall back into the pre-9/11 mind-set, if you will, that in fact these terrorist attacks are just 
criminal acts and that we are not really at war.” (Dana Milbank and Spencer S. Hsu, “Cheney: Kerry Victory Is 
Risky; Democrats Decry Talk as Scare Tactic”, The Washington Post, September 8, 2004, A01). Senator Kerry 
was not beyond such tactics himself. The Kerry campaign quickly responded with an ad featuring a close-up 
of 9/11 widow Kristen Breitweiser in which she says, “I want to look into my daughter’s eyes and know that 
she is safe, and that is why I am voting for John Kerry.” (Walter Shapiro, “With Scare Tactics Aplenty, Election 
Rivals Halloween: Hype & Glory”, USA Today, October 19, 2004, 4A). What is merely “regime security” often 
seeks to represent itself as “national security”.
52  It was in partial recognition of this that in US v. Robel the Court also affirmed that “implicit in the term 
‘national defense’ is the notion of defending those values and ideals which set this Nation apart.” It would 
be ironic “if, in the name of national defense, we would sanction the subversion” of those liberties that make 
“the defense of the Nation worthwhile” (389 U.S. 258, at 264 (1967)).
53  To comment in this way courts some sort of political backlash. To ignore or downplay such threats may 
be to encourage their expression in increasingly effective ways. Likewise, to respond to them overactively may 
also strategically advantage those who make them.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
165
directions. In other words, we need to be able to argue that for the foreseeable 
future human security is best achieved via national security. This is not the 
place to resolve such issues, but they cannot be ignored. Appeals to national 
security cannot be introduced as though they require no further explication or 
justification, including by reference to individual liberty rights.54
Our point here is not to claim that we should stick with a simplistic or outmoded 
understanding of national security. The world in which we live is not the world 
of one hundred years ago and our national interests are not as localized as 
they were one hundred years ago. Even though talk of a global village takes it 
too far there is nevertheless a sense in which we (understood as a “particular 
people”) are now more easily impacted by events (and not just hostile armies) 
beyond our geographical and jurisdictional boundaries. Conflict overseas may 
bring pressures to accept refugees or may threaten energy supplies, and distant 
economies may threaten global environmental disaster. However, if national 
security is to be invoked as a trumping consideration, the links need to be spelled 
out and, if necessary, defended and quantified. Otherwise we will find ourselves 
on a politically slippery slope in which neither the slipperiness, the slope nor 
the end point will be clear. The Vietnam War was almost certainly sustained by 
means of a flawed argument (the domino theory) about the international spread of 
communism. Its mistakes are repeatable, and probably have been repeated in Iraq.
The account of security that we have so far provided views it largely as a means 
toward, or a precondition for, the enjoyment of our rights and other goods, 
not as something to be valued or sought for its own sake. This has obvious 
implications for the extent to which private, public and national security 
measures are legitimately undertaken. Should security involve significant 
derogations of the rights (and other goods) to which it is a justifying means then 
it will have been taken too far. In the article “Too Much Security?” Lucia Zedner 
posits and discusses six paradoxes of security. Her concern is principally with 
private and public security rather than with national security, though it is not 
too difficult to recast her discussion to apply to national security:
1.	 Security pursues risk reduction but presumes the persistence of crime.
2.	 The expansion of security has enlarged not diminished the penal state.
3.	 Security promises reassurance but in fact increases anxiety.
4.	 Security is posited as a universal good but presumes social exclusion.
5.	 Security promises freedom but erodes civil liberties. 
54   John Kleinig offers some reflections on these issues in “Patriotic Loyalty”, Patriotism: Philosophical and 
Political Perspectives, ed. Aleksandar Pavkovic and Igor Primoratz (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2008), ch. 2. A 
brief account of such an argument is offered later.

Security and Privacy
166
6.	 Security is posited as a public good but its pursuit is inimical to the good 
society.55
We doubt whether all these so-called paradoxes are indeed such. Nevertheless, 
they point to ways in which the concern for security may overreach, or imperil 
other values. Her discussion of (1), for example, warns us against thinking that 
we should try to secure ourselves against all threat. Security is concerned with 
diminishing risk, not with eliminating it. Even if at time t1 we can effectively 
eliminate risk it is likely that new risks will appear at time t2. Not only is the 
elimination of risk a virtually unattainable goal but at a certain point it is also 
likely to become an unacceptably costly one. We need to make judgments about 
how much risk is acceptable and therefore how much security is needed. As we 
see from items (3) to (6), efforts to remove (or even diminish) risk may serve to 
undermine or compromise other values we support.
Item (3) reminds us that the enjoyment of our rights involves more than a bare 
ability to exercise them. We should be able to exercise them without undue 
anxiety – whether that anxiety is based on actual risk or (more problematically) 
on fears created by those who manage the apparatuses of security and who 
may have their own reasons for maintaining anxiety and creating social docility. 
Security measures ought not to create or exploit anxieties disproportionately to 
the risk involved.
Item (4) speaks to the egalitarian concerns of a liberal democratic society, and 
notes how the burdens of security often tend to fall more heavily – and indeed 
unfairly – on some groups.56 For reasons of convenience, much profiling has the 
practical effect of shifting security burdens to particular ethnic groups.
55  Lucia Zedner, “Too Much Security?”, International Journal of the Sociology of Law 31 (2003): 155–84. 
Though informative, we are not always persuaded by Zedner’s discussion.
56  Most of us are probably not affected by the USA PATRIOT Act or other measures introduced following 
9/11. Ostensibly, our security has been increased or restored, but most of us will not have borne any significant 
costs in return. However, there have been significant costs for some – and they have fallen disproportionately 
on a small segment of the population – those with Middle Eastern appearances, those with visa irregularities 
and those who, for some reason or other, have had governmental attention turned on them. Those satisfying 
certain profiles or who have appeared on various “watch lists” have borne the brunt of the costs of “our” 
greater security. Now, it might be argued that this is precisely how it should be, since it is from among those 
groups that our security has been jeopardized. This might look a bit more plausible – at least as a matter of 
policy – were it arguable that a high proportion of those made to bear the cost are also linked to terrorism 
in some active or conspiratorial way. But this is not arguable at all. Only a minute proportion of those on 
whom the burden of heightened security has been thrust has and has had any sympathy with – let alone 
constructive connection to – the cause of terrorism. They are no more morally tainted than those who have 
suffered no appreciable diminution of liberty (or, more significantly, abrogation of their liberties). Not only 
do we not gain in security from the investigation of those who pose no threat to it but, if the investigation is 
sufficiently ill conceived, it may actually diminish security by creating sympathy for the terrorist cause where 
there was previously none.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
167
Those who speak about the relation of security to civil liberties often talk of 
an innocuous “balancing” of the two, but item (5) correctly notes the trade-
off, derogation or sacrifice that is involved and the frequent erosion of those 
liberties in the name of security.57
In (6) we can observe the ways in which the focus on security can display a lack 
of trust, or at least diminishes it. Insofar as a good society is one in which trust 
is abundant, an over-concern with security will tend to undermine it.58
To the extent, then, that security is a means to the enjoyment of our rights it has 
a limited claim on our liberties and other rights.
However, security – or at least the national security that now tends to dominate 
our horizon – may also be valued for its own sake. If it is so-valued then it 
will make more sense to trade it off against those things for which it is (also) 
intended as the means. It is then no longer a mere means but also an end.
We are not dealing with a hypothetical possibility. National security is often 
treated as though it were something to be ensured in its own right and not 
merely for what it makes possible. Part of the reason for this is that many of us 
have come to identify with the state, nation or country of which we are a part 
so that securing our state/nation/country is securing something that is not only 
a means to our various individual (and perhaps collective) human rights but 
also something that has become valuable for us in its own right. The nation has 
become one of the associations with which we as associational beings have come 
to identify.
To recapitulate: the process of human growth and development is not itself an 
individualistic one, even if it may sometimes result in persons who are extremely 
individualistic. Unlike trees that have their “final form” (more or less) encoded 
in the DNA of their seeds, or many animals, whose nurture is more or less co-
extensive with their development of survival and reproductive skills, humans 
come to be what we normatively represent them to be (i.e. ends in themselves, 
possessors of waivable rights etc.) only as the result of a fairly long process of 
nurture and learning, much of which is social in nature, and resulting from a 
57  For critiques of the balancing metaphor, see Jeremy Waldron, “Security and Liberty: The Image of 
Balance”, Journal of Political Philosophy 11 (2) (June 2003): 191–210; James E. Fleming, “Securing Deliberative 
Democracy”, Fordham Law Review 72 (2004): 1435–76; T.M. Scanlon, “The Constitutional Essentials of 
Political Liberalism: Adjusting Rights and Balancing Values”, Fordham Law Review 72 (2004): 1477–86; Lucia 
Zedner, “Securing Liberty in the Face of Terror: Reflections from Criminal Justice”, Journal of Law and Society 
32(4) (December 2005): 507–33; and John Kleinig, “Liberty and Security in an Age of Terrorism” in Security 
and Justice in the Homeland: Criminologists on Terrorism, ed. Brian Forst, Jack Greene and James Lynch 
(Cambridge University Press, 2011), ch. 15.
58  See also John Kleinig, “The Burdens of Situational Crime Prevention: An Ethical Commentary”, in Ethical 
and Social Perspectives on Situational Crime Prevention, ed. Andrew von Hirsch, David Garland, and Alison 
Wakefield (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2000), 37–58.

Security and Privacy
168
significant immersion in families, friendships, educational institutions and so 
forth.59 Not only this but, for most of us, many of the activities that, as the people 
we have become, we subsequently value – both as means and as ends – are social 
in nature. They may be orchestras, social groups, religious communities, political 
parties, cultural traditions, national rituals, professions and so forth. Our lives, 
therefore, come to be partially encompassed by associative arrangements that 
are of both instrumental and intrinsic value to us. Included in those associations 
may be our state/nation/country.
This is not an uncontroversial claim. Indeed, it could be argued that friendship 
is the only relationship that is properly valued for its own sake,60 whereas 
families and other associations are valued primarily (and justifiably) because of 
their instrumental value. However, we think that this is a nonviable position, in 
part because of what is sometimes referred to as institutional entropy – namely, 
the endemic tendency of institutions/associations/affiliations/relationships 
to decline over time. Their capacity to sustain themselves in the face of this 
tendency is dependent on the non-instrumental commitment of (at least some 
of) their members, a commitment that will sustain them during both downturns 
as well as prompt efforts to recuperate them.61 That, however, is not in itself 
sufficient to pick out nations/states/countries as appropriate associations for 
intrinsic valuing. There are many associations, often quite close and often 
valued in themselves, that are inappropriately so valued (i.e. gangs, organized 
crime rings, rogue states and so forth).
So why, if at all, should we value a state, nation or country – a patria – in 
such a way that its security is important to us not simply because it enables 
the exercise of our rights but also because of the kind of association it is? We 
can construct a contingently affirmative response, though we need to enter some 
brief initial caveats before providing a somewhat roundabout argument in favor 
of intrinsically valuing national security.
The caveats. Historically speaking, patriae have not been essential to human 
flourishing. Many humans have flourished – not, perhaps in our fashion, though 
in their own way – in tribal communities that it would be anachronistic to 
characterize as countries, states or even polities. However we may have wanted 
59  Human beings (i.e. members of the species Homo sapiens) who lack this long period of communal 
nurture also come to be significantly lacking in the traits that we identify with normative personhood. See 
the discussions of feral children in Michael Newton, Savage Girls and Wild Boys: A History of Feral Children 
(New York: Faber & Faber, 2002).
60  We probably need to distinguish here between what are sometimes referred to as end-friends and means-
friends. See e.g. Neera Kapur Badhwar (ed.), Friendship: A Philosophical Reader (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1993); idem, “Friends as Ends in Themselves”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 48 (1987): 
1–23.
61  The classic discussion of this thesis is to be found in Albert O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: 
Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
169
to characterize their tribal and other particularistic commitments, they were 
not recognizably commitments to a nation, state or country. The state, or patria, 
though not entirely modern, does not have the deepest of historical roots and, 
moreover, does not appear to be as central to our sense of being as we may 
consider friends (and family and tribe) to be.
Given these caveats, however, our (post-Enlightenment) sense of being probably 
could not have been created or sustained by a merely tribal life. What we count 
as our flourishing is not generally something we could have conceptualized or 
realized had our lives remained tribally based. What we require as the arena 
for our growth and satisfaction has demanded much greater social complexity, 
involving a fairly elaborate social infrastructure along with fairly advanced 
technological possibilities. The point is not simply that patriae provide the 
conditions for our flourishing but that, for many of us, our individual patria 
is partially constitutive of our flourishing. Many of what constitute aspirations 
and possibilities for us are given through our socio-political arrangements.
We (those reading this study) are expressions of the potentiality that particular 
social formations have enabled, thus our conception of what it is that constitutes 
a good life and the social conditions for our achieving it will be significantly 
influenced by the social environment within which we have been formed.
At this point, at least two questions immediately arise. Firstly, to what extent 
does our self-conception presume the existence and maintenance of the patria 
in which we find ourselves? Secondly, might we conceive our possibilities 
differently within a different socio-political environment (in which our patria 
no longer existed)? Since the two questions are connected, our response will 
bear on both.
Liberal selves – the kind that we are considering here – are often adaptable. 
They are not usually wedded to a single way of living as the only or best way 
for humans, or even as the only or best way for them. We can be born and raised 
in the US and move to Australia or the UK without too much trauma. For many 
so born and raised, the US may not be critical to their flourishing (or continued 
flourishing). However, we might think that some liberal democratic patria is 
important to our way of being – the thought of relocating to or being taken over 
by a fascist or Stalinist regime would be highly threatening to our sense of self.62
Some liberal selves might also develop cosmopolitan tendencies or even 
aspirations, finding themselves equally at home in Sydney, London, Paris and 
New York, and probably other places, without any particular (or at least strong) 
patriotic or national ties. That is certainly a possibility. Not all, however, will 
thrive in such a multicultural environment. They will retain strong patriotic 
62  It is not uncommon for those who must relocate to problem regimes then to live in enclaves.

Security and Privacy
170
allegiances to their countries of origin because they have imbibed – and feel 
particularly at home in – distinctive aspects of their early culture (we think of 
Annette Baier refusing to give up her New Zealand citizenship and later retiring 
to New Zealand63). Certain of its features resonate with their deepest sense of 
who they are. Yet other liberal selves may come to identify so strongly with 
the culture and ways of the country to which they have relocated that their 
commitments/loyalties shift. This is often – though certainly not always – the 
case with those who migrate to establish better lives for themselves and their 
children.
However, the attraction that cosmopolitans feel for a world community is, we 
suspect, an attraction partly because they conceive of it in fairly liberal terms. 
Were cosmopolitanism to have the form of a Trotskyite international communist 
regime or of an extended Muslim umma wahida (universal community), it would 
not be as attractive (for most of us, at least). For us it is often our patria, and for 
some others, their patria, that constitutes the expression as well as guardian of 
a way of life that sustains both the requisites and “vocabulary” for flourishing. 
It may not constitute an exclusive venue for flourishing, but insofar as there 
are perceived to be “forces” abroad that might and indeed want to change it 
radically, we may acquire considerable attachment to it and value its security. 
Were circumstances to arise in which our liberal democratic way of life was 
radically challenged, our loyalty might well prompt us to defend our particular 
patria with our lives.
There need not be anything chauvinistic or jingoistic about such patriotism and 
the commitment to national security that goes with it. The popular critique of 
loyalty generally (and of patriotism in particular), in which it is claimed that 
loyalty enjoins or requires a belief in the superiority of the object of one’s loyalty 
and/or denigrates the objects of others’ loyalty (especially their country), is 
misguided. Chauvinism, like many exploitations of loyalty, hijacks loyalty for 
nefarious purposes.64 Just as there is no need to think that the family and friends 
to whom we are loyal are ipso facto superior to those of others, there is no need 
to build claims of superiority into patriotic loyalty.
Nevertheless, there is little doubt that, given a very different socio-political 
environment, we might conceive of the possibilities for our flourishing 
differently. In a more expansive socio-political environment than we now 
inhabit we might be able to conceive of possibilities for ourselves that do 
not currently cross our radar screen. As women and historically suppressed 
63  Annette Baier, “Some Virtues of Resident Alienage”, in Virtue, NOMOS XXXIV, ed. John W. Chapman and 
William Galston (New York: NYU Press, 1992), 291–308.
64  As a side note on a theory of the virtues, almost any – if not every – virtue if taken in isolation or 
absolutized will lead to some form of excess. As Portia memorably observed in The Merchant of Venice, even 
justice, that pre-eminent of virtues, needs to be tempered with mercy (and probably prudence).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
171
or marginalized minorities in liberal democracies know from their own (and 
historical) experience, significant socio-political changes have been required for 
many members of those groups to have even conceived of certain social roles 
and possibilities for themselves. For others, such changes have been essential 
to their ability to translate such broader conceptions into some sort of reality.
A patria, in other words, though important enough for many of us, is not deeply 
necessary to human flourishing. Were the conditions of our socio-political 
environment different from what they are, many of us might move relatively 
easily from one patria to another or into some more cosmopolitan federation of 
communities. Some security of our social environment would be necessary, but 
it might not need to be conceived of as national security.
We are not postulating a completely malleable conception of human flourishing. 
We have the biological structure we have, along with its potentialities (albeit 
incompletely mapped).65 If enabled, we would anticipate that our self-
conception as reasoning and responsible beings (characterizations that are, 
admittedly, contestable) is likely to translate itself into non-oppressive polities. 
Except when seen through the lens of certain ideologies (protection against 
which there are no guarantees), there is likely to be a desire for movement from 
polities that are closed to polities that are open. But that need not lead to a 
rejection or downgrading of patriotism and the demand for security associated 
with it. Patriotism is likely to be a reasonable expectation in an open society. 
Within such open societies, patriotism and unreasonable expressions of national 
security are more likely to be kept in check, and a plurality of free societies is 
more likely to keep each in check – but only more likely.
Although there are rich cultural possibilities to membership in some patria, 
especially a pluralistic one, we suspect that the deeper roots of patriotic loyalty 
probably lie in the desire to secure from serious encroachment or destruction 
the elements of a way of life with which we have come to identify, and which 
are components of our own flourishing. And that is risk laden.
Endangerments to our national security might be construed in largely cultural 
terms. We might fear and even resent the cultural changes brought about by 
immigration or foreign media, and even if we are not averse to cultural change 
– if, indeed, we welcome it – we may wish for it to occur at a pace that does not 
leave us feeling culturally stranded.66 We do not want to find ourselves isolated 
from the social environment that has provided important elements of meaning 
65  We prescind from the issue of future genetic manipulation, however, see Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, James 
Moor, and John Weckert, “Ethics of Human Enhancement: 25 Questions and Answers”, Studies in Ethics, Law, 
and Technology 4, no. 1 (2010), doi: 102202/1941-6008.1110.
66  Joel Feinberg usefully addresses some of these issues in Harmless Wrongdoing (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988), ch. 29.

Security and Privacy
172
for our lives.67 There are often historical as well as current dimensions to this 
status quo – considerable pain may be involved if one’s socio-political history is 
“swallowed up” in the history of another.
Also important, however, is the sorry and ongoing history of human predation. 
The lion, cosmopolitans need to recognize, is not yet ready to lie down with the 
lamb. In a world that will foreseeably remain deeply divided by inequality of 
opportunity, the patria is always “at risk” of conquest (or secession), and to assure 
ourselves in the event of challenge we need the patriotic loyalty of citizens who 
are prepared to defend a way of life they value not only instrumentally but for 
its own sake. Even – perhaps especially – liberal states need armies (or military 
alliances) and a population willing to make sacrifices for their preservation.68 
We may – and should – work to diminish some of those inequalities, but it 
is unlikely that we will eliminate them. Though patriotic loyalty may be an 
imperfect obligation, it is not dispensable.
The foregoing constitutes a fairly discursive argument for seeing national 
security not simply as an instrumental value but also as having a contingently 
intrinsic value for us. It does not, however, constitute an argument for seeing 
every appeal to national security as legitimate, though it may sometimes 
constitute an argument for seeing a potential in arguments for national security 
for some (limited) sacrifices of other values and liberties. We need to recognize 
that there are limits to this.
Because we tend to identify with our patria in a way that gives national security 
an intrinsic value, there is usually implicit in our loyalty a judgment that its 
objects are compatible with what we stand for. That is, embedded in those 
relationships to which our loyalty is owed are certain presumptions about the 
compatibility of values attributable to the objects of loyalty with those for which 
we stand.69 To the extent that we learn otherwise we have a reason for taking 
some action – either to try to bring about change in the object of our loyalty 
or (in the event of failure) to abandon it (on the grounds that it has forfeited its 
claims to our loyalty). We have what Albert Hirschman refers to as voice and 
exit options.70 Appropriate loyalty will generally encourage voice and delay exit 
until we have sufficient reason to think that necessary change is unlikely to be 
forthcoming, and that the associational object no longer expresses the values 
67  This can happen on micro as well as macro levels, changing neighborhoods as well as changing societies.
68  This is a major theme in Alasdair MacIntyre’s Is Loyalty a Virtue? Lindley Lecture (Lawrence: University 
of Kansas Philosophy Department, 1984).
69  This is not to be confused – as is so often the case – with grounding our loyalty in the qualities that we 
presume to be implicit in the object of our loyalty. In that case we might be tempted to argue that our loyalty 
is to the qualities. Rather, our loyalty is to the object of our association – the friend, organization, or whatever. 
It is the association with that object that we value – not just the object and not just the association.
70  Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. We may, of course, as people often do, compromise our values and 
live with a contradiction.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
173
we deemed essential to the relationship. Nevertheless, the loyalty we have to 
an affiliational object or person is not a loyalty to the particular values that are 
instantiated by them. The loyalty is to the objects of an association or relationship.
Because we identify with the objects of our loyalty, critical and often painful 
decisions will need to be made should we discover significant dissonance 
between the values exemplified by the object of loyalty and our own. If, for 
example, we learn that our lover once murdered someone, that our country is 
engaging in something close to genocide or that our university is sponsoring 
research into biological weaponry, we will be confronted with the possibility of 
severing our connection with something that has become part of us. In the case 
of our country, its security may no longer hold great value for us.
The metaphors of balance and trade-off
Having made a case for both personal and collective security, as well as noting 
their interconnections as well as tensions between them, it is appropriate at 
this point of transition to other values with which security is often in some 
kind of tension (e.g. liberty and privacy) to first explore two metaphors that 
are commonly employed to characterize these tensions. Waldron himself refers 
to the pervasiveness of the balancing/trade-off metaphors in the literature on 
liberty (in particular) and security (though one might link the discussion as 
readily with privacy as with liberty). They repay further discussion, as there 
are some serious inadequacies to the balancing metaphor that have political and 
policy implications. Waldron has himself provided some discussion of them, 
and though we agree largely with his critique of the balancing metaphor, we 
believe that he conflates it inappropriately with the trade-off metaphor.71
Balances
In considering the relations between liberty and security – how they are to be 
“played off” against each other – it is very common, almost standard, to use the 
metaphor of a scale in which liberty/privacy and (possibly national) security 
are placed in opposing pans, one to be “balanced” against the other in zero-sum 
fashion.72 The underlying or at least implied idea is that there is an appropriate 
71  Waldron has a few comments on the metaphor in “Security and Safety”, 502–06. His main discussion, 
however, is to be found in Jeremy Waldron, “Security and Liberty: The Image of Balance”, Journal of Political 
Philosophy 11 (2003): 191–210.
72  Presumably the inspiration for the balancing metaphor goes back to Themis, the goddess of justice and 
war, holding the sword in one hand and scales in the other. However, the metaphor also pervades the language 
of the Supreme Court. Of course, the interests, values or rights to be “balanced” are not restricted to “liberty” 
and “security”. Only a few writers have challenged the usefulness or appropriateness of the metaphor.

Security and Privacy
174
level or balance to be achieved – one, moreover, that does not threaten the 
integrity of the other. Appropriate liberty73 is that which balances appropriate 
security.
The need for such balancing is seen as an essential and pervasive feature of our 
social existence. Given Lockean or, even more gloomily, Hobbesian presumptions 
about the subjects of liberty, some constraints will always be required in order 
that our security can be assured. The problem, it is said, is to get the right 
balance, namely, one in which constraints on liberty are appropriate to an 
appropriate level of security.74
(1) How balancing works
Securing the right balance is not something that can be determined in the 
abstract, or once and for all, but something that will change depending on the 
gravity of a threat and the level of risk (to security). Where the risks are small, 
appropriate constraints on liberty will be few, but where the risks are large 
and imminent we might expect liberty to be substantially, and appropriately 
or justifiably, diminished. An appropriate balance is also a function of the 
importance we attach to liberty and security. Some constraints on liberty might 
be seen as more important than others, though this will be complicated by the 
fact that people may disagree as to their importance. The level of security that 
we consider necessary will also offer opportunities for contestation. Some of us 
are more risk-averse than others, so even if the balancing metaphor works it will 
have to confront some complexity in its application to social life.75
The balancing metaphor has a surface plausibility, or at least it strikes us as 
familiar and easy to work with. Both liberty and national security can be 
thought of as matters of degree – of more and less – and, on the face of it, it 
seems reasonable to think that where security threats are great, liberty might 
reasonably be contracted, and that where security threats are minimal, liberty 
might – indeed, ought to – be expanded. The only significant issue might appear 
to be one of getting the balance right – of judging the gravity and probability of 
risk to security accurately enough to make appropriate adjustments to liberty.76
73  We will continue – as does Waldron – to talk about liberty (it can function as an umbrella term) even 
though much of our interest here is more narrowly concerned with privacy.
74  The picture involves an oversimplification in that it fails to accommodate other “values” – such as 
efficiency and economy – that might also need to be “balanced” against liberty or security.
75  Perhaps we will need to introduce some notion of what are reasonable risks to take – though that, of 
course, may not be easy to determine.
76  We are assuming that we can compute degrees of liberty in a relatively unproblematic way. That is not an 
unproblematic assumption. Even leaving to one side the challenge posed by the liberty/liberties distinction 
it is not clear how to compare the constraint on liberty constituted by a change of speed limit of 65 mph to 
55 mph with a change of drinking age from 18 to 21. Are these equivalent constraints or different, and if so, 
which is the greater? Included in these questions are thorny distributional matters on the side of both who 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
175
Many have said that the balance changed dramatically, if not irrevocably, on 
9/11; what we thought to be an appropriate balance of liberty and security was 
shown not to be so. An appropriate balance needed to be restored. Grave threats 
that we thought were theoretical and remote before 9/11 were shown to be real 
and imminent. To re-ensure the level of security that we valued (that is, that we 
considered appropriate) we would need to give up a measure of liberty.
We did not have to react in the way that we did. We might have argued that 
the balance was adequate as it was and that we simply needed to recognize that 
even an appropriate balance would not rule out every contingency. It was a cost 
that would need to be borne from time to time (like the occasional conviction of 
an innocent person despite the procedural safeguards we have instituted).
(2) Is rebalancing needed?
However we might have reacted, the invocation of a balancing argument makes 
certain important assumptions. One concerns the balancing metaphor – to which 
we will return, but other important presumptions may also need examination. 
Central among those is the presumption that what was lacking on 9/11 was a 
proper balance of liberty and security rather than the functionality of existing 
mechanisms. If, as it seems reasonable to argue, particularly in light of The 9/11 
Commission Report, the existing mechanisms for security were dysfunctional in 
various ways, then what was lacking may not have been an appropriate balance 
of liberty and security but well-functioning security mechanisms and agencies 
that needed to be brought up to standard.77 No shift in the balance might have 
been called for but a more efficient administration of what already existed. 
Alternatively, the evident requirement for greater security might reasonably be 
purchased not simply by greater efficiency but also by greater expenditure of 
resources on security. The latter alternative, like the former, does not necessarily 
involve any significant reduction in liberty.
(3) Problems of commensurability
Returning to the balancing metaphor, are liberty and security balanceable in 
the way that is suggested? The metaphor presumes that national security and 
liberty are commensurable values appropriately balanced against one another. 
No doubt, to the extent that our ethic is a straightforwardly consequentialist 
bears the costs and who the benefits, questions we take up later. (Note that one constraint affects a narrower 
group of people than the other – this presumably will require some justification, no doubt along the lines that 
drinkers between the ages of 18 and 21 are disproportionately responsible for risky behavior.)
77  The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the 
United States, 2004, at: http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/index.htm. Other reports have come to 
similar conclusions. This is a critical consideration because, even if it were decided that the balance had been 
wrongly struck, any rectificatory change would be of little value were the new mechanisms not to function 
properly. Why should we assume that dysfunctional intelligence agencies with new powers will function any 
better than the same ones with the old powers?

Security and Privacy
176
one – that is, to the extent that our moral values are subordinate to some end, 
such as the greatest happiness or good for the greatest number78 – then this will 
seem to be a reasonable presumption. The right balance of security and liberty 
will be the ratio that maximizes happiness, good and so on. For example, in 
the interests of security and overall social good we may no longer enter certain 
venues without a picture ID or without subjecting our backpacks to X-ray 
scrutiny. There does not seem to be anything particularly problematic about 
that if there is some reason to think that failure to have a valid ID shown or a 
backpack X-rayed would actually heighten a security risk.
However, even on straightforwardly consequentialist premises there are 
problems. Remember that what we have are two values that are not equally 
“substantial”. Constraints on liberty are likely to be more certain than risks to 
security. Actual constraints on liberty must be weighed against risks to security. 
How do you weigh an actual contraction of liberty to do X against an increase 
of “security” from 70% to 95% (or even from low to high)? It's not easy. It is 
made even more problematic by the fact that it is notoriously difficult to estimate 
levels of risk with any kind of accuracy. Moreover, the political sphere – and 
this is where policy is made – is highly prone to partisan taint. We need not 
look further than calculations of dangerousness in the criminal justice arena, 
in which sex and violent offenders have found themselves victims of what are 
barely more than ideological judgments. Risk data are very spongy, and those 
who make policy may be inclined to draw conclusions from the data according 
to their prior leanings.
However, the view that liberty and security can be balanced in some 
consequentialist 
manner 
is 
highly 
tendentious, 
both 
morally 
and 
constitutionally. Morally, as has already been noted, there are certain liberties 
– or, as we often refer to them, rights – that cannot be easily accommodated to 
the balancing metaphor. They function as constraints on consequentialist or 
maximizing doctrines. Robert Nozick spoke of such rights as side-constraints,79 
or considerations that should not be entered into a utilitarian calculus, and 
Ronald Dworkin, in his view of rights as trumps,80 suggests that when utility 
conflicts with rights, utility must normally give way. To the extent that liberty 
encompasses what we may consider to be our “civil liberties” or “rights”, the 
simple balancing metaphor is problematic or, indeed, inappropriate. It is not, 
78  Here we will have to assume that notions of happiness and good are unitary. Otherwise we get into the 
Millian problem of quality v. quantity (in Utilitarianism) or of the commensurability of different kinds of 
goods.
79  Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (New York: Basic Books, 1974), 28 et seq.
80  Ronald Dworkin, “Rights as Trumps”, in Theories of Rights, ed. Jeremy Waldron (Oxford: OUP, 1984), 
153–67.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
177
as Nozick's and Dworkin's terminology perhaps misleadingly suggests, that 
values and “goods” such as national security can never take precedence but 
that, should they do so, it will not be as the result of a simple balancing process.
Civil liberties do not inhabit the realm of liberty in a purely additive way. Even 
though privacy, freedom of speech and freedom of association may be expanded 
or contracted they are not expanded or contracted as part of a continuum – for 
example, with the expansion or contraction of speed limits or drinking ages 
– as part of a more general liberty of action or movement. Privacy and the 
freedoms of speech and association have a special place within the sphere of 
liberty. Briefly, they are seen as necessary conditions – indeed, elements – of 
human flourishing and not merely its catalysts. Their abrogation or constriction 
requires a special kind of argument, not simply some consideration about greater 
security or efficiency or social welfare.
Americans give constitutional recognition to the special status of liberties via 
the Bill of Rights, in which agents of government are inhibited from engaging in 
maximizing reasoning. Even if it is more efficient to tap phones or enter premises 
at will when a murder is being investigated such invasions are not permitted 
unless certain stringent conditions have first been satisfied. Arguments from 
efficiency (utility) are not sufficient. A different kind of argument is required if 
we are to engage legitimately in such activities.
We might want to argue that these aspects of liberty (our liberties) are simply 
weightier than other parts, and that when they are constrained the security 
interests just have to be higher. It is certainly true – as was awkwardly recognized 
by their initial proponents81 – that the side-constraining and trumping effects of 
certain considerations, such as rights, are not absolute. Justice need not be done 
if the heavens will fall.82 But this does not leave the balancing metaphor intact. 
When, as in emergency situations, rights must be compromised lest disaster 
(and not simply some maximizing end) occur, what results is not a balance in 
which appropriate levels of liberty and security are secured, but a situation in 
which there is a derogation from or infringement of (some) liberty; it is not merely 
diminished.
The balancing metaphor – at least in the present context – will not do. It fails to 
capture the complexity of our moral universe.
(4) Distributive problems
The balancing metaphor, to the extent that it is seen as a weighing of 
commensurables, is problematic in yet another way. Appeals to the metaphor 
81  See Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously, London: Duckworth, 1977, 191; Nozick, Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia, 30n.
82  Though some have asserted otherwise.

Security and Privacy
178
suggest that what we lose in liberty we gain (or regain) in safety and security. 
We. It tends not to work that way. Most of us are probably not affected by the 
USA PATRIOT Act or other measures introduced following 9/11. Ostensibly, 
our security has been increased or restored, but most of us will not have borne 
any significant costs in return. However, as we noted earlier there have been 
significant costs for some, and these costs have fallen disproportionately on 
a small segment of the population – those with Middle Eastern appearances, 
those with visa irregularities and those who, for some reason or other, have 
had governmental attention turned on them. Those satisfying certain profiles or 
who have appeared on various “watch lists” have borne the brunt of the costs of 
“our” greater security.83 What we may have in each pan of the scales, therefore, 
is increased security for the large majority on the one side and, on the other, 
decreased liberty for a much smaller minority.
(5) Establishing connections
In means-end reasoning of the kind that suffuses the “war on terrorism” it 
is important to ensure that certain conditions are satisfied if the end is to be 
appealed to in justifying the means. One of those conditions is that the means 
actually achieve the end sought (or, less stringently, make it highly probable 
that the end will be accomplished).84 It is all very well to argue that, in the name 
of security, our liberties need to be curtailed, but we first need some assurance 
that such contractions will (likely) increase our security. More than say-so is 
required. If, as has been suggested, our security on 9/11 was inadequate not 
because more stringent controls were not available but because controls that 
were already in place were ineptly employed then we have no reason to think 
that additional controls will be correlated with greater efficiency/security. As 
Waldron expresses the point, it is not enough to argue that “reducing a given 
liberty is necessary for combating terrorism effectively. It may be a necessary 
condition, and yet – because sufficient conditions are unavailable – the terrorist 
threat may continue unabated.” The point is important, because there are 
significant costs to the curtailment or contraction of liberties, especially for 
certain members of the community – aliens, members of particular religious 
or ethnic groups, political dissidents and so forth. If what is done to them is to 
have any justification, it needs to be correlated with significant security benefits 
that would not otherwise have been realized.85 The worry, of course – and this 
83  Many innocents and, it would appear, not too many guilty, were scooped up in post-9/11 sweeps. See 
“One Man Still Locked up from 9/11 Sweeps”, MSNBC.com (October 14, 2006) at: http://www.msnbc.msn.
com/id/15264274/from/ET.
84  On these different accounts, see John Kleinig, “Noble Cause Corruption or Process Deviance: Ruminations 
on Means and Ends in Policing” in Police Corruption – Paradigms, Models and Concepts, ed. Stanley Einstein 
and Menachem Amir, Uncertainty Series, Vol. 4 (Huntsville, TX: OICJ Press, 2004), 129–46.
85  Waldron suspects that such contractions have more symbolic than real value because they show that the 
authorities “care about” or are “doing something about” a situation – like presidents visiting areas devastated 
by hurricanes. What is the moral worth/weight to be accorded such symbolic acts?

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
179
is why such consequentialist arguments need to be looked at carefully and 
realistically – is that even mild crackdowns of various kinds may contribute to 
social alienation and worsen the security situation.86
A further condition for valid means-end reasoning is that unintended side-
effects be taken into account. Just as profiling – even if seen as an effective law 
enforcement tool – may have as an unwanted effect the aggravation of historically 
troubled relations between different ethnic groups, so too may the constriction 
of liberties have unintended and undesirable side-effects. As Waldron puts it:
When liberty is understood (as it usually is) in a negative sense, it is something 
that cannot be reduced without increasing something else, namely the 
powers and means and mechanisms that obstruct or punish the ability of 
individuals to do what they want. Reducing liberty may prevent an action 
taking place which would otherwise pose a risk of harm. But it necessarily 
also increases the power of the state, and there is a corresponding risk that 
this enhanced power may also be used to cause harm.87
The point is an obvious one but, viewed through the lens of liberalism, is also 
one of some importance. Liberal thought, even in its democratic version, is 
predicated on a distrust of concentrated power, especially power that is less than 
transparent.88 Even republican liberals89 strongly committed to the importance 
of governmental mechanisms believe that those mechanisms need to be carefully 
circumscribed through “checks and balances”. We might argue that any 
governmental powers exercised on “our” behalf will be exercised benevolently, 
but that would be overly sanguine, given the history not only of the previous 
US government but also of almost any other government. Government officials 
generally have strong incentives to err on the side of security; elected public 
officials in particular are rarely voted out of office for either protecting the 
public too vigorously or placing the safety of the majority above the liberties of 
a minority.
We should not forget that the boundaries of terrorism have been cast very 
broadly to maximize governmental flexibility: political dissent may sometimes 
be enough to trigger governmental attention. That is troubling enough, but in 
addition we have seen a number of provisions that were introduced explicitly 
86  Thus, despite former Attorney General John Ashcroft’s comments (March 20, 2002) on the “voluntary” 
interview program initiated by the US government on November 9, 2001, that “the process of reaching out to 
foreign nationals and their communities fostered new trust between law enforcement and these communities” 
(see: http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/sept_11/ashcroft_018.htm), a great deal of ill will was created.
87  Waldron, “Security and Liberty” 204 (footnote omitted).
88  This, of course, has been one of the major complaints about the governmental response to 9/11 – the lack 
of access to what is going on in Guantánamo Bay, the secret handling of aliens and certain provisions of the 
USA PATRIOT Act.
89  See e.g. Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1997.

Security and Privacy
180
and specifically for the “war on terrorism” now transferred to the wider “war 
on crime”.90 Such measures would have been considered overly intrusive had 
they been intended for ordinary law enforcement purposes.
Trade-offs. 
If we want a more promising metaphor to characterize the situation, we might 
do better with that of a trade-off. From time-to-time Waldron and others slide 
from the balancing metaphor to that of the trade-off as though they had similar 
implications.91 We think not. When we trade one value off against another, 
we not only acknowledge an adjustment to the balance – the restoration of an 
equilibrium that has been upset – but have in view a cost or sacrifice to one when 
the other is given priority. There is an infringement or derogation of liberties or 
rights when liberty is traded off for security. Naturally, as noted above, the 
necessity for a trade-off – if, indeed, there is such a necessity – implies that 
more security cannot be had without a reduction in liberty, and this, as we have 
seen earlier, is by no means self-evident.
A trade-off is not a trade. In a trade – at least in theory (a “fair” trade) – one 
value is exchanged for another and no party to the trade loses. Each party sees 
the exchange as being advantageous: A had x and B had y; B wanted x and A 
wanted y; the trade, because consensual, satisfies both. A trade-off, on the other 
hand, involves a tension or conflict whereby A, if he is to get y, must sacrifice 
x. If he deems it an acceptable trade-off, it nevertheless comes at some cost. A 
would have preferred to secure y without sacrificing x. In a trade-off, the key 
issue will be to determine whether the sacrifices can be justified or sustained, 
and how the costs incurred should be responded to.
If many values that we might pursue are side-constrained by our liberties or 
rights, national security has at least the potential to be involved in a trade-off. 
The courts have long recognized that even constitutionally guaranteed rights 
may be infringed in the name of national security or some other broad social 
interest (such as public safety or territorial integrity). However, such interests 
are not to be casually invoked. Any claim must be subject to strict scrutiny 
in which the interests invoked in favor of constraining the liberty in question 
must be specified and explicitly defended.92 Thus, vague references to “national 
90  Most of these expansions have so far focused on financial crimes, though urban gangs are now being 
targeted with legislation originally designed for terrorists.
91  Waldron, “Security and Liberty”, 196–198, 203. See also Philip A. Thomas, “Emergency and Anti-
Terrorist Power: 9/11: USA and UK”, Fordham International Law Journal 26 (April 2003): 1193 and 1208.
92  Strict scrutiny requires that “some compelling state interest” be shown. It stands in contrast with what is 
called a “rational relations” test, in which liberty is constrained (say, a dress code for employees or a lowering 
of the speed limit) and all that usually needs to be shown is that there is a plausible connection between 
the restriction on liberty and the purposes of the restricting body. In the broad gap between these two, a 
third level of scrutiny (“heightened”) is developed to secure interests that are deemed “important” but not 
“fundamental” (say, the interests of gay men).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
181
security” will not do. The national security interests that are threatened will 
need to be specified, the ways in which they are threatened will need to be 
articulated, the threat will need to be quantified in some way and some 
reasonable case will need to be made to sustain such claims.
Security, of course, may be seen in the same way as liberty – as a right – though 
what is likely to be in view will not be national security so much as personal 
security. (The two kinds of security may be related, since national security 
may facilitate or provide an environment for personal or individual security.) 
To the extent that securing our right to personal security comes into conflict 
with our liberties, the tension will not be between some good and our liberties 
but between two rights – or, to put it in a way that encompasses a modest 
view of national security, between a good (national security) that secures a right 
(personal security) and some other rights (our liberties). How are such tensions 
to be resolved? Although we may use the term “trade-off”, it is a different 
kind of trade-off from that involved when a liberty is traded off against some 
communal or social good.93
To a degree, we are assuming that, though the interests of both national security 
and individual liberty will be in some tension, they will also be mutually 
supportive. As with courage and discretion, generosity and caution or even 
justice and happiness, we expect that in the ordinary transactions of life we 
will be presented with choices that do not violate the demands of either. 
Discretion will temper courage and courage will save discretion from cowardice; 
caution will contribute to wise expressions of generosity and generosity will 
overcome the inertia of caution; justice will check the aggregative tendencies 
of happiness and respect for happiness will save justice from rigidity. And so 
we anticipate that security will enhance our freedom and that freedom will 
guide security. Indeed, violations of personal security typically consist in part 
of violations of liberty rights; slavery is perhaps the most graphic illustration 
of this. Accordingly, insofar as national security is taken to be in large part 
constituted by aggregate personal security then national security is, or ought 
to be, ultimately in the service of liberty rights (as well as rights to life and 
so forth). Were this not to be the case, our lives would be wretchedly torn. 
However, circumstances sometimes arise in which we are faced with what seems 
to be a moral necessity to give one precedence over the other – not merely a 
93  The choice of term can also reflect much deeper debates within moral theory between those who view 
ethics as a rational system grounded in some single principle or set of compatible principles and those who 
claim that we are confronted by a plurality of values – either (as Alasdair MacIntyre has suggested in After 
Virtue, second ed., University of Notre Dame Press, 1984) because we have inherited fragments from competing 
moral schemata or because (try as we might) our human condition is such that we are confronted by a moral 
plurality that calls for judgment rather than calculation. Debates over deontological and consequentialist 
theory, or between universalists and particularists, often reflect such deeper debates. This, however, is not 
the place to do more than to acknowledge them. See also the symposium on conflicts of rights in Legal Theory 
7 (2001): 235–306.

Security and Privacy
182
precedence that arises because one has some inherent priority over the other 
but a precedence that serves to compromise or undermine the other, leaving a 
residue of moral loss or even taint.
Judgment. 
At the end of the day, there are reasons for thinking that both terms (balance 
and trade-off) fail to do justice to the complexity involved in clashes between 
security and liberty – even though the term “trade-off” comes rather closer 
to the mark.94 That is also Waldron’s position.95 What is required is judgment, 
and judgment is not a matter of algorithmically drawing conclusions from 
premises but of incrementally bringing reasons to bear on one another – point 
and counterpoint – until we can reach a conclusion that is defensible. This will 
involve the assembling of relevant considerations, prioritizing them and making 
determinations about whether or to what degree, in the particular case (or in 
respect of a particular policy, if that is the level at which we are seeking to reach 
a decision), one is to be sacrificed to the other. The process is one of the interplay 
of reasons enabling one to perhaps warrant trading off a measure of one in favor 
of the other. The trade-off, if any, is determined though a judgmental process. 
Stanley Benn puts it well:
The metaphor of ‘balancing’ or ‘weighing’, with its image of weights 
held in the balance or in the hands, is not altogether perspicuous 
when applied to arguments or claims. For one thing, weighing and 
balancing suggest the achievement of a state of equilibrium – equal 
weights – while judgment requires the determination of an outcome 
because some reasons ‘outweigh’ others. More important than this, 
however, is the consideration that judging claims and reasons generally 
proceeds seriatim. There is commonly a presumption of right, which 
counterclaims are then designed to override. These in turn may be 
undercut or overridden, as may be those adduced against them in their 
turn. Admittedly, deciding whether a claim has indeed been undercut 
or whether a counterclaim overrides may itself demand judgment, and 
secondary disputes employing precisely similar tactics can develop at 
94  Scanlon (following Rawls) makes use of the language of “adjustment”:
To summarize this discussion: Rawls holds that basic liberties such as freedom of expression (once 
defined) cannot be balanced against other interests. But they need to be ‘adjusted’. The powers and 
prerogatives (and limits on powers and prerogatives) that define these liberties need to be specified. 
What is specified in this process is, among other things, the grounds on which expression may 
legitimately be regulated. In determining these limits we need to take various potentially conflicting 
interests into account. But in this process of balancing and adjustment, our interest in assuring 
conditions for the development and full exercise of the two moral powers has the primary role: If 
allowing some other interest to justify restrictions on expression in a certain way would pose a threat 
to the full exercise of these powers, then that justification for restriction cannot be allowed. (“The 
Constitutional Essentials of Political Liberalism: Adjusting Rights and Balancing Values”, 1484)
95  Waldron, “Safety and Security”, 502–06.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
183
each point in the argument. It will always help in settling such disputes 
to understand precisely what kind of argument is going on. To describe 
it as one in which ‘considerations are being weighed’ or ‘balanced’ is 
not helpful, because the metaphor does not really illumine the process.96
Privacy
As we have had occasion to note, ensuring security may come into conflict 
with other important liberal values such as privacy, liberty, autonomy and 
dignity, thus threatening the identity of persons. Trade-offs may have to be 
made in which, to ensure the former, the latter may be compromised in certain 
ways. We can see what is at stake in these trade-offs by reviewing the ways in 
which privacy and other values are to be construed and valued within a liberal 
framework. We begin with privacy.
Although occasional references to privacy can be found earlier, and the 
expectation of it goes back much further,97 the modern debate about privacy 
was not really kicked off until Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis published 
their seminal law review paper in 1890.98 Controversially, they characterized the 
right to privacy as “the right to be let alone”. It captured something of what is 
involved – concerned as they were about the growing intrusiveness of the press, 
paparazzi etc. – but did not do so very well or accurately. Interestingly, it was 
there cast in terms that do not reflect or even presage its later appearance in US 
Constitutional law as a Constitutional right against governmental intrusion.
The right to privacy did not come to possess explicit (US) Constitutional status 
until the 1965 case of Griswold v. Connecticut, in which a law prohibiting the 
advocacy and use of contraceptives was said to have violated a “right to marital 
privacy”.99 The judges had some difficulty locating such a right in Constitutional 
provisions and, in fact, they varied in the ways in which they sought to account 
96  A Theory of Freedom, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988, 296–97. Cf. Science Research 
Council v. Nassé H.L.(E.), (1980) A.C. 1028 at 1067, (1979) 3 W.L.R. 762 at 771 (Lord Wilberforce).
97  Eavesdropping is a very old offense (see William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, 
(c. 1765) vol. IV: Of Public Wrongs (169), (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962), 189. The derogatory notion of a “Peeping 
Tom” goes back even earlier. See Daniel J. Solove, “A Taxonomy of Privacy”,University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 154 (2006): 491.
98  Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy”, Harvard Law Review 4 (1890): 193–
220, available at: http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/6805/articles/privacy/Privacy_brand_warr2.html.
99  381 US 479 (1965). The relevant statutes were 53-32 and 54-196 of the General Statutes of Connecticut 
(1958 rev.). The former provided: “Any person who uses any drug, medicinal article or instrument for the 
purpose of preventing conception shall be fined not less than fifty dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty 
days nor more than one year or be both fined and imprisoned.” The latter provided: “Any person who assists, 
abets, counsels, causes, hires or commands another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and punished as 
if he were the principal offender.” Estelle Griswold was Executive Director of the Planned Parenthood League 
of Connecticut, and the League provided information, examinations and advice on contraceptives.

Security and Privacy
184
for it. It was then invoked again, though much more controversially, in Roe 
v. Wade,100 in which a woman’s right to an abortion was defended – in part – 
by reference to her right to privacy under the Fourteenth Amendment’s due 
process clause. Although the right appears to have gained a reasonably secure 
Constitutional toehold in the US, its meaning, scope, moral status and limits 
remain highly controversial.
Here, however, our primary interest will not be in the legal (or Constitutional) 
right to privacy but in privacy as a moral notion.101
Privacy and publicity are complex and multi-layered concepts, part of an 
even more complex domain of privateness and publicness, and here we do no 
more than note certain aspects of that complexity.102 As for the larger domain, 
consider the differences in the understanding of “private” and “public” in 
distinctions between private property and public property, private interests 
and the public interest, private officials and public officials, private goods and 
public goods, private meetings and public meetings, and private bathrooms and 
public bathrooms.103
100  410 US 113 (1973).
101  Constitutional interpretations may develop in directions that cannot be readily accommodated by moralized 
accounts. Thus one might want to argue for a moral right to privacy without thinking that it should encompass 
abortion, even though, Constitutionally, the right to privacy does encompass abortion. Compare the debate about 
whether capital punishment constitutes cruel and unusual punishment. Some argue that – morally – capital 
punishment is cruel and unusual, though as far as Constitutional argument is concerned it is not (at present, anyway).
102  There is, in addition, a further set of overlapping distinctions between privacy and secrecy. That which 
we keep secret (at least with respect to A, B and C, though not necessarily everyone) may or may not also be 
private. Indeed, what we keep secret (such as criminal acts that we have committed) may be a matter of public 
concern and should be made public. There are some critics of privacy who maintain that we would be better 
off if our lives were more transparent, and that we should – more or less – eschew privacy. We would not be 
(as) vulnerable to blackmail and fraud, there would be less hypocrisy and deceit, and greater candor. Some 
would maintain that we would be healthier psychologically if we had fewer hang-ups over things we tend to 
treat as private (e.g. matters of sexual preference and potency, penis size and religious commitment), or that 
the desire for privacy is connected to shame – our having something to hide. No doubt privacy can function 
as a cloak for secrecy, but often what seems to be complained about is not privacy but secrecy. Secrecy – 
deliberately concealing information from others – is a topic in its own right, even though arguments for when 
it may or may not be justified will sometimes intersect with arguments concerned with privacy. See Sissela 
Bok, Secrets: On the Ethics of Concealment and Revelation (New York: Vintage, 1989); Carl J. Friedrich, “Secrecy 
Versus Privacy: The Democratic Dilemma”, in J. Roland Pennock and John W. Chapman (eds.), Privacy, 
NOMOS XIII (NY: Atherton Press, 1971), 105–20; Carol B. Warren, “Secrecy”, in The Encyclopedia of Privacy, 
ed. William G. Staples, Greenwood Press: Connecticut, (2007): 482–85; C. Warren and B. Laslett, “Privacy 
and Secrecy: A Conceptual Comparison”, The Journal of Social Issues (1977): 1ff; Paul B. Thompson, “Privacy, 
Secrecy and Security”, Ethics and Information Technology 3, no. 1 (March, 2001): 13–19; Judith DeCew, In 
Pursuit of Privacy: Ethics and the Rise of Technology (Cornell UP, 1997), 48; Julie Inness, Privacy, Intimacy, and 
Isolation (Oxford University Press, 1992), 60ff; Michael Barkun, “Religion and Secrecy After September 11”, 
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 74, no. 2 (2006): 275–301, at 277.
103  For a valuable and detailed representation of that complexity, see S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus, “Public and 
Private – Concepts in Action”, in Public and Private in Social Life, ed. S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus (NY: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1983), 3–27. The contrast is not always between private and public but, say, between “private (use)” 
and “business (use)”. Moreover, what is public may also have a private dimension – the categories are not 
exclusive. One is entitled to privacy in a public toilet (an issue about which there have been public debates 
and court cases).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
185
As a way into the discussion of privacy as we shall be mainly concerned with it here, 
consider the following situations, often taken to involve breaches of privacy:
(1)	 A person rigs up a device that enables him to listen in on his neighbors’ 
conversations;
(2)	 Government agents use a thermal sensor to detect heat patterns in a person’s 
home;104
(3)	 A passer-by stops and peers through the slightly parted shades of a lighted 
bedroom;
(4)	 A person moves up and down the escalator of a public mall, carrying a small 
video camera that enables him to take up-skirt photos of young girls who are 
using the escalator. He posts them on YouTube;105
(5)	 Someone leans over to hear what a couple is saying to each other on a park 
bench on which they are sitting;
(6)	 A company pledges not to sell personal customer information, but does so 
when the price is right;106
(7)	 A tabloid publishes the name of a rape victim;107
(8)	 A company markets a list of five million elderly, incontinent women; and
(9)	 Security devices that X-ray through people’s clothing to the skin are installed 
at airports.108,109
Insofar as it is agreed that there has been a breach of privacy in each of these 
cases, we think it is fair to say that it involves our gaining (or seeking to gain) 
104  See Kyllo v. US, 533 U.S. 27 (2001). In this case, government agents, suspicious that Kyllo was growing 
marijuana indoors, used a heat sensor to determine whether parts of his house were hotter than others, 
consistent with the use of heat lamps to grow marijuana. After determining that some parts of the house were 
hotter than others, they obtained a search warrant. The Supreme Court considered the use of this device an 
unreasonable search, even though it could only detect variations in heat. It is interesting to compare this case 
with Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405 (2005), in which police used a sniffer dog to check for drugs in the trunk 
of the defendant’s car. It was argued that because the dog was trained to detect only that to which Caballes had 
no right, no violation of his Fourth Amendment rights was involved. It is also interesting to compare these 
cases with Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445 (1989), in which marijuana plants growing in a greenhouse in Riley’s 
backyard were spotted using a surveillance aircraft. Here it was argued inter alia that overflying aircraft had 
become commonplace, and that Riley had no reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to that location.
105  See, for example, State v. Glas, 54 P. 3d 147 (2002).
106  See In re Geocities, 127 FTC, 94 (1999).
107  See Florida Star v. B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524 (1989).
108  See Austin Considine, “Will New Airport X-Rays Invade Privacy?”, The New York Times, October 9, 
2005, TR3; also the Rapiscan website: http://www.rapiscansystems.com/sec1000.html and, more graphically, 
http://www.electromax.com/rapiscan%20secure%201000.html. Jeffrey Rosen has spoken of the scanning 
device as an “electronic strip search” in “The Naked Crowd: Balancing Privacy and Security in an Age of 
Terror”, Arizona Law Review 46 (Winter, 2004): 608.
109  Airports themselves have become topics of interest in the surveillance field. See Peter Adey, “Surveillance 
at the Airport: Surveilling Mobility/Mobilising Surveillance”, Environment and Planning A 36, no. 8 (2004): 
1365–80.

Security and Privacy
186
access to or information about, or disseminating (or seeking to disseminate) 
information or knowledge about, others that is thought to be rightfully theirs 
to control.
So, underlying (1) there is a view that certain spaces are private and that what 
goes on in them is out of bounds and not (ordinarily) the business of any others. 
Within certain limits, this is irrespective of what goes on in them – whether or 
not it is a matter that one would otherwise see as private. Of course, because 
that particular space – the home – is considered private, it is also a major venue 
for matters that would be seen as private. Whether or not what goes on inside 
a home is made known to others is generally for those inside it to determine. 
Advances in technology enable such private spaces to be invaded without 
physically entering them.
The case of the thermal scanner in (2) reinforces the point about a private space 
– the home – but part of its interest arises from the fact that the information 
obtained is not verbal but, at best, probabilistic. It also raises an important 
question about the lengths to which government may go in gathering information 
concerning us and the extent to which it may gather and use such data.110 We 
can already observe here the particular US preoccupation with governmental 
infringements of privacy.
In (3), we have a further permutation on the “private domain”. Though the 
shades are drawn, presumably as a measure to secure privacy (while dressing 
or engaged in some intimate/private activity), the voyeur takes advantage of a 
failure in the mechanism designed to exclude the possibility of surveillance. 
However, the intention of the drawn shades is clear enough,111 even though the 
voyeur may mean no harm beyond the harm of invading privacy.
Case (4) occurs in a public space, though one might presume that what can 
be seen using such a camera would be considered an intrusion into a private 
domain. Posting it on a video-sharing site such as YouTube would aggravate the 
invasion.
Although the couple on the park bench in (5) are conversing “in public”, their 
conversation would normally be considered a private one, overheard by others 
in snatches at most. Despite its being “in public”, leaning over to listen to their 
conversation would be a breach of privacy. As with the previous case, there 
has been a vigorous discussion about the extent to which one might be said to 
110  Wiretapping is also an interesting case in which the government may not physically penetrate but 
nevertheless “invade” the home. In Olmstead v. US, 277 U.S. 438 (1928), wiretapping was not seen to breach 
privacy. However, forty years later the Supreme Court reversed this decision in Katz v. US, 389 U.S. 347 (1967).
111  Compare this with the case of a toilet stall whose doors leave a narrow crack through which someone 
could peer.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
187
possess privacy rights in public. This discussion is often associated with the 
installation of CCTV cameras. Is it activities or locations that are private, or, 
depending on circumstances, either or both?
Case (6) is interesting in that the information may or may not be private, but 
the company has pledged to treat it as private by not selling it. Selling the 
information may expose the person to bombardment with advertising (or other 
approaches) or it could be purchased by a data mining company that could 
then integrate that information with other information; cumulatively, it could 
allow for more information about individuals to be available to others than those 
individuals would reasonably agree to.
Case (7) operates against a background of the social opprobrium or prejudice 
to which even rape victims are sometimes subject, making it the case that 
publishing the name of a rape victim – unlike, perhaps, the name of a mugging 
victim – constitutes a violation of privacy. This case also indicates the extent to 
which privacy interests are tied up with social conventions and expectations.
Case (7) also has some similarities to (8), which deals with information that 
people would not wish to make available to others, except on terms of their own 
choosing. Consider a company that delivers adult diapers by mail order. It could 
be tempted to sell the list to other companies with niche products. Although 
there are now privacy disclosure regulations for much commercially gained 
marketing information,112 this has not always been the case, and marketing 
information that people would be embarrassed to have others know and that 
in ordinary circumstances would be deemed private can be seen as a breach of 
privacy.
As with (2), case (9) also raises a question about the kind of information that a 
government may legitimately collect about its citizens and others. As we have 
already seen, those who travel – at least since 9/11 – must expect that, for security 
reasons, special care will be taken that they do not pose a security risk to others. 
Given that those who pose such a risk could seek to conceal dangerous objects 
on their persons, officials must determine how to ensure that passengers do not 
exploit their privacy rights for nefarious purposes. We are now familiar with 
X-ray (or similar) machines for carry-on (and even checked) luggage, frames that 
pick up metallic objects, wands and devices that are sensitive to the presence of 
explosives, but as the concealment of dangerous implements has become more 
sophisticated so has a need developed for increasingly sophisticated detectors. 
Pat-down searches are sometimes used but are often claimed to be violative of 
privacy, and there have been moves to subject people to a type of X-ray or 
backscatter ray scrutiny that avoids unwanted touching. However, the base 
112  One important issue in the development of these disclosures concerns “opt-in” vs. “opt-out” provisions.

Security and Privacy
188
machines which penetrate to the skin reveal more than most of us would care 
to reveal to strangers, and there has been strong opposition to them.113 On the 
other hand, it may be that technology can come to the rescue here by ensuring 
that the operators of scanning devices do not view “pornographic” images but 
only images of hidden metal objects and the like. If so, this would be an instance 
of what Jeroen van den Hoven refers to as “designing-in-ethics”.114 In general 
terms, what van den Hoven has in mind is the possibility of not having to make 
trade-offs between (in this case) security and privacy. We can have security 
with at most a very minor reduction in privacy.
There is a not-very-clear debate in the literature about whether privacy is always 
concerned with information or whether it is to be distinguished from privacy 
that involves access.115 Although there is a distinction of some sort between A’s 
reading of B’s mail and A’s peeking into B’s bedroom, in each case there is some 
invasion of a personal space/domain over which B should be able to exercise 
control. In both cases A gains access to aspects of B’s person (e.g. information 
concerning the terms of B’s relationships with others and what B looks like 
when naked) that it is preferred that A did not have (without consent). In both 
cases A gets information that is B’s to determine whether A has. In A’s breaching 
of B’s privacy, B loses some control over A – or over themselves and his/her 
self-presentation. However, we are not convinced that the distinction between 
information and access is ultimately of any great ethical significance.
Some of the foregoing cases, particularly (6) and (8), are concerned with 
confidentiality as well as privacy. Confidential information is information that 
is shared with specific parties on the understanding that it will not then be 
shared with others. The information in question may be private or personal, 
though it need not be. The person who confesses his crimes to a priest expects 
that the priest will not then share that information with others, even though 
it is not private in the traditional sense. A lawyer is bound by confidentiality 
expectations not to share with others information the client has provided without 
that client’s permission. Confidentiality is usually justified in consequentialist 
terms, though where the thing confided is also private there may be other 
considerations that tell against its sharing with others. In the case of lawyers, 
physicians or priests, confidentiality is justified as a means whereby certain 
services can be more adequately provided – clients, patients or parishioners 
will be more inclined to provide relevant information if they believe that it will 
113  As we have seen, there are technological solutions, even if they have not been fully exploited.
114  Jeroen van den Hoven, “Computer Ethics and Moral Methodology”, Metaphilosophy 28, no. 3, (1997): 
1–12.
115  Whether these exhaust the scope of privacy is debated. Helen Nissenbaum writes that “the scope of 
privacy is wide-ranging – potentially extending over information, activities, decision, thoughts, bodies, and 
communications”; “Privacy as Conceptual Integrity”,Washington Law Review, 79 (2004): 119–57. However, 
we think the notion of informational privacy is central.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
189
not be shared with others or, in the event that it is shared, that it will be shared 
on an appropriately “need to know” basis. Because justification of the duty of 
confidentiality is largely based on consequentialist grounds, consequentialist 
considerations can also be appealed to in order to justify overriding it (e.g. some 
significant public interest). For the most part, the duty of confidentiality lapses 
if and when the information enters the public domain.
What is it that makes the unconsented-to gaining of 
access to or dissemination of information concerning 
oneself a breach of privacy?
At the heart of privacy is a certain notion of agency – that is, of someone’s 
standing as an autonomous chooser or moral agent who, by virtue of that status, 
warrants the respect of others.116 The respect that is due to agents requires that 
we permit them to control the conditions of their self-disclosure to others. When 
privacy is invaded, such agency is usually violated, and it can be violated in a 
number of ways:
(i) It is violated when one leans over to listen to another’s conversation on the 
park bench, since, when the other becomes aware of one’s presence, it alters the 
conditions under which the other carries on the conversation and may affect 
not only what the other wishes to include but also how the other says what he 
or she wants to. The other becomes aware that there are some things that are 
being said that are meant for their companion’s ears alone and that, given the 
presence of a further set of ears, the other no longer wishes to say them. Further, 
even if the other is not so worried about the content of what is being said, he/
she may come to realize that what is being said to the other is being conveyed 
against a background of knowledge and assumptions that is unlikely to exist 
with respect to the eavesdropper and that it may therefore be misunderstood 
and misinterpreted. The other will therefore be under some pressure to put 
what he/she wants to say rather differently.
The control to which one is entitled as a chooser is not simply a matter of 
intellectual but also of emotional control. Privacy is a condition of personal 
wellbeing or, as Ruth Gavison puts it, of “mental health, autonomy, growth, 
creativity, and the capacity to form and create meaningful human relations.”117 
Informational control concerns how as well as what.
116  That is, in the classical liberal sense of respect for persons and respect for one’s status as a person 
(recognition respect), not necessarily respect for the particular person one is (appraisal respect). See Stephen 
L. Darwall, “Two Kinds of Respect”, Ethics 88 (1) (1977): 36–49.
117  Ruth Gavison, “Privacy and the Limits of Law”, Yale Law Journal 89 (January, 1980): 442.

Security and Privacy
190
(ii) Privacy is violated even if one is not aware of the other person’s presence 
and therefore does not make adjustments for it. One may not be aware of the 
person who is peering through the slightly parted shades of one’s bedroom, 
but that person has still violated one’s agency, since agency consists in part 
in determining what others may know of those matters that are appropriately 
deemed to be private – for example, one’s naked body or one’s activities in the 
bed. That, after all, is why one pulled the shades in the first place, even if they 
failed to exclude prying eyes. Being denied that power, one’s agency has been 
compromised.
(iii) What is violated, therefore, when privacy is violated is the person as conceived 
of within liberal democratic theory. Liberal democratic theory arose as a reaction 
against hierarchical and paternalistic polities in which some were judged or thought 
to be inherently superior to others and were therefore appropriately accorded powers 
of rulership. Liberal democratic societies – in theory at least – are populated not only 
by equals but also by those whose capacities (at least when “of age”) fit them to be 
full participants in the life of the community.
It is within a social framework in which privacy is acknowledged and fostered 
that the kind of person well-suited to the demands and expectations of a 
liberal democracy is nurtured – one who is characterized by thoughtfulness, 
imagination, independence, courage and vitality. As Hyman Gross puts it, 
“respect for privacy is required to safeguard our changes of mood and mind, 
and to promote growth of the person through self-discovery and criticism.”118
(iv) A somewhat different kind of violation occurs when information that is gathered 
is then used to harm one in some way. For example, somebody gets one’s social 
security number, puts that together with other information that is available about 
one and opens a bank account that enables one’s assets to be stolen.
This suggests that there are different kinds of wrongs that may be involved 
when privacy is violated. Traditionally, they have been divided between 
deontological and consequentialist wrongs – between those that are intrinsic to 
breaches of privacy and those that are contingent on them but often found. The 
former are usually said to be more fundamental than the latter.
(a) Consider some of the deontological dimensions to the breaches of privacy 
enumerated above. There is, first of all, an objectification of those whose 
privacy is breached. The neighbors (1) or people on the park bench (4) who are 
eavesdropped upon and the person whose bedroom is spied on (3) are treated 
as objects of curiosity by others and their feelings about being overheard or 
viewed in that way are ignored or discounted or even deliberately ruffled. In 
other words, their agency is left out of account or downgraded, at least as far as 
118  Hyman Gross, “Privacy and Autonomy”, in Privacy, NOMOS XIII, ed. J. Roland Pennock and John W. 
Chapman (NY: Atherton Press, 1971), 176.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
191
the eavesdropper/voyeur is concerned. In some cases, there is also a deliberate 
deception involved in that those who are violated believe they are conducting 
their activities away from the presence of others – i.e. that their private activities 
are occurring “in private”.
Having privacy – that is, having a sphere of activity within which one may 
exercise control or express one’s status as an agent – is critical to being a person 
and not a mere thing. Centrally, though not exclusively, it involves being 
able to think for oneself without the monitoring of one’s thoughts. Almost as 
importantly, it involves the ability to determine (within reason) the audience to 
which those thoughts are expressed. Agency requires that others respect that 
control. Traditionally, the home and, even more particularly, certain areas of the 
home have been deemed private spaces within which, within broad limits, one 
might express oneself without the intrusions of others.
A number of writers have argued that intimacy and friendship are in some 
important sense dependent on and expressed through our being able to control 
access and information concerning ourselves to others. Intimates and friends are 
those to whom we make special disclosures, disclosures that not only express a 
certain closeness (a drawing of them within certain boundaries) but also a trust 
that they will not jeopardize our interests. There is some truth in that, though it 
is not the case, as some (for example, Charles Fried119) have suggested, that the 
value of privacy resides in its enablement of intimacy or in its power to mark 
out different kinds of relationships.
To the extent that we become aware of our world as one without privacy – as 
one in which what we wish to think, say or do is (or is vulnerable to) being 
monitored by others – our status as moral agents is threatened. Rather than 
determining the terms of the presentation of ourselves in decisions and actions, 
our own sense of appropriateness or inappropriateness, our presentation is 
determined by factors outside us. Rather than being the primary controllers of 
the terms of our social interactions the terms under which our social interactions 
take place are determined by (the scrutiny of) others.
The private sphere is not identical to, nor is it unrelated to, the sphere of self-
regarding conduct about which Mill spoke and which he distinguished from 
other-regarding conduct. Both connect up with the idea of a person as an 
“individual”, a “normative agent” or a “progressive being”, and the similarities 
are to some extent responsible for reductionist accounts of privacy that see it 
simply as an aspect of autonomy.120 Here is Mill’s account:
119  Charles Fried, “Privacy”, Yale Law Journal 77 (1968): 475–93; see also Robert Gerstein, “Intimacy and 
Privacy”, Ethics 89, no. 1 (1978): 76–81; and Innes, Privacy, Intimacy and Isolation.
120  Cf. Joel Feinberg: “The United States Supreme Court in recent years appears to have discovered a basic 
constitutional right suggestive of our ‘sovereign personal right of self-determination’, and has given it the 
highly misleading name of ‘the right to privacy’” (“Autonomy, Sovereignty, and Privacy : Moral Ideals in the 
Constitution”, Notre Dame Law Review 58 (1983): 445–92, at 483). However, Feinberg is taking a swipe at 

Security and Privacy
192
[T]here is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished from the 
individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending all that 
portion of a person's life and conduct which affects only himself, or if 
it also affects others, only with their free, voluntary, and undeceived 
consent and participation. When I say only himself, I mean directly, 
and in the first instance: for whatever affects himself, may affect others 
through himself; and the objection which may be grounded on this 
contingency, will receive consideration in the sequel. This, then, is 
the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises, first, the inward 
domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of conscience, in the most 
comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute freedom of 
opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, 
moral, or theological. The liberty of expressing and publishing opinions 
may seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to that 
part of the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but, 
being almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, 
and resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable 
from it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; 
of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of doing as we 
like, subject to such consequences as may follow: without impediment 
from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not harm them, 
even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong. 
Thirdly, from this liberty of each individual, follows the liberty, within 
the same limits, of combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for 
any purpose not involving harm to others: the persons combining being 
supposed to be of full age, and not forced or deceived.121
Millian liberty is concerned with conduct rather than information, conduct in 
which others have no business interfering because it does not affect their interests 
detrimentally. Privacy, on the other hand, concerns a zone of informational 
control that is central to moral autonomy. Not everything that is self-regarding 
(in the Millian sense) is private; not everything that is private is self-regarding.
(b) The consequentialist dimensions to privacy. When people – be they individuals 
or institutions – obtain information that we would consider to be private to us, 
they may be in a position to do us considerable harm. The crime of blackmail is 
structured around the threat to reveal (usually) private (though sometimes just secret) 
information unless some “payment” is made to keep quiet about it.122 Although the 
judicial reasoning rather than rejecting the idea of privacy. For a different reductionist account, See Judith 
Jarvis Thomson, “The Right to Privacy”, Philosophy & Public Affairs 4, no. 4 (1975): 295–314, who considers 
privacy rights to be reducible to, for example, property rights and right to self-ownership. For a critique, see 
inter alia, Innes, Privacy, Intimacy, and Isolation, 28–41.
121  John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1869), see: http://www.bartleby.com/130/1.html.
122  As noted earlier, what is secret (e.g. the fact that we murdered someone) need not also be private.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
193
person in possession of another’s private information may choose to reveal it without 
the threat of penal consequences, using that threat to exact from another a payment 
is considered an improper exploitation of the other.123
The securing of private information by other individuals and organizations may 
subject individuals to various forms of invasion or threat, but so may its collection 
by governments. Not surprisingly, given its history, much of the US debate 
about privacy has concerned the gathering of data by governments. Although 
communitarian liberals tend to have a relatively benign attitude to governmental 
power – seeing it as an affirmative social structure and not simply as a lesser 
evil than the state of nature – such liberals are still wary of collective power 
and the ways in which it may be misused. This was a major concern during the 
years of the Cold War, with governmental worries about Communist conspiracies 
(Orwell’s 1984 was published in 1949) and various other initiatives designed to 
centralize governmental data on individuals, eventually leading to the Privacy 
Act of 1974, which was tightened after Watergate by FISA (1978). However, since 
9/11, with a somewhat weakened public resolve, there has been a re-emergence of 
governmental data collection initiatives as part of the “war on terrorism”, along 
with, more recently, some half-hearted resistance to those initiatives.124
There has always been a tendency, even among liberal democratic governments, to 
“do what it takes” to retain power, and information can be an important source of 
power.
Privacy and cultural relativity
One reason privacy has generated a lot of debate is that it appears to be culturally 
variable. What one person considers to be private information (e.g. whom X is 
going out with; one’s telephone number or address) another person may think 
not; what one person thinks is extremely private (e.g. that she has had breast 
cancer) another may think only moderately so. What one culture treats as 
private (e.g. certain bodily parts) another may not. Some people think of those 
who treat certain matters as private simply as thin-skinned.125
123  It also gives rise to the so-called “paradox of blackmail” – beloved of libertarians – whereby two acts, 
neither of which is illegal (making known to others the truth about someone and asking someone for money) 
become illegal when conjoined (cf. prostitution).
124  On August 4, 2007, Congress approved expanded surveillance powers. The Protect America Act of 2007 
(see: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d110:s.01927:). For different perspectives, see James Risen and 
Eric Lichtblau, “Concerns Raised on Wider Spying Under New Law”, The New York Times, August 19, 2007; 
Philip Bobbitt, “The Warrantless Debate over Wiretapping”, The New York Times, August 22, 2007; and as 
follow-up to the USA PATRIOT Act, see Eric Lichtblau, “F.B.I. Data Mining Reached Beyond Initial Targets”, 
The New York Times, September 9, 2007: 1, 31.
125  Moreover, there are those who seem to have no sense of privacy and who gossip about the most intimate 
details of their lives in such a way that we may consider them lacking in self-respect. This has become part of 
the world of Facebook, YouTube and Twitter.

Security and Privacy
194
Although it can be argued with respect to almost any value, it is especially the 
case that privacy is often argued to be a value that is culturally relative. The 
claim can take one of at least two forms. Firstly, it can be claimed that, whereas 
privacy is a value in some cultures,126 it is not valued greatly or at all in others. 
Were this to be the case (though unlikely) then either we might argue that privacy 
does not constitute a human (and is at best only a cultural) value and therefore 
a right to privacy does not constitute a human right, or we might argue (and 
would need to establish) that cultures that fail to recognize the importance of 
privacy are significantly lacking in normative resources (morally impoverished). 
Secondly, it can be argued that although privacy is universally valued, it is 
valued in different ways in and within different cultures, depending on other 
values (e.g. prevailing religious traditions) and social circumstances (privacy 
expectations on a beach may differ significantly from those on a crowded 
street).127 To the extent that this is so, we will need to be careful to distinguish 
general claims about privacy from particular instantiations of information or 
access as private, and, further, to the extent that we choose to enforce a right 
to privacy, we will need to exercise considerable care in differentiating what is 
acceptably protected from what is unacceptably individual.128
Privacy in public
It has often been said that people have “no reasonable expectation of privacy in 
public spaces”. If it is reported that X was seen cavorting with a woman not his 
wife in a shopping mall, can X complain that his privacy was being violated? Can 
X complain if others look in his direction while he is travelling on the subway? 
Are these rhetorical questions? What if a gay man, wishing to remain closeted 
in his hometown, nevertheless marches in a gay pride rally in a town several 
hundred miles away? Is his privacy violated if pictures of him marching are 
distributed in his hometown? What if the look on the subway becomes a stare? 
And what if Y cleans out her cupboards, getting rid of old medical records, 
bills and personal documents by tearing them in half and putting them in the 
garbage, from which someone “retrieves” them and then “uses” them against 
her? Has her privacy been violated?129
126  For present purposes, we leave largely to one side what constitutes a “culture”.
127  See further, Alan Westin, Privacy and Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 1967); Anita Allen, Uneasy 
Access: Privacy for Women in a Free Society (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988); James Rachels, 
“Why Privacy is Important”, Philosophy & Public Affairs, 4 (1975): 323–33; A. Moore, “Privacy: Its Meaning 
and Value”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 40 (2003): 215–27. We are unfamiliar with what is available 
on privacy in the anthropological literature, though see John M. Roberts and Thomas Gregor, “Privacy: A 
Cultural View”, in Privacy, NOMOS XIII, ed. J. Roland Pennock and John W. Chapman (NY: Atherton Press, 
1971), 199–225, where they talk about widely divergent “patterns of privacy” at the same time as they see 
privacy as a “promising cross-cultural variable”.
128  We might want to compare such debates with those surrounding what is deemed offensive. For the 
latter, see Joel Feinberg’s magisterial Offense to Others (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985).
129  No, according to California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35 (1988). The legal argument for shredders!

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
195
The view that we have “no reasonable expectation of privacy in public spaces” 
is surely only part of the story. Not everything that happens in public view 
or in a public space is public. If X takes out and reads a letter on the subway, 
his activity, though engaged in public, is not thereby reasonably open to the 
close scrutiny of others. There is a moral etiquette to conduct in public that 
acknowledges the privacy of certain conduct that occurs in public. A public 
kiss should not be gawked at, and looking intently down the cleavage of a low-
cut dress may be felt intrusive, even though the low-cut dress may have been 
worn in order to display one’s “endowments”. Sometimes people may not seem 
to care too much about the fact that their private affairs are being carried out 
in public, but that does not in itself show that they are no longer private, and 
it may be inappropriate for others to focus on or record them. A mother who 
must breast feed her baby in public is not ipso facto indicating that it is all right 
for others to stare. At the same time, those who conduct in public what are 
conventionally considered private affairs can sometimes seriously inconvenience 
or embarrass others who have such matters thrust upon them (the loud cell 
phone discussions, public arguments between spouses, expressions of sexual 
intimacy and so forth).
Privacy in public is not just a matter of activities “in plain view”. A lot of 
theoretically public information about us is now available in digital format, is 
relatively easily accessible and is able to be combined (aggregated) in ways that 
we would find quite intrusive. One’s address and changes of address, property 
transactions, purchases, dealings with the law and so forth have always been 
“public” in some sense, but for someone to track these and consolidate them 
into some sort of profile has previously involved a great deal of effort – unlikely 
to be made unless that person has a specific purpose and determination in doing 
so. The digitalization of records and their internet accessibility has changed all 
this. Not only that, but the development of niche marketing, credit checking, 
securitization and so forth have brought in their wake companies that specialize 
in developing dossiers on individual people which can be sold (not always to 
reputable people) and even demanded by security organizations.130
Helen Nissenbaum complains that the factors/considerations that tend to bear 
on ordinary cases of privacy do not operate as well in the public domain (i.e. 
when in public or publicly available), and that we need to develop an alternative 
way of accommodating our privacy concerns. That is, most privacy doctrine has 
developed around private spaces (such as homes), sensitive information (such 
as medical records) or limitations on government intrusiveness (whereas most of 
the information in public is harvested by commercial firms).
130  Check ChoicePoint, LexisNexis, and Axciom. A large portion of the business of some of these companies 
is with government agencies such as the FBI. We have already spelled out some of the dimensions of this in 
Chapter VII.

Security and Privacy
196
One thing that happens when the sorts of things that were referred to a couple 
of paragraphs ago occur is that a presumption of anonymity in public is eroded. 
That is, much of what we do in public we allow ourselves to do in part because 
– so far as others are concerned – it is done in a fleeting and anonymous way. 
It is part of the etiquette of conduct in public that it is (for the most part) 
fleeting and anonymous. Were we to be aware that we were being watched at 
length, that those watching knew us or that our actions were being recorded 
and reviewed, we would (probably) act differently (or more discreetly).
Anonymity is one of the ways in which we can conduct ourselves in public 
without others knowing our identity – or, sometimes more literally, our name.131 
We may publish a book or article anonymously, give to charity anonymously 
or blow the whistle anonymously for a variety of perfectly legitimate reasons. 
Although a free society is generally characterized by transparency rather than 
secrecy, there are often good reasons – as can be seen from the kinds of cases 
enumerated above – for acting in a way that does not reveal our identity/name.
A degree of anonymity in public enables us to retain some of the benefit of 
privacy in a public setting. It provides some kind of moral freedom in public 
settings, a space in which we can retain some control over the information about 
ourselves that we make available to others. Consider the effects on conduct if it 
were the case that once we stepped out of our doors and onto the public street 
everything we did was recorded and made available to others as they wished – 
every look, every gesture, every word and every movement.
Helen Nissenbaum makes the case for anonymity as follows:
For situations that we judge anonymity acceptable, or even necessary, 
we do so because anonymity offers a safe way for people to act, transact, 
and participate without accountability, without others "getting at" 
them, tracking them down, or even punishing them. This includes a 
range of possibilities. Anonymity may encourage freedom of thought 
and expression by promising a possibility to express opinions, and 
develop arguments, about positions that for fear of reprisal or ridicule 
they would not or dare not do otherwise. Anonymity may enable people 
to reach out for help, especially for socially stigmatized problems like 
domestic violence, fear of HIV or other sexually transmitted infection, 
emotional problems, suicidal thoughts. It offers the possibility of a 
protective cloak for children, enabling them to engage in internet 
communication without fear of social predation or – perhaps less ominous 
but nevertheless unwanted – overtures from commercial marketers. 
131  Anonymity is, literally, without our name. Our name, however, is just a dummy for something more – 
our person or identity. See the later notes on identity.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
197
Anonymity may also provide respite to adults from commercial and 
other solicitations. It supports socially valuable institutions like peer 
review, whistle-blowing and voting.
In all these cases, the value of anonymity lies not in the capacity to 
be unnamed, but in the possibility of acting or participating while 
remaining out of reach, remaining unreachable. Being unreachable means 
that no-one will come knocking on your door demanding explanations, 
apologies, answerability, punishment or payment. Where society places 
high value on the types of expression and transaction that anonymity 
protects (alluded to in the previous paragraph) it must necessarily 
enable unreachability. In other words, this unreachability is precisely 
what it at stake in anonymity. If, in previous eras, namelessness, that 
is choosing not to reveal one’s name, was the best means of achieving 
unreachability, it makes sense that namelessness would be protected. 
However, remaining unnamed should be understood for what it is: not 
as the end in itself of anonymity, but rather, the traditional means by 
which unreachability has been achieved. It has been the most effective 
way to keep others at bay, avoid ridicule, and prevent undeserved 
revenge, harm, and embarrassment, and so forth.132
Nissenbaum focuses fairly heavily on the consequential value of anonymity, a 
value that has to be weighed against the value of transparency. The calculus 
may vary, as we know from the issue of anonymous whistle blowing. Because of 
the history of retaliation against those who blow the whistle – a history that is 
hard to reverse, given the subtleties of organizational retaliation – we have, in 
many cases, provided for anonymous whistle blowing. However, the provision 
of anonymous whistle blowing also allows for vindictive attacks on others, and 
whether and under what conditions anonymous whistle blowing is permitted 
will often reflect some sort of cost-benefit analysis. Internet anonymity is 
problematic for the same reason; though the child may engage with others 
without unwanted solicitations, others may insinuate themselves anonymously 
and dangerously.133
But the benefits are not straightforwardly consequential. The presumption of 
anonymity is the condition for “being oneself” in public. For many, the possibility 
of anonymity is the attraction of a large urban center – and lack of anonymity 
is correspondingly the burden of a small community in which “everyone knows 
everyone and everything” and in which personal independence, particularly in 
132  Helen Nissenbaum, “The Meaning of Anonymity in an Information Age”, see: http://www.nyu.edu/
projects/nissenbaum/paper_anonimity.html.
133  It is instructive to think about internet anonymity in relation to the Myth of Gyges as told by Plato in 
the Republic, II 359d–360b. See e.g. http://falcon.tamucc.edu/~sencerz/Myth_of_Gyges.htm. See also “Gyges 
Goes Surfing”: http://www.applelust.com/one/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=35.

Security and Privacy
198
public, is very difficult to achieve. True, anonymous urban centers may also be 
lonely, alienating and depressing, but on the other side, though we may value 
the “community of care” that a small center provides, we may also be suffocated 
by it. The issue is one of achieving a balance.134
The proliferation of CCTV cameras makes public anonymity much more difficult 
to sustain than it used to be. What was fleeting and lost in the great surge of 
public activity is now, with CCTV’s advent, recorded, sometimes indefinitely. 
It can be played back, played over and over, shared (sometimes widely) and 
combined with other data, all but destroying the anonymity one thought one 
had. For the most part, we block out the fact that much of our public behavior 
(in Manhattan, for example) is recorded by CCTV, for we trust that the technical 
possibilities will not be taken advantage of. However, if there were to be enough 
counterexamples, this would have a chilling effect on our behavior in public. At 
the moment we can generally count on recording tapes that are overplayed after 
several days, that are not archived or indexed in certain ways, that are consulted 
only in the event of some critical need, that are not coordinated and so on. But 
things could change along with the technology, even though there are problems 
in principle with the image of ubiquitous, continuous, real-time surveillance of 
everyone in every public space and at all times. Specifically, there are significant 
limits on the number of people who could be employed to do the surveillance; 
real-time, continuous surveillance is hugely expensive.
The presumption of anonymity in public is reflective of a larger concern that 
constitutes the heart of Nissenbaum’s alternative approach to privacy. If what is 
in the public domain is treated as “fair game”, there is a subversion of what she 
speaks of as “contextual integrity”,135 which is – in her view – what constitutes a 
violation of privacy. If teacher X turns up to the cash register in the supermarket, 
and it is recorded – as indeed it would be – that on this particular occasion 
he bought, inter alia, three cans of Spam, two bottles of rather cheap wine, 
suppositories and a pack of flavored ribbed condoms – a public but anonymous 
act – and a copy of his purchases was then distributed to his students, this 
latter act could be seen as a breach of privacy, even though what X did was 
public, done in public, recorded and even viewed (albeit casually, though 
maybe with eyebrows raised) by those in the line behind him. If, in addition, X 
has a supermarket discount purchasing card then, over time, some patterning 
to his supermarket acquisitions may be developed that could be sold or used 
(for marketing purposes) or perhaps to suggest he has a drinking problem or 
a very active sex life. Once again, one might claim, as Nissenbaum might, that 
there had been a violation of X’s privacy by virtue of a violation of contextual 
134  In this case it is a balance rather than a trade-off as we are seeking to determine for ourselves an 
appropriate level of individuality in community.
135  Helen Nissenbaum, “Privacy as Contextual Integrity”,Washington Law Review 79 (2004): 119–57.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
199
integrity. Information that X willingly and virtually anonymously provided to 
the checkout worker has now been re-contextualized and given a new context 
that X could find embarrassing, threatening or otherwise unacceptable.136
Informing the idea of contextual integrity is a recognition that our lives 
are constituted – in part, at least – by various arenas or spheres of activity, 
each of which is governed by certain norms of appropriateness, including, 
especially, norms relating to information acquisition and flow.137 These spheres 
of activity may include those of family, workplace, religious community, 
friendships, medical care, local grocery and so on. There may be some overlap 
(say, between the spheres of friendship and family) and there is often internal 
complexity (“not in front of the children” might be a norm governing certain 
communications between parents). Allowing for such overlaps and complexity, 
what constitutes appropriate behavior and information sharing in one context 
may be inappropriate in another context. Norms of behavior that are appropriate 
in regard to one’s priest, doctor, banker or workmates may be inappropriate in 
relation to each of the others, and what is appropriately shared or communicated 
in relation to one may be not appropriately shared with each of the others. 
Contextual integrity is constituted by acting appropriately and observing 
certain norms of informational flow in relation to each of the contexts.
Such norms may be challenged, refined, added to or dropped over time, though 
one presumes, at least within relatively stable cultures, that there will be a fair 
degree of longevity, continuity and specificity.
Limits to privacy
While we consider privacy important, and even a right, it does not follow that 
it is absolute. That is, it is not incapable of being legitimately constrained or 
overridden. The important question concerns the conditions under which it 
may be contracted or overridden, and that presumes that we know what is 
at stake in privacy. There have been times when claims of privacy have been 
overvalued just as there have been times at which they have been undervalued. 
Various forms of marital or partner assault have sometimes been “secured” 
behind a cloak of privacy.138 At the same time, a bomb-making factory in a 
home cannot claim the protections of privacy, even if a warrant to access it 
136  We do not wish to argue that, just because we find something embarrassing, threatening or otherwise 
unacceptable, it is therefore unjustified. There may be countervailing reasons that make it appropriate that 
information is used in ways we would prefer that it not be.
137  The account we give of Nissenbaum’s position is – as we see it – “touched up”: we think she casts her 
net too widely.
138  For some examples, see James J. Fyfe, “Structuring Police Discretion”, in John Kleinig (ed.), Handled 
with Discretion: Ethical Issues in Police Decision Making (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996), 183–
205.

Security and Privacy
200
needs to be obtained, and not even the latter may be required if police are in 
hot pursuit of someone who manages to run into his home. What is done “in 
private” need not be private, but even what is ordinarily deemed “private” (i.e. 
information or space) may be invaded if the stakes and probabilities are high 
enough. Police may apply to wiretap one’s phone if there is some appropriate 
level of probability that one is engaged in certain kinds of criminal activities. 
Here, because the stakes are not as high, a greater probability has to be shown 
(to a court) to override one’s claims to privacy. But maybe the probabilities do 
not have to be too high. One’s suitcases may be inspected at the airport, even 
if there is no particular reason to believe that one’s own bags are being used to 
conceal a bomb.
Privacy, in other words, may compete or come into conflict with other values. 
Security and public safety are major issues, but they are not the only ones. 
Privacy may conflict with freedom of expression, of speech and of the press, 
with ideas of governmental transparency, with economic efficiency and others. 
We draw lines – not always very satisfactorily, as we know all too well with 
respect to freedom of the press – and we continue to debate and sometimes 
revise them.
In The Limits of Privacy, Amitai Etzioni outlines four criteria that he believes 
should be invoked to determine whether privacy or some other value should 
be given precedence in the event of a clash. He then uses these to review the 
following issues: HIV testing of infants; registration and community notification 
of sex offenders; limits on encryption in the “war on terror”; ID cards and 
biometric technologies; and medical privacy. He argues that limitations on 
privacy can be justified only:
(i) in the event of a “well-documented and macroscopic threat to the common 
good”;139
(ii) if there is no alternative to the invasion of privacy;
(iii) if the invasion is as “minimally intrusive” as possible; and
(iv) if “measures that treat undesirable side effects of needed privacy-diminishing 
measures are to be preferred over those that ignore these effects”.140
To some extent these criteria track those that must be satisfied whenever we 
engage in means-end reasoning – that is, whenever we seek to secure some 
value that requires the employment of means that may be problematic. We have 
already discussed these at length. Etzioni casts his account in the communitarian 
139  Amitai Etzioni, The Limits of Privacy (New York: Basic Books, 1999), 12.
140  Ibid., 13. For a critique of Etzioni, see Miller and Blackler, Ethical Issues in Policing, 92–98.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
201
terms for which he has become the major spokesperson.141 His general position 
is that we tend to go a bit overboard on privacy, especially insofar as it applies to 
governmental access to information (he is more concerned with the intrusiveness 
of big business than big government). However, what he may underplay are 
not the abstract trade-offs that may sometimes be necessary but the abilities 
of those who may have access to private information to secure or control it in 
the way that they profess. Exposés of loss, hacking or unintentional disclosure 
of information may lead to a practical concern for privacy that might not be 
justified on abstract theoretical grounds.142
Quite apart from that, there are substantial challenges to applying the criteria to 
particular cases. The criteria do not function algorithmically but simply begin 
a process of deliberation that does not have any tightly determined outcomes. 
What, for example constitutes a sufficiently documented and macroscopic threat 
to the common good? What is the common good? When it is claimed that there is 
no alternative to the invasion of privacy, how hard must one have looked at/for 
other possibilities? And what if some alternatives maintain privacy but would 
compromise other values? Part of the value of Etzioni’s discussion – whether or 
not one agrees with his own conclusions – is that the chapter-length discussions 
of the issues he reviews indicate how complex they can be.
Autonomy
In “Privacy and Autonomy”, Hyman Gross warns against the “danger that 
privacy may be conceived as autonomy”.143 What Gross has in mind (as did 
Feinberg in n. 120 above) is the US Supreme Court’s tendency (following Warren 
and Brandeis) from Griswold on to see the appeal to privacy as a way of stopping 
government from regulating personal affairs rather than as a way of stopping it 
from getting information on them – as seeing privacy simply as a “right to be let 
alone”. Gross’s contention, with which we are in substantial agreement, is that 
whereas “an offense to privacy is an offense to autonomy, not every curtailment 
of autonomy is a compromise of privacy.”144
So what is the autonomy that violations of privacy are said to compromise? Any 
review of the literature throws up a cluster of cognate terms – freedom, liberty, 
141  Amitai Etzioni, The Responsive Society (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991); The Spirit of Community: 
Rights, Responsibilities and the Communitarian Agenda (New York: Crown Publishers, 1993).
142  See Ragib Hasan and William Yurcik, “Beyond Media Hype: Empirical Analysis of Disclosed Privacy 
Breaches 2005–2006 and a DataSet/Database Foundation for Future Work”, at: http://wesii.econinfosec.org/
draft.php?paper_id=37. We have heard that data for 110,000,000 people have been hacked or lost.
143  Hyman Gross, “Privacy and Autonomy”, Privacy, NOMOS XIII, ed. J. Roland Pennock and John W. 
Chapman (NY: Atherton Press, 1971), 180.
144  Ibid., 181.

Security and Privacy
202
individuality, authenticity, independence and personal sovereignty – that are 
sometimes used interchangeably with autonomy and sometimes distinguished 
from it. Our inclination is to draw various distinctions among (at least some of) 
them, and what follows in the next paragraph – as a prelude to the more detailed 
discussion of autonomy – is a bonsai version of the central distinctions.
We see liberty as a social state of affairs, either an absence of external, social 
(human-generated145) constraints on action (negative liberty) or (and probably 
including) certain requisites for action (positive liberty).146 It may have individual 
and collective dimensions (often thought to be causally connected).147 We tend 
to associate freedom (though it is frequently used generically) with a level of 
personal development. We think of it more specifically as an individual (though 
not isolated) achievement of maturation and learning – specifically, as a state of 
largely personal development in which individuals have acquired the capacity 
to reflect on and revise their attitudes, reasons, motives and desires and to act 
upon them.148 With such freedom comes a measure of responsibility for what 
we do, both morally and otherwise.149 Such personal freedom is related, though 
not identical, to personal autonomy or individuality.150 Autonomy refers not 
145  There may be non-social constraints on action that do not constitute limits on liberty. Gravity and 
our physiological structure both have some bearing on how high we may be able to jump, but they are not 
constraints on our liberty.
146  Debate about this distinction goes back to at least the nineteenth century, where it revolved around 
the question of whether liberty/freedom required not merely the absence of social constraints but also 
access to the wherewithal that would enable a person to make use of such negative liberty. For without 
such wherewithal one’s (negative) liberty might not be said to be worth much. See W.L Weinstein, “The 
Concept of Liberty in Nineteenth Century English Political Thought”, Political Studies 13 (1965): 145–62. In 
the twentieth century, the debate was given a Cold War cast in Isaiah Berlin’s influential essay, Two Concepts 
of Liberty (Oxford: Clarendon 1958). He saw in positive liberty, and the “self-mastery” he believed it implied, 
the seeds of a paternalistic perfectionism. For a better discussion, see Gerald C. MacCallum, Jr., “Negative and 
Positive Freedom”, Philosophical Review 76 (July, 1967): 312–34.
147  It is often argued that liberty, as an absence of constraint or domination by others, is primarily 
individual. However, we believe this to be somewhat misleading. Individual liberty is most likely to exist in 
an environment of liberty – in which collective rules operate to secure individual liberty and, with it, the 
conditions for individual flourishing. It is the reference to securing the conditions for individual flourishing 
that helps to link liberty in its collective and individual aspects with freedom, in both its basic sense and 
its heightened autonomous expression. They are causally intertwined – with free persons developing more 
successfully and being better sustained in a society that is characterized by liberty. Were it not for our 
concern with personal freedom we would not have the interest we do in liberty. We have left the notion of 
human flourishing unanalysed. There is obviously much that could and should be said on the issue. Here we 
do no more than reference some of the discussions in a special issue of Social Philosophy & Policy, 16 no. 1 
(1999).
148  This is not to deny a relational dimension to individual autonomy. See Seumas Miller, “Individual 
Autonomy and Sociality”, in Socializing Metaphysics: The Nature of Social Reality, ed. F. Schmitt (Lanham: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 2003).
149  Here we shall prescind from a longstanding and important debate (going back to Plato and Aristotle) on 
whether this account should be supplemented by certain substantive beliefs that must be held if a person is 
truly to be said to be free. Elements of that debate reappear in the debate over whether liberty (or freedom) 
should be construed as positive or negative.
150  Although in this study we generally speak of personal autonomy, much of what we say relates more 
specifically to its narrower specification in moral autonomy. We also leave to one side a distinction that can 
be drawn between autonomy as a state and autonomy as a quality of particular acts or decisions. What we 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
203
only to a level of personal development compatible with responsibility but also 
to a heightened level of individual freedom – a dispositional commitment to 
and capacity for rational living. In Chapter 3 of On Liberty, “Individuality, as 
One of the Elements of Well-Being”, John Stuart Mill says that a person “must 
use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to gather 
materials for decision, discrimination to decide, and when he has decided, 
firmness and self-control to hold to his deliberate decision.”151 He is speaking 
here of what we characterize as autonomy. The autonomous person does more 
than go with the flow or conform to whatever is the prevailing fashion. In the 
larger passage from which the quote is taken, however, Mill makes it clear that 
autonomy is not simply a matter of “rational” or calculative development – it 
also has emotive and conative dimensions: it concerns the capacity to choose 
well and it involves both authenticity (whereby the reasons, feelings, attitudes 
and judgments one has have become one’s own – one identifies with them152) 
and competence (a level of development of rational capacities and other 
discriminative sensibilities that secure one against systematic ignorance, self-
deception and other debilitating pathologies).153 Moreover, the development 
of individuality is something generally achieved in concert with others rather 
than in social isolation.
Some background
Like privacy, the idea of personal autonomy has clearly emerged as only a 
product of modernity, though traces can be found much earlier. Even today, 
Socrates stands in some sense as an exemplar of autonomy. But what the elders of 
Athens may have found threatening, contemporary liberalism tends to foster as 
an ideal not just for an exceptional few but for people generally. When praising 
the virtue of originality, Mill recognizes that that kind of creativity belongs to 
only a few: “The initiation of all wise or noble things, comes and must come 
from individuals; generally at first from some one individual. The honour and 
glory of the average man is that he is capable of following that initiative; that 
he can respond internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his 
eyes open”154 – an ability that he distinguishes clearly from hero-worship.
It is often noted that the idea of autonomy has its background in political theory, 
where it refers to self-government, self-rule, self-determination or institutional 
characterize as autonomy can be possessed as a matter of degree.
151  See On Liberty at: http://www.bartleby.com/130/3.html.
152  The notion of authenticity has generated a huge and problematic literature, some of which is referred 
to in John Christman, “Autonomy in Moral and Political Philosophy”, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, at: 
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/autonomy-moral.
153  One of the problems often associated with Kantian conceptions of autonomy concerns its overconcern 
with a passionless rationality.
154  Mill, On Liberty, ch. 3.

Security and Privacy
204
independence. An autonomous individual is thus to be construed on a rough 
analogy with a country or institution that has charge of its own affairs and is not 
beholden to other powers.
Feinberg usefully suggests that personal autonomy can be understood in four 
closely related ways: (1) as a capacity to govern oneself that can be possessed to 
a greater or lesser degree; (2) as the actual condition of self-government; (3) as 
an ideal of character derived from the latter; or (4) as the sovereign authority to 
govern oneself.155 While (1) is fundamental, much of the purport of autonomy, at 
least in liberal thought, is the authority (4) that it is intended to convey.
The capacity that constitutes autonomy refers to a level or threshold of 
competence reached so far as one’s natural abilities are concerned – self-control, 
the capacity for making wise and prudent judgments, developed sensibilities 
and self-reflectiveness – the kinds of factors mentioned above regarding Mill’s 
notion of individuality. We would argue that it involves not only a capacity 
but a disposition to govern oneself. (1) differs from (2) insofar as a person who 
has the capacity for self-government may be prevented from actualizing it by 
bad luck or powers beyond his or her control. When we speak of someone as 
autonomous, we are ruling out certain kinds of descriptions as applying to them 
– they are free from indoctrination, compulsion, manipulation or coercion.
Individuality and individualism
As we have suggested on a number of occasions, autonomy and individuality 
need not be thought of individualistically. It has been a common complaint 
against classical liberal theory, not only by those who have had more socialistic 
or communitarian leanings but also by recent feminists (who have adopted the 
vocabulary of “relational autonomy”156), that liberal autonomy is framed in a 
way that does not have adequate regard to the social dimensions of human life. 
The complaint is either that autonomy is construed as a natural endowment 
of humans (“man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains”157) or that the 
relational and communal aspects of mature life are underestimated.
Although we have no doubt that some classical accounts of autonomy are 
excessively individualistic, it does not seem to us necessary that autonomy 
be construed individualistically. It takes a village, so to speak, to produce 
155  Joel Feinberg, The Moral Limits of Criminal Law, vol. 3: Harm to Self (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1986), 28.
156  See, particularly, Relational Autonomy: Feminist Perspectives on Autonomy, Agency, and the Social Self, 
ed. Catriona Mackenzie and Natalie Stoljar (NY: Oxford University Press, 2000); see also Miller, “Individual 
Autonomy and Sociality”.
157  Rousseau, The Social Contract, at: http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_
reader_2/rousseau.html.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
205
an autonomous person; moreover, autonomous persons frequently find that 
“villages” are integral to their projects and plans. A good deal of our autonomy is 
realized through relational activities. The big challenge is not to choose between 
individualism (or atomism) and socialism (or some other relational option) but 
to get an appropriate balance between the individual and relational elements of 
our personhood.
It is easily forgotten that, in becoming the individuals we are, we acquire – and 
in some sense cannot shrug off – both a language, with its embedded cultural 
understandings, and the trappings of a broader culture and its traditions. 
Autonomy is not to be thought of as the absence or negation of these so much 
as the capacity to question or interrogate them. We may not be able to do this 
all at once (we are, after all, sailing on Theseus’ ship), but there may not be any 
aspect of our lives that is permanently shielded from scrutiny.
Sovereign authority
As noted above, it is commonly claimed by many liberal writers that personal 
autonomy (understood as capacity and disposition) provides a basis for 
according individuals autonomy in another sense (sovereignty over their 
personal affairs, which is compatible, it is assumed or argued, with according a 
similar sovereignty to others). That usually provides an argument for opposing 
any strong form of paternalism in which individuals are prevented from making 
decisions that are seriously detrimental to their own interests. Mill’s “harm 
principle” provides a classic statement:
The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as entitled 
to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the 
way of compulsion and control, whether the means used be physical 
force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion of public 
opinion. That principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are 
warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of 
action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose 
for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a 
civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His 
own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant. He cannot 
rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him 
to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of 
others, to do so would be wise, or even right. These are good reasons 
for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or persuading him, 
or entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any 
evil in case he do otherwise. To justify that, the conduct from which it 
is desired to deter him, must be calculated to produce evil to some one 

Security and Privacy
206
else. The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable 
to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely 
concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, 
over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.158
As a statement this is about as absolute as you can get. Nevertheless, as Mill 
himself recognizes, there are hard cases.159 What he sees as the hardest case is 
the decision to sell oneself into slavery, though the argument that he uses to 
back away from it is uncharacteristically opaque:
In this and most other civilized countries . . . an engagement by which a 
person should sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would 
be null and void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion. The ground 
for thus limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, 
is apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. The reason for 
not interfering, unless for the sake of others, with a person's voluntary 
acts, is consideration for his liberty. His voluntary choice is evidence 
that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the least endurable, to him, 
and his good is on the whole best provided for by allowing him to take 
his own means of pursuing it. But by selling himself for a slave, he 
abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future use of it beyond that single 
act. He therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose which is the 
justification of allowing him to dispose of himself. He is no longer free; 
but is thenceforth in a position which has no longer the presumption in 
its favour, that would be afforded by his voluntarily remaining in it. The 
principle of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be free. 
It is not freedom, to be allowed to alienate his freedom.160
One might question Mill’s coherence on this point, or at least ask for greater 
clarity on why it is not (an exercise of) freedom to give up one’s freedom.161
158  On Liberty, ch. 1, at: http://www.bartleby.com/130/1.html.
159  “If either a public officer or any one else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge which had been 
ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of his danger, they might seize him and turn 
him back, without any real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he 
does not desire to fall into the river. Nevertheless, when there is not a certainty, but only a danger of mischief, 
no one but the person himself can judge of the sufficiency of the motive which may prompt him to incur the 
risk: in this case, therefore, (unless he is a child, or delirious, or in some state of excitement or absorption 
incompatible with the full use of the reflecting faculty) he ought, I conceive, to be only warned of the danger; 
not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it.” Ch. 5, at: http://www.bartleby.com/130/5.html.
160  Ibid., ch. 5, at: http://www.bartleby.com/130/5.html.
161  John Kleinig has tried to unravel Mill’s claim in “John Stuart Mill and Voluntary Slavery Contracts”, 
Politics 18, no. 2 (November, 1983): 76‑83. But see also: David Archard, “Freedom Not to be Free: The Case 
of the Slavery Contract in J. S. Mill’s On Liberty”, Philosophical Quarterly (October, 1990): 453‑465; Alan 
E. Fuchs, “Autonomy, Slavery, and Mill’s Critique of Paternalism”, Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 4, 
no. 3 (September, 2001): 231‑51; John D. Hodson, “Mill, Paternalism, and Slavery”, Analysis 41 (January, 
1981): 60‑62; Andrew Sneddon, “What’s Wrong with Selling Yourself into Slavery? Paternalism and Deep 
Autonomy”, Critica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofia 33, no. 98 (August, 2001): 97‑121 (see also: http://
critica.filosoficas.unam.mx/pdf/C98/C98_sneddon.pdf); Mark Strasser, “Mill on Voluntary Self-enslavement”, 

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
207
More recently, a German case of consented-to cannibalism has once again pushed 
the limits of an absolutist anti-paternalistic stance.162 Suicide (unassisted and 
assisted) has elicited a great deal of discussion, though part of that discussion 
has concerned not intervention so much as criminalization.
What is not absolutely clear about the move from the capacity account to the 
sovereignty account is how it is to be understood. Is there a (non-arbitrary) 
threshold autonomy such that, once one has met the threshold, others may not 
intervene? That seems to be Mill’s position and why he has to meet the self-
enslavement challenge in the way he does (it is not freedom to be allowed give 
up one’s freedom). However, given that autonomy may be a matter of degree, is 
it the case that the greater a person’s autonomy, the heavier the burden that must 
be faced by those who would paternalistically intervene? Paternalism would 
not be ruled out but simply made increasingly difficult to justify.163 Opposition 
to it may be viewed as presumptive without being absolute.
Perhaps the sovereign authority that goes with personal autonomy is not 
absolute but, like the political sovereignty from which the metaphor originates, 
simply provides a strong but not overriding reason for not intervening in the 
affairs of others.
Dignity
As has become clear in the foregoing discussion, lurking behind most of the 
concepts we have been discussing and fundamental to much of the liberal 
tradition has been the idea of human dignity – an idea with a long history 
in Western thought but with renewed prominence in post-World War Two 
political rhetoric. Violations of privacy and autonomy tend, at their deepest 
level, to be also violations of dignity.
Although Immanuel Kant has been the most influential architect of modern 
ideas of human dignity, he built on and extended a Renaissance tradition that 
included, among others, Giannozzo Manetti (1396‑1459) and Giovanni Pico 
Philosophical Papers 17 (November, 1988): 171‑83; Ten Chin Liew, Mill on Liberty (Oxford: Oxford University 
press, 1980), ch. 7; Samuel V. La Selva, “Selling Oneself into Slavery: Mill and Paternalism”, Political Studies 
35, no, 2 (1987): 211‑23.
162  See Armin Meiwes at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armin_Meiwes. For New York Times articles 
on 
the 
case, 
see: 
http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/subjects/c/cannibalism/index.
html?query=BRANDES,%20BERND-JURGEN&field=per&match=exact. There is a useful discussion of 
this and other cases in Vera Bergelson, “The Right to Be Hurt. Testing the Boundaries of Consent”, George 
Washington Law Review 75 (2007): 165 (see also: http://works.bepress.com/vera_bergelson/4).
163  In such cases other factors, such as the kind of intervention (e.g. criminal, civil), the identity of the 
intervener (e.g. friend, state) and the intrusiveness of the intervention (e.g. seat belt laws, enforced dieting) 
might also be taken into account.

Security and Privacy
208
della Mirandola (1463‑1494).164 That tradition helped to transplant165 an older 
tradition in which dignitas was most closely associated with social rank. This 
was done by universalizing a standing and bearing associated with rank. There 
was a raising up, not a leveling down.166 The big question prompted by this 
universalization of dignity was, naturally: In what does such human dignity 
consist? Pico located this generalized dignity in the human power of self-
transformation; that is, in our capacity as humans to be whatever we wish to be. 
This was innovative in more ways than one. It accorded powers to humans that 
many Christian theologians considered to have been radically lost when Adam 
and Eve rebelled against their Maker.167 But its most distinctive feature was to 
universalize the idea of dignity.
There is much to be said for the Kantian tradition of understanding human 
dignity. We take as our starting point a position that is articulated in numerous 
recent international documents. This is the view that human dignity is not simply 
another value – to be traded off against autonomy and such like – but one that 
possesses foundational significance. Thus, in the Preamble to the UN Convention 
Against Torture (1987), it is affirmed that “the equal and inalienable rights of 
164  See, Giannozzo Manetti, De dignitate et excellentia hominis libri IV; Book 4 translated by Bernard 
Murchland in Two Views of Man: Pope Innocent III On the Misery of Man; Giannozzo Manetti On the Dignity of 
Man (New York: Frederick Ungar, 1966); Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, De dominis dignitate oratio, translated 
as Oration on the Dignity of Man, by A. Robert Caponigri (Chicago: Gateway, 1956). Some see the seeds of a 
general idea of human dignity in Cicero or even earlier in Judeo-Christian thought. For overviews, see Izhak 
England, “Human Dignity from Antiquity to Modern Israel’s Constitutional Framework”, Cardozo Law Review 
21 (May 2000): 1903‑27; Charles Trinkhaus, “Renaissance Idea of the Dignity of Man”, Dictionary of the History 
of Ideas, vol. 4, 136‑46 (see also: http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/DHI/dhiana.cgi?id=dv4-20); Richard C. 
Dales, “A Medieval View of Human Dignity”, Journal of the History of Ideas 38, no. 4 (October‑December 
1979): 557‑72.
165  We say “transplant” because, in many cases, including that of Kant, there was not so much a rejection of 
older traditions of rank-based dignity as the addition of a distinct kind of dignity, one attaching to all humans. 
This universal dignity also needs to be distinguished from another contemporary account of transplanted 
dignity – the dignity of each citizen.
166  Admittedly, there were those (e.g. Thomas Paine) who sought to replace the dignity of rank with the 
equal dignity of all, and several influential writers have spoken of this development as a “leveling up” (e.g. 
James Q Whitman) or an “upwards equalization of rank” (Jeremy Waldron). For the most part, though, Kant 
and others who wished to advocate a universal human dignity did not wish to abandon traditional forms of 
rank. Instead, contrary to tradition, they thought that by virtue of their humanity all possessed a dignity 
comparable to that associated with traditional rank. See Thomas Paine, The Rights of Man (New York: Anchor, 
1973), 320; James Q. Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity versus Liberty”, Yale Law 
Journal 113 (2004): 1151‑221; Jeremy Waldron “Dignity and Rank”, Archives Européennes de Sociologie 48 
(2007), 201‑37; also idem, “Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment: The Words Themselves”, New York 
University School of Law, Public and Legal Theory Research Paper Series, Working Paper # 08-36 (November 
2008), 36 (see also: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1278604).
167  Some later Christian theologians spoke of the partial restoration of this dignity, located in the imago 
Dei, “in Christ”. Nevertheless, the awkwardness of connecting dignity with some universally possessed 
inherent characteristic led other theologians, especially in the Lutheran tradition, to construe human dignity 
as an “alien dignity” – an “infinite worth” that is not constituted by qualities such as rationality but by the 
distinctive relationship we have with God – created in love, called in love and redeemed in love. For a useful 
exposition of this idea, see Karen Lebacqz, “Alien Dignity: The Legacy of Helmut Thielicke for Bioethics”, 
in Religion and Medical Ethics: Looking Back, Looking Forward ed. Allen Verhey (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
1996), 44‑60.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
209
all members of the human family . . . derive from the inherent dignity of the 
human person.”168 A similar point is implicit in German Basic Law (1949), which 
opens with the claim that “human dignity shall be inviolable” (Art. 1) and follows 
with the assertion that “the German people therefore acknowledge inviolable and 
inalienable human rights as the basis of every community” (Art . 2).169
In the Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, Kant is quite explicit about what 
he thinks is intended by the idea of human dignity: “the dignity of man consists 
precisely in his capacity to make universal law, although only on condition 
of being himself also subject to the laws he makes.”170 This is an enormously 
illuminating understanding of human dignity, especially if abstracted from some 
of the more complex elements of Kantian doctrine. If we understand correctly 
what Kant is saying here, there are two dimensions to human dignity that are 
now deeply embedded in our cultural understanding of human dignity.
On the one hand, there is, as Kant puts it, the human capacity to make universal 
law – what he elsewhere explicates in terms of the categorical imperative. 
For present purposes we can leave the problems associated with Kant’s 
understanding of the categorical imperative aside. The important underlying 
point is that human dignity does not consist primarily in some idea of rationality 
or freedom, however important those may ultimately be to his account. It is 
the capacity to make universal law – that is, the capacity to bind or obligate 
oneself – that is central. Or, to put it a bit more generally, it is to be found 
in our status as normative beings whose decisions are not to be resolved in 
terms of simple means-end determinations but as judgments of appropriateness 
and inappropriateness. It is our standing as moral agents (especially), given to 
evaluating courses of action as a condition of determining them, that is a critical 
element in our dignity.
On the other hand, Kant says that the capacity to make human universal law 
is constitutive of human dignity only if those who exercise such capacity also 
subject themselves to the law that they make. Again, we do not want to get 
bogged down in Kantian scholarship. However, what Kant is adverting to is that 
there is more to human dignity than the capacity for certain kinds of decisional 
168  See: http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/h_cat39.htm. A similar ordering is found in the preamble to 
the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966): 
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, 
recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the 
human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world, recognizing that these 
rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person . . .”
169  Grundgesetz, GG, at: http://www.iuscomp.org/gla/statutes/GG.htm. Additional references to – and 
discussion of – the internationalization of human dignity can be found in Man Yee Karen Lee, “Universal 
Human Dignity: Some Reflections in the Asian Context”, Asian Journal of Comparative Law 3, no. 1 (2008) 
(see: http://www.bepress.com/asjcl/vol3/iss1/art10).
170  Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, translated by H. J. Paton (New York: Harper & Row, 1956), 
sect. II, Akad. 440.

Security and Privacy
210
determinations. Such determinations must also be reflected in one’s own person. 
We must carry ourselves in a certain way if we are to be creatures with dignity. 
There is an expressive aspect to human dignity.
These two elements of dignity have often been sundered in discussions of 
dignity – to the point that dictionaries will often distinguish, as two distinct 
meanings of “dignity”, one that focuses on certain capacities and the other that 
focuses on a certain bearing or way of being. The Oxford English Dictionary, 
for example, offers as its second usage of dignity: “honourable or high estate, 
position, or estimation; honour; degree of estimation, rank”; and as its fourth 
usage: “nobility or befitting elevation of aspect, manner, or style; becoming or 
fit stateliness, gravity”. Although treated as distinct and separate, these two 
accounts really belong together as two dimensions of a single account.171 If we 
recall the roots of the current conception of human dignity as a kind of social 
rank, we are confronted with a person who not only had a certain status but was 
expected to manifest it in certain forms of social behavior. There were not two 
kinds of dignity – dignity of status and dignity of bearing – but a single dignity 
that had two dimensions.
Before moving on, let us briefly comment on what we see as the connection 
between the understanding of human dignity as normativity and the common 
identification of human dignity with autonomy or rationality – connections 
that are also strong in Kant. The human capacity for moral discernment and 
determinations – our normativity – is to an important extent premised on our 
capacity for rationality and autonomy. Compromise that and you threaten our 
normative capacity; you challenge our dignity.
If this account of human dignity is somewhere near the mark, the question that 
then arises is: how does it help us to understand the claim that the inherent 
dignity of the human person is foundational to our rights? We could worry 
– as Jeremy Waldron does – that such international statements might simply 
be expressions of pious rhetoric,172 but once we grasp the central connection 
between dignity and the capacity for determining the course of our lives by 
means of moral considerations, dignity’s foundational character becomes much 
clearer.
We are rights-possessing creatures – that is, we are in a position to make 
enforceable claims on others – by virtue of our normative capacity. It is our 
normative capacity, our capacity to guide our lives by means of considerations 
171  We do not mean to imply that they cannot be sundered – indeed, they have been. But we want to 
suggest that there goes with the first usage an expectation of the second.
172  Jeremy Waldron, “Dignity and Rank”, 235.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
211
of appropriateness (and not mere efficacy), that undergirds our status as rights 
bearers, and those who act in ways that would compromise, subvert or destroy 
that capacity violate us.
We are not suggesting that we can directly infer from our possession of dignity 
what rights we should have. To be sure, Waldron attempts such an exercise by 
considering the accoutrements of rank as the substance of our human rights. He 
considers whether what those with rank were entitled to by virtue of their rank 
we might all be entitled to – the entitlement to vote and a voice in public affairs, 
a right not to be struck, a right to have one’s wishes respected in the conduct 
of personal life and so on.173 Our own claim is the much more modest one that 
whatever others may do that jeopardizes our capacity to act as normatively 
determined beings ipso facto jeopardizes our rights.
Nevertheless, there is something else implicit in the idea of dignity that is 
important. Whereas Waldron focuses on the positive trappings of dignity as 
rank, it might be more appropriate to focus on the situation of those who lack 
dignity. In The Metaphysical Elements of Justice, Kant observes that the head 
of state – the chief dignitary – possesses the right to distribute “positions of 
dignity that are distinctions of rank not involving pay and that are based on 
honor alone; these distinctions of rank establish a superior class (entitled to 
command) and an inferior class (which although free and bound only by public 
law), is predestined to obey the former”.174 What we may infer from this is that 
those lacking in dignity are beholden to others – they are not authors of their 
obligations but are obligated as those under authority. What our human dignity 
does is morally entitle us to treatment by others that acknowledges our status as 
normatively determining beings.
Identity
We have already looked at some of the values associated with anonymity, 
particularly as a means of retaining a certain measure of privacy in public and, 
along with that, a constituent of personal autonomy. Anonymity enables one to 
retain some control over one’s identity.175 However, control over one’s identity is 
something of a two-edged sword. Although it may express and protect autonomy, 
173  Ibid., 226 et seq.
174  Kant, The Metaphysical Elements of Justice, translated by John Ladd (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965), 
Akad., 328.
175  A useful listing of reasons for anonymity, more detailed than those of Nissenbaum, can be found in Gary 
Marx, “Identity and Anonymity: Some Conceptual Distinctions and Issues for Research”, in Documenting 
Individual Identity: The Development of State Practices in the Modern World, ed. J. Caplan and J. Torpey 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001): 326, available at: http://web.mit.edu/gtmarx/www/
identity.html.

Security and Privacy
212
as with Gyges’ ring it also constitutes an opportunity for harm to others. The 
control we have may enable us to present ourselves to others deceptively, as 
someone other than who we are, and this possibility is made easier with the 
increasing use that is being made of automated transactions. This is exacerbated 
in large and complex societies that have made themselves responsible for the 
disbursal of a large number of benefits and burdens (social security benefits, 
banking systems, tax collections, neighborhood protection, penalties, welfare, 
education and so forth). The most dramatic recent expression of this has been 
identity theft, now numbering in the millions each year. Protection against 
the stealing of identities requires increasing use of increasingly sophisticated 
identifiers, and the increasing use of such identifiers also increases the potential 
for privacy violations as well as harm done to one through them. The social 
challenge is to secure privacy at the same time as one secures appropriate 
identification.
Control over one’s identity is made increasingly problematic by the development 
of digital technologies that seek to identify one by means of certain identifiers. 
Among other things, many digital technologies store, move and integrate data 
about people. If someone was to Google John Kleinig’s name, that person would 
find online data about him (and perhaps others of that name) at various sites 
that might then be integrated to create a composite that could then be used to 
qualify or disqualify a co-author of this study for some kind of social response. 
It might provide enough information to enable someone to engage in identity 
theft; it could provide pertinent information to a prospective employer who 
might, because of some posting (say, on MySpace), decide not to offer him a job; 
it might enable him to be targeted for certain kinds of merchandise; or it might 
trigger an FBI (or other governmental) investigation into his politics or sexual 
proclivities. There are lots of possibilities – and that is just Google. However, in 
addition to Google there are lots of other repositories of digitalized information 
about John Kleinig to which someone is able to get access by paying a fee. 
Alternatively, those who do not wish to pay fees to get private or personal data 
about John Kleinig may seek to trick him into revealing it by means of phishing.
LexisNexis176 and ChoicePoint177 use sophisticated search software to gain access 
to and combine a great deal of data about John Kleinig, much of which might 
be considered personal and private. Even if the discrete bits of data are not 
private, the composite that can be produced as a result of its integration (like 
a jigsaw puzzle) might be seen by him as too revealing or even as distorting.178 
176  See: http://global.lexisnexis.com/us>; but see also <http://www.lexisnexis.com/gov/.
177  See: http://www.choicepoint.com/index.html and also: http://www.epic.org/privacy/choicepoint/.
178  For example, it so happens that there are (at least) two John Kleinigs of almost the same age and same 
national origins who, because of certain similarities, have often been confused.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
213
The composite in question can be sold to financial institutions, marketers, the 
FBI or other interested parties. In the case of the FBI, it is used in the process of 
compiling travel watch lists.
Sometimes, of course, it is perfectly legitimate for others to ask for some private 
data from one. If one wants to make an online purchase, the seller has every 
reason to ask for one’s credit card number.179 Or, as a sign of good faith with 
respect to some online contribution one has made, one’s name and address might 
need to be entered. Or one’s social security number might need to be provided 
to determine one’s eligibility for some service or benefit. Some way or other, 
certain more or less uniquely identifying information may need to be provided.
There are two important terms/concepts that crop up in this connection – those 
of identity and identification:
1.	  The notion of identity is already the topic of multiple and somewhat divergent 
philosophical inquiries, whether it is the “identity of indiscernibles”, 
“personal identity” or “identity politics”.180 The kind of identity that we 
are concerned with here is different again, though not entirely unrelated. 
It is closer in meaning to “identity” as we use it in talking about “identity 
theft”,181 though even that constitutes a particular take on something that 
has become increasingly multi-layered and elusive.
Let us start with a simple and simplified account of identity. As a particular 
person, John Kleinig, a co-author of this study, might be said to have a specific 
identity or individuality. It is constituted by certain uniquely identifying 
characteristics that make him the particular person that he is.182 This core identity 
(what makes him “him”) is likely to have some invariant features (date and place 
of birth, names of parents etc.) but it need not be fixed; indeed, it will almost 
certainly change over time as he develops, matures and declines. Sometimes we 
want to say of ourselves that we are no longer the persons we were: we have 
a different identity now from that which we once had. We sometimes find it 
galling that people remember us as we were and do not see us as we are. And 
sometimes, perhaps, we would prefer people to remember us as we were rather 
than know us as we have become.
179  If we are antsy about even supposedly secure sites, companies will sometimes provide a phone option 
(though that, too, may be less secure than we think).
180  The OED distinguishes at least ten major meanings.
181  See: http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/.
182  Later we indicate how this apparently unique identity can also – because of the categories upon which 
it draws, such as ethnicity, religion and so forth – function to dis-identify one and to merge one with a group 
that is either privileged or discriminated against.

Security and Privacy
214
But even this notion of a core identity is fraught with complications.183 At 
one level it seems to be constituted by a series of “objective” facts about one, 
allowing that some of those facts may change over time (or, perhaps better, need 
to be seen as historically mutable – e.g. was a pain in the neck when growing up 
and is now the salt of the earth, began as a girl but is now transgendered). But we 
also want to connect the idea of core identity with some notion of self-identity 
that links with the idea of one as an individual autonomous agent. Insofar as we 
connect these things there will be an irreducibly “subjective” aspect to one’s 
core identity. Our current sense is that there is an ongoing tension between 
these two elements within the idea of a core identity.
However, one’s current core identity may not be one’s only identity, for one may 
seek to create alternative identities for oneself.184 For example, one may seek to 
pass oneself off as a wealthy bon vivant so that one can insinuate oneself into 
certain social circles. One may create an online identity for oneself so that one 
may enter certain chat rooms from which one would otherwise be excluded.185 
Less problematically, one may create an online identity for oneself simply for 
the purpose of experiencing an alternative identity, much as an actor may 
temporarily enter into the persona of a script character. Or one may go to live 
in a distant city so that one can create a new identity for oneself, either having 
tired of or wishing to escape an old one.
Even if one makes no conscious effort to do so, one may project a different 
identity to different people, and each may be – so far as it goes – “real”. To 
one’s students one may be an aging, white male philosopher; to one’s children 
one may be an easy touch and supportive presence; to one’s friends one may 
be funny and laidback; and to one’s bank manager one may be the guy who 
has trouble managing his finances. Some will have a better or fuller grasp than 
others of the “I” one really is; that is, they will have a better sense of the range 
of characteristics that constitute one’s identity. Although we are sometimes glad 
if people see us “in the round” (and not simply as the person who . . .), at 
183  Even the very notion of a core identity is being called into question, and not just because Judith Butler 
says so. Has the notion of identity itself become a victim of self-creative postmodernism? Do we display our 
prejudices and/or unwillingness to let go of Linus’s rug? Is the elusive “I” non-existent? It may be, at least 
insofar as many time-worn – and seemingly fixed – categories (such as gender, religion, and nationality) 
become less permanent (or exclusive).
184  Sometimes, as we know from well-researched biographies, even what are seen as the core identities of 
individuals are radically reconstructed. Birth names, dates and places are reconfigured so that what their 
subjects present as their true selves are at variance with important facts about them. In some cases, it would 
appear that even the persons themselves have come to identify with the identity that they have now claimed 
for themselves.
185  Some of these identities may be reflective of or consonant with our wider identity. Others may not. The 
pedophile who pretends to be a teenager looking for sex is expressing, albeit deceptively, his identity as a 
pedophile, whereas the FBI agent who enters the same chat room as a 14-year-old girl is acting deceptively 
but (we presume) not expressing his identity as a sexually hungry person. Of course, to identify someone as a 
pedophile may be to impose on that person an identity with more associations than ought to be the case (e.g. 
predator, rather than desperately lonely).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
215
other times we may wish to conceal aspects of our identity from others. Our 
identities may contain a variety of contradictory characteristics, the result of 
our (or others’) attempts to create alternative identities for alternative purposes.
Thus we may be ambivalent about our identities, should it happen to be the 
case that some aspect of our identity will benefit or burden us in ways that 
we do not want. One’s identity as an “Astor” may (to one’s embarrassment) 
privilege one in the job market as one will be seen to be “connected” to certain 
social circles; whereas one’s identity as “Robert Zimmerman” may be thought 
to prejudice one’s chances in certain WASPy circles, leading one to change one’s 
name to “Bob Dylan”. On the other hand, there may be contexts in which we 
wish to assert our identity (e.g. as Australian or American) rather than conceal 
it. Our identities do not exist in a vacuum, whether we “own” them or are 
simply ascribed them. Some of our identifying characteristics tend to pick us 
out uniquely, others link us to groups (ethnic, national, religious, political and 
so on). Problematically, some of the factors that we think of as contributing to 
our uniqueness (because they narrow the field), may also serve to link us to 
others, thus including us – for some purposes – in socially significant groups 
(e.g. Jewish, gay).
We can crudely link identity in the sense(s) we have been outlining with identity 
in other senses as follows. In the philosophical literature, personal identity is 
usually taken to refer to the persistence of a particular individual over time186; 
that is, the John Kleinig who is co-authoring this study is the same person who 
went to Nedlands Primary School in the 1940s. However, the personal identity 
issue focuses on continuity and persistence, not on what might be called one’s 
identity at age five and one’s identity at age sixty-five. In the latter sense, one 
is a different person now from the person one was then. The latter (change in 
identity over time) is sometimes used to deny that there is personal identity in 
the former sense.187 The debate may have normative importance. Suppose John 
Kleinig at age ten broke into a neighbor’s house and stole money that he used to 
186  In the sociological and psychological literature, “personal identity” tends to be understood differently. 
For example, Erving Goffman understands by personal identity what we initially characterized as a person’s 
identity: “Personal identity, then, has to do with the assumption that the individual can be differentiated 
from all others and that around this means of differentiation a single continuous record of social facts can be 
attached, entangled, like fairy floss, becoming then the sticky substance to which all other biographical facts 
can be attached”, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity (1963; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1968), 74–75. Susan Hekman states: “Each of us possesses a personal identity that is constituted by 
an array of influences and experiences that form us as a unique person. These forces are both public, the 
hegemonic discourses that define our social life, and individual, the character and situation of those who care 
for us as infants, and through whom the public concepts are transmitted to us. The result of these influences 
is . . . our core self. But in addition to possessing a personal identity, each of us is subsumed under an array 
of public identities: woman/man; white/nonwhite; middle class/working class, and so forth”, Private Selves, 
Public Identities, Reconsidering Identity Politics (University Park, PA: Penn State University Press, 2004), 7.
187  See, in particular, Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984), esp. 
326; and also L. Fields, “Parfit on Personal Identity and Desert”, Philosophical Quarterly 37 (1987): 432–41.

Security and Privacy
216
purchase chemicals and equipment for his chemistry experiments. In his later 
teens he underwent a major change of outlook and subsequently became an 
exemplary citizen. Forty years later, he meets the neighbor again, and somehow 
the matter of the theft arises. Can fifty-year-old John be held responsible for 
what ten-year-old John did? Certainly the fifty-year-old John does not have 
the same identity as the ten-year-old John; he’s now the kind of person who 
would never steal from others. But can he hide behind that change of identity to 
conceal his continuity with the ten-year-old who burgled the neighbor? Can he 
deny responsibility for what was done when he was ten? Pace Parfit, we think 
not. There does not seem to be anything inappropriate about his apologizing for 
what he did when he was ten.
In the case of identity politics, what we are talking about is political decision 
making designed to foster the interests of a particular group on the basis of some 
shared feature – often one feature, such as gender or race – that is also often 
included as part of a person’s identity. In such cases, the feature in question, now 
being advanced as a reason for special recognition, was perhaps once exploited 
as a reason for invidious discrimination.
So far we have been talking about (more or less) self-ascribed identities – how we 
characterize ourselves as the particular persons we are (presumably on the basis 
of features that also hold true of us). Identities are also ascribed to us by others. 
Indeed, identities are first ascribed to us by others and it is only later that we 
are likely to claim an identity as our own. That later, self-ascribed identity may 
include (mostly) elements of what has been ascribed to us by others, or it may 
involve a repudiation of some or much of that other, other-ascribed identity. The 
co-author of this study was an Australian by birth, baptized as John Kleinig 
in a Methodist church and raised in a right-wing family. Each and all of these 
elements of his identity he may later wish to repudiate – not that they were 
never part of his identity but that they may come to have no significance for 
the person who forty years later is an American citizen called Roscoe Mann 
who worships in a working-class Catholic church. As far as personal identity 
is concerned, Roscoe Mann is continuous with John Kleinig, and if it turns out 
that John Kleinig went to the US to reconstitute himself as Roscoe Mann after 
he murdered someone in a robbery gone bad, he will not be able to wriggle out 
of it if he is found out fifty years later by claiming that he is not John Kleinig 
etc. but Roscoe Mann etc.188
The identities that are ascribed to us are much more varied and complex than 
the ones that we have just alluded to. Governments and other organizations 
have multitudinous purposes in ascribing particular identities to us and they 
188  The co-author of this study hastens to add that a number of the identifying factors that are being 
referred to here are fictional.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
217
may do so in ways that we may wish to disavow.189 Consider something that 
tends to be (relatively) anonymous – a census. By filling in a census form we 
will check a variety of boxes (number of people in household, zip code, ethnic 
identity (possibly a limited number of choices), income, etc.), information that 
will be aggregated and become the basis for distributions of federal funds – 
to age groups, communities etc. However, the identities that we may thereby 
acquire, albeit only for aggregative purposes, may not be identities that we want 
to “own”. If one of John Kleinig’s parents was German and the other Sorbian, he 
may be proud of his ethnic heritage, but the census will not allow him the option 
of identifying with that, even though it gives others the option of identifying 
with their heritage.190 If one and one’s family are (normally) resident in Harlem, 
but at the time of the census one is incarcerated in an upstate New York prison, 
one will be counted (for census purposes and the distribution of certain federal 
funds) as a resident of the county in which the prison is located.191 In the 1930s 
many German Jews thought of themselves as more German than Jewish, but 
governmental policy prioritized (and denigrated) their Jewishness even if, as 
had occurred in a fair number of cases, they had converted.
For purposes of taxation, welfare, health benefits and salary, one’s identity (in 
the US) is largely structured around one’s social security number, supposedly 
a uniquely referring identifying number. It may serve to verify one’s identity 
but will not in other ways say very much about one’s identity (and because of 
that it may enable one’s identity to be stolen more easily). Other factors about 
one – such as one’s belonging to an underrepresented (for certain purposes) 
group (as determined by others) may make one eligible for certain opportunities 
that one may or may not otherwise have had and whether or not one wishes to 
have them.192 One’s passport does not include a social security number, even 
though an increasingly nonreplicable (but also not private) photograph is 
central. For other purposes, a fingerprint or other biometric data may be used. 
What we should note is the potential for divergence between our identity as it 
is construed by governmental agencies and our identity as we construe it for 
ourselves. It is unlikely to figure in a government account of one’s identity that 
one has a morbid fear of spiders or elevators, even if those fears may tend to 
dominate one’s everyday behavior.
189  We focus here on identities that may be ascribed to us for various governmental purposes. However, 
they may be ascribed to us for various marketing purposes as well – as people fitting various lifestyle or age 
classifications.
190  Intermarriage of various kinds creates havoc with the options provided by censuses and other registers. 
See Marx, “Identity and Anonymity: Some Conceptual Distinctions and Issues for Research”.
191  There are some – as yet unsuccessful – moves afoot to rectify this. The poor communities from which 
prisoners ordinarily come are further deprived of benefits and the communities in which the prisons are built 
are glad of the extra income. They also tend to have greater political clout.
192  Consider the offense felt in the 1990s by some African-American sergeants in the NYPD as those they 
supervised speculated about whether they were “affirmative action sergeants”.

Security and Privacy
218
We shall return to issues of identity, but first we go to the other term of our 
distinction.
2.	 Identification is what we do to establish an identity, and we do this by means 
of identifiers. Thus one may be identified as a particular person by one’s 
name (though not uniquely so), one’s parentage (though not uniquely so), 
one’s height, weight and skin color (though not uniquely so), one’s ethnicity 
(though not uniquely so), one’s profession (though not uniquely so), one’s 
address (though not uniquely so) the websites one visits (though not uniquely 
so) and so on, though it may well be the case that there is no other person 
who answers to all these identifying characteristics. Different identifiers may 
be used for different purposes. One’s address, for example, may be used to 
locate one (for purposes of interrogation), to classify one (as middle class) or 
to render one as eligible for certain benefits/burdens.193 One’s name may be 
used to classify one (e.g. German lineage, gender, to sort one in a process) and 
so on. A biometric identifier (such as fingerprint, voiceprint or DNA) may 
identify one for purposes of immigration eligibility, criminal guilt or access 
to a restricted site.
In digital contexts, identities are fixed through a process of identification in 
which various identifiers are employed or brought together. A critical question 
will concern the match between a digitally created identity and the (core or self) 
identity of the person it is intended to “capture”. Does the identity of the John 
Kleinig who is digitally identified match the John Kleinig who is co-authoring 
this study? Although there has always been an issue about the match between 
some public or official identity and the identity of the person it refers to, it was 
not until the development of digital tools that this became a significant issue.
One’s digitally stored or available identity may be accurate so far as it goes 
(though it may not go far enough), or it may contain inaccuracies. Insofar as that 
identity may then be used to make various decisions that bear on one’s interests 
(e.g. one’s ability to take out a loan or fly on an aircraft, or one’s capacity to 
be electronically surveilled), it is important that it should be adequate to the 
purposes to which it is put.
Not only is the accuracy of an ascribed identity for particular purposes 
important, it is also important to be able to correct misidentifications. One of 
the huge problems encountered in the so-called “war on terrorism” has been 
the misidentification of those who are deemed to pose a terrorist threat and the 
enormous difficulty such people have had in correcting such misidentifications.
193  Some identifiers will usually contribute to one’s being uniquely identified (such as name, address, and 
SS#), whereas others may be of a comparative nature, enabling one to be classified (e.g. using income range, 
IQ or SAT scores for marketing purposes, welfare eligibility, college admission and so forth).

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
219
Creating a set of identifiers that accurately and sufficiently capture or secure a 
person’s identity is not an easy task.194 Most names are not unique and even a 
name that is unique may be spelled in different ways, sometimes arising from 
simple typos and sometimes because of digital constraints.195 Even a combination 
of name and address is not likely to remain stable. A more reliable identifier may 
be some code, such as a social security or employee number, though, like a 
name, it may not carry a lot of information with it, and if it does link to other 
information it may not always be accurate. It may be mined, stolen or misused, 
as may also be the case with passwords and PINs, which are used to protect a 
person from some invasion of his or her identity.196 Such devices are protective 
rather than descriptive – and, of course, there may be some inaccuracies in 
what is protected. Various tokens (such as smart cards, drivers licenses, birth 
certificates and passports) may also serve to identify a person to others and 
secure that person against another’s misuse of his or her identity. Currently, 
no widely used set of identifiers is foolproof, though some emerging biometric 
techniques such as retinal identification197 may be very difficult to steal or forge.
Arguments for privacy and anonymity center on the idea of autonomous agency, 
both constitutively and instrumentally. Privacy and anonymity can assure our 
identity as something that we can control, but, insofar as we wish to secure 
the viability of various social activities and participate in them (activities that 
themselves may be expressive of our identities), we must enable our identity to 
be verified. That will be achieved via various forms of identification. Gary Marx 
suggests ten normative uses for identification. It may be used to:
1.	 assist accountability;
2.	 determine reputation;
3.	 pay dues or receive just deserts;
4.	 assist efficiency and improve service;
5.	 determine bureaucratic eligibility;
6.	 guarantee transactions distanced or mediated by time/space;
7.	 assist research;
8.	 protect health and consumers;
194  We may control some identifiers (even if socially adopted) ourselves. For example, we may choose to get 
a tattoo that identifies us as a member of a particular gang.
195  Roger Clarke notes some of the ways in which a name can go wrong in “Human Identification in 
Information Systems: Management Challenges and Public Policy Issues”, Information Technology & People, 7 
(1994): 6–37 (See: http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/HumanID.html).
196  Vulnerability is exploited through practices such as phishing (see: http://www.antiphishing.org) or the 
attachment of trojans (see: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trojan_horse_(computing)) to emails or internet files.
197  See: http://www.cse.msu.edu/~cse891/Sect601/textbook/6.pdf.

Security and Privacy
220
9.	 assist relationship building; and
10.	assist social orientation.
(Marx’s paper was written before 9/11. No doubt he would have expanded 
one of the above categories or emphasized a security use of identifiers had he 
written it later.)
Though these social purposes may justify the development and implementation 
of increasingly sophisticated – because of failures or subversions – forms of 
identification, they bring in their train a series of normatively charged questions, 
lest these forms of identification jeopardize the identities of those whom they 
are intended to identify:
1.	 Questions concerning necessity. Are the identifying materials asked for really 
necessary? Why does Y need one’s phone number when he/she has one’s 
email address? Does Y really need one’s social security number for this?
2.	 Questions of reliability. How good are the various forms of identification at 
doing the tasks for which they were intended? What are the problems of 
false positives and false negatives?198 Are particular identifiers (religion, 
ethnicity, gender etc.) as relevant as they might once have been?
3.	 Questions concerning rectification. If the identifiers fail, will procedures 
be in place for setting records straight? Will they be easily accessible and 
responsive? Will there be some form of recompense for those falsely excluded 
from benefits or subjected to burdens?
4.	 Questions concerning enforcement. If matters go awry, what procedures are in 
place to ensure that rectificatory or punitive strategies will actually work?
5.	 Questions concerning updating. Will mutable identifiers have a mandated life? 
Will information be eliminated or reconfirmed after a certain period? How 
long?
6.	 Questions concerning use. Will use of the identifiers be restricted to the 
purposes for which they were originally developed or, if used for other 
purposes, will these be known (how?) and consented to (how?)? Will 
information that is given be sold or made available to others? If made 
available to others, will there be constraints on use? Will this information be 
aggregated with information given for other purposes? If so, to what further 
uses might this consolidated information be put? Does one have any control 
over such uses – or the imputations involved in such uses?199
198  Gary Marx notes the number of communications he receives that are addressed to Georg Simmel, Emile 
Durkheim and Karl Marx, efforts he has made to deflect the intentions of marketers.
199  Consider how one’s zip code could include or exclude one with respect to a range of benefits or burdens 
– higher real estate values, marketing targeting etc.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
221
Aligning the values
We have endeavored to provide a broad articulation of the values at stake in 
the development of new technologies. We have sought to provide an account 
that will have traction for a wide spectrum of liberal democratic viewpoints, 
even though the policy traditions of different liberal polities have diverged 
considerably. Is it possible that out of this analysis some rapprochement may 
be achieved? We have some hope that this can be so. Although the current 
divergences track different strands and roots within the liberal tradition, they 
are more reflective of political responses to historical circumstances than of deep 
and intractable normative divisions.
At an earlier point in this study (Chapter III), we drew attention to James 
Q. Whitman’s paper, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity versus 
Liberty”.200 As we saw, his history of the development of privacy in Europe and 
in the US nicely illustrates their divergence from a common history (prior to US 
Independence) as well as the possibilities for rapprochement.
Whitman contended that European conceptions of privacy view it as an aspect 
of dignity, whereas the US conception of privacy tends to see it as an aspect of 
liberty. But dignity is closely connected to liberty, both in the latter’s sense as 
autonomy as well as in its social sense of political liberty. There is a well-trodden 
path from political liberty to personal autonomy (and back) and from the 
acknowledgment of human dignity to the recognition of autonomy and support 
for political liberty. It should not be impossible to develop an account of privacy 
(especially) that will reunite or at least bring into fruitful dialogue the seemingly 
divergent conceptions that have developed in the EU and the US. What will 
then be needed is the political will to bring them into more practical alignment. 
Of course, this would by no means constitute the completion of the larger task 
of bringing all or most liberal democracies into such practical alignment. In the 
case of some liberal democracies, such as Australia, if alignment between the US 
and the EU were to be achieved, then alignment with Australia would be all but 
complete. However, in the case of others such as India, there would likely be 
some considerable way to go.
We believe that some motivation for a more fruitful dialogue and the possibility 
for some rapprochement might be fostered by recognizing the ways in which 
specifically US values have been exploited. Deeply embedded in US culture 
is a concern about governmental overreaching that goes back to the situation 
that prompted the Declaration of Independence – the British exploitation of 
the colonies and the eventual refusal of those colonies to accept this. A great 
200  James Q. Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity verses Liberty”, Yale Law Journal 
113 (2004).

Security and Privacy
222
deal of US culture since then – including the Constitutional Bill of Rights – can 
be explained as a project to curb federal (and later state) excess. “Liberty” is 
construed primarily in terms of freedom from certain governmental constraints. 
A “free market” – commercial liberty – has been seen as one of the guarantors 
of this. One consequence of this stance – which reached its apogee/nadir in 
Lochner201 – has been the failure to see the extent to which prized individual 
liberty (and the autonomy which it fostered) could be subverted by institutional 
structures other than governmental ones. Because they have seen commercial 
freedom as a bulwark against governmental oppression, American citizens have 
been remarkably sanguine about the collection of their personal information 
by commercial companies – such as ChoicePoint and LexisNexis – believing 
this to be an expression of legitimate social freedom (liberty). What has not 
been appreciated is the extent to which – especially since 9/11 – governmental 
agencies have sought to avail themselves of these commercially collected 
personal data. What Americans have been loath to permit their government to 
collect, their government has purchased or otherwise obtained from private/
commercial sources. Indeed, government agencies (especially the FBI) have been 
the largest customers of some personal data-gathering agencies.202
We believe that, were this commercial/governmental nexus better appreciated, 
there would be a serious concern about existing privacy arrangements and a 
much greater sympathy for the privacy arrangements that exist in EU countries. 
In the latter, no distinction is made between governmentally and commercially 
gathered personal data. Personal data are viewed as private, no matter who 
collects them.
It is true that because the events of 9/11 occurred on US soil there have been 
greater concerns about terrorism in the US than in European countries (though 
we should not forget Madrid, London and Glasgow). But this should impact only 
secondary issues, such as the length of time that legitimately gathered personal 
data can be retained or with whom such data can be shared. It should not have 
manifested itself in a different conception of what constitutes appropriately 
private data.
In general, it appears to us that the countries of the EU have a more rigorous and 
defensible conception of privacy than the prevailing one in the US (even if, as 
we also believe, they do not always manage to live up to their own expectations). 
At the same time it appears to us that the dominant conception of privacy in 
the US trades on a misunderstanding of the independence of government and 
commerce, and that were American citizens to be more aware of the ways in 
which their federal government obtains backdoor access to personal data there 
would be a significant rethinking of the status quo.
201  Lochner v. New York, 198 US 45 (1905).
202  This is developed at some length in Chapter VII.

 VIII. The Underlying Values and their Alignment
223
We do not want to suggest that this will resolve all differences between the 
US and EU regarding the privacy of personal data. However, if the foregoing 
enhanced awareness were to be realized we believe that it would move us in 
the direction of some form of liberal rapprochement. To reaffirm Whitman’s 
judgment: “There is no logical inconsistency in pursuing both forms of privacy 
protection: It is perfectly possible to advocate both privacy against the state 
and privacy against non-state information gatherers to argue that protecting 
privacy means both safeguarding the presentation of self, and inhibiting the 
investigative and regulatory excesses of the state.”


225
 IX. The Complexities of Oversight 
and Accountability
Assuming that there are ways of aligning the values that infuse various liberal 
democratic societies, there is still the important question of how to implement 
them within the diverse institutional arrangements in which they are or will be 
embedded.1 What regulatory or oversight arrangements would be most suited 
to their realization?
Ideally, oversight arrangements within liberal societies will reflect their 
undergirding values. Oversight mechanisms should gravitate in the direction 
of structures that exemplify those values. In particular – and apposite to 
the concerns of this study – there will be a determination to ensure social 
arrangements in which personal accountability is both fostered and maximized.
However, as liberal writers from as far back as John Locke have realized, good 
social order requires more than reliance on individual good will and good 
judgment. Structural supports and incentives are needed. As civil society itself 
exemplifies – with its legislative, judicial and enforcement structures – the human 
condition requires more formalized approaches to social ordering than a laissez 
faire expectation will be able to deliver. Even so, more formalized approaches 
can differ significantly in the level of compulsion they involve. Although we 
noted in Chapter IV of this study the need and our desire to eventually move 
the US in the direction of creating an independent National Office of Data 
Protection, we understand that traveling this path is likely to be slow going. 
Recognizing this reality, our inclination here is therefore first of all to advocate 
for better development of what we term a “soft-law” approach to accountability. 
We recommend this tactic in conjunction with the development of appropriate 
legislation and enforcement mechanisms. Ultimately, in this area as elsewhere, 
there is a need for an integrated mix of soft law and coercive hard law.2
1  The Appendix provides some insight into the complexity of implementing common global standards for 
security and privacy, even within liberal democracies. Reviewing the variety of institutional structures and 
oversight mechanisms established by Australia and India gives perspective to the wider challenge beyond that 
posed by the EU–US focused discussion that has primarily occupied us.
2  We are mindful of T. H. Green’s warning – albeit in a somewhat different context – that the precise measures 
to be adopted as social policy need to have regard to what people will tolerate: “to attempt a restraining law 
in advance of the social sentiment necessary to give real effect to it, is always a mistake.” See T.H. Green, 
“Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract”, (1881), published in Works, ed. R.L. Nettleship (London: 
Longmans, 1888), vol. 3, 265–86. The Appendix to this study adds grist to this mill. The countries reviewed 
clearly operate at different points of what could reasonably be construed as a security/privacy continuum. 
Recognizing that such variation exists requires sensitivity in establishing mechanisms for achieving the 
common end of desired protection for multiple stakeholders. Providing a flexible framework for choosing and 
implementing a menu of means, which we are attempting to articulate here, is essential to enabling success in 
what are often dissimilar settings.

Security and Privacy
226
A soft-law approach to enhancing oversight can serve as an intermediate 
mechanism for managing already legislated or regulated surveillance activities 
where guidance for achieving accountability is vague and where the political 
will to clarify confusion is not exercised. It can also be useful in cases in which 
emerging surveillance issues require clarification before hard law is explored 
and introduced. The recommendations that we make in this chapter focus 
specifically on increasing accountability in electronic surveillance, profiling 
and data mining efforts through the utilization of an accountability assessment 
tool that allows an organization to take stock of its surveillance operations, and 
through the creation of multi-disciplinary Techno-ethics Boards that could be 
worked into the process of building and applying surveillance programs.
Soft law and oversight
To date, hard law has served as a less-than-ideal means of achieving 
accountability in surveillance operations across levels of government in the 
US and elsewhere. Although such legal tools hold a necessary place among 
the approaches to monitoring and controlling surveillance operations, 
even after long and detailed public discussion (resulting in actual laws and 
codified rules of implementation for techniques such as wiretapping), they 
have nevertheless sometimes proven ineffective in certain areas of practice. 
Such failures of foresight have required the employment of effective practical 
oversight methods so that problems that have emerged can be identified and 
rectified. As a recent example, we need look no further than the dilemmas 
that the FBI has encountered with its surveillance activities. Although the 
USA PATRIOT Act authorized the use of National Security Letters (in effect, 
administrative subpoenas) by the FBI in investigations of international 
terrorism and foreign spying,3 a Department of Justice Office of Inspector 
General (OIG) report indicated that in the earlier part of this decade there had 
been insufficient monitoring of the implementation of this strategy by its field 
officers. These findings raised questions of impropriety and illegality in the 
FBI surveillance activities that had been implemented.4 It was fortunate that 
this step was taken by the OIG before problems found their way into the court 
system for settlement through judicial review of administrative operations. It 
is just this type of occurrence that points out the weaknesses and openings 
for abuse that can arise between the development of hard law and its resulting 
implementation. As we have previously noted, another problem that has 
3  See Charles Doyle, “National Security Letters in Foreign Intelligence Investigations: A Glimpse of the 
Legal Background and Recent Amendments”, CRS Report for Congress Received through the CRS Web, March 
31, 2006, Order Code RS22406.
4  See Julie Hirschfeld Davis, “Lawmakers Warn FBI Over Spy Powers Abuse”, Associated Press, March 21, 
2007.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
227
come to light involving the FBI regards the illegal soliciting of phone records 
between the years 2002 and 2006.5 A Justice Department OIG report examines 
these issues in depth.
In other situations, developers of hard law can find themselves struggling to 
offer the insight required to do the job of managing surveillance activities 
effectively where newer forms of technology are involved. This too can result 
in problems developing during implementation that will not be rooted out 
early, and are left to be caught only after they have impacted upon the public. 
For example, unique expertise that exists among private sector professionals 
developing technology and innovations within certain fields, such as facial 
recognition imaging, enables them to operate at such high levels that without 
commensurate knowledge at their disposal government regulators and elected 
officials may find themselves challenged to create well-targeted and effective 
control mechanisms within legislation. Understanding these shortcomings, a 
more flexible means of ongoing oversight needs to be sought out that can 
provide stability as the development and eventual implementation of hard law 
requirements are pursued.
One approach to shrinking this gap in effectiveness and accountability is to 
heighten flexible governmental regulation and oversight activities through 
the exploration of “soft law”. Discussions of soft law can be considered part of 
an emerging discourse on the overall value of regulation and governance that 
in academic circles has recently come to the foreground in a multi-disciplinary 
fashion.6
“Soft law” is an inexact term that covers a multitude of quasi-legislative, often 
non-binding instruments used to enhance government efforts to regulate 
service delivery areas. These instruments are intended to enable policy 
changes to emerge and harden through voluntary application and adherence 
in both confrontational and politicized atmospheres in which a wide array 
of players from public, private and non-governmental sectors are involved.7 
Such tools have been referred to broadly as “unofficial guidelines” that deliver 
information to those being regulated.8
5  See John Solomon and Carrie Johnson, “FBI Broke Law for Years in Phone Records Searches”, The 
Washington Post, January 19, 2010, A01. Additional information about the role of the ill-fated White House 
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board in this case can be found in Allen Charles Raul’s Letter to the 
Editor, “The Missing Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board”, The Washington Post, January 24, 2010.
6  See John Braithwaite, Cary Coglianese, and David Levi-Faur, “Editors’ Introduction: Can Regulation and 
Governance Make a Difference?”, Regulation & Governance 1 (2007): 1–7.
7  See Taco Brandsen, Marcel Boogers, and Pieter Tops, “Soft Governance, Hard Consequences: The 
Ambiguous Status of Unofficial Guidelines”, Public AdministrationReview 66, no. 4 (July/August 2006): 546–
53; and Peter Mameli, “Managing the HIV/AIDS Pandemic: Paving a Path into the Future of International Law 
and Organization”, Law & Policy 22, no. 2 (April 2000): 203–24.
8  Brandsen, Boogers and Tops, 546.

Security and Privacy
228
Some of the instruments that communicate these ideas include codes of 
governance, quality standards, letters of advice, handbooks, manuals, reports, 
declarations, recommendations, guidelines and resolutions, to name a few.9 
They can be used to fill gaps between existing legal norms and implementation 
shortcomings, or to exercise initiative where no legal guidance currently 
exists. The result is intended to be a collaborative effort at ensuring quality 
service delivery by all parties involved in the process. Sometimes they can 
even result in the drafting of enhanced or new binding legal agreements, after 
a slow process in which policy diffusion is accepted and validated by the 
players affected.
In the case of government surveillance programs that rely on electronic 
surveillance, profiling or data mining activities, construction and delivery 
of mutually acceptable soft-law guidelines for their ongoing management and 
oversight would likely enhance reliability in the eyes of the public. Among 
the guidelines provided could be agreement to the need for time-driven audits 
and program evaluations, ongoing development of relevant performance 
measurement indicators, public reporting expectations on the results of the 
measurement systems created and the use of Techno-ethics Boards to resolve 
issues of ethical concern at the same time as developing advice for carrying 
out surveillance activities from the beginning of operations through to their 
conclusion. These ideas will be expanded on in later sections of this chapter.
Soft governance, trust and success
Although a soft law approach to oversight promises to relieve problems 
and pressures that have surfaced with surveillance programs, there are also 
quandaries to address well before such programs are productively employed. 
Quasi-legislative instrumentation of the nature discussed here is voluntarily 
adhered to and presents an uncertain edict to those on the receiving end. The 
intent is obvious; the authors of soft law believe that others should follow 
these “suggestions” and upgrade their operations accordingly. Yet there is 
no “authority” determining that action be taken. These are not new laws or 
regulatory rules that must be followed. They are something else: important 
enough to be taken note of, but ignored at one’s own professional and 
personal peril.10 Complicating matters further, soft law often suggests that 
new implementation norms be followed and attested to through self-reporting 
by the entities that are charged with providing a particular service. Yet, given 
9  Brandsen, Boogers and Tops, 546; and Mameli, 203.
10  Brandsen, Boogers and Tops, 550–51.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
229
that a gap exists between hard law and regulation and implementation in this 
sensitive policy area, a soft-law approach does offer opportunities to begin the 
process of deepening oversight.
The conundrum noted above frames a central discussion point that needs 
to be entertained here: how does soft law consistently result in something 
more than soft, or even abdicated, governance? Even if governance was found 
lacking before, does this yield a better answer? How can you be sure you have 
not let the fox guard the henhouse when you are counting on the fox to give 
you a daily testament to his/her actions? Given this problem, it is important to 
begin by noting that there are two sides to the coin of soft law.
The first side of the coin views the use of such unofficial guidelines as necessary 
tools for distributing new information to agents perceived as needing to update 
and improve their services, while still creating room for innovative practices 
to flourish. This view assumes good faith on the part of those being regulated 
to honestly address the suggested course of action, or to offer a better path to 
follow. The other side of the coin is one in which the suggested changes are 
not implemented due to a lack of comprehension or ability on the part of the 
receiver, a lack of leverage on the part of the sender or, worst of all, a desire by 
one or both to engage in fraud, waste or abuse by keeping loopholes open and 
outside eyes closed.11 Both sides of the coin are relevant parts of the discussion 
about the implications that these instruments have for practitioners of soft law 
in complex environments.
When constructed well, the use of soft law to close gaps between hard law 
and implementation efforts opens doors to programmatic innovation and 
improvement. In practice it can also serve to increase accountability by 
mitigating administrative confusion and folly due to imprecise understandings 
of how to accomplish desired ends. However, it is also true that political 
stressors and unclear messages from central authorities regarding unofficial 
guidelines can drag down the potential gains of the process by causing those 
being regulated to stifle innovation and simply toe the line in order to avoid 
being cited during inspections and oversight – even though these are not 
clear infractions that they will be called on.12 In such a scenario, the process 
that should lead to an active interchange of ideas between the center and 
the periphery that results in continuous improvement leads only to a game 
of follow-the-leader or, worse, resistance. Further still, poorly developed 
unofficial guidelines that do not provide effective problem resolution can also 
allow for abuse in application by practitioners.
11  See Ibid, 547–48, for a nice breakdown of possible paths that regulated parties can take in reaction to 
unofficial guidelines.
12  Ibid., 550–51.

Security and Privacy
230
We should be striving to shut off the mains that allow illegal activity to flow 
forward by crafting useful soft law that also improves results. In the world of 
surveillance operations such a goal is of great value in and of itself, given the 
threats to liberty, privacy, and civil rights that hang in the balance. The question 
that emerges becomes: How can the relationship between those sending the 
soft forms of guidance and those receiving it be made to work better? Can 
we ensure transparency, attain accountability, improve effectiveness, prevent 
misconduct and enable innovation all at once? Can individuals charged with 
overseeing government surveillance programs help this development along in 
a front-to-back process? The answer seems to boil down to partnership and 
how to achieve it.
If creative interchange between all parties is what is desired then trust must be 
created to allow the interchange to flourish. That trust needs to run through 
the entire process. Trust must exist in the formulation of the quasi-legislative 
instruments and advice up front, as well as in the oversight process that is 
created afterward. However, it is hard to create that level of trust when there 
is resistance to oversight in sensitive areas of national security (e.g. involving 
surveillance operations, or any other activity).
Certainly, recent problems between the US CIA and its own OIG, where 
the former challenged the investigative methods of the latter in politically 
sensitive reviews, attest to this dilemma.13 Indeed, at this time the agency 
has successfully managed to create two new positions to oversee the actions 
of its own internal watchdog!14 Yet oversight and accountability of national 
security activities must exist, and so the conundrum surrounding trust is laid 
bare. One undeniable finding from the CIA’s situation so far is that at the very 
least a lack of trust in oversight operations distracts an organization from 
accomplishing its mission. Therefore, if government is to function effectively 
it seems clear that trust needs to be established early on rather than as an 
afterthought or as the result of a crisis.
In unpacking these concerns we first examine weaknesses that complicate the 
processes of soft law implementation and then note how particular forms of 
collaborative (rather than adversarial) interaction between oversight entities 
and those being inspected can improve accountability through enlightened, 
triangulated oversight. In conjunction with this analytical effort, addressing 
elements of performance measurement and management that can be used in 
constructing transparent and accountable partnerships between oversight 
agents and those being inspected must be further developed. Taken in total, 
13  Mark Mazzetti and Scott Hane, “CIA Watchdog Becomes Subject of CIA Inquiry”, The New York Times, 
October 12. 2007, A1, A25.
14  Greg Miller, “CIA Places Controls on Inspector General”, Los Angeles Times, February 2, 2008, retrieved 
February 9, 2008 at: www.latimes.com/news/printedition/a/la-na-cia2feb02,1,6583760.story.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
231
our recommendations represent an attempt to stretch the current discourse 
on regulating new and existing surveillance operations into less-well-traveled 
areas of thought. Here we are considering a role for oversight personnel in 
government surveillance that is essentially counter to the logic of reaction 
and punishment that often permeate such dialogues, and then offering tools 
to build trust between these parties and enhance capacity to achieve success. 
It may be hoped that the framework we lay out here can create room for 
free thinking and discussion about soft law in regard to better managing the 
surveillance society of the future.
Surveillance technology accountability 
assessment tool
What we initially offer below is a soft accountability assessment tool, designed 
to encourage those who engage in surveillance, data mining and profiling, 
to reflect on the nature and consequences of what they are doing. In many 
respects it particularizes the various means-end questions that we raised at an 
earlier stage of this discussion, linking those questions specifically to what we 
can characterize broadly as surveillance technologies.
The rationale behind such a tool is that within a liberal society we ought to 
encourage surveillance strategies that acknowledge, draw upon and foster the 
dignity of those who use them as well as those who are subject to them. This 
we do when we implement strategies that encourage individual accountability 
rather than presume a lack thereof. If these fail, harder strategies should be 
available to ensure that important liberal values are not left vulnerable and 
unprotected.
In addition, this tool brings focus to the channels by which oversight can be 
exercised on surveillance programs in order to grow accountability and ensure 
that reasonable levels of control and scrutiny are met.15 Activities such as 
improved contracting requirements, audits, inspections, program evaluations 
and the establishing of ongoing performance measurement and management 
systems can all aid in this effort. Ingrained within the logic of the “new public 
management” is a heavy reliance on these practices to aid in the effective 
steering of government programs as they navigate the real world flows and 
barriers that cross the ship of state’s path.16 Bringing these concepts to bear 
on surveillance programs is both proper and necessary. However, though 
15  See Donald F. Kettl and James. W. Fesler, The Politics of the Administrative Process, fourth ed. (Washington, 
D.C.: CQ Press, 2009), 9–12 for a useful description of the layers of government accountability.
16  Donald F. Kettl, The Global Public Management Revolution, second ed. (Washington D.C.: The Brookings 
Institution, 2005), 17–18.

Security and Privacy
232
it is essential to understand the methods for achieving and maintaining 
accountability, the way in which they are executed is also crucial to their 
success or failure.
Some of the modes of oversight noted above can be used upfront in the 
development of surveillance programs (strict requests for proposal and 
contracting requirements as well as formative program evaluations), 
while others can be carried out during the life of surveillance operations 
(performance and financial audits, interim and summative program evaluations 
and performance measurement reporting). The problems arise with the 
willingness and ability to build these activities into the entire lifespan of 
surveillance programs across levels of government. For instance, it is not at all 
clear that such oversight activities are legislatively mandated into government 
surveillance programs, or are expected to happen in regular patterns in all law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies. In addition, even if such oversight of 
surveillance operations is taking place, the degree to which there is regular 
reporting to elected officials and the public no doubt varies. Is such reporting 
simply desired and left to occur at the will of the agencies and oversight bodies 
involved, or mandated and handled in a more regimented fashion? It appears 
that, due to the need for operational secrecy, the former is the case more often 
than not, and this needs to change. The question is how to create change 
and enhance accountability without endangering the effectiveness of the 
surveillance program in question? To this end we offer a tool that will allow for 
self-assessment in order to begin the process of improvement in oversight and 
accountability activities. The tool can be used by practitioners of surveillance 
interested in growing accountability within their organizations, as well as 
those interested in carrying out oversight of these groups.
SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY ACCOUNTABILITY ASSESSMENT TOOL*
1.	 What external agencies are charged with carrying out oversight of the 
creation and use of the surveillance technologies you work with? Please 
name the oversight agencies and explain their roles.
2.	 What internal units within your agency are charged with carrying out 
oversight of the creation and use of the surveillance technologies you work 
with? Please name the oversight units and explain their roles.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
233
3.	 How is oversight carried out for the surveillance technologies you create 
and/or work with? Please explain for each condition noted below and 
differentiate by type of technology or method if necessary. Also, please 
provide documentation if possible.
(A) Consultation with experts beyond the organization?
(B) Closed/open meetings within the organization?
(C) Closed/open hearings with the public or an oversight body?
(C) Closed/open hearings with the public or an oversight body?
(D) Program evaluations of success in implementation?
(E) Performance audits for accountability?
(F) Financial audits for accountability?
(G) Investigations of fraud, waste, abuse and mismanagement?
(H) Performance measurement and management system development 
and monitoring?
(I) Other.
4.	 Are experts external to the organization utilized to ensure that the 
surveillance technology being constructed and/or utilized satisfies 
appropriate ethical concerns for development and implementation? Please 
explain. What about regulatory concerns? Please explain. What about 
statutory legal concerns? Please explain.
5.	 if your agency issues a Request for Proposal (RFP) for development of a 
surveillance technology, or employs a subcontractor for such a purpose, 
what accountability mechanisms (if any) do you require to be built into the 
resulting submissions to provide service? Please explain.
6.	 Does your agency establish performance measures in its contracts when 
dealing with the creation of surveillance technologies by outside parties?
If yes, please explain the steps, benchmarks and measures that are to be 
built into the contract for provision of such services to determine if a 
vendor is effectively achieving desired outcomes.
If you do currently establish performance measures in contracts in which 
surveillance technologies are created, how do you think this process could 
be improved?
Finally, please explain what happens if a vendor or subcontractor fails to 
perform adequately.

Security and Privacy
234
7.	 Has your agency established performance measures for methods of using 
surveillance technologies?
If yes, please explain the steps, benchmarks and measures that are used to 
monitor such services and determine if the process is effectively achieving 
desired outcomes. If necessary, differentiate by type of surveillance 
technology.
If you do currently establish performance measures for methods of 
using surveillance technologies, how do you think this process could be 
improved?
Finally, please explain what happens if performance is inadequate.
8.	 Does your agency have an articulated rule defining inappropriate and/
or personal use as it relates to surveillance technologies? If yes, please 
explain and/or provide a copy of the rule(s). 
9.	 Suppose that someone is suspected of misusing surveillance technology; 
is there a formal process for investigating and adjudicating the breach? If 
yes, please describe the process and/or provide a written copy of it.
10.	What systems do you have in place for actively detecting potentially 
inappropriate or personal uses of your surveillance technologies? Please 
explain how this is done and whether you utilize an automatic alerting of 
suspected misuse systemically.
11.	 What systems do you have in place for passively detecting potentially 
inappropriate or personal uses of your surveillance technologies? Please 
explain how this is done and whether you have established a system of 
“whistle blowing” protections for people so that they feel they can alert 
managers and other relevant parties when misuse is detected.
12.	If you work with third-party vendors to build and implement new or 
enhanced surveillance technologies, how does your agency ensure that the 
vendors and their employees do not re-use or re-sell the code for creating 
the resulting systems that are developed?
13.	How does your organization secure proprietary algorithms for its 
surveillance technology activities? Please explain and/or provide written 
copy of the process.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
235
14.	If your organization procures third-party algorithms for surveillance 
technology do you have a process for checking the validity and 
reliability of the algorithms? If yes, please explain and/or provide written 
documentation of how this process would work.
15.	If your organization procures data from third parties how are they securely 
stored when the original purpose for its use is completed? Please explain 
and/or provide written documentation of this process.
16.	Considering how information and databases can be re-purposed and 
mined for an indefinite number of applications, how do you ensure that 
the systems you create do not exceed their legal or ethical boundaries after 
implementation? Please explain and/or provide written documentation of 
this process.
* This tool was developed by Peter Mameli and Vincenzo Sainato.
If the foregoing soft law questions are diligently asked and responded to by 
either internal or external parties, we might expect that liberal values will be 
sustained at an acceptable level. Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that a culture 
supportive of such an approach is not easily achieved or sustained, especially 
in times of apparent crisis. Therefore, various “harder” approaches may be 
required.
Harder approaches may take various forms. Some may take the form of (a) 
building (“hard-wiring”) appropriate values into the surveillance technologies 
themselves; (b) imposing various administrative or civil penalties on those who 
disregard or contravene such values; and, as a last resort, (c) implementing 
criminal mechanisms in cases in which such values are egregiously flouted.
For a culture supportive of oversight and accountability to take root, trust must 
be ingrained among the parties involved. Trust can be developed in a number 
of ways at the beginning of operations when advice is crafted and distributed 
to surveillance practitioners in soft or hard forms. The first way is to utilize 
the accountability assessment tool provided to ease concerns that issues of 
oversight are being glossed over or ignored. An additional layer of protection 
offers the opportunity to bring a variety of parties together early in order to 
craft mutually agreeable guidance on surveillance operations. Such an approach 
could accomplish this goal in a number of ways. One is where the public sector 
defers to nongovernmental parties from the start in the development of said 
guidelines.17 This is similar to a model of rulemaking that Weimer refers to as 
17  Brandsen, Boogers and Tops, 552. For additional examples, see Steven Bernstein and Benjamin Cashore, 
“Can Non-State Global Governance Be Legitimate? An Analytical Framework”, Regulation & Governance 1 
(2007); 347–71.

Security and Privacy
236
“private rulemaking”.18 It is important to note that the private rulemaking 
model is different from the “negotiated rulemaking” approach, in which external 
parties engage in the process but do not control it, or the “agency rulemaking” 
approach, in which experts and advisory boards are invited in only to offer 
their insight and support.19 Each of these approaches can create buy-in early on 
that will help to support positive relationships as problems arise in the future. 
However, neither fully addresses the negative reactions to oversight discussed 
earlier that follow once guidance is provided. Another level of trust needs to be 
developed in order to get over this hurdle, and it is incumbent on the personnel 
charged with such oversight to help facilitate that trust. But how can this goal 
be achieved when thinking in the world of inspection is colored by expectations 
of adversarial relationships rather than collaborative ones?
Techno-ethics Boards: guiding and growing 
accountability
One way to build trust between practitioners and oversight entities involved 
in responsibly carrying out surveillance operations is to explore the creation 
of a means of constructive engagement between the parties. However, the form 
of interaction must include those who would be involved in such a process 
from front to back. To achieve this purpose we suggest developing Techno-
ethics Boards. Akin to Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) in universities, and 
Bioethics Boards in health settings, Techno-ethics Boards in law enforcement and 
intelligence settings would be charged with advising surveillance practitioners 
on how to go about implementing hard law and regulation on these matters. 
They would also be responsible for addressing ongoing questions of acceptable 
practice that would evolve as technology (and criminality) changes. However, as 
opposed to IRBs, they would not have the ability to prevent the implementation 
of official policies existing in surveillance programs. Due to the need for security 
and the sensitive nature of information that may need to remain protected even 
from the board itself, final calls on implementation would still remain with law 
enforcement and intelligence personnel directly involved with the activity. 
Hence, the board’s oversight of said surveillance operations would still have 
limits. Yet this additional layer of scrutiny would no doubt aid in clarifying 
problems and halting preventable errors through the application of mutually 
accepted soft governance, built on soft law and soft instrumentation.
18  David L. Weimer, “The Puzzle of Private Rulemaking: Expertise, Flexibility, and Blame Avoidance in U.S. 
Regulation”, Public Administration Review 66, no. 4 (July/August 2006): 569–82.
19  Ibid., 569.

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
237
IRBs have been used within universities for decades to protect human and 
animal subjects from research abuses.20 Although the protections of subjects 
and procedures for construction of a Techno-ethics Board to provide guidance 
to government surveillance programs might indeed differ from an IRB, it is a 
worthwhile enterprise to begin exploring. Could such a body stop abuses from 
happening in cases in which law enforcement and intelligence efforts are trying 
to protect national security but go beyond acceptable norms of practice? If so, it 
is at least worth the effort to take a close look at the possibilities for such boards. 
Why risk making the error of creating a new type of Stanley Milgram scenario, 
where both surveillance practitioners and their subjects become victims of 
overzealous observation efforts, if it can be short-circuited?21
As with federally mandated IRBs a Techno-ethics Board would require a spray 
of appropriate expertise and talent, with a recommended membership of at 
least five parties.22 The members would include, at a minimum, one lawyer, one 
ethicist, one technology expert, one oversight expert and one field practitioner. 
As with IRB appointments, sensitive demographic information would also need 
to be taken into account in the development of a Techno-ethics Board in order 
to ensure that a balance of backgrounds is represented.23 All may come from 
government circles, or none. However, there are complications that come with 
including non-governmental entities in security driven operations that make for 
a quandary in this regard. It is more likely that, given the information and the 
context under which surveillance reviews would take place, personnel would 
need to be drawn from across differing law enforcement agencies (and perhaps 
levels of government) more so than from outside parties. However, regardless 
of who is chosen to serve, the goal would not be to create a confrontational 
atmosphere but rather a mutually supportive one in which professionals 
concerned with surveillance and its implications could gather to address real-
world implementation issues.
Evaluating the difficult choices that must be made by governmental entities, in 
which adherence to protections of civil rights and liberties are traded against 
the need for protection, is no easy task. Given that matters of security are at 
stake, parties granted entrance to a given Techno-ethics Board at any level of 
20  Lawrence W. Neuman, Social Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches, fifth ed. 
(Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 2003). Recently Christine Grady surfaced concerns about the effectiveness of 
IRBs in her article entitled, “Do IRBs Protect Human Research Participants?”, Journal of the American Medical 
Association 304, no. 10 (2010): 1122–23. A key point made was that a lack of evidence exists allowing such a 
question to be resolved, and that new approaches to measure the work of IRBs must be developed. Clearly, the 
best way to build a Techno-ethics Board would be to benefit from the improvements in IRBs that will likely be 
generated from the ensuing discussion of Grady’s comments.
21  Royce A. Singleton, Jr. and Bruce C. Straits, Approaches to Social Research, fourth ed. (NY and Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005), 519.
22  Singleton and Straits, p. 530.
23  Elizabethann O’Sullivan, Gary R. Rassel, and Maureen Berner, Research Methods for Public Administrators, 
fifth ed. (US: Pearson Longman, 2008), 261.

Security and Privacy
238
government should not be chosen without careful consideration. As such, it 
is important to turn to those who have the levels of clearance necessary to be 
involved with these matters. One such participant could be found within OIGs. 
OIGs have already been awarded oversight responsibility at the federal level of 
surveillance operations in the US through the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Act Amendments Act of 2008. Considering personnel from these organizations 
for inclusion within a Techno-ethics Board is therefore no great leap of logic. 
Now that the OIG concept is found in many countries around the world and 
operates at many levels of government, OIG members would constitute a good 
population to explore for the purposes of this discussion.
By taking some time to look at the theory that underpins OIGs in the US we 
can begin to see how one type of inspection and oversight body’s personnel can 
be deployed constructively and justifiably in a Techno-ethics Board. If welded 
together carefully with other relevant members, surveillance practitioners can 
be provided with a feeling of comfort that they remain free to innovate solutions 
to crime and intelligence problems despite the existence of the board. Further 
still, they will feel that they have somewhere to go for support and guidance as 
the inevitable tough decisions arise.
Offices of Inspector General and Techno-ethics 
Boards
Over the last twenty years in the US, OIGs have become common entities 
on the government oversight landscape. With a growing realization that the 
costs of corruption and abuse devastate all sectors of society, there has been 
an increasing reliance on oversight bodies such as OIGs to step up and ensure 
accountability and transparency. Yet OIGs do not need to be only reactive in their 
work, seeking out wrongdoers for punishment after infractions have occurred. 
OIGs can also be proactive and can become engaged in constructive efforts to 
ensure that processes of change occur smoothly and, in select circumstances, 
that innovation is encouraged without fear. As such, there is an increasing role 
for OIGs in facilitating soft governance by engaging in a type of consultative 
capacity building that can enhance oversight.
OIGs have a straightforward purpose that is reflected in the US Association of 
Inspectors General’s (AIG) explanation of its role:
Accountability is key to maintaining public trust in our democracy. 
Inspectors general at all levels of government are entrusted with 
fostering and promoting accountability and integrity in government. 
While the scope of this oversight varies among Offices of Inspectors 

 IX. The Complexities of Oversight and Accountability
239
General (OIGs), the level of public trust, and hence public expectation, 
embodied in these offices remains exceptionally high. The public 
expects OIGs to hold government officials accountable for efficient, cost 
effective government operations and to prevent, detect, identify, expose 
and eliminate fraud, waste, corruption, illegal acts and abuse.24
The AIG further notes that the qualifications and skills that should exist in 
these offices include:
Skills needed to evaluate the efficiency, economy, and effectiveness of 
program performance within the OIG's area of responsibility . . . and 
state-of-the-art technical skills as needed such as computer auditing, 
detection of computer fraud, review of information technology design 
requirements, statistical sampling and analysis, factor analysis, trend 
analysis, systems and management analysis, undercover techniques, and 
covert surveillance.25
The language above casts OIGs in a reactive oversight role to those they are 
overseeing. This role has most recently been seen in the efforts of five federal 
OIGs to examine the President’s Surveillance Program as required by the FISA 
Amendments Act of 2008.26 However, the work of OIG staff does not have to be 
restricted to post-implementation analysis once they become part of a Techno-
ethics Board. Where compliance efforts are voluntary to start with, rather than 
mandated, members of OIGs working on Techno-ethics Boards can take on more 
of a capacity-building face than they might normally do when they maintain 
their regular oversight watches. In fact, the skills identified above can be put to 
use in a multitude of ways so as to build operational understanding as part of a 
Techno-ethics Board’s abilities. Expertise brought to the table by OIG personnel 
can enhance adherence to unofficial guidelines upfront, or can at least increase 
understanding of why such guidelines are being ignored or improved upon by 
the parties being asked to implement them. Under such a rationale, members 
of OIGs on Techno-ethics Boards could view themselves as being in position 
to get ahead of problems, rather than be trapped behind them. The parties 
being asked to conform to such soft-law advice would feel that they are being 
worked with, rather than being worked over. This would be especially true if 
surveillance practitioners were given time to comment on board advice prior to 
it being finalized and recommended. In addition, OIG personnel would not find 
themselves totally out of the loop as implementation (or the lack of it) moves 
forward. Finally, when OIG personnel on Techno-ethics Boards receive the self-
24  Association of Inspectors General, Principles and Standards for Offices of Inspector General, 2004 
(Philadelphia: Association of Inspectors General, 2004).
25  Ibid.
26  Offices of Inspectors General, Unclassified Report of the President’s Surveillance Program – Report No. 
2009-0013-AS (Washington, D.C., 2009).

Security and Privacy
240
reported attestations of those being overseen, they will have a much better 
understanding of what is being presented in the final documents. The ways 
in which they would then address issues of non-compliance and enforcement 
could proceed with greater understanding.27 Similar benefits would likely be 
gained by all participating members of a Techno-ethics Board.
In this chapter of the study we are suggesting that creative soft-law approaches 
to government surveillance programs can supplement – and in some cases, 
obviate the need for – hard law by successfully addressing and containing abuses 
of power that occur through negligence, overzealous application or outright 
abuse. They can also aid in simply containing random error. The utilization of 
the Surveillance Technology Accountability Assessment Tool to assess current 
surveillance oversight practices, and the creation of intermediary bodies such 
as Techno-ethics Boards that can be used to provide advice and guidance at 
points between those who create hard law and regulation regarding surveillance 
operations and those who practice its implementation, are the touchstones of 
this offering. Future research in this area should, at the very least, explore: 
(1) The possibilities for such enterprises to be developed; (2) The procedural 
hurdles that would need to be overcome to make Techno-ethics Boards a reality 
in law enforcement settings across levels of government; (3) the selection of 
proper participants in such endeavors; and (4) the piloting of the Surveillance 
Technology Accountability and Assessment Tool in a variety of settings to 
determine its overall usefulness.28
27  See Christopher S. Decker, “Flexible Enforcement and Fine Adjustment”, Regulation & Governance 1 
(2007): 312–28, for some private sector examples.
28  Vincenzo Antonio Sainato’s criminal justice dissertation, “Situational Surveillance Control” (City 
University of New York, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, 2009), explored the value of this tool as part of 
an ethnographic examination of the Branford, Connecticut, Police Department.

241
X.  Recommendations
Here we articulate a series of recommendations with respect to the use 
of technologies identified in Chapters VI and VII that will bear on both 
accountability mechanisms and legal constraints/requirements. Although 
these recommendations focus particularly on the current US situation, they 
have clear implications for democratic polities writ large. To some degree, our 
recommendations arise out of a review of the EU experience which, even if 
flawed in the implementation, strikes us as formally well-developed.
(1) 	That steps be taken to make the American 
public more aware of the extent to which 
its expectations of privacy have been 
compromised.
The point here is that compromises of individual privacy – via the collection 
of data by government agencies – are not limited to newspaper exposés such 
as those undertaken by the New York Times but are a much more pervasive 
feature of contemporary life, engaged in not only by government agents but 
also by private information-gathering firms. Further, these gathered materials 
are in many respects vulnerable to unauthorized access by others via hacking, 
non-encryption of databases and so on. Despite the willingness of individuals 
to make private personal data known to others via social networking sites, 
we believe that if awareness of the extent to which personal data is available, 
accessible and collected is raised there will be an increased concern about 
privacy and the extent to which it has been compromised. One opportune time 
to initiate a more visible national discussion would be the next International 
Data Privacy Day, currently celebrated on January 28 of each year. If a coalition 
of data protection advocates, private sector organization representatives charged 
with protecting privacy, and public officials engages in the concerted promotion 
of such a dialogue, it will constitute a good first step in this direction. Using 
this opportunity to begin debate on the recommendations of this study would 
allow for a more focused conversation to surface on security and privacy than 
we have seen to date.

Security and Privacy
242
(2) 	That this process draw attention to the 
collapse of the traditional distinction between 
the commercial and governmental collection, 
use and retention of personal data.
We are particularly concerned – especially in the case of the US – that it be made 
known to what extent a traditional division between the government’s access 
to private data and commercial access to that data – for legitimate commercial 
purposes – has broken down, in order that there will be increased concern about 
issues of privacy and the legitimate expectations that we may have concerning 
its protection. The relationship between these growing infringements on 
information privacy and the resulting uses of data by law enforcement, 
intelligence and national security organizations should be highlighted as a part 
of the ensuing activities.
(3) 	That this process also include a clear 
articulation of the values that inform personal 
privacy, and that this extend to expectations 
of privacy in public.
Along with an increased awareness of the extent to which private data are now 
widely available – and of course the various uses to which they are and may 
be put – we believe that there should also be more public articulation of the 
importance of privacy to individual and social wellbeing, to the preservation of 
dignity and to the securing of our identities as citizens in a liberal democracy. 
Recent revelations of how the New York Police Department’s Intelligence 
Division has worked with the US CIA to engage in questionable domestic 
surveillance operations indicates how urgent it is to engage in this clarification.1 
Given the current terrorist threat environment, brighter lines of demarcation 
must be drawn to separate acceptable and unacceptable impacts on these values.
1  Adam Goldman and Matt Apuzzo, “With CIA Help, NYPD Moves Covertly in Muslim Areas”, Associated 
Press New York, August 24, 2011, available at: http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=14368992.

X. Recommendations
243
(4) 	That there be greater transparency 
regarding the kinds of data digitally collected, 
stored and used.
Transparency is a significant liberal value, and a liberal democratic society that 
lacks transparency is seriously compromised. Although we do not doubt the 
importance of the challenge posed by transnational crime and terrorism, we 
believe that responses to it should be conducted in ways that do not unnecessarily 
compromise the privacy, autonomy and ultimately the dignity of citizens. That 
will happen only if there is transparency about how those who represent us in 
government are transparent about what personal data are collected and how 
they are being used. To this end, we recommend that government agencies 
construct and publicly report on performance measurement indicators within 
their organizations’ performance management systems that clearly display 
activities in these areas.
(5) 	That a national public discussion be 
initiated concerning the legitimate extent and 
limits of privacy, and of ways of protecting it.
We believe that social changes have significantly affected the nature and extent 
to which the privacy of citizens is construed and secured, especially (though 
not exclusively) as a result of technological advances and their deployment 
to counter crime and terrorism. We believe that these changes need to be 
publicly acknowledged and discussed as part of the deliberative life of a liberal 
democratic community.2
2  Recent discussions in the UK and the US about limiting the use of social media sites during times of political 
and social unrest display the need for early reflection on such concerns. Decisions relating to restricting free 
speech in these contexts could lead to a future erosion of privacy rights in others. Although they are not 
dominoes, many issues intersect with the way in which we construct our image of privacy. Waiting for riots 
and protests to break out in order to address such complexities is akin to closing the barn door after the 
horses have already fled. See James Robinson, “Twitter and Facebook Riot Restrictions Would Be a Mistake, 
Says Google Chief”, Guardian.co.uk, August 27, 2011, available at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/
aug/27/twitter-facebook-riot-restrictions-eric-schmidt. See also Daniel B. Wood, “BART Puts Social Media 
Crackdown in Uncharted Legal Territory”, The Christian Science Monitor, August 16, 2011, available at: 
http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2011/0816/BART-puts-social-media-crackdown-in-uncharted-legal-
territory.

Security and Privacy
244
(6)	That the US federal government 
create a National Office of Data Protection 
(NODP) charged with responsibility for 
developing national policy guidelines and 
recommendations for associated legislation 
for the protection of personal data, and with 
responsibility for oversight of compliance with 
such guidelines and legislation.
In part because transnational crime and international terrorism are of national 
concern, and also in order to avoid a piecemeal approach to an issue of national 
concern, we believe that a federally funded and nationally focused office should 
be set up to gather data concerning privacy-related issues as well as to develop 
national guidelines and associated legislative provisions for the protection of 
privacy. This office should also oversee compliance with privacy legislation and 
guidelines, including implementation of program evaluations, audits, receipt of 
complaints and investigation of infringements of privacy rights.
(7)	That these guidelines and 
recommendations for associated legislation 
take into account both commercial and 
governmental collection, use and retention of 
personal data.
The NODP should see its role as encompassing all significant compromises or 
threats to private data, whether they are initiated by government or commercial 
agencies. Especially given the nexus that has developed between commercial 
data gatherers and governmental interests, we do not believe that the existing 
conventions concerning governmental and commercial or private data gathering 
retain any significant validity. Only an NODP charged with recommending the 
regulation of both public and private sector entities involved with privacy 
matters can adequately satisfy this need.

X. Recommendations
245
(8)	That the NODP recommend a graduated 
series of guidelines and legislative provisions 
for the oversight of personal data collection, 
use and retention by private and public 
agencies, including but not limited to soft-law 
self-regulatory measures, privacy enhancement 
of software, administrative measures designed 
to protect privacy and the identification of 
situations in which criminal penalties ought to 
be levied.
Recognizing that the social history of the US is distinct from that of the EU, we 
believe that a graduated system, commencing with voluntary compliance with 
general guidelines, is best suited to the former’s distinctive culture. However, 
we also recognize that self-regulation has had only a modest success and that it 
needs to go hand in glove with more coercive options given the inevitability of 
noncompliance.
(9) 	That the NODP also have a communicative 
responsibility to ensure that the American 
public is aware of current concerns about 
the privacy of personal data, as well as 
recommendations concerning protection 
enhancements.
It is critical to liberal democratic communities that information concerning 
data protection issues and contemplated responses to them be made available 
in fora that enable public discussion to play an effective role in reviewing 
problem areas and responding to them. Although some watchdog and advocacy 
organizations already exist for that purpose, we believe that the NODP should 
have a responsibility of its own for ensuring that a public debate occurs.

Security and Privacy
246
(10)	 That the NODP explore the possibility 
of the formation of Techno-ethics Boards to 
provide practical oversight of institutional data 
collection and surveillance operations.
It is not enough to have a general office of data protection such as the NODP; 
a more focused body is required to provide immediate oversight of operations 
that threaten privacy boundaries, whether they are engaged in by government 
or commercial agencies. Internal to organizations, Techno-ethics Boards have 
the ability to engage in proactive troubleshooting and problem solving. Where 
programs of data collection, retention and use, as well as surveillance and 
profiling, are formed and implemented, the varied expertise of board members 
can help to achieve and maintain a successful equilibrium between security and 
privacy interests.
(11)	 That the NODP liaise with the European 
Data Protection Supervisor and those similarly 
situated in other liberal democratic countries 
to develop a set of standards that can be 
generally implemented within such societies.
As we have indicated, there is a rich international resource of experience in data 
protection and oversight to be drawn upon, and though we do not question the 
distinctive circumstances of social and political life in the US, we believe that 
there is a great deal to be learned – not only by the US – through developing 
firm links with similar kinds of agencies in other liberal democratic societies. 
However, we see the purpose of such liaisons not only to be one of mutual 
enrichment but also as a means whereby – in an increasingly connected world – 
universal standards for data collection, processing, dissemination and retention 
can be developed.

247
Appendix: Security and Privacy 
Institutional Arrangements: Australia 
and India
Australia
Introduction
The Commonwealth of Australia is a federation of states. The purposes for which 
the Commonwealth was established are known and (to an extent) codified within 
the Australian Constitution. There are a number of sections in the Constitution 
of the Commonwealth of Australia that explicitly establish a framework for law 
enforcement activities. These are:
Section 51:
(xxiv) The service and execution throughout the Commonwealth of civil and 
criminal process and the judgments of the courts of the States:
And:
Section 119: The Commonwealth shall protect every State against invasion and, 
on the application of the Executive Government of the State, against domestic 
violence.
Having said this, the Constitution is silent concerning which rights (if any) of 
citizens are meant to be served by the government. To that extent, there is a 
problem in discerning the limiting factors that ought to serve as the boundaries 
within which the Commonwealth pursues its law enforcement activities. In 
fact, the absence of a Bill of Rights (or some equivalent document) leaves this 
important question unresolved except in the following circumstances:
1.	 Where the Commonwealth legislates to create a right.
2.	 Where a treaty to which the Commonwealth is a party creates a right (as in 
the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights).
3.	 Where the courts discern that a right exists under the common law.
4.	 Where the courts find that a stated or implied right exists under the 
Constitution.

Security and Privacy
248
Although the Commonwealth has law enforcement powers and agencies, law 
enforcement is and remains primarily a state responsibility, and each of the 
states has its own police service (e.g. New South Wales Police, Victoria Police).
Moreover, although there is no Commonwealth Bill of Rights, one of the states 
(Victoria) and one of the territories (Australian Capital Territory (ACT)) have 
recently introduced human rights legislation (Victoria’s Charter of Human Rights 
and Responsibilities Act 2006 and the ACT Human Rights Act 2004), and each 
requires that any statutory provisions that are found to be incompatible with 
the human rights thus established are identified and a justification provided. 
However, the relevant parliaments are not required to rescind legislation that 
is found to be incompatible with the relevant human rights legislation. Both 
the Victorian and ACT human rights legislation explicitly establish a human 
right to privacy. There are also moves afoot to establish a Commonwealth Bill of 
Rights (Brennan Commission of Inquiry).
Some of the key federal agencies relevant to security and privacy are those with 
law enforcement or defense functions and their respective oversight bodies. 
Regarding law enforcement, key agencies include the Australian Federal Police 
(AFP), the Australian Crime Commission (ACC) and Australian Transaction 
Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC). The AFP has an analogous role to 
that of the FBI. For example, it is concerned with serious trans-jurisdictional 
crimes, such as organized crime and terrorism. The focus of the ACC is on 
organized crime; its functions include collecting and analyzing criminal 
intelligence and maintaining criminal intelligence systems. AUSTRAC gathers 
and analyzes information about financial transactions. The various Australian 
police databases of information, including those containing names and details 
of offenders (photographs, fingerprints, criminal history, outstanding warrants 
and, in many cases, DNA records), names of gun owners and missing persons, 
listed telephone numbers and addresses, stolen cars and names and aliases of 
“persons of interest” are linked through the National Police Reference System. 
An important oversight body is the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement 
Integrity (ACLEI). The main focus of ACLEI is the prevention, detection and 
investigation of serious corruption in federal law enforcement agencies. The 
Parliamentary Joint Committee on the Australian Crime Commission is the main 
oversight body for that organization.
Regarding intelligence and defense intelligence, key agencies include (in regard 
to intelligence) the Australia Security Intelligence Organization (ASIO), the 
Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS) and (in regard to defense intelligence) 
the Defence Intelligence Organisation (DIO). ASIO is principally concerned with 
the domestic security of Australia; it has both an intelligence collection role and 
an assessment role. Security in this context means the protection of Australia 
from espionage, sabotage, attacks on the Australian defense system, terrorism 

Appendix
249
and the like. ASIS collects intelligence outside Australia and engages in counter-
intelligence. DIO assesses foreign intelligence and exists principally to support 
the Department of Defence. An important oversight body is the Inspector-
General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS). The latter is an independent 
statutory officer responsible for ensuring that the activities of the intelligence 
and defense agencies are lawful and have appropriate regard to human rights, 
including privacy.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner is the federal agency with responsibility 
for overseeing the operation of the key piece of Australian legislation pertaining 
to privacy, namely, the Privacy Act 1988. Most law enforcement agencies in 
Australia are covered by the Privacy Act, including the AFP and AUSTRAC, 
though the ACC is exempt. The intelligence and defense intelligence agencies 
are partially or completely exempt from the Privacy Act.
Some of the key pieces of federal legislation pertaining to security and privacy 
are: the Privacy Act 1988 (in partial fulfillment of Australia’s international 
obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which 
recognizes a basic right to privacy); the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-
terrorism Financing Act 2006; the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) 
Act 1979; the Telecommunications Act 1997; the Surveillance Devices Act 2004 
(which outlines the circumstances under which surveillance devices can be used 
by federal law enforcement agencies in particular); the Freedom of Information 
Act 1982 (which outlines the rights of access of individuals to government-held 
documents); and the Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 
(which regulates data-matching that makes use of tax file numbers). In addition, 
the states have legislation in relation to privacy and various associated agencies, 
such as privacy commissioners.
In Australia, no jurisdiction has legislated into existence a cause of action for 
invasion of privacy; rather, any such cause of action is part of the common law.
In Australia, identity theft is not currently a federal offense. However, it is a 
federal offense to dishonestly obtain or deal in personal financial information 
without the consent of the relevant person. Although the legislation clearly 
captures credit card fraud and a range of other kinds of identity fraud/theft, it 
is not clear that it is wholly adequate.
The Privacy Act 1988 and privacy principles
The Privacy Act gives effect to Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights and the OECD’s Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and 
Transborder Flows of Personal Data. The Privacy Act regulates the collection, 
use, storage, disclosure and correction of personal information. The requirements 

Security and Privacy
250
of the Act include the National Privacy Principles (NPP) (applying to private 
sector organizations) and the Information Privacy Principles (IPP) (applying to 
Australian government agencies).
The NPP include principles that relate to: (1) collection of information by an 
organization from an individual (e.g. that information collection is lawful, not 
unreasonably intrusive or necessary for one of the organizations purposes); 
(2) use and disclosure (e.g. that information is lawful, is consented to by an 
individual, is necessary to prevent serious or imminent threat to life or is not 
sensitive); (3) data quality (e.g. that information is accurate and up-to-date); 
(4) data security (e.g. that information is protected from unauthorized access 
by members of an organization); (5) openness (e.g. that an organization make 
available how it manages personal information); (6) access and correction 
(e.g. that an individual has access to information about him/herself, unless 
providing access would be unlawful); (7) identifiers (e.g. that an organization 
not adopt as its own identifier of an individual an identifier of the individual 
that has been assigned by a government agency – to reduce the possibility of 
data-matching); (8) anonymity (e.g. that individuals have the option of not 
identifying themselves in transactions with organizations); (9) transborder data 
flows (e.g. a presumption against transfer of personal information to someone 
in a foreign country); and (10) sensitive information (e.g. a presumption against 
the collection of sensitive information).
The IPP consists of most of the principles constitutive of the NPP. However, 
it does so in the context of some requirements specific to Commonwealth 
agencies, for example, with respect to legal requirement for archival record-
keeping. Moreover, there are some important differences. For example, unlike 
the IPP, under the NPP there is no obligation to destroy or de-identify personal 
information data when they are no longer required for the purpose for which 
they were originally collected.
Agencies
Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC)
The OPC’s responsibilities include overseeing and monitoring compliance 
with the Privacy Act (see below), investigating breaches of the Data-matching 
Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990 and monitoring compliance with record-
keeping requirements of the Telecommunications Act 1997. As a consequence, 
the OPC conducts audits and examines records, receives and investigates 
privacy complaints and enforces the acts through determinations and court 
proceedings.1
1  See The Operation of the Privacy Act: Annual Report 2008–2009 (Canberra: Office of the Privacy 
Commissioner, 2009).

Appendix
251
The Australian government has announced the establishment of a new statutory 
Office of the Information Commissioner, to be headed by an Information 
Commissioner, but which will also include the Privacy Commissioner and a 
Freedom of Information Commissioner (another new statutory office).
The Privacy Commissioner is a member of various government committees 
and groups, such as the National Identity Security Group, convened by the 
Attorney-General’s Department, and in these fora the Privacy Commissioner 
provides advice on privacy issues.
The OPC is an active participant in various international organizations (e.g. the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)), fora (e.g. 
Asia Pacific Privacy Authorities Forum) and developments (such as the Asia 
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Data Privacy Pathfinder, endorsed by the 
APEC economies under the APEC Privacy Framework). Under the Pathfinder 
work plan are projects such as cooperation arrangements for cross-border 
cooperation on privacy enforcement and cross-border complaint handling.
The OPC makes numerous submissions to government and elsewhere. For 
example, in 2009 the OPC made a submission to the Australian Law Reform 
Commission’s Review of Secrecy Laws on secrecy laws and, specifically, the 
interaction between secrecy laws and the Privacy Act.2 Among other things, 
the OPC recommended “that where an agency identifies a need to require or 
authorize the handling of personal information where that handling would 
otherwise breach the Privacy Act, the agency should have a clear and appropriate 
policy basis for doing so.”3
Although the Privacy Act applies to private sector organizations as well as 
Australian government agencies, the OPC does not have the power to conduct 
audits of organizations in the private sector. Moreover, there are various public 
sector agencies that are exempt from the Privacy Act and, therefore, from 
oversight and monitoring by the OPC (see below). Further, the Privacy Act 
does not cover businesses with less than AU$3 million annual turnover (i.e. the 
majority of businesses in Australia).
The federal Privacy Act does not cover state public sector agencies and the 
OPC does not have jurisdiction with respect to state public sector agencies. 
These come under the jurisdiction of the various state privacy commissioners 
(e.g. the Office of the Victorian Privacy Commissioner) and are covered by 
state legislation. However, not all the states have privacy legislation or privacy 
commissioners – Western Australia, for example, does not. Moreover, some 
state law enforcement agencies have partial exemptions from the relevant state 
2  Australian Law Reform Commission, Review of Secrecy Laws – Issues Paper 34 (2009).
3  Annual Report 2008–09,1.4.1.

Security and Privacy
252
privacy legislation. Victoria Police, for example, does not have to comply if it 
has a reasonable belief that, in relation to a particular matter, compliance would 
prevent it from conducting its law enforcement function.
In Australia, other than the Victorian Commissioner for Law Enforcement Data 
Security, there is no statutory body concerned exclusively with data security. 
At the federal level and in other states data security and, specifically, law 
enforcement data security are simply functions of oversight agencies with a 
wider remit. Thus the Crime and Conduct Commission in Queensland oversees 
the Queensland Police (and other Queensland public sector agencies) and has a 
concern with data security.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO)
As stated above, ASIO is responsible for protecting Australia and Australians 
from espionage, sabotage, attacks on the Australian defense system, terrorism 
and the like; moreover, ASIO has both an intelligence collection and an 
assessment role.
ASIO collects security information under warrant and only the Director-General 
of Security or an ASIO officer authorized by the Director-General can communicate 
such information. Under the Attorney-General’s guidelines articulated in 
the Performance by the Australian Security Intelligence Organization of its 
Function of Obtaining, Correlating, Evaluating and Communicating Intelligence 
relevant to Security (including Politically Motivated Violence),4 ASIO must: 
obtain intelligence in a lawful and timely manner; ensure the means it uses to 
obtain information are proportionate to the threat; and ensure such means are 
the least intrusive possible. The Director-General must ensure that any personal 
information held or disclosed is accurate and protected against unauthorized 
disclosure.
As noted earlier, ASIO’s compliance with the Attorney-General’s guidelines 
is overseen by the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS). The 
IGIS has access to ASIO’s records and the power to require persons to answer 
questions and produce documents, including documents with a national 
security classification.
However, ASIO is exempt from the Privacy Act and the Freedom of Information 
Act. In addition, according to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Privacy 
Inquiry, the privacy rules that are applicable to ASIO do not cover persons who 
are not Australian citizens.5 Nevertheless, these rules need to be updated with 
respect to classified (as opposed to security-classified) information in respect of 
the incorrect disclosure, accuracy of records and storage of personal information.
4  Available at: www.asio.gov.au/About/Content/AttorneyAcountability.aspx.
5  Australian Law Reform Commission, Australian Privacy Law and Practice – Report 108 (2008), 17–18, 
available at: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/alrc/publications/reports/108/.

Appendix
253
Australian Crime Commission (ACC)
As stated earlier, the focus of the ACC is on organized crime. The ACC’s projects 
have included drug trafficking, targeting suspected pedophile rings and 
determining the nature and extent of organized crime within particular ethnic 
communities. The ACC has the full array of intrusive law enforcement powers, 
such as the use of surveillance devices, the capacity to intercept telephone and 
internet communications, the use of undercover operatives and participation 
in controlled operations (“traps”). In addition, the ACC has special powers that 
are not possessed by normal law enforcement agencies, such as the power to 
issue a summons requiring a person to give evidence under oath and for which 
failure to attend may attract imprisonment. The ACC also provides strategic 
and tactical intelligence to other law enforcement agencies in relation to serious 
crimes, including murder and violent crime, drug trafficking, fraud, organized 
motor vehicle theft, organized gambling and extortion.
As mentioned above, the functions of the ACC include collecting and analyzing 
criminal intelligence and maintaining criminal intelligence systems. The 
ACC uses and adds to a variety of criminal intelligence data bases. It deploys 
techniques such as data-matching and profiling. As noted elsewhere in this 
study, profiling consists of developing a profile or set of characteristics of an 
offender or class of offenders, based in part on the characteristics of the types 
of person who commit that sort of crime. Once a profile has been developed, 
people with that profile can become the subjects of targeted investigations.
Besides data provided by law enforcement agencies, including surveillance 
sheets, the ACC relies on data from public records, company records, the National 
Missing Persons Unit, Telstra and government departments, including taxation, 
social security, health and immigration. Although provision of confidential 
information by these government departments is at the discretion of these 
departments, it is usually provided after a request from the ACC. Such requests 
are made for the general reason that the information will assist investigation into 
a serious crime.
As noted above, the Privacy Act does not apply to the ACC; nor does the Freedom 
of Information Act. The ACC does not destroy but archives information that it 
possesses, including transcripts and files on individuals. Although there are 
audit trails on ACC activities, it is not known whether there are procedures in 
place that actually monitor these audit trails.
In the area of organized crime, there is some tension between privacy and law 
enforcement. This tension is especially evident with respect to third parties – 
that is, persons who are not themselves suspects but who communicate with 
suspects whose communications are being intercepted.

Security and Privacy
254
Whether the ACC should be exempted from the Privacy Act is an issue that 
remains unresolved. One option here would be to bring the ACC under the 
Privacy Act, albeit qua law enforcement body (as is the case with, for example, 
the AFP). This would ensure it was subject to privacy principles, except to the 
extent that its law enforcement activities exempted it. The view of the Australian 
Law Reform Commission is that the ACC should remain exempt from the Privacy 
Act, but that: “The Australian Crime Commission (ACC) in consultation with 
the Privacy Commissioner, should develop and publish information-handling 
guidelines for the ACC and the Board of the ACC.”6 In that case, the Parliamentary 
Joint Committee on the Australian Crime Commission should then monitor the 
ACC’s compliance with these guidelines.
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC)
Under the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-terrorism Financing Act 
2006 and related legislation, AUSTRAC concerns itself with money laundering 
activities. Illegal activities, such as drug dealing and major fraud, generate large 
amounts of money that need to be laundered. In addition, terrorist organizations 
seek to acquire and transfer funds illegally. One of the most effective ways of 
combating these kinds of crime is to follow the so-called money trail. AUSTRAC 
gathers and analyzes data about financial transactions, and the data – at least in 
the first instance – is of two kinds: (1) data automatically provided in accordance 
with the law, including domestic bank and other transactions over $10,000, and 
international telegraphic transfers over $5,000; and (2) data furnished in suspect 
transaction reports (STRs) on the basis of the discretionary judgment of bank 
tellers and the like. These discretionary judgments are based on “suspicious” 
behavior or situations – for example, someone apparently structuring deposits 
in such a manner as to avoid the $10,000 reporting requirement. (STRs go 
directly to law enforcement agencies as well as AUSTRAC.)
These two kinds of data are entered on AUSTRAC's database and might provide 
the starting point for an investigative analysis by AUSTRAC. This investigative 
analysis might make use of computerized techniques such as data-matching 
and may have recourse to additional data, the precise nature of which is not 
publicly available. Should the investigative analysis fail to allay the suspicions 
that triggered the initial interest of AUSTRAC, the material is handed over 
to law enforcement agencies for further investigation. For example, frequent 
deposits in a number of banks by person X of sums of $9,900 might trigger 
an investigative analysis that, because X is unemployed, yields no apparently 
legitimate explanation. Alternatively, X might turn out to be a legitimate 
businessman whose product retails for $9,900.
6  Australian Law Reform Commission, Australian Privacy Law and Practice, Recommendation 37–1 (a).

Appendix
255
AUSTRAC has some accountability mechanisms covering its activities. For 
example, its staff will have had their security checked and they have limited 
access to data. Moreover, their activities leave audit trails, and the Director of 
AUSTRAC has the right to follow these trails. Nevertheless, although there are 
audit trails, there is evidently no set of procedures in place that will routinely 
follow those trails. According to the OPC website’s list of agencies audited, the 
OPC has to date not audited AUSTRAC. Moreover, state agencies that have access 
to AUSTRAC data may not have the same accountability under the Privacy Act 
as federal agencies. Specifically, it is unclear whether some state agencies are 
using AUSTRAC-provided data for purposes other than those provided for in 
the anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing legislation.
In some instances AUSTRAC's capacity to provide data and intelligence in 
relation to money laundering might be undermined by recent technological 
developments. For example, money launderers who use smartcard technology, 
high-level encryption and the internet might be able to make international 
transfers that bypass the financial system and that are not able to be intercepted.
India
India is a sovereign democratic republic and a British Commonwealth nation; 
in fact, this former British colony is the world’s largest democracy. India has 
the parliamentary form of a union government and a unitary construction of 
twenty-eight states – each with its own elected legislative assembly – and seven 
union territories administed by India’s union government.
The Constitution of India provides for various Fundamental Rights (e.g. the 
protection of life and personal liberty (Article 21)) that cannot be removed by 
the state and that are legally enforceable against the state. The Constitution is 
interpreted by the Supreme Court, and states that “the law declared by the 
Supreme Court shall be binding within the terrority of India” (Article 141).
India’s legislative authority is divided between the legislative assemblies of the 
states that form the Union of India and Parliament (the central government). In 
some matters both have concurrent legislative powers. Section 246 of India’s 
1950 Constitution makes policing the responsibility of its states (entries 1 and 2 
in List II of the Seventh Schedule of India’s 1950 Constitution).
Although each of India’s states has legislative authority, the structure and 
practices of the states’ police forces either are governed by India’s Police Act 
1861 or use that Act to provide the model for their own police procedure 
manuals. That Act, together with the operation of other legislation, such as 

Security and Privacy
256
the Indian Penal Code 1860, the Indian Evidence Act 1873 and the Criminal 
Procedure Code 1973 (which replaced the Criminal Procedure Code 1861), apply 
throughout India, imposing uniformity on Indian policing.
From time to time special laws to combat terrorism have been enacted in India. 
The Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Prevention Act (TADA) was in use for 
quite a few years. However, strong and vociferous criticism about its draconian 
provisions and misuse in some cases led to it being repealed. The Prevention 
of Terrorists Activities Act (POTA) was introduced in its place, but that Act is 
also no longer in force, and there is now no special law to deal with terrorist 
activities in India.
Policing and security organizations
India’s state police organizations are headed by Director-Generals/Inspector-
Generals of police, accountable to the relevant state government for the 
administration and good order of the state’s police.
Unfortunately, even after Independence (1947), the original hierarchical police 
structure in India has remained substantially intact, and no serious attempt has 
been made to redefine the relationship between the police and the government 
so as to better reflect the needs of a democracy. In particular, it needs to be 
made clear that the police are not simply an instrument of the executive arm of 
government – and, as such, highly susceptible to corruption – but are rather 
servants of the law and protectors of the rights of the ordinary citizenry.
Numerous commentators and commissions of inquiry have made this point, 
including the Kerala Police Commission (1959), the National Police Commission 
(1981) and the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution 
of India (2002). The National Police Commission, for example, recommended 
that the investigative wing of the police needed to be insulated from external 
pressures and that the head of the police be given statutory tenure.
Each state has a Criminal Investigation Department (CID). The CIDs are divided 
into two cohorts, the Crime and the Intelligence branches. Each of these CID 
branches is headed by an Inspector-General or an Additional-Inspector-General.
In the “Company” era, some of India’s great cities (Calcutta, Madras, Bombay) 
modelled the police of London rather than the paramilitary forces of the British 
colonies. Such police forces were commanded by a Commissioner of Police 
who was accountable not to the state government via an Inspector-General but 
directly to the local city government. Police Commissioners enjoyed judicial-

Appendix
257
executive authority and licensing and regulatory powers that elsewhere lay 
within the purview of District Magistrates. In modern India, larger cities or 
developmental areas with special needs have established Commissionerates.
Thus Cyberabad Commissionerate is located in India’s “Silicon Valley”, the home 
of its burgeoning IT industry. This go-ahead Commissionerate is conducting 
a community-interactive Culture Change Management Programme, a staple of 
which is “constabulary empowerment”, intended to overcome the limitations 
of an “officer-centered” orientation imposed by the 1861 Police Act. Constables 
have been retitled constable officers, and up-skilled as problem-solving “police 
executives”, with ownership of and responsibility for the execution of solutions 
to policing problems, including the use of IT.
The central government’s responsibility under the Constitution includes 
protecting states against internal disturbances, guarding India’s 14,090 km land 
border, providing security for infrastructure and the like.
As well as “communalism” (inter-communal violence) and foreign invasion (China 
in 1962 and Pakistan in 1965), India faces cross-border terrorist incursions and its 
own internal terrorism, including: (a) leftist extremism (Naxalism) in the states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, 
Orissa and West Bengal; (b) ethnic extremism in Nagaland, Tripura, Assam and 
Arunachal Pradesh in furtherance of demands for seccession from India; and (c) 
religious extremism in Kashmir, where the Muslim majority variously seek the 
freedom (Azadi) of an independent Kashmir state, or unification with Pakistan. 
In recent years Kashmir-based terrorist groups, notably Lashkar-e-Toiba, have 
undertaken terrorist attacks in Indian cities outside Kashmir, such as Mumbai 
and Delhi. Moreover, although the majority of the population of India still do 
not possess computers, mobile phones and the like, there has nevertheless been 
an exponential growth in the use of communication and information technology 
and, as a consequence, a steady increase in cybercrime. Among other things, 
the Indian government is concerned about cyber-terrorism, cyber-warfare 
and transnational crime involving the use of communication and information 
technology.
The central government’s Minister for Home Affairs has a coordinating function, 
and may deploy central government police assets to assist states. Such central 
government police asset forces as have been deployed lifted Indian police 
numbers to 1.8 million and include: the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF); the 
Border Security Force (BSF); the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP); the Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF); and the Railway Protection Force (RPF). 
Central government organizations concerned with intelligence and investigation 
include: the Central Intelligence Bureau (CIB) (which focuses on domestic 

Security and Privacy
258
intelligence); the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) (which focuses on external 
intelligence, e.g. regarding India’s conflict with Pakistan); the Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI); the National Investigation Agency (NIA); and the National 
Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). Other central government agencies include the 
Bureau of Police Research and Development and the Institute of Criminology 
and Forensic Science.
Privacy and information technology
In India, the right to privacy derives from the Constitution as well as the 
common law of torts. The Constitution does not explicitly recognize the right to 
privacy but, as mentioned earlier, Article 21 provides for personal liberty, and 
in various cases this has been taken by the Supreme Court to include the right to 
privacy against the state.7 For example, in Kharak Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh 
(1964) the Supreme Court held that police intrusions into a person’s house were 
a violation of privacy. In People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India 1997, 
the Supreme Court held that telephone tapping by the government under the 
Telegraph Act 1885 constituted an infringement of privacy. On the other hand, 
in the course of these judgments it emerged that the right to privacy is not 
absolute and can be lawfully infringed for the prevention of crime and disorder. 
So telephone tapping on the part of law enforcement agencies is permissible 
under certain conditions.
In India, there is no right against infringements of privacy by individuals or 
other private entities. Nevertheless, individual or other private entities who 
infringe one’s privacy are subject to the common law of torts and are liable for 
damages. That said, there is no privacy protection authority in India.
Data protection is not explicitly provided for in the Constitution and, under its 
right in the Constitution to legislate in relation to matters not enumerated in the 
relevant lists, the central government has taken it to be an appropriate matter 
for its involvement. Accordingly, it has enacted the Information Technology 
Act 2000. The Act declared computers and computer networks to be protected 
systems and provided for various civil and criminal offenses in respect of 
unauthorized computer access, theft of computer data, destruction of data, 
corruption of data, fraud and so forth. The Act also set up various regulatory 
authorities, such as the Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal. However, there 
is no data protection authority in India. On the other hand, computerization 
has a long way to go in India, including among law enforcement agencies, and 
there are few comprehensive electronic data bases of a kind that would enable 
efficient and effective data mining or profiling.
7  This also enables India to partially fulfil its international obligations under the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights, in which a basic right to privacy is recognized.

Appendix
259
In 2009 the Information Technology (Amendment) Act 2008 was enacted 
in part to address not only domestic and regional security issues, including 
cyber-crimes and cyber-terrorism, but also, and very importantly, the security 
concerns of foreign companies in respect of India’s huge outsourcing industry. 
The Act provides penalties for various new cyber-crimes (e.g. cyber-terrorism 
and identity theft), the recognition of new electronic documents (e.g. electronic 
documents with e-signatures) and enhanced data security (e.g. for intermediaries 
(any person who receives, stores or transmits data for another person such as 
internet service providers)).
In 2007, the Indian IT software and services industry generated export revenues 
of US$31.3 billion (especially from the US and EU) and it is projected to increase 
this to US$60 billion in 2010.8 Approximately 80% of the world’s 500 largest 
companies outsource some of their sales calls, technical help desks, payroll 
management and/or legal services etc. to India.9
As already noted, data security is not simply a general concern, it constitutes 
a specific threat to India’s billion-dollar IT outsourcing industry and, as a 
consequence, the Indian government and the Indian IT industry have joined 
forces with respect to legislation and on several other fronts to deal with the 
data security issue. The Information Technology (Amendment) Act 2008 is 
part of the legislative response. The establishment by NASSCOM of the Data 
Security Council of India (DSCI) is part of the broader institutional response – in 
this instance, a self-regulatory part, for the DSCI represents software companies 
and the business process outsourcing (BPO) and related IT industries. The 
function of DSCI is to establish, disseminate, monitor and enforce privacy and 
data protection standards for India’s IT and outsourcing industry. Obviously, 
enforcement is the key challenge for DSCI; however, it is difficult to see how 
what is essentially a voluntary organization can effectively enforce the standards 
it establishes other than by the threat of expulsion.
The Information Technology Act 2000 and the Information Technology 
(Amendment) Act 2008 do not set out a comprehensive set of specific privacy 
and data protection principles in the manner of, say, the EU Directive or the 
OECD Guidelines. Rather, they require the use of “reasonable security practices 
and procedures”, defined in terms of practices and procedures designed to 
protect sensitive personal information from unauthorized access, damage, use, 
modification, disclosure etc. However, the DSCI has recommended that companies 
implement one of the available industry-recognized standards such as the OECD 
8  N. Saravade (former Director of Cyber Security and Compliance, National Association of Software and 
Service Companies (NASSCOM)), available at: http://nationalskillsregistry.com/winwin.html.)
9  See: http:www.reuters.com/article/idUSSP4999820060207.

Security and Privacy
260
Privacy Principles for Information Management Systems. Nevertheless, there 
is no requirement that companies undergo an audit to verify the existence and 
efficacy of the controls they have in place to meet any such industry standards.
The Indian government and, specifically, the Department of Information 
Technology (DIT) within the Ministry of Communication and Information 
Technology, has embarked on an ambitious program of e-governance known 
as the National eGovernance Program (NeGP) in relation to the delivery of 
citizen services at both central and state government levels. This program faces 
prodigious challenges in terms of resources, skill levels of personnel and IT 
infrastructure and equipment, although more so in some states than in others. 
The implementation of such an e-governance program in the Indian social and 
institutional context brings with it multiple security threats. Recognizing the 
vulnerability of the information infrastructure to e-crime and e-corruption, the 
government has formulated an information security policy, established various 
bodies (notably the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) within 
the DIT) and required that the government’s information infrastructure be 
subjected to an annual audit. However, the focus of this audit is principally on 
the technical IT systems and networks.
Agencies
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
The CBI is a central government agency and India’s leading investigative agency. 
The CBI’s remit is very wide and includes criminal offenses, corruption and 
national security matters. It can investigate offenses anywhere in India. The 
authority of investigation of the CBI can be exercised only on a specific case-by-
case authorization by the concerned state government or High Court.
Its power to investigate derives from the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act 
1946, according to which it can investigate offenses only in the union territories. 
However, its jurisdiction can be extended by the central government to the 
states, provided that the state government in question consents.
Cases investigated by the CBI include: those involving employees of the central 
government or in which a central government organization is involved; breaches 
of the Official Secrets Act involving the central government; serious breaches 
of import/export laws; trans-jurisdictional crime; serious fraud; and organized 
crime.
The Director of the CBI is a Director General of Police within the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment. Although the CBI is an administrative unit of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, in operational and policy terms the CBI is controlled by the 

Appendix
261
Department of Personnel and Training under a Minister of State who reports to 
the Prime Minister. However, the investigation by the CBI of offenses under the 
Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 (involving offenses by public officials of the 
central government) are controlled by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). 
The CVC also oversees the CBI.
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)
The CVC is a statutory body established under the Central Vigilance Commission 
Act 2003. It consists of a Central Vigilance Commissioner and two Vigilance 
Commissioners. Its principal focus is corruption within central government 
agencies. It identifies high-risk areas, conducts surprise inspections to detect 
system deficiencies and malpractices and advises in relation to, and monitors 
the workings of, anti-corruption systems. It also receives written complaints 
on any allegation of corruption or misuse of office and recommends appropriate 
action. It does not act on anonymous complaints. However, the identity of the 
complainant is not revealed and the CVC can direct the relevant authorities to 
provide protection to complainants.
The CVC is not an investigative agency. Rather, as noted above, it initiates and 
supervises corruption investigations carried out by the CBI or by departmentally 
based vigilance (anti-corruption) officers. An exception is the investigation by the 
CVC of civil works/contracts (e.g. scrutiny of financial controls, reasonableness 
of prices, tender documents, purchase manuals, filing systems etc.), conducted 
by the Chief Technical Examiners Organization, which is the Technical Wing of 
the CVC.
The CVC has undertaken a number of new initiatives including naming corrupt 
officials on its website (“naming and shaming”), and enhancing transparency in 
high-risk areas such as procurement by the use of new information technology 
processes, for example, e-bidding and e-payment.
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
The IB has an intelligence-gathering and an assessment function. It also has 
a preventive function, for example, in developing security checks, vetting 
procedures and the like. The IB is focused on internal security, including public 
order, terrorism, sabotage of vital installations, VIP security and counter-
intelligence, and it is an administrative unit of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
However, the Director of IB is a member of the Joint Intelligence Committee 
(which is in turn responsible to the Cabinet Secretariat in the Prime Minister’s 
Office) and has the authority to brief the Prime Minister should the need arise. 
The IB operates at both central and state levels (through state IBs). However, as 
noted above, the internal security situation in many states is precarious.

Security and Privacy
262
In the interest of national security, the IB’s intelligence-gathering operations 
include human intelligence (e.g. from informants, mail and telephone 
interception). Moreover, in the interest of national security, the central 
government – and, therefore, the IB – has the authority to intercept, monitor 
and block access to electronic information and to monitor and collect data 
identifying a person, computer system or location to or from which the 
communication was transmitted.
Infringements of human rights on the part of law enforcement and intelligence 
agencies, including the IB, can be investigated by the National Commission on 
Human Rights. However, it is unclear what specific oversight mechanisms there 
are in relation to the IB.
Research and Analysis Wing (RAW)
RAW is India’s foreign intelligence agency. RAW has intelligence-gathering, 
counter-intelligence and assessment functions. It also engages in covert 
operations, for example, covert assistance to the ANC, training members of 
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and attempts to limit the supply of military 
hardware to Pakistan. Although its personnel and their numbers are shrouded 
in secrecy, it is estimated to employ around 10,000 agents.10
The head of RAW is the Secretary (Research) in the Cabinet Secretariat, which 
is part of the Prime Minister’s Office. In relation to operational matters the 
Secretary (Research) reports to the National Security Advisor. In addition to 
its headquarters in Delhi, RAW has a number of regional offices and various 
overseas stations.
Infringements of human rights on the part of law enforcement and intelligence 
agencies, including RAW, can be investigated by the National Commission on 
Human Rights. However, the activities of RAW are highly secretive and it is 
unclear what specific oversight mechanisms exist in relation to RAW.
10  “RAW: India’s External Intelligence Agency”, Council on Foreign Relations, available at: http:www.dfr.
org/publications/17707/.

263
References
Alessandro Acquisti, “Privacy in Electronic Commerce and the Economics of 
Immediate Gratification”, Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, 2004, 21–29.
Peter Adey, “Surveillance at the Airport: Surveilling Mobility/Mobilising 
Surveillance”, Environment and Planning A 36, no. 8 (2004): 1365–80.
Per Ahlmark, “How Democracy Prevents Civic Catastrophes”, at: http://www.
unwatch.org/speeches/demcat.html.
David S. Alberts, The Unintended Consequences of Information Age Technologies: 
Avoiding the Pitfalls, Seizing the Initiative (Diane Publishing Co. 1996).
Anders 
Albrechtslund, 
“Online 
Social 
Networking 
as 
Participatory 
Surveillance”, First Monday 13, no. 3 (March 2008).
Anita Allen, Uneasy Access: Privacy for Women in a Free Society (Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1988).
Fritz Allhoff, Patrick Lin, James Moor and John Weckert, “Ethics of Human 
Enhancement: 25 Questions and Answers”, Studies in Ethics, Law, and 
Technology 4, no. 1 (2010), doi: 102202/1941-6008.1110.
Monique Altheim, “The Review of the EU Data Protection Framework v. The 
State of Online Consumer Privacy in the US”, EDiscoveryMap, March 17, 
2011, 
at: 
http://ediscoverymap.com/2011/03/the-review-of-the-eu-data-
protection-framework-v-the-state-of-online-consumer-privacy-in-the-us.
Anthony G. Amsterdam, “Perspectives on the Fourth Amendment”, Minnesota 
Law Review 58 (1974): 349, 428–34.
Anon., “Data Protection in the European Union”, at: http://ec.europa.eu/
justice/policies/privacy/docs/guide/guide-ukingdom_en.pdf.
Anon., “US Identity Fraud Rates by Geography”, I.D. Analytics Inc., San Diego, 
CA, February 2007.
Anon., “Phishing”, at: http://www.antiphishing.org/.
Anon., “A History of Surveillance in New York City”, available at: http://www.
notbored.org/nyc-history.html.
Anon., “Armin Meiwes”, at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armin_Meiwes.
Anon., “NSA Warrantless Surveillance Controversy”, at: http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/NSA_warrantless_surveillance_controversy.

Security and Privacy
264
Anon., “Trojan Horse”, (Computing) at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trojan_
horse_(computing).
Anon., “Gyges Goes Surfing”, at: http://www.applelust.com/one/index.
php?option=com_content&task=view&id=35.
Leonora LaPeter Anton, “Airport Body Scanners Reveal All, But What About 
When It’s Your Kid?”, St Petersburg Times, July, 17, 2010.
Francisco Rojas Aravena, “Human Security: Emerging Concept of Security in 
the Twenty-First Century”, Disarmament Forum 2 (2002), at: http://www.
unidir.ch/pdf/articles/pdf-art1442.pdf.
David Archard, “Freedom not to be Free: The Case of the Slavery Contract in J. 
S. Mill's On Liberty”, Philosophical Quarterly (October, 1990): 453–465.
Nicholas S. Argyres, “The Impact of Information Technology on Coordination: 
Evidence from the B-2 ‘Stealth’ Bomber”, Organization Science 10, no. 2 
(1999): 162–80.
Association of Inspectors General, Principles and Standards for Offices of Inspector 
General, 2004 (Philadelphia: Association of Inspectors General, 2004).
Association of the Bar of the City of New York and Center for Human Rights and 
Global Justice, Torture by Proxy: International and Domestic Law Applicable 
to “Extraordinary Renditions”, New York: ABCNY & NYU School of Law, 
2004; available at The Record (of the Bar Association of the City of New York), 
60 (2005): 13–193.
Australian Law Reform Commission, Australian Privacy Law and Practice – 
Report 108 (2008), available at: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/alrc/
publications/reports/108/.
_____, Review of Secrecy Laws – Issues Paper 34 (2009).
C. Babcock, “Data Data Everywhere”, Information Week Global CIO, January 9, 
2006.
Neera Kapur Badhwar (ed.), Friendship: A Philosophical Reader (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1993).
_____, “Friends as Ends in Themselves”, Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 48 (1987):1–23.
Annette Baier, “Some Virtues of Resident Alienage”, in Virtue, NOMOS XXXIV, 
ed. John W. Chapman and William Galston (New York: NYU Press, 1992), 
291–308.

References
265
Al Baker, “Police Seek a Second Zone of High Security in the City”, The New York 
Times, March 31, 2009, available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/01/
nyregion/01kelly.html.
Wade H. Baker, Alex Hutton, C. David Hylender, Christopher Novak, Christopher 
Porter, Bryan Sartin, Peter Tippett, M.D., PhD and J. Andrew Valentine, 
2009 Data Breach Investigations Report, Verizon Business, available at: http://
securityblog.verizonbusiness.com, viewed 14 December 2009.
Michael Barkun, “Religion and Secrecy After September 11”, Journal of the 
American Academy of Religion 74, no. 2 (2006): 275–301.
S.I. Benn, A Theory of Freedom, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
1988, 296–97.
S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus, “Public and Private – Concepts in Action”, Public and 
Private in Social Life, ed. S.I. Benn and G.F. Gaus (NY: St. Martin’s Press, 
1983), 3–27.
Craig Bennell and Shevaun Corey, “Geographic Profiling of Terrorist 
Attacks”,Criminal Profiling: International Theory, Research, and Practice, ed. 
R. N. Kocsis (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2007), 201.
Colin J. Bennett, “Cookies, Web Bugs, Webcams and Cue Cats: Patterns of 
Surveillance on the World Wide Web”, Ethics and Information Technology 3 
(2001): 197–210.
Jeremy Bentham, The Works of Jeremy Bentham, ed. John Bowring (London: W. 
Tait, 1838–43), vol. 4.
_____, The Panopticon Writings, ed. Miran Bozovic (London: Verso, 1995).
Vera Bergelson,. “The Right to Be Hurt. Testing the Boundaries of Consent”, 
George Washington Law Review 75 (2007): 165 at: http://works.bepress.
com/vera_bergelson/4.
Steven Bernstein and Benjamin Cashore, “Can Non-State Global Governance Be 
Legitimate? An Analytical Framework”, Regulation & Governance 1 (2007); 
347–71.
Calvin Biesecker, “TSA to Test Additional Personal Imaging Systems at 
Airports”, Defense Daily, 8/21/2007.
Francesca Bignami, “European versus American Liberty: A Comparative Privacy 
Analysis of Anti-Terrorism Data-Mining”, Boston College Law Review, 48 
(May 2007): 609.

Security and Privacy
266
 _____, “Privacy and Law Enforcement in the European Union: The Data 
Retention Directive”, Chicago Journal of International Law 8 (2007): 233.
Dan Bilefsky, “Data Transfer Broke Rules, Report Says”, The New York Times, 
September 28, 2006.
Charles Black, Decision According to Law (New York: Norton, 1981).
Edwin Black, IBM and the Holocaust, Time Warner Paperbacks (2001).
William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, (c. 1765) vol. IV: Of 
Public Wrongs (169), Boston: Beacon Press, 1962, 189.
Philip Bobbitt, “The Warrantless Debate over Wiretapping”, The New York 
Times, August 22, 2007.
Sissela Bok, Secrets: On the Ethics of Concealment and Revelation (New York: 
Vintage, 1989).
Danah Boyd, “Friendster and Publicly Articulated Social Networking”, 
Conference on Human Factors and Computing Systems, April 24–29, Vienna, 
Austria, 2004, available at: http://www.danah.org/papers/CHI2004Friendster.
pdf.
Taco Brandsen, Marcel Boogers and Pieter Tops, “Soft Governance, Hard 
Consequences: The Ambiguous Status of Unofficial Guidelines”, Public 
Administration Review 66, no. 4 (July/August 2006): 546–53.
William F. Brennan, Jr., “The Bill of Rights and the States”, NYU Law Review 
61 (1986): 535.
Ian Brown, Terrorism and the Proportionality of Internet Surveillance, European 
Journal of Criminology 6, no. 2 (2009): 119–134.
Allen Buchanan, Justice, Legitimacy, and Self-Determination: Moral Foundations 
for International Law (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Public Defender Offices, at: http://bjs.
ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=215.
Holger Bϋrk and Andreas Pfitzmann, “Digital Payment Systems Enabling 
Security and Unobservability”, Computers & Security 8, no. 5 (1989): 399–
416.
B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde, and O. Waever, Security: A New Framework for 
Analysis (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1997).
Norman S. Care, “On Fixing Social Concepts”, Ethics, 84 (October, 1973), 10–21.

References
267
Leslie Cauley, “NSA Has Massive Database of Americans’ Phone Calls”, USA 
Today, May 11, 2006, A1.
Samidh Chakrabarti and Aaron Strauss, “Carnival Booth: An Algorithm for 
Defeating the Computer-Assisted Passenger Screening System”, Electrical-
Engineering-and-Computer-Science (2002), at: http://www.mit.strathmore.
edu/NR/rdonlyres/Electrical-Engineering-and-Computer-Science/6-805Fall-
2005/4E484655-6947-4D60-B789-32F2FFE6199A/0/caps.pdf.
David W. Chapman and Roger A. Boothroyd, “Threats to Data Quality in 
Developing Country Settings”, Comparative Education Review 32, no. 4 
(1988): 416–29.
Robert N. Charette, “Why Software Fails”, IEEE Spectrum, at http://spectrum.
ieee.org/computing/why-software-fails, viewed January 3, 2010.
Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo and Russell G. Smith, “Criminal Exploitation of 
Online Systems by Organized Crime Groups”, Asian Journal of Criminology 
3, no. 1 (June 2008).
John Christman, “Autonomy in Moral and Political Philosophy”, Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/autonomy-
moral/.
Roger Clarke, “Human Identification in Information Systems: Management 
Challenges and Public Policy Issues”, Information Technology & People, 7 
(1994): 6–37, at: http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/DV/HumanID.
html.
_____, “Person-Location and Person-Tracking: Technologies, Risks and Policy 
Implications”, Information Technology & People 14, no. 2 (Summer 2001): 
206–31.
William J. Clinton & Albert Gore, Jr., A Framework for Global Electronic 
Commerce, July 1, 1997, available at http://www.technology.gov/
digeconomy/framewrk.htm.
Simon A. Cole and Michael Lynch, “The Social and Legal Construction of 
Suspects”, Annual Review of Law and Social Science, December 2006, vol. 2, 
39–60 (doi: 10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.2.081805.110001).
Committee on Assessment of Security Technologies for Transportation, National 
Research Council, Assessment of Millimeter-Wave and Terahertz Technology 
for Detection and Identification of Concealed Explosives and Weapons 
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), at: http://books.nap.
edu/openbook.php?record_id=11826&page=R1.

Security and Privacy
268
William E. Connolly, The Terms of Political Discourse (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1993).
Austin Considine, “Will New Airport X-Rays Invade Privacy?”, The New York 
Times, October 9, 2005, TR3.
Maureen Cooney, Report to Congress on the Impact of Data Mining Technologies 
on Privacy and Civil Liberties (Washington, DC: DHS, July 6, 2006), at: http://
www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_data_%20mining_%20
report.pdf.
Daniel Cooper, Henriette Tielemans, and David Fink, “The Lisbon Treaty and 
Data Protection: What’s Next for Europe’s Privacy Rules?”, The Privacy 
Advisor, athttp://www.cov.com/files/Publication/44dd09f7-3015-4b37-
b02e-7fe07d1403f4/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/8a89a612-
f202-410b-b0c8-8c9b34980318/The%20Lisbon%20Treaty%20and%20
Data%20Protection%20What%E2%80%99s%20Next%20for%20
Europe%E2%80%99s%20Privacy%20Rules.pdf.
CyberSource Corporation, “Online Fraud Report: Online Payment Fraud Trends, 
Merchant Practices and Benchmarks”, available at: http://www.cybersource.
com.
Omar Dahbour, “Advocating Sovereignty in an Age of Globalization”, Journal of 
Social Philosophy, 37, no. 1 (2006): 108–26.
Richard C. Dales, “A Medieval View of Human Dignity”, Journal of the History 
of Ideas 38, no. 4 (October–December 1979): 557–72.
Stephen L. Darwall, “Two Kinds of Respect”, Ethics, 88 (1) (1977): 36–49.
Eric Dash, “City Data Theft Points Up a Nagging Problem”, NY Times, June 10, 
2011, B1 and 7.
Julie Hirschfeld Davis, “Lawmakers Warn FBI Over Spy Powers Abuse”, 
TheWashington Post, March 21, 2007, available at: http://www.washingtonpost.
com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/03/21/AR2007032100225.html
Dionysios S. Demetis, “Data Growth, the New Order of Information Manipulation 
and Consequences for the AML/ATF Domains”, Journal of Money Laundering 
Control 12, no. 4 (2009): 353–70.
Department of Commerce Internet Policy Task Force, “Commercial Data Privacy 
and Innovation in the Internet Economy: A Dynamic Policy Framework”, 2010, 
available at http://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2010/
december/iptf-privacy-green-paper.pdf.

References
269
Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Office – Privacy Impact Assessments 
(PIA), at: http://www.dhs.gov/files/publications/editorial_0511.shtm.
_____, Agreement Between the United States of America and the European Union 
on the Processing and Transfer of Passenger Name Record (PNR) Data by 
Air Carriers to the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
(2007 PNR Agreement), at: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/pnr-
2007agreement-usversion.pdf.
_____, A Report Concerning Passenger Name Record Information Derived from 
Flights between the U.S. and the European Union, at: http://www.dhs.gov/
xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_pnr_report_20081218.pdf.
_____, Office of Inspector General, Survey of DHS Data Mining Activities, OIG-
06-56 (Washington, DC: Office of Information Technology, August 2006), at: 
http://www.dhs.gov/xoig/assets/mgmtrpts/OIG_06-56_Aug06.pdf.
Gijs de Vries, “Terrorism, Islam and Democracy”, EurActiv.com, March 4, 
2005, at: http://www.euractiv.com/en/security/gijs-vries-terrorism-islam-
democracy/article-136245.
Geoff Dean, “Criminal Profiling in a Terrorism Context”, in R. N. Kocsis (ed.), 
Criminal Profiling – International Theory, Research, and Practice, Humana 
Press, 2007.
Judith DeCew, In Pursuit of Privacy: Ethics and the Rise of Technology (Cornell 
UP, 1997), 48.
Christopher S. Decker, “Flexible Enforcement and Fine Adjustment”, Regulation 
& Governance 1 (2007): 312–28.
Tamara Dinev, Paul Hart, and Michael R. Mullen, “Internet Privacy Concerns 
and Beliefs about Government Surveillance – An Empirical Investigation”, 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 17 (2008): 214–33.
Charles Doyle, “Administrative Subpoenas and National Security Letters in 
Criminal and Foreign Intelligence Investigations” (Congressional Research 
Service, 2005), at: http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL32880.pdf.
_____, “National Security Letters in Foreign Intelligence Investigations: A 
Glimpse of the Legal Background and Recent Amendments”, March 31, 2006, 
CRS Report for Congress Received through the CRS Web. Order Code RS22406.
George F. du Pont, “The Time Has Come For Limited Liability For Operators of 
True Anonymity Remailers in Cyberspace: An Examination of the Possibilities 
and Perils”, Journal of Technology Law & Policy 6, no. 2 (2001): 175–218, 
available at: http://grove.ufl.edu/~techlaw/vol6/issue2/duPont.pdf.

Security and Privacy
270
Christopher Drew, “Military Is Awash in Data From Drones”, The New York 
Times, January 11, 2010.
Michael Dusche, “Human Rights, Autonomy and National Sovereignty”, Ethical 
Perspectives, 7, no. 1 (2000): 24–36.
Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously, London: Duckworth, 1977.
_____, “Rights as Trumps”, in Theories of Rights, ed. Jeremy Waldron, Oxford: 
OUP, 1984, 153–67.
Editorial, “The Cloud Darkens: As Online Security Threats Grow, Companies 
and Government Are Scarily Unprepared”, NY Times, June 30, 2011, A26.
EDRI-gram, January 14, 2009, at: http://www.edri.org/edri-gram/number7.1.
Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Facebook’s New Privacy Changes: The Good, 
the Bad and the Ugly”, December 9, 2009. Available at: http://www.eff.org/
deeplinks/2009/12/facebooks-new-privacy-changes-good-bad-and-ugly.
Yuval Elovici, Bracha Shapira, Mark Last, Omer Azzfrany, Menahem Friedman, 
Moti Schneider and Abraham Kandel, “Content Based Detection of Terrorists 
Browsing the Web Using an Advanced Terror Detection System”, in Terrorism 
Informatics: Knowledge Management and Data Mining for Homeland Security, 
Hsinchun Chen, Edna Reid, Joshua Sinai, Andrew Silke, and Boaz Ganor 
(eds), 2008, Springer, 365–384.
Izhak England, “Human Dignity from Antiquity to Modern Israel’s Constitutional 
Framework”, Cardozo Law Review 21 (May 2000): 1903–27.
Amitai Etzioni, The Responsive Society (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991).
_____, The Spirit of Community: Rights, Responsibilities and the Communitarian 
Agenda (New York: Crown Publishers, 1993).
_____, The Limits of Privacy (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
EUROPA Press Releases Rapid, “European Commission Sets Out Strategy to 
Strengthen EU Data Protection Rules”, IP/10/1462, Brussels, November 4, 2010, 
at: http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/10/1462.
European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS), “Opinion of the European Data 
Protection Supervisor on the Evaluation report from the Commission to 
the Council and the European Parliament on the Data Retention Directive 
(Directive 2006/24/EC)”, May 31, 2011, available at: http://www.edps.
europa.eu/EDPSWEB/webdav/site/mySite/shared/Documents/Consultation/
Opinions/2011/11-05-30_Evaluation_Report_DRD_EN.pdf.

References
271
EU Privacy Commission, “Summary of the Opinion on the Transfer of Personal 
Data by SCRL SWIFT Following the UST (OFAC) Subpoenas”, at: http://www.
privacycommission.be/communiqu%E9s/summary_opinion_Swift_%20
28_09_2006.pdf.
European Union Fundamental Rights Agency, “Data Protection in the EU: the 
role of National Data Protection Authorities – Strengthening the fundamental 
rights architecture in the EU II”, 2010, available at: http://fra.europa.eu/
fraWebsite/research/publications/publications_en.htm.
Mark Evans (ed.), Special Issue: New Directions in the Study of Policy Transfer, 
Policy Studies, 30, no. 3 (June 2009): 237–402.
Kareem Faheem, “Surveillance Will Expand To Midtown, Mayor Says”, The 
New York Times, October 4, 2009, available at: http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/10/05/nyregion/05security.html.
W. Fan, L. Wallace, S. Rich and Z. Zhang, “Tapping the Power of Text Mining”, 
Communications of the ACM 49, no. 9 (September 2006): 77–82.
Lyle Fearnley, “Signals Come and Go: Syndromic Surveillance and Styles of 
Biosecurity”, Environment and Planning A, 40 (2008): 1615–1632.
FTC, Privacy Online: Fair Information Practices in the Electronic Marketplace 
(2000), available at: http://www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy2000/privacy2000.
pdf.
FTC Preliminary Staff Report, “Protecting Consumers in an Era of Rapid Change: 
Proposed Framework for Business and Policy Makers”, December 2010, 
available at: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2010/12/101201privacyreport.pdf.
Federal Trade Commission, “Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of 
Rapid Change”, December 2010, available at: http://www.ftc.gov/
os/2010/12/101201privacyreport.pdf.
Lukas Feiler, “The Legality of the Data Retention Directive in Light of the 
Fundamental Right to Privacy and Data Protection”, European Journal of Law 
& Technology 1, no. 3 (2010), available at: http://ejlt.org//article/view/29/75.
Joel Feinberg, The Moral Limits of Criminal Law, vol. 3: Harm to Self (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1986).
_____, The Moral Limits of Criminal Law, vol. 4: Harmless Wrongdoing (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
_____, “Autonomy, Sovereignty, and Privacy: Moral Ideals in the Constitution”, 
Notre Dame Law Review 58 (1983): 445–92.

Security and Privacy
272
Stephen E. Feinberg, “Privacy and Confidentiality in an e-Commerce World: 
Data Mining, Data Warehousing, Matching and Disclosure Limitation”, 
Statistical Science 21, no. 2 (2006): 143–54.
A. Felt and D. Evans, “Privacy Protection for Social Networking APIs”, presented 
at Web 2.0 Security and Privacy 2008, Oakland, Ca, May 22, 2008. Available 
at: http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~afelt/privacybyproxy.pdf.
Glen W. Fewkes, “New Public Surveillance Technologies May Alter Fourth 
Amendment Standards”, Government Security News, available at: http://
www.gsnmagazine.com/
L. Fields, “Parfit on Personal Identity and Desert”, Philosophical Quarterly 37 
(1987): 432–41.
Peter Fleischer, “Protecting Privacy on the Internet”, December 19, 2007, 
available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2IKBke1puFw.
James E. Fleming, “Securing Deliberative Democracy”, Fordham Law Review, 
72 (2004): 1435–76.
Michael Foucault, Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison, translated by 
Alan Sheridan (NY: Vintage Books 1977) pp. 195–228.
FoxNews, “FBI Ditches Carnivore Surveillance System”, at: http://www.
foxnews.com/story/0,2933,144809,00.html.
Leslie P. Francis, Margaret P. Battin, Jay Jacobson, and Charles Smith, 
“Syndromic Surveillance and Patients as Victims and Vectors”, Bioethical 
Inquiry 6 (2009):187–195.
Charles Fried, “Privacy”, Yale Law Journal 77 (1968): 475–93.
T. Frieden, “Report: FBI Wasted Millions on ‘Virtual Case File’”, CNN (2005, 
February 3), viewed September 7, 2009, at: http://www.cnn.com.
Carl J. Friedrich, “Secrecy Versus Privacy: The Democratic Dilemma”, in J. 
Roland Pennock and John W. Chapman (eds.), Privacy, NOMOS XIII (NY: 
Atherton Press, 1971), 105–20.
Alan E. Fuchs, “Autonomy, Slavery, and Mill's Critique of Paternalism”, Ethical 
Theory and Moral Practice, 4, no. 3 (September, 2001): 231–251.
Christian Fuchs, Social Networking Sites and the Surveillance Society (Salzburg 
Förderung der Integration der Informationswissenschaften, 2009).

References
273
James J. Fyfe, “Structuring Police Discretion”, in John Kleinig (ed.), Handled 
with Discretion: Ethical Issues in Police Decision Making (Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1996), 183–205.
W.B. Gallie, “Essentially Contested Concepts”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, 56 (1955–56), 167–98 (also in Essentially Contested Concepts and the 
Historical Understanding, London: Chatto and Windus, 1964, ch. 8).
EOS Gallup Europe – FLASH EB No 147, Data Protection in the European Union: 
Report, p. 5, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl147_
data_protect.pdf.
Simson Garfinkel, Database Nation: The Death of Privacy in the 21st Century 
(O’Reilly Media, December 2000).
Gerald Gaus, The Modern Liberal Theory of Man (New York: St Martin’s Press, 
1983).
Ruth Gavison, “Privacy and the Limits of Law”, Yale Law Journal, 89 (January, 
1980): 442.
John A. Gentry, “Doomed to Fail: America’s Blind Faith in Military Technology”, 
Parameters (2002–03): 88–103.
Robert Gerstein, “Intimacy and Privacy”, Ethics 89, no. 1 (1978): 76–81.
Rebecca Givner-Forbes, Steganography: Information Technology in the Service 
of Jihad (Singapore: The International Centre for Political Violence and 
Terrorism Research, A Centre of the S. Rajaratnam School of International 
Studies, Nanyang Technical University, 2007).
Erving Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity (1963; 
Englwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1968).
Adam Goldman and Matt Apuzzo, “With CIA Help, NYPD Moves Covertly in 
Muslim Areas”, Associated Press New York, August 24, 2011, available at: 
http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory?id=14368992.
Harry Goldstein, “Who Killed the Virtual Case File?”, IEEE Spectrum, available 
at: http://lrv.fri.uni-lj.si/~franc/COURSES/VP/FBI.pdf viewed 5 July 2009.
Benjamin Goold, “Privacy Rights and Public Spaces: CCTV and the Problem of 
the ‘Unobservable Observer’”, Criminal Justice Ethics 21, no. 1 (2002): 24.
_____, “Open to All? Regulating Open Street CCTV”, Criminal Justice Ethics 25, 
no. 1 (2006): 11–12.

Security and Privacy
274
Siobhan Gorman, Yochi J. Dreazen, and August Cole, “Insurgents Hack U.S. 
Drones, $26 Software Is Used to Breach Key Weapons in Iraq; Iranian Backing 
Suspected”, The Wall Street Journal, December 17, 2009, A1.
Christine Grady, “Do IRBs Protect Human Research Participants”, Journal of the 
American Medical Association 304, no. 10 (2010): 1122–23.
Stephen Graham and David Wood, “Digitizing Surveillance: Categorization, 
Space, Inequality”, Critical Social Policy 23, no. 2 (2003): 227–48.
John N. Gray, “The Contestability of Concepts”, Political Theory, 5 (1977), 330–
48.
_____, “On Liberty, Liberalism, and Essential Contestability”, British Journal of 
Political Science, 8 (1978), 385–402.
Mary W. Green, The Appropriate and Effective Use of Security Technologies in U.S. 
Schools, A Guide for Schools and Law Enforcement Agencies, Sandia National 
Laboratories, September 1999, NCJ 178265.
Hyman Gross, “Privacy and Autonomy”, in Privacy, NOMOS XIII, ed. J. Roland 
Pennock and John W.Chapman (NY: Atherton Press, 1971).
Ralph Gross and Alessandro Acquisti, “Information Revelation and Privacy 
in On-line Social Networks (The Facebook Case)”, Proceedings of the ACM 
Workshop on Privacy in Electronic Society (WPES), November 2005, available 
at: 
http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/~acquisti/papers/privacy-facebook-gross-
acquisti.pdf.
Jeremy Gruber, RFID and Workplace Privacy, on the NATIONAL WORKRIGHTS 
INSTITUTE 
website, 
http://www.workrights.org/issue_electronic/
RFIDWorkplacePrivacy.html, 23 December 2009.
Niels Haering, Péter L. Venetianer, and Alan Lipton, “The Evolution Of Video 
Surveillance: An Overview”, Machine Vision and Applications 19 (2008):279–
90.
Arun Hampapur, Lisa Brown, Jonathan Connell, Sharat Pankanti, Andrew 
Senior and Yingli Tian, “Smart Surveillance: Applications, Technologies 
and Implications”, available at: http://domino.research.ibm.com/comm./
research_projects.nsf/pages/s3.pubs.html/$FILE$/PCM03.pdf.
David Harris, “Profiling: Theory and Practice”, Criminal Justice Ethics 23, no. 
2 (2004): 51–57.
Edward Hasbrouck, “What’s in a Passenger Name Record (PNR)?”, at: http://
hasbrouck.org/articles/PNR.html.

References
275
Ragib Hasan and William Yurcik, “Beyond Media Hype: Empirical Analysis of 
Disclosed Privacy Breaches 2005-2006 and a DataSet/Database Foundation 
for Future Work”, at: http://wesii.econinfosec.org/draft.php?paper_id=37.
Susan Hekman, Private Selves, Public Identities, Reconsidering Identity Politics 
(University Park, PA: Penn State University Press, 2004).
Richard Hillestad, James H. Bigelow, Basit Chaudhry, Paul Dreyer, Michael 
D. Greenberg, Robin C. Meili, M. Susan Ridgely, Jeff Rothenberg and 
Roger Taylor, Identity Crisis: An Examination of the Costs and Benefits of a 
Unique Patient Identifier for the U.S. Health Care System (Santa Monica, CA: 
Rand, 2008), available at: http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/
monographs/2008/RAND_MG753.pdf.
Albert O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, 
Organizations, and States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970).
John D. Hodson, John D. “Mill, Paternalism and Slavery”, Analysis 41 (January, 
1981): 60–62.
Bruce Hoffman, “Defining Terrorism”, in Terrorism and Counterterrorism: 
Understanding the New Security Environment, ed. Russell D. Howard, Reid L. 
Sawyer, Natasha E. Bajema (third ed., NY: McGraw-Hill, 2009), 4–33.
Jennifer Daw Holloway, “The Perils of Profiling for the Media: Forensic 
Psychologists Speak Out on the Lessons Learned from the Washington-Area 
Sniper Case”, APA Online at: http://www.apa.org/monitor/jan03/perils.
html.
Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Jennifer King, Su Li, and Joseph Turow, “How Different 
Are Young Adults from Older Adults When it Comes to Information Privacy 
Attitudes and  Policies?”, available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1589864.
Patrick Howard, Chief Information Security Officer, Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission, “Creating a Culture of Security – Top 10 Elements of an 
Information Security Program”, available at: www.govinfosecurity.com/
webinarsDetails.php.
IAPP (International assoc. of Privacy Professionals), “House Subcommittee Hears 
Call for ECPA Updates”, June 25, 2010, at: https://www.privacyassociation.
org/.../2010_06_25_house_subcommittee_hears_call_for_ecpa_updates.
Information Policy Division, UK Ministry of Justice, Circular 2011/01, “Council 
Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the 

Security and Privacy
276
framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters 2008/977/
JHA”, Jan. 25, 2011, available at: http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/
docs/data-protection-framework-decision-circular.pdf.
Julie C. Innes, Privacy, Intimacy and Isolation (NY: Oxford University Press, 
1992).
R. Jones, “Digital Rule: Punishment, Control and Technology”, Punishment and 
Society 2, no. 1 (2001): 5–22.
Paul W. Kahn, “Interpretation and Authority in State Constitutionalism”, 
Harvard Law Review 106 (1993): 1147.
Yale Kamisar, “Remembering the Old World of Criminal Procedure: A Reply to 
Professor Grano”, University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 23 (1990): 
537, 562–65.
Immanuel Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, translated by H. J. 
Paton (New York: Harper and Row, 1956).
_____, The Metaphysical Elements of Justice, trans John Ladd (Indianapolis: 
Bobbs-Merrill, 1965).
Gary C. Kessler, “An Overview of Steganography for the Computer Forensics 
Examiner” (edited version), Forensic Science Communications (Technical 
Report) 6, no. 3 (July 2004), available at: http://www.fbi.gov/hq/lab/fsc/
backissu/july2004/research/2004_03_research01.htm 
and 
http://www.
garykessler.net/library/fsc_stego.html.
Donald F. Kettl, The Global Public Management Revolution, second ed. 
(Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 2005).
Donald F. Kettl and James. W. Fesler, The Politics of the Administrative Process, 
fourth ed. (Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2009).
Mun-Cho Kim, “Surveillance Technology, Privacy and Social Control: With 
Reference to the Case of the Electronic National Identification Card in South 
Korea”, International Sociology, 2004, 19(2), 193–213.
Neil King, Jr., “FBI’s Wiretaps to Scan E-Mail Spark Concern”, Wall Street 
Journal, 7/11/2000, A3.
Barbara D. Klein, “Data Quality in the Practice of Consumer Product Management: 
Evidence from the Field”, Data Quality 4, no. 1 (1998).
John Kleinig, “John Stuart Mill and Voluntary Slavery Contracts”, Politics, 
XVIII, 2 (November, 1983), 76‑83.

References
277
_____, “Patriotic Loyalty”, Patriotism: Philosophical and Political Perspectives, 
ed. Aleksandar Pavkovic and Igor Primoratz (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2008), 
ch. 2.
_____, “Liberty and Security in an Age of Terrorism”, Security and Justice in 
the Homeland: Criminologists on Terrorism, ed. Brian Forst, Jack Greene and 
James Lynch (forthcoming).
_____, “The Burdens of Situational Crime Prevention: An Ethical Commentary”, 
in Ethical and Social Perspectives on Situational Crime Prevention, ed. Andrew 
von Hirsch, David Garland and Alison Wakefield (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 
2000), 37–58.
_____, “Noble Cause Corruption or Process Deviance: Ruminations on Means 
and Ends in Policing”, in Police Corruption – Paradigms, Models and 
Concepts, ed. Stanley Einstein and Menachem Amir, Uncertainty Series, vol. 
4, Huntsville, TX: OICJ Press, 2004, 129–46.
Peter Kovesi, Video Surveillance is Useless, Presentation at the 18th International 
Symposium of the Australia and New Zealand Forensic Society, April 2–7, 
2006, Fremantle, Western Australia.
_____, Video Surveillance: Legally Blind, presentation at DICTA 2009, Digital 
Image Computing: Techniques and Applications, December 1–3, 2009, 
Melbourne, Australia, at: http://dicta2009.vu.edu.au/, viewed December 31, 
2009.
Samuel V. La Selva, “Selling Oneself into Slavery: Mill and Paternalism”, Political 
Studies, 35, no. 2 (1987): 211–23.
Konrad Lachmayer, “European Police Cooperation and its Limits: From 
Intelligence-led to Coercive Measures”, The Outer Limits of European Union 
Law, ed. Catherine Barnard and Okeoghene Odudu (Oxford: Hart Publishing 
2009).
Marc Langheinrich, Personal Privacy in Ubiquitous Computing – Tools and 
System Support, PhD dissertation, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, May 2005. 
Available at: http://www.vs.inf.ethz.ch/res/papers/langheinrich-phd-2005.
pdf.
Karen Lebacqz, “Alien Dignity: The Legacy of Helmut Thielicke for Bioethics”, 
Religion and Medical Ethics: Looking Back, Looking Forward ed. Allen Verhey 
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1996), 44–60.

Security and Privacy
278
Man Yee Karen Lee, “Universal Human Dignity: Some Reflections in the Asian 
Context”, Asian Journal of Comparative Law 3, no. 1 (2008), at: http://www.
bepress.com/asjcl/vol3/iss1/art10.
LexisNexis Breach Notification Letter. Available at: http://privacy.wi.gov/
databreaches/pdf/LexisNexisLetter050509.pdf (Last visited May 1, 2009).
Eric Lichtblau, “F.B.I. Data Mining Reached Beyond Initial Targets”, The New 
York Times, September 9, 2007, 1, 31.
Eric Lichtblau and James Risen, “Bank Data is Sifted by U.S. in Secret to Block 
Terror”, The New York Times, June 23, 2006, A1.
Eric Lipton, Eric Schmitt and Mark Mazzetti, “Jet Bomb Plot Shows More 
Missed Clues”, The New York Times, January 18, 2010.
Eric Lipton and Scott Shane, “Questions on Why Terror Suspect Wasn’t 
Stopped”, The New York Times, December 2, 2009, at: http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/12/28/us/28terror.html?_r=1&scp=2&sq=Umar%20Farouk%20
Abdulmutallab%20&st=cse.
John Locke, Second Treatise Of Civil Government, 1689, ch. 9.
Steven Lukes, “Relativism: Cognitive and Moral”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, Supp. vol. 48 (1974), 165–89.
David Lyon, Surveillance Studies: An Overview (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 
2007).
Gerald C. MacCallum, Jr., “Negative and Positive Freedom”, Philosophical 
Review, 76 (July, 1967): 312–34.
Andrew McClurg, “A Thousand Words Are Worth A Picture: A Privacy Tort 
Response To Consumer Data Profiling”, Northwestern University Law Review 
98, no. 1 (2006): 63–143.
Alasdair MacIntyre, “The Essential Contestability of Some Social Concepts”, 
Ethics, 84 (October, 1973), 1–9.
_____, After Virtue, second ed. University of Notre Dame Press, 1984.
_____, Is Loyalty a Virtue? Lindley Lecture (Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Philosophy Department, 1984).
Catriona Mackenzie and Natalie Stoljar (eds), Relational Autonomy: Feminist 
Perspectives on Autonomy, Agency, and the Social Self (NY: Oxford University 
Press, 2000).

References
279
Wayne Madsen, “FBI’s Communications Surveillance Capabilities Widen”, 
Computer Fraud & Security, no. 10 (October 2000): 16–17.
Peter Mameli, “Managing the HIV/AIDS Pandemic: Paving a Path into the 
Future of International Law and Organization”, Law & Policy 22, no. 2 (April 
2000): 203–24.
_____, “Tracking the Beast: Techno-Ethics Boards and Government Surveillance 
Programs”, Critical Issues in Justice and Politics 1, no. 1 (2008): 31–56.
Giannozzo Manetti, De dignitate et excellentia hominis libri IV; Book 4 translated 
by Bernard Murchland in Two Views of Man: Pope Innocent III On the Misery 
of Man; Giannozzo Manetti On the Dignity of Man (New York: Frederick 
Ungar, 1966).
John Markoff, David E. Sanger and Thom Shanker, “In Digital Combat, U.S. 
Finds No Easy Deterrent”, The New York Times, January 26, 2010.
Aaron K. Martin, Rosamunde Van Brakel and Daniel Bernhard, “Understanding 
Resistance to Digital Surveillance: Towards a Multi-Disciplinary, Multi-
Actor Framework”, Surveillance & Society 6 no. 3 (2009): 213–32.
Gary Marx, “Identity and Anonymity: Some Conceptual Distinctions and 
Issues for Research”, Documenting Individual Identity: The Development of 
State Practices in the Modern World, ed. J. Caplan and J. Torpey (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001): 326, available at: http://web.mit.edu/
gtmarx/www/identity.html. 
_____, “A Tack in the Shoe: Neutralizing and Resisting the New Surveillance”, 
Journal of Social Issues 59, no. 2 (2003): 369–90.
Mike Masnick, “Privacy: Senator Leahy Wants to Update Digital Privacy Law: 
Some Good, Some Bad”, TechDirt, May 17, 2011, at http://www.techdirt.
com/blog/?tag=ecpa.
Andrew Mason, “On Explaining Political Disagreement: The Notion of an 
Essentially Contested Concept”, Inquiry 33 (1990), 81–98.
Lorin J. May, “Major Causes of Software Project Failures”, at: http://www.stsc.
hill.af.mil/crosstalk/1998/07/causes.asp, viewed 20 November 20, 2009.
Mark Mazzetti and Scott Hane, “CIA Watchdog Becomes Subject of CIA 
Inquiry”, The New York Times, October 12 2007, A1, A25.
James Meek, “Robo Cop”, The Guardian, 13/06/2002.

Security and Privacy
280
N. Memon, H.L. Larsen, “Investigative Data Mining Toolkit: A Software Prototype 
for Visualizing, Analyzing and Destabilizing Terrorist Networks”,Visualising 
Network Information (2006), 14-1–14-24.
Nasrullah Memon, “Detecting Terrorist Activity Patterns Using Investigative 
Data Mining Tool”, IFSR 2005: Proceedings of the First World Congress of 
the International Federation for Systems Research: The New Roles of Systems 
Sciences For a Knowledge-based Society, Nov. 14–17, 2123, Kobe, Japan.
Jeanne Merserve and Mike M. Ahlers, “Body Scanners Can Store, Send Images, 
Group Says”, CNN News, January 11, 2010, available at: http://edition.cnn.
com/2010/TRAVEL/01/11/body.scanners/index.html.
M.G. Michael, Sarah Jean Fusco, and Katina Michael, “A Research Note on 
Ethics in the Emerging Age of Überveillance”, Computer Communications 31 
(2008): 1192–99.
Dana Milbank and Spencer S. Hsu, “Cheney: Kerry Victory Is Risky; Democrats 
Decry Talk as Scare Tactic”, The Washington Post, September 8, 2004, A01.
John Stuart Mill, “The Contest in America”, in J.M. Robson (ed.) The Collected 
Works of John Stuart Mill, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984, vol. 
XXI, 141–42.
-------, On Liberty (1869) at: http://www.bartleby.com/130/1.html.
-------, Utilitarianism, ch. 5, at: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/11224/11224-
h/11224-h.htm#CHAPTER_V.
Greg Miller, “CIA Places Controls on Inspector General”, Los Angeles 
Times, February 2, 2008; www.latimes.com/news/printedition/a/la-na-
cia2feb02,1,6583760.story.
Seumas Miller, Terrorism and Counter-terrorism: Ethics and Liberal Democracy 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2010).
_____, The Moral Foundations of Social Institutions: A Philosophical Study (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
_____, “Collective Responsibility: An Individualist Account”, Midwest Studies 
in Philosophy 30 (2006): 176–93.
_____, “Individual Autonomy and Sociality”, Socializing Metaphysics: The 
Nature of Social Reality, ed. F. Schmitt (Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield, 
2003).

References
281
Seumas Miller and John Blackler, Ethical Issues in Policing (Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2005).
Seumas Miller and John Weckert, “Privacy, the Workplace and the Internet”, 
Journal of Business Ethics 28, no. 3 (2000): 255–65.
Christopher S. Milligan, “Facial Recognition Technology, Video Surveillance, 
and Privacy”, Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal 9 (2000): 
295–334.
Minnesota Internet Traffic Studies (MINTS), at: http://www.dtc.umn.edu/
mints/home.php, viewed February 1, 2010.
Tobias W. Mock, “Comment: The Tsa's New X-Ray Vision: The Fourth 
Amendment Implications of ‘Body-Scan’ Searches at Domestic Airport 
Security Checkpoints”, Santa Clara Law Review 49 (2009): 213–51.
A.P. Montefiore (ed.), Neutrality and Impartiality: The University and Political 
Commitment (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1975), Part I.
James H. Moor, “Towards a Theory of Privacy in the Information Age”, 
Computers and Society, 27–32, September 1997.
A. Moore, “Privacy: Its Meaning and Value”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 
40 (2003): 215–27.
Hans Morgenthau, In Defense of the National Interest (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1951).
_____, “National security must be defined as integrity of the national territory 
and its institutions”, Politics Among the Nations: The Struggle for Power and 
Peace, third ed. (NY: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960), 562.
MSNBC News, “One Man Still Locked up from 9/11 Sweeps”, MSNBC.com 
(October 14, 2006), at: http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/15264274/from/ET.
Angela Murphy, Morgan Streetman and Mark Sweet, “Carnivore: Will it Devour 
Your Privacy?”, Duke Law & Technology Review (2001): 0028, at: http://www.
law.duke.edu/journals/dltr/articles/2001dltr0028.
National Technology Alliance, Geographic Profiling and the Hunt for Insurgents 
(2007), available at: http://www.nta.org/docs/Geoprofiling.pdf, accessed on 
Feb 15, 2007.
Lawrence W. Neuman, Social Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Approaches, fifth ed. (Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 2003).

Security and Privacy
282
Abraham L. Newman, Protectors of Privacy: Regulating Personal Data in the 
Global Economy. (United States: Cornell University Press, 2008).
Michael Newton, Savage Girls and Wild Boys: A History of Feral Children (New 
York: Faber & Faber, 2002).
Kenneth Nguyen, “Australia Hands over Man to US Courts”, The Age (Melbourne), 
May 7, 2007; Alex P. Schmid, A.J. Jongman, and Irving Horowitz, Political 
Terrorism: A New Guide to Actors, Authors, Concepts, Data Bases, Theories, 
and Literature (Amsterdam: Transaction Books, 1998).
The 9/11 Commission, The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National 
Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, 2004, at: http://
www.9-11commission.gov/report/index.htm.
Helen Nissenbaum, “The Meaning of Anonymity in an Information Age”, at: 
http://www.nyu.edu/projects/nissenbaum/paper_anonimity.html.
_____, “Privacy as Conceptual Integrity”, Washington Law Review, 79 (2004): 
119–57.
Érika Nogueira de Andrade Stupiello, “Ethical Implications of Translation 
Technologies”, 
Translation 
Journal, 
2007, 
available 
at: 
http://
translationjournal.net/journal/43ethics.htm, accessed, 3 January 2010.
Note, “Legal Authorities Supporting the Activities of the National Security 
Agency Described by the President”, Indiana Law Journal, 81 (2006): 1374.
Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia, New York: Basic Books, 1974.
Office of the Privacy Commissioner, The Operation of the Privacy Act: Annual 
Report 2008–2009 (Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Canberra, 2009).
Offices of Inspectors General, Unclassified Report of the President’s Surveillance 
Program – Report No. 2009-0013-AS (Washington, D.C.: USA 2009).
S. Oka, H. Togo, N. Kukutsu, and T. Nagatsuma, “Latest Trends in Millimeter-
Wave Imaging Technology”, Progress In Electromagnetics Research Letters 1 
(2008): 197–204.
Jo Ann Oravec, “Secret Sharers: Consensual and Participatory Surveillance 
Concerns in the Context of Network-Based Computer Systems”, ACM 
SIGOIS Bulletin 14, no. 1 (July 1993): 32–40.
Elizabethann O’Sullivan, Gary R. Rassel, and Maureen Berner, Research Methods 
for Public Administrators, fifth ed. (US: Pearson Longman, 2008).

References
283
Susan Page, “Lawmakers: NSA Database Incomplete”, USA Today, June 30, 
2006, A1.
Thomas Paine, The Rights of Man (New York: Anchor, 1973).
Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
George L. Paul and Jason R. Baron, “Information Inflation: Can the Legal System 
Adapt?”, Richmond Journal of Law & Technology 13, no. 3 (2007), at: http://
law.richmond.edu/jolt/v13i3/article10.pdf, viewed 25 January 2010.
Derek J. Paulsen, “Connecting the Dots: Assessing the Accuracy of Geographic 
Profiling Software”, Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & 
Management 29, no. 2 (2006): 306–34.
Marin Perez, “Opera Add Locations Awareness”, Information Week, March 9, 
2009.
Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Pew Internet and American Life Project, “Social Media & Mobil Internet 
Use Among Teens and Young Adults, Pew Research Center”, Feb 3, 2010, 
available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Social-Media-and-
Young-Adults.aspx.
Eric Pfanner, “Data Leak in Britain Affects 25 Million”, The New York Times, 
November 22, 2007.
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, De dominis dignitate oratio, translated as Oration 
on the Dignity of Man by A. Robert Caponigri (Chicago: Gateway, 1956).
Plato, Republic, II 359d–360b.
Thomas Pogge, Realizing Rawls (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989), 
Part III.
Irene Pollach, “What’s Wrong with On-line Privacy Policies?”, Communications 
of the ACM 50, no. 9 (September 2007): 103–108.
David A. Powner, Director, United States Government Accountability Office, 
Information Technology Management Issues, Management and Oversight of 
Projects Totaling Billions of Dollars Need Attention, Testimony Before the 
Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government Information, 
Federal Services, and International Security, Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs, US Senate, April 28, 2009.

Security and Privacy
284
Pre-employ.com, “Background Checks and Social Networking Sites”, February 
24, 2009.
James Rachels, “Why Privacy is Important”, Philosophy & Public Affairs, 4 
(1975): 323–33.
Allen Charles Raul, “The Missing Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board”, The Washington Post, January 24, 2010, available at: http://
www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/01/23/ 
AR2010012302190.html.
John Rawls, “The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus”, Oxford Journal of Legal 
Studies, 7, no. 1 (1987): 1–25.
ReadWriteWeb, “Does That Facebook App Have a Privacy Policy? Probably 
Not”, July 29, 2009. Available at: http://www.readwriteweb.com.
Jeffrey Reiman, “Towards a Secular Lockean Liberalism”, Review of Politics, 67 
(2005): 473–93.
James Risen and Eric Lichtblau, “Concerns Raised on Wider Spying Under New 
Law”, The New York Times, August 19, 2007.
John M. Roberts and Thomas Gregor, “Privacy: A Cultural View”, Privacy, 
NOMOS XIII, ed. J. Roland Pennock and John W. Chapman (NY: Atherton 
Press, 1971), 199–225.
James Robinson, “Twitter and Facebook Riot Restrictions Would Be a Mistake, 
Says Google Chief”, Guardian.co.uk, August 27, 2011, available at: http://
www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/aug/27/twitter-facebook-riot-restrictions-
eric-schmidt.
Jeffrey Rosen, “The Naked Crowd: Balancing Privacy and Security in an Age of 
Terror”, Arizona Law Review 46 (Winter, 2004): 608.
Richard Rose, Learning from Comparative Public Policy: A Practical Guide 
(London: Routledge, 2005).
David Rosenblum, “What Anyone Can Know: The Privacy Risks of Social 
Networking Sites”, IEEE Security and Privacy 5, no. 3 (May/June 2007): 
40–49.
Paul Roth, “Workplace Privacy Issues Raised by RFID Technology”, Privacy 
Issues Forum, March 30, 2006 University of Otago.
E. Rothschild, “What is Security?”, Daedalus 124, no. 3 (1995): 61.

References
285
Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau, 
The 
Social 
Contract, 
at: 
http://www.wsu.
edu:8080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/rousseau.html.
Bijon Roy, “A Case Against Biometric National Identification Systems (NIDS): 
‘Trading-off’ Privacy Without Getting Security”, Windsor Review of Legal & 
Social Issues 19 (March 2005): 45–84.
Ira S. Rubinstein, Ronald D. Lee, and Paul M. Schwartz, “Data Mining and 
Internet Profiling: Emerging Regulatory and Technological Approaches”, 
University of Chicago Law Review 75, no. 1 (2008): 261–85, esp. 274–80.
S. Sackmann, J. Struker and R. Accorsi, “Personalization in Privacy-aware 
Highly Dynamic Systems”, Communications of the ACM 49, no. 9 (September 
2006): 32–38.
Michael V. Sage, “The Exploitation of Legal loopholes in the Name of National 
Security”, California W. International Law Journal 37 (Fall, 2006): 121–42.
Vincenzo Antonio Sainato, “Situational Surveillance Control”, Criminal Justice 
PhD dissertation, City University of New York, John Jay College of Criminal 
Justice, 2009.
Douglas Salane, “Are Large Scale Data Breaches Inevitable?”, Cyber Infrastructure 
Protection ’09, The City University of New York, June 2009.
Sudhir Saxena, K. Santhanam and Aparna Basu, “Application of Social Network 
Analysis (SNA) to Terrorist Networks”, Strategic Analysis 28, no.1 (January–
March 2004): 84–101.
T.M. Scanlon, “The Constitutional Essentials of Political Liberalism: Adjusting 
Rights and Balancing Values”, Fordham Law Review, 72 (2004): 1477–86.
Frederick Schauer, Profiles, Probabilities and Stereotypes (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2003).
Leslie Regan Shade, “The Culture of Surveillance: G-Men Redux and Total 
Information Awareness”,Topia 9 (2003): 35–45.
H. Schneider, H. C. Liu, S. Winnerl, O. Drachenko, M. Helm, and J. Faist, 
“Room-temperature Midinfrared Two-photon Photodetector”, Applied 
Physics Letters 93, no. 101114 (2008): 1–3.
School of African and Oriental Studies, University of London, “Transfer Outside 
the EU”, at: http://www.soas.ac.uk/infocomp/dpa/policy/outside.

Security and Privacy
286
Adina Schwartz, “Homes as Folding Umbrellas: Two Recent Supreme Court 
Decisions on ‘Knock and Announce’”, American Journal of Criminal Law 25 
(1998): 545–94.
Ari Schwartz, written supplement to testimony before the Data Privacy and 
Integrity Committee, Department of Homeland Security, June 15, 2005. Available 
at: http://www.netdemocracyguide.net/testimony/20050718schwartz.pdf.
Walter Shapiro, “With Scare Tactics Aplenty, Election Rivals Halloween: Hype 
& Glory”, USA Today, October 19, 2004, 4A.
Henry Shue, Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and U.S. Foreign Policy, second 
ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996).
Royce A. Singleton, Jr. and Bruce C. Straits, Approaches to Social Research, 
fourth ed. (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
James Sinkula, “Status of Company Usage of Scanner Based Research”, Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science 14 (1986): 63–71.
Gregory Slabodkin, “Software Glitches Leave Navy Smart Ship Dead in the 
Water”, Government Computer News, 13 July 1998.
Marion Smiley, “Collective Responsibility”, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/collective-responsibility/.
Andrew Sneddon, “What's Wrong with Selling Yourself into Slavery? Paternalism 
and Deep Autonomy”, Critica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofia 33, no. 
98 (August, 2001): 97–121, at: http://critica.filosoficas.unam.mx/pdf/C98/
C98_sneddon.pdf.
John Solomon and Carrie Johnson, “FBI Broke Law for Years in Phone Records 
Searches”, The Washington Post, January 19, 2010, A01.
Julie Solomon, “Does the TSA Have Stage Fright? Then Why are they Picturing 
you Naked?”, Journal of Air Law and Commerce 73, no 3 (2008): 643–71.
Daniel J. Solove, “Restructuring Electronic Surveillance Law”, George 
Washington Law Review 72 (2004): 1706.
_____, “A Taxonomy of Privacy”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 154 
(2006): 491.
Daniel J. Solove and Chris J. Hoofnagle, “A Model Regime of Privacy Protection”, 
University of Illinois Law Review, (February, 2006): 357–404.
Daniel J. Solove, The Future of Reputation: Gossip, Rumor, and Privacy on the 
Internet (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007).

References
287
John T. Soma, et al., “Corporate Privacy Trend: The ‘Value’ of Personally 
Identifiable Information (PII) Equals the ‘Value’ of Financial Assets”, 
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology 15, no. 4 (2009), available at: http://
law.richmond.edu/jolt /v15i4/article11.pdf.
Andrew Speirs, “The Individual and the Stereotype: From Lavater to the War on 
Terror” Australian Council of University Art and Design Schools (ACUADS) 
ACUADS 2003 Conference Hobart, 1–4 Oct 2003, http://www.acuads.com.
au/conf2003/papers_refereed/speirs.pdf.
K. Srikumar and B. Bashker, “Personalized Recommendations in E-commerce”, 
International Journal of Electronic Business 3, no. 1 (2005): 4–27.
L. Story, “Company Will Monitor Phone Calls to Tailor Ads”, The New York 
Times, Sept. 24, 2007.
Katherine J. Strandburg, “Freedom of Association in a Networked World: First 
Amendment Regulation of Relational Surveillance”, Boston College Law 
Review 49, no. 1 (2008): 1–81.
Mark Strasser, Mark, “Mill on Voluntary Self-enslavement”, Philosophical 
Papers 17 (November, 1988): 171–183.
P.F. Strawson, “Social Morality and Individual Ideal”, Philosophy 36 (January, 
1961): 1–17.
William J. Stuntz, “Privacy’s Problem and the Law of Criminal Procedure”, 
Michigan Law Review 93 (1995): 1016.
Christine Swanton, “On the ‘Essential Contestedness’ of Political Concepts”, 
Ethics, 95 (July, 1985), 811–27.
Peter P. Swire, “Privacy and Information Sharing in the War on Terrorism”, 
Villanova Law Review 51 (2006): 951–980.
Hiroko Tabuchi, “Facebook Wins Relatively Few Friends in Japan”, The New 
York Times, January 9, 2011.
Kim Taipale, “Data Mining and Domestic Security: Connecting the Dots to Make 
Sense of Data”, Columbia Science and Technology Law Review, 5 (2003): 24–25.
Joelle Tanguy, “Redefining Sovereignty and Intervention”, Ethics and 
International Affairs, 17, no. 1 (2003): 141–48.
Herman T. Tavani and James H. Moor, “Privacy Protection, Control of 
Information, and Privacy-Enhancing Technologies”, Computers and Society 
31, no. 1 (March 2001): 6–11.

Security and Privacy
288
Chin Liew Ten, Mill on Liberty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), ch. 7.
Hugo Teufel III, 2007 Report to Congress on the Impact of Data Mining Technologies 
on Privacy and Civil Liberties (Washington, DC: DHS, July 6, 2007), at: http://
www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_rpt_datamining_2007.pdf.
Philip A. Thomas, “Emergency and Anti-Terrorist Power: 9/11: USA and UK”, 
Fordham International Law Journal 26 (April 2003): 1193.
Paul B. Thompson, “Privacy, Secrecy and Security”, Ethics and Information 
Technology 3, no. 1 (March, 2001): 13–19.
Judith Jarvis Thomson, “The Right to Privacy”, Philosophy & Public Affairs, 4, 
no. 4 (1975): 295–314.
Ying-li Tian, Lisa Brown, Arun Hampapur, Max Lu, Andrew Senior and Chiao-
fe Shu, “IBM Smart Surveillance System (S3): Event Based Video Surveillance 
System with an Open and Extensible Framework”, Machine Vision and 
Applications 19 (2008):315-27, DOI 10.1007/s00138-008-0153-z.
TSA website, at: http://www.tsa.dhs.gov/approach/tech/castscope.shtm.
Alan Travis, “Lords: CCTV is Threat to Freedom”, The Guardian, February 9, 
2009, available at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/feb/06/surveillance-
freedom-peers.
______, “New Scanners Break Child Porn Laws”, The Guardian, Monday, 
January 4, 2010 22.14 GMT.
Charles Trinkhaus, “Renaissance Idea of the Dignity of Man”, Dictionary of the 
History of Ideas, vol. IV, 136–46, at: http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/DHI/
dhiana.cgi?id=dv4-20.
Matteo Turilli and Luciano Floridi, “The Ethics of Information Transparency”, 
Ethics and Information Technology 11 (2009): 105–112.
Richard Ullman, “Redefining Security”, International Security, 8 (Summer, 
1983): 129.
US Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Records, Computers and the 
Rights of Citizens: Report of the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Automated 
Personal Data Systems (July 1973), available at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/
DATACNCL/1973privacy/tocprefacemembers.htm.
US Department of Labor, Permenant Labor Certification, available at: http://
www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/perm.cfm.

References
289
Jeroen van den Hoven, “Computer Ethics and Moral Methodology”, 
Metaphilosophy 28, no. 3, (1997): 1–12.
Andrew von Hirsch, “The Ethics of Public Television Surveillance”, in Andrew 
von Hirsch, David Garland and Alison Wakefield (eds.), Ethical and Social 
Perspectives on Situational Crime Prevention (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2000), 
68.
A.K. Vorrat, “Police Statistics Prove Data Retention Superfluous”, EDRI-Gram, 
Number 9.12, June 15, 2011, http://www.edri.org/edrigram/number9.12.
Jeremy Waldron, God, Locke and Equality: Christian Foundations of Locke's 
Political Thought (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
_____, “Minority Cultures and the Cosmopolitan Alternative”, University of 
Michigan Journal of Law Reform 25 (1992): 751–793.
_____. “Security and Liberty: The Image of Balance”, Journal of Political 
Philosophy, 11 (2) (June 2003): 191–210.
_____, “Safety and Security”, Nebraska Law Review, 85 (2006): 454–507.
_____, “Dignity and Rank”, Archives Européennes de Sociologie, 48 (2007), 201–
37.
_____, “Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment: The Words Themselves”, 
New York University School of Law, Public and Legal Theory Research Paper 
Series, Working Paper #08-36 (November 2008), 36, at: http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1278604.
Carol B. Warren, “Secrecy”, The Encyclopedia of Privacy, ed. William G. Staples, 
Greenwood Press: Connecticut, (2007): 482–85.
C. Warren and B. Laslett, “Privacy and Secrecy: A Conceptual Comparison”, The 
Journal of Social Issues, (1977): 1ff.
Arnold Wolfers, “‘National Security’ as an Ambiguous Symbol”, in Discord and 
Collaboration: Essays on International Politics (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1962), 147.
Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars (1977).
Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy”, Harvard Law 
Review, 4 (1890): 193–220, at: http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/6805/articles/
privacy/Privacy_brand_warr2.html.
The Washington Post, “A Flashy Facebook Page at a Cost to Privacy”, June 12, 
2008

Security and Privacy
290
Dale Watson, “Foreign Terrorists in America: Five Years After the World Trade 
Center”, (Senate Judiciary Committee), February 24, 1998, available at: 
http://fas.org/irp/congress/1998_hr/s980224w.htm.
Leanne Weber, “The Shifting Frontiers of Migration Control”, in Borders, 
Mobility and Technologies of Control, ed. Sharon Pickering and Leanne Weber 
(Springer, 2006), ch. 2.
John Weckert (ed.), Electronic Monitoring in the Workplace: Controversies and 
Solutions (Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 2005).
David L. Weimer, “The Puzzle of Private Rulemaking: Expertise, Flexibility, 
and Blame Avoidance in U.S. Regulation”, Public AdministrationReview 66, 
no. 4 (July/August 2006): 569–82.
Mark Weiser, “The Computer for the Twenty-First Century”, Scientific American, 
September 1991, 94–10.
David Weissbrodt and Amy Bergquist, “Extraordinary Rendition: A Human 
Rights Analysis”, Harvard Human Rights Journal, 19 (Spring, 2006): 123–60.
 _____, “Extraordinary Rendition and the Torture Convention”, Virginia Journal 
of International Law, 46 (Summer, 2006): 585–650.
 _____, “Extraordinary Rendition and the Humanitarian Law of War and Occupation”, 
Virginia Journal of International Law, 47 (Winter, 2007): 295–356.
Amy Westfeldt, “LexisNexis Warns 32,000 People about Data Breach”, San 
Francisco Chronicle, May 1, 2009, 22.
Alan F. Westin, Privacy and Freedom (New York: Atheneum, 1967).
Matthew White, “Democracies Do Not Make War on One Another. . . Or Do 
They?”, at: http://users.erols.com/mwhite28/demowar.htm.
White House, Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a Trusted and Resilient 
Information and Communications Structure (May, 2009), available at: www.
whitehouse.gov/assets/.../Cyberspace_Policy_Review_final.pdf.
Zach Whittaker, “Microsoft Admits Patriot Act Can Access EU-Based Cloud Data”, 
ZDNet, June 28, 2011, available at: http://www.zdnet.com/blog/igeneration/
microsoft-admits-patriot-act-can-access-eu-based-cloud-data/11225
wik-Consult/RAND Europe/CLIP/CRID/GLOM, “Comparison of Privacy and 
Trust Policies in the Areas of Electronic Communications – Final Report”, 
European Commission (2007).

References
291
James Q. Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of Privacy: Dignity versus 
Liberty”, Yale Law Journal 113 (2004): 1151–1221.
Daniel B. Wood, “BART Puts Social Media Crackdown in Uncharted Legal 
Territory”, The Christian Science Monitor, August 16, 2011, available at: 
http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2011/0816/BART-puts-social-
media-crackdown-in-uncharted-legal-territory.
Edward Wyatt and Tanzina Vega, “FTC Honors Plan to Honor Privacy of Online 
Users”, The New York Times, December 1, 2010.
P.W. Young, “Extradition to the US”, Australian Law Journal 81 (April, 2007): 
225.
Xiaoyi Yu, K. Chinomi, T. Koshimizu, N. Nitta, Y. Ito and N. Babaguchi, “Image 
Processing, 2008”, ICIP 2008, 15th IEEE International Conference, October 
12–15, 2008, 1672–75.
Lucia Zedner, “The Concept of Security: An Agenda for Comparative Analysis”, 
Legal Studies 23 (2003): 157.
_____, “Too Much Security?”, International Journal of the Sociology of Law, 31 
(2003): 155–84.
_____, “Securing Liberty in the Face of Terror: Reflections from Criminal 
Justice”, Journal of Law and Society, 32 (4) (December 2005): 507–33.

