Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the 
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu
aesearch@umn.edu
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only. 
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright 
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their 
employer(s) is intended or implied.


GENDER AND COOPERATIVE CONFLICTS 
Amartya Sen 
Drummond Professor of Political Economy 
Oxford University 
and 
Research Advisor 
World Institute for Development Economics Research 
Helsinki 
July 1987 
WIDER 
Annankatu 42 
00100 HELSINKI 
FINLAND 

1. Introduction (p.l) 
2. Capabilities, well-being, agency and perceptions (p.6) 
3. Social Technology, cooperation and conflicts (p.10) 
4. Households economics, bargaining models and information bases (p.15) 
5. Cooperative conflicts: Interests, contributions and perceptions (p.20) 
6. Extended entitlements and perceived legitimacy (p.30) 
7. Production, earnings and perceived contributions (p.37) 
8. Well-being, agency and cooperative conflicts (p.42) 

2 
GENDER AND COOPERATIVE CONFLICTS* 
1. Introduction 
In the standard literature on economic development there is frequently 
a noticeable reluctance to consider the position of women as a separate 
problem of importance of its own. Gender-based analysis is often seen as 
being 
unnecessarily 
divisive. 
Poverty, 
undernourishment, 
escapable 
morbidity or avoidable mortality strike men as well as women, and the lives 
of all members - male and female - of households at the bottom of the pile 
are plagued by severe deprivations. It is, therefore, not surprising that 
many writers insist on seeing the deprivation of entire families as the 
right focus for studying misery and for seeking remedies, concentrating 
on the placing of families in the class structure and in the economic and 
social hierarchy (and also on the over-all prosperity of the community). 
That non-gender view has much plausibility in some contexts. However, 
for some problems income and class categories are over-aggregative and ever. 
misleading, and there is a need for gender classification. 
In fact, the 
importance of gender as a crucial parameter in social and economic analysis 
is complementary to, rather than competitive with, the variables of class, 
ownership, occupations, incomes and family status. 
* This paper draws heavily on two previous attempts to address this set of 
issues, viz., "Cooperative Conflicts: Technology and the Position of 
Women", mimeographed, All Souls College, Oxford, 1983, and 
"Women, 
Technology and Sexual Divisions", Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 6 (1985). 
For helpful comments I am most grateful to Jocelyn Kynch and Irene Tinker. 
My thinking on this question has been deeply influenced by discussions with 
my late wife, Eva Colorni, over a number of years, until her tragic death 
on 3 July, 1985, and it is to her memory that I dedicate this essay. 

3 
The systematically inferior position of women inside and outside the 
household in many societies points to the necessity of treating gender as a 
force of its own in development analysis. 
The economic hardship of 
woman-headed households is both a problem of female deprivation and of 
family poverty. Furthermore, females and males in the same family may well 
have quite divergent predicaments, and this can make the position of women 
in the poorer families particularly precarious. 
To concentrate on family 
poverty irrespective of gender can be misleading in terms of both causation 
and consequences. 
The fact that the relative deprivation of women vis-a-vis men is by no 
means uniform across the world does not reduce the importance of gender as 
a parameter of analysis. In fact, this variability is itself an important 
reason for giving serious attention to the causal antecedents of the 
contrasting deprivations. 
To take an extremely simple and crude example, 
it is clear that despite the evident biological advantages that women seem 
to have over men in survival and longevity (when there is some symmetry in 
the attention they receive on basic matters of life and death, such as 
nutrition, health care and medical attention), there is nevertheless a 
remarkable preponderance of surviving men over surviving women in the 
population of less developed countries (the LDCs) taken as a whole, in 
sharp contrast with the position of the more developed countries. 
While 
there are about 106 women per 100 men in Europe and North America, there 
are only 97 women per 100 men in the LDCs as a whole. Since mortality and 
survival are not independent of care and neglect, and are influenced by 
social action and public policy, even this extremely crude perspective 
cannot fail to isolate gender as an important parameter in development 
studies. 
There are also systematic differences among the LDCs in the survival 

4 
rates of females vis-a-vis males. While Asia has a sex ratio (females per 
male) of only 0.95, Africa comes closer to Europe and North America with a 
sex ratio of 1.02 - indeed considerably higher than that in non-Northern 
Africa. 
Even within Asia the sex ratio is higher than unity in some 
regions, e.g. South Eastern Asia 
(1.01), but much lower 
in China, 
Bangladesh and West Asia (0.94) and in India and Pakistan (0.93). 
There 
are substantial variations even within a given country, e.g. in India the 
sex ratio varies between 0.87 and 0.88 in Haryana and Punjab, and 1.03 in. 
Kerala. 
It is easily checked that had the average African sex ratio 
obtained in India, then given the number of men, there would have been 
about 30 million more women in India today.1 
The corresponding number of 
'missing women' in China is about 38 million. The cumulative contrasts of 
sex-specific mortality rates - not unrelated to social and economic 
inequalities between men and women - find expression in these simple 
statistics, which form something like the tip of an iceberg much of which 
is hard to observe. 
Development analysis cannot really be divorced from gender categories 
and sex-specific observations. It is, however, difficult to translate this 
elementary recognition into practice, and to find an adequate framework for 
the use of gender categories and sex-specific information in social 
analysis. This paper is addressed to some of the issues in this difficult 
field. 
The problem is far too complex and basic to be 'resolved' by any 
kind of a simple model, but we can go some distance towards a better 
understanding of the problem by broadening the conceptual structure and the 
informational base of gender analysis in economic and social relations. 
1. These and related matters are discussed in my C.N. Vakil Lecture to the 
8th World Congress of the International Economic Association (see Sen 
1986b, in reference). See also Kynch (1985). 

5 
In the next section some of the basic notions in the proposed 
conceptual 
structure are briefly examined, 
including 
'functionings', 
'capabilities', 'well-being' and 'agency'.2 
The role of pereceptions in 
the informational base of the conceptual structure is also discussed, 
disputing the identification of well-being with the fulfilment of perceived 
interests, but making room for the causal influence of perceptions on ideas 
of propriety and legitimacy of different institutional arrangements and 
through that on the respective well-beings of men and women. 
In section 3 the notion of 'social technology' is presented, broadening 
the traditional view of technology. Explicit note is taken of the role of 
household arrangements in sustaining commodity production. 
In Section 4, the alternative approaches underlying different theories 
of household economics are examined. 
The 'bargaining models' have an 
advantage over others (such as standard models of 'household production', 
or 'family allocation', or 'equivalence scales') in capturing 
the 
coexistence of extensive conflicts and pervasive cooperation in household 
arrangements. But 
it is argued 
that they 
too have 
an 
inadequate 
informational base and are particularly negligent of the influence of 
perceived interests and perceived contributions. 
In section 5 an alternative approach to 'cooperative conflicts' is 
sketched, 
identifying certain qualitative 
relations 
in the 
form of 
directional responses of the outcome to certain determining variables in 
the informational base. In section 6 these relations are translated into a 
format of 'extended entitlements', based on sharpening the concept of 
2. These concepts are more extensively discussed in my Dewey Lectures at 
Columbia University, published In the Journal of Philosophy (Sen 
1985a). See also Sen (1985b). 

6 
'entitlements' (already used in studying famines and deprivation of 
households) 
by 
incorporating 
notions 
of 
perceived 
legitimacy 
in 
intra-household divisions.3 
The directional responses are examined in section 7 in the light of 
empirical information presented in micro studies as well as in aggregative 
interregional comparisons. 
Some concluding remarks are made in the final 
section. 
2. Capabilities, well-being, agency and perception 
Everyone has many identities. Being a man or a woman is one of them. 
Being a member of a family is another. 
Membership of a class, an 
occupation group, a nation or a community can be the basis of particular 
links. 
One's individuality co-exists with a variety of such identities. 
Our understanding of our interests, well-being, obligations, objectives and 
legitimate behaviour 
is influenced by the various - and 
sometimes 
conflicting - influences of these diverse identities. 
In some contexts the family identity may exert such a strong influence 
on our perceptions that we may not find it easy to formulate any clear 
notion of our own individual welfare. 
Based on empirical observations of 
family-centred perceptions in some traditional societies (such as India), 
some authors have disputed the viability of the notion of personal welfare 
in those societies.4 It has often been observed that if a typical Indian 
3. The notion of 'entitlements' was used, primarily for famine analysis, 
in Sen (1976, 1981). 
That of 'extended entitlements' is discussed in 
Sen (1985c). See also Tilly (1985, 1986) and Vaughan (1985). 
4. For a particularly forceful and cogent statement of this position, see 
Das and Nicholas (1981). 

7 
rural woman were asked about her personal 'welfare', she would find the 
question unintelligible, and if she is able to reply, she may answer the 
question in terms of her reading of the welfare of her family. The idea of 
personal welfare may itself be unviable in such a context, it has been 
argued. 
This empirical problem of perception and communication is indeed 
important. 
On the other hand, it is far from obvious that the right 
conclusion to draw from this is the non-viability of the notion of personal 
welfare. 
This is so for several distinct reasons. 
First, there are 
considerable variations in the perception of individuality even within such 
a traditional society, and the lack of a perception of personal welfare, 
where that holds, is neither immutable nor particularly resistant to social 
development. Indeed, the process of politicization - including a political 
recognition of the gender issue - can itself bring about sharp changes in 
these perceptions. 
So can processes of economic change, such as women's 
involvement in so-called 'gainful employment' and outside work (on which 
more presently).5 
Second, 
insofar 
as 
intrafamily 
divisions 
involve 
significant 
inequalities in the division of food, medical attention, health care, etc. 
(often unfavourable to the well-being - even survival - of women), the lack 
of perception of personal interest combined with a great concern for family 
welfare is, of course, just the kind of attitude that helps to sustain the 
traditional inequalities. 
There is much evidence in history that acute 
inequalities often survive precisely by making allies out of the deprived. 
The underdog comes to accept the legitimacy of the unequal order and 
becomes an implicit accomplice. It can be a serious error to take the 
5. See Boserup (1970), Bardhan (1974, 1982), Miller (1981), Sen (1982b, 
1985c, 1986b), Mazumdar (1985). 

8 
absence of protests and questioning of inequality as evidence of the 
absence of that inequality (or of the non-viability of that question). 
Third, personal 
interest 
and welfare 
are not just matters 
of 
perception, and there are objective aspects of these concepts that command 
attention even when the corresponding self-perception does not exist. For 
example, the illfare associated with morbidity or undernourishment has an. 
immediacy that does not await the person's inclination or willingness to 
answer detailed questions regarding his or her own welfare. 
Indeed, the 
well-being of a person may plausibly be seen in terms of a person's 
functionings and capabilities: what he or she is able to do or be (e.g. the 
ability to be well-nourished, to avoid escapable morbidity or mortality, to 
read and write and communicate, to take part in the life of the community, 
to appear in public without shame).6 
While the functionings and the 
capability to function have to be evaluated (since they are diverse and not 
directly commensurable), the contingent absence of explicit discussion on 
this evaluative question does not make these functionings and capabilities 
valueless. 
There is a need to go beyond the primitive feelings that a 
person may have on these matters, based perhaps on unquestioning acceptance 
of certain traditional priorities. 
Social change and politicization may 
well take precisely the form of making people face those evaluative 
questions. 
Finally, it is also possible to distinguish between a person's 
'well-being' and 'agency'. A person may have various goals and objectives 
other than the pursuit of his or her own well-being. 
While there are 
obvious links between a person's well-being and the fulfilment of his or 
her other objectives, the over-all success as an agent may well not be 
6. On this, see Sen (1985a, 1985b, 1987). 

9 
closely connected - and certainly may not be identified - with that 
person's own well-being.7 
It is the agency aspect that is most influenced 
by a person's sense of obligation and perception of legitimate behaviour. 
These perceptions - while influencible by politics and education - may have 
relevance of their own (even in their contingent existence), but they must 
not be confused with the person's well-being, or - alternatively - taken as 
evidence of the unviability of any personal notion of well-being. 
It is, of course, possible to assert the importance of actual mental 
states as reflections of individual well-being, and in fact, in the 
utilitarian tradition, the metrics of happiness and desire do occupy a 
commanding position in the evaluation of individual welfare and through 
that on the goodness of states of affairs and the Tightness of actions. 
But that approach to welfare and ethics can be - and has been - extensively 
challenged.8 
Deprived groups may be habituated to inequality, may be 
unaware of possibilities of social change, may be hopeless about upliftment 
of objective circumstances of misery, may be resigned to 
fate, and 
may well be willing to accept the legitimacy of the established order. The 
tendency to take pleasure in small mercies would make good sense given 
these perceptions, and cutting desires to shape (in line with perceived 
feasibility) can help 
to save one from serious disappointment and 
frustration. The deprivations may, thus, be muted in the metric of 
7. The distinction between well-being and agency, their inter-
connections, and their different realms of relevance are discussed in 
my Dewey Lectures: Sen (1985a). 
8. For critiques of the utilitarian measures, see Rawls (1971), Williams 
(1973), Nozick (1974), Scanlon (1975), Sen (1979), Dworkin (1981), and 
Parfit (1984), among others. See Gosling (1969) for an exposition of 
the two perspectives of desire and pleasure in the utilitarian 
tradition. 
For sophisticated - and illuminating- defences of the 
utilitarian calculus, see particularly Harsanyi (1976), Hare (1981) and 
Griffin (1987). 

10 
happiness or desire fulfilment. But the real deprivations are not just 
washed away by the mere fact that in the particular utilitarian metrics of 
happiness and desire-fulfilment such a deprived person may not seem 
particularly disadvantaged. 
The embarrassment, if there is one here, is 
for utilitarianism (and for welfarism in general) 9 and not for those who 
insist that the underfed, under-clothed, undercared or overworked person is 
in some real sense deeply deprived no matter what the utility metrics 
say.10 
The point of arguing this way is not, in fact, to claim that a person's 
perceptions are not important. Indeed, they may be extremely important in 
understanding what social and familial arrangements emerge and survive. In 
fact, in this paper considerable use is made of the nature of actual 
perceptions in understanding the outcomes of cooperative conflicts (see 
section 5). But the contingent perceptions are important not because they 
are definitive guides to individual interests and well-being (this they are 
not), but because the perceptions (including illusions) have an influence -
often a major impact - on actual states and outcomes. 
3. Social technology, cooperation and conflicts 
Technology is often seen in highly limited terms, e.g. as particular 
mechanical or chemical or biological processes used in making one good or 
another. The extremely narrow view of technology that emerges from such a 
9. On the distinction between the particular approach of utilitarianism 
(involving the summation of utilities) and 'welfarism' in general 
(judging of a state of affairs as a function of individual utility 
information - not necessarily in the form of the sum-total) , see Sen 
(1979) and Sen and Williams (1982). 
10. I have tried to discuss these issues more extensively in Sen (1985a). 
Welfarism is the approach that takes the value of state of affairs to 
be a function exclusively of utility information regarding that state 
Utilitarianism involving the summing of utilities is a special case of 
welfarism. 

11 
limited outlook does little justice to the 'social' content of technology -
what Marx called "the combining together of various processes into a social 
whole".11 
The making of things involves not merely the relationship 
between, say, raw materials and final products, but also the social 
organization that permits the use of specific techniques of production in 
factories or workshops, or on land. 
The so-called 'productive' activities may be parasitic on other work 
being done, e.g. housework and food preparation, the looking after of 
children, bringing food to the field where cultivators are working. 
Technology is not only about equipment and its operational characteristics, 
but also about social arrangements that permit the equipment to be used and 
the so-called productive processes to be carried on. 
Household activities have been viewed in many contradictory ways in 
assessing production and technology. 
On the one hand, it is not denied 
that the sustenance, survival and reproduction of workers are obviously 
essential for the workers being available for outside work. On the other, 
the activities that produce or support that sustenance, survival or 
reproduction are typically not regarded as contributing to output, and are 
often classified as 'unproductive' labour. 
There has been a good deal of recent interest in the problem of 
valuation of these activities and also in reflecting them in the estimates 
11. Marx (1867), p. 515. Marx is discussing here the nature of 'capitalist 
production' and how it has developed technology into a social 
whole, "sapping the original sources of all wealth - the soil and the 
labourer". 

12 
of national income and national consumption.12 However, for the present 
purpose, these accounting questions are not really central.13 
What is 
important is to take an integrated view of the pattern of activities 
outside and inside the home that together make up the production processes 
in traditional as well as in modern societies.14 The relations between the 
sexes are obviously much conditioned by the way these different activities 
sustain and support each other, and the respective positions depend inter 
alia on the particular pattern of integration that is used. 
The prosperity of the household depends on the totality of various 
activities - getting money incomes, purchasing or directly producing (in 
the case of, say, peasants) food materials and other goods, producing 
eatable food out of food materials, and so on. 
But in addition to 
aggregate prosperity, even the divisions between sexes in general, and 
specifically those within the household, may also be deeply influenced by 
the pattern of gender division of work. In particular, the members of the 
12. See particularly Goldschmidt-Clermont (1982) and the rather large 
literature surveyed there. There is also the related issue of 
properly valuing non-household work of women, on which see Beneria 
(1982), Jain and Chand (1982), Banerjee (1985), Bryceson (1985), 
Jain (1985), Mukherjee (1985). 
13. These questions are, however, important in seeking a better 
understanding of the social position of women, on which see 
section 6 below. 
14. A particular pattern - that of capitalist production arrangements with 
family wages being used for household production - is appropriately 
characterized by Jane Humphries (1977) thus: "the working-class 
family constitutes an arena of production, the inputs being the 
commodities purchased with family wages, and one of the outputs being 
the renewed labour-power sold for wages in the market" (p.142). On 
the interrelations between problems of class divisions and gender 
division, see - among other contributions - Benston (1964), Delia 
Costa (1972), Meillassoux (1972), Rowbotham (1973), Harrison (1974) 
Seccombe (1974), Gardiner, Himmelweit and Mackintosh (1975), Milkman 
(1976), Himmelweit and Mohun (1977), Humphries (1977), Mcintosh 
(1978), Young (1978), Mackintosh (1979), Molyneux (1979), Young, 
Wolkowitz and McCullagh (1981), Mies (1982). See also the studies of 
experiences in socialist countries, e.g. Croll (1979) and Molyneux 
(1982). 

13 
household 
face two different 
types of problems simultaneously, one 
involving co-operation (adding to total availabilities) and the other 
conflict (dividing the total availabilities among the members of the 
household). 
Social arrangements regarding who does what, who gets to 
consume what, and who takes what decisions, can be seen as responses to 
this combined problem of co-operation and conflict. The sexual division of 
labour is one part of such a social arrangement, and it is important to see 
it in the context of the entire arrangement. 
Seeing social arrangements in terms of a broader view of technology and 
production has some far-reaching effects. 
First, it points to the 
necessity of examining the productive aspects of what are often treated as 
purely 
'cultural' 
phenomena. 
It 
also 
brings 
out 
the 
productive 
contributions that are in effect made by labour expended in activities that 
are not directly involved in 'production', narrowly defined. 
A deeper 
probing is especially important in trying to clear the fog of ambiguity in 
which the roles of different types of labouring activities are hidden by 
stereotyped social perceptions, and this is of obvious importance in 
assessing the nature and implications of particular patterns of gender 
divisions. 
Second, it throws light on the stability and survival of unequal 
patterns of social arrangements in general, and deeply asymmetric sexual 
divisions in particular. 
An example is the resilient social division of 
the 
labour in most societies by which women do cooking and are able to take on 
outside work only insofar as that can be combined with persisting as the 
cook.15 
[15. See next page.] 

14 
Third, the division between paid and unpaid work in the context of 
general productive arrangements (and 'the combining together of various 
processes into a social whole') can be seen as bringing in systematic 
biases in the perception of who is 'producing' what and 'earning' what -
biases that are central to understanding the inferior economic position of 
women in traditional (and even in modern) societies. 
Fourth, 
specific 
patterns 
of 
sexual 
divisions 
(and 
female 
specialization 
in particular 
economic 
activities) 
even 
outside 
the 
household can be seen as being partly reflective of the traditional 
within-household divisions related to established arrangements, which 
differentially bias the cultivation of skill and tend to sustain asymmetry 
of opportunities offered for acquiring 
'untraditional' skills. 
In 
understanding the inferior economic position of women inside and outside 
the household in most societies, the hold of these social arrangements has 
to be clearly identified and analysed.16 
The nature of 'social technology' has a profound effect on relating 
15. This pattern also influences the type of outside work for which women 
are typically thought to be 'suited'. One of the consequences of being 
offered relatively mechanical jobs involving repetitive activities is 
greater vulnerability, in many cases, to job loss as a result of 
mechanisation (on this see Sen 1985c). 
On the nature of women's job 
opportunities, see Boserup (1970), Palmer (1985), Standing and Sheehan 
(1978), Banerjee (1979, 1983a, 1985), Burman (1979), Ahooja-Patel 
(1980), Amsden (1980), Jain (1980), Deere and de Leal (1982). 
On the 
nature of threatened job losses through mechanization and technical 
change, see Harriss (1977), Carr (1978), Palmer (1978), Ahmed (1978, 
1983), Loutfi (1980), Agarwal (1981), Date-Bah and Stevens (1981), 
Whitehead (1981), Ahmed and Loutfi (1982), Beneria (1982), ILO (1982a, 
1982b), Ventura-Dias (1982). 
16. Even in the United States the average woman worker seems to earn only a 
fraction of the average male worker's earning (62 percent, to be exact, 
as reported in 'Female Sacrifice', New York Times, 14 April 1984). 
These differences arise not so much from different payments to men and 
women in the same job categories, but from women being more confined to 
particular types of jobs that are typically less remunerative. On this 
see Larwood, Stromberg and Gutek (1985), particularly the paper by June 
O'Neill. See also Hacker (1986). 

15 
production and earnings to the distribution of that earning between men and 
women and to gender divisions of work and resources. 
The divisional 
arrangements that, on the one hand, may help in the economic survival and 
in the over-all opulence of families and societies, may also impose, 
through the same process, a typically unequal division of job-opportunities 
and work-freedoms. 
They influence the division of fruits of joint 
activities - sometimes sustaining inequalities in the commodities consumed 
in relation to needs (e.g. of food in poorer economies). The nature of the 
co-operative 
arrangements 
implicitly 
influences 
the 
distributional 
parameters and the household's response to conflicts of interests. 
4. Household economics, bargaining models and informational bases 
The simultaneity of cooperation and conflict in gender divisions have 
often been trivialized in the formal economic literature by making 
particular - often far-fetched - assumptions. One approach is to see the 
household arrangements as resulting from implicit markets with transactions 
at 'as if market prices (see Becker 1973-74, 1981), even though it may be 
hard to see how such implicit markets can operate without the institutional 
support that sustain actual market transactions. 
Sometimes, the same basic model can be substantially varied by 
postulating that the transactions take the form of falling in line with the 
objectives of an altruistic family-head. As Becker (1981) puts it: "In my 
approach the 'optimal reallocation' results from altruism and voluntary 
contributions, and the 'group preference function' is identical to that of 
the altruistic head, even when he does not have 
sovereign power" 
(p.192).17 
17. On the peculiar nature of this solution, see Manser and Brown (1980), 
McElroy and Horney (1981), and Pollak (1983). 
Also Berk and Berk 
(1978). 

16 
Others have assumed that somehow or other - in ways unspecified - an 
'optimal' distribution of commodities and provisions takes place within the 
family, permitting us to see families as if they are individuals (see 
Samuelson 1956). The central issues of co-operative conflicts are avoided 
in all these models by one device or another. 
Helpful insights can be obtained by seeing divisions as 'bargaining 
problems', which 
form 
a 
class 
of 
co-operative 
conflicts.18 
The 
technological interdependences make it fruitful for the different parties 
to co-operate, but the particular pattern of division of fruits that 
emerges from such co-operation reflects the 'bargaining powers' of the 
respective parties. 
This format certainly has many advantages over the 
models of 'as if markets', or 'an altruistic leader's dominance', or 
'harmonious optimal divisions'. 
A number of recent contributions have 
brought out these advantages clearly enough.19 
Nevertheless, the informational base of the bargaining problem is 
limited by focussing exclusively on individual interests (typically taken 
to be cardinally representable), and by the assumption of clear and 
unambiguous perceptions 
of these individual 
interests. 
The latter 
assumption misses crucial aspects of the nature of gender divisions inside 
and outside the family. 
The sense of appropriateness goes hand in hand 
with ambiguities of perception of interests, and with certain perceived 
notions of legitimacy regarding what is 'deserved' and what is not. These 
18. 'Bargaining Problems' were first formulated by Nash (1950, 1953), and 
have been extensively discussed by Luce and Raiffa (1957), Harsanyi 
(1977), Roth (1979), and Binmore and Dasgupta (1987), among many 
others. 
On the normative features of bargaining problems, see 
Braithwaite (1955), Sen (1970), Kaneko and Nakamura (1979), and Kaneko 
(1980), among others. 
19. See particularly Clemout and Wan (1977), Manser and Brown (1980), 
McElroy and Horney (1981), Brown and Chuang (1980), Rochford (1981), 
Pollak (1983), Folbre (1984). 

17 
perceptions are also closely related to the nature of the social technology 
establishing 
specificity 
of roles and 
sustaining 
a presumption 
of 
'naturalness' of the established order. 
Also, they have a role in 
explaining particular production arrangements that are seen as forming the 
basis of economic survival and success. The informational base has to be 
widened 
to 
include 
perceptions 
of legitimacy 
and desert, and 
the 
specification of felt individual interests must take note of perception 
problems. 
These issues would have to be faced, but we may begin with the neat 
format of the bargaining problem as a starting point.20 
In the simplest 
case, there are two persons with well-defined and clearly perceived 
interests in the form of two cardinal utility functions respectively. They 
can co-operate altogether. 
The outcome when they fail to co-operate has 
been variously denoted, and may be called 'the status quo position' or 'the 
breakdown position'. 
What happens if the co-operative proposals should 
break down is of obvious relevance to the choice of the collusive outcome, 
since the breakdown position affects the two persons' respective bargaining 
powers. 
Since each person's interests are reflected by an exact (and 
cardinal) utility 
function, the breakdown position 
in a 
two-person 
bargaining problem 
is a pair of utility numbers, and the various 
co-operative outcomes form also a set of pairs of utility numbers (all with 
cardinal properties). 
If there were only one collusive possibility that is better for both 
than the breakdown position, then there would, of course, be no real 
20. While the classic contributions to formulating the bargaining problem 
were those of Nash (1950, 1953), some interesting and important 
variations can be found in Braithwaite (1955), Luce and Raiffa (1957), 
Schelling (1960), Kalai and Smordinsky (1975), Harsanyi (1977), Roth 
(1979), Binmore (1980), Kaneko (1980), Shubik (1983), Dasgupta (1986), 
and Binmore and Dasgupta (1987), among others. 

18 
bargaining problem, since that unique collusive solution would be the only 
one to choose. 
The bargaining problem arises from the existence of many 
choosable collusive arrangements - each such arrangement being better for 
both persons than the breakdown position. 
If there is a collusive 
arrangement which - while better for both than the breakdown position - is 
worse for both (or worse for one and no better for the other) than some 
other feasible collusive arrangement, then the first collusive arrangement 
- 'dominated' as it is - is taken to be rejected straightaway. 
Once the dominated arrangements have been weeded out, there remain 
possible collusive solutions that are ranked by the two in exactly opposite 
ways. 
If for person 1, arrangement x is better than y, then for person 2, 
arrangement y must be better than x. 
(If not, then x would have dominated 
y as an arrangement.) 
At this stage of the exercise the aspect of 
co-operation is all gone and there is only conflict. 
The choice between 
any two undominated collusive arrangements is, therefore, one of pure 
adversity. But at the same time each person knows that the choice between 
any such collusive arrangement and the breakdown position is a matter of 
co-operation since the former is better for both. 
It is this mixture of 
co-operative and conflicting aspects in the bargaining problem that makes 
the analysis of that problem potentially valuable 
in understanding 
household arrangements which, too, involve a mixture of this kind.21 
What solution would emerge in the 'bargaining problem'? 
That depends 
on a variety of possible influences, including the bargaining power of the 
two sides. 
The problem can be resolved in many different ways. 
Nash 
confines the informational base of the solution to (1) the pairs of 
21. The advantages and limitations of the 'bargaining problem' format 
in analysing household arrangements are discussed in Sen (1985c). 

19 
alternative feasible individual welfare levels, and (2) to the welfare 
levels at the breakdown point. More specifically, he suggests a particular 
solution that would maximise the product of the two persons' welfare gains 
compared with the breakdown position.22 Others have suggested other 
solutions.23 
The main drawback of the 'bargaining problem' format applied to gender 
divisions arises not so much from the nature of any particular 'solution', 
but from the formulation of the 'problem' itself. 
As was discussed 
earlier, the perception of interest is neither likely to be precise, nor 
unambiguous. There are two distinct issues here. 
The first is the need to distinguish between the perception of interest 
(of the different parties) and some more objective notion of their 
respective well-being. 
As was argued in section 2 (see also Sen 1982a, 
1985a), focusing on the 'capabilities' of a person - what he or she can do 
or can be - provides a direct approach to a person's well-being. 
While 
that format also has many problems (especially dealing with indexing of 
capabilities),24 it has important theoretical advantages as well as much 
22. Nash did not see his solution of the bargaining problem as a predictive 
exercise, and seems to have characterized it as a normative solution of 
this conflict. 
His method of choosing a solution took the form of 
postulating some axioms of reasonablemness of a co-operative outcome, 
and these axioms together uniquely identified the product-maximization 
formula. 
But, interestingly enough, exactly the same solution as 
Nash's would be arrived at if the bargaining procedure followed a 
method analysed earlier by Zeuthen (1930), whereby the two parties 
would move from one proposed arrangement to another if and only if the 
percentage gain of the gainer from the move would be greater than the 
percentage loss of the loser. 
23. See footnotes 18 and 20 above. Manser and Brown (1980) have used the 
outcome specified by Kalai and Smordinsky (1975). 
24. Some of the technical problems are discussed in Sen (1985b). 

20 
practical convenience.25 Especially in dealing with poor economies, there 
are great advantages in concentrating on such parameters as longevity, 
nutrition, health and avoidance of morbidity, educational achievements, 
etc., compared with focusing purely on subjective utility in the form of 
pleasure, satisfaction, desire fulfilment, which can be influenced by 
social conditioning and a resigned acceptance of misfortune.26 
The 
analyses of co-operative conflicts have, in this view, to go beyond 
perceived interests, and we have to distinguish between perceptions and 
well-being. 
The second limitation arises from the informational base of bargaining 
models being confined to individual interests (or welfare) only, without 
letting the solution respond explicityly to other variables such as 
conceptions of desert and legitimacy (e.g., those related to perceived 
'productive contributions' of each party to family opulence). 
2 7 
The 
nature of 'social technology' makes these ideas particularly influential in 
the determination of gender divisions. We need, on both these grounds, a 
wider informational base for studying cooperative conflicts. 
5. Cooperative conflicts: Interests, contributions and perceptions 
The informational base of cooperative conflicts must distinguish 
25. For some applications of the format in the specific context of women's 
position and relative disadvantage, see Kynch and Sen (1983), Sen and 
Sengupta (1983), Sen (1984: Essays 15 and 16), and Sen (1985b: Appendix 
B). 
26. The capability to be happy can, of course, be sensibly included among 
the relevant capabilities, but this is quite different from using 
utility (or happiness) as the measure of all types of benefits, or 
(even more ambitiously) as the ultimate source of all value (as in 
different versions of the utilitarian approach). 
27. The Nash bargaining models are, in his sense, 'welfarist', without 
being utilitarian. 

21 
between (i)interest perceptions, and (ii) measures of the well-being of the 
persons involved. 
Further, the base must include information regarding 
perceptions of who is 'contributing' how much to the overall family 
prosperity.28 
This greater plurality of the informational structure makes 
the modelling of cooperative outcomes that much more complex than in the 
simple special case of the bargaining problem in the tradition of Nash. 
But the simplicity of the Nash model and the related structures is achieved 
at considerable 
sacrifice of informational sensitivity.29 
In this 
presentation, I shall not try to develop a fully worked out solution 
function for the cooperative conflict problems. 
Indeed, a variety of 
solutions can be suggested, and all that will be done here is to specify a 
set of directional features, related respectively to (1) well-being levels 
at the breakdown points, (2) perceived interests, and (3) perceived 
contributions. 
For our present purpose this is adequate, though -
obviously - any attempt at specifying an exact outcome would not be able to 
escape presenting a more complete solution structure. 
One particular feature of the Nash bargaining problem has attracted -
justifiably - a good deal of attention. This makes the outcome respond 
28. The 'bargaining solution function' presented in Sen (1970), pp.126-7, 
can be readily extended for this purpose. 
In that characterisation of 
the Nash bargaining model, the solution x depended on the breakdown 
position X and on the welfare combination W, with specified 'invariance 
conditions' corresponding to cardinal non-comparability of individual 
well-being. 
To these informational inputs (possibly with changed 
invariance conditions), we can add the perceived-interest combination I 
and perceived-contribution combination P, the latter unique (since the 
units will be so many units of, say, incomes generated by each) in the 
respective points of collusive solutions. 
The informational base for 
the solution will then be (X,W,I,P) . In this elementary exposition, 
we are concerned only with some directional responses of x, the 
solution, to the determining variables. 
29. Schelling (1960) has pointed to the fact that the Nash solution pays no 
attention to the 
'salience' of some outcomes vis-a-vis others. 
Schelling's alternative approach also enriches the informational base 
of the Nash model, but takes us in a different direction, which I shall 
not pursue here. 

22 
firmly to the nature of the breakdown position.30 
Indeed, a more 
favourable placing in the breakdown position would tend to help in securing 
a more favourable bargaining outcome. 
Nash had seen his solution as a 
normative one, and it has been argued in criticism of Nash that in that 
context this responsiveness to the breakdown position may not perhaps be so 
easy to defend.31 But predictively it is, of course, entirely plausible 
that the fear of the breakdown position would tend to govern the bargaining 
process and strongly influence its outcome. 
With a little more structure in the characterization of the bargaining 
problem than we have introduced so far, it is easy to get a directional 
relation of the following form: 
(1) Breakdown well-being response: Given other things, if the breakdown 
position of one person were worse in terms of well-being, then 
the collusive solution, if different, would be less favourable to his 
or her well-being. 
The breakdown position gives the person vulnerability or strength in the 
'bargaining'. 
If in the case of a breakdown, one of the persons is going 
to end up in more of a mess than it appeared previously, that is going to 
weaken that person's ability to secure a favourable outcome. 
30. This is, in fact, obvious from the method - already described - of 
identifying the solution. 
31. Punishing the more vulnerable is not unplausible from a predictive 
point of view, but it is odd to think of this as being "just", or 
otherwise normatively attractive, though that interpretation has been 
taken (see particularly Braithwaite 1955). To say 'I see you are going 
to be even worse off (than we first thought) if you do not join up with 
me, so you better agree to these worsened terms of joining' , may not 
ring untrue (if a little explicit and crude), but it is hardly 
overflowing with anything that can plausibly be called justice. On the 
relation between the predictive and normative issues in the context of 
Nash's bargaining problem, see Sen (1970) and Rawls (1971). 

23 
The 
'breakdown 
response' 
is a general 
qualitative 
property 
of 
co-operative conflicts entirely in line with the rationale of Nash's 
approach to bargaining. Others have extended the idea of bargaining power 
by bringing in the idea of 'threat', to wit, a person threatening the other 
with some harmful action if the bargaining were to fail. This can make the 
actual result of breakdown worse for the threatened person than the 
previously identified breakdown position, if the threat is carried out.32 
This is a plausible direction of extension, though there are some very 
basic difficulties with any theory of threats, since it has to deal with 
situations after the bargaining has failed.33 
But in the context of a 
bargaining arrangement that continues over time, there are possibilities of 
going on making 'side threats' (and through them, trying to make the 
outcome more favourable in the process of living through it) . The nature 
of 'repeated games' gives credibility to threats. I shall not pursue here 
this type of influence further (see, however, Sen 1985c). 
The influence of perceived interest on the bargaining outcome may take 
the form of choosing a solution in the space not of individual well-being 
levels, but in that of perceived interests. In fact, a simple translation 
of the Nash model would be to redefine the solution in terms of these 
interest perceptions rather than well-being measures. 
If the breakdown 
point too is defined in terms of perceived interests, rather than actual 
32. See Braithwaite (1955), Luce and Raiffa (1958), Schelling (1960), 
Harsaryi (1979), Roth (1979), Binmore and Dasgupta (1987). 
33. See Sen (1970), pp. 120-1. 
The person who 'threatens' to harm the 
other if the bargaining should fail does it at no direct advantage to 
himself (otherwise it won't be a 'threat' but something he may do 
anyway, and will be thus reflected in the breakdown position). 
While 
it is plausible to try to get bargaining advantage out of a threat 
during the process of bargaining, once the bargaining has failed, the 
threatener has no obvious interest in carrying out the threat. 
But 
that recognition on the part of the threatened person would call into 
question the credibility of the threat itself. 

24 
well-being levels (unlike in 'breakdown well-being response'), then this 
will amount to a simple interpretational shift of the Nash model without 
necessarily changing the mathematical properties of the solution (but 
making 
a substantive 
difference 
to 
the actual 
solution 
since 
the 
perceived-interest relations may well be much less favourable to one party 
than the well-being relations, for reasons discussion in Section 2). In 
the plural informational format proposed here, both perceived interests and 
well-being measures may have influence, the latter especially through 
breakdown response. 
The motivation underlying the directional response to be specified here 
relates to the fact that a person may get a worse deal in the collusive 
solution if his or her perceived interest takes little note of his or her 
own well-being. 
As was discussed earlier, such perception bias in the 
direction of the interests of the others in the family may apply-
particularly to women in traditional societies (see Section 2). 
(2) Perceived interest response: Given other things, if the 
self-interest perception of one of the persons were to attach less 
value to his or her own well-being, then the collusive solution, 
if different, be less favourable to that person, in terms of 
well-being. 
A different type of issue is raised by the influence of a perceived 
sense of greater 'contribution' (and of the 'legitimacy' of enjoying a 
correspondingly bigger share of the fruits of co-operation). This question 
has already been discussed earlier. 
'Perceived contributions' have to be 
distinguished from actual contributions. 
Indeed, the idea of who is 
actually producing precisely what in an integrated system may not be at all 
clear. Nevertheless the perceived contribution of people can be important 

25 
in 
tilting 
the 
co-operative 
outcomes 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
perceived 
contributor. 
(3) Perceived contribution response: Given other things, if in 
the accounting of the respective outcomes, a person were perceived 
as making a larger contribution to the over-all opulence of 
the group, then the collusive solution, if different, would be 
more favourable to that person. 
The three 'responses', related respectively to breakdown, perceived 
interest and perceived contribution, may throw some light on the way the 
deal tends to be biased between the sexes. This can be seen both in terms 
of a stylized reference point of a 'primitive' situation as well as a more 
realistically portrayed 'current' one, and the relation between the two 
situations is itself of some interest. 
Some disadvantages of women would 
apply in both types of situations. 
For example, frequent pregnancy and 
persistent child-rearing (as happens in many present communities and has 
happened in most of the past ones) must make the outcome of co-operative 
conflicts less favourable to women through worse breakdown position and a 
lower ability to make a perceived contribution to the economic fortunes of 
the family.34 Other disadvantages are much more specific to the nature of 
the community, e.g. greater illiteracy and less higher education of women 
in most developing - and some developed - countries today, and these too 
would tend to make the breakdown positions worse for women. 
The perception biases unfavourable to women, both in terms of 
34. On the importance of 'reproductive' role of women in influencing gender 
bias, 
are Bryceson 
(1985). 
Leela Gulati 
(1981) presents 
and 
interesting case study of astonishingly rapid impact of an extension of 
family planning in some fishing villages in Kerala on the health and 
survival of women and on their earning power. 

26 
reflecting well-being in perceived interests and recording productive 
contributions adequately, will also vary from one society to another. The 
'perceived interest response' and the 'perceived contribution response' can 
be tremendously more effective in some societies than in others (see Sen 
1984: Essays 15 and 16). 
The relation between the co-operative conflicts in one period and that: 
in the next is of the greatest importance even though it may be hard to 
formalize this properly. 
The 'winners' in one round get a satisfactory 
outcome that would typically include not only more immediate benefit but 
also a better placing (and greater bargaining power) in the future. 
This 
need not be the result of a conscious exercise of taking note of future 
placing or bargaining power (though it can also be that) , but the effect 
may be brought about by the fact that 'more satisfactory work' from the 
point of view of immediate benefit also tends, incidentally, to enhance the 
power bases of the deal a person can expect to get in the future. 
For 
example, getting better education, being free to work outside the home, 
finding a more 'productive' employment, etc. may all contribute not only to 
immediate well-being, but also to acquired skill and a better breakdown 
position for the future.35 
Also job training improves the quality of 
labour, and improves one's breakdown position, threat advantages and 
perceived contributions within the family, even when these may not have 
been conscious objectives. 
The transmission can also work from one generation to the next, indeed 
from one historical epoch to the next, as the 'typical' patterns of 
35. Cf. Becker, Landes and Michael's (1977) characterization of 'working 
exclusively in the non-market sector' as a form of marriage-specific 
investment. As Pollak (1983) remarks, "a decision to work exclusively 
in the non-market sector, however, is also a decision not to acquire 
additional human capital by working in the market sector' (p.35). 

27 
employment and education for men get solidified vis-a-vis those for women. 
The asymmetries of immediate benefits sustain future asymmetries of future 
bases of sexual divisions, which in turn sustain asymmetries of immediate 
benefits. 
The process can feed on itself, and I shall refer to this 
process as 'feedback transmission'.36 
In the stylized 'primitive' situation, the disadvantages of women in 
terms of 'breakdown response' would relate greatly to purely physical 
factors, even though the role of physical factors will be governed by 
social conditions. 
For example, at an advanced stage of pregnancy, 
securing food on one's own in a hunting community must be no mean task. 
The breakdown positions can be asymmetrically worse for women in various 
types of 'primitive' societies, and this can make the gender visions go 
relatively against women in line with 'breakdown response'.37 
In a less primitive situation - stylized 'current' one - the primitive 
asymmetries, if any, are supplemented by socially generated further 
36. If this were to be formalized, it will take the form of 'repeated 
games' with varying participants with distinguished 
intertemporal 
links. 
37. Strictly speaking, 'breakdown response' is not concerned with the 
relative, positions of two parties but with the different positions of 
the same person in two situations with different breakdown features. 
Indeed, in Nash's own formulation, the position of one person being 
worse than that of another is not a meaningful statement, since. Nash 
had no provision for interpersonal comparison (on this see Sen 1970, 
pp.118-125). 
However, when such comparisons are admitted and a 
condition 
of 
symmetry 
is 
used 
regarding 
the 
relation 
between 
circumstances and outcomes for the two parties, the property of 
breakdown response can be easily translated from intrapersonal to 
interpersonal relations. The same translation has to be done for the 
other two 'responses' as well, to move from intrapersonal formulation 
to interpersonal application. I desist from pursuing the formalities 
here. 

28 
asymmetries, e.g., of ownership, education and training,38 and also a 
nurtured view of the 'fragility' of women (seen as 'quite unsuitable' for 
some types of jobs). 
These all contribute to a worse breakdown position, 
and worse ability to make a 'perceived contribution' to the family's 
economic status. 
The bargaining disadvantages will feed on themselves 
through 'feedback transmission'. 
It may not be, then, terribly important 
to know how all this got started, i.e., whether because of the physical 
asymmetries relevant in the 'primitive' situation, or through some other 
process (e.g., as Engels 1884 had argued, through the emergence of private 
property). 
In the present context, the important point is that such 
asymmetries - however developed - are stable and sustained, and the 
relative weakness of women in co-operative conflict in one period tends to 
sustain relative weakness in the next.39 
38. There is, in fact, some substantial common ground here with those 
neo-classical analyses of women's employment which have emphasized the 
differences in 'human capital' investment in women's working background 
to explain their lower wages, inferior jobs and worse unemployment 
risks (see, for example, Mincer and Polachek 1974 and Becker 1981; see 
also Apps 1981. That neo-classical literature has done a substantial 
service in emphasizing these differences related to sex. However, the 
nature of the analysis suffers from certain fundamental limitations, in 
particular: (1) taking the existence and realization of competitive 
market equilibrium for granted (with or without market institutions and 
competitive conditions), (2) ignoring the role of social prejudices and 
preconceptions operating in the labour market 
(going beyond the 
'stochastically rational' employer behaviour pointed out by Phelps 
1972), (3) dealing trivially with 'co-operative conflicts' implicit in 
household arrangements by concentrating either on an as if market 
solution or on the assumed dominance of an altruistic head, and 
ignoring in particular the role of perception biases and bargaining 
powers 
in 
explaining 
family 
decisions 
regarding 
human 
capital 
investment and the gender division of labour, and (4) related to the 
last point, ignoring the role of 'feedback transmission' in sustaining 
the gender asymmetry. 
39. Regarding the role of 'threats', the physical asymmetry would be more 
important in the primitive situation, though it remains important 
enough even today, judging by the frequency of wife-battering, even in 
the richer countries. 
But physical asymmetries in the ability to 
threaten are also supplemented by nurtured asymmetries of social power. 
It is easy to under-estimate the importance of threat in the social 
arrangements (including those within the household) since much of it 
may be implicit rather than explicit and liberally mixed with other 
(Continued on next page). 

29 
The 
impact of 
'perceived 
contribution 
response' may have 
been 
primitively associated with acquiring food from outside. The fact that the 
division of labour within the household permits some members to play this 
role while others take care of other activities (including preparation of 
food and looking after children) may not weaken the perception of special 
importance of 'bringing the food home'. Ester Boserup (1970) has, rightly, 
taken Margaret Mead (1950) to task for the following overgeneralization: 
"the home shared by a man or men and female partners, into which men bring 
the food and women prepare it, is the basic common picture the world 
over".40 
But it is nevertheless a common enough picture in many primitive 
(and modern) societies, amd may well have contributed a further force in 
the direction of gender asymmetry of consumption and sustenance. 
Ester Boserup has noted that women appear 
to fare relatively better in those socieities in which women play the major 
role in acquiring food from outside, e.g. in some African regions with 
shifting cultivation (Boserup 1970, chapter 1; see also Boserup 1986). The 
role of outside earning does seem to be a strong one in creating a 
difference within the family. 
It has been noted that in India in the 
regions in which women do little outside earning (e.g. Punjab and 
39. [continued from previous page]... 
features of household relations, 
including love, affection and concern. But threat can in some cases be 
explicit enough, both as a phenomenon in itself and in the transparent 
role it can play in maintaining a particularly inequitous household 
arrangement. 
(See for example Kurian, 1982, dealing with the role of 
violence and social power asymmetries in the plantation sector of Sri 
Lanka, helping to sustain a particularly inequitous situation for women 
workers.) 
It becomes, of course, the subject of much discussion when 
the violence or threat is associated with other features that arouse 
social interest, e.g., the peculiar relationship between pimps and 
prostitutes in which threat often plays an important part in securing a 
regular pay-off for the former from the earnings of the latter (see, 
for example, Phongpaichit 1982). 
40. Mead (1950), p.190; Boserup (1970), p.16. See also Dasgupta (1977) and 
Slocum (1975), who also goes into 'the male bias in anthropology'. 

30 
Haryana) sex disparities are sharper - visible even in the discriminated 
treatment of female children - than in regions where they have a bigger 
role in earning from outside (e.g. in Southern India).41 
As was noted 
earlier, even the crude indicator of sex ratio (female per male) is as low 
as 0.87 and 0.88 in Haryana and Punjab respectively in contrast with the 
Southern Indian states (0.96 in Karnataka, 0.98 in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu and 1.03 in Kerala). 
The nature of 'perceived contribution' to family opulence has to be 
distinguished from the amount of time expended in working inside and 
outside the home. 
Indeed, in terms of 'time allocation studies', women 
often seem to do astonishingly large amounts of work even when the 
so-called 'economic' contribution is perceived to be relatively modest 
(see, for example Batliwala 1981; Jain and Chand 1982; Mukhopadhayaya 1982; 
Jain and Banerjee 1985). 
The perception bias tends to relate to the size 
of the direct money earning, rather than to the amount of time and effort 
expended (or to the role of non-market activities by other members of the 
family, who indirectly support such earnings). 
6. Extended entitlements and perceiyed legitimacy 
In a series of earlier studies dealing specifically with starvation and 
famines, I have tried to analyse the problem of command over goods and 
services (including food) in terms of 'entitlement systems' (Sen 1976. 
1977a, 1981). The analysis concentrated on the command that the household 
can exercise over goods and services, and it did not take on the issue of 
distribution within the household. 
Entitlement is essentially a legal 
concept, dealing with rules that govern who can have the use of what. 
Since the distribution within the household is not typically controlled by 
law (as property ownership and market transactions are) ,there are obvious 

31 
difficulties in extending the entitlement analysis to the problem of 
intrahousehold distribution. 
But the distributions of food, health care, education, etc., are of 
obvious importance in determining each person's actual command over 
necessities, and this is often a source of inequality. 
In some empirical 
studies relating to India and Bangladesh (e.g. Sen 1982b, 1984: Essay 15;, 
Kynch and Sen 1983; Sen and Sengupta, 1982), a pattern of sex bias in 
nutritional achievements, health care and medical attention 
(and in 
morbidity and mortality rates) has come through strikingly.42 
Such 
systematic differences have also been observed in other parts of the 
developing world.43 
There is also some evidence that deep-seated notions of 'legitimacy' 
operate in the distribution within the family (see Sen 1982b, 1983b), 
supplementing the operations of entitlement relations at the levels of 
households, occupation groups and classes. There is, thus, a good case for 
extending the entitlement analysis to intrahousehold distribution as well, 
taking a broad view of accepted legitimacy (rather than just of 'laws' in 
the strict sense). 
Such an extension will closely relate to the structure 
41. See P. Bardhan (1974, 1984, 1987), Miller (1981), Dyson and Moore 
(1983), Kynch and Sen (1983), Sen and Sengupta (1983), K. Bardhan 
(1985), G. Sen (1985). The contrast between Eastern and Southeast Asia 
and South Asia may also relate to greater female participation in 
outside work in the former region. See Dixon (1983), Sen (1984: Essay 
16). 
On some more general but related issues, see also Chakravarty 
(1986) and Tilly (1986). 
42. See also Wyon and Gordon (1971), Mitra (1980), Natarajan (undated), 
Chen, Huq and D'Souza (1981), Chan (1982), Hassan and Ahmad (1984), 
Bhuiya et al (1986), Das Gupta (1987). 
However, for some contrary 
considerations, see also Wheeler (1984), Kakwani (1986), Basu (1987), 
n (1982),Dyson (1987). 
Barbara 
Harriss (1987) has presented an extensive and 
illuminating survey of the available evidence on different sides. 
43. See, for example, den Hartog (1973) and Schofield (1975). 
See also 
Vaughan (1985, 1987) and Whitehead (1985). 

32 
of gender divisions with which the earlier parts of this paper have been 
concerned. 
In a private ownership economy, the two basic parameters of entitlement 
analysis are 'endowment' (roughly, what is initially owned) and 'exchange 
entitlement mapping' (reflecting the exchange possibilities that exist 
through production and trade).44 
The person (or the household) can 
establish command over any bundle of commodities that can be obtained by 
using the endowment and the exchange entitlement mapping, reflecting both 
possibilities and the terms of trade and production. 
The set of all 
commodity bundles over any one of which the person (or the household) can 
establish command is his or her (or its) 'entitlement set' . 
If the 
entitlement set does not include any bundle with enough food, then the 
person (or the household) must starve. 
With this very general structure 
much of the analysis was devoted to studying patterns of endowment and 
exchange entitlement mappings, paying particular attention to modes of 
production, class structure, roles of occupation groups, and market forces. 
The analysis was also used to study a number of modern famines, in some 
of which (e.g. the Bengal famine of 1943, the Ethiopian famines of 1973, 
the Bangladesh famine of 1974) the total availability of food per head 
turned out to have been no less (sometimes more) than in previous years. 
The famines were shown to be the results of entitlement failures related 
either to endowment decline (e.g. alienation of land, or loss of grazing 
rights), or exchange entitlement decline (e.g., loss of employment, failure 
of money wages to keep up with food prices, failure of prices of animal 
44, For a fuller presentation of the entitlement approach and its 
application, see Sen (1981). 
See also Alamgir (1980), Arrow (1982), 
Oughton (1982) 
Desai (1984). Solow (1984), Appadorai 
(1985), Khan 
(1985), Ravallion (1985, 1987) . Snowdon (1985), Tilly (1985 
1986), 
Vaughan (1985, 1987), Devereux and Hay (1986),Kamsler (1986). 

33 
products or craft products or services to keep up with the prices of basic 
food), or both. 
The famines decimated specific occupation groups, while 
leaving 
other 
occupation 
groups 
and 
classes 
unaffected, 
sometimes 
enriched.45 
For for most of humanity, virtually the only significant endowment is 
labour power. 
Much of the analysis, thus, turned on the conditions 
and 
governing the exchange of labour power (e.g. employment, wages 
prices, 
etc. , and social security, if any). It was also found that the right to 
the use of land, even without ownership, e.g. secured share-cropping 
rights, makes a big difference to famine-vulnerability. 
In fact, in the 
South Asian context, while landless rural labourers constitute 
the 
occupation group most vulnerable to famine, nevertheless sharecroppers (who 
are, in normal circumstances, not much richer than labourers) turn out to 
be often much less vulnerable to famines than labourers (Sen 1981). 
The 
difference relates largely to the fact that the share-cropper gets directly 
a share of the food crop (without having to depend on the market), whereas 
the rural labourer faces the dual threat of unemployment and possible 
inadequacy of wages to buy enough food at the relative prices that would 
happen to emerge. 
The fact that daily wage labourers often form a much 
of 
higher proportion of female agricultural workers than males (see Dixon 
1983, G. Sen 1983, Agarwal 1986, among others) is, thus, of some 
importance. 
Turning now to the intrahousehold distribution of food in famine 
situations, the empirical evidence seems to suggest conflicting stories. 
The famine experts of the British Raj in India were on the whole persuaded 
45. See Sen (1976, 1977a, 1981). 
See also Griffin (1978), Ghose (1979), 
Alamgir (1980), Oughton (1982), Khan (1985), Ravallion (1985, 1987), 
Snowdon (1985), Vaughan (1985), among others, for other case studies 
and related analyses. 

34 
that men died in much larger numbers than women in Indian famines,46 but 
the evidence might possibly have been based on biases in data collection.47 
There has been no serious famine in India since independence, but there 
have been many situations of hardship in acquiring food, not altogether 
relieved (though typically much reduced) by government intervention. There 
is some considerable evidence of bias against the female, especially the 
female child vis-a-vis the male child, in such situations of hardship (see 
Sen 1984: Essay 15). And in normal mortality too, there is clear evidence 
of female disadvantage in age groups below 35. This is especially striking 
for children.48 
One remarkable feature of Indian demography 
is a 
significant decline in the sex ratio (female to male) in the Indian 
population, from 0.972 in 1901 (quite low even then) to 0.935 in 1981. 
This feature relates to many other ways in which the continued - and in 
some ways increasing - relative deprivation of Indian women come through 
46. See Census of India 1911, vol. I, part I, Appendix to chapter VI, 
surveying the nineteenth century famine inquiry reports, well reflected 
by Sir Charles Elliot's summary: 'all the authorities seem agreed that 
women succumb to famine less easily than men'. 
47. An excess of male deaths was reported also in the Bengal famine of 1943 
by Das (1949), based on a survey asking people receiving cooked food 
relief, who of their relations had died. However more complete data do 
not seem to support Das's survey finding and indicate that the sex 
ratio of famine mortality in 1943 was much the same as the sex ratio of 
normal mortality in Bengal (see Sen, 1981, pp.211-3). Among the relief 
receivers (the population that was questioned), there seems to have 
been a higher proportion of women (famine relief policy was more 
suspicious of supporting able-bodied men), and this bias in favour of 
women in the questioned population would have acted as a bias in favour 
of men being reported as dead in the survey. 
A woman has typically 
more male relatives in the nuclear family (including her husband) than 
female relatives, and thus she has a higher probability of having a 
dead male relative. Similar biases in sampling could have affected the 
nineteenth century belief in greater famine deaths among men. But the 
evidence requires a more thorough examination than it has received so 
far. 
48. See P. Bardhan (1974, 1984, 1987), Natarajan (undated), Mitra (1980), 
Sopher (1980), Miller (1981), Dyson (1982, 1987), Padmanabha (1982), 
Kynch and Sen (1983), K. Bardhan (1985). 
On related observations 
regarding Bangladesh, see Chan, Huq and D'Souza (1981), Chen (1982), 
Mahmud and Mahmud (1985). 

35 
(see Kynch and Sen 1983). 
The problem is present in many other countries 
as well, and as was mentioned earlier, the female-male ratio is very 
substantially lower than unity in Asia as a whole. 
In extending the entitlement analysis to include 
intra-household 
distribution, attention must be paid to the fact that the relationships 
within the household in the distribution of food and other goods cannot 
sensibly be seen in the same way as the relationships of persons and 
households to others outside the household, e.g. an employer, a trader, a 
landowner, a retailer, a speculator. 
That is why a straightforward 
translation of the entitlement analysis presented earlier would be a 
mistake, tempting though it might be. To indulge in technicalities for a 
in this context 
moment,it is best to see entitlements not as a set of vectors (bundles of 
commodities going to the household as a whole) , but as a set of matrices 
(bundles of commodities for each members of the household), with each 
person's share being given by a column of the matrix. 
Similarly, 
endowments too are best seen as matrices (bundles of ownership for each 
member), even though the children may typically enter with zeroes 
everywhere, and more importantly, most of the adults too would have nothing 
other than their labour-power to adorn the household endowment matrix. 
frequently 
Women in particular will tend to fall in that category (outside a small 
class). 
The exchange entitlement mapping will then specify for each 
endowment matrix the set of possible commodity matrices. 
Starvation will 
occur if - given the endowment matrix - none of the possible commodity 
matrices includes adequate food for each person. It can also occur even if 
there is a feasible matrix with adequate food for all, if that feasible 
matrix does not emerge in the choice process. 
This is not the occasion to launch forth into the technical analysis 
that will clearly be needed for some purposes, nor indeed to go into detail 

36 
in the way ownership patterns, production possibilities 
and market 
arrangements (including that for labour power) interact to constrain the 
exchange entitlement mappings. 
Some of that analysis can draw heavily on 
the entitlement relations explored earlier (Sen 1981) at the interhousehold 
level, but the supplementation needed must capture the essentials of the 
sexual 
divisions, 
including 
intrahousehold 
distributions. 
If 
the 
intrahousehold distribution patterns are taken as completely flexible, then 
the possible matrices would reflect that freedom through listing all 
possible intrahousehold distributions of the same household bundle. At the 
other extreme, if the head of the household has very fixed ideas of how the 
bundle 
must be 
distributed 
and has 
the power 
to carry 
out his 
(patriarchial) decisions, then each household commodity bundle would 
translate into exactly one household matrix of who would have which good.49 
The actual situation would vary between these limits. 
The general 
issues underlying 
the formulation of 
the household 
arrangement problem as a 
'bargaining problem' can now be used to 
characterize some features of the extended exchange entitlement mapping. 
For example, 'breakdown response' will be reflected in the individual 
consumption of the person (his or her 'column') being more favourable in 
the possible entitlement matrices, given other things, as the person's 
fall-back position improves. Similarly, the column of each person would be 
influenced by perceived interests and perceived contributions in the ways 
49. The approach of 'equivalence scales' based on the assumption of 
maximization of a unique utility function for the family as a whole, 
which is technically perhaps the most impressive part of the literature 
in intrafamily allocation 
(see Deaton and Muellbauer 
1980), 
is 
implicitly based on some assumption of this kind, e.g. the 'head' of 
the family 
imposing a benevolent preference 
ordering 
in making 
decisions about everyone's consumption in the family. When the 'head' 
has a strictly convex preference map, each household entitlement vector 
would be translated into a unique household entitlement matrix. There 
are, however, other ways of interpreting the outcome of intra-family 
divisions; see Deaton (1987) and Muellbauer (1987). 

37 
specified by the respective 'responses'.50 
7. Production, earnings and perceived contributions 
A woman's opportunity to get 'gainful' work outside is one of the 
crucial variables affecting the extended exchange entitlement mapping. 
This can happen in two distinct ways, corresponding respectively to the 
'co-operative' 
and 
'conflicting' 
features 
discussed 
earlier 
in the 
'co-operative conflict' formulation of sexual divisions. 
First, such 
employment would enhance the over-all command of the household, i.e. the 
family entitlement. 
Second, for a given family entitlement, the woman's 
relative share may also respond positively to her outside earnings. 
This 
latter influence corresponds, of course, to the element of pure conflict in 
'co-operative conflicts', and the directional link described here would 
reflect some combination of the three responses discussed earlier. Outside 
earnings can give the woman in question: (1) a better breakdown position, 
(2) possibly a clearer perception of her individuality and well-being, and 
(3) a higher 'perceived contribution' to the family's economic position. 
The empirical basis of the directional link has been supported in a 
number of studies dealing with women's work, following the pioneering 
contribution Ester Boserup (1970). 
To quote just one example, in her 
definitive study of the women workers in the beedi (crude cigarette) 
industry in Allahabad in India, Zarina Bhatty (1980) found the following: 
50. It is not difficult to extend the mathematical formulation of the 
vector-vector 'exchange entitlement mapping' (see Appendix A in Sen 
1981) into this expanded format of matrix-matrix 'extended exchange 
entitlement mapping', and to specify the 'responses' in question as a 
set of 'monotonicity conditions'. To be exact, 
the 'extended' 
exchange entitlement mapping relates a matrix of family endowment to a 
set of matrices of family entitlements, just as the standard exchange 
entitlement mapping relates a vector of family endowment to a set of 
vectors of family entitlements. 
The monotonicity conditions would be 
defined in that format. 

38 
"A greater economic role for women definitely improves their 
status within the family. A majority of them have more money to 
spend, and even more importantly, have a greater say in the 
decisions to spend money. Most women claim to be better treated 
as a result of their contribution to household income.... A 
substantial proportion of women feel that they should have a 
recognized economic role and an independent source of income.... 
Their attitudes evidence a clear perception of the significance of 
their work to family welfare and their own status within the family". 
(p.41)51 
The impact of outside earning of women depends also on the form of that 
earning. In her well-known study of the lace makers of Narsapur in India, 
Maria Mies (1982) notes that these women workers do not get much benefit 
from their work, because despite the fact that the products are sold in the 
world market, the women "are recruited as housewives to produce lace as a 
so-called spare-time activity, in their own homes" (p.172). 
"As she 
herself is not able to see her work as a value-producing work, she 
subscribes to the devaluation of this work as non-work, as purely 
supplementary to her husband's work, and she is not able to bargain for a 
just wage. 
This mystification is the basis of her over-exploitation as 
housewife and as worker" (pp.173-4). 
The lower bargaining power of the 
women workers vis-a-vis the employers depresses the exchange entitlement of 
the household as a whole. Further, the weakness of the three 'responses' 
51. See also Beneria (1982), Croll (1979), Deere and de Leal (1982), 1L0 
(1982a), Loutfi (1980), Mies (1982), Phongpaichit (1982), Jain and 
Banerjee (1985), Mahmud and Mahmud (1985). 
Also 
Standing and Sheehan 
(1978). 
Lloyd and Niemi (1979) deal with a related problem in the 
context of rich and economically advanced countries. 

39 
for women workers vis-a-vis the rest of the family further affects the 
extended exchange entitlement by depressing their status and the share of 
benefits that go to them within the household. 
The extension of entitlement analysis to divisions within the family 
brings in notions of legitimacy that go well beyond the system of 
State-enforced laws on which property relations, market transactions, wage 
employment, etc., operate and on which the standard entitlement analysis 
depends. But these notions of legitimacy have a firm social basis and may 
be hard to displace. 
What would have looked, in the format of the 
'bargaining problem', like a might-is-right bargaining outcome (e.g. giving 
a worse deal to the person with a weaker breakdown position) may, actually, 
take the form of appearing to be the 'natural' and 'legitimate' outcome in 
the perception of all the parties involved. The idea of entitlement in the 
extended form can be influenced by a shared sense of legitimacy (however 
inequitous it might be) and adapted perceptions that relate to it. 
The care that female children receive vis-a-vis male children (in terms 
of nutrition, medical attention etc.) may also be positively influenced by 
the size of outside earnings of women vis-a-vis men. The neglect of female 
children and the preference for having male ones in India, especially in 
and especially of second and later daughters 
the North (see Miller 1981, Das Gupta 1987) may well be related to lower 
earnings powers of women and thus lower 'returns' in rearing girls 
vis-a-vis boys, and this may be an important influence on family behaviours 
of the less well-off rural population (see Rosenzweig and Schultz 1982 and 
Behrman 1986). 
The 
influence of outside earnings and the so-called 
productive 
activities of women for their extended entitlements can also be studied in 
terms of interregional contrasts. 
In her pioneering study of women's 

40 
issues in economic development, Ester Boserup (1970) has drawn attention to 
the contrast between Africa and Asia in terms of women's outside employment 
and its effects (pp.24-5). The greater female participation of rural women 
in Africa than in Asia is brought out also by some inter-country statistics 
presented by Ruth Dixon (1983). 
In fact, as Boserup noted, there are 
considerable 
contrasts 
within 
Africa 
itself 
in 
terms 
of 
female 
participation. 
The big regional contrast within Africa relates in fact to the 
participation rates in Northern Africa vis-a-vis those in the rest of the 
continent. An aggregative picture of interregional contrasts within Africa 
and Asia is presented in Table 1 with comparative data for five major 
regions: Northern Africa, Non-Northern Africa, West Asia, South Asia and 
Eastern and South-eastern Asia. 
'Activity rate ratios' (females to males) 
for each of these regions have been calculated by aggregating data for all 
countries covered by the ILO (1986) in the respective regions. 
The 
female-male life expectancy ratios for the same regions are also given in 
the same table, calculated from the country statistics presented in the 
United Nations' tapes on 'Estimates and Projections of Population' (United 
Nations 1985).52 
52. Note that China has not been included in this comparative picture. 
In 
fact, the female-male activity rate ratio has gone up sharply in China 
in recent years (especially for the lower age groups). 
But, while the 
female-male life expectancy ratio has also gone up substantially, 
China's relative rank in the latter is still rather low. 

41 
Table 1 
Regions 
Activity-rate ratios 1980 
Life expectancy ratios 1980 
(female-male) 
(female-male) 
Values 
Ranks 
Values 
Ranks 
Non-Northern 
Africa 
0.645 
1 
1.071 
1 
Eastern & South 
Eastern Asia 
0.610 
2 
1.066 
2 
Western Asia 
0.373 
3 
1.052 
3 
Southern Asia 
0.336 
4 
0.989 
5 
Northern Africa 
0.158 
5 
1.050 
4 
Source: Sen (1986b), calculated from country date given in ILO (1986) 
and United Nations (1985). I am grateful to Jocelyn Kynch for 
her research assistance in preparing these aggregative tables. 
The activity rate ratios represent the proportions of total 
population of each sex engaged in so-called 'economic' (or 
'gainful') activities. 
As was discussed earlier, the regional contrasts within India, e.g., that 
between South and North India, also seem to suggest a similar influence of 
female 'activity' rate ratios on the deal that rural women receive 
vis-a-vis men.53 
The possible routes of influence (though breakdown 
response, perceived interest response, and perceived contribution response) 
have already been discussed in the analysis presented earlier. 
It is interesting 
that the ranking of life 
expectancy 
ratios 
(female-male) 
is 
very 
similar 
to 
that 
of 
activity 
rate 
ratios 
(female-male). While no definitive conclusion can be drawn from these data 
alone, insofar as anything does emerge from them, 
it 
would seem to 
support and corroborate the conclusions drawn from micro studies and 
general economic reasoning, which also point in the direction of positively 
relating female 'productive' activity to a better deal (and enhanced 
extended entitlement for women). 
The contrasts between Southern Asia and 
Non-Northern Africa, and those between Southern Asia and Eastern and 
South-Eastern Asia, and between Northern and Non-Northern Africa, are 
53. See particularly Bardhan (1974, 1984, 1987), Killer (1981, 1982). 

42 
particularly striking in view of the variety of evidence on greater female 
involvement 
in 
outside 
work 
in 
Northern 
Africa 
and 
Eastern 
and 
South-eastern Asia vis-a-vis North Africa and South Asia. 
8. Well-being, agency and cooperative conflicts. 
In this paper I have tried to present some elementary relations that 
might be of relevance in discussing women's issues in economic development. 
Conflicts of interest between men and women are very unlike other 
conflicts, such as class conflicts. 
A worker and a capitalist do not 
typically live together under the same roof - sharing concerns and 
experiences and acting jointly. 
This aspect of 'togetherness' gives the 
gender conflict some very special characteristics. 
One of these characteristics is that many aspects of the conflict of 
interest between men and women have to be viewed against the background of 
pervasive cooperative behaviour. 
Not only do the different parties have 
much to gain from cooperation, their individual activities have to take the 
form of being overtly cooperative, even when substantial conflicts exist. 
This is seen most clearly in the parts of the gender divisions that relate 
to household arrangements, in particular who does what type of work in the 
household and enjoys what benefits. 
While serious conflicts of interests 
may, in the choice of 'social technology' (section 3), be involved, the 
nature of the family organization requires that these conflicts be moulded 
in a general format of cooperation, with conflicts treated as aberrations 
or deviant behaviour. 
The cooperative format makes it particularly important to pay attention 
to perception problems about respective interests, contributions and claims 
(section 2). 
In analysing cooperative conflicts, we had difficulty in 

43 
following the leads provided by seeing household economics in terms of 
harmonious 'optimal' divisions (Samuelson 1956), or in terms of 'as if 
competitive markets (Becker 1973-74), or in terms of 'altruism and 
voluntary contributions' in line with 'a group preference function' which 
is 'identical to that of the altruistic head' (Becker 1981). 
Even though 
formulations of household economics in terms of 'bargaining problems' 
(Manser and Brown 1980, McElroy and Horney 1981) succeed in catching one 
aspect of cooperative conflicts well, it misses many others because of the 
limited informational base of that game structure, neglecting in particular 
issues of perception in assessing interests and well-being and in 
evaluating contributions and claims (section 4). 
The alternative line of analysis pursued in this paper takes the form 
of specifying important parts of the relevant informational base rather 
than that of pinpointing one exact 'solution' of the divisional problem. 
The analysis presented focused on a few 'responses' of outcomes to the 
identified informational base, dealing specifically with the influences of 
(1) the respective well-being 
levels in the case of breakdown of 
cooperation (a feature taken over from the Nash 1950 formulation of 
'bargaining problem'), (2) the perception (including illusions) about 
personal interests in a family setting, and (3) the perception of 
'contributions' made respectively by different members and the 'claims' 
arising 
from 
these 
contributions. 
These 
qualitative, 
rather 
than 
quantitative, relations help to establish some directional structure in 
relating social and personal parameters to divisional outcomes (section 5) 
and 
to notions 
of 
'extended 
entitlements' 
including 
intrahousehold 
divisions (section 6). The correspondence of these directional structures 
to empirical observations of variations in gender divisions was discussed 
in terms of micro studies as well as aggregative regional contrasts 
(sections 5 - 7). 

44 
One of the parameters that seemed particularly important to pursue is 
the involvement of women in so-called 'productive' activities and in 
earning from outside (section 7). 
These activities are, of course, of 
obvious importance for female-headed households without adult men (Visaria 
and Visaria 1985) , but they are of importance also when there are both 
adult men and women in the family. 
In addition to adding to the over-all 
affluence of the family, these activities also influence the relative 
shares by affecting the 'breakdown positions' of women and also the 
perceptions of women's 
'contributions' and 
'claims'. 
The relative 
'returns' from rearing boys vis-a-vis girls, which have been found to be of 
some importance in the neglect of female children in some developing 
countries (see particularly Rosenzweig and Schultz 1982 and Behrman 1986), 
are also correspondingly influenced by variations in female 'activity 
rates' and 'outside earnings'. 
The explanation of the observed relations 
may involve not merely hard-headed individual calculations of relative 
returns from rearing boys vis-a-vis girls, but also the social influence of 
general prevalence of female activity and earnings on the common perception 
of 'contributions' made by women and of women's entitlements to a better 
share of the household's joint benefits (sections 5 - 7 ) . 
Even the perception of individual interests of women, which - it has 
been observed - tends to be merged with the notion of family well-being in 
some traditional cultures (section 2), may be sharpened by greater 
involvement of women with the outside world, and this may have important 
implications for household divisions. 
A preliminary examination of 
interregional variations of relative activity rates (female-male) and life 
expectancy ratios (female-male) provided some corroboration of what was 
expected on general theoretical grounds in terms of the directional 
responses of cooperative conflicts (section 7), but the empirical picture 
is far too complex to be summarised in the form of a simple 
model of 

45 
quantified cause-effect relationships. 
One of the central issues that need more examination is the question of 
women's 'agency' as opposed to their 'well-being' (a distinction that was 
pursued in Sen 1985a and discussed in section 2 above). 
Neither the 
well-being nor the agency of women coincide with the utilitarian (or 
welfarist) mental metrics of happiness or desire fulfilment (though there 
are obvious connections). 
Well-being may be best analysed in terms of a 
person's 'functionings' and the 'capability' to achieve these functionings 
(i.e., what the person can do or can be), involving evaluation of the 
different capabilities in terms of the person's ability to live well and to 
achieve well-being. 
But a person is not necessarily concerned only with 
his or her own well-being and there are other objectives a person may 
pursue (or value pursuing if he or she had the opportunity to think freely 
and act freely). 
Our actual agency role is often overshadowed by social 
rules and by conventional perceptions of legitimacy. In the case of gender 
divisions, these conventions often act as barriers to seeking a more 
equitable deal, and sometimes militate even against recognizing the 
spectacular lack of equity in the ruling arrangements (sections 2 and 3). 
In the analysis presented in this paper, the importance of perception 
and agency emerge as being quite central to achieving a better basis for 
female well-being in many parts of the world. 
In the recent development 
literature there is, happily, a growing awareness of inequities in gender 
divisions and of the neglect of women's well-being. 
But there is also a 
danger in seeing a woman, in this context, as a 'patient' rather than as an 
'agent'. 
The political agency of women may be particularly important in 
encountering the pervasive perception biases that contribute to the neglect 
of women's needs and claims.54 In addition to that, even the economic 
54. See Jayawardena (1986). 

46 
agency of women has an important role in enhancing visibility of women's 
contributions 
to social living - a view that is obscured by the 
conventional form of 'social technology'. Even the particular influence of 
women's activity rates and outside earnings, which was discussed in terms 
of interregional correspondences in Africa and Asia (section 7), is an 
example of the instrumental role of agency in influencing gender division, 
and through that, the well-being - and survival - of women. 
The importance of the links between perceptions, well-being and agency 
is among the central themes of this paper. 
The analysis of cooperative 
conflicts in gender divisions calls for a better understanding of these 
links. 
The narrow informational bases of traditional household economics 
can do with some substantial broadening. 
The study of women's issues in 
development can also benefit from informational diversification. The broad 
coverage of the needed informational base is not really surprising. 
After 
all, the subject matter includes some of the central issues of contemporary 
human existence. 

47 
REFERENCES 
Agarwal, B. (1981). "Agricultural Modernisation and Third World Women: 
Pointers from the Literature and an Empirical Analysis", ILO Working 
Paper. 
Agarwal, B. (1986). "Women, Poverty and Agricultural Growth in India", 
Journal of Peasant Studies, 13. 
Ahmed, I. (1978). "Technological Change and the Condition of Rural 
Women: A Preliminary Assessment", ILO Working Paper. 
Ahmed, I. (1983). "Technology and Rural Women in the Third World", 
International Labour Review, 122. 
Ahmed, Z.M. and Loutfi, M, (1982). "Women Workers in Rural Development: 
A Programme of the ILO", ILO Working Paper. 
Ahooja-Patel, K.,ed. (1980), Women at Work, Nos. 1 and 2, Geneva: ILO. 
Alamgir, M. (1980). Famine in South Asia - Political Economy of Mass 
Starvation in Bangladesh (Cambridge, Mass.: Oelgeschlager, Gunn and 
Hain). 
Appadorai, A. (1984). "How Moral Is South Asia's Economy: A Review 
Article", Journal of Asian Studies, 43. 
Apps, P. (1981). A Theory of Inequality and Taxation (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). 
Amsden, A.H. (1980), ed. The Economics of Women and Work (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin). 
Arrow, K.J. (1982). "Why People Go Hungry", New York Review of Books, 29, 
15 July. 
Banerjee, N. (1979). "Women in Urban Labour Market", Labour, Capital and 
Society, 12. 
Banerjee, N. (1982). Unorganised Women Workers: The Calcutta Experience 
(Calcutta: Centre for Studies in Social Sciences). 
Banerjee, N. (1983). "Indian Women and the Urban Labour Market", 
mimeographed, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta. 
Banerjee, N. (1985). "Women's Work and Discrimination", in Jain and 
Banerjee (1985). 
Bardhan, K. (1985). "Women's Work, Welfare and Status", Economic and 
Political Weekly, 20 (December 21-28). 
Bardhan, P. (1974). "On Life and Death Questions", Economic and Political 
Weekly, 9, Special Number. 
Bardhan, P. (1984). Land, Labour and Rural Poverty: Essays in Development 
Economics (New York: Columbia University Press). 
Bardhan, P. (1987). "On the Economic Geography of Sex Disparity in Child 
Survival in India: A Note", mimeographed, University of California 
at Berkeley. 

48 
Basu, A.M. (1987). "Is Discrimination in Food Really Necessary for 
Explaining Sex Differential in Childhood Mortality?" mimeographed. 
National Council of Applied Economic Research. 
Basu, A., et al (1986). "Sex Bias in Intrahousehold Food Distribution: 
Roles of Ethic and Socioeconomic characteristics": Current 
Anthropology, 27. 
Batliwala, S. (1985). 
"Women in Poverty: The Energy, Health and Nutrition 
Syndrome; in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Becker, G.S. (1965). 
"A Theory of the Allocation of Time", Economic 
Journal, 75; reprinted in Amsden (1980). 
Becker, G.S. (1973-74). 
"A Theory of Marriage", Journal of Political 
Economy, "Part I", 81 and "Part II", 82. 
Becker, G.S. (1981). A Treatise on the Family (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press) . 
Becker, G.S., Landes E.M., and Michael, R.T. (1977). "An Economic Analysis 
of Marital Instability", Journal of Political Economy, 85. 
Behrman, J. (1986). 
"Intrahousehold Allocation of Nutrients in Rural 
India: Are Boys Favoured? Do Parents Exhibit Inequality Aversion?" 
mimeographed, forthcoming in Oxford Economic Papers. 
Behrman, J. (1987). "Intrahousehold Allocation of Nutrients and Gender Effects" 
mimeographed, WIDER. 
Behrman, J., Pollak, R., and Taubman, P. (1982). "Parental Preferences 
and Provisions for Progeny", Journal of Political Economy, 90. 
Beneria, L., ed. (1982), Women and Development: The Sexual Division of 
Labour in Rural Societies, New York: Praeger. 
Benston, M. (1969). 
"The Political Economy of Women's Liberation, 
Monthly Review, September. 
Berk, R.A., and Berk, S.F. (1978). 
"A Simultaneous Equation Model for 
the Division of Household Labour", Sociological Methods and Research, 
6. 
Bhalla, A. (1975), ed. Technology and Employment in Industry: A Case 
Study Approach. (Geneva: ILO.) 
Bhatty, Z. (1980). "Economic Role and Status of Women: A Case Study of 
Women in the Beedi Industry in Allahabad", ILO Working Paper. 
Bhuiya, A., et al (1986). "Socioeconomic Determinants of Child's 
Nutritional Status: Boys versus Girls", Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 8. 
Binmore, K. (1980). "Nash Bargaining Theory", mimeographed, London 
School of Economics. Revised version included in Binmore and 
Dasgupta (1987). 
Binmore, K., and Dasgupta, P., eds., (1987). The Economics of Bargaining 
(Oxford: Blackwell). 
Boserup, E. (1970). Women's Role in Economic Development, (London: 
Allen & Unwin). 
Boserup, E. (1986). "Economic Change and the Role of Women", mimeographed. 

49 
Braithwaite, R. B. (1955). Theory of Games as a Tool for the Moral 
Philosopher (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Brown, M., and Chuang, C.F. (1980). "Intrahousehold Power and Demand 
for Shared Goods", Mimeographed, SUNY, Buffalo, N.Y. 
Bryceson, D.F. (1985). Women and Technology in Developing Countries 
(Santo Domingo: United Nations). 
Burman, S., ed. (1979), Fit Work for Women (London: Croom Helm). 
Carr, M. (1978). Appropriate Technology for African Women (Addis 
Ababa: United Nations). 
Chakravarty, L. (1986). "Poverty Studies in the Context of Agricultural 
Growth and Demographic Pressure: Case of Post-Independent India", 
mimeographed, Indraprastha College, Delhi University, Delhi. 
Chen, L.C. (1982) "Where Have the Women Gone?" Economic and Political 
Weekly, 17 (March). 
Chen, L.C, Huq, E., and D'Souza, S. (1981). "Sex Bias in the Family 
Allocation of Food and Health Care in Rural Bangladesh", Population 
and Development Review, 7. 
Clemhout, A. (1979). "A Life-Cycle Theory of Marriage and Divorce: 
A Pareto-Optimal Differential Game Model", in P. Liu and J. F. 
Sutinen, eds. Control Theory in Mathematical Economics (New York: 
Marcel Dekker). 
Clemhout, S., and Wan, Jr., H.Y. (1977). "Symmetric Marriage, Household 
Decision Making and Impact on Fertility", Working Paper 152, Cornell 
University. 
Croll, E. (1979). Women in Rural Development: The People's Republic 
of China (Geneva: ILO). 
Dalla Costa, M. (1972). "Women and the Subversion of the Community", 
in The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community, 
(Falling Wall Press). 
Das, T. (1949). Bengal Famine (1943) (Calcutta: University of Calcutta). 
Das, V., and Nicholas, R. (1981). "'Welfare' and 'Well-being' in South 
Asian Societies", ACLS-SSRC Joint Committee on South Asia 
(New York: SSRC). 
Das Gupta, M. (1987). "Selective Discrimination against Female Children 
in Rural Punjab, India", Population and Development Review, 13. 
Dasgupta, B. (1977). Village Society and Labour Use (Delhi: OUP). 
Dasgupta, P. (1986). "Trust as a Commodity", in Gambetta (1987). 
Date-Bah, E., and Stevens, Y. (1981). "Rural Women in Africa and 
Technological Change: Some Issues", Labour and Society, 6. 
Deaton, A. (1987). "The Allocation of Goods within the Household: 
Adults, Children and Gender", mimeographed, Princeton University. 

50 
Deaton, A., and Muellbauer, J. (1980). Economics and Consumer Behaviour 
(Cambridge: CUP). 
Deere, C D . , and de Leal, M.L. (1982). Women in Andean Agriculture 
(Geneva: ILO). 
Den Hartog, A.P. (1973). "Unequal Distribution of Food within the 
Household", FAO Newsletter, 10, 4 (October-December). 
Desai, M.J. (1984). 
"A General Theory of Poverty", Indian Economic 
Review. 
Devereux, S., and Hay, R. (1986). "The Origins of Famine", mimeographed 
Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford. 
Dixon, R. (1982). 
"Mobilizing Women for Rural Employment in South Asia: 
Issues of Class, Caste, and Patronage", Economic Development and 
Cultural Change, 30. 
Dixon, R. (1983). "Land, Labour and the Sex Composition of the 
Agricultural Labour Force: An International Comparison", Development 
and Change, 14. 
Dreze, J., and Sen, A.K., eds. (1987). Hunger: Economics and Policy, 
forthcoming (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Dworkin, R. (1981). "What is Equality? Part 1: Equality of Welfare". 
Philosophy and Public Affairs, 10. 
Dyson, T. (1982). 
''India's Regional Demography", mimeographed, 
London School of Economics. 
Dyson, T. (1987). "Excess Female Mortality in India: Uncertain 
Evidence on a Narrowing Differential", mimeographed, London School of 
Economics. 
Dyson, T., and Moore, M. (1983). "On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy, 
and Demographic Behaviour in India", Population and Development 
Review, 9. 
Engels, F. (1884). The Origin of the Family; reprinted (Moscow: 
Foreign Language Publishing House, 1969). 
Evans, M. (1982), ed. The Woman Question: Readings on the Subordination 
of Women (London: Fontana). 
Folbre, N. (1984). "Cleaning House: New Perspectives on Household and 
Economic Development", mimeographed, New School for Social Research. 
Fuchs, V.R. (1983). How We Live (Cambridge: Harvard University Press). 
Gambetta, D., ed. (1987). Trust and Agency 
(Oxford: Blackwell). 
Gardiner, J., Himmelweit, S., and Mackintosh, M. (1975). 
"Women's 
Domestic Labour", Bulletin of the Conference of Socialist Economists, 
4. 
Ghosh, A. (1979). "Short-term changes in Income Distribution in Poor 
Agrarian Economies: A Study of Famines with reference to the Indian 
Subcontinent", ILO Working Paper. 

51 
Goldschmidt-Clermont, L. (1982). Unpaid Work in the Household 
(Geneva: ILO). 
Gosling, J.C.B. (1969). Pleasure and Desire 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Griffin, J. (1987). Well-being (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Griffin, K. (1978). International Inequality and National Poverty 
(London: Macmillan). 
Gulati, L. 
(1981a). 
"Women and Technological Change - A Case Study of 
Three Fishing Villages", Working Paper, Centre for Development 
Studies, Trivandrum. 
Gulati, L. (1981b). 
"The Role of Women from Fishing Households: Case 
Study of a Kerala Fishing Village:, Working Paper, Centre for 
Development Studies, Trivandrum. 
Hacker, A. (1986). "Women at Work: New York Review of Books, 33 (August 
14). 
Hare, R.M. (1981). Moral Thinking (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Harriss, B. (1977). "Paddy Milling: Problems in Policy and Choice 
of Technology", in B.F. Farmer, ed., The Green Revolution. (London: 
Billing). 
Harriss, B. (1987). "Intrafamily Distribution of Hunger in South Asia", 
WIDER Conference paper, to be published in Dreze and Sen (1987). 
Harriss, B., and Watson, E. (1984). "The Sex Ratio in South Asia", 
mimeographed, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. 
Harrison, J. (1974). "Political Economy of Housework", Bulletin of the 
Conference of Socialist Economists, 3. 
Harsanyi, J. (1976). Essays on Ethics, Social Bahaviour and Scientific 
Explanation (Dordrecht: Reidel). 
Harsanyi, J. (1977). Rational Behaviour and Bargainsing Equilibrium 
in Games and Social Situations (Cambridge: CUP). 
Hassan, N., and Ahmed, K. (1984). "Intra-family Distribution of Food 
in Rural Bangladesh", Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 6. 
Himmelweit, S., and Mohun, S. (1977). "Domestic Labour and Capital", 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1. 
Humphries, J. (1977). "Class Struggle and the Persistence of the 
Working-Class Family", Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1: 
reprinted in Amsden (1980). 
ILO (1982a). Rural Development and Women in Asia (Geneva: ILO). 
ILO (1982b). Rural Women Workers in Asia (Geneva: ILO). 
ILO (1986). 
Economically Active Population Estimates and Projections, 1950-2025 
(Geneva: ILO) 
Jacob, P. (1983). "The Activity Profile of Indian Women", 
mimeographed, National Sample Survey, Calcutta. 

52 
Jain, D. (1980). "Women's Employment - Possibilities of Relevant 
Research", mimeographed. 
Jain, D. (1985). "The Household Trap: Report on a Field Survey of 
Female Activity Patterns", in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Jain, D., and Banerjee, N., eds. (1985). Tyranny of the Household: 
Investigative Essays on Women's Work (New Delhi: Vikas). 
Jain, D., and Chand, M. (1982). "Report on a Time Allocation Study -
Its Methodological Implications", Institute of Social Studies Trust, 
New Delhi. 
James, J. (1980). 
"Appropriate Technologies and Inappropriate Policy 
Instruments", Development and Change, 11. 
Jayawardera, K. (1986). Feminism and Nationalism in the Third World 
(London: Zed Books). 
Kakwani, N. (1986). "Is Sex Bias Significant?" WIDER Working Paper. 
Kalai, E. (1977). "Nonsymmetric Nash Solutions and Replications of 
Two-Person Bargaining", International Journal of Game Theory, 6. 
Kalai, E., and Smordinsky, M. (1975). "Other Solutions to Nash's 
Bargaining Problem", Econometrica, 43. 
Kamsler, V. (1986). "Distribution, Entitlement and the Family", 
mimeographed, Oxford University. 
Kaneko, M. (1980). "An Extension of the Nash Bargaining Problem and 
the Nash Social Welfare Function", Theory and Decision, 12. 
Kaneko, M., and Nakamura, K. (1979). "The Nash Social Welfare 
Function", Econometrica, 47. 
Khan, Q.M. (1985). "A Model of Endowment-Constrained Demand for Food 
in an Agricultural Economy with Empirical Applications to Bangladesh ' , 
World Development, 13. 
Kongstad, P., and Monsted, M. (1980). Family, Labour and Trade in 
Western Kenya (Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African Studies). 
Krishnaswamy, K.S.,. and Rajgopal, S. (1985). 
"Women in Employment: 
A Micro Study in Kannataka", in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Kuhn, A., and Wolpe, A. (1978), eds. Feminism and Materialism 
(London: 
Routledge). 
Kurian, R. (1982). Women Workers in the Sri Lanka Planatation Sector 
(Geneva: ILO). 
Kynch, J. (1985). 
"How Many Women Are Enough? Sex Ratios and the 
Right to Life". Third World Affairs 1985 (London: 
Third World Foundation). 
Kynch, J., and Sen, A.K. (1983). "Indian Women: Well-being and Survival", 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 7. 

53 
Larwood, L., Stromberg, A.H., and Gutek, B., eds. (1986). Women's 
Work: An Annual Review (New York: Sage). 
Laslett, P. (1972), with the assistance of R. Wall. Household and 
Family in Past Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Lloyd, C.B., and Niemi, B.T. (1979). The Economics of Sex Differentials 
(New York: Columbia University Press). 
Loutfi, M.F. (1980). Rural Women: Unequal Partners in Development 
(Geneva: ILO). 
Luce, R.D., and Raiffa, H. (1957). Games and Decisions (New York: 
Wiley). 
McElroy, M.B., and Horney, M.J. (1981). 
"Nash-Bargained Household 
Decisions: Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand", 
International Economic Review. 
Mackintosh, M.M. (1979). 
"Domestic Labour and the Household", in 
Burman (1979) . 
Mcintosh, M. (1978). 
"The State and the Oppression of Women", in Khun 
and Wolpe (1978); reprinted in Evans (1982). 
Mcintosh, J., Nasim, A., and Satchell, S. (1981). 
"Differential Mortality 
in Rural Bangladesh", mimeographed. 
Mahmud, W., and Mahmud, S. (1985). 
"Age-Sex Aspects of the Food and 
Nutrition Problems in Rural Bangladesh", ILO Working Paper, 
WEP 10-6/WP74. 
Manser, M., and Brown, M. (1980). 
"Marriage and Household Decision-
Making: A Bargaining Analysis", International Economic Review, 21. 
Marx, K. (1867). Capital, Vol. I. English translation (London: 
Allen & Unwin, London, 1938. 
Mazumdar, V. (1985). Emergence of Women's Questions in India and 
the Role of Women's Studies 
(New Delhi: Centre for Women's 
Development Studies). 
Mead, M. (1950). Male and Female 
(London). 
Meillassoux, C. (1972). 
"From Reproduction to Production", 
Economy and Society, 1. 
Michael, R.T., and Becker, G.S., (1973). 
"On the New Theory of 
Consumer Behaviour", Swedish Journal of Economics, 75. 
Mies, M. (1982). The Lace Makers of Narsapur: Indian Housewives 
Produce for the World Market (London: Zed Press). 
Milkman, R. (1976). 
"Women's Work and the Economic Crisis: Some Lessons 
from the Great Depression", Review of Radical Political Economics, 8. 
Miller, B. (1981). The Endangered Sex: Neglect of Female Children 
in Rural North India (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press). 

54 
Miller, B. (1982). 
"Female Labor Participation and Female Seclusion 
in Rural India: A Regional View", Economic Development and Cultural 
Change, 30. 
Mincer, J. (1962). "Labour Force Participation of Married Women", in 
H.G. Lewis, ed., Aspects of Labour Economics (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press); reprinted Amsden (1980). 
Mincer, J., and Polachek, S. (1974). "Family Investments in Human Capital 
Earnings of Women", Journal of Political Economy, 82; reprinted in 
Amsden (1980). 
Mitra, A. (1980). Implications of Declining Sex Ratio in India's 
Population (Bombay: Allied Publishers). 
Molyneux, M. (1979). 
"Beyond the Domestic Labour Debate", 
New Left Review, No. 116. 
Molyneux, M. (1982). State Policies and the Position of Women Workers in 
the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, 1967-77 (Geneva: ILO). 
Muellbauer, J. (1987). "Professor Sen on the Standard of Living" in 
G. Hawthorn, ed., The Standard of Living (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). 
Mukherjee, M. (1985). 
"Contributions to and Use of Social Product of 
Women", in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Mukhopadhyay, S. (1982). 
"The Nature of Household Work", mimeographed 
Delhi School of Economics. 
Nash, J. F. (1950). "The Bargaining Problem", Econometrica, 18. 
Nash, J.F. (1953). "Two-Person Co-operative Games", Econometrica, 21. 
Natarajan, K.S. (undated). "Child Mortality: Rural-Urban and Sex 
Differentials: Further Analysis of 1972 Fertility Survey", mimeographed 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. 
Nozick, R. (1974). Anarchy, State and Utopia (Oxford: Blackwell). 
Oaxaca, R. (1973). 
"Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labour 
Markets", International Economic Review, 14. 
Oughton, E. (1982). 
"The Maharashtra Drought of 1970-73: An Analysis 
of Scarcity", Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 44. 
Padmanabha, P. (1982). 
"Trends in Mortality", Economic and Political 
Weekly, 17 (7 August). 
Palmer, I. (1975). "Women in Rural Development", mimeographed. 
Palmer, I. (1978). "Women and Green Revolution", mimeographed. 
Phelps, E.S. (1972). 
"The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism", 
American Economic Review, 62; reprinted in Amsden (1980). 
Phongpaichit, P. (1982). From Peasant Girls to Bangkok Masseuses 
(Geneva: ILO). 

55 
Pollak, R.A. (1983). 
"A Transaction Cost Approach to Families and 
Households", mimeographed, University of Pennsylvania. 
Ravallion, M. (1985). 
"The Performance of Rice Markets in Bangladesh 
during the 1974 Famine", Economic Journal, 92. 
Ravallion, M. (1987). Markets and Famines (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press and 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Reiter, R. (1975)., ed. Toward an Anthropology of Women (New York; 
Monthly Review Press) . 
Rochford, S.C. (1981). 
"Nash-Bargained Household Decision-Making in 
a Peasant Economy", mimeographed. 
Rochford, S.c. (1982). 
"General Results for Stable Pairwise-Bargained 
Allocations in a Marriage Market", mimeographed, 1982. 
Rogers, B. (1980). The Domestication of Women (London: Tavistock). 
Rosenzweig, M.R., and Schultz, T.P. (1982). 
"Market Opportunities, 
Genetic Endowments, and Intrafamily Resource Distribution: Child 
Survival in Rural India", American Economic Review, 72. 
Rotberg, R.I., and Rabb, T.K. (1985). Hunger and History (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
Roth, A.E. (1979). Axiomatic Models of Bargaining 
(Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag). 
Rowbotham, S. (1973). Women's Consciousness, Man's World (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin). 
Rubin, J.Z., and Brown, B.R. (1975). The Social Psychology of 
Bargaining and Negotiation 
(New York: Academic Press). 
Samuelson, P.A. (1956). 
"Social Indifference Curves", Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 70. 
Scanlon, T. (1975). 
"Preference and Urgency", Journal of Philosophy, 72. 
Scanzoni, J.H. (1970). Opportunity and the Family 
(New York: Free 
Press). 
Schelling, T.C. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict 
(Oxford: 
Clarendon Press). 
Schofield, S. 
(1975). Village Nutrition Studies: An Annotated 
Bibliography 
(Brighton, Sussex: Institute of Devopment Studies). 
Seccombe, W. (1974). 
"The Housewife and Her Labour under Capitaqlism", 
New Left Review, No. 83. 
Sen, A.K. (1970). Collective Choice and Social Welfare (San Francisco: 
Holden-Day: republished by North-Holland, Amsterdam 1979). 
Sen, A.K. (1975). Employment, Technology and Development, (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press). 

56 
Sen, A.K. (1976). "Famines as Failures of Exchange Entitlements:, 
Economic and Political Weekly, 11. 
Sen, A.K. (1977). 
"Starvation and Exchange Entitlement: A General 
Approach and its Application to the Great Bengal Famine", 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1. 
Sen, A.K. (1982a). Choice, Welfare and Measurement (Oxford: Blackwell, and 
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press). 
Sen, A.K. (1982b). Food Battles: Conflicts in the Access to Food, 
Coromandel Lecture, New Delhi, 13 December; reprinted in Mainstream 
8 January 1983. 
Sen, A.K. (1983a). 
"Economics and the Family", Asian Development Review, 
1. 
Sen, A.K. (1983b). 
"Carrots, Sticks and Economics: Perception Problems 
in Incentives", Indian Economic Review, 18. 
Sen, A.K. (1984). Resources, Values and Development (Oxford: Blackwell 
and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Sen, A.K. (1985a) "Well-being, Agency and Freedom: The Dewey Lectures 
1984", Journal of Philosophy, 82. 
Sen, A.K. (1985b), Commodities and Capabilities (Amsterdam: North-Holland). 
Sen, A.K. (1985c). 
"Women, Technology and Sexual Divisions", 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 6. 
Sen, A.K. (1986a). 
"Food, Economics and Entitlements", Lloyds 
Bank Review, 160. 
Sen, A.K. (1986b). 
"Africa and India: What Do We Have To Learn From 
Each Other?". C.N. Vakil Memorial Lecture, 8th World Congress of the 
International Economic Association; to be published in the 
proceedings, edited by K.J. Arrow. 
Sen, A. and Sengupta, S. (1983). "Malnutrition of Rural Indian Children 
and the Sex Bias", Economic and Political Weekly, 18, Annual Number. 
Sen, A.K., and Williams, B., eds. (1982). Unilaterianism and Beyond 
(Cambridge:Cambridge University Press). 
Sen, G. (1985). 
"Women Agricultural Labourers - Regional Variations 
in Traders and Employment', in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Sharma, U. (1980). Women, Work and Property in North-West India 
(London: Tavistock). 
Sheshinski, E. and Weiss, Y. (1982). 
"Inequality Within and Between 
Families", Journal of Political Economy, 90. 
Shubik, M. (1983). Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts and 
Solutions 
(Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press). 
Singer, H. (1977). Technologies for Basic Needs, Geneva: ILO. 

57 
Slocum, S. (1975). 
"Women the Gatherer: Male Bias in Anthropology" 
in Reiter (1975); reprinted in Evans (1982). 
Snowdon, B. (1985). 
"The Political Economy of the Ethiopian Famine", 
National Westminster Bank Quarterly Review. 
Solow, R.M. (1984). 
"Relative Deprivation?" Partisan Review, 51. 
Sopher, D.E. (1980). ed. An Exploration of India: Geographical 
Perspective on Society and Culture (London: Longman). 
Standing, G., and Sheehan, G. (1978), eds. Labour Force Participation 
in Low-Income Countries (Geneva: ILO). 
Stone, L. (1977). The Family, Sex and Marriage in England, 1500-1800 
(London: Weidenfeld). 
Tilly, L.A. (1985). 
"Food Entitlement, Famine and Conflict", in 
Rotberg and Rabb (1985). 
Tilly, L.a. (1986). 
"Sex and Occupation in Comparative Perspectives", 
mimeographed, New School for Social Research, New York. 
Vaughan, M. (1985). 
"Famine Analysis and Family Relations", 
Past and Present, 108. 
Vaughan, M. (1987). The Story of an African Famine: Gender and Famine 
in Twentieth-Century Malawi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Ventura-Dias, V. (1982). 
"Technological Change, Production Organisation 
and Rural Women in Kenya", Working Paper, ILO. 
Visaria, P. (1961). The Sex Ratio of the Population of India, Monograph 
10, Census of India 1961 (New Delhi: Office of the Registrar General). 
Visaria, P., and Visaria, L. (1985). 
"Indian Households with Female 
Heads", in Jain and Banerjee (1985). 
Waldron, I. (1976). 
"Why Do Women Live Longer than Men? Soc. Sci. Med. 
Weitzman, L.J. (1981). The Marriage Contract (New York: Free Press). 
Werneke, D. (1983). Micro electronics and Office Jobs: The Impact 
of the Chip on Women's Employment 
(Geneva: ILO). 
Wheeler, E.F. 
(1984). 
"Intrahousehold Food Allocation: A Review of 
Evidence", mimeographed, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine. 
Whitehead, A. (1981). 
"A Conceptual Framework for the Analysis of 
the Effects of Technological Change on Rural Women", Working Paper, 
ILO. 
Whitehead, A. (1985). 
"Gender and Famine in West Africa", mimeographed; 
forthcoming in Review of African Political Economy. 
Williams, B. (1973). 
"A Critique of Utilitarianism", in B. 
Williams and J.J.C. Smart, ed. Utilitarianism For and Against 
(Cambridge: CUP). 

58 
Williamson, O.E. (1979). "Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance 
of Contractual Relations:, Journal of Law and Economics, 22. 
Wyon, J.B., and Gordon, J.E. (1971). The Khanna Study (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press). 
Young, K. (1978). "Modes of Appropriation and the Sexual Division 
of Labour: A Case Study of Oaxaca, Mexico", in Kuhn and Wolpe (1978). 
Young, K., Wolkowitw, C , and McCullagh, R. (1981)., eds. On Marriage 
and the Market: Women's Subordination in International Perspective. 
(London: CSE Books). 
Zeuthen, F. (1930) Problems of Monopoly and Economic Welfare 
(London: Routledge).