 
J. W. Burrow. The Crisis of Reason: European Thought, 1848-1914. Yale Intellectual
History of the West Series. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000. xvi + 271 pp.
$29.95, cloth, ISBN 978-0-300-08390-3. 
 
Reviewed by Chris Mack 
Published on H-Ideas (June, 2001) 
The Crisis of Reason 
The triumph and collapse of the Revolution of
1848 marks the opening of J. W. Burrow's, The Cri‐
sis of Reason: European Thought, 1848-1914. Be‐
ginning  with  Richard  Wagner  and  Mikhail
Bakunin as exemplars of the Promethean spirit of
the "Generation of '48," Burrow traces a familiar
story--one of hopes joyfully held only to be dashed
and  plunged  into  disillusion  and  darkness.
Tragedy is the trope Burrow adopts, and given the
great shadow of the First World War that lurks at
the end of the period he canvasses, it is well cho‐
sen. Burrow's ability to harness that trope and of‐
fer a study that ranges widely, analyzes ideas and
thinkers astutely, and at the same time entertains,
marks his notable achievement. 
Burrow's aim is to allow the reader to "eaves‐
drop" on past intellectual discussions, while si‐
multaneously  being  faithful  to  the  intellectuals
and their ideas, controversies, and the "intellectu‐
al deadends" of the past (p. x). To accomplish this
task, he employs a tactic of "thematically overlap‐
ping circles" throughout the book's six chapters
(p. x). As a result, Burrow successively deepens
his analysis of particular thinkers and more com‐
pletely relates how cultural, social, and political
events shaped their thought and activity. Thus, we
get a better sense of the full trajectory of individu‐
al thinkers (e.g. Marx, Herbert Spencer, or Hip‐
polyte Taine), as well as important concepts like
the notion of the autonomous self. It is a structure
and technique that could easily lead to confusion
and opacity, but Burrow's practiced hand keeps
the  reader  aware  of  their  place  and  progress
throughout the text. 
A particular strength of the book (not surpris‐
ing given Burrow's past work on Darwin) is the
discussion of science and its impacts during the
period. The first two chapters trace the develop‐
ment of materialism and the triumph of scientific
method as a mechanism for inquiry into all hu‐
man activities. Burrow presents a trenchant dis‐
cussion of the progress of materialism, from the
foundational  Kraft  und  Stoff (1855)  of  Ludwig
Buchner, to the sensationalism of Ernst Mach. His
vivid analysis allows the reader to experience the
elation of the materialists as they appeared to slay
holy superstition--only to be dogged by charges of

founding  their  own  metaphysics  through  the
equivalence of matter and energy. One path away
from dogmatic materialism was Mach's emphasis
on sensation. He sought to place knowledge on
phenomenological,  not  metaphysical,  grounds.
Knowledge did not offer a royal road to the truth,
but  was  merely  an  ordering  of  sensations  into
concepts that one could employ in their daily life.
In Burrow's description, "Knowledge, in the new‐
er version, was not a self-justifying ideal, the goal
of humanity in its highest manifestation, as com‐
prehension of the world in its totality, as in the
neo-Hegelian conception of Renan and Taine; it
was an organizing instrument in the struggle for
life" (p. 61). 
Ernst  Haeckel  and  his  supporters,  Burrow
rightly points out, presented another alternative
to straight materialism. Burrow goes some way to‐
ward recognizing the importance of Haeckel and
his place in European intellectual history. Howev‐
er, Haeckel remains a somewhat ghostly figure
who  appears  and  recedes  throughout  the  text.
One is left intrigued, but ultimately unsatisfied,
with his treatment of such a central, but contro‐
versial figure. Nevertheless, Burrow does an ex‐
cellent job of tracing the overall path of physical
science in the nineteenth and early twentieth cen‐
turies. 
An exemplary effort is also produced in the
discussion of the life sciences. Burrow's familiari‐
ty  with  Darwin  and  the  various  evolutionary
schemes that led to a budding of "Darwinisms" is
welcome and apparent. His discussion of classifi‐
cation, or taxonomy, and its importance to ques‐
tions of evolution is solid. Just as probing is Bur‐
row's treatment of the range and importance of
Herbert Spencer and his theories. Burrow demon‐
strates  the  Lamarckian  underpinnings  of
Spencer's entire body of work, especially his un‐
derstanding of social evolution. Thanks to Lamar‐
ckian notions of adaptation, Spencer argued that
individuals  in  a  highly  complex  society  could
learn, over time, to regulate their conduct in soci‐
ety without perpetual recourse to a strong central
government. Thereby, Spencer hoped to reconcile
his explanation of social evolution through the di‐
vision of labor with his desire for a classically lib‐
eral government and society. Social evolution, ac‐
cording to Spencer, would ultimately allow gov‐
ernment to "wither away." (p. 73) As a counter‐
point to Spencer's use of evolutionary arguments
for his social theories, Burrow offers the example
of  Emile  Durkheim.  He  cogently  presents
Durkheim's  arguments  for  social  integration
based on the creation of a moral order. (p. 76) He
does so in such a clear and concise way that his
explication serves to delineate not only the differ‐
ences between Spencer and Durkheim, but it also
underscores the many forms in which evolution‐
ary  ideas  (both Darwinian and  non-Darwinian)
could appear. 
Conceptions of the self are also a central con‐
cern of the text. In chapters four and five Burrow
considers the development (and destruction) of
the notions of the autonomous and transcenden‐
tal  self.  His  discussion  is  well  constructed  and
clearly presented. His judgements are sound. For
example, in his discussion of J. S. Mill and his idea
of the individual, Burrow points out that Mill's
call for individual emancipation and the creation
of an autonomous self appeared thin when one
asked the simple question of "How?" Mill relied
on injunctions to develop one's individual "char‐
acter" (p. 156). But how to discover, and simulta‐
neously mold, one's character remained largely
unexplained. 
The transition from nineteenth-century confi‐
dence to modernist conceptions of decadence and
degeneration  is  also  nicely  presented.  Burrow
identifies many of the leading ideas and issues
that led to a modernist movement determined to
shatter the tyranny of the concept. Using exam‐
ples  like  the  Futurists,  Burrow  contends  that,
"Modernism... was concerned, as a defining char‐
acteristic, not only with disrupting the serial char‐
acter of logic and narrative but with challenging
H-Net Reviews
2

the techniques of representation, verbal and vis‐
ual, by which the illusion of a world of stable
characters and things, governed by intention and
causality, had been sustained" (p. 240). One might
search long and hard before finding a more co‐
gent, and useful, definition of the modern project
in the arts and beyond. 
Clearly, Burrow has produced a thorough and
accessible text that is more than just a survey of
the intellectual history of the period. His sources,
listed in a select bibliography, are apt and used
well.  The  illustrations  are  well  chosen  and  en‐
lightening.  The  text  is  an  enjoyable  read  and
might profitably be used in an undergraduate sur‐
vey course. One can only hope that the forthcom‐
ing volumes in the Yale Intellectual History of the
West series will be as well executed. 
Copyright 2001 by H-Net, all rights reserved.
H-Net permits the redistribution and reprinting of
this  work  for  nonprofit,  educational  purposes,
with full and accurate attribution to the author,
web location, date of publication, originating list,
and H-Net: Humanities & Social Sciences Online.
For any other proposed use, contact the Reviews
editorial staff at hbooks@mail.h-net.msu.edu. 
If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at
https://networks.h-net.org/h-ideas 
Citation: Chris Mack. Review of Burrow, J. W. The Crisis of Reason: European Thought, 1848-1914. H-
Ideas, H-Net Reviews. June, 2001. 
URL: https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=5203 
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No
Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. 
H-Net Reviews
3
