The Protection of 
Children in England: 
A Progress Report
The Lord Laming 	
March 2009

LONDON: THE STATIONERY OFFICE
Return to an Address of the Honorable the House of Commons  
dated 12 March 2009  
for the
The Protection of  
Children in England: 
A Progress Report
The Lord Laming
Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed on 
12 March 2009
HC 330	
£19.15

© Crown Copyright 2009 
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and other departmental or agency logos)  
may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium providing it is reproduced  
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as  
Crown copyright and the title of the document specified. 
Where we have identified any third party copyright material you will need to obtain permission  
from the copyright holders concerned.
For any other use of this material please write to Office of Public Sector Information,  
Information Policy Team, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 4DU or e-mail: licensing@opsi.gov.uk
ISBN: 9780102958928

1
Contents
Introduction	 	
2
Chapter 1 –	 Progress	
9
Chapter 2 –	 Leadership and accountability	
14
Chapter 3 –	 Support for children	
22
Chapter 4 –	 Interagency working	
36
Chapter 5 –	 Children’s workforce	
43
Chapter 6 –	 Improvement and challenge	
61
Chapter 7 –	 Organisation and finance	
73
Chapter 8 –	 Legal	
78
Chapter 9 –	 Complete List of Recommendations	
83
Appendix 1:	 Letter to Lord Laming from the Secretary of State	
93
	
for Children, Schools and Families
Appendix 2:	 Glossary of abbreviations	
96
Appendix 3:	 List of Lord Laming’s Secretariat and Advisers	
98
The front cover picture was drawn by Caitlin, aged 8 years.
The back cover picture was drawn by Megan, aged 12 years.

2
INTRODUCTION
“Children become the victims or the beneficiaries of adult 
actions.”
Hugh Cunningham1
‘Please keep me safe’. This simple but profoundly important hope is 
the very minimum upon which every child and young person should 
be able to depend. Sadly, sometimes even our imaginations fail to 
help us understand the dependency of young children or the 
vulnerability of adolescents, regardless of their displays of bravado. 
Most adults recognise that children and young people need security, 
stability, love and encouragement. As the Chief Rabbi Sir Jonathan 
Sacks put it, “Children grow to fill the space we create for them, and 
if it’s big, they grow tall”.2 The years of childhood pass all too quickly 
and become the foundation upon which the rest of life depends.
Policies, legislation, structures and procedures are, of course, of 
immense importance, but they serve only as the means of securing 
better life opportunities for each young person. It is the robust and 
consistent implementation of these policies and procedures which 
keeps children and young people safe. For example, organisational 
boundaries and concerns about sharing information must never be 
allowed to put in jeopardy the safety of a child or young person. 
Whilst children and young people’s safety is a matter for us all, a 
heavy responsibility has rightly been placed on the key statutory 
services to ensure it happens.
But it serves no one, least of all children, if the scale of the task is 
under estimated. For example, Department for Children, Schools and 
Families (DCSF) information shows that on 31 March 2008, 37,000 
children3 were the subjects of care orders (of 60,000 children looked 
1	 Cunningham, Hugh, The Invention of Childhood (BBC Books, 2006)
2	 The Chief Rabbi, Sir Jonathan Sacks, on ‘Thought for the Day’, BBC Radio 4, 12 December 
2008. Quoted with the permission of The Chief Rabbi
3	 DCSF SSDA903 data collection 31 March 2008 (available online at  
www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/SFR/s000810/index.shtml)

3
INTRODUCTION
after by local authorities4) and 29,000 children5 were the subject of 
child protection plans. Home Office data shows that in 2007/08, 55 
children6 were killed by their parents or by someone known to the 
child.
It would be unreasonable to expect that the sudden and unpredictable 
outburst by an adult towards a child can be prevented. But that is 
entirely different from the failure to protect a child or young person 
already identified as being in danger of deliberate harm. The death of 
a child in these circumstances is a reproach to us all.
Following the case of ‘Baby P’, the Secretary of State for Children, 
Schools and Families, the Rt Hon Ed Balls MP, acted decisively. On 17 
November 2008 he commissioned me to provide an urgent report on 
the progress being made across the country to implement effective 
arrangements for safeguarding children. His letter is reproduced at 
Appendix 1. The kernel of the task was to evaluate the good practice 
that has been developed since the publication of the report of the 
Independent Statutory Inquiry following the death of Victoria Climbié, 
to identify the barriers that are now preventing good practice 
becoming standard practice, and recommend actions to be taken to 
make systematic improvements in safeguarding children across the 
country.
The Government deserves credit for the legislation and guidance that 
has been put in place to safeguard children and promote the welfare 
of children over the last five years. Every Child Matters7 clearly has the 
support of professionals, across all of the services, who work with 
children and young people. The interagency guidance Working 
Together to Safeguard Children8 provides a sound framework for 
professionals to protect children and promote their welfare. New 
models for early intervention developed nationally and delivered 
locally through extended schools and Sure Start Children’s Centres 
have established a solid foundation on which to build more 
imaginative and flexible responses to the needs of children and 
4	 DCSF CPR3 data collection 31 March 2008  
(available online at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/SFR/s000811/index.shtml)
5	 DCSF CPR3 data collection 31 March 2008  
(available online at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/SFR/s000811/index.shtml)
6	 Homicides, Firearm Offences and Intimate Violence 2007/08 (Supplementary Volume 2 to Crime 
in England and Wales 2007/08), David Povey (ed.), Kathryn Coleman, Peter Kaiza and Stephen 
Roe (Home Office, available online at www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs09/hosb0209.pdf) 
Additional offences where suspect is unknown not recorded here
7	 HM Government, Every Child Matters: Change for Children (2004)
8	 HM Government, Working Together to Safeguard Children: A guide to inter-agency working to 
safeguard and promote the welfare of children (2006)

4
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
families. However, whilst the improvements in the services for children 
and families, in general, are welcome it is clear that the need to 
protect children and young people from significant harm and neglect 
is ever more challenging. There now needs to be a step change in the 
arrangements to protect children from harm. It is essential that action 
is now taken so that as far as humanly possible children at risk of 
harm are properly protected.
One of the main challenges is to ensure that leaders of local services 
effectively to translate policy, legislation and guidance into day-to-day 
practice on the frontline of every service. As the Society of Local 
Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers (SOLACE) advised me 
in their evidence to this report:
“Chief Executives are the best paid most senior members of staff in 
councils. Notwithstanding the statutory role of other staff, now 
including Directors of Children’s Services, Chief Executives should 
accept their role in setting and securing high standards and hiring 
and where necessary firing expert staff.”
The personal accountability of the most senior managers in all of the 
public services now needs to be fully understood.
Leaders of local services must recognise the importance of early 
intervention and ensure that their departments support children as 
soon as they are recognised as being ‘in need’, averting escalation to 
the point at which families are in crisis.
Frontline staff in each of the key services have a demanding task. 
Their work requires not only knowledge and skill but also 
determination, courage, and an ability to cope with sometimes intense 
conflict. This must be recognised in their training, case-loads, 
supervision and conditions of service, and their managers must 
recognise that anxiety undermines good practice. Staff supervision 
and the assurance of good practice must become elementary 
requirements in each service. More should be done to ensure the 
well-being and confidence of the staff who undertake such an 
important task on behalf of us all.
To support staff in this vitally important task of protecting children, 
central government and local agencies must immediately take the 
following action:
First and foremost, the Secretaries of State for Health, Justice, the 
Home Office and Children, Schools and Families must collaborate in 
the setting of explicit strategic priorities for the protection of children 

5
INTRODUCTION
and young people for each of the key frontline services and ensure 
sufficient resources are in place to deliver these priorities. There is little 
hope for the full integration and joined-up working of local and 
regional services if the same approach is not fully realised in central 
government. Now is the time to address this imbalance.
Secondly, the Government must immediately inject greater energy 
and drive into the implementation of change and support local 
improvement by establishing a powerful National Safeguarding 
Delivery Unit to report directly to Cabinet through the Families, 
Children and Young People Sub-Committee, and to report annually 
to Parliament. This multi-disciplinary unit must be led by someone 
with great authority, specialist knowledge and obvious ambition for 
improving outcomes for children and young people and for the quality 
of services they receive, especially for children in danger of deliberate 
abuse or neglect. This flexible and agile team must be able to draw on 
staff with direct frontline experience from across police, health and 
children’s services along with staff from central government who can 
act quickly to offer their expertise to improve outcomes for children. 
The unit would not have to be a permanent presence, but it is needed 
for a short time to bring coherence, drive and energy to the 
implementation of change through government departments and 
local services whose work is to protect children. Initially, the unit’s 
main task will be to drive the implementation of the recommendations 
of this report, working with the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, 
Children and Young People to set and publish challenging timescales 
for each recommendation. More detail on the unit is given in 
Chapter 6.
Thirdly, the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families must 
immediately address the inadequacy of the training and supply of 
frontline social workers. The message of this report is clear: without 
the necessary specialist knowledge and skills social workers must not 
be allowed to practise in child protection. A high priority must be 
given to establishing a new postgraduate programme to be completed 
by all children’s social workers as soon as is practicable. A programme 
of management training should be put in place and steps taken to 
ensure there is strong and determined leadership in every local 
authority. No time should be lost in demanding best practice for some 
of the most vulnerable children in our society. Issues of low morale 
and esteem within the service must be rectified. In this context, 
I welcome the decision by ministers to establish the Social Care Task 

6
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Force led by Moira Gibb, the well-respected Chief Executive of the 
London Borough of Camden.
Fourthly, the Secretary of State for Health must immediately address 
the wariness of staff throughout the health services to engage with 
child protection work. GPs, community nurses and paediatricians must 
be helped to develop a wider range of skills and become very much 
more confident in this important area of their work. Of greater 
challenge still is the need to address the status, training and 
responsibilities carried by health visitors. Evidence to this progress 
report makes clear that there are a number of challenges to be 
addressed in this service. The work of health visitors requires 
immediate action to increase the numbers, confidence and 
competence of staff.
Fifthly, the Home Secretary must urgently address the adequacy of 
the resources devoted to police child protection teams, the specialist 
training of these staff, the vacancy rates, the status of this work and 
the quality of service provided.
Sixthly, the Secretary of State for Justice should take immediate action 
to shorten the time taken in court processes relating to the care of 
children. In 2008/09 the average time taken for a case to come to 
court was 45 weeks,9 an unacceptably long time to leave a child in 
limbo at this formative stage in his or her life. When the state is 
seeking to make a care order, there should be no budgetary 
impediment to this. The increase in court fees for care order 
applications by local authorities was unhelpful, and was made worse 
by the transfer of the money into the general funding of local 
government. The Ministry of Justice should make arrangements for 
these fees to be reconsidered.
The remainder of this document, and its recommendations, are aimed 
at making sure that good practice becomes standard practice in every 
service. This includes recommendations on improving the inspection of 
safeguarding services and the quality of Serious Case Reviews as well 
as recommendations on improving the help and support children 
receive when they are at risk of harm. The utility of the policy and 
9	 Family Court, County and High Courts 2008/09 provisional data, Ministry of Justice, England 
and Wales. Notes: 
(1)	 Family Court data is from Family Case Tracker and FamilyMan. County Court and High  
	
Court data is from FamilyMan
	
(2)	 Figures are for April to September 2008
	
(3)	 Care and supervision orders are included and are counted by child for Family Court figures 
and by order for County Court and High Court

7
INTRODUCTION
legislation has been pressed on me by contributors throughout this 
report. In such circumstances it is hard to resist the urge to respond by 
saying to each of the key services, if that is so “NOW JUST DO IT!”
With greater ambition and determination I am sure it can be done. 
Now is the time to prove that the well-being of every child and young 
person really does matter, not least because the UN Convention on 
the Rights of the Child (Article 6) states, “Parties recognise that every 
child has the right to life. Parties shall ensure to the maximum extent 
possible the survival and development of the child”.10 It has been put 
to me that it is inevitable that some adults, for whatever reason, will 
deliberately harm children. That may well be so. Nevertheless, it 
cannot be beyond our wit to put in place ways of identifying early 
those children at risk of deliberate harm, and to put in place the 
means of securing their safety and proper development.
In general, families are best placed to care for children and promote 
their welfare. Fortunately the vast majority of parents seek the best for 
their children and, entirely rightly, the state supports them in this 
important task. However, parenthood incorporates not only rights but 
also responsibilities: it is a lifetime commitment. Particular mention 
should be made of the part to be played by fathers, not least as good 
role models.
Because this report has been conducted against a tight timescale I 
wish to record my thanks to the many organisations that responded 
so quickly and all of those that have become involved in other ways. 
In the course of the report I received over 100 written submissions 
from key stakeholders and over 200 letters from a range of individuals 
including professionals across the children’s workforce. The report 
team visited six local areas and met with key staff from local 
authorities, education, health and the police. The team hosted a series 
of seminars to gather the views of national stakeholders, local leaders 
and frontline staff. I and other members in the team met national 
stakeholders, trade unions, officials of government departments, and 
some Members of Parliament. I am also most grateful to 11 Million 
and to Dr Roger Morgan for consulting young people and passing on 
to me their views and experiences of services for children and young 
people. It is the evidence, information and opinions gathered from all 
of these sources that underpin this report.
10	Available online at www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/k2crc.htm

8
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
I could not have undertaken this report without the strong support of 
a team of skilled, enthusiastic and very committed colleagues. Their 
names are recorded in Appendix 3. A glossary of abbreviations used 
throughout the report is at Appendix 2.
The Lord Laming
March 2009

CHAPTER 
9
CHAPTER 1
“Be gentle with the young.”
Juvenal11
Children are our future. We depend on them growing up to become 
1.1	
fulfilled citizens well able to contribute successfully to family life and 
to the wider society. It is of fundamental importance that the life and 
future development of each child is given equal importance. Every 
child needs to be nurtured and protected from harm. A great deal of 
progress has been made towards achieving this and the Government 
deserves credit for its policy of Every Child Matters. Yet recent events 
have shown that very much more needs to be done to ensure that the 
services are as effective as possible at working together to achieve 
positive outcomes for children.
Progress so far
This country has a long history of commitment to the protection of 
1.2	
children and supporting their welfare. Many of those who contributed 
to this report have vast personal experience in grappling with these 
matters and there have been significant milestones along the way. 
At the level of frontline delivery, there is an impressive degree of 
individual commitment and enthusiasm for Every Child Matters and 
for the vision of what a ‘good’ childhood should be. Throughout 
children’s services, police and health, there are many individuals who 
are making it their life’s work to protect children and improve their 
well-being despite the fact that often this is a challenging task that 
can entail facing real conflict.
The last five years have been a particularly intense time of change. 
1.3	
Every Child Matters came about as a direct result of a failure of the 
services to safeguard children with the death of Victoria Climbié and it 
still has overwhelming support across children’s services and beyond. 
Central government and local agencies are now at the halfway point 
11	Juvenal (early AD), Roman poet
Progress

10
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
in this ten-year programme of change. The first five years have seen 
sound progress in legislative and structural terms. The introduction of 
a Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and Young People 
chaired by the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families 
and supported by a cross-government delivery board for the Public 
Service Agreement to improve children and young people’s safety12 
are important and welcome developments. The Child Safety Reference 
Group utilises the experience of over 20 stakeholders to influence the 
safeguarding agenda. At local level, a great deal has been done to 
create new universal services for the under 5s, and ensure that 
support is in place for children and young people through early 
intervention and greater joint working through schools.
However, despite this encouraging start, there are real challenges still 
1.4	
to address in safeguarding and child protection if children are to have 
services they can rely on when their own lives are in crisis.
The challenges that remain
Working Together to Safeguard Children
1.5	
13 sets out sound practices for 
children’s social workers and for other professionals which, if well 
understood and used intelligently and effectively will give children and 
young people better quality lives and, on occasion, save lives. 
However, the evidence is mixed on how well understood these 
processes are, and too often the findings of Serious Case Reviews 
demonstrate that simple steps from this guidance could have saved 
lives.14 There are training and workforce issues to be resolved, and 
data systems that need to be improved to support professionals better, 
but ultimately the safety of a child depends on staff having the time, 
knowledge and skill to understand the child or young person and their 
family circumstances.
Despite considerable progress in interagency working, often driven by 
1.6	
Local Safeguarding Children Boards and multi-agency teams who 
strive to help children and young people, there remain significant 
problems in the day-to-day reality of working across organisational 
boundaries and cultures, sharing information to protect children and 
a lack of feedback when professionals raise concerns about a child. 
Joint working between children’s social workers, youth workers, 
12	PSA Delivery Agreement 13: Improve children and young people’s safety (HM Government, 
April 2008)
13	HM Government, Working Together to Safeguard Children: A guide to interagency working to 
safeguard and promote the welfare of children (2006)
14	Ofsted, Learning lessons, taking action: Ofsted’s evaluations of serious case reviews 1 April 2007 
to 31 March 2008 (December 2008)

11
Progress
schools, early years, police and health too often depends on the 
commitment of individual staff and sometimes this happens despite, 
rather than because of, the organisational arrangements. This must be 
addressed by senior management in every service.
Undermining many attempts to protect children and young people 
1.7	
and improve their well-being effectively is the low quality of training 
and support given to often over-stretched frontline staff across social 
care, health and police. Social work case-loads are often very high and 
more than 60 per cent of health visitor case-loads are above 
recommended levels.15 The pressure of high case-loads is exacerbated 
by the fact that many social workers believe their training fails to 
prepare them for working with families in crisis. Within police forces 
the profile of child protection is variable with some forces (but by no 
means all) having reduced resources for child protection continually 
over the last three years and many contributors expressing concerns 
that vacancy rates are too high. There is a lack of high-quality 
specialist training on child protection across these services that 
undermines the good intentions of staff to do the best they can for 
the children they work with.
The issues outlined above have not had the priority they deserve over 
1.8	
the last five years. In part, this may be due to the lack of effective 
challenge and support for improvement of safeguarding and child 
protection services across agencies. The inspection process has not 
been as effective in scrutinising practice in safeguarding as it has been 
in education, and the changes to the inspection framework 
announced recently are very much needed. The development function 
that the Commission for Social Care Inspection provided for children’s 
social care has been lost and not effectively replaced or expanded to 
support safeguarding and child protection services across agencies 
(see Chapter 6).
Understanding the scale and complexity of need
Childhood and family life today is a complex matter and it is small 
1.9	
wonder that there are still persistent misconceptions about child abuse 
and neglect. Safeguarding is not only about very young children or 
indeed issues of class, but it extends across society and through the 
15	Unite/Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association Omnibus Survey, 2008

12
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
teenage years. In 2007/08, 55 children were killed by someone known 
to the child (see graph below).16
Fig 1: Child homicides where the suspect was known to the victim
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Total acquainted
Son or daughter
2007/08
2006/07
2005/06
2004/05
2003/04
2002/03
2001/02
2000/01
1999/00
1998/99
70
52
85
49
62
46
41
35
44
55
54
48
78
40
51
34
30
25
35
43
Source: Police Crime Statistics, England and Wales.
Notes:
(1)	 As at November 2008; figures are subject to revision as cases are dealt with by the 
police and by the courts or as further information becomes available
(2)	 Child homicides including baby battering, neglect, excessive punishment
(3)	 Offences are shown according to the year in which the incident took place or the year 
in which any court decision was made
(4)	 If a child is killed by their adoptive parents they would be included in the son or 
daughter category but if the child is killed by their foster parents they would be 
included in the total acquainted category
(5)	 There are additional homicides where the suspect is unknown
Of the 11 million children in England
1.10	
17 a total of 60,000 children were 
looked after by a local authority:18 37,000 were the subject of a care 
order (either full or interim)19 and 29,000 were the subject of a Child 
Protection Plan.20 In 2005, the last time national data was collected, a 
16	Homicides, Firearm Offences and Intimate Violence 2007/08 (Supplementary Volume 2 to Crime 
in England and Wales 2007/08), David Povey (ed.), Kathryn Coleman, Peter Kaiza and Stephen 
Roe (Home Office, available online at www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs09/hosb0209.pdf) 
Additional offences where suspect is unknown not recorded here
17	Office for National Statistics (ONS) population estimates mid 2007, children aged under 18 years
18	Children in Need Census, February 2005
19	DCSF SSDA903 data collection, 31 March 2008 (available online at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/
DB/SFR/s000810/index.shtml)
20	DCSF CPR3 data collection, 31 March 2008 (available online at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/
SFR/s000811/index.shtml)

13
Progress
total of 235,000 children21 were described as being ‘in need’ and 
therefore requiring Section 17 support from the local authority.
11 million children in England. Of these …22
200,000 children live in households where there is a known 
●
●
high risk case of domestic abuse and violence23
235,000 are ‘children in need’ and in receipt of support from a 
●
●
local authority
60,000 are looked after by a local authority
●
●
37,000 are the subject of a care order
●
●
29,000 are the subject of a Child Protection Plan
●
●
1,300 are privately fostered
●
●
24
300 are in secure children’s homes
●
●
25
The scale of need amongst children and young people, and the social, 
1.11	
emotional and financial consequences of not improving their well-
being and keeping them safe at an early stage in their lives, dictate 
that resolving the challenges laid out above should be one of the 
highest priorities for central and local government and the other 
key services. To effect a step change in services and to transform 
outcomes for children and young people the priority given to 
safeguarding must be achieved through strong and effective 
leadership, early intervention, adequate resources, and quality 
performance management, inspection and support.
21	Children in Need Census, February 2005
22	There is overlap between these categories: for example, a child who is living in a household with 
domestic violence may also be subject to a child protection plan
23	Co-ordinated Action Against Domestic Abuse based on their work to date on Multi-Agency Risk 
Assessment Conferences
24	DCSF private fostering return, 31 March 2008 (available on line at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/
DB/SFR/s000803/index.shtml)
25	DCSF SA1 Survey, England, 31 March 2008 (available on line at www.dcsf.gov.uk/rsgateway/DB/
SFR/s000802/index.shtml)

CHAPTER 
14
CHAPTER 2
“Children are our most valuable natural resource.” ­
Herbert Hoover26
National leadership
Effective leadership sets the direction of an organisation, its culture 
2.1	
and value system, and ultimately drives the quality and effectiveness 
of the services provided. It is essential that there is a sustained 
commitment to child protection and promoting the welfare of children 
at every level of government and in every one of the local services. 
The Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and Young People, 
chaired by the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families, 
carries ultimate responsibility for shaping a national safeguarding 
system that protects the safety and promotes welfare of children and 
young people in England. Building on progress already made, the 
Sub-Committee will need to continue to work to increase the 
momentum on delivering quality services at a local level and to raise 
the profile of children as a distinct group at all levels of government. 
The National Safeguarding Delivery Unit, which is explained further in 
Chapter 6 of this report, has a major contribution to make in this task.
Children are not ‘little adults’ and need particular support both as 
2.2	
children, and for the particular condition or situation they find 
themselves in at any given moment in time. Within central 
government, the Department of Health, Ministry of Justice and Home 
Office, as departments with key safeguarding responsibilities, must 
recognise children as individuals with their own needs and ensure that 
their delivery strategies and services are appropriate and well quipped 
for the task.
26	Herbert Hoover (1874–1964), US President
Leadership and accountability

15
Leadership and accountability
Recommendations
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Children, 
Schools and Families, Health, and Justice must collaborate in the 
setting of explicit strategic priorities for the protection of children 
and young people and reflect these in the priorities of frontline 
services.
The Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and Young 
People should ensure that all government departments that 
impact on the safety of children take action to create a 
comprehensive approach to children through national strategies, 
the organisation of their central services, and the models they 
promote for the delivery of local services. This work should focus 
initially on changes to improve the child-focus of services delivered 
by the Department of Health, Ministry of Justice and Home Office.
Managing performance
Central government departments, particularly the Department for 
2.3	
Children, Schools and Families (DCSF), the Department of Health, the 
Home Office, and the Ministry of Justice, need to collaborate to create 
an effective system of performance management that drives 
improvement in the quality of services designed to safeguard and 
promote the welfare of children and enable them to ensure they are 
meeting their responsibilities for keeping children safe. There is an 
urgent need to develop effective indicators for safeguarding children 
and young people that will drive positive improvements and secure 
better outcomes for them. The performance indicators currently in 
use for the safeguarding of children are inadequate for this task. 
Discussion with local authorities suggested that this was because of 
concerns that current indicators focus on processes and timescales, 
are not helpful in creating shared safeguarding priorities amongst 
statutory partners, are unclear in their impact upon positive outcomes 
for children and young people, and do not drive improved services. 
As a result, the take-up of these National Indicators (NIs) by local areas 
as part of their Local Area Agreements (LAAs) is low, with less than 
10 per cent of local authorities choosing to adopt targets on most 
child protection indicators. A relatively small number of local 
authorities have opted to use the indicators as local targets.
It is undoubtedly not easy to find good measures of outcomes for 
2.4	
safeguarding and child protection. However, it is important to 

16
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
continue to find ways of understanding the impact of work to keep 
children safe from harm. The Government’s statutory DCSF targets 
should be reviewed to include safeguarding and child protection 
targets. The NI set also requires revision to ensure that the indicators 
available for inclusion in a LAA better describe improved outcomes 
and services for children and young people. These indicators must be 
specifically agreed by the Department of Health and the Home Office 
to ensure they are reflected in the performance management 
frameworks of Strategic Health Authorities (SHAs), Primary Care Trusts 
(PCTs) and Police Authorities. The complexity of managing 
performance across partner services should not be allowed to be a 
barrier to improving the safety of children and young people in 
England.
Central government departments need to communicate with 
2.5	
increased clarity to local services their expectations around 
safeguarding and child protection. In particular, the Department of 
Health and the Home Office have more to do in ensuring that SHAs, 
PCTs and Police Authorities fully understand their responsibilities and 
statutory duties to provide appropriate and effective local services for 
children in need. Furthermore, all partners in Children’s Trusts will 
need support from central government to develop a local performance 
framework and minimum data sets in order that their performance 
can be assessed against the identified needs of local children and 
young people.
Recommendations
The Government should introduce new statutory targets for 
safeguarding and child protection alongside the existing statutory 
attainment and early years targets as quickly as possible. The 
National Indicator Set should be revised with new national 
indicators for safeguarding and child protection developed for 
inclusion in Local Area Agreements for the next Comprehensive 
Spending Review.
The Department of Health must clarify and strengthen the 
responsibilities of Strategic Health Authorities for the performance 
management of Primary Care Trusts on safeguarding and child 
protection. Formalised and explicit performance indicators should 
be introduced for Primary Care Trusts.

17
Leadership and accountability
Regional leadership – Government Offices
Children and Learners Teams in Government Offices support the 
2.6	
implementation of The Children’s Plan27 and the Every Child Matters 
programme, the negotiation of LAAs and the translation of national 
children’s policy into local delivery. Children and Learner Teams also 
have a role in supporting improvement within their region, overseeing 
the implementation of Serious Case Review Recommendations and 
challenging the performance of local authorities. The majority of 
contributors to this progress report recognised the input that they 
received from Government Offices. However, some also felt that 
Government Office teams were not always able to provide the level of 
support or expertise that local areas often need, particularly on 
complex child protection issues. There is a stronger role for 
Government Offices to play in raising the profile and increasing the 
momentum on child protection work. There must be a particular focus 
on their role in challenging performance and sharing learning and 
expertise at a regional level. In undertaking this work, Government 
Offices should ensure that they are joining up sufficiently with all of 
the other contributors in the region with an interest in the children’s 
safeguarding agenda. Government Office Directors for Children and 
Learners will wish to ensure that they have the required expertise in 
child protection within their teams to carry out this role effectively.
Local political leadership
All local authorities must by now have a designated councillor to act 
2.7	
as Lead Member for Children’s Services, with responsibility for 
promoting the safety and welfare of children across all agencies in 
their area. The sustained commitment from both the Council Leader 
and the Lead Member for Children’s Services is essential if the profile 
and importance of safeguarding and promoting the welfare of 
children is to be understood throughout the authority and the 
Children’s Trust. However, it appears that the degree of focus of 
Council Leaders and Lead Members on safeguarding children from 
harm is variable. At best there are examples of Lead Members who 
actively hold Children’s Trust partners to account and who deliberately 
seek to understand the range of service provision in their area. 
However, such good practice is not yet well established in every local 
authority.
27	HM Government (DCSF), The Children's Plan: building brighter futures (December 2007)

18
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
In order to be most effective, Lead Members must have access to an 
2.8	
appropriate level of up-to-date detail of safeguarding practice for their 
authority, including an understanding of the profile of children and 
young people in their area, the level of need, and the quality and 
effectiveness of the services that protect children from harm. They 
should receive regular reports from the Director for Children’s Services 
(DCS) on service delivery and local outcomes for children and young 
people, and maintain regular contact with the senior managers of 
other safeguarding partners. They should provide regular scrutiny of 
key management information, including assessment and inspection 
reports, and assure themselves that appropriate quality assurance 
systems are in place. To support Lead Members in this complex and 
challenging role, regular training will be required to develop and 
maintain their knowledge base and enable them, where necessary, to 
better scrutinise and challenge service delivery to children and young 
people. The DCSF has recently completed a consultation on the roles 
of the DCS and Lead Member for Children’s Services following the 
initiatives set out in the DCSF’s Children’s Plan, with a focus on 
prevention. The results of this will be published shortly and will be 
invaluable in shaping their responsibilities more effectively.
Local professional leadership and accountability
In recent months there has been a great deal of attention on the role 
2.9	
of the DCS in safeguarding children, sometimes at the expense of 
recognising the importance of the role of the local authority Chief 
Executive. This was underlined by the Society of Local Authority Chief 
Executives and Senior Managers (SOLACE) in their written evidence to 
this report, which stated:
“Decision making about the rights of parents and the needs of 
children, we submit, is the most onerous of local government 
responsibilities.”
The time is long past when the most junior employee should carry the 
2.10	
heaviest burden of accountability. The performance and effectiveness 
of the most senior managers in each of these services should be 
assessed against the quality of the outcomes for the most vulnerable 
children and young people.
Beyond the local authority, the Children Act 2004 placed a duty to 
2.11	
cooperate on each of the key services. It is therefore important that 
senior managers in partner agencies such as Chief Executives of 
PCTs and senior police officers work to ensure priority is given to 
safeguarding children and provide equal commitment, including 

19
Leadership and accountability
resources, to local safeguarding partnerships. At senior level there 
should be a culture of mutual challenge, improvement and openness. 
Local areas may want to publish an annual report on their 
safeguarding practice as a way to raise the profile of safeguarding 
children within both agencies and the local community.
Attention by senior managers to the quality of services delivered at the 
2.12	
front door of each agency, where referrals are received and the risk of 
harm assessed, is vitally important. Managers must lead by example by 
taking a personal and visible interest in frontline delivery. They must 
assure themselves that the assessment of risk of harm to each child 
and young person is being undertaken effectively and that the referral 
and assessment processes in Working Together to Safeguard Children 
are being followed intelligently and effectively. Senior managers 
should be confident that decision making, communication and 
information sharing within and between each of the local services is 
effective in keeping children safe even when those services are under 
pressure. In turn, they should support and value first-line managers 
ensuring that management oversight of decision making is rigorous 
and that the lines of communication between senior managers and 
frontline child protection staff are as short and effective as possible.
Recommendation
Directors of Children’s Services, Chief Executives of Primary Care 
Trusts, Police Area Commanders and other senior service 
managers must regularly review all points of referral where 
concerns about a child’s safety are received to ensure they are 
sound in terms of the quality of risk assessments, decision making, 
onward referrals and multi-agency working. 
Directors of Children’s Services
Directors of Children’s Services (DCSs) are locally at the centre of 
2.13	
safeguarding children, although their remit is far wider, with responsibility 
for education, children’s social care, early years provision and other 
services to support children and families. There is no doubt that bringing 
these services together under one local authority department has 
provided a more integrated approach to support children. But it must be 
recognised that balancing the many different demands of the role 
requires significant levels of determination and leadership skills. The 
responsibility of the role should not be underestimated, nor should the 
dedication that DCSs show daily in ensuring that children in need receive 

20
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
appropriate services, and, when necessary, adequate protection. The 
creation of Children’s Services Departments has meant that a large 
proportion of DCSs do not have first-hand experience of frontline 
social work. It is therefore essential that someone within the senior 
management team is able to scrutinise cases properly and challenge 
practice from a position of skill and expertise. However, the DCS should 
also develop sufficient personal knowledge and understanding of 
safeguarding and child protection. The development programme for 
DCSs that the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families has 
recently commissioned from the National College for School Leadership 
should provide useful extra support in dealing with the complexity of 
their safeguarding responsibilities.
Every DCS needs a skilled and well-motivated team to support them, 
2.14	
but service delivery is equally dependent on the skills and dedication 
of frontline staff. DCSs, therefore, need to pay particular attention to 
the capacity of their frontline workforce. Chapter 4 provides more 
detail on concerns about the morale of frontline social workers that is 
resulting in recruitment and retention problems in many areas and 
ultimately is risking the safety of children. No national workforce 
strategy will resolve these issues without the robust, decisive and 
effective leadership of a DCS committed to creating a supportive 
culture for children’s services. It is important to recognise the stressful 
and emotional content of social work and to create an environment 
that enables social workers to share their feelings and anxieties 
without being labelled as inadequate. There is a need for DCSs to put 
measures in place to help staff deal with the emotional stress of child 
protection work. Such support needs to be reinforced by a system of 
good line management that is creative, empowering and sensitive to 
the individual needs of frontline staff, yet confident enough to set and 
secure high standards of delivery.
Recommendations
All Directors of Children’s Services who do not have direct 
experience or background in safeguarding and child protection 
must appoint a senior manager within their team with the 
necessary skills and experience.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should 
organise regular training on safeguarding and child protection and 
on effective leadership for all senior political leaders and managers 
across frontline services.

21
Children’s Trusts
Children’s Trusts Boards (rather than the local authority alone) will 
2.15	
shortly be required by legislation to undertake a needs analysis, 
including safeguarding, to inform the development of new Children 
and Young People’s Plans (CYPPs) that come into effect from April 
2011. However, it is not clear that the quality of the analyses 
underpinning current CYPPs is of a consistently high level nationally to 
drive the resourcing of services to meet the needs of all children. 
Further work should now be done, at local, regional and national levels, 
to improve the quality of data on levels of need amongst children and 
young people, and local authorities should formally reconsider the 
adequacy of their budgetary commitment. This should include ensuring 
that management information fully reflect the needs of all those for 
whom a local authority has responsibilities, up to 18 for most children 
and 25 for care leavers. A more determined commitment to universal 
preventative services will facilitate the identification of children in need. 
Robust information systems need to be in place locally to improve this 
information. The needs analysis for the CYPP should draw on the data 
of all partner agencies, and include information about the impact on 
children and young people of domestic violence, adult alcohol and 
drug dependency, and adult mental health difficulties.
Recommendation
Every Children’s Trust should ensure that the needs assessment 
that informs their Children and Young People’s Plan regularly 
reviews the needs of all children and young people in their area, 
paying particular attention to the general need of children and 
those in need of protection. The National Safeguarding Delivery 
Unit should support Children’s Trusts with this work. Government 
Offices should specifically monitor and challenge Children’s Trusts 
on the quality of this analysis.
leadership and accountability

CHAPTER 
22
CHAPTER 3
“When I approach a child, he inspires in me two sentiments: 
tenderness for what he is, and respect for what he may become.”
Louis Pasteur28
Focus on the child
Every Child Matters
3.1	
 is intended to organise services and resources 
around children to ensure their safety and proper development, and 
improve their well-being. However, there are significant levels of 
concern that current practice, and in particular the pressure of high 
case-loads for children’s social workers and health visitors, has meant 
that staff often do not have the time needed to maintain effective 
contact with children, young people and their families in order to 
achieve positive outcomes. In these circumstances professionals can 
find it very difficult to take the time to assess the family environment 
through the eyes of a child or young person. The failure to see the 
situation from their perspective and to talk to them was highlighted in 
Ofsted’s first annual report of evaluations of Serious Case Reviews.29 
Staff across frontline services need appropriate support and training to 
ensure that as far as possible they put themselves in the place of the 
child or young person and consider first and foremost how the 
situation must feel for them. They need to be able to notice signs of 
distress in children of all ages, but particularly amongst very young 
children who are not able to voice concerns and for whom 
bedwetting, head-banging and other signs may well be a cry for help.
28	Louis Pasteur (1822–95), French chemist and microbiologist
29	Ofsted, Learning lessons, taking action: Ofsted's evaluations of serious case reviews 1 April 2007 
to 31 March 2008 (December 2008)
Support for children

23
Support for children
“It seems like they have to do all this form filling, their bosses’ bosses 
make them do it, but it makes them forget about us.” 

Boy, 16
“She does things by text book, she doesn’t know me as a person.” 

Girl, 1630
Demanding excellence for children
At the autumn DCSF regional conferences on child deaths and Serious 
3.2	
Case Reviews, the University of East Anglia presented early findings 
from their work on the overview report of Serious Case Reviews 
initiated during the period 2005–07. They identified that professionals 
have a “tendency towards justification and reassurance that all was 
well, rather than more objective consideration and investigation of 
what had occurred”, and that sympathy for parents can lead to the 
expectations being set too low.31 Every professional coming into 
contact with a child in whatever context should be clear that it is not 
acceptable to do nothing when a child may be in need of help. It is 
important that the social work relationship, in particular, is not 
misunderstood as being a relationship for the benefit of the parents or 
for the relationship itself, rather than a focused intervention to protect 
the child and promote their welfare.
Early intervention
Early intervention is vital – not only in ensuring that fewer and fewer 
3.3	
children grow up in abusive or neglectful homes, but also to help as 
many children as possible reach their full potential. The Government’s 
investment in prevention and early intervention, especially through 
children’s centres and extended schools, has been widely welcomed. 
The Audit Commission has estimated that, if effective early 
intervention had been provided for just one in ten of those young 
people sentenced to custody each year, public services alone could 
have saved over £100 million annually.32
30	Quotations taken from findings of research with children undertaken by 11 Million in January 
2009 specifically for this report
31	Extract from the presentation of early findings from the overview of Serious Case Reviews 
during 2005–07, at the recent DCSF regional seminars on child deaths and Serious Case 
Reviews (University of East Anglia, 2008)
32	HM Treasury, Policy review of children and young people: A discussion paper (January 2007)

24
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
A recent report co-authored by MPs Graham Allen and Iain 
Duncan Smith highlights the need for early intervention, noting 
that “child poverty and income are only part of the picture. 
Building human capabilities is at least as important and rewarding. 
Capable, competent human beings will almost always find their 
way in life, find work and raise happy families.” The report also 
highlights the importance of the first years of a child’s life and 
how they lay the foundation for that child’s growth and 
development; the authors believe that “medical evidence points 
overwhelmingly in favour of a shift to Early Intervention. 
It highlights the essential importance of years 0–3 in human 
development, and the vital influence on years 0–3 of their primary 
caregivers. That in turn makes it essential to prepare children of 
0–18 for their future role as parents. Skills that for generations 
were passed on, almost unconsciously, now have to be taught: 
if they are not, we will all reap the consequences.”
Graham Allen MP and Rt Hon Iain Duncan Smith MP, 
Early Intervention: Good Parents, Great Kids, Better Citizens 
(Centre for Social Justice/Smith Institute, 2008)
However, there are differing understandings (particularly amongst 
3.4	
professionals in universal services) about what early intervention 
actually is – from pre-natal assessment to support for children before 
they require a child protection plan. Early intervention certainly should 
not be seen as something that applies only to babies and toddlers. 
Teenagers who are starting to disengage from school or show signs of 
anti-social behaviour can also benefit from preventative and early help 
and support. Schools, youth workers and other professionals should 
be aware of the signs and know how best to respond.
Schools and early years settings play a key role in early identification, 
3.5	
intervention and support for children at risk of significant harm or 
who have additional needs. In the findings of the DCSF biennial 
overview report of Serious Case Reviews from 2003–05,33 it was found 
that 68 per cent of the children aged 4 and over who subsequently 
died or experienced significant harm had been showing signs of poor 
school attendance. The commitment in the recent 21st Century 
33	Brandon, Marion, Pippa Belderson, Catherine Warren, David Howe, Ruth Gardner, Jane 
Dodsworth, Jane Black, Analysing Child Deaths and Serious Injury though Abuse – What can we 
Learn? A Biennial Analysis of Serious Case Reviews 2003-05, HM Government (2008)

25
Support for children
Schools strategy34 to create a clear national framework for early 
intervention is timely. Schools and early years settings need to be 
encouraged to prioritise safeguarding children within their school 
improvement plans. The inspection and improvement regime for 
schools needs to ensure that schools are proactively involved in 
safeguarding children, for example by offering multi-agency services 
on-site, making sure that their staff understand the referral 
arrangements in their area, and by continuing involvement in 
supporting children by attending child protection conferences and 
sharing information where appropriate. This is crucial in keeping 
children safe and often in keeping them in education.
Recommendation
Ofsted should revise the inspection and improvement regime for 
schools giving greater prominence to how well schools are 
fulfilling their responsibilities for child protection.
Front door – safe and welcoming
A key factor in identifying children and young people who need help 
3.6	
is ensuring services are designed to encourage contact from members 
of the public, parents and children and young people as well as by 
other agencies. If safeguarding children is everybody’s responsibility, 
then everybody should know how, and who, to contact if they are 
concerned about a child or young person. All service providers must 
look critically at how they receive referrals, the point known as their 
‘front door’. In local authorities where callers are directed to call 
centres that handle a wide range of local authority business, the local 
authority must ensure that any call relating to the protection of a child 
or young person is quickly transferred to a trained person with 
immediate access to an experienced social worker allocated to work 
with that team for more complex or high-risk referrals.
34	HM Government (DCSF), 21st Century Schools: A World-Class Education for Every Child 
(December 2008)

26
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Case study A
A common approach to managing referral and 
assessment
One local authority has been successful in developing an effective 
and responsive referral system for children and young people. It 
has been a priority to organise good responses to information 
about vulnerable children and they have now achieved the basic 
aim of ‘never doing nothing’. The stories at the ‘front door’ are 
now managed well and there are consistent responses to what 
are often chaotic and complex referrals. Central to this way of 
working are some basic questions:
What is the nature of the information?
●
●
Who is giving the information?
●
●
How are referrals progressed and who is accountable?
●
●
– and three basic principles:
Precision
●
●
 – making sure there is a transparent process (consistently 
applied) for establishing the cause for concern/referral
Visibility 
●
●
of action in order that every professional in the team 
knows what is happening and can track progress of the referral
Accountability
●
●
 – making sure that there is a supervisor 
constantly assessing the decisions being made and the action 
being taken
This new approach which enables both managers and 
practitioners to view the whole system as it responds to the 
identified needs of children and their families is resulting in 
important and positive results which include:
increased professional confidence and competence in 
●
●
managing and responding to complex referrals
consistent and transparent management of referrals across a 
●
●
large county area
reduced uncertainty amongst referring professionals who 
●
●
always get a response to their referral

27
Support for children
releasing resources both for more preventative work (pre-front 
●
●
door) and for direct work with children and families about 
whom there are serious concerns
Most importantly, these new practices have ensured that ‘doing 
nothing’ is no longer an option. The increased precision and focus 
which is applied to managing referral information is creating a 
confidence amongst local professionals that children are safer and 
resources are targeted where the risk of harm to children and 
young people is assessed as being the greatest. It is now hoped 
that this approach can be expanded across the Yorkshire and the 
Humber region.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
Working Together to Safeguard Children to set out clear expectations 
at all points where concerns about a child’s safety are received, 
ensuring intake/duty teams have sufficient training and expertise to 
take referrals and that staff have immediate, on-site support available 
from an experienced social worker. Local authorities should take 
appropriate action to implement these changes.
Accident and Emergency
In many of the cases where a child has experienced significant harm 
3.7	
or died as a result of abuse, the child has at some point been taken 
to the Accident and Emergency department of a hospital. Working 
Together to Safeguard Children is helpful in setting out the 
expectation that “staff in accident and emergency, ambulatory care 
units, walk-in centres and minor injury units, should be able to 
recognise abuse and be familiar with local procedures for making 
enquiries to find out whether a child is subject to a child protection 
plan”. It also recognises the risk that parents may deliberately use 
different sources of help to conceal repeated injuries to a child or 
siblings. However, not all Accident and Emergency departments follow 
this guidance effectively or are yet fully involved in local arrangements 
for child protection or have easy, up-to-date access to the names of 
children subject to a child protection plan and the knowledge of 
whether a child has recently presented at another Accident and 
Emergency department. All staff in Accident and Emergency 

28
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
departments should be trained to recognise abuse and neglect, with 
someone available at all times who has up-to-date information on 
children subject to a child protection plan and what further action 
should be taken to protect that child. Staff should not work on the 
assumption that this is the child’s first presentation at Accident and 
Emergency or rely on the parent or carer’s assertion that that is the 
case unless they know this to be true.
Where medical staff suspect that the injury is non-accidental they 
3.8	
must ensure that children’s social care services and the child’s general 
practitioner (GP) are notified as soon as possible. Having asked for the 
parent’s permission, they should arrange for a more thorough medical 
examination of the child in these cases, to identify any additional 
injuries or concerns. Full notes should be taken and information shared 
with the social worker. Medical professionals should notify children’s 
social care services and the child’s GP of any refusal. No child should be 
discharged from hospital where medical staff have remaining concerns 
about that child’s safety or welfare. Any concerns they have should be 
fully explored as set out in Recommendation 19 (see page 86).
Recommendation
The Department of Health and the Department for Children, 
Schools and Families must strengthen current guidance and put in 
place the systems and training so that staff in Accident and 
Emergency departments are able to tell if a child has recently 
presented at any Accident and Emergency department and if a 
child is the subject of a Child Protection Plan. If there is any cause 
for concern, staff must act accordingly, contacting other 
professionals, conducting further medical examinations of the 
child as appropriate and necessary, and ensuring no child is 
discharged whilst concerns for their safety or well-being remain.
Assessment processes
Fundamental to establishing the extent of a child’s need is a child-
3.9	
centred, sensitive and comprehensive assessment. Assessment should 
involve gathering a full understanding of what is happening to a child in 
the context of their family circumstances and the wider community, 
using a variety of sources of information. It must, therefore, be a joint or 
parallel assessment with all professionals concerned for the child’s safety 
and welfare. Time needs to be spent making sense of this information 
involving the family where appropriate. Assessment processes should 

29
Support for children
build up an increasingly clear understanding of a child’s situation over 
time, building up a picture of continuous neglect or cumulative 
concerns about abuse where this exists. This should minimise the risk of 
repeated initial assessments not taking account of what has gone 
before. Whilst these principles are well embedded in some services, 
evidence to this report suggests there is further work to be done to 
ensure sound assessment processes are in place in every service.
Recommendation
Children’s Trusts must ensure that all assessments of need for 
children and their families include evidence from all the 
professionals involved in their lives, take account of case histories 
and significant events (including previous assessments) and above 
all must include direct contact with the child.
A continuum of support for children
Local authorities have a general duty to safeguard and promote the 
3.10	
welfare of children in need in their area.35 This is because, for the vast 
majority of children, the best place for them to be brought up is with 
their families. Local authorities are required to provide a range and 
quantity of services appropriate to the needs of children who are ‘in 
need’ because they are unlikely to achieve or maintain a reasonable 
standard of health or development, or whose development is likely to 
be impaired without support, or who are disabled. This is deliberately 
a wide definition to ensure every child receives the support needed to 
stay with his or her family and to secure their proper development. 
But where the local authority has reasonable cause to believe that a 
child is suffering or is likely to suffer significant harm the authority 
must ensure that enquiries are undertaken to make an informed 
decision about how the safety and welfare of that child is best 
protected, and take appropriate action to do so.
In recent years the term ‘threshold’ has been increasingly used amongst 
3.11	
professionals in children’s services and their partner agencies. Thresholds 
are an attempt to limit access to services either because of finance or 
staffing constraints. Thresholds have no statutory basis and are not part 
of the Framework for the Assessment of Children in Need and their 
Families.36 Despite this, concerns have been raised from across the full 
35	Under Section 17 of the Children Act 1989
36	Department of Health, April 2000

30
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
range of services contributing to this report that thresholds, which act as 
gateways to restrict services for children, are inconsistent, and are too 
high. As a result local authorities are missing opportunities to intervene 
and support families at an earlier stage and avoid situations progressing 
on a downward spiral. This undermines the very purpose of Section 17 
of the Children’s Act 1989, which is to provide early support to children 
and families and prevent the escalation of risk which can lead to a child 
being harmed. Local authorities that adopt very high threshold criteria 
run the risk of legal challenge. Children who fall just short of needing a 
child protection plan are placed at particular risk of suffering harm when 
services are not provided for them. Local authorities must address this 
issue urgently and ensure they are providing the range and level of 
services and support that children in need require. Where this is done 
well, both statutory and voluntary partners are involved in service 
planning to ensure that they understand the services that are available to 
children when making referrals.
In providing services under the Children Act 1989 it is important that 
3.12	
local authorities do not take a compartmentalised view of the 
legislative framework for meeting the needs of children. If a child is 
identified as being ‘in need’, their circumstances should be monitored 
to ensure they do not change for the worse placing them at risk of 
significant harm. There should be constant monitoring of the progress 
of children in need by all agencies involved with the family. Where 
children are supported at home, the child protection plan must clearly 
identify the objectives to be achieved, with timescales, that signal 
either the withdrawal of support to the family or, if the objectives are 
not achieved, indicate the point when further action must be taken. 
This is particularly important in cases of child neglect where often 
there is no single event that ‘triggers’ matters escalating to an 
application for a court order. In such cases parents may, or may not, 
be cooperating and the extent of the risk of harm to the child may 
increase over time. Realistic timescales need to be applied for these 
cases to ensure a child is not subjected to long-term neglect. Signs of 
non-compliance by parents, or indeed threat or manipulation, must 
form part of the decision to protect a child.
Recommendation
Local authorities must ensure that ‘Children in Need’, as defined 
by Section 17 of the Children Act 1989, have early access to 
effective specialist services and support to meet their needs. 

31
Support for children
Social workers should be confident in using the full range of legal 
3.13	
options, as appropriate, to safeguard a child’s welfare. This includes 
child assessment orders, care and supervision orders, emergency 
protection orders and voluntary agreement by parents for their child 
to be accommodated by the local authority. They must use these 
options appropriately and decisively. For example, local authorities 
must consider how appropriate it is to accommodate children with the 
voluntary agreement of their parents, 37 which can be revoked at any 
time, when there are concerns for a child’s safety. They should be 
ready to act decisively if it becomes necessary to apply for a care order.
Evidence-based programmes
Vulnerable children and families have a right to expect that the 
3.14	
services they are provided with are based on evidence that they have 
been shown to work in meeting their needs. There have been a 
number of examples of evidence-based programmes that practitioners 
and service leaders have found particularly supportive in their 
contributions to this report. Family Nurse Partnerships, that provide 
intensive support for the most vulnerable first time parents, have 
proven benefits with evaluations stretching over 25 years in the US 
and seem to have been well received here. The announcement of the 
expansion of this service in the recent Children’s Health Strategy 
Healthy lives, brighter futures38 is welcome. Family Intervention 
Programmes have introduced new ways to support parents at times 
when their relationships come under strain, and give more support to 
children when family relationships break down. Parenting programmes 
already being used widely include Webster Stratton, Strengthening 
Families, and Triple P, all of which have been shown to be particularly 
effective for younger children. Three other programmes – Functional 
Family Therapy, Multi-systemic Therapy and Multidimensional 
Treatment Foster Care – are currently being piloted in some local 
authorities in England and have the potential to deliver positive 
outcomes. DCSF, the National Safeguarding Delivery Unit and existing 
organisations who work to share good practice in safeguarding 
children all have a role to play in sharing the learning from evidence-
based programmes and encouraging their availability.
37	Under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989
38	HM Government (DCSF and Department of Health), Healthy lives, brighter futures – The strategy 
for children and young people’s health (2009)

32
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Reflective practice
The role of social work staff and managers is particularly critical in 
3.15	
ensuring enabling action to protect children. There is concern that the 
tradition of deliberate, reflective social work practice is being put in 
danger because of an overemphasis on process and targets, resulting 
in a loss of confidence amongst social workers. It is vitally important 
that social work is carried out in a supportive learning environment 
that actively encourages the continuous development of professional 
judgement and skills. Regular, high-quality, organised supervision is 
critical, as are routine opportunities for peer-learning and discussion. 
Currently, not enough time is dedicated to this and individuals are 
carrying too much personal responsibility, with no outlet for the 
sometimes severe emotional and psychological stresses that staff 
involved in child protection often face. Supervision should be open 
and supportive, focusing on the quality of decisions, good risk 
analysis, and improving outcomes for children rather than meeting 
targets.
Recommendations
The Social Work Task Force should establish guidelines on 
guaranteed supervision time for social workers that may vary 
depending on experience.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
Working Together to Safeguard Children to set out the elements 
of high quality supervision focused on case planning, constructive 
challenge and professional development.
Data systems
There are definite advantages to electronic record keeping in place of 
3.16	
the previous often inaccessible paper files. Technology offers the 
potential for professionals to share information more effectively, to 
make information more accessible, and to use systems to manage the 
workflow of children’s services. The new ContactPoint system will 
have particular advantages in reducing the possibility of children for 
whom there are concerns going unnoticed.
Practitioners and managers are committed to the principle of an 
3.17	
electronic system and have no desire to return to paper-based case 
management. However, the current state of the technology – 
particularly the local IT systems that support the use of the Integrated 

33
Support for children
Children’s System (ICS) – is hampering progress. Professional practice 
and judgement, as said by many who contributed evidence to this 
report, are being compromised by an over-complicated, lengthy and 
tick-box assessment and recording system. The direct interaction and 
engagement with children and their families, which is at the core of 
social work, is said to be at risk as the needs of a work management 
tool overtake those of evidence-based assessment, sound analysis and 
professional judgement about risk of harm.
There is no single national IT system that delivers the ICS 
3.18	
requirements. Some areas have access to systems that support 
practice, but there is wide variation from area to area in the time staff 
spend inputting information into the ICS. Local authorities that 
ensured practice strongly informed the implementation process appear 
to have been successful in reducing time spent by social workers in 
front of screens. Those local authorities with strong leadership and a 
confident workforce ensure social workers remain primarily focused 
upon contact with children and families. However, there remain 
fundamental limitations to local systems that impact daily on the 
working lives of many social workers and, as a result, affect the quality 
of their work with children and their families. Some of the concerns 
shared by contributors to this report are detailed below. Local 
authorities are having to find ways to work around their systems – 
often introducing parallel systems for capturing qualitative data – 
with the result that the benefits of the system are being undermined. 
Too much time and money is being spent at local level trying to 
correct the failings of individual systems and stronger national 
leadership of ICS is needed.
Examples of concerns about ICS raised in evidence
The systems do not support reflective thinking and risk analysis
●
●
Some of the systems in use require some data to be re-entered 
●
●
for each child in a family
Some of the systems in use do not allow qualitative 
●
●
assessments and case notes to be captured
Most systems do not produce chronologies that can be used in 
●
●
court, although the specification published in June 2008 
requires this
It is hard to use the outputs to engage with children and families
●
●

34
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Case study B
Integrated Children’s System
One local authority has implemented an ICS which is supporting 
improvement in the overall management and delivery of children’s 
services. It is acknowledged that there are still improvements to be 
made, but it is also clear that this would indeed be the case where 
any system is being developed to support children and their 
families. Critical to their local success in implementation is:
a clear and open relationship from the start with the developer/
●
●
provider of the system
a local dedicated IT team who understand the needs of the 
●
●
children’s service and who can broker this with the developers 
of the system
senior leadership involvement in the commissioning and 
●
●
ongoing development of the system
a commitment throughout the service to focusing on practice 
●
●
and not exclusively timescales. The quality of assessments and 
decision making is reinforced at all times
recognition that the multi-disciplinary relationships around the 
●
●
system must be in place and be effective for the system to 
work. Where this is the case, good information sharing 
amongst professionals will be replicated in the system
clarity amongst staff that ICS is not a replacement for professional 
●
●
judgement but rather a tool to enable and support case-load 
planning and management and multi-disciplinary working 

35
Support for children
Recommendations
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should 
undertake a feasibility study with a view to rolling out a single 
national Integrated Children’s System better able to address the 
concerns identified in this report, or find alternative ways to assert 
stronger leadership over the local systems and their providers. This 
study should be completed within six months of this report.
Whether or not a national system is introduced, the Department 
for Children, Schools and Families should take steps to improve 
the utility of the Integrated Children’s System, in consultation with 
social workers and their managers, to be effective in supporting 
them in their role and their contact with children and families, 
partners, services and courts, and to ensure appropriate transfer 
of essential information across organisational boundaries.
Irrespective of the methods used for recording and managing 
3.19	
casework, local leaders must ensure that children and young people’s 
information is managed and recorded effectively to reduce their risk 
of harm. Clearly systems are only as good as the information put into 
them, and the priority should be to ensure that staff are able to 
dedicate maximum efforts to face-to-face contact with children 
and families.

CHAPTER 
36
CHAPTER 4
“Relationships are crucial; it’s not about structures, it’s about 
making it work out there for children.”
Social worker
It is clear that most staff in social work, youth work, education, police, 
4.1	
health and other frontline services are committed to the principle of 
interagency working, and recognise that children can only be 
protected effectively when all agencies pool information, expertise 
and resources so that a full picture of the child’s life is better 
understood. Cooperative working is increasingly becoming the normal 
way of working. However, good examples of joint working too often 
rely on the goodwill of individuals. Colleagues in education, early 
years, health and police are vital partners in protecting children and 
they need to be willing and proactive in discharging their statutory 
duty to cooperate on child safeguarding.
“Some agencies still think they are helping out social care rather than 
thinking that safeguarding is everybody’s responsibility.” Local 
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) Chair, Loughborough University 
2009 LSCB Survey 39
The Government’s 
4.2	
Working Together to Safeguard Children set out 
sound principles and procedures for collaborative working, but to 
protect children these need to be intelligently and effectively applied 
in every local service. All professionals working with a child should 
explicitly understand their responsibilities in order to achieve positive 
outcomes, keep children safe, and complement the support that other 
professionals may be providing. They should all know when a child is 
subject to a child protection plan and act accordingly.
39	Interim findings to be published in spring 2009: Loughborough University research led by 
Professor Alan France and Emily Munro 
Interagency working

37
Interagency working
Recommendations
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must 
strengthen Working Together to Safeguard Children, and 
Children’s Trusts must take appropriate action to ensure:
all referrals to children’s services from other professionals lead 
●
●
to an initial assessment, including direct involvement with the 
child or young person and their family, and the direct 
engagement with, and feedback to, the referring professional;
core group meetings, reviews and casework decisions include 
●
●
all the professionals involved with the child, particularly police, 
health, youth services and education colleagues. Records must 
be kept which must include the written views of those who 
cannot make such meetings; and
formal procedures are in place for managing a conflict of 
●
●
opinions between professionals from different services over the 
safety of a child.
Yet it is evident that the challenges of working across organisational 
4.3	
boundaries continue to pose barriers in practice, and that cooperative 
efforts are often the first to suffer when services and individuals are 
under pressure. Examples of poor practice highlighted to this report 
include child protection conferences where not all the services 
involved in a child’s life are present or able to give a view; or where 
one professional disagrees with a decision and their view is not 
explored in more detail; and repeated examples of professionals not 
receiving feedback on referrals. As a result of each of these failures, 
children or young people at risk of neglect or abuse will be exposed 
to greater danger. The referring professional may also be left with 
ongoing anxiety and concern about the child or young person. This 
needs to be addressed if all local services are to be effective in keeping 
children and young people safe.

38
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendations
All police, probation, adult mental health and adult drug and 
alcohol services should have well understood referral processes 
which prioritise the protection and well-being of children. These 
should include automatic referral where domestic violence or drug 
or alcohol abuse may put a child at risk of abuse or neglect.
The National Safeguarding Delivery Unit should urgently develop 
guidance on referral and assessment systems for children affected 
by domestic violence, adult mental health problems, and drugs 
and alcohol misuse using current best practice. This should be 
shared with local authorities, health and police with an 
expectation that the assessment of risk and level of support given 
to such children will improve quickly and significantly in every 
Children’s Trust.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should 
establish statutory representation on Local Safeguarding Children 
Boards from schools, adult mental health and adult drug and 
alcohol services.
Adult and child services working together
It is estimated at least 200,000 children live in households where there 
4.4	
is a known high risk case of domestic abuse and violence, with very 
many more affected at some point in time.40 Approximately 450,000 
parents41 are estimated to have mental health problems; an estimated 
250,000 – 350,000 children42 have parents who are problematic drug 
users, and around 1.3 million children43 live with parents who are 
thought to misuse alcohol. In this context, it is vital that professional 
staff working with adults are trained to identify and assess the needs 
of, and risk of harm to, children and young people. These issues are a 
consistent feature of Serious Case Reviews, 44 demonstrating how 
seriously they put children at risk of significant harm. There are some 
40	Figures provided by Co-ordinated Action Against Domestic Abuse (CAADA)
41	Morris, J and M Wates, ‘Supporting Disabled Parents and Parents with Additional Support 
Needs’ in Adult’s Services Knowledge Review 11 (Social Care Institute for Excellence, 2006)
42	Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, Hidden Harm: Responding to the Needs of Problem 
Drug Users (2003)
43	Prime Minister’s Strategy Unit, Alcohol Harm Reduction Project – Interim Analytical Report 
(2003)
44	Brandon, Marion, Pippa Belderson, Catherine Warren, David Howe, Ruth Gardner, Jane 
Dodsworth, Jane Black, Analysing Child Deaths and Serious Injury though Abuse – What can we 
Learn? A Biennial Analysis of Serious Case Reviews 2003–05, HM Government (2008)

39
Interagency working
examples of good practice of adult and children’s services working 
together to ensure that the protection of children is paramount in 
contact with adults. However, there are too many examples of referral 
and assessment processes that do not adequately identify and assess 
the risk of harm to children or take the necessary action to support 
those children.
These are complicated matters and they need to be handled with 
4.5	
great care. It is vital to ensure that, in creating a robust system of 
identifying and supporting these children appropriately, crude systems 
of referral are not used that deter victims of domestic violence or 
those suffering with mental health illness from seeking help, for fear 
that this would automatically put in jeopardy their right to care for 
their child. Sound referral systems must be based on proper 
assessment and judgement. The answer must lie in joint working 
between police, health and children’s services to ensure that the risk 
of harm to children is well understood, assessed and acted upon as 
appropriate in every case. Local areas need further support in 
consistently developing such robust arrangements, and the National 
Safeguarding Delivery Unit should address this as one of its earliest 
priorities.
Case study C
Multi-agency working – an example from one local 
authority
In one local authority, doing the ‘basics’ well has enabled the 
Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) to develop a strong and 
mature partnership. The LSCB benefits from a personal 
commitment from Executive Directors across each of the health 
trusts. Four Health Trusts (two acute, one mental health and one 
Primary Care Trust (PCT) have their own safeguarding boards 
which meet quarterly, and are led by their respective Executive 
Directors. The function of the health safeguarding boards is to 
co-ordinate safeguarding practice across the trusts, ensuring a 
‘two way learning and improvement dialogue’ with the LSCB. 
These arrangements also support an annual event to consider 
cross boundary issues, across the trusts and two local authority 
areas. This has led to implementation of the same protocols 
regardless of the local authority area where a child or family live.

40
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
One trust has recently established an operational multi-agency 
safeguarding team across children and adult services. There are 
weekly multi-disciplinary case review meetings with partners and 
multi-agency audits. The Accident and Emergency department 
holds a weekly psycho-social meeting, to discuss attendances in 
the previous week with representation from hospital and social 
care staff. Robust screening is universally applied for safeguarding 
issues including domestic violence, all attendances at hospital are 
notified to the health visitor, school nurse, GP, and social worker, 
and a rigorous risk assessment is undertaken before any child is 
discharged.
Vulnerable children are ‘flagged’ in GP practices, there is a named 
safeguarding GP in each practice, and there is also a GP with a 
special interest in safeguarding contributing to the PCT’s strategic 
safeguarding work and acting as a key conduit to GP practices. 
Regular training is provided by designated and named 
professionals to GPs to maximise their contribution to the 
safeguarding agenda.
Health Trusts are represented on the seven sub-committees of the 
LSCB, which enables them to influence any training programmes, 
identify likely barriers to change, and exploit the full impact of 
interagency working. The value of interagency audit has been 
particularly important in driving change and creating a culture of 
continuous improvement.
Information sharing
Despite the fact that the Government gave clear guidance on 
4.6	
information sharing in 2006 and updated it in October 2008,45 there 
continues to be a real concern across all sectors, but particularly in 
the health services, about the risk of breaching confidentiality or data 
protection law by sharing concerns about a child’s safety. The laws 
governing data protection and privacy are still not well understood 
by frontline staff or their managers. It is clear that different agencies 
(and their legal advisers) often take different approaches.
Whilst the law rightly seeks to preserve individuals’ privacy and 
4.7	
confidentiality, it should not be used (and was never intended) as a 
barrier to appropriate information sharing between professionals. 
The safety and welfare of children is of paramount importance, and 
45	HM Government, Information sharing: Guidance for practitioners and managers (2008)

41
Interagency working
agencies may lawfully share confidential information about the child 
or the parent, without consent, if doing so is in the public interest. 
A public interest can arise in a wide range of circumstances, including 
the protection of a child from harm, and the promotion of child 
welfare. Even where the sharing of confidential medical information 
is considered inappropriate, it may be proportionate for a clinician to 
share the fact that they have concerns about a child.
“The key factors in deciding whether or not to share confidential 
information are necessity and proportionality, ie whether the 
proposed sharing is likely to make an effective contribution to 
preventing the risk and whether the public interest in sharing 
information overrides the interest in maintaining confidentiality. 
In making the decision you must weigh up what might happen if 
the information is shared against what might happen if it is not 
and make a decision based on professional judgement.”
Information sharing: Guidance for practitioners and managers 
HM Government (2008)
Those who have local accountability for keeping children safe should 
4.8	
ensure that all staff in every service, from frontline practitioners to 
legal advisers and managers in statutory services and the voluntary 
sector, understand the circumstances in which they may lawfully share 
information about both children and parents, and that it is in the 
public interest to prioritise the safety and welfare of children. Agencies 
should regularly test their local information sharing arrangements to 
satisfy themselves that their procedures are understood and working 
properly to protect children.
Recommendation
Every Children’s Trust should assure themselves that partners 
consistently apply the Information Sharing Guidance published 
by the Department for Children, Schools and Families and the 
Department for Communities and Local Government to 
protect children.

42
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Common Assessment Framework
The Common Assessment Framework (CAF) is a tool designed to aid 
4.9	
the assessment of a child’s needs where more than one practitioner is 
likely to be involved in meeting those needs. It is designed for the 
early intervention end of the spectrum of need rather than for children 
who are at risk of significant harm. It is still too early to make a 
judgement on the effectiveness of the CAF in improving outcomes for 
children and young people, and opinion from contributors to this 
report has been divided. There has been some evidence that the CAF 
has been helpful in bringing together a wider range of professionals 
to make joint assessments that are both positive in achieving better 
assessments of a child and as a learning experience for staff. However, 
it is in danger, like other tools, of becoming process-focused or, even 
worse, a barrier to services for children where access to services 
depends on a completed CAF form. All agencies need further help in 
using the CAF effectively and consistently. They also need further 
support in managing the role of lead practitioners to ensure that all 
those who undertake this role have the time, training and 
relationships needed to allow them to support children effectively.
Views on CAF from contributors to this Progress 
Report
“The CAF has made a huge difference in this area to the early 
identification of children and young people in need.”
Local authority managers during a fieldwork visit
“The CAF can be very effective in building bridges and shared 
understanding between different professional groups.”
Police organisation in written evidence
“The CAF has caused a lot of confusion and is burdensome to 
complete, not least because not all agencies know how to feed 
their information into it.”
Voluntary organisation in written evidence

CHAPTER 
43
CHAPTER 5
“All kids need is a little help, a little hope and somebody who 
believes in them.” 
Earvin ‘Magic’ Johnson46
Few careers are as demanding or rewarding as that of working with 
5.1	
children, young people and their families. People who enter the 
children’s workforce, be it in the health services, the police, education, 
youth work or social work, do so to make a difference to other 
people’s lives. Every day, thousands of children are helped, supported 
and in some cases have their lives saved by these staff. However, 
rather than feeling valued for their commitment and expertise 
professionals across these services often feel undervalued, 
unsupported and at risk. Morale amongst social workers in services 
for children is particularly low. There is a desperate need for more 
health visitors, and many paediatricians and police officers report 
that child protection work is often of low status in contrast to the 
challenges that accompany it. As a result, children may be being put 
at risk of suffering harm.
Progress so far
The issues facing all the staff working with children remain very real. 
5.2	
Vacancies for children’s social workers in local authorities stood at 
9.5 per cent in 2006, 47 compared with 0.7 per cent for teachers.48 
Turnover rates were also high at 9.6 per cent. 64 per cent of local 
authorities reported difficulties in recruiting children’s social workers 
in 2008, and 39 per cent had difficulty in retaining them, although 
progress has been made since 2006.49 In some authorities visited in 
46	Earvin ‘Magic’ Johnson (1959 –), US basketball player
47	Children’s, Young People’s and Families’ Social Care Workforce Survey 2006, Local Authority 
Workforce Intelligence Group
48	618G survey (annual, DCSF), full-time vacancy rate for maintained nursery/primary, secondary 
and special schools in England
49	Local Government Workforce Survey 2008 (available on line at www.lga.gov.uk/lga/core/page.
do?pageId=1095305)
Children’s Workforce

44
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
the preparation of this report over half of social workers are newly 
qualified with less than a year’s experience. One survey suggested that 
nearly three-quarters of children’s social workers report that average 
case-loads have increased since 2003.50 Equally worryingly, the 
number of health visitors is at its lowest in 14 years.51 Research for 
Community Care as part of the ‘Children in Focus’ series back in 2002 
suggests that working in child protection teams within the police 
service is seen as being low status.52 This was a view repeated by a 
number of police service representatives in the evidence to this Report.
In December 2008, the Department for Children, Schools and Families 
5.3	
(DCSF) published the 2020 Children and Young People’s Workforce 
Strategy, 53 setting out the Government’s vision for all those working 
with children. Moreover, the Secretary of State for Children, Schools 
and Families established the Social Work Task Force (SWTF) to focus 
particularly on the roles of those working in frontline social work 
services for children and young people. The Workforce Strategy and 
the SWTF are very welcome responses to the current challenges in 
social work. They demonstrate a recognition that, whilst there have 
been significant improvements in some parts of the children’s 
workforce, these have focused primarily on universal services, 
particularly education, and have not yet reached social workers.
Social workers
Frontline social workers and social work managers are under an 
5.4	
immense amount of pressure. Low staff morale, poor supervision, 
high case-loads, under-resourcing and inadequate training each 
contribute to high levels of stress and recruitment and retention 
difficulties. Many social workers feel the size of the task in protecting 
children and young people from harm is insurmountable and this 
increases the risk of harm. Social work and, in particular, child 
protection work is felt to be a ‘Cinderella’ service within other parts of 
the children’s workforce. It is noticeable that education has received 
substantially more investment over the last decade. Public vilification 
of social workers has a negative effect on staff and has serious 
implications for the effectiveness, status and morale of the children’s 
workforce as a whole. There has been a long-term appetite in the 
50	UNISON, Still slipping through the net? Frontline staff assess children’s safeguarding progress 
(2008) 
51	Unite/Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association Omnibus Survey, 2008
52	Sally Gillen (available online at www.communitycare.co.uk/Articles/2002/05/23/36528/child-
protection-blues.html)
53	HM Government (DCSF), 2020 Children and Young People’s Workforce Strategy (December 2008)

45
Children’s Workforce
media to portray social workers in ways that are negative and 
undermining. Inevitably, other ways of helping children, young people 
and families often look more appealing to staff. However, without 
highly motivated and confident social workers the reality is that more 
children will be exposed to harm.
A national supply strategy for social work
The issues outlined above have resulted in a recruitment and retention 
5.5	
crisis within social work. There is a national and local shortage of 
qualified social workers able and willing to undertake the skilled 
safeguarding and child protection work required. Many authorities are 
reliant on agency social workers, despite this being a short-term 
solution. Together with the high turnover of permanent staff and use 
of staff from abroad, it fails to provide vulnerable children with the 
continuity of the same worker with whom they can form a long-term 
relationship. Good local leadership will not of itself be enough to 
overcome these issues, although it will play a crucial role.
Case study D
Recruitment and retention of social workers
Managers in one local authority wanted to look at opportunities 
to improve the recruitment and retention of social workers. 
A range of innovative and effective solutions have been found.
A strategy has been drawn up, evaluated and the following key 
points have been identified as important in retaining and 
recruiting social workers:
a clear induction programme for new staff with a strong 
●
●
emphasis on development;
a new ‘consultant’ role within the organisational structure for 
●
●
experienced social workers to support newly qualified staff, 
increasing practitioner confidence, skills and assertiveness, and 
leading to increased direct work with children and families;
a strong supervision policy where workloads and case 
●
●
management are regularly discussed and assessed;
a new pilot with a local university to sponsor places on training 
●
●
programmes; and

46
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
the creation of a joint safeguarding service bringing together 
●
●
staff from three previously separate teams (social care, 
education and health), emphasising the authority’s commitment 
to integrated working, and including an expert-staffed advice 
line for professionals.
DCSF, with support from the SWTF, should develop a strategy to raise 
5.6	
the profile of social work and positively seek to overcome the current 
media and public misunderstandings about the important contribution 
that social workers make to keeping children safe. It needs to forecast 
and plan to meet projections for social workers over future years, 
taking into account the complexity and weight of case-loads, and 
supervision and training needs. There should be clearer and more 
attractive entry routes into social work for those unqualified staff who 
would like to progress into qualified social work roles. Building on 
work currently being developed by the Children’s Workforce 
Development Council (CWDC), there should also be efforts to engage 
professionals in mid-career in other sectors to retrain to enter the 
social care workforce and reward them for doing so. Further 
consideration needs to be given to how best to retain experienced 
staff enabling them to continue to be available to work with children 
and families on the frontline by making effective use of the advanced 
practitioner status to be introduced later this year. This will not be an 
easy task or one that comes without a significant financial 
commitment, but a comparison should be made with the resources 
provided to achieve similar outcomes in the teaching profession, if 
safeguarding and child protection services really are to be effective in 
keeping children safe.
Remodelling social work
There are similarities between the current pressure, overload and 
5.7	
dissatisfaction that many social workers feel, and that of the teaching 
workforce ten years ago. Case-loads are consistently high, increasing 
the risk of harm to children and creating anxiety for social workers. 
The introduction of teaching assistants and advanced skills teachers, 
protected preparation time and other elements of remodelling have 
made great strides in overcoming these issues in education.

47
Children’s Workforce
Some similar steps, led by CWDC, are now being taken for social 
5.8	
workers, with the introduction, for example, of the Newly Qualified 
Social Worker Status and the development of a career progression 
framework for social workers. However, there remains a real need for 
a determined and well-resourced national remodelling strategy for 
social work. A programme to remodel children’s social work could 
include the introduction of multi-skilled teams with shared ownership 
of a manageable case-load. Within a team there could be a mix of 
junior and more experienced social workers along with administrative 
and multi-disciplinary support. There should be a focus on efficient 
case management using the skills of all members of the team. This 
approach, already used in some areas, ensures continuity of service to 
the child and that social workers are not isolated in their contact with 
the child and their family, and have others around them with whom 
they can discuss concerns and make decisions together or undertake 
joint visits. Skilled administrative support also allows social workers to 
focus on their areas of expertise, as can other professionals in the 
team. An effective remodelling programme will ensure that 
experienced and skilled staff are recognised and motivated, using the 
role of advanced practitioner due to be introduced later this year, with 
the importance of their role reflected through a pay structure that is 
comparable to others with similar skills and experience elsewhere in 
the children’s workforce. Within this context, practitioners, teams and 
individuals should all have a mixed case-load of both child protection 
and children in need work. No social worker should handle only the 
more complex and emotionally demanding child protection cases. 
The case study on page 50 shares the experience of one local 
authority that has devised a new arrangement to ensure continuity of 
help to the families and to support frontline staff. These are issues 
which many authorities will face and will have varied ways of dealing 
with.

48
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Case study E
Remodelling social work
“If the people working with children and their families are not 
competent, then the infrastructure to support them will make no 
difference or add any value.”
Local authority Deputy Director
It is this starting point which led one local authority to ‘reclaim 
social work’. Observing that social work as a profession has 
lost it way, lacks confidence, expertise and gravitas, is over-
bureaucratised and risk averse they suggest that whilst assessment 
should remain central to planning and decision making, more 
time should be spent on direct intervention with families to effect 
positive change. In order to achieve this, they state that clear 
professional accountability, clinical support and high calibre 
practitioners are fundamental.
At the heart of the model is the Social Work Unit (SWU). Under 
the leadership of a consultant social worker (CSW), members of 
the SWU (a social worker, a children’s practitioner, a family 
therapist and a unit co‑ordinator) work to deliver the service.
Key aims of the SWUs are to use systemic approaches and social 
learning theory interventions to create change in families.
Families and children want consistency and this approach goes a 
long way to securing that. This requires SWUs to be flexible and 
responsive in the roles and tasks they undertake.
The CSW has full responsibility for all cases allocated to their SWU.
“If you have excellent social workers, you don’t stop them 
practising. That’s why we now have consultant social workers.”

49
Children’s Workforce
Each family, child and young person is known to each member of 
the SWU. Each SWU meets weekly to agree the tasks needed to 
be undertaken that week. The families are discussed and tasks are 
allocated to members of the SWU according to availability, skill, 
and knowledge of and relationship to the family. Direct work is 
undertaken by everyone as appropriate (including the CSW). 
The SWU is given a high degree of autonomy and is expected to 
take responsibility for the decisions made and the actions taken. 
All practitioners in the SWUs have delegate authority for some 
limited financial spend. It operates as a whole. The CSW line 
manages the social worker and children’s practitioner. The 
Clinician receives clinical supervision and line management from 
the Supervising Clinicians within Family Support. The SWU 
co‑ordinators are line managed by administration managers 
within each service area.
This is a new paradigm for social work. The SWUs have to have 
both a good understanding of evidence-based interventions and 
at the same time understand and be able to manage risk. At the 
centre of all the work is to focus on the need to protect children 
from significant harm.
There is a commitment to creating a culture where good social 
work thrives. This means reducing the bureaucratic burdens on 
units and creating a new relationship between CSW and 
managers.
“No professional social work practitioner or manager gets a job in 
this authority without being successful at an interview panel 
always chaired by either the deputy director or assistant director.”
In the words of one consultant when talking about a complex 
case the Unit had worked with, “I feel the whole family has 
benefited … it’s enormously satisfying and professionally 
invigorating”.
 

50
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendations
The Social Work Task Force should:
develop the basis for a national children’s social worker supply 
●
●
strategy that will address recruitment and retention difficulties, 
to be implemented by the Department for Children, Schools 
and Families. This should have a particular emphasis on child 
protection social workers;
work with the Children’s Workforce Development Council and 
●
●
other partners to implement, on a national basis, clear 
progression routes for children’s social workers;
develop national guidelines setting out maximum case-loads of 
●
●
children in need and child protection cases, supported by a 
weighting mechanism to reflect the complexity of cases, that 
will help plan the workloads of children’s social workers; and
develop a strategy for remodelling children’s social work which 
●
●
delivers shared ownership of cases, administrative support and 
multi-disciplinary support to be delivered nationally.
Children’s Trusts should ensure a named, and preferably 
co‑located, representative from the police service, community 
paediatric specialist and health visitor are active partners within 
each children’s social work department.

51
Children’s Workforce
Social work initial training
The introduction in 2003 of the degree course in social work is widely 
5.9	
acknowledged to be a great advance in improving social workers’ 
skills. However, the quality and content of degree courses are not yet 
sufficiently well developed and there is no rigorous assessment regime 
in place to ensure that standards are being met by providers. The 
degree course should ensure social workers are prepared for the 
realities of working with children and families who may have complex 
needs and parents who, in some cases, may be intentionally deceptive 
or manipulative. Social workers themselves do not think that their 
training is equipping them to take on the responsibilities for which 
they are being trained – two-thirds of newly qualified social workers 
felt that the degree prepared them just enough or not at all for their 
current role.54
At the heart of the difficultly in preparing social workers through a 
5.10	
degree course is that, without an opportunity to specialise in child 
protection work or even in children’s social work, students are 
covering too much ground without learning the skills and knowledge 
to support any particular client group well. There are few placements 
offered in children’s services and fewer still at the complex end of child 
protection or children ‘in need’. It is currently possible to qualify as a 
social worker without any experience of child protection, or even of 
working within a local authority, and to be holding a full case-load of 
child protection cases immediately upon appointment. The current 
degree programme should be reformed to allow for specialism after 
the first year, with no graduate entering frontline children’s social 
work without having completed a specialised degree including a 
placement within a frontline statutory children’s social work team, 
or having completed further professional development and children’s 
social work experience to build on generic training.
54	Children’s Workforce Development Council Research Team, Newly Qualified Social Workers. 
A report on consultations with newly qualified social workers, employers and those in higher 
education (unpublished preliminary findings) 

52
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
“I was astonished … to find that a new graduate is immediately 
a qualified social worker and can work unsupervised. If you 
compare that with other professions – medicine or dentistry, 
optometry, pharmacy, or teaching – they have a period of one or 
two years during which you go out on placement and acquire, 
under supervision, the general practical ability and experience that 
will enable them to practise successfully … If either a doctor or 
nurse were going to specialise in work with children, for example, 
they would need to undergo accredited specialist training, and 
they would have a mark on the register saying they had such 
training.”
From an interview with Rosie Varley, chair of the General Social 
Care Council, in The Guardian (4 February 2009)
A specialist children’s social work degree would need to provide 
5.11	
students with an in-depth understanding of child development as well 
as more practical skills. Social workers need good observation and 
analytical skills in order to be able to understand the nature of the 
relationship between a parent and child, to understand signs of non-
compliance, to work alongside a family, and to come to safe and 
evidence-based judgements about the best course of action. They 
need to develop the emotional resilience to manage the challenges 
they will face in dealing with potentially difficult families. They need to 
know how to record information clearly, present key case information, 
reflect and analyse on what they are seeing, and to communicate it 
clearly to colleagues and other professionals. Furthermore, social 
workers need a thorough understanding of the legal framework 
surrounding safeguarding and child protection. The social work 
degree needs to be developed to provide these skills.

53
Children’s Workforce
Recommendations
The General Social Care Council, together with relevant 
government departments, should:
work with higher education institutions and employers to raise 
●
●
the quality and consistency of social work degrees and 
strengthen their curriculums to provide high quality practical 
skills in children’s social work;
work with higher education institutions to reform the current 
●
●
degree programme towards a system which allows for 
specialism in children’s social work, including statutory 
children’s social work placements, after the first year; and
put in place a comprehensive inspection regime to raise the 
●
●
quality and consistency of social work degrees across higher 
education institutions.
Newly qualified social workers
Social workers must have guaranteed support and supervision during 
5.12	
their first year to enable them to develop their skills and their 
confidence as a professional in a relatively safe learning environment 
whilst still having exposure to children in complex and difficult 
circumstances. CWDC’s Newly Qualified Social Worker pilot is 
currently providing 1,000 new social workers in 90 local authorities 
with protected time for training and development and better quality, 
more frequent supervision in their first year of practice. 1,000 more 
newly qualified social workers will receive this from September. 
Working with CWDC, the SWTF should take action to ensure that all 
newly qualified social workers receive this level of support.
Continuing professional development (CPD) for 
social workers
This Progress Report has heard much about the complexity and 
5.13	
challenges facing frontline staff working with children and families to 
protect children from harm. No two cases are the same and each case 
should be considered as a learning opportunity, through which the 
social worker develops his or her skills and knowledge base. It is 
important to develop a culture of continuous learning and 
development as a natural part of social work practice.

54
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
However, in order to carry out their roles effectively, social workers 
5.14	
and their managers need access to good quality post-qualifying 
training. It is particularly important that those working in child 
protection regularly refresh their skills and knowledge base, ensuring 
they are fully aware of and competent in undertaking evidence-based, 
effective assessments and appropriate interventions. There are, 
however, shortfalls in CPD and post-qualifying training for social 
workers, together with reticence from employers to release and 
sponsor staff to take up such opportunities. There is currently no 
national framework for CPD. Nor are there clear links between CPD 
and career progression. This impacts upon staff morale and their 
motivation to remain in post and develop their careers. Training 
opportunities across local authorities are varied and locally sourced, 
particularly for first line managers. This should be addressed to ensure 
social workers have the continuing support to be competent and 
confident in their roles and managers are able to provide effective 
oversight of casework and provide high-quality supervision.
As a first step, a post-graduate qualification in safeguarding children 
5.15	
is needed that is practice-based, focusing on the key skills required for 
effective working with children and families and protecting children 
from harm. All children’s social workers should be expected to 
complete this postgraduate qualification as soon as is practicable. 
It will need to be funded centrally and with protected study time 
made available.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families and the 
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills should introduce 
a fully-funded, practice-focused children’s social work 
postgraduate qualification for experienced children’s social 
workers, with an expectation they will complete the programme 
as soon as is practicable.
Qualifications for overseas social workers
There are relatively high numbers of social workers who were trained 
5.16	
outside the UK with 6,40055 registered with the General Social Care 
Council (GSCC) in 2007 (8 per cent of all social work staff 
55	Moriarty, Manthorpe, Hussein and Cornes, Staff Shortages and Immigration in the Social Care 
Sector (a paper prepared for the Migration Advisory Committee, Kings College London (2008))

55
Children’s Workforce
registered).56 Their contribution to safeguarding children in the UK is 
welcomed and valued with many local authorities relying heavily on 
their contribution and praising the training they have received abroad. 
Many social workers who qualified overseas take it upon themselves 
to ensure they are familiar with the safeguarding framework in the 
UK. However, this training must become consistent for every overseas 
qualified social worker, as must their English language capability for 
the minority for whom English is not their first language. The DCSF, 
together with the GSCC and CWDC, and partners, should explore 
how this can best be achieved through a national framework of in-
house and external training, leading to a conversion qualification.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families, working with 
the Children’s Workforce Development Council, General Social 
Care Council and partners should introduce a conversion 
qualification and English language test for internationally qualified 
children’s social workers that ensures understanding of legislation, 
guidance and practice in England. Consideration should be given 
to the appropriate length of a compulsory induction period in 
a practice setting prior to formal registration as a social worker 
in England.
Training across all agencies
Training for social workers, police, teachers, health visitors, GPs and 
5.17	
paediatricians all have different professional starting points on 
engaging with children and young people, governed by the nature 
of the service they provide. Yet it is essential that all professionals 
working with children have a solid understanding of child 
development. All those who work with children need to be able to 
identify the signs that suggest a child may be suffering from abuse 
or neglect and know what actions to take to safeguard the child’s 
welfare. This would include knowing when a child is not developing 
as would be expected for their age.
56	Not all of these would go on to practise as social workers and only some would become 
children’s social workers

56
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendation
Children’s Trusts should ensure that all staff who work with 
children receive initial training and continuing professional 
development which enables them to understand normal child 
development and recognise potential signs of abuse or neglect.
Multi-agency training is important in helping professionals understand 
5.18	
the respective roles and responsibilities and the procedures of each 
agency involved in child protection, in developing a joint 
understanding of assessment and decision making practices, and in 
learning from Serious Case Reviews. However, the scale and quality of 
multi-agency training needs to be substantially improved to ensure 
that all those organisations who are part of a child’s life, such as early 
years providers, schools, youth services, health, and the police, social 
workers, paramedics and others who step in when problems arise, 
have this understanding.
Recommendation
All Children’s Trusts should have sufficient multi-agency training in 
place to create a shared language and understanding of local 
referral procedures, assessment, information sharing and decision 
making across early years, schools, youth services, health, police 
and other services who work to protect children. A named child 
protection lead in each setting should receive this training.
The introduction of the 
5.19	
Common Core of Skills and Knowledge57 in 
2005 aimed to provide a common language for working with 
children. However, following concerns about the extent to which the 
Common Core addresses issues of integrated working; working with 
families to support vulnerable children and young people; and how 
well embedded it is in some parts of the workforce such as the health 
sector or the police, the 2020 Children and Young People’s Workforce 
Strategy has called for a review, which is welcomed.
Employer and social worker codes of practice
The GSCC has developed codes of practice for social workers and for 
5.20	
their employers which provide the basis for a national ‘contract’ to 
develop the profession. However, it appears that the codes are in need 
of updating to be more effective in protecting children. The Code of 
57	HM Government, Common Core of Skills and Knowledge for the Children’s Workforce (2005)

57
Children’s Workforce
Practice for Social Care Workers should be reviewed to ensure the 
needs of children are paramount, regardless of whether the social 
worker is in adult or children’s services. The employer code provides an 
important basis for a national standard for employers, and therefore 
should be revised to clarify expectations around accountability, quality 
and amounts of supervision, reflective practice and support, and 
commitment to staff training and CPD. The employer code should be 
made statutory for all employers of social workers.
Recommendation
The General Social Care Council should review the Code of 
Practice for Social Workers and the employers’ code ensuring the 
needs of children are paramount in both and that the employers’ 
code provides for clear lines of accountability, quality supervision 
and support, and time for reflective practice. The employers’ code 
should then be made statutory for all employers of social workers.
Health professionals
Health visitors play a key role in child protection, particularly for very 
5.21	
young children who are unable to raise the alarm when suffering from 
abuse or neglect. The evaluation of 161 Serious Case Reviews58 shows 
that 47 per cent of children were under one year of age but only 
12 per cent were subject to a child protection plan.59 Those who were 
not could have been receiving less intensive support, or may not have 
been identified as in need. In this context, the role of health visitors as 
a universal service seeing all children in their home environment with 
the potential to develop strong relationships with families is crucially 
important. A robust health visiting service delivered by highly trained 
skilled professionals who are alert to potentially vulnerable children 
can save lives.
Despite this, the number of health visitors has dropped by 10 per cent 
5.22	
in the last three years60 and case-loads are significantly higher than the 
recommended 300 families or 400 children,61 with 40 per cent of 
health visitors handling case-loads of over 500 children and 20 per 
58	Brandon, Marion, Pippa Belderson, Catherine Warren, David Howe, Ruth Gardner, Jane 
Dodsworth, Jane Black, Analysing Child Deaths and Serious Injury though Abuse – What can 
we Learn? A Biennial Analysis of Serious Case Reviews 2003–05 (HM Government [DCSF], 2008)
59	Ofsted, Analysing Child Deaths and Serious Injury through Abuse: What can we Learn? 
A Biennial Analysis of Serious Case Reviews 2003–2005
60	Unite/Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association Omnibus Survey, 2008
61	As recommended by the Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association

58
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
cent over 1,000 children62. 69.2 per cent of health visitors say that 
they no longer have the resources to respond to the needs of the 
most vulnerable children.63 Health visitors need time to properly 
support and assess children and to be competent and confident in 
doing so. There are very real risks to the welfare of children if this does 
not happen. The commitment to increase the number of health 
visitors in Healthy lives, brighter futures64 is a helpful one but priority 
and resources need to be committed to achieving this aim.
Furthermore, there is confusion about the role of health visitors who 
5.23	
provide a universal service and yet often are called upon to support 
families with complex needs. As the case-loads of social workers have 
risen there is also concern that health visitors are carrying child 
protection issues that once would have been referred on to children’s 
social care services. This is both inappropriate and unmanageable for 
health visitors and needs to be addressed.
Recommendations
The Department of Health should prioritise its commitment to 
promote the recruitment and professional development of health 
visitors (made in Healthy lives, brighter futures) by publishing a 
national strategy to support and challenge Strategic Health 
Authorities to have a sufficient capacity of well trained health 
visitors in each area with a clear understanding of their role.
The Department of Health should review the Healthy Child 
Programme for 0–5-year-olds to ensure that the role of health 
visitors in safeguarding and child protection is prioritised and has 
sufficient clarity, and ensure that similar clarity is provided in the 
Healthy Child Programme for 5–19-year-olds. 
The engagement of health professionals, particularly GPs in Children’s 
5.24	
Trusts, Local Safeguarding Children Boards, and other multi-agency 
forums for safeguarding children is very varied. A common concern 
raised during the production of this report is the difficulty in attracting 
‘designated’ and ‘named’ health professionals, both in primary and 
secondary care, with responsibility for child protection. It appears that 
the safeguarding of vulnerable children is often not viewed as a 
priority for GPs in some areas. A range of measures has been 
62	Unite/Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association Omnibus Survey, 2008
63	Unite/Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association Omnibus Survey, 2008
64	HM Government, Healthy lives, brighter futures – the strategy for children and young people’s 
health (2009)

59
Children’s Workforce
introduced to support GPs and child health professionals by the 
Department of Health, through the Care Services Improvement 
Partnership, and by many of the Royal Medical Colleges including the 
Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) and the Royal College 
for Paediatrics and Child Health. These support measures include a 
toolkit for GPs developed in partnership with the NSPCC, a secure 
website to enable ‘named’ and ‘designated’ professionals to share 
practice, the establishment of regional learning networks, and the 
piloting of an ‘Influencing for Leadership’ course. However, more 
needs to be done to ensure GPs are proactive in doing all they can to 
keep children safe. There needs to be suitable rigour in the child 
protection training for each GP which enables them to contribute 
effectively to a multi-agency approach to the well-being of children. 
This should include appropriate referral and information sharing 
training.
Recommendation
The Department of Health should promote the statutory duty of 
all GP providers to comply with child protection legislation and to 
ensure that all individual GPs have the necessary skills and training 
to carry out their duties. They should also take further steps to 
raise the profile and level of expertise for child protection within 
GP practices, for example by working with the Department for 
Children, Schools and Families to support joint training 
opportunities for GPs and children’s social workers and through 
the new practice accreditation scheme being developed by the 
Royal College of General Practitioners.
Evidence to this report suggested that paediatricians are sometimes 
5.25	
reluctant to become involved in child protection work. The 
Department of Health should take forward further work with 
paediatricians to understand and respond to their concerns and to 
enable them to become confident in carrying out their role.

60
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendation
The Department of Health should work with partners to develop a 
national training programme to improve the understanding and 
skills of the children’s health workforce (including paediatricians, 
midwives, health visitors, GPs and school nurses) to further 
support them in dealing with safeguarding and child protection 
issues. 
Police services
Concerns about the resourcing of child protection teams exist within 
5.26	
a large number of police forces, particularly since other issues have 
taken on greater national significance.65 Although not general, there 
is clearly an issue that, in a number of forces, child protection work is 
accorded low status and does not attract the most able and 
experienced police officers. Some forces that contributed to this report 
also described high vacancy rates within child protection teams and 
others have seen significant reductions in posts in the years since the 
initial response to Victoria Climbié.
Police services should take immediate action to review the staffing of 
5.27	
child protection teams to ensure they are well resourced to ensure 
children’s safety is not compromised. As with other professions, police 
officers must receive specialist training to work on child protection 
over and above core police training, including that of how best to talk 
and listen to children and young people often in distress.
Recommendation
The Home Office should take national action to ensure that police 
child protection teams are well resourced and have specialist 
training to support them in their important responsibilities. 
65	Gardner, Ruth, and Marian Brandon, ‘Child protection: crisis management or learning curve?’ in 
Public Policy Research (December 2008 – February 2009)

CHAPTER 
61
CHAPTER 6
“There are only two lasting bequests we can hope to give our 
children. One is roots; the other, wings.”
Hodding Carter66
There is a clear need for a determined focus on improvement of 
6.1	
practice in child protection across all the agencies that support 
children. New ways should be created to share good practice and 
learn lessons when things go wrong. Within that context there is a 
need to strengthen the inspection processes of each of the services 
responsible for the safety of children. Inspection should not be a 
stand-alone activity. It should not be only an isolated snapshot. 
It must be accompanied by a robust developmental process aimed 
at achieving higher standards of service provision.
Inspection
Since April 2007, Ofsted have had responsibility for inspecting all local 
6.2	
authority children’s services, including safeguarding and child 
protection. This responsibility was previously held by the Commission 
for Social Care Inspection (CSCI). From 2005 to 2008, Ofsted (along 
with CSCI until 2006) undertook Annual Performance Assessments of 
local authorities’ children’s services which were largely paper-based 
and reported a performance rating for staying safe. Local authorities 
said in their evidence to this report that they were often dissatisfied 
with the rigour and quality of these assessments. In addition, Ofsted 
worked with the Healthcare Commission, Audit Commission and HMI 
Probation to undertake Joint Area Reviews (JARs) of children’s services 
every three years. JARs looked at the performance of all local partners 
in safeguarding children. They involved a short on-site inspection 
fieldwork but the evidence to this report was critical about the depth 
and breadth of the fieldwork.
66	Hodding Carter (1907–72), US journalist and author
Improvement and challenge

62
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
On 10 February 2009 Ofsted announced changes to the inspection of 
6.3	
safeguarding from April 2009. In future they will undertake annual 
unannounced on-site inspections of the quality and effectiveness of 
arrangements for contact, referrals and assessment processes for 
safeguarding and child protection work. A full, announced, 
inspection will take place every three years (more often where 
services are inadequate) to evaluate the impact of the local authority, 
partners, and of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) and 
Children’s Trust in improving safeguarding outcomes. The three-yearly 
inspection programme will be carried out by inspectors from Ofsted 
and the new Care Quality Commission (that will take on the 
responsibilities of the Healthcare Commission on 1 April 2009). HMI 
Constabulary is considering its capacity to contribute to this 
programme. The inspections will include analysis of local audits of 
need and their role in driving services as well as on-site visits to 
scrutinise practice, case-loads, training and support for staff, 
management oversight, the impact of the LSCB and Children’s Trust, 
and the views of children and young people and of stakeholders. 
These changes are very much needed and potentially pave the way 
for more effective challenge of safeguarding and, particularly, child 
protection services.
Due to the multi-agency nature of child safeguarding and protection 
6.4	
it is vital that other inspectorates follow the lead of Ofsted in 
improving the rigour of their inspection of police and health services 
for safeguarding and child protection. Inspectorates should also 
demonstrate more joint working to prepare and follow up inspections 
ensuring that safeguarding services as a whole are understood and 
improved. 
Recommendation
The Care Quality Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI 
Probation should review the inspection frameworks of their 
frontline services to drive improvements in safeguarding and child 
protection in a similar way to the new Ofsted framework. 
To be effective and respected in challenging the status quo, any 
6.5	
inspection process needs to be able to demonstrate expert knowledge 
and understanding of the subject under consideration. In the past, 
weaknesses in some inspection processes have been as a result of lack 
of expertise and limited experience in child protection in the key 
inspection bodies, most notably within Ofsted. There is a shared view 

63
Improvement and challenge
of those undergoing inspection that Ofsted’s primary expertise lies in 
the education field and that, whilst some specialist child protection 
and social care inspectors transferred into Ofsted from the CSCI, many 
senior inspection managers and experienced inspectors were lost in 
the move. This needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency if the 
new inspection framework is to be effective.
Recommendation
Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI 
Probation should take immediate action to ensure their staff have 
the appropriate skills, expertise and capacity to inspect the 
safeguarding and child protection elements of frontline services. 
Those Ofsted Inspectors responsible for inspecting child protection 
should have direct experience of child protection work. 
Serious Case Reviews (SCRs)
SCRs are an important tool for learning lessons from the death of, 
6.6	
or a serious incident involving, a child. They are now generally well 
established and have, in principle, support from all services. However, 
the purpose and processes of SCRs can be further developed to 
strengthen their impact on keeping children safe from harm.
The purpose of SCRs
Working Together to Safeguard Children 
6.7	
set out the purpose of SCRs67 
both in identifying lessons about how professionals and agencies work 
together to safeguard and promote the welfare of children, and 
ensuring interagency working is improved as a result. Whilst reviewing 
lessons for interagency working is important, the evidence to this 
report has identified that weaknesses also exist within individual 
organisations from which lessons could be learned to protect children 
better from harm. To be effective, an SCR must include consideration 
of the lessons that can be learned within each of the services involved 
in a case, as well as how they cooperate together where there has 
been the death or serious harm of a child. This is not intended to 
change the purpose of SCRs as a learning exercise or to suggest they 
should become involved in blame or disciplinary proceedings. But the 
current remit of SCRs as set out in Working Together to Safeguard 
Children is too narrow and is at risk of not being sufficiently explicit 
67	HM Government, Working Together to Safeguard Children: A guide to interagency working to 
safeguard and promote the welfare of children (2006), Paragraph 8.3

64
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
about the role of SCRs in learning lessons for individual organisations 
to allow a proper understanding of how children can be better 
protected from harm to be developed.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
Working Together to Safeguard Children so that it is explicit that 
the formal purpose of Serious Case Reviews is to learn lessons for 
improving individual agencies, as well as for improving multi-
agency working.
Conducting an SCR
Evidence submitted to this report indicates that the primary purpose 
6.8	
of SCRs as a learning process to protect children more effectively in 
the future is in danger of being lost. This is a result both of confusion 
about the purpose of SCRs, which are sometimes perceived as holding 
individuals or agencies to account, and as a result of the SCR process 
itself, which does not currently lend itself to quick, effective reflection 
and the sharing of learning following a serious or tragic incident.
SCR panels have no powers to demand access to documents from 
6.9	
agencies, and are entirely dependent upon the willing cooperation of 
all concerned. This presents a real difficulty for SCR panels in gathering 
all the information they need to understand a case properly and make 
recommendations on how similar tragedies can be avoided in future. 
The framework for SCRs needs to be reviewed to ensure that the SCR 
panel chairs have access to all of the relevant documents and staff they 
need to conduct a thorough and effective learning exercise.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
the framework for Serious Case Reviews to ensure that the 
Serious Case Review panel chair has access to all of the relevant 
documents and staff they need to conduct a thorough and 
effective learning exercise.
Concerns have also been raised that the SCR process has become too 
6.10	
focused on the writing of an often long and unwieldy report with 
insufficient focus by LSCBs on whether lessons are being learned from 
a child’s death or serious injury and whether action plans are 
subsequently implemented. This needs to be addressed urgently to 

65
Improvement and challenge
create a more streamlined learning process. Of the 45 SCRs which 
Ofsted assessed between April 2007 and March 2008 only 31per cent 
were completed within one year.68 The guidance in Working Together 
to Safeguard Children that lessons should be implemented as soon as 
practicable needs strengthening to encourage LSCBs not to wait until 
an SCR is completed before doing so. To this end, there is good 
practice that can be adapted from the Metropolitan Police’s Homicide 
Task Force and the National Patient Safety Agency‘s Root Cause 
Analysis Toolkit.69
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
Working Together to Safeguard Children to ensure Serious Case 
Reviews focus on the effective learning of lessons and 
implementation of recommendations and the timely introduction 
of changes to protect children.
Ofsted evaluation of SCRs
“Ofsted are evaluating SCRs as if they were an academic exercise. 
The real skill is in cascading the lessons to be learnt across all the 
multi-agency partners.”
LSCB Board Member
Many of those who contributed to this report felt unsure about how 
6.11	
Ofsted were making judgements on SCRs, or were concerned that too 
much emphasis was placed on the quality of the written report rather 
than on the SCR as an effective learning tool. Ofsted evaluation 
should focus on the quality of the process of the review, the adequacy 
of learning and change, professional practice, and the quality of 
recommendations in protecting children to ensure that they are 
actively driving improved outcomes and better safeguarding systems 
and this focus should be properly communicated to LSCBs.
68	Ofsted, Learning lessons, taking action: Ofsted’s evaluations of serious case reviews 1 April 2007 
to 31 March 2008 (December 2008)
69	These single agency processes are still useful comparators in learning lessons quickly from 
serious incidents. The National Patient Safety Agency’s Root Cause Analysis Toolkit can be found 
at www.npsa.nhs.uk/nrls/improvingpatientsafety/patient-safety-tools-and-guidance/
rootcauseanalysis/

66
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendation
Ofsted should focus its evaluation of Serious Case Reviews on the 
depth of the learning a review has provided and the quality of 
recommendations it has made to protect children.
Case study F
Learning lessons from Serious Case Reviews
One local authority had experienced a number of child deaths and 
recognised the importance of learning lessons from each event, 
and of noticing trends over a number of SCRs.
The local authority has introduced a number of innovative 
methods to help practitioners and managers learn from previous 
cases. These have included the facilitation of workshops which 
have captured local and national issues and themes arising from 
SCRs, and the production of a highly effective CD recorded by six 
student social workers featuring the stories of children and young 
people who have died. The stories were taken from case material 
and told from the child’s own perspective. They are a valuable 
though emotionally hard-hitting tool for further understanding 
the voices and views of the child, an issue important for all 
professionals involved in frontline services. Through these and 
other learning events, the local authority is able to evidence 
change and improvement through learning lessons and 
recognising recurring themes in their own SCRs. The learning is 
shared across agencies and is proving beneficial to social workers 
and health visitors especially.
The importance of confidentiality
SCRs inevitably include a great deal of case material that should 
6.12	
remain confidential, not only to protect vulnerable people, but also 
because SCRs depend upon the cooperation of witnesses, often in 
a highly charged situation. Without this assurance many would be 
reluctant to participate in the process, rendering the task worthless. 
The future of SCRs depends, to a large degree, on the guarantee of 
confidentiality. Full reports should, therefore remain confidential 
beyond the immediate partners involved in a case, the relevant 
inspectorates, Government Offices and the relevant government 
departments.

67
Improvement and challenge
Executive summaries of SCRs
The confidentiality of full SCRs makes the provision of a high-quality 
6.13	
executive summary all the more important. Executive summaries 
should provide an accurate reflection of all the main points in the full 
report, include a copy of the full action plan, and provide the names 
of all the SCR panel members so that the public can have confidence 
that a senior and multi-agency panel, as well as an independent chair 
and independent author, have been in charge of the process.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
Working Together to Safeguard Children to underline the 
importance of a high quality, publicly available executive summary 
which accurately represents the full report, contains the action 
plan in full, and includes the names of the Serious Case Review 
panel members. 
When to conduct an SCR
There have been a number of calls for greater clarity in the guidance 
6.14	
provided in Working Together to Safeguard Children on when an SCR 
should be conducted. DCSF data shows that there is considerable 
variation in the number of SCRs initiated in each region.70 It is the 
conclusion of this report that further guidance on when to instigate 
an SCR would not be helpful due to the complexity and variety of 
cases for which an SCR may be conducted. However, Government 
Offices must continue to take a role in challenging SCR panels and 
LSCBs where they think inappropriate decisions have been made 
about conducting an SCR. Importantly, they should be certain that the 
cost and complexity of carrying out an SCR should not influence the 
decision of whether to conduct one. As SCRs are part of a learning 
process, the culture should be to encourage the undertaking of an 
SCR and no criticism should be made of an LSCB that chooses to carry 
out more SCRs. Such a review may also be used when a serious 
incident has been avoided to ensure lessons are learned about how to 
protect children better in future. There is a statutory requirement for 
every local area to have a child death overview panel which will 
consider every child death in the area, including those that may or 
may not be the result of an unavoidable accident or due to natural 
causes. The panel may decide to make a recommendation to the LSCB 
70	DCSF, Child Protection Database

68
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
for an individual case to be looked at further by, for example, the 
LSCB commissioning an SCR. This may result in more SCRs being 
undertaken and further learning about when it is appropriate to 
commission an SCR.
Chairing of SCR panels
In carrying out an SCR it is important that the chairing and writing 
6.15	
arrangements offer adequate scrutiny and challenge to all the 
agencies in a local area. For this reason, the chair of an SCR panel 
must be independent of all of those local agencies that were, or 
potentially could have been, involved in the case. A panel may be 
chaired by someone with similar responsibilities in another Children’s 
Trust or may be fully independent of statutory services. However, they 
will need to be fully prepared for their role in conducting an effective 
scrutiny of each aspect of how the agencies responded to the needs 
of the child or young person. There should be training for SCR panel 
chairs available nationally and Government Offices must take the lead 
in ensuring there are enough people within a region who are trained 
and able to chair SCRs when the need arises. It is important that 
throughout the process, the SCR panel chair and all its members 
maintain the principle that the views of all partners are valid and equal 
so that appropriate challenge and robust dialogue can take place.
Independent authors
Similarly, a greater emphasis is needed on building a cohort of people 
6.16	
skilled and able to write effective SCR reports. Many authorities have 
had difficulties in recruiting good quality authors and this has led to 
both delays and poor quality reports. SCR authors must be 
independent of those local agencies that were, or potentially could 
have been, involved in the case. An SCR author may or may not be 
the same person who chairs the SCR panel. The decision should be 
made according to the individual needs of the case in question. 
Training should be made available nationally for SCR authors and 
Government Offices should take the lead in ensuring they have 
enough high-quality trained authors in their region. It will remain the 
responsibility of the LSCB to take up references on those who have 
completed the training before appointing an independent author.

69
Improvement and challenge
Recommendations
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should ensure all Serious Case 
Review panel chairs and Serious Case Review overview authors are 
independent of the Local Safeguarding Children Board and all 
services involved in the case and that arrangements for the 
Serious Case Review offer sufficient scrutiny and challenge.
All Serious Case Review panel chairs and authors must complete 
a training programme provided by the Department for Children, 
Schools and Families that supports them in their role in 
undertaking Serious Case Reviews that have a real impact on 
learning and improvement.
Government Offices must ensure that there are enough trained 
Serious Case Review panel chairs and authors available within 
their region. 
Sharing SCRs with Inspectorates
To ensure that the learning from SCRs is driving safer systems and 
6.17	
processes for children and young people, Ofsted, the Care Quality 
Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI Probation (when 
appropriate) should have access to the full reports and should use 
them in the preparation for local inspections of children’s services, 
health, police and probation where appropriate. This will ensure that 
the consequences of an inadequate SCR are felt by all partner 
agencies and not just the local authority. It should ensure also that 
inspectorates of the other agencies are able to assess whether the 
recommendations have been implemented.
Sharing learning from SCRs
Learning from SCRs needs to be shared quickly so that lessons are 
6.18	
learned across different areas and agencies as quickly as possible. This 
should include the timely sharing of the executive summaries of SCR 
reports between local authorities, with the Association of Chief Police 
Officers, with Primary Care Trusts and with Strategic Health 
Authorities. In addition to this, Ofsted should produce more regular 
reports bringing together the lessons from SCR reports as well as 
drawing upon practice evaluated as part of their inspection function.

70
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendations
Ofsted should:
share full Serious Case Review reports with HMI Constabulary, 
●
●
the Care Quality Commission, and HMI Probation (as 
appropriate) to enable all four inspectorates to assess the 
implementation of action plans when conducting frontline 
inspections;
share Serious Case Review executive summaries with the 
●
●
Association of Chief Police Officers, Primary Care Trusts and 
Strategic Health Authorities to promote learning; and
produce more regular reports, at six-monthly intervals, which 
●
●
summarise the lessons from Serious Case Reviews.
The role for a National Safeguarding Delivery Unit
In addition to the challenge that inspection systems provide and the 
6.19	
learning that is shared when there is a tragic failure to protect a child 
from harm, there must be a continuing drive for improvement in the 
protection of children and young people that ensures the systems and 
practices become the best in the world at keeping children safe. It is 
clear that within the existing landscape every organisation has only a 
partial view. There is none that has the breadth of vision across 
frontline agencies responsible for keeping children safe from harm, 
or the authority to achieve improvements across all the services with 
responsibility for safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children.
Therefore a National Safeguarding Delivery Unit should be established 
6.20	
that can work flexibly to take urgent action to challenge and support 
local services to improve provision for children and young people. The 
unit does not have to be a permanent presence in the landscape of 
safeguarding, but should be an authorative, agile organisation with an 
initial remit for three years, and sufficient programme resources, to 
create a real and early impact across children’s services, health and 
police services, and in every Children’s Trust across the country.
In order to have the authority to drive such changes the National 
6.21	
Safeguarding Delivery Unit should report on progress every three 
months directly to the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children 
and Young People. In addition it should provide Parliament with an 
annual report on progress in improving the effectiveness and 
efficiency of child protection systems in this country.

71
Improvement and challenge
The unit should be led by someone with the expertise, authority and 
6.22	
ambition to drive change in safeguarding services. It should draw 
upon expertise from practising senior staff with frontline experience in 
safeguarding across children’s services, police and health and other 
partners, and with experience of bringing about large-scale change in 
performance and culture. It should do this through secondments and 
project groups, ensuring that the most up-to-date expertise always 
informs its work.
Recommendation
The remit of the National Safeguarding Delivery Unit should 
include:
working with the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children 
●
●
and Young People to set and publish challenging timescales for 
the implementation of recommendations in this report;
challenging and supporting every Children’s Trust in the country 
●
●
to implement recommendations within the agreed timescales, 
ensuring improvements are made in leadership, staffing, 
training, supervision and practice across all services;
raising the profile of safeguarding and child protection across 
●
●
children’s services, health and police;
supporting the development of effective national priorities on 
●
●
safeguarding for all frontline services, and the development of 
local performance management to drive these priorities;
leading a change in culture across frontline services that enables 
●
●
them to work more effectively to protect children;
having regional representation with expertise on safeguarding 
●
●
and child protection that builds supportive advisory 
relationships with Children’s Trusts to drive improved outcomes 
for children and young people;
working with existing organisations to create a shared evidence 
●
●
base about effective practice including evidence-based 
programmes, early intervention and preventative services;

72
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
supporting the implementation of the recommendations of 
●
●
Serious Case Reviews in partnership with Government Offices 
and Ofsted, and put in place systems to learn the lessons at 
local, regional and national level;
gathering best practice on referral and assessment systems for 
●
●
children affected by domestic violence, adult mental health 
problems, and drugs and alcohol misuse, and provide advice to 
local authorities, health and police on implementing robust 
arrangements nationally; and
commissioning training on child protection and safeguarding 
●
●
and on leading these services effectively for all senior political 
leaders and service managers across those frontline services 
responsible for safeguarding and child protection.

CHAPTER 
73
CHAPTER 7
“My first social worker was lovely, she was kind... I think she 
liked me”
Girl, 1271
Local Safeguarding Children Boards
Despite Local Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCBs) being relatively 
7.1	
new, they are already having a positive impact on services for 
protecting children. Ofsted published 21 Joint Area Reviews of 
children’s services between April to June 2008 and in 18 of those they 
reported that LSCBs are already making a significant positive 
difference to their local services. In many areas, LSCBs provide a vital 
role in building stronger partnership relationships, and in providing a 
central point of focus within local areas for safeguarding children. 
However, it is inevitable that, being newly developed, there is greater 
potential to drive improvements, particularly around an increase in 
their ability to challenge the standard of practice and in strategic 
leadership.
There is no single model for how an LSCB operates. The Department 
7.2	
for Children, Schools and Families (DCSF) and the Department of 
Health have commissioned research from the Loughborough 
University into the structures and working arrangements of LSCBs.72 
Early results demonstrate that their scope, structures, membership, 
resourcing, and ways of working vary considerably from area to area 
with some models likely to be more effective than others. Despite the 
positive feedback about LSCBs from contributors to this report, it is 
evident that many LSCBs would welcome further advice on these 
issues to help them maximise their impact on outcomes for children. 
The interim findings of the research from Loughborough University 
will be published in spring 2009 and it will greatly assist in 
71	Quotation taken from findings of research with children undertaken by 11 Million in January 
2009 specifically for this report
72	Publication forthcoming
Organisation and Finance

74
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
understanding the differences in practice emerging in LSCBs. This 
should be used to provide further guidance to local areas to assist 
them making the arrangements for their LSCB as effective as possible.
Recommendation
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must provide 
further guidance to Local Safeguarding Children Boards on how 
to operate as effectively as possible following the publication of 
the Loughborough University research on Local Safeguarding 
Children Boards later this year. 
Whilst recognising the value of local flexibility, there must be a clear 
7.3	
distinction between the roles and responsibilities between LSCBs and 
Children’s Trusts to ensure appropriate challenge, scrutiny and 
impartiality. Where the Director for Children’s Services (DCS) chairs the 
LSCB they must not also chair the Children’s Trust. Where chairs are 
independent of the local authority they must be sufficiently 
experienced in statutory safeguarding and child protection services 
and should have access to training and support to enable them to 
carry out their role effectively. To support the role of the LSCB chair 
in challenging the work of the Children’s Trust, it is important that the 
chair is selected with the agreement of a group of partners 
representing the key services involved in safeguarding and child 
protection locally and should not be removed without consultation 
with those partners.
Recommendations
The Children’s Trust and the Local Safeguarding Children Board 
should not be chaired by the same person. The Local Safeguarding 
Children Board chair should be selected with the agreement of a 
group of multi-agency partners and should have access to training 
to support them in their role.
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should include membership 
from the senior decision makers from all safeguarding partners, 
who should attend regularly and be fully involved as equal 
partners in Local Safeguarding Children Board decision making.

75
Organisation and Finance
It is important that there is a strong relationship between the LSCB 
7.4	
and the Children’s Trust. Ultimately it is the Children’s Trust that is 
responsible for improving the well-being of children in the area across 
all five Every Child Matters outcomes, including keeping children safe. 
The responsibilities of the LSCB, in ensuring that the multi-agency 
partners in each local area are co-operating to safeguard and promote 
the welfare of children effectively, are a fundamental part of the 
overarching responsibilities held by the Children’s Trust. The LSCB 
should report to the Children’s Trust on the effectiveness of 
safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children and should 
publish a report on improving outcomes for children on an annual 
basis. Their report, and regular dialogue between the Children’s Trust 
and the LSCB, should demonstrate that all the functions of both the 
LSCB and the Children’s Trust as set out in Working Together are being 
effectively discharged. This must include effective policies and 
procedures to keep children safe, including the policies and 
procedures for the safe recruitment of frontline staff, ensuring staff 
receive suitable training, and commissioning Serious Case Reviews 
when appropriate. The commitment by Ofsted to inspect the impact 
of LSCBs on outcomes for children from April 2009 is very welcome.
Recommendation
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should report to the Children’s 
Trust Board and publish an annual report on the effectiveness of 
safeguarding in the local area. Local Safeguarding Children Boards 
should provide robust challenge to the work of the Children’s 
Trust and its partners in order to ensure that the right systems and 
quality of services and practice are in place so that children are 
properly safeguarded.
Funding safeguarding and child protection
Local authority expenditure on children’s social care has increased 
7.5	
greatly in recent years, from £2.9 billion in 2000/01 to £5.5 billion in 
2007/08.73 This is combined with significant increases in funding for 
preventative help and support for children and young people in the 
form of children’s centres, extended schools, targeted youth support 
and family and parenting support, which are indicative of the 
Government’s commitment. However, there is a danger that these 
73	NHS Information Centre, Personal Social Services Expenditure and Unit Costs: England 2006/07 
(available online at www.ic.nhs.uk/statistics-and-data-collections/social-care/adult-social-care-
information/personal-social-services-expenditure-and-unit-costs:-england-2006-07)

76
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
worthwhile initiatives have drawn resources away from the challenges 
of child protection. Protecting children from harm demands skill, 
determination and, quite often, courage. It is a vitally important work 
that deserves our full support.
It is imperative that those making financial decisions on the 
7.6	
safeguarding of children at national and local level accurately plan 
adequate provision around real need and risk factors, rather than 
historic spending or even numbers of children who are the subject of 
child protection plans. In doing so, they should ensure that sufficient 
resources are in place to support early intervention and preventative 
services in addition to ensuring child protection work is properly 
resourced. These two very critical functions of any children’s services 
department should not be in competition for resources. The Children’s 
Trust should also have responsibility in understanding how the 
budgets of other agencies support safeguarding and child protection, 
and the benefits of pooling resources to provide maximum effect.
There is particular pressure on safeguarding budgets as a result of 
7.7	
funding arrangements for local authorities. Whilst 82 per cent of 
schools funding is provided through the Dedicated Schools Grant,74 
a ring-fenced grant, finance allocated for safeguarding children is not 
made through a specific protected grant. So there is no guarantee 
that funding provided by government for the purposes of keeping 
children safe from harm, and improving their well-being is used for 
these purposes. The lack of protection around budgets for 
safeguarding children has also left them at risk from the pressure 
upon councils to deliver efficiency savings under the 2004 Gershon 
Review of Public Sector Efficiency.75 The Government should therefore 
take decisive action to protect budgets for safeguarding children, 
thereby ensuring consistent appropriate levels of investment across 
England in both early intervention and statutory child protection 
services.
74	Figure obtained from the Department for Children, Schools and Families
75	Gershon, Sir Peter, Releasing resources for the frontline: Independent Review of Public Sector 
Efficiency (HM Treasury, 2004)

77
Organisation and Finance
Recommendations
The Department for Children, Schools and Families, the 
Department of Health, and the Home Office, together with 
HM Treasury, must ensure children’s services, police and health 
services have protected budgets for the staffing and training for 
child protection services.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must 
sufficiently resource children’s services to ensure that early 
intervention and preventative services have capacity to respond 
to all children and families identified as vulnerable or ‘in need’.
A national annual report should be published reviewing 
safeguarding and child protection spend against assessed needs 
of children across the partners in each Children’s Trust.

CHAPTER 
78
CHAPTER 8
“Every child should be listened to, no matter how difficult they 
are to talk to.”
Girl, 1576
Understanding the law
In this country there is a comprehensive legislative framework for 
8.1	
protecting children and keeping them safe from harm. The Children 
Act 1989 reformed the law and was “the most comprehensive and far 
reaching reform of child law”.77 The Children Act 2004 introduced a 
statutory duty on local authorities and their partner agencies to 
cooperate to improve the well-being of children and embedded the 
five Every Child Matters outcomes in law. Further legislative change is 
not what is needed to protect children. However, it is vital that all 
professionals with responsibility for the welfare of children fully 
understand the legislative framework in relation to safeguarding and 
child protection, and have a clear understanding of their 
responsibilities in the process. This includes ensuring that legal advisers 
within a local authority receive high-quality initial training and 
continuing professional development in this area of law.
Who makes a care order?
It is for the local authority to decide whether they should take action 
8.2	
to safeguard and promote the child’s welfare such as applying for a 
care order. However, it is for the court to decide whether the threshold 
criteria are met and a care order should be made with respect to the 
child. As Baroness Hale of Richmond said in Re B (A Minor) (AP)
“It is to confuse the role of the local authority, in assessing and 
managing risk, in planning for the child, and deciding what action to 
initiate, with the role of the court in deciding where the truth lies and 
76	Quotation taken from findings of research with children undertaken by 11 Million in January 
2009 specifically for this report.
77	Per Lord Mackay Children Bill (Hansard, H.L. Vol. 502, col. 488; 6 December 1988) 
Legal

79
Legal
what the legal consequences should be. I do not under-estimate the 
difficulty of deciding where the truth lies but that is what the courts 
are for.”
Pre-proceedings – the role of the local authority
New guidance for local authorities was issued in April 2008
8.3	
78 that sets 
out the processes to be followed in making an application for a care 
or supervision order. It is essential that the local authority can put the 
evidence on which their decision to make the application is based 
before the court. This is the reason for the pre-proceedings checklist. 
Good preparation enables a case to proceed more quickly and to 
reach a permanent solution for the child. It is essential that the court 
is well-informed about the work that has taken place with families. 
The evidence should demonstrate that the parents understand the 
concerns that have been raised, the objectives and goals of any 
intervention, and the action taken by parents and the local authority 
and when such actions were reviewed.
However, whilst it is important that the correct documentation is in 
8.4	
place for each case, the local authority should not delay making an 
application because of paperwork considerations if there is concern 
for a child that requires swift action in order to safeguard their 
welfare.
Public Law Outline
In April 2008 the Public Law Outline (PLO), a new approach to case 
8.5	
management, was introduced to reduce delay in care proceedings. It is 
too soon to be clear about the impact of the introduction of the PLO, 
and in particular whether or not it has increased workloads and added 
to delays in the process. There is currently conflicting evidence, for 
instance, whilst a number of contributions to this report raised 
concerns about the impact of the PLO, in London, the number of care 
proceedings cases being completed in under 40 weeks in care centres 
has risen from 22 per cent to 36 per cent when comparing the data 
for the quarter before the introduction of the PLO with the latest data 
following its implementation.79
78	The Children Act 1989: Guidance and Regulations: Volume 1: Court Orders
79	From June 2007, the draft PLO was tested in ten ‘initiative’ areas selected by the President of 
the Family Division. In autumn 2007 the President sought feedback from Designated Family 
Judges in the initiative areas about how the draft PLO was operating. The information and 
experiences from these areas and a consultation (between June and September 2008) helped to 
inform the final version of the PLO

80
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Court proceedings
A number of social workers and other professionals struggle with the 
8.6	
adversarial nature of court proceedings. Appearing in court can be an 
intimidating experience for social workers and other professionals, and 
managing this alongside a continuing relationship with a family is 
challenging. It is therefore important that all staff are adequately 
trained before going to court. This should be part of both specialist 
child protection training and continuing professional development.
Court case delays
On average care proceedings take 45 weeks in the Family Proceedings 
8.7	
courts and 56 weeks in County and High Courts.80 It is clear that for 
many children the length of delay in a court case is unacceptable. 
Research shows there are a number of possible reasons for delays, 
including, for example, delays in completing reports, the need to 
balance the case-loads of children’s guardians over time, the need to 
explore and test family placements, and delays in obtaining expert 
evidence. 81 The view of the Judiciary is that in the vast majority of 
cases the expertise of the professionals already involved with the child 
should be sufficient expertise and a national expert is rarely required 
to add weight to a case.
The Ministry of Justice needs to take immediate action to address the 
8.8	
length of delays in care proceedings to ensure that it is delivering its 
commitment to meet the timetable for the child. The aim to have a 
case progression function in all courts will help ensure that courts are 
used most effectively. In addition to this, listing arrangements of 
hearings should be more effectively business managed to ensure that 
the time of all staff involved in family court proceedings is used most 
effectively. Particular thought should be given to the use of expert 
witnesses to ensure they are used only when appropriate and do not 
delay proceedings unnecessarily.
80	Family Court, County and High Courts 2008/09 provisional data, Ministry of Justice, England 
and Wales. Notes:
	
(1)	 Family Court data is from Family Case Tracker and FamilyMan. County Court and High 
Court data is from FamilyMan.
	
(2)	 Figures are for April to September 2008
	
(3)	 Care and supervision orders are included and are counted by child for Family Court figures 
and by order for County Court and High Court.
81	Masson, Judith, Julia Pearce and Kay Bader, Care profiling study (Ministry of Justice, March 
2008): references the three studies as Booth, 1996; Lord Chancellor’s Department, 2002; Finch, 
2004

81
Legal
Court fees
Where a local authority intervenes in the interests of protecting a 
8.9	
child, it is clearly inappropriate that court fees might be a factor in 
that decision. These matters must be handled with very great care and 
in the interests of the child. Placing a child in the care of the local 
authority is a serious step, and local authorities should be encouraged 
to bring cases to court where they believe a care order may be 
necessary to safeguard the child. A local authority’s role in 
safeguarding children is of vital importance, and no barrier, however 
small, should stand in the way of local authorities exercising this 
function.
It is of concern that the need to pay a fee might sometimes present a 
8.10	
barrier that could influence a local authority’s decision as to whether 
or not to commence care proceedings, despite the fact that they are 
very small in comparison to the overall costs of obtaining a care order. 
It is likely that a large proportion of the reduction in care applications 
in spring 2008 was as a result of the introduction of the PLO, as local 
authorities familiarised themselves with the new guidelines. It is also 
clear that the Government did not take the decision to increase these 
court fees lightly and it was helpful, to an extent, that funding was 
transferred from the Ministry of Justice to local authorities in 
recognition of the increased fees. However, if, even in one case, a 
local authority is deterred in taking action, that is one case too many.
Given the level of concern expressed about this issue, it may well be 
8.11	
that abolition of fees altogether in these cases would be the safest 
course. For this reason, the Ministry of Justice should undertake to 
hold an independent review of the impact of the fees in the coming 
months. Unless this review provides incontrovertible evidence that the 
fees were not acting as a deterrent, the fees should then be abolished 
for the financial year 2010/11 and the ensuing years, with the funding 
transferred from the local government settlement to the Ministry of 
Justice.

82
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Recommendations
The Ministry of Justice should:
lead on the establishment of a system-wide target that lays 
●
●
responsibility on all participants in the care proceedings system 
to reduce damaging delays in the time it takes to progress care 
cases where these delays are not in the interests of the child; 
and
appoint an independent person to undertake a review of the 
●
●
impact of court fees in the coming months. In the absence of 
incontrovertible evidence that the fees had not acted as a 
deterrent, they should then be abolished from 2010/11 
onwards.

CHAPTER 9
83
The Home Secretary and the Secretaries of State for Children, Schools 
1.	
and Families, Health, and Justice must collaborate in the setting of 
explicit strategic priorities for the protection of children and young 
people and reflect these in the priorities of frontline services.
A National Safeguarding Delivery Unit be established to report directly 
2.	
to the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and Young 
People. It should have a remit that includes:
working with the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and 
●
●
Young People to set and publish challenging timescales for the 
implementation of recommendations in this report;
challenging and supporting every Children’s Trust in the country to 
●
●
implement recommendations within the agreed timescales, 
ensuring improvements are made in leadership, staffing, training, 
supervision and practice across all services;
raising the profile of safeguarding and child protection across 
●
●
children’s services, health and police;
supporting the development of effective national priorities on 
●
●
safeguarding for all frontline services, and the development of local 
performance management to drive these priorities;
leading a change in culture across frontline services that enables 
●
●
them to work more effectively to protect children;
having regional representation with expertise on safeguarding and 
●
●
child protection that builds supportive advisory relationships with 
Children’s Trusts to drive improved outcomes for children and young 
people;
working with existing organisations to create a shared evidence 
●
●
base about effective practice including evidence-based 
programmes, early intervention and preventative services;
COMPLETE LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS

84
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
supporting the implementation of the recommendations of Serious 
●
●
Case Reviews in partnership with Government Offices and Ofsted, 
and put in place systems to learn the lessons at local, regional and 
national level;
gathering best practice on referral and assessment systems for 
●
●
children affected by domestic violence, adult mental health 
problems, and drugs and alcohol misuse, and provide advice 
to local authorities, health and police on implementing robust 
arrangements nationally; and
commissioning training on child protection and safeguarding and 
●
●
on leading these services effectively for all senior political leaders 
and service managers across those frontline services responsible for 
safeguarding and child protection.
Leadership and accountability
The Cabinet Sub-Committee on Families, Children and Young People 
3.	
should ensure that all government departments that impact on the 
safety of children take action to create a comprehensive approach to 
children through national strategies, the organisation of their central 
services, and the models they promote for the delivery of local 
services. This work should focus initially on changes to improve the 
child-focus of services delivered by the Department of Health, Ministry 
of Justice and Home Office.
The Government should introduce new statutory targets for 
4.	
safeguarding and child protection alongside the existing statutory 
attainment and early years targets as quickly as possible. The National 
Indicator Set should be revised with new national indicators for 
safeguarding and child protection developed for inclusion in Local 
Area Agreements for the next Comprehensive Spending Review.
The Department of Health must clarify and strengthen the 
5.	
responsibilities of Strategic Health Authorities for the performance 
management of Primary Care Trusts on safeguarding and child 
protection. Formalised and explicit performance indicators should be 
introduced for Primary Care Trusts.
Directors of Children’s Services, Chief Executives of Primary Care 
6.	
Trusts, Police Area Commanders and other senior service managers 
must regularly review all points of referral where concerns about a 
child’s safety are received to ensure they are sound in terms of the 
quality of risk assessments, decision making, onward referrals and 
multi-agency working.

85
complete list of recommendations
All Directors of Children’s Services who do not have direct experience 
7.	
or background in safeguarding and child protection must appoint a 
senior manager within their team with the necessary skills and 
experience.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should organise 
8.	
regular training on safeguarding and child protection and on effective 
leadership for all senior political leaders and managers across frontline 
services.
Every Children’s Trust should ensure that the needs assessment that 
9.	
informs their Children and Young People’s Plan regularly reviews the 
needs of all children and young people in their area, paying particular 
attention to the general need of children and those in need of 
protection. The National Safeguarding Delivery Unit should support 
Children’s Trusts with this work. Government Offices should 
specifically monitor and challenge Children’s Trusts on the quality of 
this analysis.
Support for children
Ofsted should revise the inspection and improvement regime for 
10.	
schools giving greater prominence to how well schools are fulfilling 
their responsibilities for child protection.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
11.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children to set out clear expectations 
at all points where concerns about a child’s safety are received, 
ensuring intake/duty teams have sufficient training and expertise to 
take referrals and that staff have immediate, on-site support available 
from an experienced social worker. Local authorities should take 
appropriate action to implement these changes.
The Department of Health and the Department for Children, Schools 
12.	
and Families must strengthen current guidance and put in place the 
systems and training so that staff in Accident and Emergency 
departments are able to tell if a child has recently presented at any 
Accident and Emergency department and if a child is the subject of a 
Child Protection Plan. If there is any cause for concern, staff must act 
accordingly, contacting other professionals, conducting further 
medical examinations of the child as appropriate and necessary, and 
ensuring no child is discharged whilst concerns for their safety or 
well-being remain.
Children’s Trusts must ensure that all assessments of need for children 
13.	
and their families include evidence from all the professionals involved 

86
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
in their lives, take account of case histories and significant events 
(including previous assessments) and above all must include direct 
contact with the child.
Local authorities must ensure that ‘Children in Need’, as defined by 
14.	
Section 17 of the Children Act 1989, have early access to effective 
specialist services and support to meet their needs.
The Social Work Task Force should establish guidelines on guaranteed 
15.	
supervision time for social workers that may vary depending on 
experience.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
16.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children to set out the elements of 
high quality supervision focused on case planning, constructive 
challenge and professional development.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should undertake 
17.	
a feasibility study with a view to rolling out a single national 
Integrated Children’s System better able to address the concerns 
identified in this report, or find alternative ways to assert stronger 
leadership over the local systems and their providers. This study should 
be completed within six months of this report.
Whether or not a national system is introduced, the Department for 
18.	
Children, Schools and Families should take steps to improve the utility 
of the Integrated Children’s System, in consultation with social 
workers and their managers, to be effective in supporting them in 
their role and their contact with children and families, partners, 
services and courts, and to ensure appropriate transfer of essential 
information across organisational boundaries.
Interagency working
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must strengthen 
19.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children, and Children’s Trusts must 
take appropriate action to ensure:
all referrals to children’s services from other professionals lead to an 
●
●
initial assessment, including direct involvement with the child or 
young person and their family, and the direct engagement with, 
and feedback to, the referring professional;

87
complete list of recommendations
core group meetings, reviews and casework decisions include all 
●
●
the professionals involved with the child, particularly police, health, 
youth services and education colleagues. Records must be kept 
which must include the written views of those who cannot make 
such meetings; and
formal procedures are in place for managing a conflict of opinions 
●
●
between professionals from different services over the safety of a 
child.
All police, probation, adult mental health and adult drug and alcohol 
20.	
services should have well understood referral processes which 
prioritise the protection and well-being of children. These should 
include automatic referral where domestic violence or drug or alcohol 
abuse may put a child at risk of abuse or neglect.
The National Safeguarding Delivery Unit should urgently develop 
21.	
guidance on referral and assessment systems for children affected by 
domestic violence, adult mental health problems, and drugs and 
alcohol misuse using current best practice. This should be shared with 
local authorities, health and police with an expectation that the 
assessment of risk and level of support given to such children will 
improve quickly and significantly in every Children’s Trust.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should establish 
22.	
statutory representation on Local Safeguarding Children Boards from 
schools, adult mental health and adult drug and alcohol services.
Every Children’s Trust should assure themselves that partners 
23.	
consistently apply the Information Sharing Guidance published by the 
Department for Children, Schools and Families and Department for 
Communities and Local Government to protect children.
Children’s workforce
The Social Work Task Force should:
24.	
develop the basis for a national children’s social worker supply 
●
●
strategy that will address recruitment and retention difficulties, 
to be implemented by the Department for Children, Schools and 
Families. This should have a particular emphasis on child protection 
social workers;
work with the Children’s Workforce Development Council and 
●
●
other partners to implement, on a national basis, clear progression 
routes for children’s social workers;

88
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
develop national guidelines setting out maximum case-loads of 
●
●
children in need and child protection cases, supported by a 
weighting mechanism to reflect the complexity of cases, that will 
help plan the workloads of children’s social workers; and
develop a strategy for remodelling children’s social work which 
●
●
delivers shared ownership of cases, administrative support and 
multi-disciplinary support to be delivered nationally.
Children’s Trusts should ensure a named, and preferably co-located, 
25.	
representative from the police service, community paediatric specialist 
and health visitor are active partners within each children’s social work 
department.
The General Social Care Council, together with relevant government 
26.	
departments, should:
work with higher education institutions and employers to raise the 
●
●
quality and consistency of social work degrees and strengthen their 
curriculums to provide high quality practical skills in children’s social 
work;
work with higher education institutions to reform the current 
●
●
degree programme towards a system which allows for specialism in 
children’s social work, including statutory children’s social work 
placements, after the first year; and
put in place a comprehensive inspection regime to raise the quality 
●
●
and consistency of social work degrees across higher education 
institutions.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families and the 
27.	
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills should introduce a 
fully-funded, practice-focused children’s social work postgraduate 
qualification for experienced children’s social workers, with an 
expectation they will complete the programme as soon as is 
practicable.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families, working with the 
28.	
Children’s Workforce Development Council, General Social Care 
Council and partners should introduce a conversion qualification and 
English language test for internationally qualified children’s social 
workers that ensures understanding of legislation, guidance and 
practice in England. Consideration should be given to the appropriate 
length of a compulsory induction period in a practice setting prior to 
formal registration as a social worker in England.

89
complete list of recommendations
Children’s Trusts should ensure that all staff who work with children 
29.	
receive initial training and continuing professional development which 
enables them to understand normal child development and recognise 
potential signs of abuse or neglect.
All Children’s Trusts should have sufficient multi-agency training in 
30.	
place to create a shared language and understanding of local referral 
procedures, assessment, information sharing and decision making 
across early years, schools, youth services, health, police and other 
services who work to protect children. A named child protection lead 
in each setting should receive this training.
The General Social Care Council should review the Code of Practice 
31.	
for Social Workers and the employers’ code ensuring the needs of 
children are paramount in both and that the employers’ code provides 
for clear lines of accountability, quality supervision and support, and 
time for reflective practice. The employers’ code should then be made 
statutory for all employers of social workers.
The Department of Health should prioritise its commitment to 
32.	
promote the recruitment and professional development of health 
visitors (made in Healthy lives, brighter futures) by publishing a 
national strategy to support and challenge Strategic Health Authorities 
to have a sufficient capacity of well trained health visitors in each area 
with a clear understanding of their role.
The Department of Health should review the Healthy Child 
33.	
Programme for 0–5-year-olds to ensure that the role of health visitors 
in safeguarding and child protection is prioritised and has sufficient 
clarity, and ensure that similar clarity is provided in the Healthy Child 
Programme for 5–19-year-olds.
The Department of Health should promote the statutory duty of all GP 
34.	
providers to comply with child protection legislation and to ensure 
that all individual GPs have the necessary skills and training to carry 
out their duties. They should also take further steps to raise the profile 
and level of expertise for child protection within GP practices, for 
example by working with the Department for Children, Schools and 
Families to support joint training opportunities for GPs and children’s 
social workers and through the new practice accreditation scheme 
being developed by the Royal College of General Practitioners.
The Department of Health should work with partners to develop a 
35.	
national training programme to improve the understanding and skills 
of the children’s health workforce (including paediatricians, midwives, 

90
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
health visitors, GPs and school nurses) to further support them in 
dealing with safeguarding and child protection issues.
The Home Office should take national action to ensure that police 
36.	
child protection teams are well resourced and have specialist training 
to support them in their important responsibilities.
Improvement and challenge
The Care Quality Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI Probation 
37.	
should review the inspection frameworks of their frontline services to 
drive improvements in safeguarding and child protection in a similar 
way to the new Ofsted framework
Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission, HMI Constabulary and HMI 
38.	
Probation should take immediate action to ensure their staff have the 
appropriate skills, expertise and capacity to inspect the safeguarding 
and child protection elements of frontline services. Those Ofsted 
Inspectors responsible for inspecting child protection should have 
direct experience of child protection work.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
39.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children so that it is explicit that the 
formal purpose of Serious Case Reviews is to learn lessons for 
improving individual agencies, as well as for improving multi-agency 
working.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise the 
40.	
framework for Serious Case Reviews to ensure that the Serious Case 
Review panel chair has access to all of the relevant documents and 
staff they need to conduct a thorough and effective learning exercise.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
41.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children to ensure Serious Case 
Reviews focus on the effective learning of lessons and implementation 
of recommendations and the timely introduction of changes to protect 
children.
Ofsted should focus its evaluation of Serious Case Reviews on the 
42.	
depth of the learning a review has provided and the quality of 
recommendations it has made to protect children.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families should revise 
43.	
Working Together to Safeguard Children to underline the importance 
of a high quality, publicly available executive summary which 
accurately represents the full report, contains the action plan in full, 
and includes the names of the Serious Case Review panel members.

91
complete list of recommendations
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should ensure all Serious Case 
44.	
Review panel chairs and Serious Case Review overview authors are 
independent of the Local Safeguarding Children Board and all services 
involved in the case and that arrangements for the Serious Case 
Review offer sufficient scrutiny and challenge.
All Serious Case Review panel chairs and authors must complete a 
45.	
training programme provided by the Department for Children, Schools 
and Families that supports them in their role in undertaking Serious 
Case Reviews that have a real impact on learning and improvement.
Government Offices must ensure that there are enough trained 
46.	
Serious Case Review panel chairs and authors available within their 
region.
Ofsted should share full Serious Case Review reports with HMI 
47.	
Constabulary, the Care Quality Commission, and HMI Probation 
(as appropriate) to enable all four inspectorates to assess the 
implementation of action plans when conducting frontline 
inspections.
Ofsted should share Serious Case Review executive summaries with 
48.	
the Association of Chief Police Officers, Primary Care Trusts and 
Strategic Health Authorities to promote learning.
Ofsted should produce more regular reports, at six-monthly intervals, 
49.	
which summarise the lessons from Serious Case Reviews.
Organisation and finance
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must provide 
50.	
further guidance to Local Safeguarding Children Boards on how to 
operate as effectively as possible following the publication of the 
Loughborough University research on Local Safeguarding Children 
Boards later this year.
The Children’s Trust and the Local Safeguarding Children Board should 
51.	
not be chaired by the same person. The Local Safeguarding Children 
Board chair should be selected with the agreement of a group of 
multi-agency partners and should have access to training to support 
them in their role.
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should include membership from 
52.	
the senior decision makers from all safeguarding partners, who should 
attend regularly and be fully involved as equal partners in Local 
Safeguarding Children Board decision making.

92
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT
Local Safeguarding Children Boards should report to the Children’s 
53.	
Trust Board and publish an annual report on the effectiveness of 
safeguarding in the local area. Local Safeguarding Children Boards 
should provide robust challenge to the work of the Children’s Trust 
and its partners in order to ensure that the right systems and quality 
of services and practice are in place so that children are properly 
safeguarded.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families, the Department of 
54.	
Health, and the Home Office, together with HM Treasury, must ensure 
children’s services, police and health services have protected budgets 
for the staffing and training for child protection services.
The Department for Children, Schools and Families must sufficiently 
55.	
resource children’s services to ensure that early intervention and 
preventative services have capacity to respond to all children and 
families identified as vulnerable or ‘in need’.
A national annual report should be published reviewing safeguarding 
56.	
and child protection spend against assessed needs of children across 
the partners in each Children’s Trust.
Legal
The Ministry of Justice should lead on the establishment of a system-
57.	
wide target that lays responsibility on all participants in the care 
proceedings system to reduce damaging delays in the time it takes 
to progress care cases where these delays are not in the interests of 
the child.
The Ministry of Justice should appoint an independent person to 
58.	
undertake a review of the impact of court fees in the coming months. 
In the absence of incontrovertible evidence that the fees had not 
acted as a deterrent, they should then be abolished from 2010/11 
onwards.

APPENDIX 1
93
LETTER TO LORD LAMING
FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR CHILDREN, 
SCHOOLS AND FAMILIES

94
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN IN ENGLAND: A PROGRESS REPORT

95
LETTER TO LORD LAMING

APPENDIX 2
96
ACPO	
Association of Chief Police Officers
BBC	
British Broadcasting Corporation
CAF	
Common Assessment Framework
CAFCASS	
Children and Family Court Advisory Support Service
CLG/DCLG	 Communities and Local Government
CPD	
Continuing Professional Development
CSCI	
Commission for Social Care Inspection
CWDC	
Children’s Workforce Development Council
DA(FCY)	
Domestic Affairs (Families, Children and Young People)
DCS	
Director of Children’s Services
DCSF	
Department for Children, Schools and Families
GP	
General Practitioner
GSCC	
General Social Care Council
ICS	
Integrated Children’s System
JAR	
Joint Area Review
LGA	
Local Government Association
LSCB	
Local Safeguarding Children Board
MP	
Member of Parliament
NHS	
National Health Service
NQSW	
Newly Qualified Social Worker
NSPCC	
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
PCT	
Primary Care Trust
PLO	
Public Law Outline
RCGP	
Royal College of General Practitioners
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS

97
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS
SCIE	
Social Care Institute for Excellence
SCR	
Serious Case Review
SHA	
Strategic Health Authority
SOLACE	
Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior 
Managers
SWTF	
Social Work Task Force
UN	
United Nations

APPENDIX 3
98
LIST OF LORD LAMING’S SECRETARIAT 
AND ADVISERS
Secretariat to the Lord Laming Report
Jenny Lawrence 
Sharon McHale 
Anne Mason 
Benjamin Nicholls 
Katharine O’Brien 
Victoria Saunders
Advisers to the Report
Ann Baxter Director of Children’s Services, London Borough of Camden 
Jacky Tiotto Senior National Adviser, Improvement and Development 
Agency (IDeA)
Lord Laming is also grateful for contributions from
Dan Cooke, Anne Gair, Roger Parr, Sarah Wolstenholme
Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
ID  6079455 03/09
Printed on Paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum.

Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online 
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone Fax & E-Mail 
TSO 
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN 
Telephone orders/General enquiries 0870 600 5522 
Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-Call 0845 7 023474 
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533 
E-mail: customer.services@tso.co.uk 
Textphone: 0870 240 3701
The Parliamentary Bookshop 
12 Bridge Street, Parliament Square, 
London SW1A 2JX 
Telephone orders/ General enquiries: 020 7219 3890 
Fax orders: 020 7219 3866 
Email: bookshop@parliament.uk 
Internet: http://www.bookshop.parliament.uk
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited Agents 
Customers can also order publications from 
TSO Ireland 
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD 
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401