JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004, pp.83–113
© Boston College & Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa, 2004
(ISSN 0851–7762)
Higher Education in Ethiopia:
The Vision and Its Challenges
William Saint*
Abstract
Ethiopia is embarked on a higher education expansion and reform programme of
impressive dimensions. Expansion will create new universities, establish three sys-
tem support agencies, mount new courses, and triple enrolments. Reforms intro-
duce increased institutional autonomy, curriculum revisions, new funding arrange-
ments and student contributions by means of a graduate tax. This article analyses
current higher education reform efforts in Ethiopia. It begins by sketching the so-
cial context in which higher education is situated and describing the country’s
higher education system. An assessment of tertiary education financing follows.
Management capacities and efficiency in the use of these resources are then dis-
cussed, noting the particular challenges posed by HIV/AIDS. Educational quality
and relevance are subsequently addressed. Analysis points out potential weaknesses
in the reform programme but concludes that enrolment expansion targets are likely
to be met. However, the dynamics of expansion may well generate difficulties in
maintaining educational quality.
Résumé
L’Éthiopie s’est engagée dans un vaste programme de développement et de réforme
de l’enseignement supérieur. Le volet développement inclut la création de nouvelles
universités, et de trois agences de suivi,  la mise en place de nouveaux cours et
l’instauration du système d’inscriptions triples. Les réformes permettront une plus
grande autonomie, ainsi que la révision des programmes, l’établissement de
nouveaux systèmes de financement, et l’introduction du système de contributions
des étudiants, par le biais d’une taxe sur la formation supérieure. Cet article analyse
les efforts déployés pour la réforme de l’enseignement supérieur en Éthiopie. Tout
*
William Saint is Lead Education Specialist, Africa Region, World Bank, 1818 H Street N.W., Wash-
ington, DC, 20433, USA;  email: wsaint@worldbank.org. The findings, interpretations and conclu-
sions expressed in this paper are those of the author alone and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank or of the governments they represent.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
83

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
84
d’abord, il fournit un aperçu du contexte social de l’enseignement supérieur, ainsi
qu’une description de ce système. Il s’ensuit une évaluation du financement de
l’éducation tertiaire. La communication évoque ensuite les capacités de gestion,
ainsi que l’utilisation efficace de ces ressources, en mentionnant le défi majeur
posé par le SIDA. La question de la qualité et du caractère adapté de l’éducation
est ensuite abordée. L’analyse présentée souligne les faiblesses du programme de
réforme, mais conclut en ajoutant que les objectifs d’élargissement du système
d’inscription pourraient bien se réaliser. Cependant, la dynamique d’élargissement
de ce système risque fort de porter atteinte à la qualité de l’enseignement fourni.
Background
Ethiopia possesses a 1,700-year tradition of elite education linked to the Or-
thodox Church. But secular higher education was initiated only in 1950 with
the founding of the University College of Addis Ababa. During the following
two decades, half a dozen specialised technical colleges were established. These
institutions hosted an educational culture that was heavily influenced by its
long informal association with the Orthodox Church (Wagaw 1990). In their
academic organisation, they were somewhat more American and less British
than higher education systems in the former British colonies of East Africa.
Strikingly, tertiary enrolments totaled only 4,500 in 1970 out of a national
population of 34 million. The resulting tertiary enrolment ratio of 0.2 per cent
was among the very lowest in the world. The skilled human resources avail-
able to guide development in one of Africa’s largest and poorest countries
were therefore miniscule in relation to the enormity of the task.
The nation’s new higher education institutions strove, with considerable
early success, to maintain international standards. But the cost was high, with
wastage rates approaching 40 per cent in the late 1960s (Wagaw 1990). Aware-
ness of the need for reform began to grow. Unfortunately, these incipient re-
forms were truncated by political events.
In 1974, a socialist military coup overthrew the monarchy of Emperor Haile
Selassie and established an oppressive regime known as the ‘Derg’ (i.e., com-
mittee). Government intervention in university affairs expanded, including
security surveillance, repression of dissent, mandated courses on Marxism,
prohibition of student organisations, appointment of senior university officers
and control of academic promotions. Three notable outcomes ensued over the
following two decades: Intellectual life atrophied on campuses, academic brain
drain soared and the country’s education system became largely isolated from
the western world.
As the twentieth century drew to a close, Ethiopia found itself with a higher
education system that was regimented in its management, conservative in its
intellectual orientation, limited in its autonomy, short of experienced doctor-
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
84

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
85
ates among academic staff, concerned about declining educational quality, weak
in its research output and poorly connected with the intellectual currents of the
international higher education community. The reform pressures that had be-
gun to build in the 1960s, only to be suppressed by the Derg in the 1970s and
1980s, returned to the fore with the establishment of elected government in
1994. This time higher education reform was embraced as a critical national
need by the government of the day.
The Reform Agenda
Ethiopia is currently engaged in a highly ambitious effort to re-align its higher
education system in more direct support of its national strategy for economic
growth and poverty reduction (Yizengaw 2003). Its achievements over the
past five years have been impressive. The reforms have targeted all levels: the
overall system, the institutions and the academic programmes.
At the system level, eight public universities now stand in the place of the
previous two-university ‘system.’ An aggressive expansion policy designed to
raise the country’s insignificant tertiary enrolment ratio to more respectable
levels is producing results.1 Total tertiary enrolments in universities and non-
university tertiary institutions, both public and private, surged from 43,843 in
1997–98 to 147,954 in 2002–03 (Ministry of Education 1998, 2003), more
than tripling in just five years. The annual enrolment growth rate of 28 per cent
was possibly the highest in the world during this period. Private provision of
tertiary education has been permitted by the government as a key component
of this expansion strategy, and private tertiary institutions now host 24 per
cent of all tertiary students (Ministry of Education 2003:7). The government
introduced student cost-sharing in September 2003 through a deferred pay-
ment taxation mechanism for all future graduates. All of this—and more—has
been ratified in a new Higher Education Proclamation approved by Parlia-
ment in June 2003 (Government 2003).
At the institution level, the proclamation awards substantial autonomy to
universities. Future recurrent funding will come in the form of block grants
defined by a funding formula. University boards and staff will choose their
own institutional leaders, and non-academic staff have been de-linked from
the civil service. Strategic planning, income diversification and information
and communications technology (ICT) development are being encouraged to
meet the fiscal, space and instructional requirements of the on-going expan-
sion.
At the level of academic programmes, degree courses have been reduced
from four to three years in length, with much of the former ‘freshman’ year
subject matter being transferred to the secondary school level. New degree
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
85

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
86
courses are being introduced in response to anticipated labour market needs
that underpin the nation’s economic development strategy and to prepare its
citizens for democratic participation in civic and social affairs. Graduate
programme enrolments are rising rapidly in an effort to boost the supply of
academic staff for the expanding system. All existing diploma programmes
(50 per cent of public enrolments in 2003) are being transferred to technical
colleges over the coming two years so that universities may concentrate on
degree training. A major review and upgrading of university curricula has just
been completed, adding courses in civics, ethics, communication skills, com-
munity outreach, and entrepreneurship, among others. A new oversight agency
will monitor both the quality and the relevance of academic programmes. To
shore up quality in the classroom, national and local pedagogical resource
centres are being set up to encourage instructional innovation and to assist less
experienced lecturers.
These reforms will constitute remarkable achievements if they are imple-
mented as legislated. Ethiopia clearly understands that economic growth in
the twenty-first century will be driven by the nation’s performance in raising
its levels of national productivity in comparison to its economic competitors,
and it is determined to make up the ground lost over the past two decades
because of political instability and economic stagnation.
When the vision outlined by the new proclamation is compared with pre-
vailing conditions in Ethiopian higher education, the massive scale of the re-
forms now underway becomes apparent. Until now, the government has ap-
pointed university presidents and vice-presidents. All non-academic staff are
classified as civil servants managed by the national civil service commission
rather than by university executives. Line item budgets prevail, and institu-
tional allocations have been increased incrementally from one year to the next
with little or no relation to enrolments or educational quality. Additional in-
come generated by institutions has been deducted from their government
subventions, thereby creating a strong disincentive for income diversification.
Quality assurance has yet to become an explicit concern. Prior to the procla-
mation, students paid no tuition fees and also received free food, lodging and
medical care as part of their university admission. The vision of reform com-
municated by the proclamation is both necessary and overdue, but the chal-
lenges of its implementation remain daunting.
Analysis of present higher education reform efforts in Ethiopia begins with
a sketch of the demographic, economic and social context in which higher
education is situated. It then reviews the links between higher education and
Ethiopian development and describes the country’s higher education system.
An assessment of tertiary education financing follows. The next item discussed
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
86

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
87
is the management capacities and efficiency in the use of these resources, not-
ing the particular challenges posed by HIV/AIDS. Educational quality and
relevance issues are subsequently addressed. Analysis then turns to the crucial
question of how this rapid system expansion will be staffed and concludes
with some observations on the sustainability of the reforms now underway.
Context: Demographic, Economic, Social
Ethiopia’s total population of 67.7 million persons is growing at 2.4 per cent
per year. (Statistics in this section are from the Ministry of Finance and Eco-
nomic Development 2002). Eighty per cent of the labour force is engaged in
agriculture, much of which is of a subsistence nature. Just 8 per cent of work-
ers are employed in industry, and the remaining 12 per cent are occupied in
government and services. This distribution suggests a relatively modest labour
market for university graduates, although there is no recent research to support
this conclusion.
Ethiopia’s gross national product (GNP) per capita currently stands at
US$110 compared to US$480 for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. Average GDP
expansion for the 1992–2002 decade was 5.5 per cent annually. However, ag-
riculture grew at a much slower rate of 2.5 per cent. Income is more evenly
distributed in comparison to other sub-Saharan Africa countries, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.28. Coffee accounts for 60 per cent of export earnings. Per
capita exports were only US$15 in 1999 compared to an average of US$163
for sub-Saharan Africa. At present, Ethiopia hardly participates in the global
economy.
The government currently pursues an economic growth strategy based on
agriculture-led development. This agricultural thrust is complemented by ef-
forts to enhance overall labour productivity through better education and health
services, to foster an emergent private business sector, and to reform aspects
of the civil service. For this strategy to be successful, the country’s higher
education system will have to produce graduates with the technical knowledge
and research skills to support economic diversification, and this is one of the
drivers of the present reform.
Poverty is a major drag on the possibilities for economic expansion. The
2000 census indicates that 44 per cent of the national population live in pov-
erty, i.e., on a per capita income of one dollar per day or less. The very low
levels of family resources mean that completion of secondary education re-
quires a major financial effort for each child, and that the potential for cost-
sharing at the university level is sharply limited.
Ethiopia’s educational performance is consistent with its economic indica-
tors. Only 24 per cent of the adult population has completed primary education.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
87

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
88
Primary education enrolls 64 per cent of the relevant age group, secondary edu-
cation 12 per cent, and tertiary education just 0.8 per cent (World Bank 1998a).
Health needs within the population compete with education for scarce pub-
lic resources and also affect educational achievement directly. Life expect-
ancy is just 44 years. HIV/AIDS prevalence in 2000 was 13.7 per cent in urban
areas (where most universities are located), and an estimated 2.6 million per-
sons are currently living with AIDS (Discovery Consultants 2003). AIDS or-
phans are expected to pose a particular challenge for the country’s education
system in the years ahead.
The government of Ethiopia emphasises that human capacity development
at all levels is one of its most important development objectives. The newly
created Ministry of Capacity Building has committed US$100 million over the
coming five years to strengthen the skills of civil servants, semi-skilled work-
ers, and private sector entities through skill development partnerships. Expan-
sion and qualitative improvement of university level education is seen as a
critical component of this overall capacity transformation in the country (Min-
istry of Capacity Building 2003).
Higher Education and Development
To address the social needs outlined above, the government launched an Edu-
cation Sector Development Programme for academic years 2002–03 through
2004–05, commonly referred to as ESDP-II. For the higher education portion
of the education sector, ESDP-II intends at the tertiary level to more than double
regular undergraduate enrolments (from 35,000 to 80,000) and to quadruple
graduate enrolments (from 1,350 to 6,000) during the three-year period.
Over the past three years, government has boosted its financial effort on
behalf of education. Public investment in education has risen as a share of
GDP from 3.2 per cent to 4.5 per cent. This level of financial effort is higher
than the 3.9 per cent registered for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. (See Table
1.) Education expenditure has also increased as a proportion of the overall
government budget from 9.5 per cent to 16.8 per cent, largely at the expense of
military expenditures. Such increases still fall short of reaching the general
range of 20 per cent to 25 per cent for most developing countries, suggesting
that scope remains for further increases in the government’s education financ-
ing effort over the coming years. At the same time, the share of the education
budget devoted to higher education has risen from 14.9 per cent to 23 per cent
in response to the recent rapid expansion of this sub-sector. This is slightly
higher than the 15 per cent to 20 per cent range used as a World Bank (2002)
guideline, but not unreasonable as a temporary measure in light of the signifi-
cant tertiary capital expansion programme currently underway.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
88

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
89
Table 1: The Government of Ethiopia’s Educational Funding
1995–96 1996–97 1997–98 1998–99 1999–00 2000–01 2001–02 2002–03
Education’s
share of GDP
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.5
2.8
3.4
4.3
Education’s share
of Ethiopian budget
14.5
14.3
15.6
12.0
9.5
14.4
16.8
18.8
Higher education’s
share of ed. budget
15.0
15.8
na
na
14.9
18.0
18.0
23.1
Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (2002); World Bank
(1998b).
Until recently, the private and social returns to education investment have been
substantial in Ethiopia at all levels, including higher education, thereby justi-
fying the government’s increased financial commitment to the sector. This was
confirmed through an analysis of earnings functions conducted in 1996 (World
Bank 1998b). Earnings more or less doubled with each school level achieved.
The rates of return to education by level of education, calculated at that time,
were roughly equivalent. Private rates of return for primary, secondary and
tertiary education were approximately 25 per cent, while social returns were
about 14 per cent. It should be noted that these calculations are now almost a
decade old and may have lost some validity in light of the huge enrolment
expansion effort currently underway.
System Size and Configuration
Until 2000, Ethiopia’s higher education system was comprised of just two uni-
versities, seventeen colleges, a total of 31,000 students, and a small supervi-
sory department in the Ministry of Education. Today, it embraces eight univer-
sities, nine technical colleges, five teacher training colleges, thirty-seven pri-
vate tertiary institutions, and three system oversight agencies (the Higher Edu-
cation Strategy Institute, the Quality and Relevance Assurance Agency, and
the National Pedagogical Resources Centre). Total tertiary enrolment in 2002–
03 was 147,954 students. Of these, 39 per cent were regular residential stu-
dents, 35 per cent were non-residential evening students, and 26 per cent were
private students. The largest public institution is Addis Ababa University (AAU)
with 17,433 undergraduate degree and 1,720 graduate students.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
89

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
90
Private Tertiary Education
Private tertiary education is a rapidly expanding part of Ethiopia’s higher edu-
cation system, increasing by 43 per cent in the past year alone and now ac-
counting for 24 per cent of all tertiary enrolments. Private tertiary institutions
in Ethiopia are a relatively new phenomenon; virtually all of them have been
established within the past five years. The majority of these institutions enroll
500 students or fewer and offer training in specialised areas such as account-
ing, business administration or information science.
All of the private colleges offer diploma programmes, a half dozen of them
have mounted degree programmes and one has initiated a master’s degree
programme. These private institutions offer educational programmes often not
available in the public institutions, provide access to growing numbers of stu-
dents who might otherwise not be admitted to tertiary education, enable a sig-
nificant expansion of tertiary enrolments at very little additional cost to gov-
ernment, provide client-oriented instruction focused on the shifting needs of
the job market and attract a high proportion of women students (almost 50 per
cent). Tuition fees run from Birr 2,500 to 3,500 a year (US$300–450).
As evidenced in the above paragraphs, private providers are making a sub-
stantial contribution both to the ministry’s expansion targets for higher educa-
tion and to the government’s goal of economic growth induced by human re-
source development. For example, private tertiary institutions educate impor-
tant portions of students in certain disciplinary areas. They teach three out of
four business students, three out of four computer science students and half of
all law students.
But in spite of these contributions, the government has been ambivalent in
its support of private higher education. Holdover aspects of socialism in the
current government’s political philosophy include government ownership of
all land and a reluctance to use public resources in support of private-sector
development. This means that the expansion of private higher education is
dependent upon the government’s willingness to grant leasehold access to land
and that private institutions encounter difficulties in their efforts to obtain bank
financing since they have little to offer in the way of loan collateral (Tamrat
2003). Likewise, these institutions are dependent upon government relief from
tax duties on textbooks, computers, software and teaching equipment that must
be imported. Although available in theory, these concessions reportedly work
less well in practice.
Tertiary Education Indicators
Access. Ethiopia’s tertiary-level gross enrolment ratio (GER) of 0.8 per cent in
2000 places it among the lowest ranking countries of the world, as does its
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
90

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
91
ratio of 62 tertiary students per 100,000 inhabitants. In comparison, the cur-
rent tertiary level GER for sub-Saharan Africa is 4 per cent with a regional
average of 339 students per 100,000 persons. As a result, professional and
technical capacities of all types have been extremely limited in Ethiopia, stunting
previous development prospects.
Unit Expenditures. Annual recurrent expenditures per university student
are roughly Birr 7,457 (US$860) when government-provided food, lodging
and health care are included, and Birr 5,500 (US$636) when student welfare
subsidies are excluded.2  This latter level of educational investment is low in
comparison to sub-Saharan Africa (US$1,500) and to neighboring nations like
Kenya (US$1,800), Tanzania (US$3,236) and Uganda (US$800).3 Experience
indicates that it is extremely difficult to provide higher education at an accept-
able standard for less than an annual per-student expenditure of US$1,000
(Association of African Universities and the World Bank 1997).
Financing. The Government provides virtually all of the financing used to
run the public tertiary system. This includes the provision of free non-aca-
demic services to regular students: meals, lodging and health care. Full-time
students (39 per cent of all students) pay no significant tuition fees, although
part-time and private students (the majority of the total enroled) do pay. Part-
time students are charged tuition of Birr 30 to 50 per credit hour, or Birr 90–
150 (US$10–17) for the normal three credit course load taken each semester.
Some institutions charge evening students additional fees of Birr 26 to 58 per
credit hour for laboratory courses.
Student welfare subsidies and fee-free higher education are increasingly at
odds with prevailing practice in other African countries, especially in the
Anglophone sphere, where various forms of student cost-sharing are emerging
(Johnstone 2003). The government has recognised this by indicating in the
new Higher Education Proclamation that cost-sharing will be a key compo-
nent for the future financing of tertiary education development. University
officials confess that not only is the provision of food and housing a signifi-
cant burden on their budget (15 per cent of all recurrent expenses), but it also
raises a serious social equity issue since 99.2 per cent of the population (of
generally poorer youth) are excluded from this welfare subsidy. In response,
the government introduced a university graduate tax in September 2003 de-
signed to re-coup gradually the cost of meals and lodging, together with a
small portion of tuition costs.
Gender. Cultural and social impediments to women’s education are reflected
in enrolment percentages: only 17 per cent of full-time students (largely resi-
dential) in public universities are female whereas 24 per cent of part-time (non-
residential) public students are female. Notably, 44 per cent of private tertiary
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
91

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
92
students are female, a difference that is likely due to the fact that most private
institutions are located in Addis Ababa where women students can more easily
live at home, thereby allaying the possible protectionist concerns of parents.
More worrisome is the fact that just 7 per cent of academic staff in public
tertiary institutions are women, thus depriving the tertiary education system of
a fully proportionate share of the country’s best female intellects and its women
students of sufficient role models for mentoring and guidance. In comparison,
the sub-Saharan average for women’s participation in degree programmes is
roughly 30 per cent and the proportion of women academic staff is about 18
per cent.4
Internal Efficiency. The drop-out rate among higher education students has
been between 10 per cent and 15 per cent in recent years, with the largest losses
occurring in the first year of study (Abebayehu 1998). This phenomenon is re-
portedly due to difficulties in adjusting to campus life away from home.
Regional Access. In the effort to nurture a greater sense of national identity,
the government has adopted a policy of admitting a representative mix of stu-
dents from the country’s eleven administrative regions to each university cam-
pus. Because this policy often requires students to study at a site at some dis-
tance from their home, the government has decided to maintain its policy of
providing food and lodging to regular residential students, while gradually
recovering this cost by means of a graduate tax. Although system-wide data
are not available on the effects of government efforts to promote regional ac-
cess to higher education, intake data for the country’s largest university (AAU)
for the 2002–03 academic year indicate rather wide variation in access rates
by region. However, the proportion of entrants by region is approximately
equal to the proportional distribution of Grade 12 students across regions. It is
probable, therefore, that these disparities reflect differences in population size,
access to secondary education and quality of education among the different
regions rather than any gross failing of the current higher education access
policies.
Equity Issues. The very limited data available on this subject suggest that
the Ethiopian higher education system is characterised by inequitable access
similar to that found in other African countries. The National Household In-
come, Consumption and Expenditure (HICE) Survey of 1999 indicates that 71
per cent of university students come from households with the highest 20 per
cent of incomes. Given significant differences in income and education attain-
ment levels across regions in Ethiopia, access to higher education often favours
students from upper-income homes, especially those from urban areas in the
most prosperous regions. These regional imbalances in access hold serious
long-term implications for the development of high level leadership in under-
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
92

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
93
served areas and consequently for their ability to participate fully in the politi-
cal life and social policymaking of the country. If these inequities are left unat-
tended, the seeds of political unrest may begin to germinate.
The government has demonstrated its concern with this potential problem
through recent actions. The creation of four new universities in 2000 was an
explicit effort to move higher education away from the capital city and into the
various regions. The two additional universities created in 2004 (Arba Minch
and Gondar) will continue this decentralisation process. In addition, govern-
ment has proposed to include increased enrolment of disadvantaged popula-
tions as one of the factors in the new funding formula for universities expected
to go into effect in 2005. Also, it has resisted recommendations to introduce
up-front cost-recovery fees for university students as a way of helping to fi-
nance the current expansion because of its concern with the equity impact of
such a policy on less advantaged regions and households.
Supply and Demand for Tertiary Graduates
Supply. The total number of degree graduates produced by Ethiopia’s tertiary
education system has tripled from 1,472 in 1992 to 4,749 in 2003. As shown in
Table 2, the disciplinary distribution of degree students has shifted somewhat
over the past decade. Enrolment shares of business/commercial/social science
disciplines have risen at the expense of agriculture, natural sciences and (to a
lesser extent) engineering. Much of this shift reflects the recent aggressive
entry of private colleges into the former areas.
By 2006, the government expects to have at least eight public universities
that enroll 10,000 residential degree students apiece. Strong demand for higher
education is evidenced by the 47,453 students who are taking evening courses
on a part-time, fee-paying basis. In addition, the output of secondary graduates
suggests that competition will not be lacking for any additional places. Some
48,130 graduates of the two-year secondary education preparatory course for
university admission took the higher education entrance examination in 2004.
Due to a steady rise in the number of qualifying students from secondary schools,
the admission rate of degree applicants to higher education institutions has
fallen from 45 per cent in 1997 to 26 per cent in 2001. Tertiary admission is
clearly becoming more competitive, even in the face of rapid expansion.
Brain drain has been an endemic problem within Ethiopia’s higher educa-
tion community for nearly two decades and could continue to undercut efforts
to increase the country’s stock of university graduates. The combination of
poverty, economic stagnation and periodic political repression has generated
strong incentives for academics to seek employment outside the country. It is
estimated that as many as half of all academic staff were lost to brain drain
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
93

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
94
during the 1990s (Aredo and Zelalem 1998), an exodus that may have been
exacerbated by the government’s dismissal of 40 professors from Addis Ababa
University in April 1993. In this context, capacity building in Ethiopia has
been a double-edged sword, as numbers of well-educated Ethiopians continue
to leave the country in pursuit of higher paying, more attractive jobs in the
region and abroad. The government will need to take measures that not only
focus on expanding the supply side but that also address the demand side by
retaining and using effectively those who are trained.
Demand. A 2001 survey of 192 employers in seven regions of Ethiopia
(Budu 2002) found that they encountered the greatest difficulty recruiting new
employees in the areas of business administration, engineering, computer sci-
ence and law. A separate ranking of disciplinary demand on the basis of the
actual number of advertised vacancies indicated a high demand for teachers,
agriculture and forestry, health services, business administration and computer
science. With regard to public sector employment, the Ministry of Capacity
Building (April 2003) issued a National Capacity Building Plan for the com-
ing five-year period. Training priorities in the public sector are related to civil
service reform, decentralised service delivery, information and communica-
tions technology development, justice system reform, tax reform and urban
management.
Table 2: Percentage of Tertiary Enrolment Distribution by Discipline
Discipline
1992–93
2001–02
Commercial/social science
25
43
Agriculture
17
9
Engineering/technology
16
12
Education
14
15
Natural sciences
14
5
Health/medical sciences
11
8
Law
—
3
Other
3
5*
Total
100%
100%
Source: World Bank (1998a); Ministry of Education (2002a, 2003).
*Roughly half of this amount is computer science.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
94

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
95
But the Ethiopian labour market for university graduates will remain lim-
ited in an economy where 80 per cent of the labour force is engaged in agricul-
ture and in which the civil service appears amply staffed. Unfortunately, no
systematic study of graduate employment has been undertaken for some time,
although anecdotal reports suggest that graduate unemployment may be rising
along with increased university output. Only steady economic growth will pro-
vide the financing required both to expand the system and to improve opportu-
nities for gainful employment for the rising numbers of graduates.
In this regard, it is worth noting that roughly a century ago, many of Europe’s
industrialised countries had tertiary enrolment ratios similar to those of Ethio-
pia today. In contrast to Ethiopia, however, they—with the exceptions of Italy
and Russia—already had less than 50 per cent of their labour force engaged in
agriculture and they all had achieved universal primary education (Fredriksen
1984). The implication is that a rapid expansion of access to education at all
levels may not by itself stimulate economic growth unless it is accompanied
by productivity-driven structural changes in the economy. The latter is yet to
occur in Ethiopia.
HIV/AIDS
HIV/AIDS holds the potential to undermine the country’s substantial invest-
ments in education. When it affects teachers, it reduces the supply of educa-
tion services. When it affects students and family financial resources, it weak-
ens the demand for education. AIDS now exists within all regions of Ethiopia.
The estimated national infection rate is 10.6 per cent (UNAIDS 2003). This
rate is substantially above the 5.0 per cent level at which infection tends to
expand rapidly and exponentially. Tertiary education communities are particu-
larly vulnerable to HIV/AIDS due to their age group (which constitutes the
peak period for sexual activity and consequent risk of HIV infection), close
physical proximity, relative autonomy from adult or community supervision
and inclination towards sexual networking. This vulnerability introduces a size-
able risk to the expected returns on investments made by families and govern-
ment in the education of tertiary students. Indeed, AIDS now constitutes a new
and irreversible form of ‘brain drain’ in Africa.
In spite of this risk, universities in Ethiopia have not yet established institu-
tional policies or programmes for the management and prevention of HIV/
AIDS. Institutional policies for the management of HIV/AIDS cover a range
of important actions, from establishing a management information data base
(on absenteeism, health centre visits, medical benefit expenditures, student
drop-outs, etc.) to a review of regulations on sick leave, confidentiality and the
rights of persons living with AIDS, from student counseling services to aware-
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
95

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
96
ness programmes and from curriculum content to testing facilities. (For a fuller
survey of present university policies on HIV/AIDS in Africa, see Otaala 2003.)
Little is known about the status of AIDS on university campuses. The sole
reference point is a recent study by Jimma University which estimates that
12.2 per cent of students are HIV positive (Ministry of Education 2004). How-
ever, results from a major study of HIV/AIDS in the Ethiopian education sec-
tor suggest what awaits higher education (Discovery Consultants 2003). The
study estimates that some 10,000 school teachers are HIV positive, that 22 per
cent of teacher attrition is due to AIDS and that teacher recruitment will need
to increase by 16 per cent annually to achieve education policy goals in the
presence of HIV/AIDS.
The implications for universities, while not spelt out in this report, are clear.
First, an overproduction of graduates will be required to offset anticipated
losses of secondary school teachers and graduates working in other sectors.
Second, Ministry of Education and university officials need to develop an in-
tegrated strategy for the dissemination of new HIV/AIDS awareness materials
and need to create university courses that are designed to equip students and
academic staff not only with knowledge but also with the skills and values to
protect themselves.
Tertiary Education Financing
Any national tertiary system would be hard pressed to substantially expand
enrolments while maintaining levels of educational quality. Ethiopia faces a
double challenge in that it seeks to accomplish this goal while also introducing
major reforms in institutional governance, management and curriculum. If the
bold vision contained in the Higher Education Proclamation is to have any
chance of success, the solution to this double challenge will have to be found
in the financing strategy that underpins these reforms. Here the prospects are
less than encouraging.
Expenditure Patterns. Budgetary allocations among the universities are
currently related quite closely to enrolment size, although with some excep-
tions. On the one hand, Addis Ababa University housed 19 per cent of enrol-
ments but received 41 per cent of the tertiary budget (Ministry of Education
2002a). It is unlikely that such a discrepancy can be explained purely by the
special needs of the AAU’s graduate programmes. On the other hand, Debub
University hosted 14 per cent of enrolments but received just 9 per cent of the
tertiary budget. Most of the remaining institutions received a budget share that
was slightly smaller than their share of enrolments. Such possible inequities
are expected to be addressed by the new funding formula scheduled for intro-
duction in 2005.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
96

Table 3: Expenditure per FTE Student by University, 2001–02
University
Regular
Evening
Grad
FTE
Budget
Est. Evening
Total
Expense per
Enrol.
Enrol.
Enrol.
Students
Allocation
Fees
revenue
studenta
(000,000)
 (000,000)
Addis Ababa
6,403
8,284
1,165
9,808
111.7 2
6,213,000
117,913,000
12,022
Alemaya
2,877
1,814
140
3,450
22.2
1,360,500
23,560,500
6,803
Bahir Dar
3,108
6,098
—
4,328
24.7
4,573,500
29,273,500
6,764
Debub
3,839
1,415
—
4,122
29.2
1,061,250
30,261,250
7,341
Jimma
3,720
1,629
—
4,046
34.0
1,221,750
35,221,750
8,706
Mekelle
2,791
3,335
—
3,458
27.1
2.501,250
29,601,250
8,560
aTo calculate U.S. dollar equivalents, divide by 8.4 which represents the dollar-to-Birr exchange rate for 2002.
bAAU budget allocation reduced by Birr 24 million earmarked for Black Lion Hospital (university teaching hospital).
Source: Ministry of Education (2002a).
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
97

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
98
The mix of academic programmes provided by institutions varies consider-
ably from one to the other, and it is well known that the costs of instruction
tend to be higher in some disciplines (e.g., engineering, medicine, sciences)
than in others (e.g., education, business administration, social science). This
difference suggests that institutional allocations should not only consider en-
rolments as a reference point but also consider the distribution of enrolments
among the different academic programmes and the respective costs of each
programme. Such unit costs have not yet been calculated in Ethiopia, but they
will soon be needed if the proposed new funding formula is to be effective.
The previous point not withstanding, it is possible to calculate the average
recurrent expenditure per student for the tertiary system as a whole, and also
for each institution. This calculation provides a very rough indicator of poten-
tial quality and management efficiency. As such, it may point out the possibil-
ity of certain problems, but it cannot by itself constitute evidence that these
problems exist. For that, more investigation is needed.
To calculate per student allocations, enrolment numbers were first con-
verted into an estimate of full-time equivalent (FTE) students to enable
standardised comparisons.5  Per-student calculations were undertaken for each
of the six main public tertiary institutions. The results are presented in Table 3.
They show that even when student numbers are standardised and evening fee
income is included, significant differences in expenditure per student remain
apparent among institutions. The best endowed institution, Addis Ababa Uni-
versity, is able to spend almost double the amount available to the least en-
dowed institutions. Since the number of graduate students has been weighted
additionally and any graduate fee income excluded from consideration, the
explanation for this sizeable difference must be sought elsewhere. To estimate
the academic expenditure per student, the unit expense figures for each insti-
tution can be reduced further by Birr 2,000 which represents the estimated
feeding, lodging and medical services costs for each student.
Analysis of how institutions employ the resources provided to them can
help to determine how effectively they focus on their main mission of teaching
and research and how efficiently the institution is managed. University recur-
rent budgets in 2002–03 were composed of salaries (40 per cent), student feeding
(15 per cent), educational materials (10 per cent), other supplies (11 per cent),
services (9 per cent), maintenance (5 per cent), and small capital expenditures
(10 per cent) (World Bank 2003). No major misallocations in the composition
of university spending are apparent. The share for student welfare is large but
not excessively so in comparison with other African countries that provide this
benefit to students.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
98

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
99
Salaries versus Non-salary Items. When resources are in short supply, as in
Ethiopia, institutions often concentrate them on maintaining staff in the as-
sumption that they are the core resource for teaching. In doing so, however,
they may deprive staff of the educational materials, equipment maintenance,
and other inputs they need in order to teach effectively. In many African coun-
tries, the economic crisis of recent years has led universities to concentrate an
unnecessarily high portion of their budgets on staff remuneration, sometimes
as much as 65 per cent or more. Budgetary analysis carried out during the
recent Public Expenditure Review indicates that Ethiopian universities have
spent a fairly reasonable 40 per cent of their budgets on salaries since 2000–
01. It is noteworthy that the salary portion in institutional budgets has evolved
favourably downwards from its 59 per cent share in 1995–96.
Teaching/Research Versus Student Support/Nonacademic Expenses. How-
ever, the universities spend 15 per cent of their budgets on student feeding,
which is not a true educational expense. They also provide student housing
and medical services out of their recurrent budgets. Analysis conducted under
the Ethiopia Country Status Report (CSR) on education indicates that these
combined student welfare expenditures may consume as much as 20 per cent
of the recurrent budget of universities (World Bank 2004b). These resources
might be better used to increase the amounts spent on educational materials
(currently just 10 per cent), to provide greater support for research (amounts
not readily discernible but reportedly quite small), and to expand access to
information technology on campuses. In recognition of this priority, the graduate
tax introduced in September 2003 includes these non-academic costs in calcu-
lating the amount charged to students.
Staff Salaries and Remuneration Policies. Until the advent of the Higher
Education Proclamation, academic staff were hired on two-year contract terms
and their salaries were oriented by civil service pay structures. Non-academic
staff were employed directly by the civil service. These arrangements made it
extremely difficult to reward non-academic staff for good performance or to
penalise them for non-performance. They also made it almost impossible for
universities to compete with the national labour market for professional skills
in short supply, creating disincentives that encouraged brain drain. The procla-
mation now enables university management to employ staff directly and to
determine their salaries and conditions of service. However, university man-
agers have not yet taken advantage of this opportunity.
Revenue Trends. Total university spending in the 2001–03 budget was
planned at Birr 681 million (US$79 million). Of this amount, 36 per cent was
allocated to capital investments. This rather large share is the result of the
substantial construction programme associated with the current expansion of
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
99

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
100
enrolments. The recurrent budget for universities has also grown rapidly in
recent years, doubling since 1999–2000. To a large extent, this is due to enrol-
ment increases, and to the incorporation of new institutions into the budget
(e.g., the Black Lion Hospital, with annual running costs of Birr 24 million,
now included with Addis Ababa University).
Income Generation. University income-generation activities supplement
the public funds received from government. Revenues from university income-
generation activities are difficult to document due to inadequate record-keep-
ing, likely encouraged by the former government practice of reducing univer-
sity budget allocations by the amounts of income generated. The main sources
of revenue appear to be the evening courses and contracted short courses. Addis
Ababa College of Commerce reportedly produces 32 per cent of its recurrent
budget from such fees, but Addis Ababa University generates only about 7 per
cent. In addition, it is estimated that the agricultural colleges at Jimma and
Debub universities may cover one fifth of their recurrent budget from agricul-
tural production earnings (Kastbjerg 1999). In the future, expanding interest
in the delivery of distance education courses may become a further source of
university income. In the effort to stimulate more aggressive income-genera-
tion efforts by universities, the government has proposed to include certain
incentives to this end within its new funding formula for higher education.
However, bookkeeping in this area will have to improve considerably before
this aspect of the formula can be introduced.
International development assistance constitutes another important source
of revenue for the higher education system. The government’s ESDP-II
programme is supported by multiple bilateral and multilateral donors, includ-
ing the World Bank. Committed external resources to the education sector in
2001–02 totalled US$154 million. Donor contributions are expected to grow
slightly over the next three to five years until they stabilise at about 35 per cent
of the sector budget. In the near future, the majority of donors, including the
World Bank, will be providing resources for basic and secondary education
through budget support for the government’s poverty reduction strategy. How-
ever, overall foreign assistance for the education sector is surprisingly low as a
proportion of total development aid to Ethiopia, comprising just 7–10 per cent
over the past five years (World Bank 2003).
The level of donor support for higher education in Ethiopia is minimal.
Over the past five years, the World Bank has been the largest contributor of
development assistance to the higher education sector, providing a relatively
modest US$11.7 million through its ESDP credit (i.e., US$2.3 million per year).
That amount will rise to US$10 million per year in 2005–10 if a World Bank
credit for postsecondary education is approved as planned in September 2004.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
100

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
101
Cost Sharing and Sub-Sector Expansion
The financial reforms now being introduced in the Ethiopian higher education
sector are both necessary and overdue. The mechanism of cost-sharing via a
‘graduate tax’ deserves recognition for its innovativeness both in Ethiopia and
more generally.6 If it works as planned, it should make the higher education
system gradually more accessible, more equitable, and more efficient in the
allocation of social resources. It should also have positive spill-over effects on
the internal managerial efficiency of institutions, which in turn will allow for
greater access. However, potential pitfalls are also present in how this scheme
is currently structured, both at the conceptual level and at the level of imple-
mentation. Yet this initiative merits watching, since it represents one of the
first attempts by a developing country to employ a graduate tax.
Bruce Chapman (2003) notes that in Ethiopia, questions of ideology and
political principle seem to influence policymaking more than in some other
countries. As a result, design and implementation of the graduate tax will need
to take into account more than financial or administrative pragmatism. He
stresses that, in an imperfect system, it may be more efficient to proceed on the
basis of up-front fees complemented by scholarships for needy students.
Cost-sharing based on the current ‘graduate tax’ will not immediately re-
lieve the financial pressures on the system produced by rapid enrolment ex-
pansion. Its contributions will not begin until 2007 because it takes a mini-
mum of four years for enrollees to graduate and start repaying through the
proposed cost-sharing recovery scheme. If one assumes a tax of 10 per cent of
income for up to 15 years (as indicated in the Higher Education Cost-Sharing
Regulation approved by the Council of Ministers), with some 35 per cent of
graduates (e.g., teachers) exempt for incentive reasons, then cost-sharing would
reduce the budget share of higher education in total public education spending
by only 1 percentage point in 2008 or 2009. This appears to be true in any
scenario regarding growth of enrolment or growth of GDP (World Bank 2004a).
While cost-sharing does not help much in the short run, if implemented at
the level of a minimum of 10 per cent of income and under the above-stated
assumptions, it does have an acceptable impact in later years. By the year
2020, for example, the share for higher education in total education spending
would be some 4 to 5 percentage points lower with cost-sharing than without
it (e.g., 18 per cent as opposed to 23 per cent, or 16 per cent as opposed to 21
per cent, depending on other assumptions). The income from cost-sharing would
then represent a significant and fairly reasonable 20 per cent of the total cost of
running the higher education system in the outlying years, say towards 2015.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
101

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
102
Management Capacities and Efficiency
As a poor country, Ethiopia has a particular incentive to manage its scarce
resources with the greatest efficiency possible. With this need in mind, this
section will look at some of the more common areas for efficiency savings,
including staff/student ratios, proportion of non-academic staff and the con-
tracting for non-academic services. The discussion will then assess the extent
to which capacities for efficient management currently exist and what steps
might be necessary in order to make them more robust in the future.
Because staff salaries usually comprise the bulk of university budgets, effi-
ciency-improving efforts often begin by looking at staff numbers and their
utilisation. A common indicator of efficiency in this area is the ratio of aca-
demic staff to students. In comparison to regional staff/student ratios, those in
Ethiopia would suggest room for improvement, i.e., that academic staff teach-
ing loads could be a bit higher when compared with other African universities.
(See Table 4.) This measure implies that academic staff numbers may not be
the most immediate constraint on enrolment expansion. But this situation will
change quickly as enrolments continue to rise. In fact, overall staff/student
ratios are gradually becoming more efficient as enrolments expand more quickly
than staffing. Ratios have improved from 1:8 in 1995 to 1:15 in 2003.
Staff/student ratios also vary among academic programmes within the ter-
tiary system. This is appropriate as some disciplines are more labour-intensive
than others. In 2001–02, the following ratios characterised the main academic
programmes within the system: social sciences (1:55), business studies (1:18),
education (1:11), law (1:15), health sciences (1:9), sciences (1:11), engineer-
ing (1:9), and agriculture (1:12). Two conclusions can be tentatively drawn
from these data. First, the ratio in the social sciences programmes is too high
for effective teaching. This may be the result of recent rapid enrolment expan-
sion in this particular area. Second, the ratio for education is somewhat on the
low side and might be brought up to 1:18 in the interests of greater efficiency.
The ratio of academic staff to non-academic staff can be used as another
indicator of efficiency. If non-academic staff numbers are proportionately high,
perhaps too many persons have been hired to undertake non-academic tasks
and the university may be playing an employment-generation role for the sur-
rounding community. Although no clear guidelines exist on this matter, many
knowledgeable observers believe that the ratio of academic staff to non-aca-
demic staff should fall between 2:1 and 3:1. On this basis, the following ratios
for Ethiopian universities suggest that more careful justification of non-aca-
demic staff numbers may be in order, especially at Alemaya and Addis Ababa
universities: Addis Ababa University (1:2), Alemaya University (1:3), Bahir
Dar University (1:1), Mekelle University (1:1), and Jimma University (2:1).
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
102

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
103
Table 4: Comparative Staff/Student Ratios, 2001–02
Institution
Staff/Student Ratio
Jimma University
 9
Debub University
11
Alemaya University
12
Mekele University
14
Addis Ababa University
13
University of Nairobi
15
Bahir Dar University
16
University of Ghana
19
University of Ibadan
19
Makerere University
20
University of Khartoum
21
Cairo University
28
Source: Ministry of Education (2002a); World Bank (2004a).
In addition, the very low ratio between non-academic staff and students has
remained surprisingly constant throughout the recent process of enrolment
expansion. Whereas this ratio was 1:6 in 1999, it had risen to only 1:8 in 2003.
This ratio suggests that managers have been hiring non-academic staff almost
as fast as student numbers increase. In the process, they overlook opportuni-
ties for cost-savings and work performance improvement.
The permanent employment of large numbers of non-academic staff is costly
and inefficient for Ethiopian universities. The contracting out of the non-aca-
demic services needed by the university is increasingly frequent in Africa.
Among the more common contracted services are the following: provision of
student meals, management of residence halls, computer maintenance, cam-
pus security, university vehicle maintenance and repair, care of the grounds
and gardens and minor facilities maintenance. These arrangements facilitate
university management by lessening the supervision burden for university staff,
reducing the non-academic workforce with its associated personnel manage-
ment responsibilities and social benefits, improving performance levels (poorly
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
103

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
104
performed contracts are not renewed) and introducing greater flexibility in the
application of university funds. The University of Dar es Salaam is a particu-
larly good example of achievement in this area (Mkude 2003).
The new Higher Education Proclamation will decentralise much of the
administrative, budget and other authority to individual universities in the in-
terest of greater institutional autonomy, flexibility and responsiveness. In or-
der to realise these benefits, as well as the gains identified above,
decentralisation will require extensive management training for university presi-
dents and many senior administrators. In addition, it will also necessitate the
introduction of new administrative tools for budget monitoring, control and
financial planning. Such decentralisation will be a major undertaking within
an institutional culture characterised by a tradition of highly concentrated au-
thority and centralised decision-making within the Ministry of Education. In-
deed, the need for such a ‘paradigm shift’ in institutional culture and manage-
ment behavior is identified as a major requirement for success of the higher
education reform effort (Ministry of Education 2004).
Educational Quality and Relevance
In the mid-twentieth century, UNESCO recommended an international guide-
line encouraging national higher education systems to strive towards a 60:40
distribution of their enrolments between sciences/technology and arts/humani-
ties. At present, Ethiopia’s tertiary enrolments fall short of this goal. As shown
in Table 5, 31 per cent of students pursue science and technology disciplines,
while the remaining 67 per cent are enrolled in the arts and humanities. The
recent elevation to university status of the Arba Minch Water Technology In-
stitute and the Gondar College of Medical Science should help to rectify this
imbalance.
Some disciplinary specialisation can be discerned among the different in-
stitutions. The main social science enrolments occur at Addis Ababa Univer-
sity and Mekele University. Addis Ababa also predominates in the sciences
and serves as the centre for national graduate education. The primary sites for
education students are Bahir Dar and Debub universities. Health science en-
rolments characterise Jimma and Gondar universities. Most agricultural enrol-
ments are concentrated at Alemaya and Debub universities. Engineering and
technology students tend to be located at Arba Minch and Bahir Dar.
The job description for academic staff communicates the expectation that
they spend 25 per cent of their time in research activities. Over the years,
Ethiopian academics have produced a substantial body of research on agricul-
ture, engineering technology, health sciences, natural sciences, social sciences,
and education. However, research output and quality in recent years is not well
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
104

Table 5: Distribution of Tertiary Enrolments by Academic Programme, 2001–02
Social
Business/
Tech/
Agricul-
Science Economics
Educ
Law
Health
Science
Engineer
ture
Other*
Total
Public
degree
3,164
1,774
3,935
661
1,975
2,445
4,530
2,948
347
21,779
Public
diploma
0
2,556
3,865
88
2,065
175
906
1,691
299
11,645
Evening
976
10,846
16,088
1,024
1,779
768
4,547
1,924
1,252
39,204
Private
0
15,271
30
730
123
0
875
85
1,977
19,091
Total
4,140
30,447
23,918
2,503
5,942
3,388
10,858
6,648
3,875
91,719
Per cent
5
33
26
3
6
4
12
7
4
100
Source: Ministry of Education (2002a).
*Roughly half of these are studying computer technology.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
105

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
106
documented. Research funding is provided mainly by donors, especially from
Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United Nations. Although reliable data are
not available on the role of donors in supporting research, their contributions
are reported to constitute the bulk of available research monies (Wondimu
2003).
Universities recruit their own staff based on standard academic qualifica-
tions. Academic salaries range from US$150 a month for a lecturer to US$400
a month for a full professor. Lecturers are supposed to be evaluated at the end
of each semester by their peers, students and the head of the department.
Favourable assessments are required in order to continue employment. Con-
tracts are supposed to be renewed every two years, but such reviews report-
edly do not often take place. This may be due to the fact that such evaluations
became suspect and discredited following a government attempt in 2002 to
add political considerations to staff evaluation criteria.
As the tertiary system has expanded, the proportion of academic staff pos-
sessing a PhD has declined from 28 per cent in 1995–96 to just 9 per cent in
2002–03. However, the percentage of PhD staff at Addis Ababa University has
stayed fairly constant at about one third. But only 4 per cent of academic staff
hold PhDs at Debub and Jimma universities, and only 8 per cent at the Gondar
College of Medical Science. Mekelle and Bahir Dar universities are in a slightly
better condition with 12 per cent of their teaching staff holding doctoral de-
grees (Ministry of Education 2003). This downward trend will surely impede
the government’s stated intention of raising the quality of higher education
and will also retard efforts to revitalise university research.
In the absence of standardised testing of tertiary students (which very few
countries carry out), it is extremely difficult to determine the current level of
educational quality within Ethiopia’s universities. However, three points of
information   combine to raise the possibility that educational quality may
presently be at risk. First, it is always difficult for any nation to maintain qual-
ity standards in the midst of rapid enrolment expansion, and the Ethiopian
higher education system is currently in the midst of a very rapid expansion.
Second, the current level of spending per student on academic expenses is
quite low from both a regional and an international perspective, varying from
US$550 to US$1,158 within the system. Third, the proportion of academic
staff with PhD. degrees has been declining and may possibly decline further as
rapid enrolment expansion proceeds.
In response to rising concerns regarding educational quality from inside
and outside the higher education system, the government has recently estab-
lished a Quality and Relevance Assurance Agency to monitor learning achieve-
ment and shore up sagging standards when they are detected. Some, however,
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
106

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
107
believe that these efforts may be directed more towards private universities
than public ones (Tamrat 2003). Of equal importance, the government has also
established a National Pedagogical Resources Centre to concentrate specifi-
cally on the improvement of teaching skills, methods and materials. Leader-
ship and initiative in these two new agencies have so far been slow to manifest
themselves. The future development of these agencies, as service-oriented re-
source organisations for the higher education system will be a critical variable
in the struggle to maintain and improve quality.
In the course of enrolment expansion, the challenge of educating less well-
prepared students will become more apparent. As higher education moves be-
yond enrolment limited to the best prepared 1 per cent of the age cohort, it will
confront new obstacles relating to curriculum and student readiness for cam-
pus academic life. The Government has recently sought to address this prob-
lem (and perhaps its growing financial constraints as well) by reducing univer-
sity degree programmes from four to three years while shifting many ‘fresh-
man’ courses to university preparatory programmes at the secondary level.
Anecdotal reports indicate that this change is yet to achieve its desired objec-
tives (Haileselassie 2004). In the future, additional forms of academic support
and student counseling will likely be necessary to confront the academic chal-
lenges posed by progressive massification of enrolments.
Will there be enough academic staff to support expanded enrolments? This
question addresses the potential for academic staff shortages to become a ma-
jor constraint on the country’s higher education expansion endeavor. Perhaps
the most daunting challenge to the implementation of Ethiopia’s higher educa-
tion reform is the sheer physical numbers of academic staff who will need to
be recruited and trained over the coming years. If the system is to reach public
enrolments of 130,000 students by 2007 (120,000 undergraduate plus 10,000
graduate students) and we assume a more efficient staff/student ratio of 1:20,
some 3,608 new academic staff will be required. This figure represents a 125
per cent increase in just five years over the current contingent of 2,892 aca-
demic staff. If the proposed qualifications guidelines (30 per cent PhDs, 50 per
cent master’s degrees) are applied, this would mean 1,082 new PhD holders
and 1,804 new master’s degree recipients.
At present, just 30 PhD. students are registered at Addis Ababa University
and only 4 doctoral degrees were awarded in 2003 (Ministry of Education
2003), thereby indicating the enormousness of this particular challenge. AAU,
with 46 graduate programmes and 1,690 graduate students in 2002–03, consti-
tutes nearly 90 per cent of the country’s capacity to provide graduate educa-
tion. Any strategy for generating the academic staff necessary to support a
doubling of undergraduate enrolments will therefore depend heavily on the
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
107

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
108
AAU’s capacity to produce a much larger number of successful master’s and
PhD. degree holders, which totaled 391 graduates in the same year. For this
reason, the government’s higher education capacity-building programme has
proposed the ambitious goal of 6,000 graduate enrollments by 2005.
After averaging roughly 300 graduate admissions yearly for much of the
past decade, Addis Ababa University has sought to respond to this challenge.
It increased its graduate admissions to 490 in 2001–02, and doubled this amount
to 951 in 2002–03. Nevertheless, it fell well short of its projected 2002 admis-
sions target of 1,700 under the higher education expansion programme. The
shortage of qualified applicants explains much of this shortfall. In spite of this
underperformance, the graduate admissions goal for 2003–04 has been set by
government at 3,000. As an interim response to this shortfall in the supply of
academic staff, the ministry has stepped up its use of expatriate academic staff,
recruited mainly from India, Nigeria and the United Kingdom. Between 2002
and 2003, their numbers more than doubled from 150 to 397 (Ministry of Edu-
cation 2003).
The pure logistics of this staffing challenge will certainly require much
more than the system’s existing capacity in order to manage these staff recruit-
ment, placement and relocation activities. In addition, the supply of bachelor’s
degree holders from which to recruit these numbers may not be sufficient. The
public higher education system is currently producing 4,700 bachelor’s degree
holders a year. Of these, only 829 appear to have specialised in education and
another 106 in technical education. Assuming that 2,600 new qualified sec-
ondary school teachers and 1,100 qualified technical education teachers would
have to be recruited in order to reach ESDP II enrolment goals for secondary
and technical education, this would mean that secondary education teacher
recruitment needs would absorb 26 per cent of all higher education graduates
over the next three years. If this occurred, then roughly 35 per cent of the
remaining degree graduates would need to be recruited as higher education
academic staff over the next three years in order to get them started on the
necessary graduate training programmes. In other words, the Ministry of Edu-
cation alone would have to hire 60 per cent of the country’s total degree-holder
output from public institutions over the near term. This seems improbable.
Conclusion
In pursuing needed higher education expansion and reform, Ethiopia is seek-
ing to do many of the right things (e.g., autonomy, revenue diversification,
funding formula, system support agencies). But the impact of these actions is
yet to be seen—and may not be. These reforms face a formidable challenge in
that many of them will require substantial changes in the existing institutional
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
108

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
109
culture of ‘command and control’ that characterises the Ministry of Education
and the government in general. Will effective institutional autonomy be pos-
sible in an environment where the government has sought to inject political
criteria into the academic staff evaluation process (2002) and directly appointed
a new president, academic vice president and administrative vice president for
Addis Ababa University (2003) when the previous incumbents resigned in pro-
test over this violation of academic freedom? Will new courses in civics pre-
pare students for democratic practice when student government is suspended,
when the student newspaper is banned, when security forces are stationed on
campus, when student admissions and placement are directed by the Ministry
of Education, when union organising among staff is prohibited and when free-
dom of the press is circumscribed (Human Rights Watch 2003)? Will new
courses in ethics produce more responsible citizens when student protests of
the above impositions are met with slaughter, mass arrests, and torture (Hu-
man Rights Watch 2003)?7
Evidence that the new Higher Education Proclamation signals a meaning-
ful shift in the prevailing government mind-set has been slow to materialise.
To date, the Ministry of Education has provided little in the way of guidance,
regulations or procedures about how institutional autonomy will be
operationalised in practice. Unsure of where the limits are and mindful of past
punishments, university leaders have been reluctant to test the proclamation’s
possibilities for revamping hiring practices, remuneration packages and bud-
geting processes. In short, the political will so clearly manifested in the
government’s approval of the Higher Education Proclamation has yet to be
demonstrated in the implementation of its authorised reforms.
On balance, the ambitious enrolment expansion goals of Ethiopia’s higher
education reform programme seem likely to be achieved. Supported by truly
massive government investments in the construction of classrooms, libraries
and dormitories at the six recently created universities, public degree enrol-
ments numbered 58,026 in 2002–03 and appear within reach of the
government’s target of 80,000 in 2005.
Achieving the reform’s quality objectives, however, remains problematic.
Expenditure per student is already very low and is likely to be pushed lower by
rapid expansion. As noted above, a substantial shortfall in the numbers of aca-
demic staff available to support this expansion seems inevitable. More than a
year after its creation, the new Quality and Relevance Assurance Agency still
exists in name only. The recent disruptive shift from a four- to a three-year
degree programme intensifies the challenges of maintaining (let alone increas-
ing) educational quality.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
109

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
110
Moreover, it is unclear where the funds will come from to equip the many
new classrooms, laboratories, libraries and dormitories that are nearing comple-
tion. The Ministry of Education is simultaneously engaged in an aggressive
expansion of technical and vocational education while maintaining its
longstanding commitment to ‘education for all’ at the primary level. And as
expanding access at the primary level translates into increased demand at the
secondary level, the latter will also become a claimant for budgetary relief.
Although the government’s commitment to human resource development re-
mains impressive, its multiple initiatives in this sphere require a budgetary
balancing act that will be increasingly difficult to sustain.
Notes
1
Adopting the precedent established by the Organisation for Economic Co-op-
eration and Development (1998:14), ‘tertiary’ is used in preference to ‘higher’
education because ‘higher’ often connotes university. Use of the latter term
risks excluding important postsecondary alternatives to universities such as
technical institutes, teacher training colleges, and distance education programs.
2
All public enrollments were first converted into full-time equivalent (FTE) stu-
dent numbers using a factor of 1.0 for regular students, 0.2 for evening stu-
dents, and 1.5 for graduate students. This yielded an FTE of 44,217 students for
2001–02. The recurrent budget for education tertiary in 2001–02 of Birr 324
million was added to income from evening student tuition fees assumed to be
50 Birr per student. Student welfare costs were estimated to be 2,000 Birr per
student.
3
Taken from various World Bank project documents.
4
UNESCO (2003) statistics supplemented by World Bank data.
5
For FTE calculations, all regular residential students were assumed to be full-
time students carrying an academic load of 15 credit hours per semester and
therefore represented 1.0 FTE. All evening students were assumed to be carry-
ing a course load of 3 credits and therefore constituted 0.2 FTE apiece. Gradu-
ate students were assumed to represent 1.5 FTE apiece in recognition of the
generally higher cost of graduate education.
6
The graduate tax was introduced in the 2003–04 academic year. It covers
government’s full costs for student meals, accommodation and health services,
plus 15 per cent of estimated tuition costs. The total amount is Birr 1,700 per
year (US$196). Payments will take place at a flat rate, regardless of income
category, until the individual’s agreed share is fully recovered.
7
On 11 April 2001, some 45 students from Addis Ababa University were injured
by security police during a student protest of the prohibitions and suspensions
noted above. On 17 April 2001, a student demonstration against this police
action triggered the killing of 41 persons (mostly students), the detention of
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
110

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
111
more than 2,000 students, the arrest of 330 students, and the documented torture
of this latter group while in custody. On 30 April 2001, police returned to campus
to arrest additional students (Human Rights Watch 2003).
References
Abebayehu, A., 1998, ‘Problems of Gender Equity in Institutions of Higher Learn-
ing in Ethiopia,’ in A. Asgedom et al., eds., Quality Education in Ethiopia:
Visions for the 21st Century, Addis Ababa: Institute for Educational Research,
Addis Ababa University.
Aredo, D., and Zelalem, Y., 1998, ‘Skilled Labour Migration from Developing
Countries: An Assessment of Brain Drain from Ethiopia,’ in S. Seyoum, A.
Seyoum, eds., Human Resources Development in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa: Ethio-
pian Economics Association.
Association of African Universities and the World Bank, 1997, Revitalising Uni-
versities in Africa: Strategy and Guidelines, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Budu, J., 2002, Final Report on Strategic Planning Study in Ethiopia: Consultant’s
Report, Addis Ababa: Ministry of Education.
Chapman, B., 2003 April, Income Contingent Loans for Higher Education: Inter-
national reform. Draft paper presented at a World Bank Workshop. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.
Discovery Consultants, 2003, Report of the Study on the Impact of HIV/AIDS on
the Education Sector and the Status and Problems of HIV/AIDS Education in
Ethiopia, Addis Ababa: Ministry of Education.
Fredriksen, B., 1984, 22–25 February, Main Trends in Norwegian Higher Educa-
tion since 1960. Paper prepared for a conference on the Historical Develop-
ment of Higher Education in Eastern and Southern African Countries organised
by the Eastern and Southern African Universities Research Project (ESAURP),
Lusaka, Zambia. Publication no. 293 (B) of the Norwegian Institute of Interna-
tional Affairs, Oslo.
Government of Ethiopia, 2003, Higher Education Proclamation. No. 351/2003.
Addis Ababa: Negarit Gazeta.
Haileselassie, A., 2004, 23 May, ‘The Looming Disaster in Higher Education,’
Fortune Newspaper, Vol. 5, No. 212.
Human Rights Watch, 2003, Lessons in Repression: Violations of Academic Free-
dom in Ethiopia, London: Human Rights Watch.
Johnstone, B., 2003, 23–25 September, Higher Education Finance and Accessibil-
ity: Tuition Fees and Student Loans in Sub-Saharan Africa. Paper presented at
the Africa regional training conference: ‘Improving Tertiary Education in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Things that Work!’, Accra, Ghana.
Kastbjerg, G., 1999, Financing Higher Education in Ethiopia. Sponsored by the
European Development Fund. Addis Ababa: Ministry of Education.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
111

JHEA/RESA Vol. 2, No. 3, 2004
112
Ministry of Capacity Building, 2003, National Capacity Building Plan: 2003/2004–
2007/2008. Addis Ababa: Ministry of Capacity Building.
Ministry of Education, 1995, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1993/94, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 1996, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1994/95, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 1997, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1995/96, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 1998, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1996/97, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 1999, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1997/98, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2000, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1998/99, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2001a, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 1999/00, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2001b, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 2000/01, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems.
Ministry of Education, 2002a, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 2001/02, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2002b, Higher Education Capacity Building Programme:
Main Document, Addis Ababa: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2003, Education Statistics Annual Abstract 2002/03, Addis
Ababa: Education Management Information Systems, Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education, 2004, 27 May, Higher Education Systems Overhaul: Re-
port of the Committee of Inquiry into Governance, Leadership and Manage-
ment in Ethiopia’s Higher Education System. Draft. Addis Ababa: Ministry of
Education.
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, 2002, Ethiopia: Sustainable
Development and Poverty Reduction Programme. Addis Ababa: Federal Demo-
cratic Republic of Ethiopia.
Mkude, D., 2003, 23–25 September, Contracting Non-Academic Services to Pri-
vate Providers: The Dar es Salaam Experience. Paper presented at the Africa
regional training conference: ‘Improving Tertiary Education in Sub-Saharan
Africa: Things that Work!’, Accra, Ghana.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 1998, Redefining Ter-
tiary Education, Paris: OECD.
Otaala, B., 2003, 23–25 September, Institutional Policies for Managing AIDS in
Africa. Paper presented at the Africa regional training conference: ‘Improving
Tertiary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: Things that Work!’, Accra, Ghana.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
112

Saint: Higher Education in Ethiopia: The Vision and Its Challenges
113
Tamrat, W., 2003, 26 July, A Glimpse of Private Higher Education Institutions in
the World and in Ethiopia. Proceedings of the First National Conference on
Private Higher Education Institutions in Ethiopia, St. Mary’s College, Addis
Ababa.
Yizengaw, T., 2003, 23–25 September, Transformations in Higher Education: Ex-
periences with Reform and Expansion in the Ethiopian Higher Education Sys-
tem. Keynote speech presented at the Africa regional training conference: ‘Im-
proving Tertiary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: Things that Work!’ Accra,
Ghana.
UNAIDS, 2003, AIDS Epidemic Update, December 2003, Geneva: UNAIDS and
World Health Organisation.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, 2003, Financing Education—Investments and Returns:
Analysis of the World Education Indicators, Paris: UNESCO.
Wagaw, T. G., 1990, The Development of Higher Education and Social Change:
The Ethiopian Experience, East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
Wondimu, H., 2003, ‘Ethiopia,’ in D. Teferra, P. Altbach, eds., African Higher
Education: An International Reference Handbook, Bloomington: University
of Indiana Press.
World Bank, 1998a, Ethiopia: Social Sector Report, Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 1998b, Ethiopia Education Sector Development Project: Project Ap-
praisal Document, Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2002, Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Ter-
tiary Education, Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2003, Public Expenditure Review: Public Spending in the Social Sec-
tors—Ethiopia, Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2004a, Higher Education Development for Ethiopia: Pursuing the
Vision, Washington, DC: World Bank, Human Development Department, Africa
Region.
World Bank, 2004b, Country Status Report: Ethiopia, Washington, DC: World
Bank, Human Development Department, Africa Region.
06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
113

06.saint.p65
27/12/2004, 18:55
114
