comptes rendus 185
The sustained excellence of Martin’s introduction is marred by two small 
errors. It is surely misleading to say that a BA degree entitled Marlowe “to 
style himself ‘Sir Christopher Marlowe’ ” (11). (Constance Kuriyama, whose 
2002 Marlowe biography Martin follows here, is referring to a not-for-export 
academic title, an English equivalent to the Latin “Ds.” or “Dominus”—but in 
Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night, the faux-cleric Sir Topas is not in anyone’s esti­
mate the social equal of a knight or baronet like Sir Toby Belch or Sir Andrew 
Aguecheek.) Secondly, it seems uncalled-for to describe as “conspiracy theo­
ries” the analyses that have led to the conclusion that Marlowe’s death was a 
political murder, rather than the result of “a quarrel over lunch” (13): one can 
take issue with the views of scholars like David Riggs, but labelling of this kind 
is not the way to do it. 
michael keefer, University of Guelph
Martin, Jessica and Alec Ryrie (eds.). 
Private and Domestic Devotion in Early Modern Britain. 
St. Andrews Studies in Reformation History. Farnham, UK and Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2012. Pp. xi, 285 + 11 ill. ISBN 978-1-14094-3131-2 (hardcover) 
$134.95.
For the last 30 years, reappraisals of the Reformation by historians and liter­
ary scholars have produced some of the richest and most fascinating work in 
the field of early modern studies. For the most part, however, this research 
has focused on structural issues, notably theology, ecclesiology, and (perhaps 
especially) doctrine. This has done much to illuminate our understanding of 
essential sites of political and cultural contestation, and of the relationship be­
tween religion and state power; yet this preoccupation with structure has left 
several significant questions largely unaddressed. What, for instance, were the 
effects of the Reformation on the lives of individual believers? What can be said 
to constitute the experience of a Reformed faith among members of the laity? 
Private and Domestic Devotion in Early Modern Britain, a collection of essays 
edited by Jessica Martin and Alec Ryrie, establishes important groundwork for 
this conversation by calling attention to the subject of religious practice within 

186 book reviews
the household: collective daily devotions, the experience of solitary prayer, and 
prayer shared only by husbands and wives. Drawing on an impressive array of 
manuscript and printed sources taken from social, political, and confessional 
contexts, these essays identify a texture of conflict and continuity at the heart of 
private devotion that hints at the truly complex shape of Reformation-era reli­
gious belief. While the trend in much recent scholarship has been to challenge 
the understanding of the Reformation as intelligible according to simplistic and 
totalizing binaries (Catholic vs. Calvinist, northern vs. southern England, “elite” 
vs. “popular,” etc.), nowhere is this vocabulary more seriously inadequate than 
in the domestic sphere, as these essays clearly show. Households and individual 
believers in England and Scotland created approaches to personal devotion that 
combined elements of the institutional Church with individual and familial in­
novations, with input from parish clergy and household chaplains, and even 
with aspects of pre-Reformation piety. 
The collection begins with two valuable surveys of Reformation-era do­
mestic devotion: Ian Green discusses England in the first, and Jane E. A. Dawson 
addresses Scotland in the second. In both countries, Reformed attitudes to­
ward private devotion are shaped by dialogue between public and personal ap­
proaches to worship as well as between the present and the Catholic past. This 
dialogue is the focus for many of the essays here. Hannibal Hamlin examines 
the penitential psalms and their continued significance as a distinct group of 
devotional texts for evangelicals. Micheline White discusses Anne Lock and 
argues that her confessional ideology is remarkable for the series of responses 
that it offers to Catholic devotional practices, especially those associated with 
the Office of the Dead. Jessica Martin reads devotional tracts and sermons as 
well as more traditionally “literary” texts in order to assess Reformed responses 
to the complex devotional problems posed by the Passion. Tara Hamling argues 
persuasively that early modern domestic devotion relied, even in Reformed 
homes, on an apparatus of visual aids, notably carefully-crafted household ob­
jects imbued with spiritual significance. In the only chapter on post-Reforma­
tion Catholic practice, Alison Shell reads John Austin’s Devotions, used by both 
Catholics and evangelicals, as a text that illustrates the difficulty of drawing 
confessional lines in the practice of private devotion in the seventeenth century, 
even if such lines might be drawn in doctrine. 
Several of the essays examine the significance of Reformed attitudes to­
ward private devotion within larger cultural debates, notably those surrounding 

comptes rendus 187
privacy itself. Though both the Church of England and the Kirk encouraged 
private prayer and reading of the Scriptures, political and cultural suspicions 
of secrecy, combined with a reverence of communal worship, created official 
attitudes toward private devotion that were conflicted to say the least. Erica 
Longfellow argues that Eikon Basilike draws upon these suspicions in order to 
portray Charles I’s solitary prayer while held captive as a result of monstrous 
political coercion. The role of the institutional church in prescribing forms of 
private devotion is also crucial to Kate Narveson’s essay, which considers the 
efforts of Reformed clerics to regulate reading practices in order to make clear 
the relationship between interpretation and Reformed doctrine. This inclina­
tion to discipline the private self emerges in Alec Ryrie’s fascinating essay on 
evangelical thinking about sleep and dreams. Sleep was occasionally regarded 
as welcome rest, but more often with suspicion as a moment in which believers 
were at their most spiritually vulnerable. Not all attention to the issue of pri­
vacy was negative, however. Beth Quitslund shows how metrical psalms were 
intended by English versifiers to be specifically domestic devotional texts, and 
Jeremy Schildt provides a riveting survey of Bible-reading practices in the mid- 
and late- seventeenth century.
This collection defines a malleable yet fundamentally cohesive subject of 
study and introduces its audience to key questions that may stimulate further 
discussion. Individual essays are very strong and provide valuable points of de­
parture for future work. Admittedly, the collection has its biases—little is writ­
ten about private devotional practice in Wales or post-Reformation Catholic 
practice, for example, and most of the pieces tend to lean heavily on evidence 
from the seventeenth century—but to emphasize these gaps too strongly would 
be to miss the point. The volume’s function is to identify an area of study that 
has been overlooked in recent years and, perhaps more importantly, to explain 
why it is that our limited understanding of this area constitutes a serious defi­
ciency in our knowledge of the Reformation as a whole. This it does, and very 
admirably. Without a sense of how the structural changes of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries affected the lives of individual believers, any portrait of 
the period is necessarily incomplete.
dan breen, Ithaca College
