International Review of Leave  
Policies and Related Research 
2009
EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS 
RESEARCH SERIES NO. 102
SEPTEMBER 2009


 
 
 
 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS RESEARCH SERIES NO. 102 
 
International Review of Leave Policies and 
Related Research 2009 
 
EDITED BY PETER MOSS, INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION UNIVERSITY OF 
LONDON  
 

About EMAR 
Employment Market Analysis and Research (EMAR) is a multi-disciplinary team of 
economists, social researchers and statisticians based in the Employment 
Relations Directorate of the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory 
Reform.  
 
Our role is to provide the evidence base for good policy making in employment 
relations, labour market and equality and discrimination at work. We do this 
through: 
 
• Conducting periodic socio-economic benchmark surveys 
• Commissioning external research reports 
• Conducting in-house research and analysis 
• Assessing the regulatory impact of new employment laws 
• Monitoring and evaluating the impact of government policies 
 
We publicly disseminate the results of this research through BIS’s Employment 
Relations Research Series and other publications. For further details of EMAR's 
work please see our web pages at:  
www.berr.gov.uk/employment/research-evaluation
About this publication 
The project manager for this report was Shilpa Patel, Senior Research Officer in 
the EMAR branch. 
Published in September 2009 by the Department for Business, Innovation and 
Skills.   
URN 09/1175 ISBN  
This report can be ordered at: www.bis.gov.uk/publications Click the ‘Browse by 
subject’ button, then select ‘Employment Relations Research’. Alternatively, call the 
BIS Publications Orderline on 0845 015 0010 (+44 845 015 0010) and quote the 
URN, or email them at: publications@bis.gsi.gov.uk. Electronic copies are available 
to 
download 
at: 
http://www.berr.gov.uk/employment/research-
evaluation/errs/index.html
Enquiries should be addressed to emar@bis.gsi.gov.uk or to: 
Employment Market Analysis and Research 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
Bay 4107 
1 Victoria Street 
London SW1H 0ET 
United Kingdom  
The views expressed in this report are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the Department or the Government. 
 
 

Contents 
 
Glossary .......................................................................................................... v 
 
Executive summary...........................................................................................1 
 
Introduction ....................................................................................................10 
 
Section 1 – Articles 
 
1.1 
Belgium: articulating work and family – the gendered use of         
institutional measures………………………………………….………….14 
 
1.2 
Belgium: career breaks in Flanders…………………….………………..32 
 
1.3 
Belgium: family-work articulation policies – a life course  
Approach………………………………………………….……………..….50 
 
1.4 
German leave reforms: acknowledging diversity?...............................65 
 
1.5 
Leave policies and discussions in Sweden today……………………...72 
 
Section 2 – Country notes on leave policies and research 
 
2.1 
Country notes 2009: introduction and main findings………………..….77 
 
2.2 
Sources, terms and currency conversion rates used in  
 
Country notes…………………………………………………….….……100 
 
2.3      Australia…………………………………………………….……………..102 
 
2.4      Austria………………………………………………….………………….113 
 
2.5 
Belgium…………………………………………………….…….......……122 
 
2.6 
Canada………………………………………………….…………………131 
 
2.7 
Czech Republic……………………………………………….…………..143 
 
2.8 
Denmark……………………………………………….……………….….149 
 
2.9 
Estonia………………………………………………………….……….…157 
 
2.10  Finland……………………………………………………………….…….163 
. 
2.11 France……………………………………………………………...………179 
 
2.12 Germany……………………………………………………………...……186 

2.13 Greece……………………………………………………………………..194
 
2.14 Hungary………………………………………………………………...….204
 
2.15 Iceland……………………………………………………………………..213
 
2.16 Ireland…………………………………………………………………...…222
 
2.17 Italy…………………………………………………………………………230
 
2.18 The Netherlands…………………………………………………….…….239
 
2.19   New Zealand…………………………..………….……………………….251
 
2.20 Norway……………………………..………………………………………259
 
2.21   Poland…………………………………………………………..………….267
 
2.22 Portugal……………………………………………………………………277
 
2.23   Russian Federation……………………………………………………….287
 
2.24 Slovenia……………………………………………………………………293
 
2.25 South Africa……………………………………………...………………..302
 
2.26 Spain……………………………………………………………………….311
 
2.27 Sweden…………………………………………………..………………..326
 
2.28 United Kingdom………………………………………………..…………337 
 
2.29 United States……………………………………………………..………349 
 
Annexes  
1. A formal network of experts on leave policies and research…………….354
 
2. Network members at April 2009 and other contributors to country  
Notes…………………………………………………………………..………356
 
3. BIS Employment Relations Research Series……………….................…361  

Glossary 
 
This report is about leave entitlements, mainly for workers with dependant children. 
As the report shows, working parents today in most countries are entitled to a 
range of different types of leave, going under a variety of different names. 
Moreover, in a number of countries the distinction between types of leave is 
increasingly blurred (for a further discussion, see Section 2.1). This glossary gives 
definitions for four of the most common types of leave, the first three of which are 
found in most countries. 
 
Maternity leave 
 
Leave generally available to mothers only (except in a few cases where part of the 
leave can be transferred to other carers under certain circumstances). It is usually 
understood to be a health and welfare measure, intended to protect the health of 
the mother and newborn child, just before, during and immediately after childbirth. 
 
Paternity leave 
 
Leave generally available to fathers only, usually to be taken soon after the birth of 
a child, and intended to enable the father to spend time with his partner, new child 
and older children. 
 
Parental leave 
 
Leave generally available equally to mothers and fathers, either as a non-
transferable individual right (i.e. both parents have an entitlement to an equal 
amount of leave) or as a family right that parents can divide between themselves 
as they choose; in some countries, part of Parental leave is an individual right, the 
remainder a family right. It is generally understood to be a care measure, intended 
to give parents the opportunity to spend time caring for a young child; it usually can 
only be taken after the end of Maternity leave. In some cases, parents can choose 
to take all or part of their Parental leave on a part-time basis. 
 
In some countries, Parental leave is supplemented by a further period of leave 
intended also as a care measure, and given various names, such as ‘childcare 
leave’ or ‘home care leave’. 
 
Career break 
 
Leave generally open to all employees, but not restricted to providing care and 
available to be taken across the life course. Less common as an entitlement than 
the three types of leave outlined above. 
 

Executive summary 
 
This is the fifth annual review of the international network on leave policy and 
research, which has members and associates from 27 countries, mostly in Europe. 
The network covers policies for parents and others with care responsibilities, 
including for adult relatives, as well as policies available to the whole population such 
as life course career breaks and time credits. But initially, priority is being given to 
leave policies focused on the care of children. Among the purposes of this network 
are: the exchange of information about policies, both in individual countries and by 
international organisations, and research on leave policies; the provision of a forum 
for the cross-national discussion of issues and trends in policy and research; and 
providing a source of regularly updated information on policies and research. 
 
Amongst other activities, the network organises an annual seminar, and this review 
includes papers from the seminar held at the Université catholique de Louvain at 
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium in October 2008. It also includes 27 ‘country notes’, 
providing information on current leave policies in the countries represented in the 
network, recent developments in policy, information on take-up, and a listing of 
recent publications and ongoing research; and an overview of current leave policies 
and recent policy developments in these countries. 
 
Section 1: Articles 
 
Belgium, the host country for the 2008 network seminar, is of particular interest 
because of its unique and highly innovative ‘time credit’ system, which extends 
entitlement to take time off work to cover the whole adult life-course and for any 
reason, one direction in which leave policies elsewhere may develop in the future. 
The first three of the five articles included in this year’s review are based on 
presentations about Belgium made to the 2008 seminar, two of which pay particular 
attention to the Belgian ‘time credit’ system. 
 
Bernard Fusulier (Articulating work and family – the gendered use of 
institutional measures) examines where Belgium is situated on the continuum of 
societal models for work-family articulation. On indicators of women’s employment, 
Belgium lies nearer to the Nordic countries (at one extreme of the continuum) than 
Japan (at the other); the employment gap between men and women is closing, 
though the employment rate for men is still around 15 per centage points higher than 
for women and, overall, time use remains very different between men and women. 
Having set this scene, Fusulier goes on to examine three main support measures:  
Maternity, Paternity and adoption leave); reduction or suspension of work in the 
private sector (time credit); and so-called thematic leave (Parental leave, leave to 
provide care for a seriously ill relative, and palliative care leave).  
 
Particular attention is paid to the ‘time credit’ system, first introduced as a ‘career 
break’ scheme in 1985, which enables workers in the private sector to take at least 
one year off work (longer where collective agreements permit this) or to work 
reduced hours for any reason (a similar system – still known as ‘career breaks’ – 
operates in the public sector). Workers using time credit receive partial income 
 

replacement through a flat-rate benefit for one year (extended to five years if the 
worker takes a full-time time credit to care for children aged under eght years), 
reduced  proportionately if they reduce their working hours. Originally introduced as a 
means to reduce unemployment at a time of economic crisis, that link no longer 
exists; paid leave is not now conditional on employers hiring an unemployed person 
as replacement. The time credit and career break schemes exist alongside Parental 
leave, and the two are not to be confused. 
 
Use of this entitlement is increasing each year among men aged 50 and over and 
among women under 50; however, this increase is due to more people working 
reduced hours and the numbers stopping work completely are falling. There are more 
women than men using the scheme except in the group aged 50 and over, where 
there are many men. When women choose to take time credit, they do so mainly 
between the ages of 25 and 39, or after 50; but most men taking time credit are over 
50. Since its introduction, women have always been the main users of this scheme 
(63 per cent), and the proportions have remained very similar since 2002. Women 
also use thematic leave, including Parental leave, more than men, accounting for 78 
per cent of users.  
 
Use is higher in Flanders (Flemish-speaking Belgium) than Wallonia (French-
speaking), the main reason being that the Flemish government pays a 
supplementary allowance, which is added to the national benefit; to have this 
allowance, the candidates must have taken a time credit, or thematic leave, for a very 
specific reason such as caring for a child under eight years or a seriously ill relative. 
 
These observations suggest that, although there are some changes, managing the 
relationship between family and work in Belgium still remains mainly women’s 
responsibility. Although some of the Belgian policy measures show support for the 
development of a universal breadwinner and caregiver model, these are not enough 
in themselves to ensure a more egalitarian relationship. Although this is partly the 
result of economic calculation (men still earn, on average, more than women), it often 
hides a gendered social structure. In this sense, socio-culturally, the main 
responsibility for family duties is still left to women, which is ipso facto an obstacle for 
men who wish to invest more in parenthood. But this is another subject to consider 
and research. 
 
Jessie Vandeweyer and Ignace Glorieux (Career breaks in Flanders) provide 
more information on the Belgian ‘career break/time credit’ system, and present 
results about use of it based on surveys conducted in Flanders, using time use 
diaries and questionnaires. These schemes are unique in that they can be taken up 
regardless of reason throughout the life cycle. The policy aims at facilitating a better 
work-life balance to keep people with competing interests in the workforce. Leave 
arrangements and part-time work prevent women dropping out of the labour market 
when family obligations become too onerous and offer fathers a legitimate framework 
to free up time for their children.  
 
But the schemes are not only intended for parents. The current policy is intended, on 
the one hand, to enable a more relaxed career and acknowledges the need for time 
across a lifespan for activities other than employment; it acknowledges the many 
uses of time that make for a good life. On the other hand, the policy encourages 
 

employees over 50 to stay in the labour market by allowing them to work four-fifths or 
one-half of normal hours until their pension age. Since 2002, there has been a 
special ruling in place for the over-50s, with more flexible conditions and larger 
contributions; so-called ‘landing-strip jobs’, whereby over-50s voluntarily reduce the 
number of hours they work, are used by many workers as a transition from work to 
retirement. This possibility is extensively used in cases of company restructuring.  
 
The research finds that the reasons for taking a career break vary depending on 
whether part-time or full-time leave is taken. For full-time male career-breakers with 
work-related activities, another professional activity was the most important reason to 
take a career leave (working in another job – often to try out another job – is an 
option while taking a career break, though the allowance is no longer paid); full-time 
career-breakers without a work-related activity mainly chose to take leave to follow a 
course or study or to spend more time with the children. Part-time leave obviously 
seems a strategy for men to better balance work and family responsibilities; half of 
the part-time career-breakers wanted more time for the children and one-fifth 
mentioned ‘more time for domestic chores’ as one of the reasons for career leave. 
The fact that 32 per cent wanted more leisure time and 23 per cent more time for 
themselves indicated a desire to ‘slow down’.  
 
The most important reason for taking a career break among women was ‘more time 
for the children’; almost three-quarters of women with a full-time or part-time leave 
specified this reason. In addition, 41 per cent of the female part-time career-breakers 
wanted more time for domestic work and 38 per cent wanted more time for 
themselves.  
 
Male career-breakers on full-time leave and with no other work activities have 34 
hours and 57 minutes extra time available compared to their working counterparts; 
on average, they spend just 43 per cent of freed-up working time on family tasks 
(domestic work and childcare). This group of men has the largest amount of spare 
time and the smallest total workload and time pressure; they are mainly divided 
between men who enrol in a course of study (this group hardly contains any fathers) 
and men who primarily perform family tasks. This last, small group of fathers made a 
conscious decision to swap paid work for unpaid work, and acted upon it.  
 
Part-time male career-breakers use 80 per cent of time freed up by working less 
primarily for domestic work and childcare. Their total workload is not less than full-
time male workers, but they experience less time pressure. These men present a 
strong image of caring fathers, using career break and time credit schemes to 
achieve a better balance between paid work and family life. This demonstrates that 
when men are presented with an opportunity to work less and are supported in taking 
up an alternative role by means of such schemes, they will take on more family tasks. 
When only women take advantage of flexible leave arrangements, this can have a 
perverse effect: work-family policies aiming at more gender equality lead to the exact 
opposite, when it is assumed that women will lower their work ambitions to prioritise 
family life. 
 
Career breaks and time credits, therefore, act both as employment and work-life 
balance policies. In 2004 in Flanders, nine per cent of the working female and three 
per cent of the working male population – 89,000 women and 35,000 men – took 
 

career breaks or time credit, part or full time. Although the total share of male 
workers using these schemes has grown in recent years, it still represents a relatively 
small group; only one per cent of the male working population under the age of 50 
took career leave, compared with seven per cent of employed women. Use is much 
higher among over 50s, especially of reduced hours working: in 2004, 18 per cent of 
employed women in this age group and ten per cent of men chose to take advantage 
of a part-time career break. 
 
Amandine J. Masuy (Family-work articulation policies – a life course approach) 
considers how life course principles may enhance the design of social policies, 
making them better able to tackle the complex field of family-work articulation taking 
Belgium as an example. 
 
There are, at least, two aspects making the definition of work/family policy complex. 
The first is the ‘inter-fields’ nature of family-work articulation, being at the intersection 
of ‘traditional’ policy fields such as employment, family and health care. The second 
is time, an essential component for understanding individual strategies, inequalities 
and consequences. 
 
There is no consensus on what the life course approach is. However, one thing is 
clear: the studies referring to a ‘life’ principle have grown in number and in popularity 
over past decades. Today, to understand a society characterised by continual 
changes where individuals are defined by multiple roles, researchers need specific 
tools capable of capturing the dynamics of individual and social changes and the 
multiple contexts in which individuals are embedded. 
 
The author discusses the life course theoretical framework developed by Glen Elder. 
This is based on five principles: the first two, ‘lifespan’ and ‘human agency’, represent 
the individual or micro approach, while the ‘time and place’ principle represents the 
societal or macro approach. These two poles are bridged by the meso principles of 
‘linked lives’ and ‘timing of transition’. Each principle, taken separately, is not specific 
to the life course approach; what makes it original and challenging is its attempt to 
link these principles in order to study events situated in time and contexts. Concepts 
such as ‘trajectory’, ‘pathway’,  ‘transition’, ‘turning points’, ‘duration’ cannot be 
attributed to one specific principle but are used to bridge them.  
 
The lifespan principle calls for a longitudinal perspective, with a focus on transitions 
and trajectories rather than current statuses. This perspective will imply a change in 
the identification of ‘target groups’. Most of the time, policy makers try to identify ‘frail’ 
statuses; but thinking only in terms of ‘frail statuses’ may miss ‘frail trajectories’. 
Using examples of different family types, within a Belgian policy context, the paper 
illustrates this and other issues, and more broadly the potential of a life course 
approach and the relevance of the different principles to policy. Deploying methods 
inspired by transition modelling by demographers, it shows how the life course 
principles may lead to revised social policy design.  
 
In conclusion, time and multidimensionality are crucial elements to include in an 
‘inter-fields’ social policy. Existing Belgian policies include a time dimension, with a 
variety of leave possibilities. But progress can still be made in their time aspect by 
identifying the frail trajectories; and in their multidimensional aspect by designing 
 

more holistic policies taking account of employment, family, health and other 
contexts. To do so, it would be essential to collect longitudinal quantitative and 
qualitative micro data on the potential beneficiaries of family-work articulation, not 
only the actual beneficiaries, allowing the identification of frail transitions and 
trajectories and of individual strategies to articulate family and work lives. 
 
Daniel Erler (German leave reforms: acknowledging diversity?), in a paper 
presented at a later network seminar on diversity in leave policies (Amsterdam, 
November 2008), looks at the recent history of leave policy in Germany and, in 
particular, at the initial impact of a major reform introduced in 2007 intended to 
reduce women’s time out of the labour market and to increase use of leave by 
fathers, by reducing the length while increasing the benefit level of paid leave and 
adding an incentive for fathers to take leave. Although the reform was widely 
supported among political parties and the wider public, it was criticised on two 
grounds. Conservative circles perceived the reduction of standard paid leave periods 
and the introduction of ‘daddy months’ as an illegitimate state interference in the 
internal choices of families; while some on the Left questioned the progressive nature 
of the new benefit, arguing that linking benefit levels to prior income effectively 
constituted  a redistribution from the poor to the rich. In order to overcome this latter 
criticism, the government introduced a minimum benefit level of €300 a month and a 
benefit ceiling of €1,800; it also added a so-called low income component for 
households with monthly earnings of less than €1,000. 
 
Initial assessments of the impact of the reformed leave suggest that it has, by and 
large, fulfilled its aims. The average length of leave periods decreased following the 
reduction of the standard paid leave time from 24 to 12 months. By relating the leave 
benefit to parents’ prior income the government has also ensured that income losses 
among middle and higher income families have been reduced significantly, without 
deterioration in the situation of low income households. The most visible effect of the 
new law has, however, been the more than threefold increase of fathers taking at 
least two months of leave, a figure that highlights the important changes German 
society is currently undergoing.  
 
Anders Chronholm (Leave policies and discussions in Sweden today) 
discusses policy debates about Parental leave in Sweden, the first country to 
introduce this policy (in 1974), and especially about how to get more men to use this 
leave. One proposal to achieve this has been individualisation of leave, so that 
periods of leave are individual entitlements for fathers (or mothers); if this individual 
entitlement is not used, it is non-transferable and, therefore, lost. This form of 
individualisation has already been introduced to a limited extent of two months each 
for fathers and mothers. The debates in the 1990s mainly blamed the men 
themselves for not using their share of paid Parental leave days, transferring it 
instead to the mother; but more recently, it has been noticed that women are by and 
large satisfied with an unequal distribution of Parental leave. 
 
It was a bourgeois government in the early 1990s that first introduced 
individualisation, the so-called ‘father’s month’ in 1995. Since then further 
individualisation has been the main theme in Parental leave discussions in Sweden. 
A Social Democrat government introduced a second individualised month in 2002, 
and an inquiry reporting in 2005 recommended a non-transferable period for each 
 

parent of five months, expanding the Parental leave period paid at 80 per cent of 
earnings from 13 to 15 months (an ‘Icelandic model’). The Social Democrats lost the 
2006 election and the new government is against further individualisation. Instead 
they have introduced two reforms: a childcare allowance  available to parents of 
children between one and three years who do not use the public childcare system; 
and a gender equality bonus, a tax reduction to stimulate a more equal sharing of 
Parental leave.  
 
The Social Democrats, now in opposition, recently proposed that Parental leave 
should be completely individualised, with a first step being to introduce the Icelandic 
model. Individualisation of Parental leave could be an important question in the next 
Swedish elections, due in 2010. 
 
Section 2:  Country notes on leave policies and research  
 
This section of the report sets out information on leave policy and research in 27 
countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Slovenia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States. Nineteen of these countries are 
member states of the European Union and six are federal states. 
 
Each country note is divided into four parts. The first describes current leave and 
other employment-related policies to support parents, under five headings: 
Maternity leave, Paternity leave, Parental leave, childcare leave and career breaks; 
and other employment-related measures, including time off for the care of sick 
children and other dependants and flexible working entitlements. The second outlines 
recent changes in leave policy, including proposals currently under discussion. The 
third reviews evidence on take-up of different types of leave, while the final part 
provides information on selected recent publications and ongoing research 
studies. In addition, basic demographic, economic, employment and gender 
information is set out for each country, in a boxed table at the start of each country 
note. 
 
Individual country notes are preceded by an introduction, which summarises the main 
features of the country notes, providing an overview of leave policies in the 27 
countries included. 
 
Current leave policies 
 
A concise overview can be provided by showing, for each country, the number of 
months of leave (Maternity, Paternity and Parental) with benefits replacing two-thirds 
or more of earnings, an indicator used by the European Commission in monitoring 
member states’ progress in meeting Employment Guidelines. The median length of 
well-paid leave among these 27 countries is 4.5 months, with extremes of no months 
to just over two years. Countries can be divided in to three groups: 
 
1. Countries providing earnings-related leave (at two-thirds or more 
replacement rate) of nine months or over: the five Nordic countries, three 
 

countries from Central and Eastern Europe (Estonia, Hungary and Slovenia), and 
Germany. 
 
2. Countries providing four to six months of earnings-related leave, in all 
cases confined to Maternity leave. Ireland comes in here, although the effect of 
a ceiling is that the maximum payment per week is only €280, showing the need 
to take account of levels of ceilings in assessing the generosity of national 
schemes.  
 
3. Countries providing less than two months of earnings-related leave: four of 
the five mainly English-speaking countries (Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, 
United States) as well as South Africa. It should be noted that Québec, which 
now has responsibility for its own leave policy, is on a par with the top group of 
countries; the rest of Canada offers up to 50 weeks of earnings-related leave, but 
at 55 per cent of earnings it falls just below the EC indicator criterion; it also has a 
rather low ceiling.  
 
The distinction between Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave is beginning to blur in 
some countries, leading to the emergence of a generic Parental leave (for example, 
Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal and Sweden). A further variant that is 
blurring distinctions is the possibility that part of Maternity leave can be transferred to 
the father, making it, in effect, Parental leave (currently in the Czech Republic, 
Poland, Portugal and Spain, and proposed for the UK). 
 
Maternity leave: only Australia and the United States make no provision for paid 
leave for most or all women at and around childbirth. In countries with a specific 
period of Maternity leave, the period is mostly between 14 and 20 weeks, with 
earnings-related payment (between 70 and 100 per cent) throughout. There are five 
exceptions, countries with extended Maternity leave – Czech Republic, Greece 
(private sector), Hungary, Ireland, and the UK.  
 
Paternity leave: sixteen of the 27 countries under review have Paternity leave, which 
(with four exceptions) varies from two to ten days and is usually paid on the same 
basis as Maternity leave. Paternity leave is obligatory in Portugal. 
 
Parental leave and childcare leave: all EU member states must provide at least 
three months’ leave per parent for childcare purposes; outside the EU, all but one 
country included in the notes provides Parental leave; the exception is the United 
States (which has a generic and unpaid leave, which does not apply to all 
employees). In six countries, parents can take additional ‘childcare’ leave after 
Parental leave finishes.  
 
Parental leave varies on four main dimensions: length; whether it is an individual or 
family entitlement; payment; and flexibility. Broadly, countries divide into those where 
total continuous leave available, including Maternity leave, Parental leave and 
childcare leave, comes to around nine to 15 months; and those where continuous 
leave can run for up to three years. Parental leave is a family entitlement in 12 
countries, to be divided between parents as they choose; an individual entitlement in 
another ten countries; and mixed (part family, part individual entitlement) in three 
countries. A majority of countries (19) provide some element of payment. However, in 
 

ten cases payment is rather low, being flat rate or means tested or paid for only part 
of the leave period, or a combination of these; the remaining nine countries pay an 
earnings-related benefit pitched at more than half of normal earnings. Flexibility takes 
four main forms. First, the possibility to use all or part of leave when parents choose 
until their child reaches a certain age; second, the possibility of taking leave in one 
continuous block or several shorter blocks; third, the possibility to take leave on a full-
time or part-time basis (i.e. so parents can combine part-time employment with part-
time leave); and fourth, additional leave in the case of multiple births or, in a few 
cases, other circumstances. 
 
Other employment-related measures: the EU Parental leave directive gives all 
workers an entitlement to ‘time off from work on grounds of force majeure for urgent 
family reasons in cases of sickness or accident making their immediate presence 
indispensable’, without specifying minimum requirements for length of time or 
payment. Among EU member states reviewed here, 11 specify an entitlement to 
leave of ten days or more per year to care for sick children, though the age range of 
children covered varies; for all except one, leave is paid. Leave is shorter or 
unspecified and unpaid in the other member states. Of the non-EU countries, Norway 
and Russia have an entitlement to paid sick leave specifically to care for a sick child.  
 
Ten countries enable women to reduce their working hours in the 12 months after 
birth, usually related to breastfeeding. Women reducing their hours are entitled to 
earnings compensation. Finally, in four countries parents have a legal right to request 
flexible working hours from their employers, who must consider their request and 
may only refuse them if there is a clear business case for doing so. 
 
Relationship between leave and other employment-related policies and 
services for young children: in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden, a 
universal entitlement for children to a publicly-funded early childhood education and 
care (ECEC) service begins before or at the end of a period of well-paid Parental 
leave lasting about one year, ensuring a place to meet the needs of working parents 
from the time their leave ends. In some countries where leave ends when children 
are three years old (e.g. France, Hungary, Germany, Spain), nursery schooling or 
kindergartens are widely available to children aged three years and upwards, with 
near universal coverage. Kindergartens throughout Hungary, and many in the former 
Eastern part of Germany, are geared to the needs of working parents, with all day 
and all year opening. This is not the case elsewhere in Germany or in France and 
Spain where the availability of school-age childcare services for periods outside term-
time and school hours is not guaranteed (though widespread in France). Nor is an 
ECEC place guaranteed for a parent returning to work before the end of the full 
Parental leave period. As is the case in the many countries where there is a gap 
between the end of leave and the start of universal availability of ECEC services, the 
two systems are not integrated. 
 
Changes in leave policy and other related developments  
 
Many countries report changes in leave policy since the 2008 review (and up to April 
2009). In two cases – Estonia and Iceland – these involve cut backs related to the 
economic crisis: removing payment for Paternity leave in the former case and 
reducing the income ceiling for all leave payments in the latter. (In addition, in a 
 

change introduced in January 2008, but not reported in the 2008 review, Sweden cut 
the level of benefit paid to parents on leave from 80 to 77.6 per cent of earnings). 
Elsewhere, the changes have involved developments of leave provision.  
 
Leave policy is a subject of debate – by Ministers or Parliament – and/or proposed 
policy changes in several countries. The two main themes are further measures to 
increase fathers’ use of leave and overall reviews of leave policy. Australia will 
introduce paid Maternity leave in 2011.  
 
Take-up of leave 
 
Information on take-up of leave entitlements has many gaps, making systematic 
cross-national comparisons impossible. As a general rule, there is no statistical 
information on take-up of unpaid leave and limited information on paid leave.  
 
Paid Maternity leave appears to be extensively and fully used by mothers who are 
eligible (in a few cases, it is even obligatory to take this leave). Paid Parental leave is 
also widely used. Where Parental leave is unpaid, there are no regular statistics on 
use but take-up by both mothers and fathers is thought to be low: irrespective of 
gender, few parents take leave schemes that are completely unpaid. Where leave is 
a family entitlement, fathers’ use is low (i.e. where leave can be shared between 
parents, fathers take only a small proportion). However, where Parental leave has 
both an individual entitlement element and is relatively well paid, fathers’ use is 
higher. There is also evidence that fathers’ use of leave does respond to targeted 
policy changes. 
 
Information on take-up among different socio-economic or ethnic groups within 
countries is even patchier. Where it exists, it points towards women being less likely 
to take Parental leave, or to take it for shorter periods, if they are: self-employed; 
work in the private sector; higher educated; and/or higher earning. Fathers are more 
likely to take leave or to take it for longer periods if: their partners have higher 
education and/or earnings; if they work in female-dominated occupations or the 
public sector.  
 
Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
Country notes finish with a brief overview of the state of research on leave policy; a 
selection of publications on leave since January 2006 with a brief description of each; 
and brief outlines of ongoing research on leave.  
 
 

Introduction 
 
Peter Moss  
 
The international network on leave policies and research 
 
This is the fifth annual review of the international network on leave policy and 
research.1 The network was established at a seminar held in Brussels in October 
2004, organised by the Flemish government’s Centrum voor Bevolkings- en 
Gezinsstudie (CBGS – Population and Family Study Centre) and the Thomas Coram 
Research Unit (TCRU) at the Institute of Education University of London. This 
seminar was attended by researchers from a dozen countries, and built on earlier 
collaborative cross-national work in which the network coordinators – Fred Deven 
(from CBGS) and Peter Moss (from TCRU) – had both been involved. This 
collaboration began with the European Commission Childcare Network, an expert 
group that between 1986 and 1996 undertook studies on a range of issues related to 
the reconciliation of employment and family responsibilities, including leave policies. 
When the EC Network ended in 1996, collaboration continued, first with an 
international seminar convened in Brussels in 1999 that led to an edited book 
Parental Leave: Progress or Pitfall?; and then with a special issue of the journal 
Community, Work and Family (2002, Vol.5, No.3) on the theme of leave 
arrangements for parents.  
 
Among the purposes of the network on leave policies and research are: 
 
• 
the exchange of information about policies, both in individual countries and by 
international organisations, and research on leave policies;  
• 
the provision of a forum for the cross-national discussion of issues and trends 
in policy and research; and  
• 
providing a source of regularly updated information on policies and research.  
 
A fuller description of the remit of the network can be found in Annex 1.  
 
The network covers policies for parents and others with care responsibilities, 
including for adult relatives, as well as policies available to the whole population such 
as life course career breaks and time credits. But the network has given priority to 
leave policies focused on the care of children. These include Maternity, Paternity and 
Parental leave, leave to care for sick children and parental entitlements to work 
reduced hours.  
 
Today, the network has members and associates from 27 countries (see Annex 2), 
and undertakes a range of activities, including: 
 
                                                 
1 The three previous reviews are downloadable at http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file31948.pdf 
(2006); http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file40677.pdf (2007); and 
http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file47247.pdf (2008). 
 
10

• 
A major annual seminar, the latest being held at the Université catholique de 
Louvain at Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium, in October 2008;  
• 
A smaller specialised seminar, on the theme of ‘Diversity and Leave 
Arrangements’, held at the Free University Amsterdam in November 2008; 
• 
An annual international review on leave policies and related research, 
based on contributions from its members;  
• 
Other publications, including: a special issue of Community, Work and 
Family (2007, Vol.10, No.4) edited by three network members; a review of 
leave policies by the network coordinators in Marriage and Family Review 
(2006, Vol.39, No.3); and an edited book The Politics of Parental leave: 
Children,Pparenting,Ggender and the Labour Market, edited and authored by 
network members, to be published in Summer 2009 by Policy Press (Bristol); 
• 
A website (http://www.sfi.dk/Default.aspx?ID=3170), where the programmes 
and presentations from all seminars can be found. 
 
The current review 
 
Like the previous reviews, this edition contains detailed information on leave policy 
and research in a number of countries, mostly but not exclusively European. The 
information is contained in a series of country notes, prepared by network members, 
each following a common format. This year the number of countries covered has 
increased to 27, with the addition of New Zealand and Russia. The country notes are 
preceded by an introduction, which offers an overview of the main features and 
developments in the participating countries.  
 
As before, this review also contains papers from the network’s latest annual seminar, 
which was held in Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium, in October 2008. The seminar was 
attended by academics and policy makers from 23 countries. These annual events 
provide an opportunity for exchange and dialogue about developments in national 
leave policies and new research projects. The Louvain-La-Neuve seminar, for 
example, had three presentations about leave and other work/family measures in the 
host country. Belgium is of particular interest because of its unique and highly 
innovative ‘career break’ or ‘time credit’ system, which extends entitlement to take 
time off work to the whole adult life course and for any reason, one direction in which 
leave policies elsewhere may develop in the future. Articles based on these 
presentations can be found in Section 1 of this review, as well as articles on current 
policy developments and discussions in Sweden, the first country to introduce 
Parental leave back in 1974; and on an initial evaluation of the impact of a major 
reform of leave policy in Germany, including changes in use by fathers (this article is 
based on a paper given at the subsequent Amsterdam seminar). 
 
Other presentations at Louvain-La-Neuve included recent policy developments in 
Australia and an introduction to leave policy in South Africa. Each seminar now 
features the work on leave and related policies being undertaken by an international 
organisation, and the 2008 seminar featured the European Union and Commission. 
Bernard Fusulier, the seminar’s host, presented a paper on the 1996 Directive on 
Parental leave; while Petra Schott, from the Commission’s Directorate-General on 
Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, spoke about the current 
European legal framework on leave arrangements and the EC’s plans to develop 
entitlements. This was very timely. Just before the seminar, the Commission 
 
11

published proposals for amending the existing Maternity leave directive, including an 
extension of the minimum period from 14 to 18 weeks; and the social partners 
(represented at the seminar) had announced their intention to open formal 
negotiations on Parental leave, both initiatives holding out the possibility of improved 
minimum European standards. 
 
Subsequent to the seminar, on 18 June 2009 the social partners concluded a new 
Framework Agreement, which increases the duration of Parental leave from three to 
four months per parent and applies to all employees regardless of their type of 
contract. The next step is for the Commission to put forward a proposal to the 
Council of Ministers for an implementing directive.
 
All presentation from this (and other network) seminars are accessible at the 
network’s website (http://www.sfi.dk/Default.aspx?ID=5309). 
 
12

Section 1: Articles 
 
13

1.1 
Belgium: Articulating work 
and family – the 
gendered use of 
institutional measures 
 
Bernard Fusulier, Université catholique de Louvain, GIRSEF (Interdisciplinary 
Research Group on Socialization, Education and Training) 
 
Introduction 
 
The idea that professional investment and family investment are not incompatible is 
now currently considered, both for women (meaning more presence in the labour 
marker) and for men (meaning more presence in the domestic sphere). A cumulative 
model of work/family articulation (WFA) is thus put forward. Its effects are expected 
to be beneficial in terms of: well-being of parents and their children; equal 
opportunities for men and women of access to and remaining in the labour market; 
and economic performance (e.g. attracting and keeping talents, reducing 
absenteeism, decreasing stress and increasing the quality of work). This model also 
takes into account the evolution of the labour market towards increased flexibility; 
and of the way that people themselves see their investment in employment as a 
means of earning a living, of course, but also as one of the ways, among others, to 
reach personal fulfilment. 
 
Institutionalising the ‘cumulative’ work-family model faces various forces, including 
those resulting from the labour market logic. As the German sociologist Ulrich Beck 
says: ‘The labour market requires mobility, without considering personal situations. 
The couple and the family require the opposite. (…) The subject of the market is the 
individual himself, without any relational, conjugal or family “handicap’’’ (Beck, 2001: 
257). The creed of ‘flexibility’ reinforces this logic. One of the societal conditions of 
the ‘cumulative’ model is, thus, to broaden the degree of freedom men and women 
have when they sell their labour on the market in order to achieve better living 
conditions. In other words, they should find time and energy (including psychological 
and 
affective) 
to 
dedicate 
to 
other 
activities. 
This 
is 
a condition 
for 
‘decommodification’ of the labour force (Esping-Andersen, 1999) through various 
policies (e.g. regulation of working time, right to leave, decent minimum social and 
wage standards). 
 
 
14

A challenge to the development of the cumulative model is the necessity for domestic 
work and the care of children or other members of the household, which is still mainly 
left to women. The ‘cumulative’ model thus presumes increased freedom for people 
to meet their family responsibilities; they must be able to find a network of accessible 
and good quality services (e.g. childcare, education) and other institutional 
provisions, so they can be available for other activities, including a professional life. 
This is the condition of ‘defamilialization’, meaning that family responsibilities need 
not be carried out only by family members (Esping-Andersen, 1999). 
 
Societal models for WFA are of course not homogeneous, since they depend on how 
far and in what way societies support ‘defamilialization’ through the three great 
institutions: Family, State and Market. Thus, the Northern European states 
(Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland) give an example of the cumulative model of 
WFA. In these countries, the ‘dominant articulation model’ differs from that of other 
countries by its high degree of cumulativity and more egalitarian gender relations. 
Writing of Sweden and Finland, OECD experts observe that these countries have set 
up ‘a complete collective model of family policies to help parents during the major 
part of their children’s youth’ (OECD, 2005: 211). In this model women have a high 
level of full-time employment, including those with children. 
 
In contrast, other countries show a far more gendered model: parents must choose 
between remaining in their work and investing in their family. This results in a 
temporary – sometimes long-lasting – withdrawal of women from the labour market. 
This gendered alternative model has institutional provisions and socio-economic 
regulations that encourage women to leave the labour market to take care of their 
children, then return, often part time: Japan is an obvious example (Fusulier, 2005). 
 
If Japan and Sweden are two contrasting models, where does Belgium stand? I shall 
examine the situation in Belgium below, and describe the institutional provisions 
available for working parents and analyse their use. I shall show how a gendered 
relationship to institutional provisions is found in Belgian society. 
 
Belgium: a cumulative gendered model 
 
Three available indicators of the degree of work/family cumulativity for women allows 
a comparison to be made between Belgium and two other countries with strongly 
contrasting WFA models – Sweden, with its cumulative model, and Japan, with its 
alternative model: 
 
1. 
the activity rate of women aged 25 to 54 
2. 
the proportion of female workers employed part time 
3. 
the employment rate of mothers living in a couple with a child under six years. 
 
I have also added the fertility rate, which is an indicator of the propensity for women 
to have children. 
 
Roughly, but not insignificantly, Table 1.1a shows that on these indicators Belgium is 
closer to Sweden than to Japan. Belgium is now composed mainly of couples of 
working age where both members have paid employment or are seeking 
employment. More than 70 per cent of mothers with a child under six years and living 
 
15

in a couple have a job, which puts Belgium at the top of OECD countries (OECD, 
2001). In 46 per cent of Belgian couples with a child under six years, both parents 
work full time, compared with 19 per cent where the husband works full time and the 
wife part time (Jaumotte, 2003: 62). According to the same source, in 27 per cent of 
couples the wife is not economically active. Moreover, even more couples express a 
preference for both parents to be employed: 55 per cent of couples prefer both 
parents employed full time, while 29 per cent prefer the man working full time and the 
woman part time; just 13 per cent prefer the male breadwinner/female housewife 
model. 
 
Today in Belgium, although the employment gap between men and women is 
closing, the employment rate for men is still around 15 per centage points higher than 
for women; in 2005, the employment rate between 15 and 64 years was 68 per cent 
for men and 54 per cent for women (SPF Economie, 2006). Temporary or fixed-term 
contract work is more common for women (11 per cent compared to seven per cent 
for men), as is part-time work (43 per cent of employed women compared to eight 
per cent of men) (ibid.). Anne-Marie Dieu (2006) reports that the main reason given 
by men for part-time work is not finding a full-time job (31 per cent), with family and 
personal reasons given by only15 per cent and childcare by just four per cent. 
Among women, childcare is the first reason (29 per cent), then personal and family 
reasons (26 per cent). Not finding a full-time job is only the third reason given (20 per 
cent). 
 
How do couples divide the various domestic tasks? 
 
 It is obvious that time use remains very different between men and women (between 
20 and 74 years). On average, women devote 2 hours and 7 minutes per day to paid 
work and/or to studies, and 4 hours and 32 minutes to housework, whereas men 
spend, respectively, 3 hours and 30 minutes and 2 hours and 38 minutes on the 
same activities (Eurostat, 2006). Summing the time spent on these two activities, it is 
clear that women work more than men. 
 
In an analysis of time use by Belgians, the Institut National de Statistique (INS, 2002) 
titled Chapter 8 ‘Le ménage égalitaire: pas encore pour demain’ [‘The equalitarian 
household: not about to happen’]. This holds true in households where both partners 
are employed. The INS survey shows that, in a week, the time spent at work is 35 
hours 1 minute for men and 25 hours 38 minutes for women; the time devoted to 
household tasks is 13 hours 51 minutes for men and 23 hours 40 minutes for women; 
and the time devoted to care and education of children is 3 hours 6 minutes for men 
and 5 hours 18 minutes for women. Among couples in the survey, men work full time 
(96 per cent), on average 35 hours per week, whereas 46 per cent of women work 
part time, on average 22 hours per week. 
 
The gendered distribution of roles obviously remains traditional. The INS also 
predicts that, as the double-income household model spreads, the pressure on time 
will intensify. The public authorities are thus called upon to provide parents (women 
and men) with a series of institutional supports that allow a better work/family 
articulation. Supporting the development of a ‘cumulative’ model is not only a 
response to what people want, it is also a necessary part of two converging policies: 
 
16

promoting equal opportunity between men and women and increasing women’s 
employment. I will now review the main institutional supports. 
 
     Institutional supports for WFA 
 
Work/family articulation is not a private matter where individuals and families have to 
make choices and juggle with various demands and desires; it is a public matter, and 
thus a responsibility of the State. In Belgium, a number of provisions that can be 
interpreted (even if that is not their primary objective) as favouring a better 
articulation of working life and family life have been institutionalised and become 
rights. I shall first examine three provisions that have become mainstays of WFA 
(Maternity, Paternity and adoption leave), and then concentrate on two additional 
measures: reduction or suspension of work in the private sector (time credit) and so-
called thematic leave (leave for medical care, palliative care leave, Parental leave). 
 
But let me first add that Belgium has a network of diverse childcare facilities: day-
care centres, community childcare centres (maisons communales d’accueil de 
l’enfance, MCAE), nursery schools, family day carers (supervised and independent), 
school-age childcare services. However, the supply of these childcare services, with 
an estimated coverage rate of 25 per cent (Dieu, 2006), is less than the demand.  
 
‘Standard’ leave  
 
a. Maternity leave: except in specific cases such as multiple births, Maternity leave 
is 15 weeks, one of which must be taken before delivery (prenatal leave) and at least 
nine must be taken after delivery (post-natal leave). The other five weeks are 
‘floating’, so the worker can choose to take them before or after the expected delivery 
date. If a multiple birth is expected, leave can be extended. During Maternity leave, 
maternity benefits are paid by the mutual insurance system. The benefits are based 
on a per centage of salary. For the first 30 days, payment is 82 per cent of salary; 
afterwards, it is a per centage of salary, but with an upper limit. 
 
b. Paternity leave: since 2002, Paternity leave is ten working days, to be taken 
within 30 days after delivery. The ten days can be taken at once or spread out. The 
employer pays the first three days of leave; during the next seven days, the worker 
does not receive a salary but a benefit through the health insurance payment system, 
equivalent to 80 per cent of salary, with an upper limit. 
 
c. Adoption leave: each worker (man or woman) has a right to adoption leave when 
an adopted child arrives in his or her family, to be taken within two months of the 
registration of the child with the public authorities. The leave is six weeks maximum 
(if the child is under three years) and four weeks maximum (if the child is over three). 
The worker keeps his or her complete salary during the first three days. For the 
remainder, he or she receives benefits from the mutual insurance system. 
 
Time credit  
 
Although it is not limited to WFA issues, since it can be taken for any reason, time 
credit is very relevant. I shall first examine the juridical aspects of the time credit 
 
17

system. After an overview of the measures prior to time credit, I consider the main 
points of the present system, based on the provisions of Collective work agreement 
(CCT) n°77 bis. 
 
The basis of the time credit system is the career interruption scheme (also called 
‘career break’), governed by the recovery law of 22 January 1985 (Dauphin, Delisse 
and Pirard, 1999). Its main aim was to reduce unemployment in a context of 
economic crisis. One of the measures adopted by the government at the time, 
supported by the Minister of Employment and Labour, was to set up a system of 
career breaks, giving every worker the right to stop work or reduce his working time, 
with the employer’s agreement, for a specific period of time. Benefits were paid by 
the Office National de l’Emploi (National Office for Labour) provided the employer 
hired an unemployed person as a replacement. Moreover, a career break could be 
taken for any reason.  
 
This system had numerous financial advantages. For the State, there was a positive 
trade-off between the benefits paid to workers taking a career break and savings on 
unemployment benefits (Verbrugge, 2002). It was a way to share the available jobs, 
but also to allow certain workers to better reconcile family and working lives, at a time 
when there was no Paternity or Parental leave. The system quickly proved 
successful and some modifications were introduced, either to promote it or reduce its 
appeal, according to the economic situation (Dauphin et al., 1999). In the early 
1990s, an increase in the benefit paid led to a sharp increase in the numbers taking a 
career break: up 140 per cent in three years, from 20,590 persons in 1988, to 49,354 
in 1991! For budget reasons, this benefit increase was stopped in 1993 and the 
increase in take-up slowed; in December 1993, there were 53,528 persons, an 
increase of just 8.5 per cent since 1991. Over time, career interruption has become a 
right for workers, at least for the first one per cent of the average number of workers 
in a company (or public sector equivalent), per year; the employer still had to give his 
agreement if more than one per cent of workers applied in a year. 
 
From the middle to the end of the 1980s, new entitlements were added to the career 
break. Workers were given the right to interrupt their work, for example, for palliative 
care, to care for a seriously ill relative, or even to take care of their children; these 
were called ‘thematic leave’. Then the right to a career break was given to three per 
cent of the workforce per year in a company rather than the previous one per cent. 
 
January 2002 is a landmark in the history of this measure: in the private sector, the 
‘time credit’ replaced the ‘career break’, through the Interprofessional collective 
agreement (CCT) nr 77. Under the influence of the then Minister of Employment and 
Labour, Ms Laurette Onkelinx, one of the points of the government declaration of 
October 2000 was to offer ‘all workers a right to interrupt their career for one year 
(possibly extended) with a monthly allowance of BEF30,000 (around €750), as well 
as the right for all to work 4/5 time’ (Verbrugge, 2002: 131). 
 
The career break scheme still exists, but only for workers in the public sector. The 
time credit scheme is a right for all personnel in private undertakings with more than 
ten workers, whereas the former career break scheme required the employer’s 
agreement if at least three per cent of the workers requested leave. Moreover, the 
 
18

obligation to replace the worker by an unemployed person was removed. Time credit 
is becoming a measure for a better articulation of work with various social activities.  
 
As some parts of CCT nr 77 caused practical problems, the social partners agreed to 
replace the whole of CCT nr 77 by CCT nr 77bis, then by CCT nr 77ter (in July 
2002). The aim was to give maximum legal security to beneficiaries. The scope of the 
concept of time credit is given in article 1 of CCT nr 77bis, which groups three 
options for partial or total withdrawal from work, which can be used simultaneously: 
 
• 
the right to time credit for full-time or part-time workers who have worked at 
least one year with their current employer; 
• 
a reduction of a fifth in employment hours, by taking one day or two half-days 
per week, for full-time workers who have worked at least five years with their 
current employer; 
• 
a specific reduction of working time for full-time workers, aged 50 or more, 
with more than 20 years of employment and at least five years with their 
current employer. 
 
Passed at the end of 2005, the Solidarity between Generations Pact brought some 
important changes. The objective was to encourage employees to work at least until 
the legal retirement age, so making ageing of the population financially sustainable. 
Thus, a whole series of measures were introduced to render working longer more 
attractive. Some of them concern time credit, and more specifically workers aged 50 
and over. Changes were made through CCT nr 77quater of 30 July 2007, which 
adapts some provisions of CCT nr 77bis. 
 
I will now examine in more detail the provisions of CCT nr 77bis, which is now in 
force. This agreement applies to workers and employers in the private sector. It must 
be noted that, in Belgium, such agreements (CCTs) determine the individual and 
collective relationships between employers and workers, either in individual 
companies or in a sector of activity. They also define the rights and obligations of the 
contracting parties. They are in fact the result of agreements between, on the one 
side, one or more workers’ associations and, on the other, one or more employers’ 
organisations or one or more employers.  
 
Collective agreements are made in joint commissions operating at different levels: 
 
• 
at the cross-sectoral level, collective agreements are concluded in the Conseil 
national du travail (National Labour Council) and apply to all undertakings in 
the country; 
• 
at the sectoral level, collective agreements are concluded in joint 
commissions and apply to all undertakings in that sector; 
• 
at the level of the individual undertaking. 
 
Collective agreements complete and elaborate the legal texts of social law. If one of 
the partners requests it, they can be made mandatory by Royal decree. In this case, 
the Collective agreement binds all the employers and all the workers that are covered 
by the joint commission. Employers and workers in the public sector remain under 
the career break system originating in the Recovery law of 22 January 1985. 
However, workers in private education (mostly catholic), public regional transport 
 
19

companies (bus, tram, metro), private or mixed intermunicipal undertakings in 
electricity and gas distribution, public autonomous undertakings (Belgacom, SNCB, 
BIAC, Post), as well as personnel in public credit institutions, can benefit from the 
time credit system.  
 
Time credit operates in two different ways (art. 3, para. 1): a total suspension of work 
or a reduction of working time to half time. In both cases, the workers must have 
been employed in the undertaking for 12 months in the 15 months preceding the 
written request for time credit (art. 5). In organisations with less than ten workers, the 
employer must give his agreement. The maximum duration of time credit, full time or 
part time, is one year. The undertaking or the joint commission can, through a 
collective agreement, extend the duration, but this can never exceed five years over 
the course of a worker’s career (art. 3, para. 2). Three months is the minimum period 
that can be taken at any one time. 
 
Since June 2007, even if the duration of the time credit can be extended beyond one 
year (as long as a collective agreement allows it), the benefits for time credit are 
limited to one year if the worker stops working completely (art. 4). However, if the 
worker takes a full-time time credit to care for children (aged under eight) or a 
seriously ill relative, to provide palliative care or for training, benefits can be received 
for up to five years. For full-time workers, the benefits are set at €427.14 per month 
(on 1 January 2008) if they have worked for less than five years with their current 
employer and at €569.53 if they have worked longer. For workers who reduce their 
working time by half, benefits are reduced accordingly. 
 
The calculation of retirement rights is based on salary over the last three years, while 
workers using time credit keep their rights to reimbursement of health costs. If the 
working time is reduced to half time, the illness allowance, the amount of holiday 
leave and the holiday pay are calculated according to the rules applicable for part-
time workers (namely proportional to the new working time and to the salary). 
 
The right to reduce working hours by a fifth – either as one whole day or two half 
days per week (art. 6, para. 1) – must be taken for a period of at least six months and 
can be taken for up to five years, calculated on the whole career of the worker (art. 6, 
para. 1). The benefit paid is €140.64 per month (on 1 January 2008). 
 
Finally, all workers aged 50 or more benefit from either a right to reduce working time 
to half time or a right to reduce working time by a fifth of full-time working hours (art. 
9, para. 1). So these workers have a right, in all cases, to work four-fifths time. 
Eligibility for a reduction in working time is lowered from five to three years 
continuous employment, and this condition can be reduced even more, down to two 
years or even one, if there is an agreement between the worker and the employer 
(art. 10, para. 2). Moreover, at the time of the request for reduced working time, the 
worker must have at least 20 years of employment (art. 10, para. 3). 
 
Workers using this right must work reduced hours for at least three months, for the 
half-time reduction, or six months for the one-fifth time reduction. But there is no 
upper limit on the length of time they can work reduced hours. Workers choosing a 
four day week receive a benefit of €140.65 per month (1 January 2008); while for a 
half-time reduction, the payment is €213.57 or €284.76, depending on whether the 
 
20

worker has fewer or more than five years employment with their current employer. 
Social rights are maintained during the whole period. This means that the previous 
salary is the reference for unemployment and retirement rights. Illness benefits, the 
number of legal leave days and the holiday pay are based on the part-time work.  
 
The worker wishing to take advantage of time credit must make a written request to 
their employer, at least three months before the desired starting date, if the 
undertaking employs more than 20 workers, or six months before if the number of 
workers is fewer. In the latter case, the right to time credit requires the agreement of 
the employer; in all other cases the taking of time credit is a right. However, in some 
circumstances, the employer can postpone the exercise of this right if there are 
pressing reasons to do so (art. 14 and 14bis), for example the difficulty of finding a 
replacement. In that case, the right to time credit will start at the latest six months 
after it would have started if it had not been postponed. If a worker aged 55 or more 
occupies a key post, the employer can defer granting the one-fifth reduction in 
working hours; before CCT nr 77quater, the employer could reject the request of the 
worker altogether, but now the undertaking has 12 months to reorganise the work, 
before permitting the reduced working hours. 
 
The employer can refuse the time credit request in one case: if the total number of 
workers that are or will be taking that right at the same time in the undertaking or in 
one of its departments exceeds five per cent of the total number of workers (art. 15). 
Since it was modified by CCT nr 77quater, workers 55 and over who wish to reduce 
their working time by a fifth are not counted in the five per cent threshold (art. 14bis). 
Moreover, those benefiting from thematic leave (Parental leave, leave for palliative 
care, leave for caring for a seriously ill relative) are never taken into account when 
calculating the threshold. When the five per cent threshold is exceeded, the claims of 
some workers have to be postponed. The Enterprise Council (or, if there is none, it is 
an agreement between the employer and the Union delegation) establish a system 
for deciding priority and planning (art. 16).  
 
Thematic leave 
 
a. Leave to provide care and assistance to a seriously ill relative: this form of 
leave covers the same group as the general time credit scheme. Workers who have 
a medical certificate proving that a relative up to the second degree is seriously ill 
and requires care, are eligible for this leave. It can be requested more than once, as 
long as it is a different relative who requires care. For each relative, there is a right to: 
 
• 
a complete interruption of employment for 12 months maximum; or 
• 
a reduction of a fifth in normal working hours in the case of full-time 
employment; or 
• 
a reduction to half-time when working at least three-quarters of full-time 
employment. 
 
The maximum duration for working reduced hours is 24 months, and all three options 
must be used for at least one month at a time. In undertakings with 50 workers or 
less, the employer can reject the request for this right if the worker has already had 
six months away from work or 12 months of reduced working hours. Where there are 
 
21

fewer than ten workers, the workers only have a right to a complete interruption of 
employment. 
 
b. Leave for palliative care: workers have the right to leave in order to care for a 
person who has an incurable illness in its terminal phase. This leave for palliative 
care is set at one month (renewable once) and can be taken as either a complete 
interruption of employment; or a reduction of working time to four-fifths or half of 
normal working hours. There are some distinctive differences between this leave and 
leave for care and assistance to a seriously ill relative, including: the terminal state of 
the illness; the shorter length of the leave; availability to care for any person, whether 
or not he or she is a relative; and the employer being unable to reject the request for 
leave. 
 
c. Parental leave: the Belgian regulations for Parental leave are based on European 
directive 96/34. In compliance with this directive, at least three months of leave are 
available for all workers at the birth or adoption of a child, and can be taken until the 
child reaches the age of six years or, in the case of adoption, during a four-year 
period from the day the child is registered with the public authorities. If the child has 
at least a 66 per cent handicap, leave can be taken until the child reaches eight 
years. In order to have the right to Parental leave, the worker must have had a work 
contract with the current employer for at least 12 months in the 15 months preceding 
the written request. For practical reasons of running the undertaking, the employer 
can postpone the beginning of the leave for six months maximum. 
 
Parental leave can be taken as: a total suspension of work for three months, taken all 
at once or in one-month periods; for full-time workers, a reduction of working hours to 
half-time for six months, taken all at once or in two-month periods; or a reduction of 
working hours by a fifth for 15 months, taken all at once or fragmented or in five-
month periods. 
 
Workers taking any thematic leave are paid a benefit by the Federal employment 
agency (ONEM). This amounts to €698.65 for a full-time interruption, €349.32 for a 
half-time reduction in working hours and €118.51 for a one-fifth reduction (1 January 
2008). 
 
Use of institutional measures 
 
This section, which is mainly based on the Master’s thesis of O. Besançon (2008), 
considers the use made in the private sector of the various measures outlined above, 
with special attention to the differences between men and women. 
 
Time credit 
 
Use of this entitlement is increasing each year among men aged 50 and over and in 
women under 50; however, this increase is due to more people working reduced 
hours and the numbers stopping work completely are falling. There are more women 
than men using the scheme except in the group aged 50 and over, where there are 
many men. When women choose to take time credit, they do so mainly between the 
ages of 25 and 39, or after 50; but most men taking time credit, 80 per cent, are over 
 
22

50. Since its introduction, women have always been the main users of this scheme 
(63 per cent), and the proportions have remained very similar since 2002 (Figures 
1.1a, 1.1b and 1.1c).  
 
There are also differences in the distribution of use between the different regions of 
Belgium. In 2007, the Flemish region accounted for 72 per cent of users, the Walloon 
region 23 per cent and the Brussels region five per cent (Figure 1.1d). However, 
these figures must be further examined. In 2005, according to the Labour Force 
Survey, Belgium had 2,542,182 employees in the private sector: 1,596,808 in 
Flanders, 719,233 in Wallonia and 226,141 in Brussels. In the same year, the total 
number of time credit users for Flanders was 64,140 and 20,240 in the Walloon 
region – meaning that four per cent of workers in Flanders used time credit, 
compared with 2.8 per cent in the Walloon region.  
 
The main reason for this difference is that the Flemish government pays a 
supplementary allowance of €168.93 per month (January 2008), which is added to 
the national benefit paid by ONEM. To have this allowance, the candidates must 
have taken a time credit, or thematic leave, for a very specific reason such as caring 
for a child under eight years or caring for a seriously ill relative. All these reasons are 
called ‘care credit’.  
 
Thematic leaves 
 
Parental leave is by far the most used thematic leave. Use has been growing steadily 
since 2002, with 26,933 beneficiaries in 2007. Leave for medical assistance to a 
relative (3,347 in 2007) or for palliative care (137 in 2007) are not used as much, 
although their use is rising slightly each year. As for time credit, women are the main 
beneficiaries of thematic leave. However, the proportion of men is growing, with 
seven times more men using Parental leave now than in 2002, although they remain 
far behind women (Figures 1.1e and 1.1f). 
 
Women as the main users of FWA measures  
 
Whatever the type of leave, women are the main users: except for time credit after 
the age of 50, there are more women interrupting their employment than men. In 
2007, women represented 63 per cent of the beneficiaries of time credit and 78 per 
cent for thematic leave. However, the number of men interrupting their employment 
rises every year. For time credit, for example, the figure was 8,868 in 2002 and 
40,972 in 2007. The largest increase has been in Parental leave, with 6,788 male 
users in 2007, eight times more than five years ago. 
 
However, the number of women interrupting their employment is also rising each 
year. Between 2006 and 2007, the number of women using time credit rose by ten 
per cent, compared to eight per cent among men. The situation is slightly different for 
Parental leave: the number of women rose by four per cent between 2006 and 2007, 
compared with 13 per cent for men.  
 
These observations suggest that, although there are some changes, FWA in Belgium 
still remains mainly women’s responsibility. We must recognise that some of the 
motives are purely financial. Gendered pay differences are real, mostly due to the 
 
23

fact that women more often work part time (Bevers and Gilbert, 2007). The 
calculation is easy for the couple: it is the wife who will choose to use the leave 
entitlement, since the income loss is lower. Does the Flemish supplementary 
allowance have a positive effect on men’s using time credit or thematic leave?  
 
The annual report of the Flemish Ministry of Employment and Social Economy shows 
that there were 27,198 beneficiaries of this allowance in the private sector in 2005. 
Compared with 2004, there was a slight (two per cent) decrease in overall numbers, 
due to new regulations implemented in April 2005 (Vlaams Ministerie van Werk en 
Sociale Economie, 2005). Nevertheless, we can see a seven per cent rise in 
numbers of men, compared with a four per cent decrease for women (Table 1.1c).  
 
It should be remembered that the Flemish benefits are given for training (training 
credit), and for help and assistance to children and relatives in need (care credit). 
The latter accounted for 99 per cent of requests in 2005, with men accounting for 20 
per cent of beneficiaries. This is much lower than the proportion of men taking leave 
nationally! However, this observation must be qualified. Since the allowance is mostly 
given for care reasons, workers over the age of 50 are rarely beneficiaries yet many 
use the time credit scheme; in Flanders, just five per cent of the total number of 
persons requesting a care credit were aged over 50, whereas nationally 41 per cent 
of beneficiaries of time credit or thematic leave were in this older age group. So to 
make a proper assessment, we need to calculate the proportion of men using time 
credit and thematic leave but excluding the over-50s. On this basis, Besançon (2008) 
calculates that men make up 18 per cent of users of time credit or thematic leave 
schemes, for the whole country, while in Flanders the proportion of care credit 
allowances claimed by men is 19 per cent. So we can deduce that the monthly 
supplement is not an incentive for men to take WFA measures. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The relationship between working life and family life is an important issue in Belgium. 
Public authorities have introduced institutional supports for a better work/family 
articulation, in order to encourage a cumulative work/family model where professional 
investment and family investment are not incompatible, for women as well as men. 
This is consistent with the perspective of a universal breadwinner and caregiver, 
which considers that each adult should have the capacity – what Sen (2004) calls 
capability – to earn a living and assume care of other persons. 
 
Part of the Belgian institutional measures show support for the development of this 
model. Besides Maternity, Paternity and adoption leave, some thematic leave and 
time credit schemes allow women and men to leave the labour market, partially or 
totally, without breaking the link with that sphere. However, laws are not sufficient to 
ensure a more egalitarian articulation. We have shown how women remain the main 
users of these measures, although they are open to both sexes. (For an analysis of 
the use of career breaks by men and women, see the next article, by Jessie 
Vandeweyer and Ignace Glorieux.) 
 
Of course, this results in part from an economic calculation, but it often hides a 
gendered social structure. In this sense, socio-culturally, the main responsibility for 
 
24

family duties is still left to women, which is ipso facto an obstacle for men who wish to 
invest more in parenthood. But this is another subject to consider and research. 
 
References 
 
Beck, U. (2001) La société du risque. Sur la voie d’une autre modernité. Paris: 
Flammarion. 
 
Bevers, T. and Gilbert, V. (2007) L’écart salarial entre les femmes et les hommes en 
Belgique – Rapport 2007. Bruxelles: Institut pour l’égalité des femmes et des 
hommes. 
 
Besancon, O. (2008) Analyse du dispositif crédit-temps et des congés thématiques, 
Master’s thesis supervised by B. Fusulier, Institut des Sciences du Travail, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Louvain-La-Neuve. 
 
Chronholm, A. (2007) ‘Father's experiences of shared Parental leave in Sweden’, 
Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques, No.2: 9-25. 
 
Conseil Supérieur de L’emploi (2002) Rapport. Partie II. La population inactive en 
âge de travailler. Bruxelles: Ministère fédéral de l’Emploi et du Travail. 
 
Dauphin, M., Delisse, M.P. and Pirard, F. (1999) Interruption de carrière 
professionnelle: secteur privé. Diegem, Ced. Samson. 
 
Dauphin, M., Delisse, M.P. and Pirard, F. (2002) Crédits-temps, droits thématiques: 
secteur privé. Bruxelles: Kluwer. 
 
Dieu, A.-M. (2006) Conciliation vie privée-vie professionnelle: la Belgique. Available 
at: http://www.gendercheck.net/conf04-fr.htm (accessed 13 February 2009). 
 
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999) Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economics. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Eurostat (2006) ‘Journée Internationale de la Femme. Un aperçu statistique de la vie 
des femmes et des hommes dans l’UE25’, Communiqué de Presse, No.29, 8 mars 
2006. 
 
Fusulier, B. (2005) ‘Aux antipodes de la Finlande: le Japon et son modèle alternatif 
d’articulation travail-famille’, in : D.G. Tremblay (ed.) De la conciliation emploi-famille 
à une politique des temps sociaux. Montréal: Presses de l’Université du Québec, 
pp.271-280. 
 
Fusulier, B., Giraldo, S. and Laloy, D. (2008) L’entreprise et l’articulation 
travail/famille. Louvain-la-Neuve: Presses Universitaires de Louvain. 
 
Institut National de Statistique (INS) (2002) ‘24 heures à la belge: une analyse sur 
l’emploi du temps des Belges’, Études statistiques, No.110. 
 
 
25

Jaumotte, F. (2003) ‘Les femmes sur le marché du travail: évidence empirique sur le 
rôle des politiques économiques et autres déterminants dans les pays de l’OCDE’, 
Revue économique de l’OCDE, Vol.37, No.2. 
 
OECD (2001) Perspectives de l’emploi. Paris: OECD. 
 
OECD (2003) Bébés et employeurs. Comment réconcilier travail et vie de famille. 
Autriche, Irlande et Japon, vol. 2. Paris: OECD. 
 
OECD (2005) Bébés et employeurs. Comment réconcilier travail et vie de famille. 
Canada, Finlande, Royaume-Uni et Suède, vol. 4. Paris: OECD. 
 
Sen, A.K. (2004) ‘Elements of a theory of human rights’, Philosophy and Public 
Affairs, Vol.32, No.4: 315-356. 
 
SPF Economie (2006) Enquête sur les forces de travail, Info Flash n°75, le 12 juillet 
2006. Available at: 
http://www.statbel.fgov.be/press/fl075_fr.asp (accessed 13 February 2009). 
 
Verbrugge, F. (2002) Interruption de carrière et crédit-temps. Bruxelles: Kluwer. 
 
Vlaams Ministerie van Werk en Sociale Economie (2005), Aanmoedigingspremies bij 
loopbaanonderbreking en tijdskrediet. Available at: 
http://www.werk.be/wn/aanmoedigingspremies/documenten/jaarrapport_awap_2004.
pdf (accessed 1 July 2009) 
 
26

 Table 1.1a: Indicators of labour market and fertility rate: 
 comparison Japan, Sweden, Belgium 
 
 
Japan 
Sweden 
Belgium 
Activity rate, women (25-54 
y.o.) in 2004 (a) 
 
68.1 
 
85.3 
 
74.3 
Proportion of part-time in 
total female employment in 
2004 (b) 
 
 
41.7 
 
 
20.8 
 
 
34.1 
Employment rate of 
mothers of a child under 6, 
living in a couple (c) 
 
 
33.3 
 
 
77.8 
 
 
71.8 
Total fertility rate (children 
per woman) in 2004 (d) 
 
 
1.38 
 
 
1.75 
 
 
1.48 
   Sources: (a) and (b) OECD, 2005: statistical annex; (c) OECD, 2001,   
   p.145; (d) Eurostat, 2006 
 
Table 1.1b: Men and women beneficiaries of time credit in the private 
sector, Belgium, 2004-2007 
 
 
Complete 
interruption 
Reduction of working time 
TOTAL 
 
Men 
Women 
Men 
Women 
Men 
Women TOTAL 
 
  
  
< 50 y.o.> 50 y.o.< 50 y.o.> 50 y.o.  
  
  
2004 
3754 9456 
5012 
19666 
21458 
13744 
28432 44658 
73090 
2005 
3754 9130 
5879 
24401 
27096 
18757 
34034 54983 
89017 
2006 
3433 8835 
6416 
27956 
31986 
23539 
37805 64360 
102165 
2007 
3052 8400 
6503 
31417 
33971 
28324 
40972 70695 
111667 
Source: ONEM 
 
Table 1.1c: Number of supplementary allowances given in the private 
sector, Flanders, 2002-2005 
 
  
Men 
Women 
Total 
2002 
2152 
14400 
16552 
2003 
3989 
20318 
24307 
2004 
5134 
22679 
27813 
2005 
5489 
21709 
27198 
Change: 2004 and 2005 
+7 per cent 
-4 per cent 
-2 per cent 
Source: Vlaams Ministerie van Werk en Sociale Economie, 2005 
 
27

Figure 1.1a: Men and women using time credit in the private sector, 
Belgium, 2004-2007 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
2004
2005
2006
2007
Years
Beneficiaries
Complete interruption Men
Complete interruption Women
Working time reduction Men < 50
years
Working time reduction Men > 50
years
Working time reduction Women <
50 years
Working time reduction Women >
50 years
gg
 
  Source: ONEM 
 
 
Figure 1.1b: Distribution of time credit beneficiaries according to age 
and gender, Belgium, 2007 
 
0,2%
7,0%
13,1%
79,7%
0,4%
37,2%
20,7%
41,8%
0,0%
10,0%
20,0%
30,0%
40,0%
50,0%
60,0%
70,0%
80,0%
90,0%
100,0%
> 25 YO
25-39 YO
40-49 YO
50 YO and more
Ages
Percentages
Men
Women
 
  Source: ONEM 
 
 
 
28

 
  Figure 1.1c: Use of time credit according to gender,  
 Belgium, 2007 
 
37%
63%
Men
Women
 
  Source: ONEM 
 
 
 
 
  Figure 1.1d: Distribution of beneficiaries of time credit  
 according to regions, Belgium, 2007 
 
71,6%
23,2%
5,2%
Flemish region
Walloon region
Brussels region
 
  Source: ONEM 
 
 
29

   Figure 1.1e: Men and women using thematic leave in the 
  private sector, Belgium, 2002-2007 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Years
Beneficiaries
Parental leave
Leave for medical
assistance
Palliative care leave
 
   Source: ONEM 
 
 
 
   Figure 1.1f: Use of thematic leave in the private sector,  
  according to gender, Belgium, 2007  
 
22%
78%
Women
Men
 
  Source : ONEM 
 
 
 
30

  Figure 1.1g: Number of men and women taking parental  
 leave in the private sector, Belgium, 2002-2007  
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Years
Beneficiaries
Men
Women
 
  Source : ONEM 
 
 
 
31

1.2 
Belgium: career breaks in 
Flanders 
 
Jessie Vandeweyer and Ignace Glorieux, Department of Sociology, Research Group 
TOR, Vrije Universiteit, Brussels 
 
Introduction 
 
In this short research note, findings are reported from a study2 of women and men in 
Flanders, the Flemish-speaking part of Belgium, taking career breaks. These findings 
include the demographic profile of the leave-takers, their motivation for taking leave, 
and their time use and subjective feelings of time pressure; where appropriate, these 
findings are contrasted with results for employed women and men not taking a career 
break.3 These are preceded by information on the Belgian career break system, 
which is unique: Belgium is the only country in the EU (and possibly in the world) 
providing, as an entitlement to all workers, a prolonged period of leave not related to 
childcare. For a more detailed description of the workings of career breaks/time 
credits and the related but separate system of ‘thematic leave’, see the preceding 
article by Bernard Fusulier. 
 
The Belgian career break system 
 
Legislation on career breaks was introduced by the Belgian government in 
1985. It allows employees to reduce working hours or to interrupt their employment 
altogether, with job security, for a specific period during which a state allowance is 
paid covering, in part, the loss of earnings. Initially, the legislation was aimed at 
achieving a redistribution of labour to counter rising unemployment. Each person 
taking a career break was to be replaced by an unemployed person, and would only 
be paid their allowance if this condition was fulfilled. In the second half of the 1990s, 
three additional forms of career break (besides the general scheme) were introduced, 
referred to as ‘thematic leave’: leave for palliative care (in 1995) for one month, 
extendable to two months; Parental leave (in 1997); and medical care leave (in 1999) 
for one to three months, extendable to 12 months. 
 
At the beginning of 2002, the system was given a radical overhaul. In the public 
sector, it kept the name ‘career break’, but became known as ‘time credit’ in the 
                                                 
2 Research Foundation Flanders Project ‘Focus on career interrupters. Living 
conditions and time use of the time credit system users in Flanders’ (agreement 
G.0515.04). 
3 A more elaborate version of this research note can be found in Vandeweyer and 
Glorieux, 2008. 
 
32

private sector (Devisscher, 2004). The replacement rule for the general scheme was 
withdrawn, breaking the link with unemployment policy, but the thematic leave forms 
of career break remain. The general schemes of career break and time credit exist 
alongside Parental leave, and the two are not to be confused. An EU directive 
stipulates all member states must provide at least three months Parental leave per 
parent, while there are no EU regulations on career break.  
 
Parental leave in Belgium is an individual entitlement of three months leave per child 
for each parent, which can be taken until the child reaches the age of six years. The 
leave may be taken full time, part time over six months or one day a week for 15 
months and is paid at a flat rate depending on how the leave is taken (approximately 
€615 per month for full-time leave). The Flemish government offers an extra incentive 
premium (approximately €160 per month for full-time leave).  
 
Career break or time credit is available to all employees who have worked at least 
one year for the same employer (with a maximum of five per cent of employees per 
organisation able to take leave simultaneously); it can be taken anytime during the 
course of life; and it is not limited to specific reasons for leave – in other words, it can 
be taken for any reason. All employees have the right to one year of this leave, which 
can be extended to five years by collective agreements and can be taken flexibly. In 
the public sector, employees can reduce their working time by one-fifth, one-quarter, 
one-third or one-half or take a full-time break. In the private sector, time credit allows 
interruption of employment or reduction of hours by one-half or one-fifth (Deven and 
Moss, 2002; Desmet, Glorieux and Vandeweyer, 2006; Moss and O’Brien, 2006).  
 
The allowance paid to people who take a career break or time credit depends on 
age, household composition and years of employment and is lower than for Parental 
leave. An employee younger than 50 in the public sector receives between €300 and 
€400 per month for a full-time break, and in the private sector up to €500. The 
additional incentive premium from the Flemish government is also offered for this 
type of leave.  
 
The current policy is intended, on the one hand, to enable a more relaxed career and 
acknowledges the need for time across a lifespan for activities other than 
employment. On the other hand, the policy encourages employees over 50 to stay in 
the labour market by allowing them to work four-fifths or one-half of normal hours 
until their pension age. Since 2002, there has been a special ruling in place for the 
over-50s, with more flexible conditions and larger contributions. The so-called 
‘landing-strip jobs’, whereby over-50s voluntarily reduce the number of hours they 
work, are used by the majority of workers as a transition from work to retirement. In 
2004, 18 per cent of the female working population over 50 and ten per cent of men 
in the same category chose to take advantage of this form of part-time career break 
(Geurts and Van Woensel, 2005: 111). This possibility is extensively used in cases of 
company restructuring.  
 
Career breaks and time credits, therefore, act both as employment and work-life 
balance policies. In 2004 in Flanders, nine per cent of the working female and three 
per cent of the working male population – 89,000 women and 35,000 men – took 
career breaks or time credit, part or full time. Although the total share of male 
workers using these schemes has grown in recent years, it still represents a relatively 
 
33

small group. If we look at the male working population under the age of 50, only one 
per cent took career leave, compared with seven per cent of employed women 
(Geurts and Van Woensel, 2005).  
 
A study of career-breakers 
 
In 2004, the University of Antwerp and the Free University of Brussels carried out a 
major survey among Flemish career-breakers aged between 20 and 49 in order to 
gain a picture of their lifestyle and time use. A conscious decision was made to 
survey only career-breakers under the age of 50 to avoid the issue of work-to-
retirement transitions. The study included both those taking advantage of the general 
career break and time credit schemes, and those taking thematic leave. To simplify 
matters, we refer to all members of these groups as ‘career-breakers’. Only career-
breakers who, at the time of sampling, had at least five months to go on their career 
breaks were selected, as the time between the initial sampling process and when the 
respondents were visited by the interviewer could vary from a few weeks to several 
months.  
 
With the help of the National Employment Office a sample of Flemish career-
breakers was drawn. Female part-time career-breakers accounted for 74 per cent of 
the total population from which the sample was taken, male part-time career-
breakers for 13 per cent, female full-time career-breakers for 11 per cent and male 
full-time career-breakers for two per cent. In total, 16 per cent of the career-breakers 
were male as opposed to 85 per cent who were female; 13 per cent interrupted their 
careers on a full-time basis (so temporarily no longer worked) against a part-time per 
centage of 87 per cent. These figures reveal the gendered nature of leave-taking in 
Flanders.  
 
A postcard was sent to a sample of career-breakers to invite them to participate in 
the study. Of the 8,907 postcards sent, 2,411 were returned with a positive answer. 
In total, 607 male (194 full-time and 413 part-time) and 629 female (294 full-time and 
335 part-time) career-breakers were interviewed, supplemented by a control group of 
278 people in employment, smaller in number since they could be supplemented by 
data from employees in the TOR ’04 time use survey.  
 
The study design was to interview equal numbers of men and women, spread equally 
over part- and full-time leave. Each subgroup of career-breakers is representative of 
the Flemish population of career-breakers aged between 20 and 49 years with a 
break of at least five months. Respondents were weighted according to age and 
leave rate (see technical report, Desmet et al., 2006). Around half of the career-
breakers kept a diary for seven days in which they noted down what they were doing 
at a particular time, who was present, to whom they had spoken, what the reason 
was for their action and, if they were travelling, the transport they used. This research 
note focuses on the full-time and part-time career-breakers who kept a diary for a 
week. In order to reveal the changes in how career-breakers spent their time, they 
were compared with employed people in the same age group from the Flemish TOR 
’04 time use survey. 
 
The methodology used in the career break survey and the TOR ’04 time use survey 
was identical, including the same diaries, and the field work for both studies was 
 
34

carried out at the same time in 2004. The questionnaires contained one section 
unique to the situation of career-breakers and a section in common with the TOR ’04 
time use survey. The first section covered, inter alia, the experience of being on 
leave, the changes in habits and time use, and future outlook. The general section 
included the social demographic variables of the respondents and their partners, 
attitudes towards work and modalities of (previous) work (timing, duration, flexibility), 
leisure activities, social participation and volunteer work, media preferences and 
general attitudes, for example towards traditional role patterns (non-exhaustive list). 
The similarities between the two surveys allowed a comparison of the demographic 
characteristics, outlook and attitude of career-breakers and the Flemish population in 
general. 
 
In this research note, we have identified four groups of men according to their 
working situation: full-time workers (n=434); full-time career-breakers with work-
related activities4 during their career breaks (n=50); part-time career-breakers 
(n=188); and full-time career-breakers with no work-related activities (n=58). There 
are also four groups of women, defined according to their working situation: full-time 
workers (n=229); part-time workers (n=173); part-time career-breakers (n=179); and 
full-time career-breakers with no work-related activities (n=133). 
 
Demographic profile 
 
The average age of the men was approximately 37 years. Part-time career-breakers 
were considerably older (40). There are no significant differences with respect to 
educational level between the four groups (Table 1.2a). The most common form of 
family life among working men and male career-breakers is living in a household with 
children. Part-time male career-breakers more often tend to live with a partner and 
children and have more and younger children than the other men in the survey. Full-
time career-breakers without any working activities tend to still live at home with their 
parents or cohabit with a partner yet are without children.  
 
The average age of women was approximately 36 years. Full-time working women 
were younger (34) and lived less often with a partner and children than the other 
women in the survey (Table 1.2b). Female part-time career-breakers were, on 
average, more highly educated. The difference in educational level was especially 
marked between part-time career-breakers and part-time workers. Most women in 
the survey lived with a partner and had children, with the exception of full-time 
working women. Full-time working women tend to live more often with their parents 
or alone and almost half of this subgroup had no children. 
 
Motivation 
 
The reasons for taking a career break vary between part- and full-time leave-takers. 
For full-time male career-breakers with work-related activities, another professional 
activity was the most important reason to take leave (Table 1.2c). One-quarter of this 
                                                 
4 The career break and time credit systems allow careers to be interrupted for 
any reason. Working in another job is an option, though the allowance is no 
longer paid. However, the leave-taker retains his/her right to return to the same 
employer after the break. 
 
35

group also specified ‘more time for the children’. Full-time career-breakers without a 
work-related activity mainly chose to take a career leave to follow a course or study 
or to spend more time with the children. One-quarter of the non-working male full-
time career-breakers were also dissatisfied with their jobs. 
 
Part-time leave obviously seems a strategy for men to better balance work and family 
responsibilities. Half of the part-time career-breakers wanted more time for the 
children and one-fifth mentioned ‘more time for domestic chores’ as one of the 
reasons for career leave. The fact that 32 per cent wanted more leisure time and 23 
per cent more time for themselves indicated a desire to ‘slow down’.  
 
The most important reason for taking a career break among women was ‘more time 
for the children’ (Table 1.2d). Almost three-quarters of women with a full-time or part-
time leave specified this reason. In addition, 41 per cent of the female part-time 
career-breakers wanted more time for domestic work and 38 per cent wanted more 
time for themselves.  
 
Time use 
 
If we disregard men choosing to take leave for other work-related activities, a career 
break goes hand in hand with a significant reduction in total workload, at least for full-
time male career-breakers (Table 1.2e). The total workload consists of paid work, 
domestic work and childcare. Male career-breakers on full-time leave and with no 
other work activities have the smallest total workload, although they spend a large 
amount of time on domestic work. Full-time career-breakers without work-related 
activities take more time for personal care, eating and drinking, and sleeping and 
resting. In line with their reasons for taking leave, they spend significantly more time 
on education and training. Not working at all also enhances the time spent on social 
participation and leisure.  
 
Taking career leave to try out another job is the most popular reason for taking a full-
time career break. These men have the highest total workload and the smallest 
amount of time for sleeping and resting, social participation, leisure and travel. 
Whether the leave provides them with a better work-life balance is questionable. 
 
Part-time leave does not imply a radical reduction in total workload. The lower 
number of hours worked by male part-time career-breakers is partially compensated 
for by an increase in domestic work and childcare. Part-time male career-breakers 
present a strong image as caring fathers. They use career leave and time credit 
schemes effectively to achieve a better balance between paid work and family life. 
Therefore their time spent on personal care, social participation, leisure and travel 
only differs moderately from full-time working men. 
 
These results do not take into account that 76 per cent of part-time career-breakers 
cohabit with a partner and children, whereas for working men it is between 55 and 60 
per cent, and for full-time male career-breakers without work-related activities it is 
just 40 per cent. We get a better picture of the changes in the combination of work-
based and family-oriented activities if we look exclusively at fathers (Table 1.2f). 
Among fathers, a clear-cut redistribution of workload can be identified. Less paid 
work or no paid work at all correlates with a gradual increase in household tasks and 
 
36

childcare. An exception to this is the full-time career-breakers. In view of the small 
number of fathers among full-time career-breakers, these figures should be regarded 
as indicative. 
 
Another way of looking at the changes in how career-breakers use their time is to 
examine how time that is freed up by not working or working less is allocated among 
other activities when compared to full-time workers. Table 1.2g corroborates previous 
findings. Part-time male career-breakers spend 82 per cent of the time that they gain 
by working on a part-time basis on family-based tasks (domestic work and childcare). 
Among full-time career-breakers without work-related activities 43 per cent of freed-
up time is devoted to family tasks. If, though, we consider only the full-time career-
breakers without work-related activities and with children, they would appear to 
spend around three-quarters of freed-up time on family tasks, just like part-time 
career-breakers. However, their numbers are too low to assess statistical 
significance. 
 
As for men, a career break for women only goes hand in hand with a significant 
reduction in the total workload for those who opt for a full-time career-break (Table 
1.2h). A huge amount of time, however, is spent at domestic work and childcare; the 
time put into household and childcare responsibilities by full-time female career-
breakers without work-related activities is comparable to a full-time working week. A 
full-time break also gives women the possibility to spend more time on personal care, 
eating and drinking, sleeping and resting, education and training, and social 
participation compared to working in a full-time job.  
 
Female part-time workers or part-time leave-takers compensate for lower numbers of 
hours worked by an increase in domestic work and childcare. Part-time career leave, 
therefore, does not imply a radical reduction in total workload. Just like men, part-
time career leave or part-time work is used as a strategy to combine work and family 
life.  
 
These findings are corroborated in Table 1.2j which shows the allocation of freed-up 
working time to other activities. About 90 per cent of the time that female part-time 
career-breakers gain by working part time is spent on family-based tasks. For female 
full-time career-breakers the freed-up time used for family-based tasks amounts to 
about 80 per cent. 
 
Time pressure 
 
Time pressure is measured using 14 statements about feelings of time shortage, 
temporal overload, dissatisfaction with the time available, and obligations, ambitions 
and expectations that are hard to meet as a result of temporal constraints. We 
distinguish between feelings of time pressure in general and feelings of time pressure 
during free time. The measure is explained in more detail in Desmet et al., 2006. 
 
Reducing working hours can be beneficial for reducing feelings of time pressure. 
Career-breakers, men and women, feel less time pressure than full-time workers. 
Subjective time pressure diminishes with a decline in working hours. Full-time career-
breakers have the lowest feeling of subjective time pressure (with the exception of 
 
37

full-time male career-breakers with work-related activities). Time pressure during the 
free time remains unaffected by taking a leave period (Tables 1.2k and 1. 2l).  
 
Conclusions 
 
Leave policy is a hot topic at present. Many countries report significant recent 
changes in their leave arrangements that increase the scope of leave entitlements 
(Moss and O’Brien, 2006). The Belgian general career break and time credit 
schemes are quite unique in that they can be taken up regardless of reason 
throughout the life cycle. The policy aims at facilitating a better work-life balance to 
keep people with competing interests in the workforce. Leave arrangements and 
part-time work prevent women dropping out of the labour market when family 
obligations become too onerous (Anxo and O’Reilly, 2002). Career breaks and 
Parental leave offer fathers a legitimate framework to free up time for their children. 
Clearly, the general scheme of career break is not only intended for parents and 
recognises one can need a break from employment at any age to travel around the 
world, to build a house, to study, to switch careers, to pursue a hobby, to relax, to 
engage in volunteer work, to be there for demanding children, to take care of elders 
or for any other reason. Such a policy acknowledges the many uses of time that 
make for a good life (Deven and Moss, 2002: 248). 
 
Previous research has indicated that men are reluctant to take Parental leave, and 
the situation in Belgium – for Parental leave and the more general career break 
scheme – is no different. In 2004, about three-quarters of the participants were 
women and their main reason for taking leave was combining work and family 
responsibilities. About 80 to 90 per cent of the freed-up working time is spent on 
family-based tasks. The total workload of part-time female career-breakers is hardly 
any lower than for full-time career-breakers. Only female career-breakers on full-time 
leave considerably reduce their total workload. Reducing work hours however 
contributes to lower feelings of time pressure, for women as well as men. Few men, 
however, opt for a complete career break; interrupting employment full time can 
seem like a daring and atypical choice for men.  
 
Strangely enough, our analyses demonstrate that 46 per cent of full-time male 
career-breakers continue to work during the break. In fact, taking career leave to try 
out another job is the most popular reason for taking a full-time career break. These 
men have the highest total workload and are subject to the greatest time pressures of 
all men. Whether the leave provides them with a better work-life balance is 
questionable.  
 
Male career-breakers on full-time leave and with no other work activities have no 
fewer than 34 hours and 57 minutes extra time available compared to their working 
counterparts. On average, non-working full-time male career-breakers spend just 43 
per cent of freed-up working time on family tasks (domestic work and childcare). This 
group of men has the largest amount of spare time and the smallest total workload 
and time pressure; they are mainly divided between men who enrol in a course of 
study (this group hardly contains any fathers) and men who primarily perform family 
tasks. This last, small group of fathers made a conscious decision to swap paid work 
for unpaid work, and acted upon it. The same conclusion can be drawn for men on 
part-time leave.  
 
38

 
Part-time male career-breakers use time that has been freed up as a result of 
working less primarily for domestic work and childcare. Eighty per cent of the time 
they gain by only working part time is devoted to family tasks. The combination of a 
part-time job and family-based tasks ensures that their total workload is not lower 
than full-time male workers – but they experience less time pressure. Part-time male 
career-breakers present a strong image as caring fathers. They use career leave and 
time credit schemes effectively to achieve a better balance between paid work and 
family life.  
 
This demonstrates that when men are presented with an opportunity to work less and 
are supported in taking up an alternative role by means of career leave and time 
credit schemes, they will effectively take on more family tasks (temporarily). When 
only women take advantage of flexible leave arrangements, this can have a perverse 
effect: work-family policies aiming at more gender equality lead to the exact opposite, 
when it is taken for granted that women will lower their work ambitions to prioritise 
family life. 
 
The time use diaries and questionnaires provide a unique insight into the life of 
career-breakers. However, the sample sise was small. A larger sample is needed to 
further test these findings. 
 
References 
 
Anxo, D. and O'Reilly, J. (2002) ‘Working-time transitions and transitional labour 
markets’, in G. Schmid and B. Gazier (eds.) The Dynamics of Full Employment: 
Social Integration through Transitional Labour Markets. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 
pp.339-364. 
 
Desmet, B., Glorieux, I. and Vandeweyer, J. (2006) Technisch verslag bij het 
onderzoek ‘Loopbaanonderbrekers onder de loep: Een onderzoek naar de 
leefsituatie en tijdsbesteding van gebruikers van het tijdskrediet in Vlaanderen’. 
Brussels: Research Group TOR, Department of Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel. 
 
Deven, F. and Moss, P. (2002) ‘Leave arrangements for parents: overview and future 
outlook’, Community, Work and Family, Vol.5, No.3: 237–255. 
 
Devisscher, S. (2004) The career break (time credit) scheme in Belgium and the 
incentive premiums by the Flemish government: discussion paper EC peer review, 
February 2004. Brussels: IDEA Consult. 
 
Geurts, K. and Van Woensel, A. (2005) Genderzakboekje. Zij en hij op de 
arbeidsmarkt. Leuven: Steunpunt Werkgelegenheid, Arbeid en Vorming. 
 
Moss, P. and O’Brien, M. (eds.) (2006) International Review of Leave Policies and 
Related Research 2006, Employment Relations Research Series No. 57, London: 
Department of Trade and Industry. 
 
 
39

Vandeweyer, J. and Glorieux, I. (2008) ‘Men taking up career leave: an opportunity 
for a better work and family life balance?’, Journal of Social Policy, Vol.37, No.2: 271-
294. 
 
Publications of the research project 
 
Desmet, B., Glorieux, I. and Vandeweyer, J. (2006) Technisch verslag bij het 
onderzoek ‘Loopbaanonderbrekers onder de loep: Een onderzoek naar de 
leefsituatie en tijdsbesteding van gebruikers van het tijdskrediet in Vlaanderen’. 
Brussels: Research Group TOR, Department of Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel.  
 
Desmet, B., Glorieux, I. and Vandeweyer, J. (2007) Het gezin of het 
maatschappelijke middenveld? Welke rol nemen loopbaanonderbrekers op na het 
wegvallen van arbeid? Brussels: Research Group TOR, Department of Sociology, 
Vrije Universiteit Brussel. 
 
Desmet, 
B., 
Glorieux, 
I. 
and 
Vandeweyer, 
J. 
(2007) 
Wie 
zijn 
de 
loopbaanonderbrekers? 
Socio-demografische 
kenmerken, 
motivaties 
en 
arbeidshouding van loopbaanonderbrekers. Brussels: Research Group TOR, 
Department of Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel. 
  
Desmet, 
B., 
Glorieux, 
I. 
and 
Vandeweyer, 
J. 
(2007) 
‘Time 
to 
leave: 
loopbaanonderbrekers onder de loep’, Over Werk. Tijdschrift van het Steunpunt 
WSE, No.3-4: 156-160. 
 
Vandeweyer, J. and Glorieux, I. (2008) ‘Men taking up career leave: an opportunity 
for a better work and family life balance?’, Journal of Social Policy, Vol.37, No.2: 271-
294. 
 
 
40

Table 1.2a: Men in study – educational level, family situation, age of 
children and employment status (column per centages) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Full-time 
break 
(working) 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=434) 
(n=50) 
(n=188) 
(n=58) 
Educational level 
 
 
 
 
Lower (on average up to 15 years) 
24.1 
16.0 
23.9 
14.0 
Medium (on average up to 18 years) 
42.8 
50.0 
38.3 
42.1 
 Higher (non-academic higher    education) 
22.1 
28.0 
29.3 
29.8 
Higher (academic higher education) 
11.0 
6.0 
8.5 
14.0 
Family situation* 
 
 
 
 
Living with parents 
14.0 
4.0 
1.6 
19.3 
Living alone 
9.9 
6.0 
7.9 
8.8 
Single parent 
2.3 
2.0 
2.6 
1.8 
With partner without children 
18.8 
28.0 
12.2 
29.8 
With partner and children 
55.0 
60.0 
75.7 
40.4 
Age of children* 
 
 
 
 
No children 
42.6 
36.7 
21.7 
58.6 
Youngest child < 7 
26.0 
20.4 
42.3 
27.6 
Youngest child >= 7 
31.3 
42.9 
36.0 
13.8 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
41

Table 1.2b: Women in study – educational level, family situation, age of 
children and employment status (column per centages) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Part-time 
work 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=229) 
(n=173) 
(n=179) 
(n=133) 
Educational level* 
 
 
 
 
Lower (on average up to 15 years) 
13.6 
23.1 
7.8 
12.9 
Medium (on average up to 18 years) 
37.3 
41.6 
31.8 
42.4 
 Higher (non-academic higher education) 
40.4 
26.6 
52.0 
35.6 
Higher (academic higher education) 
8.8 
8.7 
8.4 
9.1 
Family situation* 
 
 
 
 
Living with parents 
14.5 
2.3 
0.6 
1.5 
Living alone 
10.5 
0.6 
1.7 
0.8 
Single parent 
7.9 
6.4 
5.1 
2.3 
With partner without children 
20.2 
11.0 
9.0 
5.3 
With partner and children 
46.9 
79.8 
83.7 
90.1 
Age of children* 
 
 
 
 
No children 
45.6 
13.9 
11.7 
9.0 
Youngest child < 7 
26.8 
30.1 
53.1 
70.1 
Youngest child >= 7 
27.6 
56.1 
35.2 
20.9 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
42

Table 1.2c: Men in study – motivations for career interruption (per 
centages) 
 
 
Full-time break 
(working) 
(n=50) 
Part-time 
break 
 
(n=188) 
Full-time break 
(not working) 
(n=58) 
More time for children* 
24 
50 
28 
More time for domestic work* 
6 
22 
14 
Other paid employment* 
71 
2 
10 
Unsatisfied with job* 
18 
9 
24 
Less work pressure* 
6 
18 
7 
Study* 
6 
7 
29 
Health reasons* 
10 
13 
10 
Stress* 
2 
8 
14 
More leisure time* 
4 
32 
7 
More time for myself* 
2 
23 
7 
Care for sick people/elders 
0 
4 
9 
Civic engagement 
0 
3 
2 
Building/renovation* 
4 
10 
14 
Travel*  
2 
1 
7 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
Table 1.2d: Women in study – motivations for career interruption (per 
centages) 
 
 
Full-time break 
(n=133) 
Part-time 
break 
(n=179) 
More time for children* 
74 
73 
More time for domestic work* 
16 
41 
Other paid employment 
1 
0 
Unsatisfied with job* 
10 
3 
Less work pressure* 
6 
15 
Study* 
11 
3 
Health reasons* 
10 
12 
Stress* 
7 
6 
More leisure time* 
3 
14 
More time for myself* 
11 
38 
Care for sick people/elders* 
13 
4 
Civic engagement 
1 
1 
Building/renovation* 
1 
3 
Travel*  
1 
0 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
43

Table 1.2e: Men in study – time spent on main activities (total week) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Full-time 
break 
(working) 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=434) 
(n=50) 
(n=188) 
(n=58) 
Paid work* 
39:24 
44:53 
27:27 
0:23 
Formal work* 
38:42 
44:33 
26:33 
0:09 
Time spent at work, without working* 
0:38 
0:20 
0:52 
0:01 
Activities related to unemployment 
and looking for a job 
0:03 
0:00 
0:00 
0:13 
Domestic work* 
10:59 
10:24 
18:21 
25:03 
Housework* 
5:50 
5:26 
9:04 
12:39 
Odd jobs* 
3:13 
2:40 
6:31 
9:05 
Shopping* 
1:32 
1:51 
2:13 
2:29 
Visiting/using services* 
0:23 
0:25 
0:32 
0:48 
Childcare* 
2:14 
2:09 
4:47 
5:02 
Childcare* 
0:58 
0:25 
2:24 
3:11 
Educating children* 
1:16 
1:44 
2:22 
1:50 
   Total workload* 
52:39 
57:27 
50:36 
30:28 
Personal care, eating &drinking* 
13:49 
13:59 
14:57 
16:25 
Eating and drinking* 
8:48 
9:08 
9:45 
11:09 
Dressing, toilet 
4:40 
4:25 
4:42 
4:16 
Receiving professional care 
0:20 
0:25 
0:30 
0:59 
Sleeping & Resting* 
57:56 
56:58 
57:35 
61:12 
   Total personal care* 
71:46 
70:58 
72:32 
77:38 
Education & Training* 
0:51 
2:07 
1:06 
8:21 
School* 
0:08 
1:12 
0:33 
7:06 
Other education, training, courses 
0:43 
0:54 
0:32 
1:14 
Social participation* 
8:36 
8:10 
9:08 
14:21 
Associational life, civic duties* 
1:23 
1:37 
1:25 
3:20 
Social contacts* 
7:11 
6:32 
7:39 
9:43 
Family care* 
0:02 
0:00 
0:03 
1:16 
 
 
44

Table 1.2e (continued): Men in study – time spent on main activities 
(total week) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Full-time 
break 
(working) 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=434) 
(n=50) 
(n=188) 
(n=58) 
Leisure* 
24:21 
20:18 
23:58 
26:36 
Hobbies and games 
1:26 
0:42 
1:12 
2:05 
Sports 
1:17 
1:01 
1:14 
1:54 
Recreation* 
2:04 
1:13 
2:57 
2:23 
Outdoors 
3:26 
3:51 
2:41 
2:50 
Entertainment and cultural events 
1:16 
1:17 
1:04 
1:37 
TV & Video 
11:30 
9:28 
11:02 
11:38 
Listening to music 
0:15 
0:12 
0:22 
0:27 
Reading* 
1:19 
1:05 
1:57 
1:12 
New media 
1:43 
1:25 
1:24 
2:25 
Travel 
8:22 
7:36 
9:06 
8:40 
To and from work* 
4:00 
2:34 
3:56 
0:10 
To school, university, courses* 
0:06 
0:29 
0:12 
0:55 
Related to leisure 
1:36 
1:33 
1:28 
1:46 
Related to domestic work* 
0:30 
0:17 
0:45 
1:14 
Related to childcare and education* 
0:25 
0:48 
1:01 
1:36 
Related to family 
0:38 
0:28 
0:40 
0:53 
Other travel* 
1:03 
1:24 
1:01 
2:02 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
45

Table 1.2f: Men in study with partner and children – time spent on paid 
work, domestic chores and childcare (total week) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Full-time 
break 
(working) 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=240) 
(n=30) 
(n=143) 
(n=23) 
Paid work* 
39:09 
46:20 
27:36 
0:08 
Domestic work* 
11:59 
9:08 
18:34 
31:54 
Childcare* 
3:45 
3:16 
6:14 
12:12 
Total workload* 
54:53 
58:45 
52:24 
44:15 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
Table 1.2g: Men in study taking career breaks – allocation of reduced 
working time compared with full-time working men (in percentages) 
 
Activities 
Part-time break 
(11 hour 57 minutes less 
paid work) 
Full-time break 
(not working) 
(39 hours 1 minute less 
paid work) 
Domestic work 
62 
36 
Childcare 
21 
7 
Travel 
6 
1 
Personal care, eating & 
drinking 
6 
15 
Education & training 
2 
19 
Social participation & leisure 
1 
20 
Other activities 
1 
1 
Total 
100 
100 
 
 
46

Table 1.2h: Women in study – time spent on main activities (total week) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Part-time 
work 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=229) 
(n=173) 
(n=179) 
(n=133) 
Paid work* 
35:04 
24:05 
22:05 
0:07 
Formal work* 
34:08 
23:27 
21:39 
0:06 
Time spent at work, without working* 
0:54 
0:37 
0:25 
0:00 
Activities related to unemployment and 
looking for a job 
0:02 
0:00 
0:00 
0:00 
Domestic work* 
16:18 
22:43 
23:54 
32:27 
Housework* 
12:27 
18:08 
18:09 
25:32 
Odd jobs* 
1:07 
1:05 
1:42 
2:35 
Shopping* 
2:17 
3:05 
3:29 
3:38 
Visiting/using services* 
0:26 
0:24 
0:32 
0:40 
Childcare* 
3:47 
5:32 
8:04 
14:52 
Childcare* 
2:26 
3:11 
4:59 
9:08 
Educating children* 
1:21 
2:20 
3:04 
5:44 
   Total workload* 
55:10 
52:21 
54:04 
47:27 
Personal care, eating & drinking* 
15:08 
14:35 
15:15 
16:06 
Eating and drinking* 
9:03 
8:42 
9:19 
10:02 
Dressing, toilet 
5:24 
5:12 
5:12 
5:14 
Receiving professional care 
0:39 
0:40 
0:43 
0:49 
Sleeping & resting 
59:44 
60:18 
59:52 
61:47 
   Total personal care* 
74:52 
74:53 
75:08 
77:53 
Education & training* 
0:50 
0:33 
0:56 
2:02 
School* 
0:07 
0:03 
0:20 
0:58 
Other education, training, courses 
0:43 
0:30 
0:36 
1:03 
Social participation* 
8:39 
9:28 
9:36 
12:22 
Associational life, civic duties 
0:46 
0:44 
0:46 
1:08 
Social contacts* 
7:51 
8:40 
8:44 
11:00 
Family care 
0:02 
0:02 
0:05 
0:14 
 
 
47

Table 1.2h (continued): Women in study – time spent on main activities 
(total week) 
 
  
Full-time 
work 
Part-time 
work 
Part-time 
break 
Full-time 
break 
(not 
working) 
 
(n=229) 
(n=173) 
(n=179) 
(n=133) 
Leisure 
18:31 
20:30 
18:18 
18:25 
Hobbies and games 
0:47 
1:00 
0:38 
1:00 
Sports 
0:45 
0:47 
0:47 
0:39 
Recreation 
2:05 
2:23 
2:22 
2:20 
Outdoors* 
2:45 
2:21 
2:00 
1:14 
Entertainment and cultural events 
1:03 
1:34 
1:09 
1:09 
TV & Video 
8:50 
10:05 
8:49 
9:17 
Listening to music 
0:07 
0:07 
0:09 
0:11 
Reading 
1:30 
1:47 
1:55 
1:56 
New media 
0:34 
0:20 
0:26 
0:34 
Travel 
8:31 
8:46 
8:29 
7:56 
To and from work* 
3:32 
2:54 
2:41 
0:01 
To school, university, courses* 
0:06 
0:05 
0:16 
0:41 
Related to leisure 
1:22 
1:37 
1:30 
1:06 
Related to domestic work 
0:38 
0:46 
0:40 
0:51 
Related to childcare and education* 
0:44 
1:40 
1:28 
3:00 
Related to family 
0:45 
0:44 
0:43 
0:56 
Other travel 
1:20 
0:59 
1:10 
1:17 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
 
48

Table 1.2j: Women in study – allocation of reduced working time 
compared with full-time working women (in percentages) 
 
Activities 
Part-time break 
(12 hours 59 minutes 
less paid work) 
Full-time break 
(not working) 
(34 hours 57 minutes 
less paid work) 
Domestic work 
58 
46 
Childcare 
33 
32 
Travel 
0 
0 
Personal care, eating & drinking 
2 
9 
Education & training 
1 
3 
Social participation & leisure 
6 
10 
Other activities 
0 
0 
Total 
100 
100 
 
 
Table 1.2k: Men in study – time pressure 
 
 
Subjective 
time 
pressure (*) 
Time pressure in 
free time 
Average 
time 
pressure 
Full-time work 
37.9 
42.0 
39.7 
Full-time break (working) 
38.9 
46.0 
42.1 
Part-time break 
35.3 
42.5 
38.4 
Full-time break (not-working) 
34.1 
39.9 
36.6 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
 
Table 1.2l: Women in study – time Pressure 
 
 
Subjective 
time 
pressure (*) 
Time pressure in 
free time 
Average 
time 
pressure 
Full-time work 
40.4 
43.8 
41.8 
Part-time work 
39.6 
46.2 
42.5 
Part-time break 
37.9 
44.7 
40.8 
Full-time break 
35.2 
47.1 
40.3 
* statistically significant difference at the level p<0.05. 
 
49

1.3 
Belgium: Family-work 
articulation policies – a 
life course approach 
 
Amandine J. Masuy, Fond National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université 
catholique de Louvain and Universiteit Katholieke Leuven  
 
Introduction 
 
Family-work articulation has become one of the most challenging issues for 
European social policy makers. It is a challenge because it includes the need for 
action with an uncertainty about the definition of the concerned field of action and 
about how to approach it. Social policies are initially made to ensure and maintain 
individual and social well-being. In today’s society, individual well-being depends 
largely on the capacity to combine harmoniously multiple social roles. Family and 
work-related roles are probably the most difficult to combine, therefore their 
articulation becomes a field of social policy action. 
 
How to define the field of family-work articulation?  
 
It is neither a sub-field of family policy nor of employment policy, rather it is a 
multidimensional or ‘inter-field’ policy. Furthermore, family-work articulation is not 
constant, nor is it a process with clearly defined phases. The way in which people 
decide to combine their family and working lives evolves over time and their 
articulation choices may have long-term or delayed consequences. Taking this into 
account requires looking at policy design through a new lens.   
 
This is what I am trying to do in this paper by using the life course approach to 
describe the realities of family-work articulation and related policies in Belgium. The 
paper is in three parts. The first picks up on the first two points of this introduction: a 
brief presentation of the European employment and population situation offers some 
insights on the reasons why policy action is needed in the ‘inter-fields’ of family-work 
articulation. Then, time and multidimensionality will be introduced as key components 
in defining family-work articulation. The other two parts are devoted to the third point 
of the introduction: how to approach or think about family-work articulation. The 
second part presents the theoretical framework of the life course approach; the third 
part shows how life course principles may enhance the design of social policies, 
making them better able to tackle the complex field of family-work articulation.  
 
 
50

This is not an empirical paper. As far as I know, there are no micro longitudinal data 
on the use of family-work articulation policies in Belgium, which would be needed to 
make an empirical analysis that includes life course principles. This paper is mainly 
theoretical, presenting the life course principles and discussing their value for policies 
aiming at facilitating family-work articulation. Nor am I presenting the Belgian leave 
system in detail or using a life course framework to evaluate its efficiency or efficacy. 
The Belgian case is used to illustrate how researchers and politicians might gain an 
understanding of the complexity of family-work articulation and how it may be useful 
to include some life course aspects (such as ‘time’ and ‘multidimensionality’) when 
shaping leave policies. 
 
Policy relevance and field definition  
 
The relevance of policy action in the European context 
 
Family-work articulation is an ‘inter-fields’ issue. It cannot be fitted into any one 
traditional social policy field. However, it is necessary to be aware of the current ‘hot 
issues’ in the relevant ‘traditional’ social policy fields, especially family and 
employment policies. One of the key issues for family policy is to ensure sustainable 
population ageing through intergenerational solidarities, without jeopardising 
individual freedom of choice. To do that, it is necessary to act on both ends of the 
age pyramid: at the bottom, by reducing the opportunity cost of childbearing for 
working women; at the top, by promoting a care system that meets the needs of 
elderly people and informal carers.  
 
The family is a key actor in the project of ‘sustainable population ageing’ but its role is 
not easy to define. The family structure and the nature of family relationships are less 
codified than before. The decision and the timing of childbearing as well as the 
negotiation of eldercare responsibilities are not given but depend on individuals’ 
preferences, resources and trajectories. Policy makers can no longer base their 
action on a family dynamic in which the woman stops working for childbearing and 
caring for elderly relatives while the man continues as a breadwinner.   
 
As for employment policy, the 2000 Lisbon Summit states what are the priorities and 
we will focus on one of them: increased employment rates in general and for women 
and older workers in particular, because increasing their employment rate is likely to 
depend on the development of sound family-work articulation policies. Although most 
want to work and ensure their financial independence, women are more likely than 
men to reduce their working time or to look for a job that is more compatible with their 
current family responsibilities. The ‘older workers’ category refers to people over 50 
years, a group who mostly have grandchildren, but they are also likely to have an 
elderly parent or even their spouse to care for. If the care load becomes too heavy, 
they may decide to retire earlier rather than reorganising their working time for the 
last years of their career. In 2008, the employment rate in Belgium for women was 55 
per cent (EU-27 average: 58) against 69 per cent for men (EU-27 average: 72.5); 
while among older worker (55-64 years), it reached 26 per cent for women and 43 
per cent for men when the EU-27 averaged respectively 36 and 53 per cent 
(Eurostat, 2009).   
 
 
51

Developing family-work articulation policies seems to be necessary to help women 
and older workers to maintain their double commitment towards work and family.  
 
Defining the field 
 
There are, at least, two aspects making the definition of policy action complex. The 
first is the ‘inter-fields’ nature of family-work articulation, being at the intersection of 
‘traditional’ policy fields such as employment, family and health care. A family policy 
that makes available high quality childcare services for traditional working hours 
might not be useful for single mothers working on flexi-time unless the policy makers 
take account of the various working-time patterns of the parents and thus, introduce 
employment characteristics into a family policy. A health care policy, such as a 
dependency cash allowance intended to decrease the opportunity cost of providing 
informal care to an elderly parent, may have the reverse effect in the long term: low 
income or part-time workers (mainly women) may decide it is less costly to take the 
allowance and unemployment benefits than to work and pay for professional carers. 
But when their caring spell is over, they may have difficulty getting a job, making the 
long-term opportunity cost of care higher than it seemed to be at first. An 
employment policy promoting part-time work may help women to conciliate family 
and employment, but if there is a family emergency (e.g. an acute health problem of 
a parent or a child), the part-time work pattern might prove an obstacle: earnings may 
be too small to pay for professional care while part-time working hours still leave too 
little time for caring. In this case, full-time employment with the possibility to take 
leave for caring would probably be a better solution.  
 
The second aspect is time, an essential component for understanding individual 
strategies, inequalities and consequences. A single mother is in a more difficult 
position: she cares for her child alone and will have to adapt her working time 
according to the school calendar, but she also has to work enough to ensure an 
adequate household income. In these conditions, childcare services and paid leave 
possibilities are essential. But, in fact, these policies are often designed for two-
parent families where at least one parent has a work schedule matching the childcare 
service and more opportunities for taking paid leave. Such policies may lead to an 
accumulation of disadvantages over time for a single mother. 
 
The example of the dependency allowance shows how the family-work articulation 
choice may have delayed consequences: if the immediate opportunity cost of care 
seems to be quite low when the woman decides to exit the labour market to care for 
a relative, the total or long-term opportunity cost of care will depend on the time she 
spends out of employment, the career opportunities she will loose, the possibility to 
re-enter the labour market and how all that will affect her pension.   
 
Finally, the part-time employment policy example clearly shows how a policy might 
turn out to be an obstacle for sound individual family-work articulation strategies. A 
mother whose child has a chronic illness and who knows that this health problem 
requires long periods at the hospital followed by periods of informal care at home, 
may prefer to have a full-time job that allows her to pay for the hospital, to work 
longer during these periods and to use leave facilities to care for her child. This 
timing strategy would be jeopardised if an employment policy promoting part-time 
work is crudely applied in her employment sector. 
 
52

 
The life course approach and principles 
 
The life course  
 
There is no consensus on what the life course approach is. Scholars refer to it as a 
theory (Dannefer, 2003), as a field of research (Mayer and Tuma, 1990), as a 
perspective (Moen, Dempster-McClain and Williams, 1992), as a new paradigm 
(Bengtson and Allen, 1993) or as all of these (Elder, 1999). It is not always easy to 
differentiate between the study of a phenomenon ‘over the life course’ and the study 
of a phenomenon using a ‘life course’ approach, or to establish the distinction 
between ‘lifespan’ and ‘life course’ studies (Mayer, 2003). However, one thing is 
clear: the studies referring to a ‘life’ principle have grown in number and in popularity 
over past decades (Marshall, 1996). Researchers have long attempted to situate 
their subject of study in a broader context (lifetime of the individual, historical or 
familial setting, etc.). What is new today is that we have reached a point where the 
state of technologies, of the society and of scientific paradigms allows and calls for a 
framework able to capture a phenomenon in its multiple contexts.  
 
To understand a society characterised by continual changes where individuals are 
defined by multiple roles, researchers need specific tools capable of capturing the 
dynamics of individual and social changes and the multiples contexts in which 
individuals are embedded. The development of longitudinal data and methods can be 
viewed as a response to this need. Among these, event history analysis allows 
researchers to account for the effect of earlier events on current status and to study 
the time spent in a given state, the transitions from one state to another or the timing 
of an event. Multi-level modelling aims at considering the respective effects of 
characteristics observed at different levels (e.g. individual and familial).  
 
At the same time, the epistemological paradigms in the social sciences have been 
reviewed. The micro-macro dichotomy seems to be inadequate to capture the 
complexity of today’s society (Allen, Blieszner and Roberto, 2000). Many disciplines 
move towards a more holistic approach: historical studies integrating demographic 
aspects and shifting their focus from wars and heroes to the ordinary events of daily 
life (e.g. births, deaths). The sociology of age shifts its focus from particular stages of 
life to the process of ageing. Developmental psychology starts to be interested in the 
influence of gender, race, individual background and life experiences on human 
development (Giele and Elder, 1998). Such evolutions contribute to the blurring of 
boundaries between disciplines.  
 
The popularity of the life course approach lies probably in its ambition to meet all 
these challenges: bridging the micro and macro perspectives, accounting for the time 
and the various contexts in which an individual is embedded, and overcoming the 
disciplinary boundaries in order to get a holistic understanding of the dynamics of a 
phenomenon. 
 
 
 
 
 
53

Principles of the life course approach according to Glen Elder 
 
The life course theoretical framework developed by Glen Elder (Elder 1977, 1978, 
1987, 1991a, 1991b, 2001; Elder, Caspi and Downey, 1986; Elder and Johnson, 
2002) is based on five principles: the first two, ‘lifespan’ and ‘human agency’, 
represent the individual or micro approach, while the ‘time and place’ principle 
represents the societal or macro approach. These two poles are bridged by the meso 
principles of ‘linked lives’ and ‘timing of transition’. Before explaining each of these 
principles and their companion concepts, the specific status of the lifespan principle 
requires further explanation, as it is sometimes missing in Elder’s work (especially in 
his publications). This principle comes from the psychological variant of the life 
course approach (itself named the ‘lifespan’ approach). Elder includes it as a fifth 
principle in his more recent contributions (Elder, Johnson and Crosnoe, 2003; 
Bengtson, Elder and Putney, 2005).   
 
The life course approach states that to understand an individual phenomenon it is 
necessary to account for the time (longitudinal aspect) and the multiple contexts 
(multidimensional aspect) in which it takes place. More precisely, five principles 
should be considered. The first two – ‘time and place’ and ‘lifespan’ – can be viewed 
as determining principles: they represent the institutional and biographical contexts 
where the individual is situated. The biographical context (‘lifespan’) does not only 
refer to the current age or ‘life stage’ of the individual, but it also refers to past stages 
or life events and to their influence on the study phenomenon. Ageing and human 
development are considered as a lifetime process during which positive and negative 
experiences are cumulated. The institutional contexts (‘time and place’) refer to the 
many aspects of the society at one moment in time: historic, geographic, economic, 
politic, social and cultural structures and norms. Not only do these contexts serve as 
enabling or disabling factors for individual actions, but they are also shaped by them. 
In other words, the life course approach considers the micro and the macro levels as 
interdependent.  
 
The next two principles – ‘linked lives’ and ‘timing’ – can be considered as ‘meso’ 
principles which connect the micro and macro levels. The ‘linked lives’ principle is 
maybe the most sociological. It refers to the fact that individuals are not isolated, but 
belong to various social groups (family, work or school, peer group, etc.) in which 
they play specific roles (mother, spouse, leader, etc.). Through these groups, they 
are in contact with institutions, their norms and rules.  The ‘timing’ principle refers to 
the fact that each individual event or process takes place in a multi-dimensional time: 
historical because it occurs at a given period and place, chronological because it 
occurs at a specific life stage of the individual.  
 
The last principle – ‘human agency’ – introduces a margin of freedom: individual 
behaviours are not entirely determined by time process and society. Two persons 
having similar social backgrounds or experiencing similar events during the same 
period of life are not necessarily affected by them the same way. Likewise, two 
persons being in the same situation at one point in time may have very different past 
personal histories.     
 
Each principle, taken separately, is not specific to the life course approach. What 
makes it original and challenging is its attempt to link these principles in order to 
 
54

study events situated in time and contexts. It is also interesting to note that the 
concepts of ‘trajectory’, ‘pathway’,  ‘transition’, ‘turning points’, ‘duration’ cannot be 
attributed to one specific principle but are used to bridge them. The two first, 
‘trajectory’ and ‘pathway’, are of a particular relevance to bridge the macro and micro 
levels, the constraints and freedom aspects. Both of them refer to a succession of 
states and transitions during the whole lifetime or a part of it. They can be 
characterised in term of ‘duration’ of a specific state, age at ‘transition’ or ‘turning 
points’. Pathways are socially defined: it is the normative way that individuals are 
expected to follow regarding the various institutions (time and place) and groups 
(linked lives) to which the individual participates. For each of the social aspects of life 
(family, education, work), there is a wide variety of pathways (more or less valued 
and constraining). A trajectory5 is unique to each individual: it is the way the 
individual concretely lives his life and organises (human agency) the events and 
social roles (linked lives) simultaneously or sequentially (lifespan). By comparing the 
individual trajectories and the various pathways at one point in time (timing), one can, 
for instance, measure the level of ‘compliance’ to current social models or analyse 
the heterogeneity of trajectories in a given society or subgroup.  
 
A life course approach to family-work articulation in Belgium 
 
Schemes inspired by transition modelling familiar to demographers will be used to 
show how the life course principles may lead to a revision of social policy design. 
Transition modelling is often used in transition analysis to represent different statuses 
and the probability of making the transition from one to another. This modelling 
strategy may easily be adapted to represent the family-work articulation dynamic. We 
start by presenting a general scheme and explaining how to read it.  
 
The statuses represented by the boxes in Figure 1.3a are ‘family-work combinations’ 
limited here to three time-varying characteristics: employment, union and parity 
statuses. For instance, the top left-hand box represents the situation where the 
woman works full-time, is single and is childless (parity 0). In this case, the 
combination is work oriented. As soon as one of the elements of the combination 
changes (e.g. she enters into a union), there is a transition to another box 
representing the new combination. Transitions – represented by arrows – link boxes 
which differ only by one element. The assumption is made that transitions are not 
simultaneous: a woman will not simultaneously change her working time and have a 
baby, but may either first make her work transition (e.g. the last months of pregnancy 
are difficult and she decides to stop working) or her parity transition (e.g. the birth 
leads her to change her priorities and she decides to work less to spend more time 
with her child).  
 
The transitions represented by arrows are parity, work and union transitions. For 
simplicity, we assume that women are childless when entering the labour market 
(first column). At that time, they may be in a union or single and starting with a full-
time or a part-time job. From that time, many transitions can be made and the sum of 
                                                 
5 The term ‘trajectory’ was preferred to ‘career’, which is often linked to a specific role and 
does not account for coexistence of multiple roles. The term ‘life cycle’ was also discarded 
because it is too normative (assuming that there are some cycles that all individuals should 
go through like marriage, childbearing, etc.).  
 
55

all the transitions made over time defines the woman’s individual trajectory. But not 
all the transitions are included: for simplicity, we consider births (parity 0=> parity 1, 
parity 1=> parity 2) only when the woman is in a union. We do not consider the death 
of a child (no arrow from parity 2> parity 1 or from parity 1> parity 0). Parity is treated 
as a non-reversible transition, but work and union transitions are always reversible. 
Finally, no arrow was drawn for parity transition of non-working women because this 
transition is out of the scope of family-work articulation policy. But, indirect transitions 
are possible: the woman may return to part-time employment after a period out of 
work (work transition), have a second child (parity transition) and then stop working 
again (work transition); after entering a first union and having a child, a woman may 
divorce and resume her previous single state (union transition). 
 
The lifespan principle 
 
This principle calls for the study of the phenomenon in a longitudinal perspective and 
to focus on transitions and trajectories rather than on current statuses. This change 
of perspective will imply a change in the identification of ‘target groups’. Most of the 
time, policy makers try to identify ‘frail’ statuses. In the example in Figure 1.3b, 
single mothers (parity 1) working part-time would be the ‘frailest’ combination 
because the equilibrium between family and work commitment is very fragile. Free 
and time-flexible childcare services for single mothers would be an example of ‘frail 
status group’ policy. It may be relevant and even effective for this specific group, but 
thinking only in terms of ‘frail statuses’ may lead to misidentification of frail 
trajectories.  
 
Take the case of a woman having a full-time job and still in a union after her second 
child; despite her apparent ‘stable situation’, the trajectory that led her to this status 
might make her fragile. In the best case, she made a direct parity transition; she is 
working again full time after her Maternity leave, and she still lives in union with the 
father of the first child when they decide to have a second child. But other trajectories 
between the two statuses are possible: for instance, the woman may decide to 
reduce her working time after the first birth, she separates from her partner and looks 
again for a full-time job, then she meets a new partner and they decide to have a 
second child (parity 2). The statuses at parity 2 are the same in both cases but the 
trajectories are very different. In the second case, the woman has experienced frail 
transitions (working-time reduction, union disruption during motherhood), though her 
trajectory is not the frailest possible as she ends up in a quite good situation (being in 
a couple and working full time). But, it might also be that her second union will fail 
and she will remain alone with two children. To account for the lifespan principle, 
family-work articulation policies should design measures to limit the impact of frail 
transitions and prevent frail trajectories.   
 
Timing of transition 
 
This principle highlights the fact that it is not only a particular status or having made a 
particular transition that matters; also important is the time when the transition takes 
place in the life of an individual (biographical time), the historical time and the social 
time. Figure 1.3c shows how a similar transition (parity 0 to parity 1) may have very 
different consequences depending on the timing of the transition.  
 
56

 
In the 1970s (historical time), women tended to have their first child in their earlier 
20s and most of them opted for part-time work or decided to stop working to care for 
the children. The model to follow was to have two or three children born within 
marriage. Single mothers or women having a first child after 35 were rare cases and 
did not respect the ‘social time’ for childbearing within this ‘historical time’.  
 
The transition to the first child does not follow such ‘rules’ in the 2000s. Women enter 
the labour market later (due to longer in education). Some of them decide not to have 
a child and others want to delay their first birth for professional or family reasons (the 
length of the arrow for parity transition shows that the timing between the entry to the 
labour market and childbearing is longer than in the 1970s). The average number of 
children per woman is lower. Finally, single motherhood and working mothers are 
more frequent too.  
 
Women becoming mothers in the 2000s are not willing to choose between work and 
family, they want both. If the articulation seems difficult, they may opt for a ‘one after 
the other’ articulation, prioritising their career first and then their family life. If many 
women opt for such a strategy, the aggregated effect will be an actual fertility rate 
lower than the desired one and to see highly qualified women suddenly reducing their 
commitment to work because their priorities have changed. Therefore, policy makers 
willing to promote a smooth family-work articulation should identify the obstacles for 
earlier childbearing and design specific measures to prevent them.  
 
Time and place 
 
This principle states that the characteristics of the phenomenon under study vary 
according to the historical time and the geographical place. This is linked to varying 
cultural norms and policy measures over time and place. In the last decades in 
Belgium, many policies were introduced related to family-work articulation (time). 
Some of the new measures were taken at the regional level (place) and others at the 
federal level.  
 
To illustrate this, I borrow another graphic representation used by demographers, the 
Lexis diagram (Figure 1.3d). It allows situating an event/phenomenon simultaneously 
according to age (vertical axis), historical period (horizontal axis) and cohort 
(diagonal). On such a graph, we can see that a new measure (e.g. the time credit 
implemented in 2002) will not have the same impact for women in the 1960-64 birth 
cohort, most of whom already had a first child in 2002 and had to manage family and 
work without having the time credit possibility, as for younger women, who may 
include time credits into their family-work articulation strategy. Similarly, the 
implementation of a regional measure (such as the premium paid to people taking 
time credits in Flanders, which reduces their opportunity cost) will have a differential 
effect according to the region and, at the national level, it may decrease or increase 
the social inequalities. The time and place effect should be accounted for when 
designing a family-work articulation policy.  
 
 
 
 
 
57

Multiple contexts principle 
 
This principle states that the study phenomenon should be situated in its 
‘environment’, in all the contexts in which it takes part. So far, we have used only 
three elements to define a ‘family-work combination’: the union status, the working-
time pattern and the parity. The reality is more complex and other aspects of work 
(such as the activity sector or the type of contract), the availability of extra family 
support (such as retired and healthy grandparents willing to care for their 
grandchildren), or extra family responsibility (such as a relative having a long-term 
illness) may influence the family-work articulation and also the availability of some 
policy measures. For instance, the entitlement conditions may vary with the activity 
sector, while a women who has used all her leave and time credits to care for her 
children will have more difficulties maintaining her work commitment if her mother 
becomes sick. A childless woman will not meet the same difficulties because she still 
has leave and time credits to use when her parents loose their autonomy. Therefore, 
policy makers should design a holistic family-work articulation policy accounting for 
all the related contexts and their interaction with family and work commitments. 
 
Human agency principle 
 
This principle is probably the most difficult to translate into policy action. It 
complements the four other life course principles by re-introducing individual 
strategies and agency. Although the family-work articulation decision and its 
consequences are influenced by the multiple contexts – the time and place, the 
lifespan and the timing – these do not completely determine what happens. In today’s 
society, the room left for human agency is larger than before. As explained in the 
timing of transition section, there is no longer a single social model for family-work 
articulation and women have to develop their own ‘strategy’. We also noted that 
those strategies might not be the most effective either for the individual or for the 
society. Therefore the question is: should the public action intervene on individual 
strategies and with the risk of further blurring the private-public boundary? A second 
question refers to the relevant level(s) for public action. In other words, who are the 
protagonists of a harmonious family-work articulation? I have focused here on 
women’s decisions and trajectories.  But policy actions aimed at more gender 
equalities should also target the fathers, the employers, the grandparents, etc.   
 
Conclusions 
 
The purpose of this paper is not to give policy recommendations but to propose a 
new way of looking at the realities of family-work articulation and related policies. 
Using a life course approach, I tried to show how the time and the multidimensionality 
aspects were crucial elements to include in an ‘inter-fields’ social policy.  
 
Existing Belgian policies include a time dimension. There is a variety of leave 
possibilities: some are event-related (Maternity, Paternity, sickness, palliative or 
imperative reasons leave) and are, usually, repeatable if the same event (birth, 
illness, etc.) recurs; others are life-stage related (Parental leave, early retirement 
scheme) and the worker is free to use them or not during a given ‘life stage’ 
(parenthood, end of career); others can be taken at any moment of the career but are 
 
58

cumulative (time credit). These policies are innovative in the sense that they 
introduce a ‘time’ aspect in their entitlement criteria.  
 
But progress can still be made in their time aspect by identifying the frail trajectories 
and in their multidimensional aspect by designing more holistic policies including 
employment, family, health and other related contexts characteristics. To do so, it 
would be essential to collect longitudinal quantitative and qualitative micro data on 
the potential beneficiaries of the family-work articulation, not only on the actual 
beneficiaries. Such data should allow identification of frail transitions and trajectories 
and the individual strategies to articulate family and work lives.   
 
References  
 
Allen, K. R., Blieszner, R. and Roberto, K.A. (2000) ‘Families in the middle and later 
years: a review and critique of research in the 1990s’, Journal of Marriage and 
Family, Vol.62, No.4: 911-926. 
 
Bengtson, V.L., Elder, G.H., and Putney, N.M. (2005) ‘The life course perspective on 
ageing: linked lives, timing, and history’, in: M.L. Johnson (ed.) The Cambridge 
Handbook of Age and Ageing. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp.493-509. 
 
Conseil Supérieur des Finances, Comité d’Etude sur le Vieillissement (2008) Rapport 
annuel juin 2008. Available at: 
http://www.plan.be/admin/uploaded/200807021044250.rapport2008_fr.pdf  
(accessed 1 July 2009). 
  
Elder, G.H. (1977) ‘Family history and the life course’, Journal of Family  
History, Vol.2, No.4: 279-304. 
 
Elder, G.H. (1978) ‘Approaches to social change and the family’, American Journal of 
Sociology, Vol.84: 1-38. 
 
Elder, G.H., Caspi, A. and Downey, G. (1986) ‘Problem behavior and family 
relationships: Life course and intergenerational themes’, in: A.B. Sørensen, F.E. 
Weinert, and L.R. Sherrod (eds.) Human Development and the Life Course: 
Multidisciplinary 
Perspectives. 
 
Hillsdale, 
NJ: 
Erlbaum, 
pp.293-340. 
 
Elder, G.H. (1991a) ‘Lives and social change’, in: W.R. Heinz (ed.) Status Passages 
and the Life Course. Volume 1: Theoretical Advances in Life Course Research. 
Weinhein: Deutscher Studien Verlag, pp.58-86. 
 
Elder, G.H. (1991b) ‘Family transitions, cycles, and social change’, in: P.A. Cowan 
and M.E. Hetherington (eds.) Family Transitions, Advances in Family Research, 
Volume II. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp.31-57. 
 
Elder, G.H. (2001) ‘Families, social change, and individual lives’, Marriage and 
Family Review, Vol.31, No.1: 177-192. 
 
Elder, G. H., and Johnson, M. P. (2002) ‘The life course and ageing challenges, 
lessons, and new directions’, in: R.A. Settersten (ed.) Invitation to the Life Course: 
 
59

Toward New Understandings of Later Life, Part II. Amityville, NY: Baywood, pp.49-
81. 
 
Elder, G. H., Johnson, M.P. and Crosnoe, R. (2003) ‘The emergence and 
development of life course theory’, in:  J.T. Mortimer and M.J. Shanahan (eds.) 
Handbook of the Life Course. New York, NY: Kleuwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 
pp.3-19. 
 
Eurostat 
(2009) 
Excel 
data 
sheet 
on 
labour 
market. 
Available 
at: 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu (Accessed 26/02/09). 
 
Marshall, V.W. (1996) ‘The state of theory in ageing and the social sciences’, in R.H. 
Binstock and L.K. George (eds.) Handbook of Ageing and The Social Sciences. San 
Diego, 
CA: 
Academic 
Press, 
pp.12-30. 
    
Mayer, K. U. (2003) ‘The sociology of the life course and life span psychology: 
diverging or converging pathways?’ in: U.M. Staudinger and U. Lindenberger (eds.) 
Understanding Human Development: Dialogues with Lifespan Psychology.  Boston, 
MA: Kluwer, pp.463-482. 
 
 
 
60

Figure 1.3a: Using transition box modelling to apply life course 
principles 
 
 
 
61

Figure 1.3b: The lifespan principle 
 
 
62

Figure 1.3c: The timing of transition principle 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Ft=full-time, Pt=part-time, Nw=no work, Si=single, Un=union, P0=no children, 
Pn=parity.  
 
 
63

Figure 1.3d: Time and place principle 
 
 
64

 
1.4 
German leave reforms: 
acknowledging diversity? 
 
Daniel Erler, European Strategy Development, pme Familienservice GmbH 
 
Introducing Parental leave 
 
When Parental leave was first introduced in West Germany in 1986 the main aim of 
policy makers was to enable and actively encourage mothers to stay at home and 
care for their children during the first years of life. For this purpose the maximum 
leave period was gradually extended to three years while the period of paid leave 
was prolonged to 24 months, with a flat-rate benefit of €307 per month. The 
possibility of part-time work during the leave period was also introduced, but limited 
to 19 hours.  
 
Overall, this new leave entitlement represented a major family policy innovation for 
the West German context because it concretely acknowledged the social and 
economic value of childrearing and because it conferred, in principle, the same leave 
rights to fathers. Indeed, in the political discourse, most politicians stressed the need 
for more paternal involvement in childrearing. But in reality, the new entitlement 
offered fathers little incentive to take leave, being too inflexible – too few part-time 
options, little possibility of flexibly sharing leave periods – and not related to prior 
earnings. 
 
Although the new leave scheme improved the situation of working parents, it was still 
based on the belief that home care by mothers was the best way to ensure the well-
being of toddlers. As put by a prominent Christian Democrat, 
 
All teachers and psychologists concur that the foundations for people’s life 
courses are laid during their first three years of life. Therefore it has been our 
goal from the very beginning, to extend Parental leave time and benefits to 
three years. Today, Parental leave and benefits enable the mother or the 
father to intensively educate and care for the new born child during the first 
years of life (Link, 1991). 
 
But the new entitlement did little to accommodate the diverse needs of parents with 
different income and employment situations. Nor was there any possibility to spread 
leave over a longer period than the first three years after childbirth or to take 
extended leave in case of sickness of a child. It was, in other words, largely tailored 
to the needs of the traditional male breadwinner family. In fact, with the introduction 
 
65

of Parental leave, employment rates of mothers with young children declined 
substantially. 
 
Reforming the system 
 
It was only 15 years later, in the aftermath of a change of government, that a new 
Red-Green coalition introduced a Parental leave reform, which had the explicit aim of 
making Parental leave more flexible for working parents. Parents are now able to use 
the last 12 months of their combined leave entitlement until eight years after the birth 
of their child, though only with the agreement of their employer. Moreover it is 
possible for parents to take their leave at the same time, whereas they previously 
had to alternate. The part-time dimension of Parental leave was also strengthened by 
the introduction of a legal entitlement to part-time work while on leave and an 
increase in the maximum number of weekly part-time hours permitted, from 19 to 30 
per parent. 
 
From a diversity perspective, these changes constituted a significant improvement, 
as leave entitlements were now more geared towards the needs of working parents 
and their children. Parents were also able to choose between a leave benefit of €300 
per month for 24 months or €450 for 12 months. This so-called ‘budget option’ was 
intended as an incentive for an earlier return to the labour market. But the reform did 
not address the fundamental money issue: parents continued to receive a flat-rate 
benefit, bearing no relation to their prior earnings. On the contrary, the reform 
actually lowered the income ceiling for benefit entitlement for the first six months of 
leave, from €51,130 to €30,000, leading to a significant decline of benefit recipients 
(Dingeldey, 2004). 
 
If the 2001 Parental leave revisions made entitlements more flexible they did not 
have much measurable impact on the gendered patterns of leave use. While the 
number of fathers taking some days of leave did slightly increase to around three per 
cent, mothers almost always took paid leave and mainly for the full 24-month period. 
Hence the new laws were neither very effective in reducing the length of women’s 
time out of the labour market – in 2003 only 12 per cent of parents opted for the 
‘budget option’ – nor did they lead to a significant increase in take-up of leave by 
fathers. 
 
It was in the light of these fairly disappointing results that policy makers, following a 
period of protracted political in-fighting, decided to enact a fundamental reform of 
Germany’s Parental leave legislation. The new ‘Elterngeld’, which was introduced in 
January 2007, provides parents with 67 per cent of prior earnings, making it a wage 
replacement measure. The standard period of benefit payments is reduced from 24 
to 12 months, although parents can still opt to spread the payment over a period of 
24 months, but at one-third of previous income. In addition, the new law also 
introduced so=called ‘daddy months’, whereby the combined paid leave entitlement 
period of both parents is extended to 14 months if the father takes at least two 
months of leave. 
 
The reform thus tries to tackle a number of interconnected issues. By linking benefit 
levels to prior earnings the law aims to reduce parental opportunity costs related to 
childbirth. At the same time this measure, like the ‘daddy months’, has the explicit 
 
66

purpose of facilitating the use of leave entitlements by fathers. The reduction of the 
standard length of paid leave, on the other hand, has the aim of reducing the time 
parents, but especially mothers, spend outside the labour market, as research clearly 
shows that a prolonged absence from the labour market entails substantial negative 
effects on career and income prospects. 
 
Although the reform was widely supported among political parties and the wider 
public, it was criticised on two grounds. The first and maybe least surprising criticism 
arrived from conservative circles, which perceived the reduction of standard paid 
leave periods and the introduction of ‘daddy months’ as an illegitimate state 
interference in the internal choices of families (Wiechmann and Oppen, 2008). The 
second criticism questioned the progressive nature of the new benefit. It was argued 
by political representatives from the left, as well as trade unions and welfare 
organisations, that the linkage of benefit levels to prior income effectively constituted 
a redistribution from the poor to the rich as it ‘basically subsidises those who need it 
least [i.e. higher income earners] with the most’ (Butterwege, 2006). In order to 
overcome such criticism the government introduced a minimum benefit level of €300 
a month and a benefit ceiling of €1,800. It further added a so-called low income 
component for households with monthly earnings of less than €1,000. 
 
Others pointed out that the de facto reduction of paid leave periods disadvantaged 
those people who had no or only intermittent earnings in the 12 months before birth. 
In fact these people – mainly students, the unemployed and housewives – now 
receive the minimum payment of €300 for only 12 months, while beforehand they 
could receive the payment for 24 months, adding up to a loss of €3,600 for some of 
the neediest social groups (Bothfeld, 2006)6.  
 
The impact of the reforms 
 
Despite such criticisms, the new Elterngeld represents a major advance in German 
family policy, especially when seen in the wider context of childcare expansion and 
low income child benefits. In fact, the federal government has committed itself to 
provide a childcare place for 35 per cent of children under the age of three years by 
2013 and it is providing local authorities with four billion Euros of additional funding to 
facilitate this expansion. The government also introduced a low-income child benefit 
(Kindergeldzuschlag) of €140 per month, which is paid on top of the usual monthly 
child benefit if parental income is below €900.  
 
I shall now briefly assess to what extent the Elterngeld has achieved its declared 
purposes and to what extent the criticisms outlined above have been justified. I will 
draw on the latest official statistical data from the Federal Statistics Office (Destatis, 
2008), as well as the results of a recent evaluation report commissioned by the 
Federal German Ministry for the Family, the Elderly, Women and Youth – BMFSFJ 
(RWI, 2008). 
 
Between January 2007 and March 2008, 729,714 Elterngeld applications were 
received, of which 1.4 per cent were rejected; before the new leave benefit, rejection 
rates were considerably higher mainly due to the previously mentioned income 
                                                 
6 For a detailed account on the history of Parental leave in Germany see Erler (2009). 
 
67

ceiling. In 2003, for example, 6.9 per cent of all applications were rejected, primarily 
because the income of  applicants was too high (akjSTAT, 2005); a further 38.3 per 
cent of recipients then faced a reduction of their benefit levels after the first six 
months of paid leave when the income ceiling was lowered. The recent leave reform 
has therefore broadened the recipient base and rendered the entitlement quasi-
universal. Yet it is also true that since the introduction of the Elterngeld ‘households 
with mothers that have a college or university degree have significantly higher 
income after the birth of a child’ than was the case before the reform (RWI, 2008: 
29). Households with higher incomes seem to be among the main beneficiaries of the 
new legislation. However, we also see that men who choose to take leave benefit 
proportionately more from the new entitlement, with almost 46 per cent receiving 
more than €1,000 per month; for women the per centage is less than 15 per cent 
(Table 1.4a). 
 
And what about households with lower incomes? Have they benefited or are they the 
main losers of the new leave settings? A look at Table 1.4b reveals a mixed picture. 
In 2008 the RWI conducted a survey of a representative sample of parental benefit 
recipients. Overall 45 per cent of survey respondents said their income in the year 
after childbirth was lower than beforehand, while 29 per cent said their income 
remained about the same and 21 per cent believed their income had actually 
increased. Households with several children were most likely to report that their 
income had increased – almost 70 per cent of households with more than three 
children; this is primarily because mothers in households with several children tend to 
have been out of employment before childbirth, particularly in West Germany. 
 
The available data also indicate that for low-income households in particular earnings 
remain stable or increase in the year after birth; more than 50 per cent of households 
with an income below €1,000 a month say that their income has increased and 27 
per cent report similar income levels. Again this may be largely attributed to the 
relatively high number of single earner households in this group. At the same time, 
the ‘low income component’ and the ‘siblings bonus’ introduced with the new 
legislation seem to have had the desired effect. In sum, one may say that the new 
leave benefit has not worsened the economic situation of low income households 
during the first year after birth, which is largely thanks to the minimum income 
features added to the original legislative proposal following severe criticisms of its 
potential social injustice. On the other hand, it is undeniable that after the first year 
the economic situation of low income families may be worse than under the previous 
policy, simply because the length of paid leave has been halved. It is also evident 
that higher income households have benefited from the reform even if most of them 
continue to incur substantial income losses after childbirth. 
 
A look at the nationality of benefit recipients shows that the vast majority (86 per 
cent) are German citisens – although some may also be of foreign origin – while 14 
per cent have foreign nationality. Turkish citisens (four per cent) constitute by far the 
largest group of foreign recipients, which is not surprising as they represent the 
largest immigrant population in Germany. The national leave legislation stipulates 
that anybody with a regular residence in Germany has the right to Parental leave. 
Hence in principle, foreigners receive the same benefits as German citisens. But it is, 
of course, well known that immigrants tend to have lower household incomes and 
higher poverty rates. It is likely, therefore, that household income in the first year after 
 
68

childbirth remains at least stable, while they may then drop significantly due to the 
reduction of the length of paid leave benefits. 
 
What has been the impact of the new legislation on how women and men use leave? 
As stated earlier, one of the main goals of the new law is a stronger involvement of 
fathers in childrearing. Initial take-up figures show that the new leave legislation is on 
track to fulfil this objective. Since the introduction of the Elterngeld, the number of 
fathers taking leave has more than tripled – from 3.5 per cent in the last quarter of 
2006 to 13.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2008 (Destasis, 2008). 
 
For the German context, where fathers have remained notoriously absent from 
childrearing, these figures are highly significant. Public opinion surveys have for 
some time shown that young men are increasingly willing to engage in childrearing, 
but they have usually shied away from taking even short leave periods due to loss of 
income and a fear of a negative effect on their careers. The new earnings-related 
benefit seems to have significantly reduced the income hurdle that many fathers cited 
as a main reason for not taking leave. At the same a rising number of fathers taking 
leave may, in the longer run, help to create employment environments and peer 
groups that are more supportive of fathers taking leave and that may consequently 
reduce the disincentives for fathers to make use of their leave entitlements. 
 
However, the encouraging figures above cannot conceal the fact that two- thirds of 
fathers taking leave do so for a maximum period of two months, while only 14 per 
cent opt for the entire 12-month period. Mothers, on the other hand, tend to opt for 
the entire 12 months of paid leave (72 per cent) while only a very limited number 
return directly after obligatory Maternity leave (Table 1.4c). In other words, fathers 
are making some forays into the childrearing world but mothers continue to bear the 
brunt of domestic responsibilities.  
 
It is also interesting to note that there are significant regional differences in the take-
up of leave. Fathers in East Germany tend to make more use of their new 
entitlements. While fathers in West Germany, especially in the traditional industrial 
regions, make less use of Parental leave. 
 
Conclusions 
 
When the federal government finally introduced an income-related Parental leave 
benefit in 2007, following decades of piecemeal policy adaptations, it had three 
declared goals: firstly, it wanted to reduce the length of time women remained out of 
the labour market after childbirth; secondly it wanted to reduce the loss of income 
families usually incur due to the labour market exit of one parent; thirdly, it wanted to 
induce more fathers to take leave.  
 
This quick analysis of available statistical data indicates that the new Parental leave 
entitlement has, by and large, fulfilled its desired aims. Not only has the average 
length of leave periods decreased since the reduction of the standard paid leave time 
from 24 to 12 months. By relating the leave benefit to parents’ prior income the 
government has also ensured that income losses among middle and higher income 
families have been reduced significantly, without a deterioration in the situation of low 
income households. The most visible effect of the new law has, however, been the 
 
69

more than threefold increase of fathers taking at least two months of leave, a figure 
that highlights the important changes German society is currently undergoing.  
 
References 
 
akjSTAT – Dortmunder Arbeitsstelle Kinder- und Jugendhilfestatistik (2005). 
 
BMFSFJ (Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und Jugend) (2008) 
Elterngeldbericht, Berlin: BMFSFJ. Available at: 
http://www.bmfsfj.de (accessed 1 July 2009) 
 
Bothfeld, S. (2006) ‘Das Elterngeld – Einige Anmerkungen zum Unbehagen mit der 
Neuregelung’, femina politica, 2/2006. 
 
Butterwege (2006) Bundestag, Stenographisches Protokoll 16/16: pp.21, 03.07.2006. 
 
Destatis (Statistisches Bundesamt) (2008) Öffentliche Sozialleistungen Statistik zum 
Elterngeld. Anträge von Januar 2007 bis Juni 2008. Wiesbaden: Destatis. 
 
Dingeldey, I. (2004) Holistic Governance: zur Notwendigkeit reflexiver Gestaltung 
von Familienund Arbeitsmarkpolitik. UK, Frankreich & Deutschland, Expertise for the 
German Family Report. 
 
Erler, D. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Germany: taking a Nordic turn?’, in: S. Kamerman and 
P. Moss (eds.) The Politics of Parental Leave Policies: Children, Parenting, Gender 
and the Labour Market. Bristol: Policy Press. 
 
Erziehungsgeld und Elternzeit. Bericht des Jahres 2003, Bericht im Auftrag des 
BMFSFJ. Dortmund: Universität Dortmund. 
 
Link, W. (1991) Bundestag, Stenographisches Protokoll 12/50: 4104, 17.10.1991 
 
RWI (Rheinisch-Westfälisches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung) (2008) Evaluation 
des Gesetzes zum Elterngeld und zur Elternzeit – Endbericht 2008 (Evaluation 
Report on behalf of Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und Jugend) 
Berlin: BMFSFJ. Available at: http://www.bmfsfj.de
 
Wiechmann, E. and Oppen, M. (2008) Gerechtigkeitsvorstellungen im 
Geschlechterverhältnis – Das Beispiel Elterngeld, WZB Discussion Papers, SP II 
2008-101, Berlin 
 
70

Table 1.4a: Leave benefit levels according to gender, 2008 (column per 
centages) 
 
Leave benefit (€/month) 
Women 
Men 
Total 
300-500 
57 
29 
53 
500-1000 
29 
25 
28 
1000-1500 
  9 
25 
11 
1500-1800 
  4 
22 
  7 
Source: BMFSFJ, 2008: 21 
 
Table 1.4b: Change of household income in the year following childbirth 
(per centage rows) 
 
Income is             Lower 
About same 
Higher 
Not asked 
Total 
45 
29 
21 
4 
According to number of children 
1 child 
55 
25 
17 
3 
2 children 
35 
31 
28 
7 
3+children 
27 
44 
24 
5 
According to income (per month)prior to birth 
Below €1000 
15 
27 
53 
5 
€1000-2000 
34 
35 
27 
3 
€2000-3000 
50 
30 
18 
2 
€3000+ 
67 
23 
  8 
2 
Source: RWI, 2008 
 
Table 1.4c: Average length of paid leave (per centage rows), 2008 
 
 
1-2 months  
3-6 months  
7-11 
months 
12 months 
13-14 
months 
Total 
10.6 
  3.5 
11.8 
72.3 
  1.8 
Mothers 
  1.3 
  2.4 
12.1 
82.0 
  2.2 
Fathers 
66.2 
10n.1 
  9.6 
14.0 
  1.0 
Source: RWI, 2008  
 
 
 
 
71

1.5 
Leave policies and 
discussions in Sweden 
today 
 
Anders Chronholm, Skövde Högskola, Sweden 
 
How to get more fathers to use Parental leave has been a main subject in Swedish 
debates about leave policies over recent decades. One proposal to achieve this has 
been individualisation of leave, so that periods of leave are individual entitlements for 
fathers (or mothers) – and if this individual entitlement is not used, it is non-
transferable and, therefore, lost. This form of individualisation has already been 
introduced to some extent in Sweden but only to a limited extent of two months each 
for fathers and mothers. The remaining period of leave, although divided between 
mothers and fathers, can be transferred to the other parent. 
 
The debates in the 1990s mainly blamed the men themselves for not using their 
share of paid Parental leave days, transferring it instead to the mother. But more 
recently, it has been noticed that women are by and large satisfied with an unequal 
distribution of Parental leave (Chronholm, 2007). 
 
A recent article in one of the biggest newspapers in Sweden presented a father who 
was taking Parental leave for two years, and so using the woman’s part of the 
Parental leave days (i.e. the mother in this case had transferred her share of the 
days to the father; usually it is the other way). He started his Parental leave when the 
first child was six weeks old and continued to stay at home also with the second 
child. With the mother focusing on her career and the father taking the main part of 
leave, this couple not only demonstrates an atypical pattern of leave use, but also 
shows that the system already offers possibilities for fathers to stay at home without 
any further extension of a father’s quota (i.e. a period of leave that only the father can 
take). The message to the readers of the newspaper was this: that not only ought 
men to use their half or even more of the leave period, but also women should let the 
fathers in (Göteborgsposten, 2008). 
 
This kind of argument was also noted in a research project at Gothenburg University, 
focusing on fathers taking a long period of Parental leave. Some of these fathers, just 
like the father in the article mentioned above, were also ambivalent about the 
individualisation of Parental leave, as sharing equally was already possible for 
motivated couples (Chronholm, 2004). Looking at developments since Parental leave 
was introduced in 1974, it is also apparent that the idea of individualisation has been 
regarded with ambivalence inside the different political parties in Sweden.  
 
72

 
The Swedish welfare state has been developed mainly under Social Democrat 
governments. The introduction of Parental leave in 1974 was a result of Social 
Democrat family policy. In 1976, however, two years after introducing Parental leave 
in Sweden, the Social Democrats lost national elections after a period of 44 years in 
government (Therborn, 1992). The new government consisted of a coalition of 
Conservative, Liberal and Centre parties, but was also positive about Parental leave 
and continued its development by expanding the leave period several times from the 
initial six months to 12 months in 1980. After a further period of Social Democrat 
government between 1982 and 1991, a bourgeois government in the early 1990s 
again reformed Parental leave by introducing the first individualisation, the so-called 
‘father’s month’, in 1995. Fathers could not transfer this month to their partners, so 
they had to use it or lose it. Since then further individualisation has been the main 
theme in Parental leave discussions in Sweden. 
 
A Social Democrat government introduced a second individualised month in 2002, 
and two years later started an inquiry about how to develop Parental leave further. 
The inquiry was influenced by the Icelandic Parental leave model, where one-third of 
the leave days are only for the mother, one-third for the father, leaving one-third to be 
shared as the parents choose. Instead of three months for each parent, as in Iceland, 
the inquiry recommended a non-transferable period for each parent of five months, 
expanding the Parental leave period paid at 80 per cent of earnings from 13 to 15 
months (SOU, 2005). 
 
However the Social Democrats lost the elections again in 2006 and did not have time 
to realise their leave reforms. The new government – a coalition, again consisting of 
Conservative, Liberal, Centre and Christian Democrat parties – is against further 
individualisation, even though the first ‘father’s month’ was introduced by a similar 
coalition government in 1995. Then, the change was mainly supported by the Liberal 
party. But in 2005 members of the Liberal party made the following statement: 
 
We think that family policy should no more be characterised by too much 
lecturing – it is time for a Liberal, liberation revolution concerning family policy, 
where freedom of choice will be the leading concept. Therefore we think that 
our own party should take the initiative to take away ‘the holy cow’: the father’s 
month (SVD, 2005a). 
 
The government has so far not acted on this; maybe it was mainly election 
campaigning. What they have done, though, is introduce a reform from July 2008, 
including a municipal childcare allowance and a gender equality bonus. The purpose 
of the childcare allowance is to increase the possibility for parents to stay at home 
when children are between one and three years of age; local authorities can decide 
whether or not to introduce the reform in their area. The allowance has been set at a 
maximum of SEK3,000 (€280) per month for each child between one and three years 
of age, and will be treated as tax free and non-pensionable income. To be entitled to 
the maximum benefit, parents should not use the public childcare system; so parents 
can get the allowance if they work full time, but use private childcare. However, it is 
not possible for parents to get the allowance if they already receive other social 
benefits.  
 
 
73

The aim of the gender equality bonus is to stimulate a more equal sharing of Parental 
leave. The parent using most Parental leave days will get a tax reduction, during the 
time the other parent takes leave; so the more sharing there is, the larger the benefit. 
However the first 60 days will not be included in the bonus, as these represent the 
individualised part of the paid Parental leave.  
 
The government has presented these reforms as a modern and flexible family policy. 
The opposition parties, however, have been critical on several points. They find the 
childcare allowance old-fashioned and argue that it could make the labour market 
situation worse for many women. The evaluation of a similar childcare allowance in 
Norway (see country note on Norway) has been brought into the political debates 
and resolutions in the Swedish Parliament (Ernkrans and Malmström, 2007); this 
evaluation has shown that the childcare allowance in Norway impedes the integration 
of minority ethnic women into the labour market and the linguistic development of 
their children, as they are missing out on the stimulation they could get by attending 
kindergartens. The opposition parties have also been critical of the gender equality 
bonus, arguing that the rules could be hard for many parents to understand and that 
the reform will probably not have much effect. 
 
The individualisation of Parental leave is again becoming important for the Social 
Democrats. The attitudes inside the Social Democrat Party have changed since their 
earlier inquiry reported in 2005, recommending more individualisation. At a party 
congress in autumn 2005, they took the decision not to adopt these 
recommendations. The then Social Democrat leader, Göran Persson, also made a 
statement before the elections in 2006 that further individualisation did not have 
support among the parents of today and therefore was not on the agenda. However a 
new statement was made recently by the Social Democrats: that Parental leave 
should be completely individualised, with a first step being to introduce the Icelandic 
model. Also the new party leader, Mona Sahlin, is positive to further individualisation 
(SVD, 2008). It is possible, therefore, that individualisation of Parental leave could be 
an important question in the next Swedish elections, due in 2010. 
 
I started by saying that how to increase fathers’ use of Parental leave has been an 
important subject in Sweden since the 1970s. In 1978 a campaign was introduced to 
convince more men to take leave, showing a picture of the Swedish weightlifter ‘Hoa 
Hoa’ Dahlgren with a small baby. This picture became famous all over the world and 
I have seen a similar picture, with a Japanese father holding a baby, in a Japanese 
campaign for Parental leave in the 1990s. 
 
However ‘Hoa hoa’ never took Parental leave and the baby shown in the photograph 
was not even his own. This was a surprise for many Swedish people when it was first 
published in one of the Swedish newspapers, Svenska Dagbladet, in 2005. Under 
the headline ‘The baby has got a baby of his own’, the baby from the campaign in the 
seventies, Peter Svenonius, now himself a 27 years old father, was presented as the 
model for Swedish fathers that ‘Hoa Hoa’ three decades earlier was meant to be. 
Peter, unlike ‘Hoa Hoa’, was taking his responsibility as a father and wanted to spend 
five months of leave with his child. The picture of him with his daughter showing the 
campaign picture from thirty years ago in the background, clearly illustrates the time 
it takes to get more fathers involved in childcare (SVD, 2005b). 
 
 
74

References 
 
Chronholm, A. (2004) Föräldraledig pappa. Mäns erfarenheter av delad 
föräldraledighet. Göteborg: Department of Sociology, Göteborg University.  
 
Chronholm, A. (2007) ’Fathers’ experience of shared Parental leave in Sweden’, in: 
B. Fusulier and J. Marquet (eds.) Articuler vie familiale et vie professionelle: une 
entrée par les pères. Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques. No.2, Louvain-
La-Neuve: Université catholique de Louvain, pp.9-25 
 
Ernkrans, M. and Malmström, L. (2007) Verklig jämställdhet kräver jämställt arbetsliv 
och jämställt familjeliv. Sveriges Riksdag: Motion 2007/08:A279, Stockholm: Sveriges 
Riksdag. 
 
Göteborgsposten (2008) ‘Pappaledig i två år’, Göteborgsposten, 16 September 2008. 
 
SOU 
(2005) 
Reformerad 
föräldraförsäkring. 
Kärlek 
Omvårdnad 
Trygghet. 
Betänkande av Föräldraförsäkringsutredningen. SOU (2005): 73. Stockholm: Statens 
Offentliga Utredningar. 
SVD  (2005a) ’Skrota alla pappamånader’, Svenska Dagbladet, 29 June 2005. 
Available at:   
http://www.svd.se/opinion/brannpunkt/artikel_434423.svd
 
SVD  (2005b) ‘Bebisen har fått en egen bebis’, Svenska Dagbladet, 12 April 2005. 
Available at: 
http://www.svd.se/nyheter/idagsidan/barnunga/artikel_412055.svd 
(accessed 
13 
February 2009). 
 
SVD (2008) ‘S vill ha delad föräldraledighet’, Svenska Dagbladet, 30 August 2008. 
Available at:  
http://www.svd.se/nyheter/inrikes/artikel_1638837.svd (accessed 13 February 2009). 
 
Therborn, G. (1992) ‘A unique chapter in the history of democracy: the Social 
Democratic in Sweden’, in K. Misgeld, K. Molin and  K. Åmark (eds.) Creating Social 
Democracy: A Century of the Social Democratic Labor Party in Sweden. University 
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, pp.1-34. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
75

Section 2: 
Country notes on leave 
policies and research 
 
76

2.1 
Country notes 2009: 
introduction and main 
findings 
 
Peter Moss and Fred Deven 
 
Introduction 
 
This section of the report sets out information on leave policy and research in 27 
countries: 
 
• Australia 
• Austria 
• Belgium 
• Canada 
• Czech Republic 
• Denmark 
• Estonia 
• Finland 
• France 
• Germany 
• Greece 
• Hungary 
• Iceland 
• Ireland 
• Italy  
• The Netherlands 
• New Zealand 
• Norway 
 
• Poland 
• Portugal 
• Russian Federation 
• Slovenia 
• South Africa 
• Spain 
• Sweden 
• United Kingdom 
• United States 
 
 
Most of these countries (19) are member states of the European Union (EU). This 
affiliation is significant in considering leave policy since the EU has set minimum 
standards for Maternity and Parental leave and leave for urgent family reasons 
(through Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19 October 1992 on measures to encourage 
improvements in the safety and health of pregnant workers and workers who have 
recently given birth or are breastfeeding; and Council Directive 96/34/EC of 3 June 
1996 which gives legal effect to a framework agreement on Parental leave agreed by 
social partners in 1995). In effect, therefore, minimum standards for leave policy for 
these countries are determined by a supra-national body.  
 
For the remaining eight countries, policy is purely a national competence. These 
include two Nordic countries that are not EU member states (Iceland and Norway); 
Australia; Canada; New Zealand; the Russian Federation; South Africa; and the 
United States. 
 
 
Each country note begins with basic information – on demography, employment, 
gender equality and early childhood services – set out in a boxed table. More 
 
77

information on the indicators and sources used is given in 2.2, immediately before 
the first country note. 
  
Each country note is organised in four parts. First, details are provided of policy for 
four main types of leave – Maternity, Paternity, Parental and care for sick 
dependants (covering biological and adoptive parents) – as well as for flexible 
working (i.e. are parents entitled to work reduced hours or otherwise adapt their 
work to meet their needs?). This includes what is termed ‘childcare leave or career 
breaks’.7 The focus is on statutory entitlements, although collective agreements or 
individual employment policies may supplement these basic entitlements for certain 
groups and the extent of this supplementation varies from country to country (for a 
fuller discussion of supplementation, see EIRO, 2004).  
 
The government department responsible for leave is given in this first part of each 
country note. Where a government locates leave policy is significant since different 
departments have different perspectives, rationalities and objectives. It may also 
have implications for the degree of coherence between leave and other policy areas. 
In most countries, leave policy is located either within departments concerned with 
employment matters and/or the regulation of business; or within departments 
concerned with social and/or family affairs. One exception is Ireland where 
responsibility is with the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform. 
 
Two departments may be involved, one responsible for leave policy, the other for 
benefit payments. For example, in the United Kingdom, the Department for Business 
has the brief for Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave and the right to request 
flexible working; while the Department for Work and Pensions is responsible for 
maternity and paternity pay (Parental leave is unpaid). In these cases, the country 
note refers only to the department responsible for leave policy. 
 
The first part provides details of leave policies as at the end of April 2009; 
proposed changes to be introduced after this date are discussed in the next 
part. 
 
The next two parts cover: changes in leave policy since 2006 and proposals for 
future change currently under discussion; and information on take-up of various 
forms of leave. The concluding part provides information on selected publications 
about leave policy since 2006 and ongoing research projects. Readers 
interested in changes in leave policy and publications between 2000 and 2005 are 
referred to the 2006 and 2007 International Review.  
 
Country notes are prepared by national experts, mainly members of the network on 
leave policy and research, and edited by the coordinators in collaboration with the 
original authors. The selection of countries included in this section, therefore, reflects 
the availability of experts prepared to contribute the required information. For 
information on other countries, see European Industrial Relations Observatory 
                                                 
7 The former is leave for parents following the end of Parental leave, and may not in practice 
be very different to Parental leave (although the conditions attached to the two types of leave 
may vary, see for example Finland or Norway); the latter, not common, is leave available for a 
wider range of reasons than the provision of care. 
 
78

(2004), the Council of Europe (Drew, 2005; Wall et al., 2009) and OECD (2008, 
Table PF7.1). 
 
Reviewing the country notes 
 
Eight of the 27 countries are federal states (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, 
Germany, Russia, South Africa and the United States). In some cases, this has 
implications for leave policies, with the constituent states or provinces having the 
possibility to supplement or vary national legislation. This is particularly striking in 
Canada and Russia. In the former country, provinces and territories have their own 
legislation for leave policy, with ensuing variations in length and eligibility conditions, 
though payment to parents on leave has been the responsibility of the federal 
government. From 2006, however, complete responsibility for leave policy, including 
funding, has been transferred to the province of Québec from the federal government 
leading to a distinctive policy emerging in that province. In Russia, regional 
governments are responsible for setting benefit payments for leave-takers, within 
maximum and minimum levels set by the federal government. In addition, various 
regional governments (Autonomous Communities) in Spain have implemented 
additional entitlements; while some local authorities in Finland pay supplements to 
the national benefit for parents using ‘home care leave’.  
 
Demographic, economic, employment and gender context (see 2.2 for 
definition of terms used and sources) The 27 countries vary widely in terms of 
population: from Estonia with 1.4 million people to the United States with 300 million. 
The fertility rate in South Africa is 2.8; otherwise no country reaches the 
replacement level of 2.1, Iceland, Ireland and the United States coming closest with 
2. Fertility rates are particularly low (below 1.5) in Russia, the five Central and 
Eastern European countries, Germany, Greece, Italy and Spain. National income is 
highest in the four English-speaking countries (Australia, Canada, Ireland and the 
United States) and two of the Nordic countries (Denmark and Iceland), lowest in 
Russia, the five Central and Eastern European countries, Portugal and Greece, and 
South Africa. 
 
Countries with high female economic activity rates (i.e. where these rates are 80 
per cent or more of men’s) include the five Nordic states, Russia, two of the Central 
and Eastern European states (Estonia and Slovenia) and five of the English-speaking 
liberal economies: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United States and the United 
Kingdom. On this measure, women’s employment rates are low (less than 70 per 
cent of men’s) in Italy, Greece, South Africa and Spain.  
 
Part-time employment is also particularly high among women (40 per cent or more) 
in Belgium, Germany, Norway, Sweden and the UK. It is relatively low (below 15 per 
cent) in all five Central and Eastern European countries and Greece, and also among 
men where the Netherlands is again distinctive for having, by far, the highest part-
time employment rate (23 per cent). 
 
Employment rates for women with children under compulsory school age are 
highest for the four Nordic countries for which data is available (Denmark, Finland, 
Iceland and Sweden), and for Portugal and Slovenia. Rates are very low for women 
with children under three years in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, and 
 
79

relatively low overall in Greece, Italy and Germany. In considering this employment 
data, it is important to consider the extent of part-time working. For example, the 
Netherlands has a higher maternal employment rate than Finland – but also far more 
part-time employment.   
 
The gender employment gap – the difference between male and female 
employment rates – is lowest in the Nordic countries (less than ten per centage 
points), and highest (more than 20 points) in Greece, Italy, Spain and Ireland. 
 
The global gender gap index provides a composite view of the relative position of 
women and men – economically, educationally, politically and on health grounds. 
The Nordic countries occupy five of the top seven positions (i.e. with the lowest 
gender gap), along with New Zealand. Russia and the Central and Eastern European 
countries have the lowest rankings among the 27 countries, all falling below 40th 
place. 
 
Finally, the information on early childhood education and care (ECEC) services 
has to be compared and interpreted with particular caution. The access rates do not, 
for example, indicate the hours offered by services nor, indeed, what parents pay (if 
anything); these, and other details of services, vary considerably between countries. 
However, three broad conclusions can be drawn: 
 
• In most countries provision for children under three years falls far behind that for 
children from three years to compulsory school age; in some cases this reflects 
the underdevelopment of services, while in others (for example the Czech 
Republic or Poland) it reflects official policy to prioritise parental (in effect, 
maternal) care through policies such as Parental leave.  
• The Nordic countries have by far the highest levels of provision for children under 
three years, with all except Iceland now providing a general entitlement to 
provision either from birth (e.g. Finland) or from around 12 months of age (e.g. 
Sweden), running through to compulsory school age; moreover, access is to 
services that generally offer full-time hours (i.e. for at least eight hours a day).  
• Most countries, at least in Europe, now provide near universal access to 
provision for children from three years of age until compulsory school age, in 
some cases stated as a legal entitlement; in many cases, however, this access 
is to a service available only for part-time hours (i.e. equivalent to school hours 
or less).   
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to support parents 
 
Tables 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 provide summaries of leave policy in the 27 countries covered 
in this report. A more concise overview can be provided by showing, for each 
country, the number of months of leave (Maternity, Paternity and Parental) with 
benefits replacing two-thirds or more of earnings8 – an indicator used by the 
                                                 
8 Countries that apply a ceiling to the amount of earnings-related payment made to leave-
taking parents are indicated with an asterisk (*); details of where this ceiling has been fixed 
are given in each country note. In these countries, the great majority, a proportion of parents 
taking leave may not receive two-thirds of their normal earnings, because of the effect of this 
ceiling. 
 
80

European Commission in monitoring member states’ progress in meeting 
Employment Guidelines (European Commission, 2009: Table 18.M3): 
 
Australia 
       0 
Canada 
       0        
     (Québec – 14.5)* 
South Africa        0 
US 
 
       0 
UK 
 
       1.5 
New Zealand       3.5* 
Austria 
       4 
Belgium 
       4* 
France 
       4* 
Netherlands        4* 
Spain  
       4* 
Italy  
       4.5 
Poland 
       4.5 
Russian Fed.       4.5* 
Ireland 
       6* 
Czech Rep.        6.5* 
Portugal 
       6.5 
Greece9 
     5-11 
Iceland 
     9* 
Finland 
   11* 
Denmark 
   12* 
Norway           12.5* 
Slovenia          12.5* 
Sweden  
   13* 
Germany 
   15* 
Estonia 
   15* 
Hungary          25* 
 
The median length of well paid leave among these 27 countries is 4.5 months, with 
extremes of no months to just over two years. On the basis of this indicator, countries 
can be divided into three groups: 
 
I. Countries providing earnings-related leave (at two-thirds or more 
replacement rate) of nine months or over: the five Nordic countries, three 
countries from Central and Eastern Europe (Estonia, Hungary and Slovenia), 
Germany. Greece (private sector) and Portugal; also, the Canadian province of 
Québec. In all of these cases, except Portugal, the earnings-related leave 
includes some period of Parental leave. 
 
II. Countries providing four to six months of earnings-related leave, in all 
cases confined to Maternity leave: includes a number of Continental Western 
European countries, also the Russian Federation. Ireland comes in here, 
although the effect of a ceiling is that the maximum payment is only €232 a week, 
showing the need to take account of levels of ceilings in assessing the generosity 
of national schemes.  
 
III. Countries providing less than four months of earnings-related leave: 
includes five of the six mainly English-speaking countries (Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand, United Kingdom, United States), plus South Africa. It should be 
noted that Québec, which now has responsibility for its own leave policy, is on a 
par with the top group of countries; the rest of Canada offers up to 50 weeks of 
earnings-related leave, but at 55 per cent of earnings it falls just below the EC 
indicator criterion; it also has a rather low ceiling.   
 
Emphasis is placed here on payment for leave-takers, justified by the clear 
relationship between take-up and payment. This review, for the first time, includes 
information in each country note on how leave payments are funded. Generally 
statutory leave payments come from some form of contributory insurance fund, 
                                                 
9 Greece has separate leave policies for the public and private sectors, as well as 
a reduced working time entitlement that may be taken as continuous leave; the 
figures here show both sectors, but excludes the continuous leave option. For 
more information, see country note. 
 
81

financed by contributions from employers and, often, employees; the costs are 
pooled or collectivised, rather than individual employers paying their own workers. In 
some cases employers may make ‘top up’ payments, adding to the statutory benefits 
received by their employees, as a result either of collective agreements or individual 
company policies. The main exception to this picture is when parents on leave 
receive a general ‘childrearing’ benefit that is paid to all parents with young children, 
not just confined to those taking leave; in such cases (discussed further below), 
payments usually come from general taxation. An exception is France, where such 
payments are funded by the family allowance fund, financed by contributions from 
employers and employees. 
 
Although the rest of this introduction and the individual country notes differentiate 
between Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave, the distinction between these types 
of leave is beginning to blur, leading to the emergence of a generic Parental leave. 
Some countries – for example, Iceland, Norway and Sweden - already have a single 
period of post-natal leave that does not distinguish between the three different kinds 
of leave; however, one part of this generic post-natal leave can only be taken by 
mothers and another part only by fathers. In other countries (e.g. New Zealand, 
Portugal), although different types of leave with distinct conditions are discernable, all 
leave comes under a common umbrella term of ‘Parental leave’. A further variant that 
is blurring distinctions is the possibility that part of Maternity leave can be transferred 
to the father, making it, in effect, Parental leave (for example, currently in the Czech 
Republic, Poland, Portugal and Spain, and proposed for the UK).    
 
Maternity leave is normally defined as a break from employment related to maternal 
and infant health and welfare; for this reason it is available only to women and is 
usually limited to the period just before and after birth. Seven of the 27 countries 
have no statutory Maternity leave. In the case of the United States, there is a general 
and ‘family and medical leave’ that can be used for a range of purposes including as 
de facto Maternity leave (though coverage is not universal, excluding workers in 
smaller organisations, and there is no benefit payment for leave-takers); while in the 
case of Australia, Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal and Sweden,10 leave is 
available at this time but is not restricted to women, being subsumed into Parental 
leave. However, while leave is paid at a high level in Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, 
Portugal and Sweden, it is unpaid in Australia and the United States (which are the 
only two industrial countries to make no provision for paid leave for most or all 
women at and around childbirth). 
 
In countries with a specific period of Maternity leave, the period is mostly between 14 
and 20 weeks, with earnings-related payment (between 70 and 100 per cent) 
                                                 
10 In Iceland, three months of the statutory leave period is reserved for women, three months 
for men and three months for the parents to divide as they choose; women may use one 
month of their quota before birth. In Norway, nine weeks of the statutory leave period is 
reserved for women and six weeks for men. In Sweden, there is no general leave for women 
before birth, but pregnant women are eligible for a period of paid leave at this time if they 
work in jobs considered injurious or involving risk to the foetus; it is obligatory for women to 
take two weeks leave before or after delivery and they can decide whether or not to take part 
of the parental insurance benefit during this period of leave. 
 
 
82

throughout; in some cases, leave may be extended where there are multiple births. 
The amount of time that can or must be taken before birth varies. 
 
There are five main exceptions. In South Africa, payment is between 31 and 59 per 
cent of earnings and confined to employees eligible for the Unemployment Insurance 
Fund. The other four countries have extended Maternity leave. Maternity leave in the 
Czech Republic is 28 weeks, in Ireland 42 weeks and in the UK 52 weeks. In the last 
two countries leave is not paid for the full period: in Ireland, earnings-related 
payments, though only up to a relatively low ceiling, are paid for 26 weeks, the 
remaining 16 weeks being unpaid; while in the UK, earnings-related payments last 
for 6 weeks, with a further 33 weeks of benefit payment at a flat-rate, leaving the 
remaining 13 weeks of Additional Maternity leave unpaid. Maternity leave in Hungary 
is 24 weeks (with earnings-related payment throughout), while part of one type of 
Parental leave (GYED) can only be taken by the mother (or a single father) until the 
child is 12 months old – in effect an extended Maternity leave. A period of extended 
Maternity leave, adding six months to the existing five months, is also about to be 
implemented for private sector workers in Greece. 
 
There is not much flexibility in Maternity leave, indeed taking leave is obligatory in 
some countries (e.g. Germany and Italy). Where it occurs, flexibility mainly takes the 
form of some choice about when women can start to take leave and how much time 
they take before and after birth. Poland, Portugal and Spain, however, have 
introduced another dimension of flexibility: mothers may transfer or share part of the 
leave period with fathers as a matter of course, i.e. without exceptional 
circumstances such as serious illness applying. Portuguese mothers may also 
choose between two periods of leave, one shorter but paid at 100 per cent of 
earnings, the other longer but paid at 80 per cent. Maternity leave can be transferred 
to fathers in some other countries, but only in certain extreme circumstances (such 
as death or severe illness). Belgian mothers may take two weeks of Maternity leave 
as ‘free days’, spread over a period of time. 
 
Paternity leave usually refers to an entitlement for fathers enabling them to take a 
short period of leave immediately following the birth of a child, often associated with 
providing help and support to the mother. However, Parental leave in a number of 
countries includes a period of time that only fathers can take (sometimes referred to 
as a ‘father’s quota’). So as already noted, the distinction between Paternity leave 
and father-only Parental leave is blurring. One example of this complexity emerges 
from a comparison of Iceland, Norway and Sweden. Iceland has introduced a 
completely reformed leave policy: nine months leave after the birth, three months for 
mothers, three months for fathers and three months as a family entitlement to be 
divided between parents as they choose, all paid via the same earnings-related 
benefit. There is, therefore, no Paternity leave per se, but three months of leave are 
available to fathers to take as and when they choose. Norway, by contrast, has two 
weeks Paternity leave (i.e. to be used at the time of birth) and a further six weeks 
father’s quota, which is a part of the Parental leave that only the father can use; most 
of the Parental leave is a family entitlement.11 Sweden also has Paternity leave (ten 
days) and a fathers’ quota (60 days) as part of Parental leave. 
                                                 
11 To complicate matters further in Norway, the Work Environment Act 2005 (the responsibility 
of the Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion), which grants leave but not money, uses the 
name svangerskapspermisjon (pregnancy leave) for the leave before birth, fødselspermisjon 
 
83

 
In this review, Paternity leave is narrowly defined as a short period immediately after 
the birth. On this basis, 16 countries under review have Paternity leave (Iceland is 
included in the countries without Paternity leave, the three months fathers-only leave 
being counted as Parental leave on the basis that it is not restricted to being taken at 
or around the time of birth). With four exceptions, leave varies from two to ten days 
and is usually paid on the same basis as Maternity leave. The exceptions are: 
Québec (but not the rest of Canada), which offers three to five weeks of leave, 
depending on the level of benefit taken; Finland, which provides 18 days of Paternity 
leave with a further 12 ‘bonus’ days for fathers who take the last two weeks of 
Parental leave; Slovenia, with 90 days of Paternity leave; and Spain, with a recently 
introduced 15 days. Portugal is unique in making Paternity leave obligatory; fathers 
must take ten days off work. 
 
Italy allows fathers 12 weeks post-natal ‘optional leave’, mainly in circumstances 
where the father is the sole or main carer (e.g. if the mother is dead or severely 
incapacitated). It is unclear whether this should be considered Paternity leave or a 
variant of schemes where Maternity leave can be transferred to fathers in certain 
conditions. 
 
Parental and childcare leave are considered together here, though treated 
separately in the country notes. Childcare leave can usually be taken immediately 
after Parental leave, creating a continuous period of leave, even if the conditions 
(such as benefit paid) may not be the same. 
 
All EU member states must provide at least three months Parental leave per parent, 
the Directive setting this standard defining the leave as being ‘to enable [parents] to 
take care of’ a child, so distinguishing this leave from Maternity leave where the 
Directive setting standards has been adopted as a health and welfare measure. No 
payment or flexibility requirements are specified in the EU Parental leave Directive. 
Six of the non-EU countries in this overview also provide Parental leave, the 
exception being the United States (which as already noted only has a generic and 
unpaid leave, which does not apply to all employees). 
 
In six countries, parents can take additional ‘Childcare’ leave after Parental leave. In 
four cases the leave is unpaid: two weeks per year per parent until a child is 14 in 
Estonia; three months per year per parent in Iceland until a child is eight years; a 
year in Norway; and two to three years in Portugal (by contrast, in Estonia, Iceland 
and Norway Parental leave, preceding childcare leave, is paid). Parents with three or 
more children in Hungary can take leave until their youngest child is eight years old, 
with a flat-rate benefit. Finland is exceptional in that its ‘home care’ leave is both 
available to all parents and paid, albeit with a relatively low flat-rate allowance (so 
blurring the distinction with Parental leave). 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(birth leave) for the six weeks after and foreldrepermisjon (Parental leave) for the remaining 
leave period. However, the Ministry of Children and Equality, which grants the money for 
leave, refers only to foreldrepengeperioden (parental money period) for the payment covering 
all three types of leave. 
 
84

Parental leave varies on four main dimensions:  
 
• 
length;  
• 
whether it is an individual or family entitlement;  
• 
payment;  
• 
flexibility.  
 
Broadly, countries divide into those where total length of leave available – including 
Maternity, Parental and Childcare – comes to around nine to 15 months; and those 
where continuous leave can run for up to three years. The former include Australia, 
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand, Slovenia 
and the UK; the latter include the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Hungary, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia and Spain. Sweden falls in 
between: paid leave is expressed in days (to emphasise that it can be taken very 
flexibly), roughly equivalent to 18 months if taken continuously, while each parent is 
also entitled to take unpaid leave until a child is 18 months. So, too, does Austria, 
with leave lasting until a child’s second birthday. 
 
Parental leave is a family entitlement in 13 countries, to be divided between parents 
as they choose (Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Hungary, New Zealand, Poland, Russia and Spain); an individual 
entitlement in nine countries (Belgium, Czech Republic, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Portugal, Slovenia, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom); and mixed (part family, 
part individual entitlement) in three countries (Iceland, Norway and Sweden). It 
should be noted, however, that countries where leave is an individual entitlements 
vary in whether unused entitlements can be transferred to a partner (e.g. in Slovenia) 
or whether entitlements, if not used, are forgone.  
 
A majority of countries (19) provide some element of payment. However, in ten cases 
(Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Italy, Ntherlands, Poland, 
Portugal and Russia) payment is less generous, being flat-rate or set at a low 
earnings-related rate, means tested or paid for only part of the leave period, or a 
combination of these. Nine countries pay an earnings-related benefit pitched at more 
than half of normal earnings. Finland combines a relatively high level of earnings-
related benefit during Parental leave, with a low flat-rate benefit for Childcare (called 
‘Home care’) leave, which has supplements for users with additional children and 
lower incomes. In some cases – notably Austria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, 
France, Germany and Poland – parents on leave receive a general ‘childrearing’ 
benefit that is paid to all parents with young children, not just confined to those taking 
leave. 
 
Slovenia has the most generous benefit payments for Parental leave – at full 
earnings with no maximum ceiling (the only country paying an earnings-related 
benefit for Parental leave with no upper limit). Denmark and Norway also pay full 
earnings, but only up to a maximum ceiling, while most or all of the leave period is 
paid at 80 per cent of earnings or higher in Iceland and Sweden (again up to a 
maximum ‘ceiling’ amount). Hungary, too, is relatively generous, paying a benefit of 
70 per cent of earnings to parents on leave until a child’s second birthday, then a 
lower flat-rate payment until the child is three years old. 
 
 
85

 
Flexibility takes a number of forms, including: 
 
• 
the possibility to use all or part of leave when parents choose until their child 
reaches a certain age (e.g. Belgium, Germany, Poland, Portugal, Sweden); 
• 
the possibility of taking leave in one continuous block or several shorter 
blocks (e.g. Estonia, Greece, Iceland, Poland, Spain, Sweden);  
• 
the possibility to take leave on a full-time or part-time basis (i.e. so parents 
can combine part-time employment with part-time leave) (e.g. France, 
Germany, Portugal, Québec, Sweden);  
• 
the option to take longer periods of leave with lower benefits or shorter 
periods with higher benefits (e.g. Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Germany, Norway, Québec);  
• 
additional leave in the case of multiple births or, in a few cases, other 
circumstances (e.g. Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy and the 
Netherlands); 
• 
the possibility to transfer leave entitlements to carers who are not parents 
(e.g. Estonia, Hungary, Slovenia). 
 
Just as the UK has the longest period of Maternity leave by far, so it also has a 
unique approach to Parental leave. As a minimum entitlement, eligible employees 
are entitled to three months unpaid leave: but this entitlement can only be taken in 
portions of four weeks per year (rather than in one continuous block, as in all other 
countries, many of which also allow leave to be taken in shorter blocks of time). 
However, employers are encouraged to go beyond the minimum provisions of the 
regulations, where it is possible to do so.   
 
Various measures have been introduced to encourage fathers to use Parental leave. 
Mostly these take the form of wholly or partly individualised entitlements, whereby 
fathers not using their ‘quota’ lose it, since unused leave cannot be transferred to a 
partner. Another approach is to offer extra leave to fathers who take some Parental 
leave. Fathers in Finland can take 12 ‘bonus’ days, in addition to their 18 days of 
Paternity leave, if they take the last two weeks of Parental leave; the 12 bonus days 
plus the two Parental leave weeks are now called ‘father's month’ in the legislation. 
Sweden has recently introduced a ‘gender equality bonus’ that provides an economic 
incentive for families to divide Parental leave more equally. While as part of a radical 
overhaul of German policy, if the father takes at least two months of leave the overall 
length of benefit payment is extended to 14 months.  
 
Career breaks provide a break from employment not necessarily tied to childbearing 
and childcare. A statutory entitlement is found in only one country, Belgium, with one 
year’s leave that can be extended up to five years by collective agreement negotiated 
at sectoral or company level. For further information, see the articles about Belgium 
in Section 1. 
 
Other employment-related measures: generally, adoptive parents have similar 
leave entitlements to other parents. 
 
The EU Parental leave directive gives all workers an entitlement to ‘time off from 
work on grounds of force majeure for urgent family reasons in cases of sickness or 
 
86

accident making their immediate presence indispensable’, without specifying 
minimum requirements for length of time or payment. Among EU member states 
reviewed here, 11 (Austria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, 
Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden and the Netherlands) specify an entitlement to 
leave of ten days or more per year to care for sick children, though the age range of 
children covered varies; for all except Italy, leave is paid at a high level of income 
replacement. In some cases, the length of leave decreases as children get older: for 
example from being unlimited for a child under 12 months to 14 days a year for 
children from six to 12 years old in Hungary; or being without limit for a child under 
three years in Italy but five days a year per parent for a child aged three to eight 
years. Leave is shorter or unspecified and unpaid in the other member states.  
 
Of the non-EU countries, Norway and Russia have an entitlement to paid leave 
specifically to care for a sick child. New Zealand employees have five days sick leave 
for themselves or their dependents; South African workers are entitled to three days 
‘family responsibility leave’ per year, but this covers a range of circumstances, not 
only caring for a sick child; while in Australia, all employees have an industrial right to 
use up to five days of personal or sick leave per year to care for a sick family 
member. 
 
Ten of the 25 countries in this review offer additional leave entitlements, covering a 
wider range of family members than young children and/or situations of serious 
illness. For example, most provinces and territories in Canada have compassionate 
care leave provisions which allow employees to take time off to care for or arrange 
care for a family member who ‘is at significant risk of death’ within a 26-week period. 
The length of leave is eight weeks unpaid within a 26-week period, but benefits of up 
to six weeks can be claimed through Employment Insurance for this leave. While in 
Portugal, in addition to up to 30 days per year of leave that can be taken to care for 
sick children under the age of ten years, paid at 65 per cent of the minimum wage, 15 
days unpaid leave per year can be taken to care for a spouse, older child or co-
resident elderly relative, increased by one day for every second and subsequent 
child. 
 
Nine countries (Estonia, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Slovenia 
and Spain) permit women to reduce their working hours to enable breastfeeding. 
Women reducing their hours are entitled to earnings compensation. This is not 
usually the case in the ten countries (Austria, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, 
Iceland, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands) that give parents 
the right to work part-time hours when they have a younger child, though sometimes 
subject to employer agreement; for example, all Dutch employees have the right to 
work part time, but employers may turn down an employee’s request under quite 
specific conditions. 
 
Greece provides an example of a country that provides both payment and a 
substantial degree of flexibility in how reduced hours may be taken. Parents working 
in the private sector are entitled to work one hour less per day for up to 30 months 
after Maternity leave, with full earnings replacement. With the employer’s agreement, 
this may be taken as: two hours less per day for the first 12 months and one hour 
less per day for another six months; or in block(s) of time of equal length within the 
30 months period after Maternity leave. This last option, of converting reduced hours 
 
87

into a block or blocks of leave, means that a parent can take a number of months off 
work, up to an estimated three and three-quarter months. This leave – titled 
‘alternative use of reduced hours as leave for the care of children’ – is considered 
part of working time and paid accordingly. 
 
Finally, in Australia, Italy, New Zealand and the UK, parents have a legal right to 
request flexible working hours from their employers, who must consider their request 
and may only refuse them if there is a clear business case for doing so.   
 
How do leave policies relate to early childhood education and care (ECEC) 
services?  
 
Although the country notes do not include a part on this topic, there is a defined 
relationship in a number of countries. Some countries have developed a long period 
of leave, up to three years, as an alternative to providing ECEC services for the 
youngest children. The Czech Republic and Poland are examples, with long leave 
periods and very low levels of ECEC provision for children under three years. 
Germany, or at least the former West Germany, was another example, but is in the 
process of shifting policy to a shorter, higher-paid leave period and increased ECEC 
services for children under three years. 
 
In Denmark, Norway and Sweden, a universal entitlement for children to a publicly 
funded ECEC service begins at the end of a period of well-paid Parental leave lasting 
about one year. This entitlement ensures that there is an ECEC place to meet the 
needs of working parents from the time their leave ends (although the entitlement 
extends to all children, not only those whose parents are employed).  
 
In these three Nordic countries, the complementary relationship between leave and 
services is mainly consecutive, i.e. access to services is introduced as leave ends. In 
Finland, the relationship is concurrent in the sense that a three-year leave entitlement 
runs alongside a universal entitlement to a place in a publicly funded early childhood 
service for all children from birth. The entitlement also includes the possibility of a 
state subsidy for parents choosing to use private services and a municipal 
supplement paid by some local authorities. The relationship here between leave and 
services emphasises maximising parental choice, though in effect any choice is 
exercised by mothers since very few fathers take a prolonged period of leave. 
France, too, emphasises a relationship between leave and services intended to 
support choice over the first three years after birth, although without an entitlement to 
a service place for children under three years. 
 
In some countries where leave ends when children are three years old (e.g. France, 
Hungary, Germany, Spain), nursery schooling or kindergartens are widely available 
to children aged three years and upwards, with near universal coverage. 
Kindergartens throughout Hungary, and many in the former Eastern part of Germany, 
are geared to the needs of working parents, with all-day and all-year opening. This is 
not the case elsewhere in Germany or in France and Spain where the availability of 
school-age childcare services for periods outside term-time and school hours is not 
guaranteed (though widespread in France). Moreover, this situation does not 
guarantee an ECEC place for a parent returning to work before the end of the full 
Parental leave period. As is the case in the many countries where there is a gap 
 
88

between the end of leave and the start of universal availability of ECEC services, the 
two systems are not integrated. 
 
2.  Changes in leave policy and other related developments  
 
A number of countries report changes in leave and related policy since the 2008 
review, up to April 2009. In two cases – Estonia and Iceland – these involve cutbacks 
related to the economic crisis. Elsewhere, the changes have involved developments 
of leave provision, although to varying degrees (for further information, see part 2 of 
the country notes): 
 
Belgium: some leave policies were adapted, mostly by introducing more flexibility 
resulting in greater choice for parents, but also to facilitate use by self-employed 
workers. 
 
Czech Republic: since January 2009, a child’s father is able to take Maternity leave 
instead of the mother from the seventh week after the child’s birth; and parents are 
allowed to alternate with each other during the course of taking leave to care for a 
sick child.  
 
Denmark: in Spring 2008, the right to Parental leave with full earnings replacement 
was secured for public sector employees, for 18 weeks in total. Although resulting 
from a collective agreement for a particular sector, this deal covers a substantial part 
of the workforce. 
 
Estonia: payment for Paternity leave has been removed. 
 
Germany: an unpaid short-term and long-term leave entitlement for people with 
dependent relatives requiring care has been introduced. 
 
Greece: a ‘special leave for the protection of maternity’ has been provided in the 
private sector, consisting of six paid months; the leave is granted after the basic 
Maternity leave. 
 
Iceland: the income ceiling for calculating earnings-related leave payments has been 
lowered. 
 
Italy: a number of small-scale changes have been introduced, including improved 
benefits for adoptive parents. 
 
Netherlands: payment for self-employed women on Maternity leave  has been re-
introduced. The length of Parental leave has been doubled, and payment (at a low 
level) has been introduced. 
 
Poland: regulations introduced in January 2009 increased the length of Maternity 
leave and provided additional leave for multiple births. 
 
Portugal: new terminology has been introduced by law, for example ‘Maternity leave’ 
and ‘Paternity leave’ being replaced by the generic term ‘Parental leave’. At the same 
time, leave has been extended with improved payment: Paternity leave (now termed 
 
89

‘father’s only Parental leave’) has increased from five to 20 calendar days, and is 
obligatory; Parental leave is paid at a low earnings-related level; and there is now an 
incentive for fathers to take at least one month of Parental leave. 
 
Spain: regulations introduced in March 2009 have extended the coverage of 
Maternity leave and benefit payments. 
 
Sweden: in July 2008, a ‘gender equality bonus’ was introduced to offer an economic 
incentive for families to divide Parental leave more equally between the mother and 
the father of the child. A municipal ‘child-rearing allowance’ was re-introduced in 
2008 for parents of one to three-year-old children who do not use public childcare 
services. (For more information on both developments see the article by Anders 
Chronholm, Section 1.5)12. 
 
United Kingdom: from April 2009, the right to request flexible working has been 
extended to parents with a child aged 16 years and under. 
 
At the same time, leave policy is a subject of debate – either by Ministers or in 
Parliament – and/or proposed policy changes in several countries, the two main 
themes being further measures to increase fathers’ use of leave and overall reviews 
of leave policy. Of particular significance is the introduction of paid Maternity leave in 
Australia in January 2011. For further information, see part 2 of the country notes for 
Austria, Australia, Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway, 
Poland, South Africa, and the United Kingdon. 
 
3. Take-up of leave 
 
Rostgaard (2005) notes that ‘only in the Nordic countries are there regular, consistent 
statistical accounts of the use of leave, according to gender, and occasionally also 
according to occupation and education of the parent … [while in] most other 
countries, however, data on take-up of Parental leave is irregular and inconsistent.’ 
This is confirmed by the information provided in country notes on take-up, which is 
full of gaps, making systematic cross-national comparisons impossible. Generally, 
there is no information on take-up of unpaid leave and limited information on paid 
leave. The situation has shown little sign of change since the network was 
established. 
 
There is the further question of what proportion of parents are eligible for leave, 
where again there is no consistent and comparable information. However, a number 
of country notes refer to substantial proportions of parents not being eligible, for 
example in Australia, Canada and Spain (Parental leave), Portugal (Maternity leave) 
and the United States (family and medical leave). Ineligibility may be related to self-
employment, temporary contracts, other conditions related to prior employment 
history or the exemption of smaller employers from leave policies. 
 
Generally speaking, paid Maternity leave appears to be extensively and fully used by 
mothers who are eligible (in a few cases, it is even obligatory to take this leave). 
                                                 
12 In a change introduced in January 2008, but not reported in the 2008 review, Sweden cut 
benefit paid to parents on leave from 80 to 77.6 per cent of earnings. 
 
90

However, in the UK, where there is an entitlement to paid ‘Ordinary Maternity leave’ 
followed by unpaid ‘Additional Maternity leave’, most women return to work well 
before the end of the unpaid entitlement. 
 
EIRO (2004) conclude that ‘the available figures show a relatively significant take-up 
rate [for Paternity leave]’. This conclusion is borne out in the country notes: two-thirds 
or more of fathers are reported to take paid Paternity leave in Denmark, Finland, 
France, Sweden, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.   
 
Where Parental leave is unpaid, as in Ireland, Portugal, Spain and the United 
Kingdom, there are no regular statistics on use but take-up is thought to be low by 
both mothers and fathers (i.e. irrespective of gender, few parents take leave 
schemes that are completely unpaid) (see also EIRO, 2004). A recent survey in the 
UK, for example, shows that only 11 per cent of mothers had taken some Parental 
leave within 17 months of their child’s birth, two-thirds of whom had taken a week or 
less.  Unpaid Parental leave tends to be used where entitlements to other forms of 
leave have been exhausted. 
 
Where leave is a family entitlement only, fathers’ use is low (i.e. where leave can be 
shared between parents, fathers take only a small proportion). For example, less 
than one per cent of recipients are fathers in the Czech Republic; and the proportion 
of fathers taking Parental leave is two per cent in Finland and Poland, 3 per cent in 
Austria, and ten per cent in Canada. However, where Parental leave has both an 
individual entitlement element and is relatively well paid, fathers’ use is higher. This 
can be seen in the four Nordic countries in this study: 
 
• Denmark: 62 per cent of children born in 2002/3 have a father who took leave 
and these fathers on average took 25 days of leave (as Paternity leave is two 
weeks, this suggests most fathers also took some Parental leave). 
 
• Iceland: in 2006, 88 fathers took a period of leave (paternity and/or parents’ 
joint rights) for every 100 mothers taking some leave, and fathers took about a 
third of all days of leave-taken by parents (an average of 100 days leave 
compared to 185 for mothers).  
 
• Norway: 89 per cent of fathers in 2003 took some Parental leave, although 
only 15 per cent took more than the one-month father’s quota. After the 
extension of the father’s quota to six weeks in 2006, 70 per cent of eligible 
fathers took more than five weeks in 2007 and increasing numbers take six 
weeks. 
 
• Sweden: 90 per cent of fathers of children born in 1998 have taken Parental 
leave, mainly when their children were 13 to 15 months of age. In 1987, fathers 
took about seven per cent of total Parental leave days that year; by 2008, it had 
increased to 21.5 per cent. Fathers also take a third of leave to care for sick 
children. 
 
In all four cases, mothers continue to take more leave than fathers. The difference is 
greatest in Denmark (where fathers took only six per cent of all days of paid leave in 
2005), followed by Norway (nine per cent). In Sweden, fathers take about a fifth of all 
 
91

days (21 per cent), with the greatest share of paid leave-taken by men in Iceland (33 
per cent), with its 3+3+3 leave scheme (Eydal and Gislason, 2008: Table 7). 
  
These figures can be viewed from different perspectives – as reflecting how care 
continues to be strongly gendered or as reflecting a gradual shift towards men taking 
more responsibility for care. The most significant changes in fathers’ behaviour seem 
to be taking place in Iceland and Sweden, where leave-taking has begun to move 
beyond a month. 
 
It is also striking that fathers’ use of leave does respond to policy changes, as a 
number of countries clearly show: 
 
Germany: the 2007 reform of leave, which had the explicit aim to raise leave-take-up 
by fathers, had an immediate impact, the number of fathers taking leave rising from 
3.5 per cent in the last quarter of 2006 (immediately before the reform) to 13.7 per 
cent in the second quarter of 2008 (for further details, see the article by Daniel Erler, 
Section 1.4). 
 
Iceland: the average number of days’ leave-taken by men in Iceland has more than 
doubled since 2001 (up from an average of 39 in 2001 to 99 in 2006) with the 
extension of father-only leave over this period.  
 
Norway: the proportion of men taking some leave has increased from four per cent 
to 89 per cent since the introduction of the one-month father’s quota.  
 
Portugal: 15 additional Paternity leave days were introduced in 1999. In 2001 only 
four per cent of fathers took these days; this increased to 14 per cent in 2002 and to 
37 per cent in 2007. 
 
Québec: the new Parental leave scheme, introduced in 2006, has had an impact on 
fathers’ participation; in 2007, 56 per cent of fathers in Québec took a period of leave 
compared with 22 per cent in 2006.  
 
Sweden: the proportion of leave days taken by men in Sweden doubled between 
1997 and 2004, with the introduction and then the extension of a father’s quota, 
though the doubling to two months had a less dramatic effect than the initial 
introduction of a quota. 
 
It is noticeable from these examples that the pace of change varies between 
countries. This may reflect a number of mediating factors, for example the design of 
policy (e.g. level of payment, flexibility of use) and possibly too the socio-cultural 
climate (e.g. levels of awareness about gender equality, extent of support for change 
in gender roles). 
 
All these examples are of paid leave. The importance of payment can also be seen in 
Catalonia, where there has been a strong take-up by public employees of a scheme 
that enables parents to reduce their working hours when they have a child under one 
year without loss of earnings. Nearly a quarter of parents using this option are 
fathers. 
 
 
92

Information on take-up among different socio-economic or ethnic groups within 
countries is even patchier. Where it exists, it points towards women being less likely 
to take Parental leave, or to take it for shorter periods, if they are: self-employed; 
work in the private sector; higher educated; and/or higher earning. Fathers are more 
likely to take leave or to take it for longer periods if: their partners have higher 
education and/or earnings; if they work in female-dominated occupations or the 
public sector.  
 
Finally, there is again limited information on the use of flexible working options, either 
within leave arrangements or as a right or possibility after leave. German data 
suggests that more flexible options (e.g. to take a higher benefit over a shorter leave 
period and to work part time while on leave) are taken by only a minority, with 
parents in former East Germany being more likely to take a higher benefit for a 
shorter period, reflecting a greater propensity among women in this part of Germany 
to work when they have young children. Recent survey data from the UK show that 
almost a quarter of employees with dependant children under six years have asked 
to work flexibly, rising to 36 per cent amongst women with a child under six years; 
most (81 per cent) requests were partly or fully accepted by employers. The 
Netherlands introduced a similar, though broader, right to request more flexible hours 
in 2000. An evaluation after two and a half years found that 26 per cent of employees 
had wanted to work less (27 per cent for men, 24 per cent for women), the main 
reasons given by both men and women being to have more time for family or 
household duties (34 per cent) or to pursue hobbies and other private activities (30 
per cent). Approximately half (53 per cent) of the employees who wished to reduce 
their working hours had informed their employers; more than half of them (54 per 
cent) had their request fully granted, with a further ten per cent partially agreed. In 
short, the legislation had contributed to about nine per cent of workers reducing their 
hours. 
 
To summarise on take-up: 
 
• 
Unpaid or low-paid leave of whatever kind has low take-up; 
• 
Leave specifically for fathers (e.g. Paternity leave, fathers’ quotas in Parental 
leave) is well used if paid at or near income replacement level; 
• 
Fathers still take only a small portion of Parental leave that is a family 
entitlement, i.e. where parents can decide how to allocate leave between the 
mother and father; 
• 
Leave is used differentially not only between women and men, but between 
parents with different levels of education, income and employment both 
individually and in relation to their partners – the impact of leave policies, 
therefore, is not uniform. 
 
4.  Research and publications on leave and other employment-related 
     policies since January 2006 
 
Country notes finish with a brief overview of the state of research on leave policy; a 
selection of publications on leave since January 2006; and brief outlines of ongoing 
research on leave. Many publications are listed (many available in English and 
increasingly downloadable), with a brief description of each. It is noticeable that the 
number of publications varies considerably between countries, implying different 
 
93

levels of policy interest and/or the presence of researchers with an interest in 
work/life issues. 
 
References 
 
Drew, E. (2005) Parental leave in Council of Europe member states. Strasbourg: 
Council of Europe (Equality Division, Directorate-General of Human Rights). 
Available at:  
http://www.coe.int/T/E/Human_Rights/equality/PDF_CDEG(2004)14 per 
cent20FINAL_E.pdf (accessed 2 July 2009) 
 
European Commission (2009) Indicators for monitoring the Employment Guidelines 
including indicators for additional employment analysis: 2009 compendium. Available 
at: http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=477&langId=en (accessed 2 July 2009) 
 
European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO) (2004) Family-related leave and 
industrial relations. Available at: 
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/eiro/2004/03/study/TN0403101S.htm (accessed 2 
July 2009) 
 
Eydal, G.B. and Gislason, I.V. (2008) ‘Paid Parental leave in Iceland – history and 
context’, in: G.B. Eydal and I.V. Gislason (eds.) Equal Rights to Earn and Care – 
Parental Leave in Iceland. Rejkjavik: Fėlagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands, pp.15-
44. 
 
OECD (2008) OECD Family Database. Available at: 
www.oecd.org/els/social/family/database (accessed 2 July 2009) 
 
Rostgaard, T. (2005) ‘Diversity and Parental leave’, in: F. Deven and P. Moss (eds.) 
Leave Policies and Research: Reviews and Country Notes (CBGS-Werkdocument 
2005/3). Brussels: Centrum voor Bevolkings- en Gezinsstudie.  
 
Wall, K., Pappámikail, L., Leditāo, M. and Marinho, S. (2009 forthcoming) 
Questionnaire on family policy; comparative analysis report. Strasbourg: Council of 
Europe. 
 
94

Table 2.1.1: Provision of statutory leave entitlements in selected 
countries 
 
 
Maternity 
leave 
Paternity 
leave 
Parental 
leave 
Total post-natal 
leave per 
family(months) 
Leave for 
sick 
children 
Australia 
± 
± 
3        F 
12    (0) 
333   
Austria 
333 
± 
33*    F 
24    (24) 
333  [+] 
Belgium 
333   
333    
33      I 
  9.5 (9.5) 
3        
Canada [fn] 
   Québec 
333   
333 
3  
333      
333    F 
333    F 
12   
(11.5) 
18   
(18) 
3     
[+] 
3     
[+] 
Czech Rep  
333 
± 
33* [fn] I 
36  
(36) 
333   
Denmark 
333   
333    
333    F 
11 
(11) 
±             
Estonia 
333 
333 
33*    F  
36.5   (36) 
±   
Finland  
333   
333    
333    F 
37.5   (37.5)[fn] 
±     [fn]     
France  
333   
333    
33*[fn] F 
36.5   (36.5) 
3     
[+] 
Germany  
333   
± 
333*    F 
36    (16) 
333  
Greece[fn] a. 
                b. 
33 
333 
333 
± 
3         I 
3         I 
15     (8) 
48     (3)[fn] 
3     
[+]  
± 
Hungary 
333   
333 
333[fn] F
36    (36)  
333  
Iceland 
(333)[fn]  
333 
333   F/I 
15    (9)[f/n] 
± 
Ireland 
33    
± 
3        
I 
16    (5.5) 
333  [+] 
Italy  
333   
± 
33      I 
13.5 (13.5)[fn] 
3  
Netherlands 
333   
333  
33        I 
14.5 (2.5) 
333  [+] 
N.Zealand 
(333)[fn] 
3 
3         F 
12     (3.5) 
333  [+] 
Norway 
(333)[fn]  
3          
333   F/I 
36.5   (12) 
333  [+] 
Poland 
333 
± 
33  
F 
36     (36) 
333  [+] 
Portugal 
(333)[fn]   
333    
33       I 
36.5   (12.5)[fn] 
333  [+] 
Russian Fed. 
333 
± 
33  
F 
36     (18) 
333 
Slovenia 
333 
33 
333   
I 
14    (11.5) 
333  [+] 
S. Africa  
33 [fn] 
± 
± 
  4     (4) 
333   
Spain [fn] 
333   
333 
3        
I 
36    (3.5)          
333 
Sweden  
(333)[fn] 
333    
333   F/I 
36.5  (16.5)[fn] 
333 
UK 
33    
33       
3        
I 
18    (9) 
3        
USA  
(3) [fn] 
± 
± 
  0 
± 
 
Key: 
 
Maternity, Paternity, Parental leave and leave for sick children columns: ± – no 
statutory entitlement. 3 – statutory entitlement but unpaid; 33 –statutory entitlement, 
paid but either at low flat-rate or earnings-related at less than 50 per cent of earnings 
or not universal or for less than the full period of leave; 333– statutory entitlement, 
paid for all or part of duration to all parents at more than 50 per cent of earnings (in 
most cases up to a maximum ceiling).  
Maternity leave column: brackets indicate that there is not a designated ‘Maternity 
leave’, but leave (with a different designation) is available for women to take 
immediately before and after childbirth. 
Parental leave column: * indicates the payment is made to all parents with a young 
child whether or not they are taking leave. F=family entitlement; I=individual 
entitlement; F/I=some period of family entitlement and some period of individual 
entitlement. 
 
95

Total post-natal leave column: Unbracketed numbers indicate total length of leave 
available to a family; this includes the longest period that Maternity, Paternity and 
Parental leave can be taken post-natally, as well as any Childcare leave. Bracketed 
numbers in ‘total post-natal leave’ column indicate length of leave that receives some 
payment. Both numbers are months, stated to the nearest half month; where leave is 
defined in days or weeks, it has been converted into months on the basis of 1 
month=4.3 weeks. 
Leave for sick children column: [+] indicates additional leave entitlements covering a 
wider range of family members than young children and/or situations of serious 
illness. 
 
Country footnotes [fn]: 
Canada: there are differences in length of leave between provinces and territories; 
three provinces allow three to five days of unpaid leave to care for members of 
immediate family. 
Czech Republic: Parental leave may be taken until child is three years, but benefit is 
paid until child is four.  
Finland: total post-natal leave includes period of low paid Childcare (‘Home care’) 
leave. All employees have access to leave to care for a sick child, with length and 
payment determined by collective agreements. 
France: Parental leave payment to parents with one child only made until six months 
after the end of Maternity leave. 
Germany: Parental leave payment up to maximum of 28 months; remainder of three 
year leave period unpaid. 
Greece: a = private sector employees; b = public sector employees. Women 
employees in both sectors can consolidate an entitlement to work reduced hours into 
a full-time leave of up to 3¾ months in the private sector and 9 months in the public 
sector. This extra leave option is not included in the total post-natal leave shown in 
the Table, which shows leave available to two parent family where both parents work 
in same sector. 
Hungary: for insured parents, leave is paid at 70 per cent of earnings until child’s 
third birthday, then at flat-rate; only mother is entitled to use in child’s first year. Either 
of the parents in a family with three or more children may take leave during the 
period between the third and the eighth birthday of the youngest child 
(Gyermeknevelési támogatás – GYET). Benefit payment as for GYES.  
Iceland: The law does not distinguish separate Maternity, Paternity and Parental 
leave, referring only to ‘birth leave’, part of which is for mothers, part for fathers and 
part for the parents to divide as they choose. Total post-natal leave includes period of 
unpaid leave after Parental leave. 
Italy: Parental leave is six months per parent, but total leave per family cannot 
exceed ten months. 
New Zealand: ‘Parental leave’ is used as a generic term to cover all forms of leave 
for new parents; the period of leave immediately after birth, usually taken by the 
mother, is not termed ‘Maternity leave’ but ‘paid Parental leave’, and can be 
transferred to a spouse or partner.  
Norway: there is no separate Maternity leave; part of Parental leave is reserved for 
women before and after birth. 
Portugal: ‘Maternity leave’ has been replaced by ‘initial Parental leave’. Total post-
natal leave includes period of unpaid leave after Parental leave. 
 
96

South Africa: payment to eligible employees from the Unemployment Insurance 
Fund on a sliding scale ranging from 31 to 59 per cent. Fathers may take up to three 
days paid ‘family responsibility leave’ when their children are born. 
Spain: women employees can consolidate an entitlement to work reduced hours into 
a full-time leave of up to four weeks. This extra leave option is not included in the 
total post-natal leave shown in the Table. 
Sweden: there is no separate Maternity leave; part of the 480 days of paid Parental 
leave is reserved for women. Each parent is entitled to take Parental leave until a 
child is 18 months; but the 480 days of paid leave can be taken until a child is eight 
years. 
United States: there is no separate Maternity leave, but parents may take up to 12 
weeks unpaid leave for childbirth or for the care of a child up to 12 months as part of 
the federal Family and Medical Leave Act; employers with less than 50 employees 
are exempt. Five states and Puerto Rica provide some benefit payments to parents 
missing work at around the time of childbirth. 
 
97

Table 2.1.2: Statutory entitlements for taking Parental leave flexibly or 
for flexible working 
 
 
Reduced hours  
Breast-          Other 
feeding 
Parental leave 
options 
Right to request 
flexible work 
Australia 
± 
± 
 
3 until CSA 
Austria 
± 
3until 7 
3, 5 
± 
Belgium 
± 
± 
1,2 
± 
Canada 
   Québec 
± 
± 
± 
± 
 
3, 5 
± 
Czech Rep 
± 
± 
1, 3, 4 
± 
Denmark 
± 
± 
1,3, 5 
± 
Estonia [fn] 
333 
333until 1½ 
1, 4 
± 
Finland 
± 
33until 8 
1, 2, 6 
± 
France 
± 
± 
1 
± 
Germany 
± 
± 
1, 3,5, 6 
± 
Greece [fn]a 
                 b 
± 
± 
333until 2½ 
333until 4 
2, 5, 6 
5 
± 
± 
Hungary [fn] 
333 
333until 8 
4, 6 
± 
Iceland [fn] 
± 
3until 8  
2, 5, 6 
± 
Ireland 
333 
± 
5, 6 
± 
Italy 
333 
± 
5, 6 
3 until CSA 
Netherlands 
3all employees entitled to work part 
time if employer agrees and has ten 
or more employees 
6 
± 
N.Zealand 
±                 ± 
 
3 any carer 
Norway 
333 
3until 10  
1,3,6 
± 
Poland 
± 
± 
2,5 
± 
Portugal 
333 
±  
1,5 
± 
Russian Fed 
333 
± 
1,4 
± 
Slovenia 
333 
3 until 3 
1,3, 4,5,6 
± 
S. Africa 
± 
± 
 
± 
Spain 
333 
3 
2 
± 
Sweden 
± 
3until 8 
1,2,5,6 
± 
UK 
± 
± 
5 
3 until 6 
USA 
± 
± 
 
± 
 
Key: 
± – no statutory entitlement; 3 – statutory entitlement but unpaid; 33 – statutory 
entitlement, paid but either at low flat-rate or earnings-related at less than 50 per cent 
of earnings or not universal or for less than the full period of leave; 333 – statutory 
entitlement, paid to all parents at more than 50 per cent of earnings (in most cases 
up to a maximum ceiling). 
CSA = compulsory school age. 
Parental leave flexible options: refers to options that are not subject to employers’ 
agreement. 
1 – leave can be taken full time or part time; 2 – leave can be taken in one block or 
several blocks of time; 3 – leave can be taken for a shorter period with higher benefit 
payment or for longer period with lower benefit payment; 4 – leave can be transferred 
to non-parent; 5 – leave can be taken at any time until a child reaches a certain age; 
6 – other, mainly additional leave in case of multiple births.  
 
98

Right to request flexible work: employer is not required to grant request. 
 
Country footnotes [fn]: 
Estonia: an employee with a child under 14 years is entitled to take two weeks 
unpaid leave per year. 
Greece: a = private sector employees; b = public sector employees.  
Hungary: an employee with three or more children may take leave or work reduced 
hours until a child is eight years olds, receiving a flat-rate payment.  
Iceland: an employee may take 13 weeks unpaid leave until a child is eight years 
old. 
 
99

 
2.2 
Sources, terms and 
currency conversion rates 
used in country notes 
 
The 27 country notes that follow have been prepared by members of the international 
network on leave policies and research, with the assistance of some other national 
experts, to a format designed by the network coordinators.  
 
Information on leave is organised under five headings: Maternity leave; Paternity 
leave; Parental leave; childcare leave or career breaks; and other statutory 
employment-related measures. The names for the first three types of leave in the 
native language of the country are given. In some countries (e.g. Iceland, New 
Zealand), the terms used for leave (and the design of leave policies) do not 
correspond to Maternity leave, Paternity leave and Parental leave; in these cases a 
‘note on terminology’ at the start of the country note explains the terminology for and 
design of leave in that country. 
 
Each country note begins with data on a number of standard demographic, economic 
and service items. These have been sourced from cross-national data sets that offer 
comparable data. However most data sets do not cover all the countries included 
here; in these cases, ‘No data’ is listed for the item. In some cases, network 
members preparing country notes have sent alternative statistics, drawing on 
national sources. Where these additional statistics are substantially different to those 
from the cross-national data sets or where there is ‘No data’ from these data sets for 
the country, these national statistics have been given as footnotes. 
 
The following items need further definition: 
 
GDP per capita: expressed as Purchasing Power Parities (PPP) in US dollars. 
 
Female economic activity, 15+: proportion of women aged 15 years and over who 
are employed or unemployed. 
Gender employment gap: per centage point difference between the employment 
rates for men and women aged 25-64 years 
Global gender gap: this index assesses the gap between men and women in four 
categories – economic participation and opportunity; educational attainment; political 
empowerment; and health and survival – using 14 indicators. The Index is 
constructed to rank countries on their gender gaps not on their development level. 
For example, the Index penalises or rewards countries based on the sise of the gap 
 
100

between male and female enrolment rates, but not for the overall levels of education 
in the country. 
Attendance at formal services: proportion of children attending ‘formal’ early 
childhood education and care services, defined as: ‘pre-school or equivalent, 
compulsory education, centre-based services outside school hours, a collective 
crèche or daycare centre, including family day-care, professional certified 
childminders. The care provided by family members, neighbours or non-certified 
childminders are therefore not included’ (European Commission (2008) Childcare 
services in the EU (Memo/08/592). 
 
The sources used are: 
 
UNDP: United Nations Development Programme (2007) The Human Development 
report 2007/2008. Tables 1, 5, 31. Available at: 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/hdr_20072008_en_complete.pdf. 
 
OECD/F: OECD (2008) OECD in Figures, 2008. Paris: OECD, p.32. Available at: 
 http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/44/17/41733586.pdf
 
OECD/BB: OECD (2007) Babies and Bosses: Reconciling Work and Family Life. A 
Synthesis of Findings for OECD Countries. Paris: OECD. Tables 3.2 and 3.3. 
 
WEF: Hausmann, R., Tyson, L.D. and Zahidi, S. (2008) The Global Gender Gap 
report 2008. Geneva: World Economic Forum. Table 3a. Available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=605&langId=en
 
ECB: European Commission (2008) Implementing the Barcelona objectives 
concerning childcare facilities for pre-school-age children (SEC(2008)2524). 
Brussels: Commission of the European Communities. Table 1. Available at: 
http://1_EN_autre_document_travail_service_part1_v3.pdf
 
All benefit payments are expressed in euros, at the conversion rate on 26 April 2009 
on http://finance.yahoo.com/currency-converter
 
101

2.3 
Australia 
 
Michael Alexander, Gillian Whitehouse and Deborah Brennan  
 
Population (UNDP) 
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
GDP per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
20.3 million 
1.8 
31,794 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
   Women  
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
56.4 per cent 
80 per cent 
 
12.4 per cent 
38.5 per cent 
20% points 
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   With child from birth to 5 years 
 
2005 
 
48.3 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
21st          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
No data 
No data 
NB Australia is a federal state 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
support parents 
 
Note on federal and State industrial relations systems and awards: in Australia, the 
employment conditions of employees have traditionally been detailed in awards, 
which are usually occupational or industry- based prescriptive documents determined 
by industrial tribunals. Historically, Australia had a different state-based industrial 
relations system for each of its six States, as well as a federal system. Federal 
awards applied to employees working in the federal public sector and for companies 
with similar operations in more than one State, while State awards covered the State 
public sector and company operations operating in a single State. Traditionally, the 
federal system had set the standard for conditions, with State systems usually 
ratifying federal decisions shortly afterwards.  
 
In December 2005 the federal Workplace Relations Act 1996 was amended (referred 
to as the ‘Work Choices’ amendments) to reduce the coverage of the State systems, 
bringing into the federal sphere all employees working for incorporated businesses 
(i.e. those falling within the federal government’s Constitutional power over 
‘corporations’). In addition, these changes and the associated ‘award rationalisation’ 
process was designed to reduce the number of awards and the matters they are able 
to address, as well as reduce award coverage through prioritisation of individual and 
collective bargaining and removal of overlapping coverage of awards and 
agreements.  
 
102

 
Following the election of the Australian Labor Party at the federal level in November 
2007, legislation has been passed that will repeal the Workplace Relations Act 1996 
(and with it, much of the Work Choices agenda) and replace it with a new system of 
employment regulation entitled the Fair Work Act 2009. These new employment 
regulations are due to come into effect on 1 January 2010 (see part 2 for a 
discussion of their impact on parental leave arrangements). Until then the previous 
Workplace Relations Act 1996 still applies (in most respects) and is what is described 
in the rest of this part. 
 
a. Statutory Maternity leave  
 
Maternity leave in Australia is conflated with the statutory entitlement to 52 weeks 
unpaid Parental leave that can be shared between a mother and her spouse (see 
below). The portion of this Parental leave entitlement taken by the mother is referred 
to in the legislation as ‘Maternity leave’ (Workplace Relations Act, s.265-s.281). 
Since amendments to the Act in 2005, the mother must take six weeks ‘Maternity 
leave’ immediately following the birth of her child (s.273).  
 
While there is currently no general entitlement to paid Maternity leave, some 
employees have access through industrial awards, workplace agreements, company 
policies, or legislation covering public sector employees. In a national survey 
conducted in August 2008, 45 per cent of female employees indicated they had 
access to paid Maternity leave in their main job, with prevalence considerably higher 
in public sector employment: 74 per cent compared with 35 per cent in the private 
sector (ABS Employee Earnings, Benefits and Trade Union Membership Survey, 
August 2008, Cat. No. 6310.0, Table 17). Organisational data indicate that the 
prevalence of paid Maternity leave has been increasing over recent years, with 46 
per cent of large organisations surveyed by the Equal Opportunity for Women in the 
Workplace Agency (EOWA) in 2005 providing paid Maternity leave, compared with 
23 per cent in 2001 (Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Survey 2005: 
Paid Parental leave, available through EOWA website, http://www.eowa.gov.au/). 
The amount of paid leave granted by these organisations varies significantly across 
employers (see later comments). 
 
b. Statutory Paternity leave  
 
As with Maternity leave, Paternity leave in Australia overlaps with the statutory 
entitlement to 52 weeks unpaid Parental leave that can be shared between a mother 
and her spouse. The portion of this Parental leave entitlement taken by a man when 
his spouse gives birth is referred to in the legislation as ‘Paternity leave’, and is 
formally divided into ‘short Paternity leave’ (up to one week at the time of the birth) 
and ‘long Paternity leave’ (leave-taken as the child’s ‘primary carer’) (Workplace 
Relations Act, s.282-s.297). While short Paternity leave can be taken simultaneously 
with the mother’s Maternity leave, long Paternity leave cannot, and the total period of 
Parental leave shared between the parents cannot exceed 52 weeks. Following 
amendments that require a mother to take six weeks Maternity leave immediately 
following the birth of her child, the maximum period of leave available to her spouse 
to use as Paternity leave has been reduced.  
 
 
103

There is no general entitlement to paid Paternity leave, but some company policies 
and industrial agreements provide a period of paid leave for fathers. In response to a 
national survey in 2008, 35 per cent of male employees indicated they had access to 
paid Paternity leave in their main job. As with paid Maternity leave, prevalence was 
higher in public sector employment; 59 per cent of male employees in the public 
sector indicated that they had access, compared with 31 per cent in the private 
sector (ABS Employee Earnings, Benefits and Trade Union Membership Survey, 
August 2008, Cat. No. 6310.0, Table 17). Organisational data indicate that the 
prevalence of paid Paternity leave has been increasing over recent years: 32 per 
cent of large organisations responding to the 2005 EOWA survey mentioned above 
provided paid Paternity leave, compared with 15 per cent in 2001.The amount of paid 
leave that is granted varies significantly across employers (see later comments). 
 
c. Parental leave  
 
Note: as discussed above, Parental leave in Australia is a shared entitlement that 
overlaps with Maternity and Paternity leave; all three terms refer to the one 
entitlement. 
 
Length of leave  
 
•  Fifty-two weeks per family around the birth or adoption of a child. A woman   can 
start to take leave up to six weeks before her baby is due. Except for the week 
following the birth of the child when both parents may take Parental leave, the 
remainder of the leave may only be taken by one or other parent (the child’s 
nominated primary care provider). Under 2005 legislative amendments, a mother 
must take six weeks of the 52-week entitlement immediately following the birth. 
• Parental leave can be taken sequentially with other types of paid leave, such   as 
annual leave or long service leave (or paid Maternity/Parental leave, if it is 
available to the employee through their employment conditions). However, for 
each period of paid leave used, the unpaid Parental leave entitlement is reduced 
by the same amount so that the maximum time available for Parental leave is still 
52 weeks. 
• A decision of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission on 8 August 2005 in 
the Family Provisions Test Case provided employees on federal awards with 
the right to request from their employer the following extensions to the above 
entitlements: 
o a period when both parents may take simultaneous unpaid Parental leave 
up to a maximum of eight weeks (currently one week); 
o a further continuous period of unpaid Parental leave not exceeding 12 
months (in addition to the current 12 months) – that is, a maximum of two 
years in total; 
o return to work from a period of Parental leave on a part-time basis until the 
child reaches school age. 
• While the 2005 Work Choices amendments to the federal Workplace Relations 
Act did not adopt these extended entitlements, they were passed on to some 
employees through state-based award systems or enacted in relevant state-
based legislation (see above ‘note on federal and State awards’). However, the 
Work Choices changes to the federal Act also restricted the scope of state-
based benefits, as most employees previously covered by State awards were 
 
104

brought into the federal jurisdiction. As discussed in part 2, the federal 
legislation is currently under review.   
 
Payment and funding 
 
• 
None for statutory provisions under the federal Act. Where paid leave is 
offered (for example, under company policies, industrial agreements or 
legislative provisions for public sector employees) duration of leave varies, 
with the most common provisions for paid Maternity leave being six or 12 
weeks and for paid Paternity leave one or two weeks. Payment is typically the 
employee’s normal pay rate, although in some cases there are provisions to 
double the duration by taking the leave at half pay. 
 
Flexibility in use 
 
• 
None for statutory provisions under the federal Act. See above for possible 
variations in duration and pay where a period of paid leave is available. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• Employees in permanent positions (full- or part-time) are eligible for these 
entitlements provided they have 12 months continuous service with the same 
employer by the expected date of delivery. 
 
• Casual employees are also eligible for the above entitlements provided that they 
have been engaged by a particular employer for a sequence of periods of 
employment during a period of at least 12 months and, but for the birth or 
adoption of a child, would have a reasonable expectation of continuing 
engagement. Since amendments to the Workplace Relations Act in 2005 all such 
‘eligible casuals’ have a statutory right to unpaid Parental leave. In the States of 
New South Wales and Queensland, this right preceded the changes made to the 
federal Act for those meeting the relevant States’ eligibility criteria and falling 
under the jurisdiction of those States’ industrial relations laws.  
 
• Parental leave is not available to self-employed workers. According to The 
Parental Leave in Australia Survey (2005), 11 per cent of mothers in employment 
prior to the birth of their child were self-employed, while the comparable figure for 
fathers was 20 per cent. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
person other than the parents 
 
• Special Maternity leave may be taken in cases of pregnancy-related illness or 
miscarriage within 28 weeks of the expected date of delivery. Any leave-taken for 
a pregnancy-related illness must be subtracted from the total entitlement to 
Parental/Maternity leave. 
 
 
 
105

Additional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
agreements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
 
• Paid Parental leave, usually specified as Maternity or Paternity leave, is available 
in some awards or workplace agreements and/or company policies. In these 
situations conditions might be attached, such as a requirement to return to work 
before receiving some or all of the payment or a guarantee to return for at least a 
period equivalent to the leave-taken. Such conditions do not appear to be 
common. For example, among respondents to the 2005 Parental leave in 
Australia Survey who had taken some paid Maternity leave, around five per cent 
reported that some or all of their pay was delayed until their return to work. 
 
d. Statutory childcare leave or career breaks 
 
• No general statutory entitlement. 
 
e. Other statutory employment-related measures 
 
Adoption leave and pay  
 
• The same statutory rights apply as to Parental leave when a child under five 
years old is adopted. 
 
Time off for the care of dependants  
 
• All employees have access to a period of paid personal/carer’s leave equivalent 
to one twenty-sixth of their nominal annual hours (10 days leave for a regular full-
time employee). In addition, employees can access up to two days unpaid carer’s 
leave for each ‘permissible occasion’ provided paid personal leave has not been 
exhausted. Personal/carer’s leave includes ‘sick’ leave and may be taken 
because of a personal illness, or to provide care or support to a member of the 
employee’s immediate family or household who is ill or injured, or in the case of 
an unexpected family emergency.  
 
Flexible work arrangements 
 
• Some parents covered by State provisions have a right to request part-time work 
upon returning to work from Parental leave until their child reaches school age.  
 
2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
On 7 April 2009, a new Fair Work Act 2009 came into effect. The Fair Work Act 
establishes a new system of employment regulation in Australia and was a key 
election commitment of the Australian Labor Party, elected to office in November 
2007 after nearly 12 years of Liberal and National Party Coalition rule. The new 
employment regulations, which come into effect on 1 January 2010, repeal significant 
aspects of the previous Workplace Relations Act 1996, including many of the 
amendments introduced in December 2005 (known as ‘Work Choices’). They also 
 
106

contain an expanded set of national employment standards, which include the ability 
for parents of children under school age to request flexible working arrangements, as 
well as an extension of the maximum period of unpaid Parental leave from 12 to 24 
months.  
 
Requests for flexible working arrangements: this new national employment standard 
is based on arrangements that are similar to those operating in the United Kingdom, 
providing a right for parents who have responsibility for the care of a child under 
school age (or a child under 18 with a disability) to request a change in work 
arrangements to assist the employee to care for the child. An employer can accede 
to the request, offer an alternative set of arrangements, or refuse the request on 
reasonable business grounds. Both ‘flexible working arrangements’ and ‘reasonable 
business grounds’ are deliberately not defined to avoid limiting the options available 
or applying to the parties, although general information and assistance will be 
provided to facilitate agreement. The request is ultimately not enforceable by any 
third-party body. 
 
Parental leave entitlement: the new Parental leave employment standard provides 
each parent with an entitlement to be absent from work for separate periods of up to 
12 months of unpaid Parental leave; previously, the 12-month period of leave was a 
joint entitlement. Unpaid Parental leave must be taken in association with the birth of 
a child to an employee or their spouse or the adoption of a child below school age. 
Following the first 12-month period of unpaid leave, a parent can request to take up 
to another 12 months (of their spouse’s unused leave period), although in this case 
an employer can refuse the request on ‘reasonable business grounds’. Any 
agreement for an additional period of leave beyond the first 12 months will reduce the 
spouse’s entitlement by an equivalent amount. 
 
As is currently the case, only one parent is entitled to access unpaid Parental leave 
at any particular point in time (except for the period immediately following the birth (or 
adoption) of the child) and each parent must take their period of leave in one 
continuous block. Following the birth (or adoption) of the child, however, parents may 
take concurrent unpaid leave for up to three weeks (an increase from the current one 
week). 
 
New Paid Parental leave scheme: on 12 May 2009, as part of its 2009-10 budget 
announcements, the government announced its intention to introduce a Paid 
Parental Leave Scheme to commence on 1 January 2011. The main features of the 
scheme are: 
 
• Tax payer funded paid Parental leave of 18 weeks duration at the federal 
minimum wage (currently AU$543.78 (€305) per week, or 52.7 per cent of full-
time average ordinary time female earnings). 
•  Where possible, the benefit would be paid by employers, with the government 
pre-paying employers for the cost. 
•  To be eligible for the paid parental leave scheme, the primary carer (usually the 
mother) must be in paid work and have: been engaged in work continuously for 
at least ten of the 13 months prior to the expected birth or adoption of the child; 
and undertaken at least 330 hours of paid work in the ten month period.  
 
107

•  The benefit would be restricted to those earning less than AU$150,000 (€84,560) 
per year or approximately four times average female annual earnings (or 2.7 
times average female full-time earnings). 
•  The benefit can be taken in conjunction with other forms of paid leave to which 
the employee may be eligible (recreational leave, long service leave, employer-
funded parental leave) but must be taken before the employee returns to work. 
•  Any unused portion of the leave benefit can be transferred to another primary 
care-giver (usually the father) in the event that they also meet the eligibility 
criteria. 
•  Where employees are covered by an existing industrial award or enterprise 
agreement that includes paid Parental leave, that entitlement cannot be 
withdrawn; the government-funded Parental leave scheme is in addition to any 
existing employment conditions. 
•  Those mothers not working (or not working for a sufficient period or hours) prior 
to the birth of a child would still be eligible for the existing baby bonus of 
AU$5,000 (€2,820) and have access to family tax benefit B (primarily payable to 
single income families). These benefits of the social security system would no 
longer be available to those claiming the paid Maternity leave benefit. 
 
The implementation of this scheme follows an earlier public inquiry into the social 
costs and benefits of providing paid Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave in 
Australia, conducted by the Productivity Commission. The government has 
implemented all but two key recommendations of the Commission’s final report. 
These additional recommendations were for: Paternity leave of two weeks payable 
primarily to fathers (or other care-giver in other circumstances) within the first 12 
months of the birth of the child; employers to pay superannuation contributions (at 
the statutory amount) for the period of the Parental leave benefit. The government 
has committed to reviewing the operation of the scheme by the end of 2014, 
cluding the appropriateness of introducing these two recommendations. 
in
 
2. Take-up of leave 
 
Until recently, Australia has had limited data on who has access to various types of 
leave, and even less information on who is accessing their entitlements and in what 
manner. This situation has now been addressed with the release in 2006 of figures 
on the availability and take-up of different leave arrangements around the birth of a 
hild, based on two surveys:  
c
 
• The Parental Leave in Australia Survey, conducted as part of Wave 1.5 of the 
Australian government-funded Growing up in Australia – the Longitudinal Study 
of Australian Children, collected information from parents with a child born 
between March 2003 and February 2004, focusing in particular on employment 
and leave arrangements prior to and following the child’s birth. (This 
longitudinal study is managed by the Australian Institute of Family Studies – 
see http://www.aifs.gov.au/growingup/, and for an overview of the survey 
findings, see http://www.uq.edu.au/polsis/parental-leave).  
• 
A supplementary labour force survey conducted by the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics in 2005 (Pregnancy and Employment Transitions, Cat. No. 4193.0) 
 
108

collected information on employment and leave from mothers of children 
s of age.  
e available. If all forms of 
ave are taken into consideration (that is, including ‘non-maternity’ forms of leave), 
 the total leave-taken was paid leave. 
nd their 
verall average duration of leave across all leave types was two weeks. Of the total 
s working as employees, around 88 per cent was paid.  
ernity’ leave; while the corresponding figure for 
thers was 30 per cent. For fathers in particular, usage of Parental leave thus falls 
under two year
 
a. Maternity leave 
 
Data from the Parental Leave in Australia Survey show that 37 per cent of mothers 
who worked as employees in the 12 months prior to the birth of their child used some 
paid Maternity leave following the birth (sometime between March 2003 and 
February 2004), although very few leave-takers (around four per cent) used paid 
Maternity leave only. Close to 60 per cent of mothers working as employees in the 
lead up to the birth used some unpaid Maternity/Parental leave, with around one- 
quarter of leave-takers relying solely on this form of leave. Most of those who took 
leave combined paid and unpaid forms, often combining unpaid Maternity leave with 
other forms of leave such as paid annual leave. The overall average duration of 
leave-taken by mothers who worked as employees prior to the birth was 40 weeks. 
Of the total Maternity leave-taken by this group, around 27 per cent was paid. A small 
proportion of this paid Maternity leave was taken at less than full-time pay: 18 per 
cent of mothers taking some paid Maternity leave took their leave at a different pay 
rate, commonly at half pay in order to double the leave tim
le
around 29 per cent of
 
b. Paternity leave 
 
Use of Paternity leave was considerably lower than use of Maternity leave. Around 
one-quarter of fathers of young children who worked as employees in the 12 months 
prior to the birth of their child used some paid Paternity leave, but less than 10 per 
cent used any unpaid Paternity/Parental leave. Fathers relied very heavily on the use 
of non-parental forms of leave, the most prevalent being paid annual leave. Fathers 
were much less likely than mothers to combine different forms of leave, a
o
leave-taken by father
 
c. Parental leave 
 
Among respondents to the Parental Leave in Australia Survey, around 80 per cent of 
employees met the basic eligibility criterion for access to Parental leave. Overall, 68 
per cent of mothers of children born between March 2003 and February 2004, who 
worked as employees in the 12 months prior to their child’s birth, used some leave 
designated as ‘Parental’ or ‘Mat
fa
well below access and eligibility.  
 
d. Other employment-related measures 
 
According to the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) 
survey, access to carer’s leave currently stands at 72 per cent of employed persons 
(those without access are mainly self-employed and casual workers). In terms of 
usage, the Parental leave in Australia Survey suggested that around 13 per cent of 
mothers who returned to work as employees after the birth of their child reported 
 
109

using some carer’s (or ‘family’ or ‘special’) leave. In addition, around 16 per cent of 
this group reported using some of their own sick leave to care for their child (Parental 
Leave in Australia Survey). Overall, around 24 per cent used at least one of these 
forms of leave. Among fathers working as employees after the birth of the child: 21 
per cent used some of their own sick leave to help care for their child; 15 per cent 
used some carer’s (or ‘family’ or ‘special’) leave; and around 30 per cent used at 
least one of these forms of leave. As discussed earlier, entitlements to carer’s and 
ick leave are now combined in the personal leave entitlement under Australia’s 
.
 and other employment-
since January 2006 
nducted on the use of Parental leave; and Wave 5 
f the HILDA survey has also included a greater number of questions on Parental 
 
b. elected publications from January 2006, including results from 
id work. The author argues that a sustainable future needs new policy 
approaches to work and family life that incorporate the perspectives of children as 
portunity Commission. 
The final report from an inquiry into how gender roles in unpaid caring work impact 
s
current legislation.  
 
 Research and publications on leave
4
related policies 
 
a. General overview 
 
There has been some research around the issue of Maternity leave specifically and 
family-friendly policies generally in Australia since 2001. Much of this has been 
generated as a result of the work and family test case brought before the Australian 
Industrial Relations Commission in 2004, and also by the inquiries into paid Maternity 
leave and into the gender division of paid and unpaid work conducted by the Sex 
Discrimination Commissioner (and published by the Human Rights and Equal 
Opportunity Commission) and the Productivity Commission’s Inquiry into Paid 
Maternity, Paternity and Parental Leave conducted in 2008-09. In addition, as noted 
above, new surveys have been co
o
leave compared to earlier waves. 
S
research studies   
 
Pocock, B. (2006) The Labour Market Ate My Babies. Annandale, NSW: Federation 
Press. 
This book examines the impact of current labour market arrangements on families 
and children, arguing that Australians’ capacity to care is undermined by the 
pressures of pa
well as adults. 
 
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (2007) It’s about Time: Women, 
Men, Work and Family. Sydney: Human Rights and Equal Op
on the ability of men and women to participate in paid work. 
 
Whitehouse, G., Diamond, C. and Baird, M. (2007) ‘Fatherhood and the use of leave in 
Australia’, Community, Work and Family, Vol.10, No.4: 387-407. 
This paper examines Australian fathers’ use of leave at the time of the birth of a child. 
Although most Australian fathers take some leave for parental purposes, use of 
formally designated Paternity or Parental leave is limited within the Australian policy 
framework, which lacks legislative provision for paid Paternity or Parental leave. The 
 
110

analysis uses survey data to identify factors influencing leave-taking, as well as an 
organisational case study illustrating some of the practicalities of implementing a 
rental leave) and 
parental well-being; while the fifth critically evaluates selected work and family policy 
ng to breastfeed. The paper also compares the 
breastfeeding rates of women on leave with women who are back at work, and those 
an examination of which 
omen feel more constrained in their labour market options by returning to work 
 mothers' return to work after childbearing: variations by 
timing of mothers' return analysing whether leave use, 
mployment characteristics prior to the birth and other factors are associated with 
Institute of Family 
existing AIFS research, while some are 
ew. This paper provides a useful snapshot of employment and leave-taking around 
Charlesworth, S. and Campbell, I. (2008) ‘Right to request legislation: two new 
comparatively generous paid Parental leave scheme.  
 
Special issue of the journal Australian Bulletin of Labour, 33(2) (2007).  
This special issue, entitled ‘Taking care: work and family policy issues for Australia’, 
includes five articles on aspects of work/family balance in Australia. The first two 
focus on Parental leave policies and practices at the organisational level; the third 
examines the impact of part-time work on women’s wages; the fourth tests the 
relationship between job quality (including access to paid Pa
initiatives implemented by the 1996-2007 Australian government.  
 
Baxter, J. (2008) ‘Breastfeeding, employment and leave: an analysis of mothers in 
Growing up in Australia, Family Matters, No.80: 17-26. 
This article explores the relationship between breastfeeding and employment, paying 
particular attention to the fact that some women do manage to combine employment 
and breastfeeding: a return to work does not always result in a stop to breastfeeding. 
The analyses explore which job and other characteristics are associated with a 
higher likelihood of continui
not working but not on leave.  
 
Baxter, J. (2008) ‘Is money the main reason mothers return to work after 
childbearing?’, Journal of Population Research, Vol.25, No.2: 141-160. 
This paper explores women’s reasons for returning to work after childbearing, using 
quantitative techniques to analyse how reasons for return to work vary with factors 
such as women’s timing of return to work, type of job previously worked in, or 
returned to, and what type of leave they used. This enables 
w
sooner than preferred, and also their reasons for returning.  
 
Baxter, J. (2008) Timing of
job characteristics and leave use (Research Paper No. 42). Melbourne: Australian 
Institute of Family Studies. 
This paper explores the 
e
differences in the timing.  
 
Baxter, J. and Gray, M. (2008) Submission from the Australian 
Studies to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into Paid Maternity, Paternity and 
Parental Leave. Melbourne: Australian Institute of Family Studies. 
This submission provides background information on Parental leave in Australia, and 
on related issues on mothers’ and fathers’ employment more generally, on mothers’ 
return to work after having a child, on breastfeeding, and aspects of parental well-
being. Some of the analyses are based on 
n
the birth of a child, as it stands at this time.  
 
 
111

Australian models’, Australian Journal of Labour Law, Vol.21, No.2: 116-136. 
A ‘right to request’ access to flexible work arrangements as a way of balancing work 
and family responsibilities has recently become policy for the federal and Victorian 
Labor governments. This article analyses the distinct features of the federal industrial 
relations model, and the Victorian model that now forms part of that state’s anti-
discrimination law. It canvasses the potential of such regulation to assist workers to 
balance their paid work and family responsibilities and the ways in which such 
otential might best be realised. 
le 
at: 
 and Parental leave in 
ustralia, and the basis for the government’s new scheme.  
leave duration’, Asia Pacific Journal of Human 
id leave is more likely to be welcomed than further 
extension of leave duration. 
rman and P. Moss (eds.) The Politics of Parental Leave, 
e 
amed the issue of financial support for new mothers (and, more recently, fathers). 
p
 
Productivity Commission (2008) Paid Parental Leave: Support for Parents with 
Newborn 
Children. 
Availab
http://www.pc.gov.au/projects/inquiry/parentalsupport/report. 
Final report on the inquiry into paid Maternity, Paternity
A
 
Whitehouse, G., Hosking, A. and Baird, M. (2008) ‘Returning too soon? Australian 
mothers’ satisfaction with maternity 
Resources, Vol. 46, No. 3: 288-302. 
This paper examines the question of optimal duration of Maternity leave through the 
lens of Australian mothers’ satisfaction with their leave: specifically, whether and why 
they returned to work earlier than they would have liked. Overall, the analysis 
highlights the financial pressures underpinning women’s decisions, and suggests that 
enhanced availability of pa
 
Brennan, D. (forthcoming 2009). ‘A late delivery? The politics of Maternity leave in 
Australia’, in: S. Kame
Bristol: Policy Press.   
This chapter explores the history and politics of Maternity and Parental leave in 
Australia, emphasising the distinctive features of the Australian approach to social 
protection and industrial relations that prevailed throughout the first three-quarters of 
the twentieth century. It focuses on the politics of paid leave, examining the ways in 
which political parties, women’s groups, trade unions and employer groups hav
fr
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112

2.4 
Austria 
 
Christiane Rille–Pfeiffer 
 
Population (UNDP) 
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
GDP per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
8.3 million 
1.4 
33,700 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
   Women  
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
49.5 per cent 
76 per cent 
 
  5.2 per cent 
31.5 per cent 
15% points 
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   With child under 3 years 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
60.5 per cent 
62.4 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
29th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB)13
   Children under 3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
  4 (1) per cent 
71(16) per cent 
NB. Austria is a federal state 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
support parents 
 
a. Maternity leave (Mutterschutz) (responsibility of Federal Ministry of 
Economics and Labour) 
 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• Sixteen weeks, eight weeks before the birth and eight weeks after the birth. 
 
Payment and funding 
 
• One hundred per cent of average income for the last three months of 
employment before taking leave for employees; there is no ceiling on payment. 
Self-employed women receive a flat-rate payment of €24.78 (2008) a day; 
freelance workers receive a flat-rate payment of €7.55 a day. Employed women 
                                                 
13 National statistics for the attendance rate in 2006 are higher for both age groups: 10.8 per 
cent for children under three years and 83.5 per cent for children aged three to five years 
(source: Austrian Statistical Office) 
 
 
113

on temporary contracts also receive a flat-rate payment of €7.55 a day. Eligible 
unemployed women or women receiving childcare benefit are entitled to 180 per 
• 
bill and from general taxes, and partly (30 per cent) from public health 
insurance. 
Flexibility in use 
• None. 
Regional or local variations in leave policy 
• None. 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances)  
• 
 have been 
ild or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
person othe
• 
omen are eligible for 12 weeks 
 leave (responsibility of Federal Ministry of Economics and 
birth of a child. During these 
. 
renz) (responsibility of Federal Ministry of 
Length of le
hes two years. This entitlement is per family.  
ayment and funding 
cent of previous unemployment benefit. 
Funded partly (70 per cent) from Familienlastenausgleichsfond (FLAF – Family 
Burdens Equalisation Fund), financed by contributions by employers based on 
their salary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All employed women are entitled to 16 weeks Maternity leave with 16 weeks 
payment (100 per cent of average income), except for short-time employed 
women and freelance workers who are eligible for Maternity leave only if they are 
voluntarily health-insured. Unemployed women are eligible for maternity payment 
only if they have completed three months continuous employment or
compulsorily health-insured for 12 months within the last three years. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of ch
r than the mother  
 
In case of danger to the health of the mother or unborn child, women are eligible 
to take leave earlier than eight weeks before delivery; in case of premature or 
multiple births or births by Caesarean section, w
after birth (in exceptional cases even 16 weeks). 
 
Paternity
b. 
Labour) 
 
There is no statutory right to Paternity leave, though collective agreements may 
rovide a few days off for fathers immediately after the 
p
days off work fathers receive full earnings replacement. 
 
Parental leave (Elternka
c
Economics and Labour) 
 
ave (before and after birth) 
 
• Until the child reac
 
P
 
114

 
• 
s 
• 
LAF (Family Burdens Equalisation Fund); 
see ‘Maternity leave’ for more details. 
lexibility in use 
 
• 
leave ends one month earlier (i.e. one 
• 
f leave, to use up to the child’s seventh 
e
 local variations in leave policy 
lig
  
f child or mother; lone parent; or delegation of leave to 
e
d
te (e.g. employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
• 
 benefit and the employer has to recruit a 
A childcare benefit is available to all families who meet the eligibility conditions, 
whether or not parents take Parental leave (see part 2). Parents can choose from 
three options: a long option (€436 a month for 30 months or for 36 months if both 
parents apply for the payment, a mid-range option (€626 a month for 20 month
or 24 months); and a short option (€800 a month for 15 months or 18 months). 
Childcare benefit is funded from the F
 
F
Leave may be taken by one parent only (mother or father) or by both parents on 
an alternating basis (the whole period can be divided into a maximum of three 
parts alternating between parents, with each part at least three months). Both 
parents cannot take leave at the same time except for one month the first time 
they alternate leave. In that case Parental 
month before the child’s second birthday). 
Each parent can postpone three months o
birthday (or school entry at a later date). 
 
R gional or
 
• None. 
 
E
ibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances).
 
• All employees are entitled to take Parental leave.  
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
oor health or disability o
p
p rson other than parent) 
 
• None. 
 
A ditional no
 
• None. 
 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
Employees have the possibility to take between six and 12 months time off for 
private reasons (e.g. further education, family reasons). It is based on a mutual 
agreement between employer and employee and is unpaid; it is not, therefore, a 
statutory entitlement. The leave period is unpaid, though if leave is taken for 
educational reasons, then it is possible to receive a further training allowance 
from unemployment insurance funds (though the employee also has to meet the 
eligibility criteria for unemployment
substitute for the period of leave). 
 
 
115

e. Other employment-related measures  
A
 
• For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for other 
T
 
• 
 take two weeks leave a year to care for sick children 
• 
for ill children, it can be extended to nine months. This leave is 
may claim subsidies, if such leave causes 
ess. 
F
 
• 
me work with the employer 
 
2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments 
(including 
proposals 
currently 
under 
luding income from letting and leasing, self-employed 
ccupation, contracts for services, freelance contracts or capital assets) from 
€14,600 to €16,200 a year.  
 
doption leave and pay 
parents. 
 
ime off for the care of dependants 
Employees are entitled to
and one week of leave for other dependants/family members needing care, with 
full earnings replacement. 
Employees may take at maximum six months family hospice leave for the 
purpose of nursing terminally ill family members or very seriously ill children. If 
the leave is taken 
unpaid, but low-income families 
financial distr
 
lexible working 
Parents with children born after 1 July 2004 are entitled to work part time until the 
child’s seventh birthday (or school entry at a later date) if they are working in 
companies with more than 20 employees and if they have been continuously 
employed with their present employer for at least three years. There are no given 
limits concerning the extent of the part-time work. The new regulations also 
include the right to change working hours within the day (e.g. from morning to 
afternoon) without reducing the number of working hours and the right to return to 
full-time employment. As in the past parents working in companies with less than 
20 employees may enter into an agreement on part-ti
to the child’s fourth birthday (see above Parental leave). Parents are protected 
against dismissal during the period of part-time work. 
discussion) 
 
After five years of experience with the childcare benefit, introduced in 2002, the 
Austrian government agreed to make the existing childcare benefit scheme more 
flexible. Since January 2008 parents can now opt for one of three different models: 
either the old ‘long’ model (€436 a month for the period of 30 months, or 36 months if 
both parents share the childcare duties); or from two models offering higher 
payments for a shorter period: 1. €800 a month for 15 months or 18 months if both 
parents share childcare; or 2. €624 a month for 20 months or 24 months for both 
parents. The two new models should encourage mothers to enter the labour market 
earlier and thus reduce the negative effects of long-term labour market absence for 
women. Furthermore, the government decided to increase the current limit of 
dditional earnings (also inc
a
o
 
116

 
Though these modifications of the childcare benefit are widely accepted, the political 
debates continue. The flexibilisation is considered to be not extensive enough (e.g. 
concerning the ceiling on additional earnings). Therefore the new State Secretary in 
the Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth envisages the implementation of 
an income-related payment for Parental leave. This initiative was included in the 
programme of the new government, but subject to funding being available. In fact the 
plans are very vague and it is not clear if this measure should be a fourth model in 
addition to the existing three models of the childcare benefit or if it is planned to 
replace the childcare benefit altogether. Currently the funding of such an income-
related Parental leave payment, at 80 per cent of previous earnings, is being 
explored by the government with two aims in mind: to increase the participation of 
fathers in leave-taking and to encourage mothers to return to work earlier. But the 
discussion has also to be seen in the context of the high public expenditure on the 
childcare benefit and concern about the ability of the FLAF (the agency paying the 
enefit) to fund the proposed payment.  
ng childcare benefit corresponds to the real participation of 
thers in childcaring.  
eeks with a minimum payment of €800 
r alternatively an earnings-related payment.  
b
 
Increasing the participation of fathers in the care of children is one of the major goals 
of the new regulation, and has been an issue for some time. Previous attempts to 
increase the per centage of fathers taking up Parental leave have proved to be rather 
ineffective. In this context it is important to distinguish between fathers taking 
Parental leave and fathers receiving childcare benefit. Whereas the per centage of 
fathers taking Parental leave remains very low, the number of fathers receiving 
childcare benefit has continuously increased. This is due to the fact that this payment 
is eligible not only for employees but for all parents irrespective of their occupational 
status. Moreover, the only requirement for receiving childcare benefit is to observe 
the limit on additional earnings. Hence, it can be questioned whether the increasing 
number of fathers taki
fa
 
Nevertheless there is broad agreement on the need to encourage fathers to 
participate in childcare, and the government is currently discussing the introduction of 
one month of obligatory Paternity leave. The new State Secretary in the Federal 
Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth pushed this initiative and Paternity leave 
became part of the government agreement in 2008. The political parties basically 
agreed to focus on fathers but made this initiative – as well as the implementation of 
the income-related Parental leave – conditional on funding being available. There are 
several ideas about how to frame the so-called ‘Papa-Monat’, although the main 
principles are agreed: a period of four to six w
o
 
Over the last few years the availability of institutional childcare – especially for 
children under three years – is an important issue for politicians as well as for 
scientists. As institutional childcare is decentralised – i.e. it is regulated by the 
provinces – it is rather difficult to ascertain the demand for childcare as well as the 
availability of care facilities. This contributes to controversy on the appropriateness of 
the childcare system, a debate that is always closely linked to the question of 
whether it is important for the child’s well-being that the mother is the main caregiver 
during the first years. Due to the new option to choose a shorter period of childcare 
benefit the question of childcare for children under three years will get additional 
 
117

attention. Childcare is highly decentralised, being a matter for the provinces. 
Recently some provincial governments have decided to extend childcare services, for 
hildren aged three to six years as well as younger children.  
ar 2009/2010, it has been postponed for the time being due 
 some legal questions.  
.  Take-up of leave 
.  Maternity leave 
ers are 
ligible; the take up of leave, therefore, corresponds to the number of births. 
.  Paternity leave 
here is no statutory entitlement. 
.  Parental leave 
ubtful whether data on the take- up of Parental leave will 
e available in the future. 
t that 
r some groups of fathers it is now possible to meet the criteria for entitlement. 
that the cash benefit for these two 
ptions is higher than it is for the long model.      
c
 
The 2008 signed programme of the new government stipulates that there will be an 
obligatory year in Kindergarten for five year old children, a measure seen as 
improving and extending preschool education. But it also addresses concerns about 
the relatively poor language skills of children coming from foreign families when they 
enter the school system. Though it was initially agreed to implement this measure 
starting with the school ye
to
 
3
 
a
 
It is obligatory for employees to take Maternity leave and almost all moth
e
 
b
 
T
 
c
 
Data provide evidence that almost all eligible (i.e. formerly employed) mothers – 
between 93 and 96 per cent – took up Parental leave in the last years of the previous 
scheme. Since the replacement of the Parental leave benefit by the new childcare 
benefit in 2002, there is only information on the number of women and men taking 
childcare benefit, which is different to the number of persons taking up Parental 
leave. There is no way of telling from these figures what proportion of parents take 
Parental leave and it is do
b
 
Parental leave for fathers was introduced in 1990. The per centage of fathers taking 
up Parental leave was always very low (between 0.6 and two per cent). Since the 
introduction of the childcare benefit in 2002, statistics are only available on fathers 
taking childcare benefit, which has slightly risen from 1.9 per cent in January 2002 to 
4.1 per cent in February 2009. As mentioned before, this is mainly due to the fac
fo
 
Data for September 2008 from the Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth gives 
some indication of the effects of the modification of the childcare benefit (i.e. the 
possibility to choose between three different models, see 1.c); 65 per cent of mothers 
coming under the new regulations opted for the long model (30+6 months), 24 per 
cent for the second model (20+4) and 11 per cent for the short model (15+3). If 
fathers draw childcare benefit they are choosing more often than women one of the 
two new models. This is mainly due to the fact 
o
 
118

 
d.  Other employment-related measures 
 available on take-up of care leave for sick children as well as 
r other dependants. 
e and other employment-
elated policies since January 2006 
.  General overview 
 
correspond to a decreasing amount of research on re-entry into the labour market.    
re. Recently, too, 
ere are several evaluation studies on part-time work for parents.  
ons from January 2006, including results from 
    research studies 
dingungen aktiver 
kus – Karenzregelungen und Teilzeit in Österreich.  
    
structures 
inforce the current model of gender-specific division of labour in Austria.  
es Kinderbetreuungsgeldes. Forschungsbericht L&R Sozialforschung. 
 
Contrary to the government’s expectations, the take-up of the family hospice leave 
has been very low, with1,159 taking this leave from July 2002 until the end of 2004. 
There is no information
fo
 
4. Research and publications on leav
r
 
a
 
Research on Maternity leave is rare because the entitlement is so well established. 
Parental leave was introduced for the first time in 1957 as an unpaid leave of six 
months for employed mothers only. During the last decades it was modified several 
times and analysed in numerous research studies. Subjects of research were mainly 
the impact of taking up Parental leave on women’s employment and their 
occupational careers, especially on re-entry into the labour market, and the take-up 
of leave by fathers. Research on Parental leave is often linked on the one hand to the 
broader issue of work-life balance and flexible working schemes for parents with 
young children; and on the other hand to the issue of gender equality and gender-
specific division of paid and unpaid labour. The introduction of the childcare benefit 
not only marked a fundamental change in Austrian leave policies but – as mentioned 
before – has also had substantial negative effects on research on take-up of leave 
due to a lack of data. There is almost no research on this issue, which also seems to
 
There have been a lot of evaluation studies on leave-related policy measures – 
especially on the childcare benefit – in the last few years, due to the recently 
introduced legal obligation to evaluate the effects of new regulations within two years. 
Particular attention in these studies (but also as an issue for research in general) has 
been paid to the role of fathers and their participation in childca
th
 
b. Selected publicati
 
Scambor, E. and Fasshauer, M. (2006) Strukturelle Rahmenbe
aterschaft. Fo
Available at: 
http://www.karenzundkarriere.at/downloads/recherche_rahmenbed_karenz. doc 
This article is an output of an initiative to encourage the careers of men and women 
who have taken Parental leave. It illustrates in which way the given 
re
 
Riesenfelder, A., Sorger, C., Wetzel, P. and Willsberger, B. (2006) Evaluierung der 
Einführung d
Available at: 
 
119

http://www.lrsocialresearch.at/files/Endbericht_Eval_KBG_L&R_Sozialforschung.pdf
 Evaluation report on the introduction of the childcare benefit, focusing on whe
    
ther the 
ildcare benefit is an adequate measure for combining family life and work. 
    
olitischen Maßnahme, ÖIF-Schriftenreihe, Band 15. Innsbruck: 
    
rk, on 
omen’s occupational career and on male participation in caring for children.  
    
imulation – Kostenanalyse. ÖIF-Schriftenreihe, Band 16. Innsbruck: 
    
at measure, and simulate macroeconomic effects of varying the level of the ceiling.    
 Monographien 34. Wien: Neuer 
    
 and presents models to combine the childcare benefit with leave 
rrangements.  
    
, ÖIF Working Paper Nr. 67. Wien: 
 trade-offs between five core categories of productive and consumptive 
ctivities. 
. Ongoing research  
    
ily Studies 
ch
   
 Rille-Pfeiffer, C. and Kapella, O. (eds.) (2007) Kinderbetreuungsgeld. Evaluierung 
einer familienp
Studienverlag. 
 This book presents results from a research project to evaluate the implementation of 
the childcare benefit from its beginning in 2002 up to 2006. The main issues covered 
are the impacts of the childcare benefit on the reconciliation of family and wo
w
 
 Dörfler, S. and Neuwirth, N. (2007) Zuverdienstgrenze zum Kinderbetreuungsgeld. 
Evaluierung – S
Studienverlag. 
A study evaluating the effects of the regulation that sets a maximum income ceiling 
for determining the level of childcare benefit. The authors point out the main 
problems concerning that ceiling, develop approaches for modifying and improving 
th
 
Kresbach, A. (2007) Betreuungsgeld als Leistungsausgleich für Familien. Ein 
familienpolitisches Konzept zur Abgeltung der Betreuungsleistungen von Eltern 
gegenüber ihren Kindern. Neue juristische
Wissenschaftlicher Verlag.  
 Another report on the childcare benefit based on the assumption that this policy 
measure is important in reducing the financial burden of families with care 
responsibilities. The author describes in a more theoretical way the concept of the 
childcare benefit
a
 
Neuwirth, N. and Wernhart, G. (2008) Work-life balance reconsidered: time allocation 
within partnerships. Germany, UK and Austria
Österreichisches Institut für Familienforschung. 
Discussion about the reconciliation of work and family, the so-called work-life 
balance, has grown considerably over the last two decades. Arguments and positions 
differ in many respects; there is not even agreement on the scope of ‘work-life-
balance’. This paper follows an analytical economic approach and shows for three 
European countries – Germany, UK and Austria – the intra-personal and intra-
partnership
a
 
c
 
 Evaluation of the childcare benefit (2008-2011). Austrian Institute for Fam
(OIF) for the Federal Ministry of Economics, Family and Youth (BMWFJ).  
Ongoing research to evaluate the modification of the childcare benefit from 2008 up 
to 2011. The main issues are: take-up of the three different models and reasons for 
using different models; and the impact of childcare benefit on the reconciliation of 
family and work, on women’s occupational careers and on male participation in 
 
120

caring for ch
fathers has b
ildren. A first report based on a quantitative study with mothers and 
een submitted to the Ministry. Contact: christiane.rille-pfeiffer@oif.ac.at. 
 
121

2.5 
B
o
Tot
GDP
elgium 
 
Fred Deven and Laura Merla 
 
P pulation (UNDP) 
al Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
 per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
10.4 million 
1.6 
32,119 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 As
rate (UNDP) 
D/BB) 
2005 
2004 
76 per cent 
17% points 
 % male 
2005 
49.5 per cent 
  
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
   Women  
ender employment gap (OEC
 
2007 
2007 
 
  6.3 per cent 
32.9 per cent 
G
Em
   W
   W
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
ith child under 3 years 
 
2005 
 
63.8 per cent 
ith child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
63.3 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
28th          
Att
   C
   Ch
endance at formal services (ECB) 
hildren under 3 years 
ildren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
40 (23) per cent 
98 (62) per cent 
NB Belgium is a federal state 
 
. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
 
. 
 
leave 
(Moederschapsverlof 
/ 
Congé 
de 
maternité) 
(responsibility of the Federal Department of Employment and Social 
e
mployees. A woman can start to take her leave six weeks 
 
Pay
 the private sector: first month at 82 per cent of earnings plus 75 per 
emaining weeks with a ceiling of €86.34 per day. Public sector: 
• F
contributions, and general taxation. 
1
support parents  
Maternity
a
Affairs)  
 
L
 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
• Fifteen weeks for e
before the estimated date of delivery; one week before and nine weeks after 
delivery are obligatory.  
ent and funding 
m
 
• Employees in
cent for the r
statutory civil servants receive full salary; contractual civil servants, as for private 
sector. 
unded from federal Health Insurance, financed by employer and employee 
 
122

 
Flexibility in use  
 
• The start of Maternity leave can be delayed until one week before birth.  
t.  
Eli
. related to employment or family circumstances)  
m which 
is less advantageous compared with employees (e.g. eight weeks of paid 
Va
poor
 parent); or delegation of leave to 
erson other than the mother  
• Mothers needing to take the full six weeks of prenatal leave, can take an extra 
 Maternity leave is extended to 16 weeks. 
hs, the length of leave increases by two weeks. 
Maternity leave can also be extended if the baby is hospitalised following birth.  
ntal leave. In the case of the death of the mother, or if the mother 
remains in hospital (after the first week after delivery) for more than a week and 
 
b. P
(r
A
• 
lexibility in use  
• Up to two weeks of post-natal leave can be taken as ‘free days’ thereby 
spreading Maternity leave over a longer period and facilitating a more gradual re-
entry into paid employmen
 
gibility (e.g
 
• All women employees are entitled to leave with earnings-related benefit. Self-
employed workers can take Maternity leave but have a separate syste
leave).  
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
 health or disability of child or mother; lone
p
 
week of post-natal leave, i.e. their
• In the case of multiple birt
• ‘Social’ pare
if the baby is at home, the father is granted the remaining weeks of the maternity 
leave period. He is paid 60 per cent of his earnings in addition to the payment of 
the mother’s maternity leave income.  
aternity 
leave 
(Vaderschapsverlof 
/ 
Congé 
de 
paternité) 
esponsibility of the Federal Department of Employment and Social 
ffairs)  
 
ength of leave  
L
 
• Ten days; three days are obligatory. 
 
Payment and funding  
 
• One hundred per cent of earnings for three days paid by the employer, 82 per 
cent of earnings for the remaining period paid by Health Insurance (ceiling of 
€94.40 per day). 
Funded as Maternity leave. 
 
F
 
• Fathers can take these two weeks during the first four months following the birth 
of their child which spreads their paternity leave over a somewhat longer period.  
 
 
123

Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances)  
 
 
Varia
ure births; 
oor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
• None.  
 
c. P
o
 
Paym
 
• 
• 
 
Flex
 
• 
 
egional or local variations in leave policy 
onal benefit during the first year 
er month for a full-time break). 
li
 
• 
nt with their present 
nths) and who have, or expect to have, parental 
ant this benefit by 
 
 
 
• All male employees. Self-employed fathers are not eligible. 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premat
p
person other than the mother 
 
arental leave (Ouderschapsverlof / Congé parental)    (responsibility 
f the Federal Department of Employment  and Social Affairs)  
 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• Three months per parent per child, which can be taken up to the child’s sixth 
birthday. Leave is an individual entitlement. 
ent and funding 
€653.22 per month net of taxes.  
Funded as Maternity leave. 
ibility in use 
Leave may be taken full time, or half time over six months or for one day a week 
over 15 months. For half-time leave, the total duration of six months can be split 
into blocks of time, minimum two months. For one-fifth leave, the total duration 
of 15 months can still be split into blocks, minimum five months instead of three. 
In addition, there is a new possibility to combine different forms of leave 
according to the following rule: one month at full time + two months at half time 
+ five months at one-fifth. 
R
 
• The Flemish Community pays an additi
(approximately €160 p
 
E gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
All employees who have completed one year’s employme
employer (during the last 15 mo
responsibility for a child. Otherwise, the employer can gr
agreement to the employee. Self-employed are not eligible.  
 
124

Va
poor
pers
 
• 
• 
or lone parents who reduce their employment by a fifth 
 
dditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
loyer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
ers may postpone granting leave for up to six months ‘where business 
cannot cope’. In addition, the request for leave must be addressed to the 
 in 
 according to age, civil status and years of 
 
 
ity system, which is financed by contributions from employers and 
    
    
Tim  off for the care of dependants  
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
 health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
on other than the parents 
• As the leave is per child, each parent of twins for example gets 26 weeks. 
Parents of disabled children can take leave until their child’s eighth birthday. 
The benefit is higher f
(approximately €129 instead of €96 per month in all the other cases). 
A
agreements; emp
 
• Employ
employer a minimum of two months and a maximum of three months
advance. 
 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks  
 
• There is a Time Credit system (Tijdskrediet / Crédit temps) which applies to 
employees in the private sector (a similar scheme – ‘career breaks’ – applies in 
the public sector). Payment varies
employment (e.g. it is higher for those aged 50 years or older, for those 
employed for five years or more). The maximum for a full-time break is €569.53 
per month; residents of the Flemish Community receive a bonus. All eligible 
workers have a basic right to one paid year of this type of leave. This period can 
be extended up to five years by collective agreement negotiated at sectoral or 
company level. Users who extend their leave to care for a child younger than 
eight years, to care for a seriously ill family member or for a handicapped child, 
will continue to receive a payment during the full length of their leave. For each 
company, there is a five per cent threshold of employees who can use the time 
credit system at any one time; priorities are settled within the company 
according to certain rules (e.g. priority in the case of care for a severely ill family 
member). There is a guarantee in principle to return to the workplace following a
career break or time credit period. Payments to time credit users come from the
social secur
employees. For more details, see articles in Section 1. 
 
  e. Other employment-related measures  
 
  Adoption leave and pay  
 
• The same regulations as for parents having their own children, except Parental 
leave may be taken until a child’s eighth birthday.   
 
e
 
• Employees may take up to ten days of leave a year ‘for urgent reasons’ (force 
majeure) to deal with unexpected or sudden circumstances. The legislation 
 
125

defines ‘urgent’ as making it ‘obligatory and necessary’ to be present at home 
instead of being at work (e.g. such as illness, accident or hospitalisation of a 
member of the household). There is no entitlement to payment.  
 member, an employee can take full-time leave ranging 
 24 months for part-time leave); but it must be 
one to three months. Benefits paid are the same conditions as 
y take six days of leave to allow them to fulfil administrative 
ents, paid as for Parental leave. 
. Changes in leave policy and other related developments 
luding proposals currently under discussion)  
 April 2007, the federal government’s ‘Solidarity between Generations’ plan was 
dits agreed by the social 
 
 
sulting in a greater amount of choice for parents, e.g. mothers can take up to two 
eeks of Maternity leave as ‘free days’, and measures were introduced to facilitate 
ave-taking by self-employed workers. There were no improvements in financial 
enefits and the Minister of Employment urged the social partners to make proposals 
r reducing expenditure on the time credit system in 2009. This saving was mainly 
profes
ncreased for those opting for 
alf-tim
• For a severely ill family
from one to 12 months (up to
taken in blocks of 
for Parental leave.  
• Employees may also take up to two months of leave, full time or part time, for 
palliative care (to be taken in blocks of one month). Benefits paid are the same 
as for Parental leave.  
• Foster parents ma
and legal requirem
 
Flexible working 
 
 
• None. 
 
2
    since 2006 (inc
 
In 2006, the post-natal period of Maternity leave was increased by one week for all 
mothers who need to take the full amount of weeks during their pre-natal period. This 
means that women who start leave six weeks before birth benefit from a total of 16 
weeks of maternity leave. 
 
In
implemented, including the following changes to time cre
partners: limitation of paid time credit (full time) to one year, except if the time credit
is taken to care for a child younger than eight years, to care for a seriously ill family 
member or for a handicapped child (in which case the payment will be granted for the 
whole duration of the leave, i.e. up to five years); time credit for ‘personal purposes’ 
(for example, travelling, renovating a house or simply taking some rest) can still be 
extended by collective agreement for up to five years, but without pay. In addition, 
the gross salary of people taking a time credit of a fifth will be limited to 90 per cent of 
their previous gross salary. For specific information on the new legislation in the 
Flemish public sector, see:  
http://personeel.vlaanderen.be/statuten/omzendbrieven_dienstorders/OMZ_DVO_20
07_10.htm
 
 2008, some leave policies were adapted mostly by introducing more flexibility
In
re
w
le
b
fo
achieved by limiting the benefit to one year only for reasons other than care or 
sional training; the amount of taxation was also i
e time credit. 
h
 
 
126

During Autumn 2008 the Commission for Social Affairs of the Belgian Senate 
 information on what proportion of women do not take the full 
mount of maternity leave, an issue especially relevant among the self-employed. 
e to use only the three 
e profile of users remains predominantly female although the proportion of 
e (private sector). People aged 50 and over 
present the majority of users, accounting for 58 per cent of expenditure, mostly 
y contrast, women tend to use it more 
 Belgium in Section 1.  
organised hearings to evaluate about fifteen proposals submitted to adapt the 
legislation related to Maternity, Paternity or Parental leave. It resulted in a number of 
recommendations, mostly for facilitating the reconciliation of paid employment and 
care. 
  
3. Take-up of leave  
 
a.  Maternity leave  
 
There is no systematic
a
 
b. Paternity leave  
 
Data on the take-up of the recently extended Paternity leave remain preliminary. 
Following the extension to ten days, a large majority of men used the extended 
Paternity leave; in 2006, it was taken by 55,499 fathers, compared with 17,045 in 
2002 (Belgian Senate). About five per cent of fathers continu
days of leave that was the previous entitlement.  
 
c. Parental leave  
 
There is no information on what proportion of employees are not eligible for Parental 
ave. Th
le
fathers among all leave-takers is slowly growing; from 2004 to 2008, the total number 
of users increased by almost 40 per cent whereas the share of fathers proportionally 
increased as well from about 16 per cent to 22 per cent. 
 
d. Other employment-related measures  
 
Between 2007 and 2008, the number of users rose by 22 per cent, due to increased 
use of a reduced hours options (reducing working time by a half or a fifth). In 2008, 
only 12 per cent of all users opted for a full-time career break (public sector) and only 
six per cent for a full-time time credit leav
re
using the scheme to adapt their working time by taking part-time leave. This age 
group are predominantly male, suggesting that men tend to use the time credit 
system as a form of flexible early retirement. B
to balance paid work and (child)care; in 2008, almost 30 per cent of expenditure was 
for women and men aged 25 to 40 years, mostly for care purposes. For more 
information, see articles on
 
 
 
 
 
 
127

4.  Research and publications on leave and other employment-
ements, 
cluding the contribution of workplace policies and practices. There have been a 
 employment when having children.  
y 2006. Available at: www.coe.int/dg3/youthfamily/savoir-
usulier, B. (2006) ‘Articuler vie familiale et vie professionnelles en Amérique du 
 in 
tion 
de 
la 
vie 
familiale 
et 
de 
la 
vie 
rofessionnelle’, 
Enfances, 
Familles, 
Générations, 
Université 
de 
d private firms located in Wallonia (Belgium), this article provides an 
s account of the extra-legal 
rovisions introduced by organisations.  
ajo y me siento bien”: Cambios en la división sexual del 
nship between the lack of legitimacy that stay-
t-home fathers confront in their daily interactions and the discursive strategies they 
related policies since January 2006 
 
a. General overview  
 
There is no research on statutory leave entitlements, and only limited official 
information on take-up. Research has been focused on how parents have managed 
to take time off work or work more flexibly without recourse to legal entitl
in
number of publications documenting the use of these entitlements based on 
administrative records showing an overall increase in use, mostly by women to 
maintain continuous
 
b. Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Deven, F. (2006) ‘Reconciling work and family life (2001-2006)’, Introduction to 
Session 3 – 28th Council of Europe Conference of Ministers responsible for family 
affairs, Lisbon, 17 Ma
plus/conferences
This paper compares the statements of most Council of Europe Member States 
made at the 2001 Conference with the measures and achievements (including leave 
arrangements) reported at the time of the 2006 Conference.  
 
F
Nord’, Les Politiques Sociales, No.1 & 2. 
Starting from general indicators and policies, the paper analyses the work-family 
articulation model in the United States and in Canada, with a special interest
Quebec. 
 
Fusulier, 
B., 
Giraldo, 
S. 
and 
Legros, 
E. 
(2006) 
‘L’utilisation 
des 
dispositifs 
d’articula
p
Trois-Rivières, No. 4.  
Based on a first-hand collection of data from 48 medium-sised and large 
organisations an
initial snapshot of whether workers make use of the institutional dispositions available 
to help them articulate their professional and family lives (Maternity leave, Paternity 
leave, Parental leave, etc.). It also identifies and take
p
 
Merla, L. (2006) ‘ “No trab
trabajo y dinámicas identitarias de padres en casa en Bélgica’, Cuadernos de 
Relaciones Laborales, Vol.24, No.2: 111-127. 
This paper focuses on the interrelatio
a
develop to deal with this.  
 
 
128

Merla, L. (2006) Appréhension et présentation de soi et transgression des normes de 
.  
endale. New York: Haworth Press.)  
his article reviews leave policies and research in a wide range of countries, both 
oncludes 
even, F. (2007) ‘Quel avenir pour quel type de politique familiale?’, in: M. Casman 
ter analyses the objectives and the main measures (‘tool kit’) of family 
his article explores the innovative ways that families seek to create work-family 
ncouraging private family-based solutions to balancing paid and unpaid 
ork. Fathers who stay at home only partially 'trade cash for care'; that is, they also 
ionally masculine sources of identity. 
–103 
This paper explores the role private companies play in the use of work-family balance 
measures, through an analysis of men’s perception of the legitimacy of using these 
measures. It is based on a questionnaire administered to 137 executives working in a 
large firm in Wallonia. 
 
Merla, L. (2007) ‘Masculinité et paternité à l’écart du monde du travail: le cas des 
pères au foyer en Belgique’, Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques, Vol. 38, 
No.2: 143–163. 
This paper examines the difficulties stay-at-home fathers confront in maintaining a 
positive masculine self-image, emphasising the role played by reference to paid work 
both in self-definition and self-presentation as a man.   
 
Merla, L. (2007) ‘Père au foyer, une expérience “hors norms”’, Recherches et 
Prévisions, No.90: 17–27. 
la division sexuelle du travail: Le cas des pères ‘au foyer’, Dissertation doctorale de 
sociologie, Louvain-La-Neuve: Université catholique de Louvain
This dissertation analyses the interrelationship between the social norms assigning 
men to paid work and women to care and the reflexive construction of gender identity 
by focusing on a group of 21 stay-at-home fathers living in Belgium.   
 
Moss, P. and Deven, F. (2006) ‘Leave policies and research: a cross-national 
review’, Marriage & Family Review, Vol.39, No.3 /4: 255-285 (also as chapter in: 
Families and Social Policy: National and International Perspectives, ed. L. Haas and 
S.K. Wis
T
within and outside the EU, highlighting the main similarities and differences and 
identifying directions discernible in recent policy developments. The article c
with a discussion of future challenges and directions for policy and research. 
 
D
et al. (eds.) Familles plurielles; Politique familiale sur mesure? Bruxelles: Editions L. 
Piré, pp.300–304.  
This chap
policy in Belgium. It also draws upon the relevance of a comprehensive policy 
dealing with work-life issues including the various leave policies. 
 
Doucet, A. and Merla, L. (2007) ‘Stay-at-home-fathering: a strategy for balancing 
work and home in Canadian and Belgian families’, Community, Work and Family, 
Vol.10, No.4: 455–473. 
T
balance in Belgium and Canada, two countries where relevant social policies are still 
focused on e
w
remain connected to tradit
 
Fusulier, B., Laloy, D. and Sanchez, E. (2007) ‘L’acceptabilité sociale de l’usage de 
congés légaux pour raisons parentales: le point de vue des cadres d’une grande 
entreprise’, Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques, Vol.28, No.2: 83
 
129

This paper is
fathers living
primary caregivers for their children.
 based on the results of a doctoral research study on 21 stay-at-home 
 in Belgium and examines the reasons why these men became the 
 
 Laloy, D. (2008) L'entreprise et l'articulation 
ociétales, supports institutionnels et médiatisation 
uve: Presses Universitaires de Louvain. 
 of Belgian stay-at- home fathers: 
an international perspective’, Fathering, Vol.6, No.2: 113–132. 
 21 stay-at-home fathers living i
ium
d and 
 research conducted in Australia, Sweden and the USA 
ry responsibility for childcar
 d
f 
ssigned norms and personal identity is studied 
rview of how stay-at-home fathers come to assume the 
s they are confronted with in their daily 
ions and the strategies used by these fathers t
ons
 self-
ijdsregelingen in de loopbaan. Terugblik, 
ectieven. Antwerpen/Leuve
npu
that critically analyses a
er 
held 
g a career break during  pro
nal 
8) ‘Men taking up
r le
pportunity 
 balance?’, Journal fo
al P
 the 
dit system compared with three per cent of all male workers. 
ba
ers to work fewer hours could well be the best policy for 
achieving more gender equality in Flanders.   
6–2009). Catholic 
niversity of Louvain (UCL/ANSO). Contact: bernard.fusulier@uclouvain.be
 
Fusulier, B., Giraldo, S. and
travail/famille. Transformations s
rganisationnelle. Louvain-La-Ne
o
 
Merla, L. (2008) ‘Determinants, costs and meanings
Data gathered from
n Belg
 are analyse
compared with results from
on fathers taking prima
e. The
ynamic process o
managing the tension between a
through a comparative ove
primary responsibility of childcare, the norm
interact
o (re)c
truct a positive
image. 
 
Frans, D. and Mortelmans, D. (2008) T
stilstand and toekomstpersp
n: Steu
nt WSE. 
A review of the literature 
n
 numb
of commonly 
assumptions related to taki
fessio
life.  
 
eux, I. (200
Vandeweyer, J. and Glori
 caree
ave: an o
for a better work and family life
r Soci
olicy, Vol.37, No.2: 
271–294. 
In 2004, nine per cent of all female employees in Flanders took advantage of
areer break or time cre
c
This article compares the time use of men interrupting their careers full time or part 
time. Only men taking part-time leave are mainly motivated to strike a better work-life 
lance. Encouraging fath
 
See also articles by Fusulier; Vandeweyer and Glorieux; and Masuy in Section 1 of 
this volume. 
 
b. Ongoing research 
 
A sociological analysis of the influence of the professional group on the use of family-
friendly policies: social workers, nurses and police officers (200
U
 
130

2
anada   
 
And
opulation (UNDP) 
DP) 
 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
32.3 million 
1.5 
33,375 PPP US$ 
.6 
C
rea Doucet and Diane-Gabrielle Tremblay 
 
P
Total Fertility Rate (UN
DP per capita (UNDP)
G
Fe
   As
% of
   Me
   Wo
Gen
2004 
11% points 
male economic activity (UNDP) 
 % male rate (UNDP) 
 employed working part time (OECD/F) 
n 
men  
der employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
60.5 per cent 
84 per cent 
 
11.0 per cent 
26.1 per cent 
Em
   Wi
 Wi
2005 
2005 
58.7 per cent 
68.1 per cent 
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
th child under 3 years 
th child aged 3-5 years 
 
 
  
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
31st         
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   C
   Ch
 
 
hildren under 3 years 
ildren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
2006 
No data 
No data 
NB C
 territories (referred to 
anada is a federal state, with ten provinces and three
below as ‘jurisdictions’) 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
Note
gove
Insu
Deve
mod
prov
and 
form
 
In Ja
and 
 called the Québec Parental Insurance Plan. 
De
ted. See part 2 for 
ful
 
 
 
support parents 
 
 on federal and provincial/territorial responsibility: in Canada the federal 
rnment provides maternity and Parental leave benefits through the Employment 
rance programme, funded by the Department of Human Resources and Social 
lopment Canada. Provinces and territories deliver the programme and thereby 
ify some of the details. These variations are minimal. Labour laws also fall under 
incial jurisdictions resulting in different leave entitlements. Payment of Maternity 
Parental leave is the same under the federal programme; based on a complex 
ula that takes economic region and low income into account. 
nuary 2006 the province of Québec launched a separate Maternity, Paternity 
Parental leave benefit programme,
tails below are for the federal programme unless otherwise sta
details on the Québec programme. 
l 
 
131

a. M
o
 
Leng
 
• 
ion. Leave may normally not start 
stimated date. 
Pa
 
• 
76), for the year). Low-
gional or local variations in 
 
explicitly declare 
do so, but for the two months after birth no 
 health protection. 
iations in leave policy 
th of leave and entitlement vary across provinces and territories.  
 offers benefits of 70 per cent of average weekly income up to a ceiling 
$59,000 per year (€36,804 for 18 weeks of Maternity leave; there is also 
 waiting period. There is some flexibility in use of Maternity leave. It 
 have a higher income replacement rate but for a shorter period, or 
come for a longer period; under the former ‘special’ plan, Maternity leave 
 are paid at 75 per cent of weekly income for 15 weeks, while under the 
t of weekly income for 18 weeks. These 
ns from employers and employees. In 
s) 
Brunswick, an employee must have been employed by the same employer for a 
aternity leave (congé de maternité) (responsibility of the Department 
f Human Resources and Social Development Canada) 
th of leave (before and after birth) 
Fifteen to 18 weeks depending on the jurisdict
earlier than 11-17 weeks before the expected date of birth, depending on the 
jurisdiction. The total leave is not affected by when a woman starts her leave, 
except in some cases where an extension may be granted if the actual date of 
delivery is later than the e
 
yment and funding 
Fifteen weeks at 55 per cent of average insured earnings (ceiling of CAN$435 
(€271) per week, up to a ceiling of CAN$41,000 (€25,5
income families can qualify for a higher benefit rate. There is no payment for the 
first two weeks which is treated as a ‘waiting period’; this means that payment is 
made for 15 weeks out of 17 weeks leave. See ‘re
leave policy’ for payment in Québec. 
• Funded from the federal Employment Insurance fund, which is financed by 
contributions from employers and employees. 
Flexibility in use 
 
• None. Women may continue with paid work until birth if they 
that it is their personal decision to 
paid work is allowed for reasons of
 
Regional or local var
 
• Leng
• Québec
of CAN
no two-week
is possible to
lower in
benefits
latter ‘basic’ plan they are 70 per cen
benefits are financed by contributio
addition to contributions to the federal Employment Insurance scheme, there is 
a supplement; employees contribute 0.484 per cent of earnings, employers 
0.677 per cent, and self-employed workers 0.86 per cent, all up to a maximum 
insurable income of CAN$62,000. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstance
 
• Eligibility for leave varies between jurisdictions and is also different from the 
eligibility for payment of benefits. Except in British Columbia and New 
 
132

certain amount of time, varying from 12 to 13 months. All but one jurisdiction, 
Saskatchewan, require this employment to be continual. Eligibility requirements 
for benefits under the federal programme are 600 hours of continuous 
employment in the last 52 weeks. Most self-employed women are not eligible for 
since they typically work under business or service contracts and are, 
therefore, not considered to have insurable employment. Many part-time 
Var
r premature births; 
ther; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 
Addi
gre
de a supplemental benefit plan that partially or wholly 
 
b. P
ibility of the Department 
ial Development Canada) 
 
Leng
 
• 
 
 
 
Flex
 
• 
 
Eli
 
• 
benefit 
workers do not have enough hours to qualify. 
 
iation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple o
poor health or disability of child or mo
erson other than the mother 
p
 
• Maternity leave can be extended in some jurisdictions if the child or the mother 
has health-related complications (in British Colombia this applies to the child if 
they have a physical, psychological or emotional condition that required 
additional care). This extension can be up to six weeks. 
tional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
a
 
• Some employers provi
makes up the difference between federal maternity benefit and the worker’s 
salary. 
aternity leave (conge de paternité) (respons
of Human Resources and Soc
th of leave (before and after birth) 
None. 
Payment 
• None. 
ibility in use 
None. 
 
Regional or local variations in leave policy 
 
• Up to five weeks after the birth in Québec. Paternity leave may be taken for 
three weeks at 75 per cent of average weekly income or for five weeks at 70 per 
cent. Funding as for Maternity leave. 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
Fathers in Québec (including self-employed workers) are eligible if they have 
earned at least CAN$2,000 (approximately €1,248) in the 52 preceding weeks. 
 
133

 
Varia
poor
r disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
pe
 
• 
 
c. P
H
 
 
P
 
•
t in Québec.  
pplement. In Québec, this supplement averaged 
CAN$34.23 per family and 7.2 per cent of families using Parental leave received 
Fle
 
• Benefit payments can be claimed by one parent or shared. They must be taken 
 higher (or, if the applicant 
lives in one of 23 economic regions, up to CAN$75 (€47) or 40 per cent of the 
 
Reg
 
•
•
 on whether 
 – the maximum number of weeks allowed 
ns is 52, although British Columbia allows 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
 health o
rson other than the father 
None. 
arental leave (congé parental) (responsibility of the Department of 
uman Resources and Social Development Canada) 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• Thirty-seven weeks in most jurisdictions for one parent or shared between two 
parents but not exceeding a combined maximum of 35 weeks. Leave is an 
entitlement per family. In all jurisdictions except the Yukon parents can take 
leave at the same time. All jurisdictions require that Maternity leave and Parental 
leave be consecutive if both are taken and the maximum number of weeks of 
leave allowed – including post-natal Maternity leave and Parental leave – for 
one person in almost all jurisdictions is 52.  
ayment and funding 
 Up to 35 weeks per family at the same rate as Maternity leave (55 per cent of 
average insured earnings up to a maximum ‘ceiling’ of CAN$435 (€271) per 
week, and maximum of $41,000 (€25,576), for the year). See ‘regional or local 
variations in leave policy’ for paymen
• Funding as for Maternity leave. 
• Low-income families, earning less than CAN$25,921 per annum (€16,170) are 
eligible for a family su
this supplement. 
 
xibility in use  
within 52 weeks of the birth. While on leave, a parent may earn CAN$50 (€31) a 
week or 25 per cent of the benefit, whichever is the
weekly benefit). 
ional or local variations in leave policy 
 Provincial and territorial policies vary in the length of leave, flexibility of use, 
eligibility, etc. The payment of benefits is the same for all jurisdictions, except for 
Québec since 2006. Federal workers and workers for the territorial governments 
are regulated by the federal policy. 
 In some jurisdictions the amount of Parental leave depends
Maternity/pregnancy leave was taken
for one person in almost all jurisdictio
 
134

for an extension of Maternity leave that is not calculated into the 52 weeks. In 
risdictions aggregate Parental leave cannot exceed the maximum of the 
allowed leave (i.e. no more than 37 weeks combined). In all other jurisdictions 
ve that is allowed (i.e. 37 weeks each 
quire that leave is completed within 52 weeks.  
 In Québec parents can choose from two options: either 55 weeks of Parental 
 
Eligi
 
• E
eligibility for payment benefits. With the exceptions of British Columbia and New 
Brunswick, an employee must have been employed by the same employer for 
 one jurisdiction require this employment to be 
continual. Some types of employees and employment are excluded: the specific 
w
 government employment creation 
•
t
e
f
€
 
Varia
poor
pers
variations for multiple births. 
• In Nova Scotia, if the child for whom leave is taken is hospitalised for more than 
l
 
Addi
e often supplemented by collective 
greements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
obligated to grant leave to both employees at the same time. 
three ju
each parent may take the full Parental lea
parent). 
• Some jurisdictions re
•
leave at 70 per cent of average weekly income up to a ceiling in 2009 of 
CAN$62,000 a year (€38,676) for 25 weeks and 55 per cent for another 30 
weeks; or 75 per cent of average weekly income for 40 weeks. Leave can be 
taken at any time in the 70 weeks that follow birth. Funding as for Maternity 
leave. 
bility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
ligibility for leave varies between jurisdictions and is also different from the 
either 12 or 13 months. All but
details vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but students, agricultural workers, 
orkers in small businesses and workers in
programmes are often excluded. 
 To be eligible for payment benefits, a parent must have worked for 600 hours in 
he last 52 weeks or since their last Employment Insurance claim. Most self-
mployed workers are not eligible. Self-employedworkers in Québec are eligible 
or 25 or 32 weeks if they have earned at least CAN$2,000 (approximately 
1,248) in the 52 preceding weeks. 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
 health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
on other than the parents 
 
• There are no 
one week, an employee can return to work and take the unused portion of the 
eave when the child is released (this can only be taken once per leave). 
tional note (e.g. if leave payments ar
a
 
• Some employers have a supplemental benefit plan that partially makes up the 
difference between Employment Insurance parental benefits and the worker's
salary; some also offer additional periods of leave. A survey of private companies 
in Québec in 2003 found that 36 per cent of union representatives and 46 per 
cent of HR managers said their companies offered supplementary leave or 
payments (Tremblay, 2004). 
• In Alberta if both parents work for the same employer, the employer is not 
 
135

 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
• None. 
 
e. Other employment-related measures 
 
Adoption leave and pay 
 
• For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for other 
parents except in four jurisdictions. In three cases, adoptive parents are eligible 
for adoptive leave which can be added to Parental leave. In Prince Edward 
ions which allow 
employees to take time off to care for or arrange care for a family member who 
lexible working 
 other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
deral Employment Insurance programme. This plan has a number of 
Island parents are eligible for 52 weeks adoption leave instead of the 35 weeks 
Parental leave for birth parents. In Newfoundland and Labrador and 
Saskatchewan adoptive parents can take 17 or 18 weeks (respectively) which 
can be added to Parental leave, however in Saskatchewan only the primary 
caregiver is eligible for the adoption leave. In Québec, adoption leave can be 
shared by both parents and provides for 12 weeks at 70 per cent and 25 weeks 
at 55 per cent. 
 
Time off for the care of dependants 
 
• British Columbia and New Brunswick allow three to five days of unpaid leave a 
year to care for immediate family members. 
• In Québec, parents are allowed ten days by the Loi sur les normes du travail. 
• Nine jurisdictions have compassionate care leave provis
‘is at significant risk of death within a 26-week period’. The length of leave is 
eight weeks unpaid within a 26-week period. Benefits of up to six weeks can be 
claimed through Employment Insurance for this leave; to qualify for benefits you 
must have worked 600 hours in the last 52 weeks and your weekly earnings 
must decrease by 40 per cent. This leave, inter alia, allows parents to take time 
off to care for a sick child even after 52 months have passed since the birth or if 
leaves periods have been exhausted. 
 
F
 
• In the federal and Québec jurisdictions, a pregnant woman or nursing mother 
may ask her employer to modify temporarily her duties or to assign her to 
another position, if continuation of her present duties puts her health or that of 
her unborn child or nursing infant at risk. 
 
2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and
 
Following an agreement reached in 2005, the Québec Parental Insurance Plan came 
into effect in January 2006, replacing the maternity and Parental leave benefits 
through the fe
 
136

advantages in terms of the population covered, flexibility in taking the leave and the 
The second change involves the increased income offered by the plan. In addition to 
 waiting period stipulated under the federal programme 
yment Insurance claimants), the new 
nge relates to the introduction of more flexibility in the plan since 
ave two options: a basic plan (longer leave with lower benefits) or a 
ks of Paternity leave. As regards Parental 
benefits that correspond to 70 per cent of income for 7 weeks and 55 
5 weeks. Adoption leave can also be shared by both parents and 
rovides for 12 weeks at 70 per cent and 25 weeks at 55 per cent. 
75 per cent for 25 weeks and can be 
shared by the father and the mother. Under this special plan, the mother can receive 
,000 (€1,248). Although 
nearly 80 per cent of full-time Canadian students are in the labour force, they are 
income replacement rate. It introduces three major changes. 
 
The first change provides for a period of leave reserved for the father that cannot be 
transferred to the mother, which is an innovation in Canada and even in North 
America. Québec fathers are now entitled to a three to five-week Paternity leave with 
higher benefits than are provided under the federal programme, since the income 
replacement rate and maximum eligible earnings have also been increased.  
 
the abolition of the 14-day
wo weeks without benefits as for all Emplo
(t
Québec plan increased the maximum insurable income to CAN$60,500 (€37,741) in 
2008 and CAN$62,000 (€38,676) in 2009, instead of CAN$42,300 (€26,387), as is 
the case with the federal Parental leave. 
 
The third cha
arents now h
p
special plan (shorter leave with higher benefits). The latter might interest those who 
need a higher income replacement rate (especially if their employment income is 
relatively low) or else who cannot afford to miss work too long for various personal or 
work-related reasons. Whereas the federal programme provides for benefits 
corresponding to 55 per cent of the maximum insurable income, CAN$41,000 
(€25,576) during the 15 weeks of Maternity leave and 35 weeks of Parental leave 
(accessible to both parents, but with a 14-day waiting period per couple), the new 
Québec basic plan offers benefits of 70 per cent of the average weekly income for 18 
eeks of Maternity leave and five wee
w
leave, it offers 
per cent for 2
p
 
The special plan provides for higher income replacement rates but for a shorter 
period. Under this plan, Maternity and Paternity leave benefits are equivalent to 75 
per cent of the weekly salary and are paid for 15 weeks and three weeks, 
respectively. Parental leave is compensated at 
benefits for a maximum of 40 weeks (versus 50 in the basic plan). Adoption leave 
can also be shared by both parents and lasts 28 weeks at 75 per cent under this 
second option. 
 
Lastly, it must be underlined that the plan is more accessible and allows more 
parents, including self-employed workers and students, to receive benefits since it no 
longer requires individuals to have worked 600 hours over the previous 52 weeks, 
but simply to have earned an insurable income of CAN$2
unlikely to work enough hours to qualify for Employment Insurance leave benefits in 
Canada. By comparison, under Québec plan, earning CAN$2,000 over the previous 
year enables more students to access Parental leave benefits. 
 
 
137

The funding of this programme is based on additional contributions that Québec 
Insurance 
rogramme.  
inc
 and self-employed. In January 
008 and 2009, contributions were increased by 7.5 per cent. With this latest 
ing CAN$40,000 pays CAN$193.60 (€121) a year. These 
creases are due to a significant increase in births. While Québec expected 75,000 
mbines Maternity and Parental leave and 
iously 
 took part of 
ad an 
ook a 
s 
o 
irth 
employers, employees and self-employed workers must pay into the plan. Employers 
and employees of course continue to contribute to the federal Employment 
p
 
This new plan has been quite successful, and the Québec government has had to 
rease the contributions of employers, employees
2
increase, a worker earn
in
births and payments of CAN$1 billion (€624 million) in 2006, there were 82,500 births 
in 2006 and 84,200 in 2007 when costs reached CAN$1.45 billion (€905 million) and 
payments were made to 114,449 parents, of whom 49,851 were fathers. 
 
3. Take-up of leave 
 
Because the information available co
benefits, the part below has been organised under two headings: ‘mothers’ and 
‘fathers’. 
 
a.  Mothers 
 
Slightly more than three-quarters (76.5 per cent) of mothers in 2006 had insurable 
income. Most (83.5 per cent) of this group received maternity or parental benefits 
from the federal Employment Insurance programme or Québec plan. A substantial 
minority (23.5 per cent) were without insurable employment and therefore not eligible 
for Maternity or Parental leave, including mothers who were self-employed (except 
or Québec), students, paid workers who did not qualify, and those not prev
f
employed. (Statistics Canada, 2006 Employment Insurance Coverage Survey, as 
reported in The Daily 3 October, 2007). 
 
b.   Fathers  
 
The federal Employment Insurance programme provides for Parental leave that can 
be shared by the father and the mother. But survey data indicate that this measure 
has not been enough to increase fathers’ participation significantly since mothers still 
ook an average of 11 months off in 2004 and only 11 per cent of fathers
t
the leave, increasing to 14.5 per cent in 2005.  
 
In Québec, take-up was higher in 2005, with 22 per cent of fathers using some 
Parental leave. But the new Parental leave scheme, introduced in 2006, has h
impact on fathers’ participation; in 2007, 56 per cent of fathers in Québec t
period of leave. This mainly accounted for an increase across Canada in father
taking leave, rising to 20 per cent in 2006. Data from the General Social Survey als
indicate that, taking account of all forms of leave, fathers’ absence from work for b
or adoption has increased from 67 to 80 per cent in Québec from 2005 to 2006, and 
from 45 per cent to 55 per cent across the whole of Canada 
 
 
138

Two-thirds (67 per cent) of Canadian men return to work less than one month after 
birth or adoption, compared to only two per cent of women; 17 per cent fathers take 
one to five months of leave and ten per cent six to 11 months compared to 12 and 33 
rt of the Parental leave. 
arental leave policy has been directly studied by Statistics Canada. The annual 
 in jurisdiction of 
for fathers (PF). Mothers are asked about parental benefits 
cluding the reasons for their spouse taking or not taking Parental leave. Fathers are 
rnal health and fathers and their work-family balance. There is a growing body 
ces and cultures might better provide more support and flexibility to 
arents and ensure optimal development in children. Within this research, there is 
ering 
ublic policy, gender 
ave: implications for class and gender’, International Journal of Social Welfare, 
per cent of women. While just over half of all mothers (51.5 per cent) take 12 months 
or more of leave, compared to only four per cent of fathers. 
  
In Québec, about two-thirds (68 per cent) of fathers take only the Paternity leave (of 
three to five weeks), while 32 per cent also take pa
 
4. Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
a. General overview 
 
P
Employment Insurance Coverage Survey monitors uptake of Parental leave across 
the country. Changes were made in 2006 to reflect the change
parental benefits in Québec and to separate Parental benefits for mothers (PM) and 
parental benefits 
in
not included in this part of the survey.  
 
Most Canadian research providing information on leave policies is embedded in more 
general research on work-family balance, the links between Parental leave and 
mate
of literature that examines issues of work-family balance in Canada and how 
workplace practi
p
some emphasis being given to fathers, including a large national study conducting 
research into the lives of diverse groups of Canadian fathers (Supporting Fath
Involvement, see part 4c). Some recent research in Québec addresses the use of 
Paternity leave and the impact of Parental leave on careers and organisations. 
 
b. elected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Doucet, A. (2006) Do Men Mother? Fathering and Domestic Responsibilities. 
S
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.  
This book explores the narratives of over 100 Canadian fathers who are primary 
aregivers of children and the interplay between fathering and p
c
ideologies, community norms, social networks and work-family policies. 
 
Phipps, S. (2006) ‘Working for working parents: the evolution of maternity and 
parental benefits in Canada’, Institute for Research on Public Policy Choices, Vol.12, 
No.2. Available at: http://www.irpp.org/choices/archive/vol12no2.pdf
This paper examines the evolution of Maternity and Parental leave in Canada. 
 
vans, P. (2007) ‘Comparative perspectives on changes to Canada’s paid Parental 
E
le
 
139

Vol.16: 119-128. 
This article examines the impact of changes in Canadian Parental leave and 
and Najem, E. (2007) ‘Work-family balancing and 
y balance that are 
ccessible to Canadian workers, including support for childcare and for elderly 
travail social au Québec: une différence de genre? Quelques 
his book presents a global view on work-family balance as well as the results of four 
arative view on the 
ting, Gender and the Labour Market. Bristol: 
olicy Press.  
d 
 for 
 
ity of Toronto Press, pp.271-290. 
maternity benefits (implemented in 2001) and the links between policy changes and 
gender and class inequalities.  
 
 
Tremblay, D.-G., Paquet, R. 
working time: is gender determinant?’, Global Journal of Business Research. Vol.1, 
No.1: 97-113. 
On the basis of Statistics Canada data from the Workplace and Employment Survey 
(WES), this article highlights the measures for work-famil
a
parents, as well as working time arrangements, analysing the data according to 
gender and  presence of children simultaneously. 
 
Fusulier, B., Tremblay, D.-G. and di Loreto, M. (2008) ‘La conciliation  emploi-famille 
dans le secteur du 
éléments de réponse’, Politiques sociales, Vol.68, no.1: 63-81. 
This article is the first to be published from a research project on three professional 
groups and the organisational support for work-family issues; it highlights differences 
in the support received by men and women in social work. 
 
Tremblay, D.-G. (2008, 2nd edn.) Conciliation emploi-famille et temps sociaux. 
Québec-Toulouse: Presses de l’Université du Québec et Octares. 
T
research projects. 
 
Tremblay, D.-G. (2008) ‘Work-family policies: the Québec and Canadian contexts’, in: 
J. Martin (ed.) Work and Family Balance: Economic and Social Benefits in a Time of 
Labour Force Shortages. Saskatoon: Saskatchewan Ministry of Advanced Education, 
Employment and Labour and Balancing Work and Family Alliance Coalition, pp.65-
73.  
This chapter highlights the work-family policies of Québec and Canada, including 
Parental leave. 
 
Barrère-Maurisson, M.-A. and Tremblay, D.-G. (2009) Concilier travail et famille. Le 
rôle des acteurs. Québec-France. Québec: Presses de l’université du Québec. 
This book looks at the role of various actors in work-family balance (employers, 
unions, municipalities, associations, etc.) and presents a comp
governance of work-family issues in Québec and France.  
 
Doucet, A., McKay, L. and Tremblay, D.-G. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Canada and Québec: 
two policies, one country’, in: S. Kamerman and P. Moss (eds.) The Politics of 
Parental Leave Policies: Children, Paren
P
This chapter explains why there are two Parental leave policies in one country an
compares the two regimes in terms of accessibility and equality. 
 
Tremblay, D.-G. (2009) ‘Québec's policies for work-family balance:  A model
Canada?’, in: M. Cohen (ed.) Public Policy for Women: The State, Income Security
and Labor Market Issues. Toronto: Univers
 
140

This chapter presents Québec policies for work-family balance, including Parental 
leave. 
Tremblay, D.-G. and Genin, É. (2009) Parental leave in the police sector: a positive 
perception…confronted with reality. Available at www.teluq.uqam.ca/chaireecosavoir
 
c. Ongoing research
 
Balancing cash and care: A study of father’s use and effects of Parental leave in 
Canada (2003-2008). Andrea Doucet, Carleton University, funded by the Social 
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (2003-2007). PhD 
Researcher: Lindsey McKay.  
This research project examines Parental leave policy and practice of federal and 
provincial governments, following enhanced commitment to this leave, with a 
particular focus on the use and effects of this leave policy by, and for, fathers in 
Ontario. Contact: Andrea Doucet at andrea.doucet@carleton.ca
 
Supporting fathering involvement (2004-2009). A multi-site and multi-cluster project 
by the Father Involvement Research Alliance, encompassing university and 
community research alliances across Canada, coordinated by Kerry Daly at the 
University of Guelph and funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research 
Council of Canada.  
The seven research clusters include a ‘New Fathers Cluster’ led by Ed Bader, 
Catholic Community Services of York Region, and Andrea Doucet, Sociology and 
Anthropology, Carleton University, which will study: the support services provided to 
fathers through the first eighteen months of the child’s life, including prenatal period; 
the impact of becoming a dad on the father’s physical and mental health and on the 
father’s personal development; and examination of the degree of support afforded to 
fathers by the health care system. Contact: Kerry Daly: kdaly@uoguelph.ca. 
 
Work-life balance over the life course. A multi-site project encompassing university 
and community research alliances across Canada as well as in France and Belgium, 
coordinated by Diane-Gabrielle Tremblay at UQAM-Téluq, funded by the Community-
University Research Alliance (CURA) program of the Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council of Canada.  This project started in April 2009 and will 
go on till 2014. It addresses the challenges of work-life articulation over the life 
courses (Parental leave, working time arrangements, pre-retirement, etc.) and 
compares the situation in Québec, Canada, France, Belgium, Sweden and Finland. It 
includes the research entitled Offer and use of work-family balancing measures by 
parents in Québec; a comparison of men and women in different types of 
organizations (2006-2009). Diane-Gabrielle Tremblay (Télé-université, Université du 
Québec à Montréal) and Elmustapha Najem (Université du Québec en Outaouais), 
funded by the Canada Research Chair on the Socio-organizational Challenges of the 
Knowledge Economy (www.teluq.uQuébec.ca/chaireecosavoir). 
This research project began with analysis of the Workplace and Employment Survey 
(WES) from Statistics Canada. The research continues in 2008-2009 with the 
analysis of work-life balance, analysing the 2004-2005 WES data according to 
gender and availability of work-life measures. Contact: Diane-Gabrielle Tremblay: 
tremblay.diane-gabrielle@teluq.uqam.ca
 
 
141

Organization
family balanc
Gabrielle Tre
al and professional mediations in the take up of leaves and other work-
e measures; a comparison between Belgium and Québec. Diane-
mblay and Bernard Fusulier, funded by the Bell Canada Chair on 
ca/chairebell) and Canada 
s of the Knowledge Economy 
olice, social work and nursing) 
t extent the organizational context and the attitudes of peers in 
 impact on the use of various types of leave, mainly Parental 
leave. We also address the issue of the use of Paternity leave and the impact of 
rs and organisations in the three 
-gabrielle@teluq.uqa
Technology and Work Organization (www.teluq.uqam.
Research Chair on the Socio-organizational Challenge
(www.teluq.uQuébec.ca/chaireecosavoir) 
his research examines three professional groups (p
T
to determine to wha
various professions can
Parental leave on caree
Gabrielle Tremblay: 
sectors. Cont
m.ca
act: Diane-
tremblay.diane
 
142

2
 
Ji
Po
2005 
2000/5 
10.2 million 
1.2 
e (OECD/F) 
  
 
 
ars 
 With child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
19.9 per cent 
50.9 per cent 
2008 
69th          
ttendance at formal services (ECB) 
 
2006 
 
er cent 
67(39) per cent 
. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
(materska dovolena) (responsibility of the Social 
Len
 
• 
 
Paym
 
• 
• 
 
lexibility in use  
• Leave can be started six to eight weeks before birth. 
.7 
Czech Republic 
rina Kocourková 
 
 
ulation (UN
p
DP) 
otal Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
T
GDP per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
20,538 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
 of employed working part tim
2005 
2005 
51.9 per cent 
77 per cent 
%
   Men 
 Women  
2007 
2007 
  1.7 per cent 
  5.9 per cent 
ender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
19% points 
G
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   With child under 3 ye
  
Global gender gap (WEF) 
A
   Children under 3 years 
2006 
  2 (1) p
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
 
1
support parents 
 
a. Maternity leave 
Security system) 
 
gth of leave (before and after birth) 
Twenty-eight weeks: six to eight weeks before the birth and 20-22 weeks 
following birth. 
ent (applied for the whole period of Maternity leave) and funding 
Seventy per cent of daily earnings up to a ceiling of CZK962 (€36) per day. 
Payment is financed from sickness insurance contributions by employers and 
employees. 
F
 
 
143

• From the start of the seventh week after childbirth, either parent may use the 
leave, i.e. the mother may alternate with the father of the child, with no restriction 
 
E
 
• 
 eligible for maternity benefit, an employee must have contributed to 
• 
ys during the 
Va
oor
d or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
d, the mother is granted 14 weeks of Maternity leave.  
b. 
 
The
a) (responsibility of the  
  
ength of leave 
’s third birthday. Leave is an individual 
 one parent is entitled to the benefit). 
a
 
• While Parental leave can only be taken up to the child’s third birthday, Parental 
 granted until the child’s fourth birthday. Parents 
options: a long option (after 
 
ild is 24 months old).  
• Parental benefit is funded from general taxation. 
 
on the frequency of alternation. 
ligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
To be
sickness insurance for at least 270 days during the   last two years.  
A self-employed worker must meet the same condition as an employee, and in 
addition have contributed to sickness insurance for at least 180 da
last year. 
• Students are entitled to the benefit. 
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
 health or disability of chil
p
person other than the mother 
 
• In the case of multiple births, the length of leave is increased by nine weeks. 
• When the child is born dea
 
 Paternity leave 
re is no statutory leave entitlement. 
 
c.  Parental leave (rodicovska dovolen
    Ministry of Work and Social Affairs)
  
 
L
 
• Both parents can take leave until the child
entitlement (but only
 
P yment and funding  
benefit (rodicovsky prispevek) is
can choose between three parental benefit 
maternity benefit or from the birth of the child (if the parent is not entitled to 
maternity benefit) at the basic rate (CZK7,600 per month, €285) until the child is 
21 months old and at the reduced rate (CZK3,800 per month, €143) until the 
child is 48 months old); a mid-range option only available to parents who are 
entitled to maternity benefit (at the basic rate (CZK7,600 per month, €285) until 
the child is 36 months old); and a short option only available to parents who are 
entitled to Maternity benefit of at least CZK380 per calendar day (at the
increased rate (CZK11,400, €428) until the ch
 
 
 
144

Flexibility in use  
 
 Parents can work, full time or part time, while receiving parental benefit.
•
 
Parents can place a child under three years in a childcare facility for up to five 
leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
nts the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for other 
take leave to care for a sick relative at home (in all cases of 
otherwise, only in case of a serious illness). 
ings up to a ceiling of CZK777 (€29) per day. 
A parent can take no more than nine days in one block of time, but there is no 
he frequency of taking leave; parents are allowed to alternate 
with each other during the course of taking leave to care for a sick child. 
 
Accordingly, parental benefit can be considered as a kind of care benefit. 
• Both parents can take Parental leave at the same time, but only one of them is 
entitled to parental benefit. They can alternate in receiving benefit as often they 
want. 
• 
days a month without losing parental benefit; they can also have a three year old 
in kindergarten for up to four hours each day without losing benefit. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• There are no special requirements; however, each parent has to ask for formal 
approval of the employer. 
 
Variation in 
person other than the parents 
 
• In the case of disabled children, a parent is entitled to parental allowance at the 
basic rate (CZK7,600, €305) until the child is seven years old. 
• Parental benefit can be taken by grandparents or other persons where they 
provide day care for the child and the parents agree to transfer their entitlement. 
  
    d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
 
e. Other employment-related measures 
 
Adoption leave and pay 
 
• For adoptive pare
parents. 
 
ime off for the care of dependants 
T
 
• Employees can 
illness for a child under ten years; 
Leave is paid at 60 per cent of earn
limit regarding t
 
Flexible working. 
 
• None. 
 
145

2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
evelopments (including proposals
d
 currently under discussion) 
 
Recently, the improvement of Parental leave arrangements has been a priority of both 
social democratic and right-wing governments. The most important change occurred 
in 2007 when parental benefit was doubled, bringing it up to about 40 per cent of 
average gross earnings in 2005.  
 
The current right-wing government, in office since 2006, introduced further changes in 
fam
. The main change was to make 
ily policy that came into effect from January 2008
parental benefit more closely connected to the economic activity of parents. Parents 
now have three options: (1) four years of parental benefit with a lower rate of payment 
than the parental benefit in 2007; (2) three years of parental benefit with the amount 
of parental benefit close to the amount in 2007; or (3) two years of parental benefit 
with a higher rate (CZK11,400, €428) of parental benefit. However, parental benefit is 
no longer indexed, so its value as a proportion of average earnings has been 
decreasing. 
 
An amendment to the Sickness Insurance Act was implemented in January 2009. 
The proposed amendment includes two changes related to the parental care of a 
child. First, a child’s father is now able to take Maternity leave instead of the mother 
from the seventh week after the child’s birth. Second, parents will be allowed to 
alternate with each other during the course of taking leave to care for a sick child. 
This ‘care benefit’ can be received for a period of nine days in total, but there is no 
limit as regards how many times parents can use this provision during a year. 
 
In 2008, the government agreed to adopt a new package of family policies including 
introduction of paid Paternity leave. The length of Paternity leave will probably be one 
week; it will be paid on the same basis as Maternity leave. Legislative procedures are 
ex
009, with the new policy coming into effect in 
pected to be completed during 2
January 2010. 
 
3. Take-up of leave 
 
a. Maternity leave 
 
Nearly all mothers take Maternity leave. 
 
b. Paternity leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
 
c.  Parental leave 
 
Legislation on Parental leave, so that fathers could take leave, was introduced in 
1990, but truly equal conditions for both parents were not introduced until January 
2001. However, the number of men receiving parental benefit in comparison to 
women has remained negligible. In 2001, there were 0.77 per cent men among 
 
146

recipients of this benefit. Since then, there has been a slight increase, but only to 
0.99 per cent in 2003 and 1.4 per cent in 2006.  
 
There is no information about how long women or men take Parental leave. It is 
assumed that most parents taking leave stay on leave only until their child’s third 
birthday (when entitlement to leave, though not benefit, ends) as they prefer not to 
lose their jobs. 
 
 
ního trhu 
p] at the Sociological Institute; (2) 
ostoj a zkusenosti s harmonizaci rodiny a zamestnání rodicu deti predskolního a 
 
form of family living] at the Research Institute for Labour and 
ocial Affairs.  
es the discrepancy between women’s reproductive plans 
 relation to the 
broader social context, especially gender roles and reconciliation of family and work 
life. 
 
Haskova, H. (2007) ‘Doma, v jeslích, nebo ve školce? Rodinná a institucionální péče 
přeškolních dětí v české společnosti v 1945-2006’ [‘At home, in a nursery or in a 
kindergarten? Family and institutional care for pre-school children in Czech society in 
1945-2006’], Gender, Equity, Research, Vol.8. No.2.  
4. Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
a. General overview 
Recently research has been undertaken in particular by the Department of Gender 
Studies at the Sociological Institute of the Academy of Science and by the working 
group on family policy in the Research Institute for Labour and Social Affairs. Three 
major research projects should be mentioned: (1) Souvislosti promen pracov
a soukromého, rodinného a partnerského zivota [Connection between transformation 
of labour market, private life, family and partnershi
P
mladsiho skolniho veku [Attitudes and experiences with harmonization work and 
family among parents of pre-school and young school children] at the Research
Institute for Labour and Social Affairs; and (3) Podpora rodin s dětmi a vliv peněžních 
transferů na formu rodinného soužití [Support for families with children and influence 
of cash transfers on the 
S
 
b. Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Ettlerova, S. and Stastna, A. (2006) ‘Harmonizace rodinnych and pracovnich 
povinnosti rodicu se zavislymi detmi’ [‘Harmonization of family and working 
obligations of parents having dependent children’], Demografie, Vol 48, No.1: 12-21. 
Professional fulfilment caus
and their actual behaviour, making the issue of harmonisation of employment and 
family life important in a period of high women’s employment rate. 
 
Nesporova, O. (2006) ‘Otcove pecujici o deti formou rodicovske dovolene’ [‘Fathers 
caring for children in the form of Parental leave’], Demografie, Vol.48, No.3: 179-193. 
The article provides information on Parental leave-taken by fathersincluding a 
detailed description of Czech families with fathers using leave, drawing on qualitative 
research. The focus is the actor’s point of view, which is presented in
 
147

The article fo
facilities afte
regime and 
cuses on changes in availability and use of childcare and pre-school 
r the Second World War, during different periods of the communist 
during the post-1989 era. It studies how they are embedded in the 
 on the labour market, gender roles, social policies, 
care and fears of population decline; and identifies 
e current drop in availability of nurseries and an 
ten children by mothers at home. 
 Kucharova, V. (2007) ‘Otcovska (rodicovska) dovolena’ [‘Paternity 
m socialni politiky, Vol.1, No.1: 25-26. 
le gives the main results
 t
 
tries. 
(2007) ‘Pre
es v
 family 
e and chil
. 
nd D. Avramov (eds.) People, Population Change and Policies: Lessons 
. Dordrech
er/S
 Parental 
an
wance 
hemes. 
rka dovolena: jak si stojí
poro
ou?’ 
r position in Europe?’] Dem
, Vo
 60-72. 
rison among 25 states in the EU, 
itzerland as regards to the 
of l
nt 
ca
rental leave in the Czech Republic and context of family 
aterstvi, rodina a práce z pohledu matek malých deti’ 
Th
arginalised in the 
labour market, including the significance that these women ascribe to motherhood 
ith women on Parental leave or women just 
turning to work from leave who had taken a re-qualification course. 
context of women’s participation
fertility rates, public debates on 
the main factors leading to th
crease in care of pre-kindergar
in
 
Koranova, M. and
(Parental) leave’], Foru
The possibility of the introduction Paternity leave is currently being discussed in the 
Czech Republic. This artic
 for this
ype of leave from
research and practise in European coun
 
Stropnik, N., Sambt, J. and Kocourková, J. 
policy measures: the case of Parental leav
ferenc
ersus actual
d allowance’, in: Ch. Hohn, I
Kotowska a
from the Population Policy Acceptance Study
In this chapter, preferences regar
t: Kluw
pringer.  
ding
arrangements are compared with actual sc
leave 
d child allo
 
Soukupová, E. (2007) ‘Mate
me v 
vnání s Evrop
[‘Maternity leave: what is ou
ografie
l.49, No.1:
The articles provides a comprehensive compa
Norway, Iceland and Sw
length 
eave and payme
during Maternity leave. 
 
Krizkova, A., Dudova, R., Haskova, H., Marikova, H. and Uhde, Z. (eds.) (2008) 
‘Prace and péce: promeny rodicovské v CR a kontext rodinné politiky EU’ [‘Work and 
: transformation of Pa
re
policy in the EU’]. Prague: Sociologické nakladatelství.  
Legislative and institutional support of childcare in the Czech Republic is broadly 
discussed particularly from the aspect of the recent reform of the Parental leave 
system. Empirical data are used to document some conceptual mistakes in the 
current trends in childcare. 
 
va, H. (2008) ‘M
Mariko
[‘Maternity, family and work in the view of mothers with young children’], Gender, 
Equity, Research, Vol.9, No.2. 
e article examines women with young children who seem to be m
and to work; it is based on interviews w
re
 
148

2
D
 
Tine
Popu
Tota
GDP
.8 
enmark 
 Rostgaard 
 
lation (UNDP) 
l Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
 per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
5.4  million 
1.8 
33,973(PPP US$) 
Fem
   As
% of
   Me
   Wo
Gen
ale economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 % male rate (UNDP) 
 employed working part time (OECD/F) 
n 
men  
der employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
59.3 per cent 
84 per cent 
 
12.4  per cent 
23.9 per cent 
  9% points 
Emp
   With child 
 3-5 years 
2005 
t 
77.8 per cent 
loyment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
under 3 years 
 
2005 
 
71.4 per cen
   With child aged
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
7th          
Att
rmal services (ECB) 
   Children u
 
2006 
 
73 (66) per cent 
96 (80) per cent 
endance at fo
nder 3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
 
1.
su
No
o
birth, B
reserv
 both 
pa
t
Barsel
the sa
 
 
a. Ma
: 
‘note on 
Le
h
 
 Eighteen weeks: four weeks before the birth and 14 weeks following birth. 
 
Pa ment and funding   
 Ninety per cent of earnings up to a ceiling of DKK725 (€97) per working day 
before taxes for full-time employees, or DKK3,515 (€470) weekly. Young people 
under 25 years who are not taking up education, only receive DKK363 (€49) or 
 Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
pport parents 
 
te n terminology: Graviditetsorlov is the leave to be taken by the mother before 
arselsorlov the leave reserved for the mother after birth, Fædreorlov the leave 
ed for the father after birth, and Forældreorlov the leave available for
ren s after birth. However, in the law the four leave schemes bear the same name 
sorlov, or literally Childbirth Leave, because they technically all originate from 
me law on leave.  
 
ternity leave (Graviditets and Barselsorlov
see 
terminology’) (responsibility of the Ministry of Labour) 
 
ngt  of leave (before and after birth) 
•
y
 
•
 
149

50 per cent of the maximum daily sickness benefit rate (youth rate) in relation to 
taking up an offer of activation or traineeship in an enterprise as part of an 
employment programme. 
• Employees either receive a daily cash benefit under the sickness benefit 
gives this entitlement. To help employers finance these 
costs, different leave funds have been set up. In 1996 a leave fund was set up 
entical funds in the following 
years, and in 2005 it was made obligatory for all municipal employers. Municipal 
eks, without cost to the 
employer. The additional cost of compensation for employees with higher 
r. 
lig
 based on a period of work of at least 120 hours in 
ers with temporary contracts are 
ployment benefit. 
ibility for self-employed workers (including helping a spouse) based on 
a certain scale for at least six months within the last 12 
e. 
se for a 
 unemployment insurance or 
 
which is the same 
  
scheme which is the basic system available for all employees; or they receive 
full coverage of their former earnings from their employer if covered by a labour 
market agreement which 
to reimburse private employers’ leave costs, so that the cost for compensation 
was pooled. Several municipal employers set up id
employers pool the costs of employees’ take-up of leave, so that a workplace 
with a predominance of female workers should not face higher costs. From 
2006, private employers also have to be members of a leave fund. Private 
employers pay in DKK786 (€105) per year for each full-time employee and 
receive reimbursement of up to DKK142 (€19) per hour for up to 26 weeks; this 
means that female employees with a salary below DKK20,000 (€2,675) per 
month will be able to receive full earnings for up to 26 we
salaries than DKK20,000 monthly has to be born by the employe
 
lexibility in use 
F
 
•
None. 
 
 
ibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
E
 
•
Eligibility for an employee is
 
13 weeks preceding the paid leave. Work
excluded only if they are not eligible for unem
• 
Elig
professional activity on 
month period, of which one month immediately precedes the paid leav
• 
People are eligible who have just completed a vocational training cour
period of at least 18 months or who are doing a paid work placement as part of 
a vocational training course.  
• 
Unemployed people are entitled to benefits from
similar benefits (activation measures). 
• 
Students are entitled to an extra 12 months educational benefit instead of the 
Maternity leave benefit. 
People on sickness benefit continue to receive this benefit 
•
amount as the Maternity leave benefit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150

Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
pe
 is no additional leave for multiple births as the right to Maternity 
(and Paternity and Parental) leave is related to the event of birth and not the 
 
Ad
agre
 
t 63 per cent of mothers receive such additional 
income during the Maternity leave, and as many as 73 per cent of those who 
See more information 
on additional rights under Paternity and Parental leave)  
 
b.  Paternity leave (Fædreorlov: see ‘note on terminology’) 
Length of leave 
E
•
 
Add
agre
 
 
c. P
(
 
Len
•
 
rson other than the mother 
 
• None. There
number of children born. 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
• All public sector employees, through collective agreements, receive full earnings 
in 24 of the 52 week leave period (including Maternity, Paternity and Parental 
leave). Some private sector employers also pay full earnings for part or all of this 
period. Survey data shows tha
were in employment prior to giving birth (Olsen, 2008). (
    (responsibility of the Ministry of Labour) 
 
 
• Two weeks, to be taken during the first 14 weeks after birth.  
 
Pa ment and funding 
y
 
• Payment and funding as for Maternity leave.  
 
ligibility 
 
 Anyone in a recognised partnership, including same sex partnerships. 
itional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
• All public sector employees, through collective agreements, receive full earnings 
during the leave. In a recent survey, 85 per cent of all fathers received full 
wages during Paternity leave (Olsen, 2008). 
arental 
leave 
(Forældreorlov: 
see 
‘note 
on 
terminology’) 
responsibility of the Ministry of Labour)  
gth of leave 
 
 Thirty two weeks, until the child is 48 weeks. Each parent is entitled to 32 weeks 
but the total leave period cannot exceed more than 32 weeks per family.  
 
151

Pay
 
• Payment and funding as for Maternity leave.  
lexibility in use  
 
• Between eight and 13 weeks can be taken later; any further period must be 
s per family. 
• Parents can prolong the 32 weeks leave to 40 weeks (for all) or 46 weeks (only 
nefit level is reduced over the extended leave period, so that 
the total benefit paid equals 32 weeks at the full rate of benefit. 
•
p
time and thus prolong the leave period from 32 to 64 weeks.) This is subject to 
agreement with the employer. 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• A
 due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) 
 
• None. 
Ad
 
g
 payment 
 
tra weeks with this additional payment, making 23 weeks 
s. Three weeks are for the father, three weeks for the 
he parents to share. The weeks for the mother and the 
 are quotas and are lost if not used.  
•
n individual right to six weeks with full pay. 
of children born in 2005, 55 per cent of fathers reported 
 full wages during their whole time on Parental leave, and 9 per 
cent of mothers. This difference is due to mothers taking longer leave periods, 
ment and funding 
 
F
agreed with the employer. This entitlement i
employees). The be
 It is possible to return to work on a part-time basis, with a reduced benefit 
ayment spread over this extended period of leave (e.g. a parent may work half-
 
s Maternity leave. 
 
Variation in leave
 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective
reements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
a
 
• Labour market agreements often give the right to 10 weeks of full   pay during 
Parental leave (Olsen, 2008). 
• From 2007, the industrial sector (representing 7,000 employers nationwide 
including production, service, knowledge and IT) has introduced a paid father’s 
quota. Previously women had been awarded the right to 14 weeks with
(in addition to the basic benefit payment) after giving birth. Now the family has
been awarded nine ex
of additional payment
mother and three for t
father respectively
 As part of the labour market negotiations in Spring 2008, a new Parental leave 
model has been introduced for employees working in the state sector. If both 
parents work in the state sector they now have a right to leave with full payment 
for 6+6+6 weeks after Maternity leave, in all 14 weeks of Maternity leave and 18 
weeks of Parental leave, both with full payment, a total of 32 weeks. Six weeks is 
earmarked for the mother, six weeks for the father and six weeks can be shared. 
The six weeks for the father replaces his two weeks of Paternity leave with full 
earnings, so in all he now has a
• In a survey on parents 
that they received
 
152

going beyond the weeks where they might be entitled to full earnings; for a large 
part of their leave period, therefore, they receive only basic benefit payments 
(Olsen, 2008) as outlined under Maternity leave.  
 
d.  Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
 
e. 
 
Ad
Flexible wor
 
2.
 
Fr
thr
lab
ea
All
 
3.
 
a.
Nearly all mothers take Maternity leave. In a survey conducted among parents of 
ch
av
tha
leave. A few mothers reported that they were made redundant or experienced 
mployer found it difficult to 
• None. 
 Other employment-related measures 
option leave and pay 
 
• For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for other 
parents, with the exception that two of the 48 weeks must be taken by both 
parents together. 
 
Time off for the care of dependants 
 
• All employees are eligible for a care benefit (Plejevederlag) if they care for a 
terminally ill relative or close friend at home (See later for proposed changes). 
 
king 
 
• None. 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
om 2007 the industrial sector has introduced a paid father’s quota, giving them 
ee weeks leave with full earnings replacement as an individual right. As part of the 
our market negotiations in Spring 2008, the right to Parental leave with full 
rnings replacement was secured for public sector employees, for 18 weeks in total.  
 
 same sex couples are now also entitled to two weeks of Paternity leave. 
 Take-up of leave 
 Maternity leave 
 
ildren born in 2005, 99 per cent of mothers had taken Maternity leave. Mothers on 
erage used all the 14 weeks to which they were entitled, and 95 per cent reported 
t they experienced no problems with the workplace when they wanted to take 
bullying from colleagues, and several mentioned that the e
find a replacement (Olsen, 2008).  
 
. Paternity leave 
b
 
153

    
 
c.
ht weeks. Twenty three per cent of fathers 
 
    
en though they only make up 48 per cent of those entitled to 
ed in the private sector (Olsen, 
g leave and/or poorer 
looking into couples who became parents in 2006. The higher 
uch as office clerks, employees in the service sector, and 
gricultural and horticulture workers on average use only 24 days. Fathers with 
e important when men and women negotiate 
hese seem be common factors for both the public and private sectors. 
n of leave 
    
Most (89 per cent) of fathers in the survey made use of the two weeks of Paternity 
leave, and 95 per cent reported that they had experienced no problems with the 
workplace when they asked for leave (Olsen, 2008). 
 Parental leave 
 
The survey data show that among parents of children born in 2005, 24 per cent of 
fathers took Parental leave and 94 per cent of mothers. On average, mothers took 
28 weeks of leave, and fathers eig
started their leave before the Maternity leave expired, i.e. parents were on leave at 
the same time. Two thirds (68 per cent) of two-parent families took all the 32 
weeks of Parental leave to which they were entitled. Among single parents, 73 per 
cent took 32 weeks; as Olsen notes, this is interesting because single parents in 
the Nordic countries tend to take shorter leave periods, often due to the loss of 
income (Olsen, 2008). 
Among the men, public employees account for two-thirds (67 per cent) of Parental 
leave-takers ev
Parental leave. This may be because they receive full earnings during leave or 
because they are working in more gender-mixed workplaces. Among those men 
who do not take leave, 88 per cent are employ
2008) and this suggests that they have more difficulties takin
rights. 
 
It seems that the take-up of leave is related to the educational level of both the 
man and the woman. In those families where the woman takes the greatest part of 
the leave, the mother tends to have a low educational level and the father is 
unskilled, or the reverse; in these families, women typically take 99 per cent of 
total Parental leave weeks. Self-employed workers, both men and women, tend in 
general to take fewer weeks of leave. This is confirmed in register data from 
Statistics Denmark, 
the educational level of the father, the more Parental leave he takes; engineers, 
lawyers and teachers on average take 42 days of parental leave, whereas 
occupational groups s
a
middle educational level – such as IT workers, chemists, photographers, nurses 
and police officers - take on average 29 days (Statistics Denmark, 2008). 14
 
 
Overall, therefore, what seems to b
on who should take leave is wages, educational level, workplace culture and age 
and t
 
According to survey data, there seems to be agreement on the divisio
between men and women; 98 per cent of women and 98 per cent of men stated 
                                             
Statistics Denmark (2008) Fædre med højere jobs holer længere barselorlov. 
ailable at: http://www.dst.dk/O
14 
Av
mDS/BagTal/Arkiv/2008-04-28-Faedre-med-hoejere-jobs-
holder-laengere-barselsorlov.aspx 
 
 
154

that they and their partner agreed on how to divide the leave period. They also
seem to agree on what is important to consider when dividing leave 
parents; among the consideratio
 
between 
ns that affect the division of leave weeks, couples 
, 
e work 
 
 
o 
ing 
ime.   
aled that 27 per cent of men and 42 per cent of women 
ported a lack of information on leave rights and that 37 per cent of men and 23 
g women as related to the fact that 
(Olsen, 2008).  
4.
e and other employment-
 
a. 
ve and the reconciliation of work and family life is only 
limited. Most statistics also use the parent rather than the child as the unit of 
nalysis. Little is therefore known about how children are cared for in their early 
onths in regards to the length of leave, parental work hours and how parents 
ombine the leave. 
 
b. Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Olsen, B.M (2008) Evaluering af den fleksible barselsorlov. Orlovsreglerne set fra 
forældres, kommuners og arbejdspladsers perspektiv [Evaluation of the flexible 
leave. Leave rights from the perspective of parents, municipalities and employers]. 
SFI 07: 29. Available at: 
http://www.sfi.dk/graphics/SFI/Pdf/Rapporter/2007/0729_Fleksibel%20Barselorlov.
pdf  
This report investigates and evaluates the new leave entitlements. Parents, local 
authorities and employers have participated in providing qualitative and 
quantitative data; the data on take-up originates from a SFI survey on use of leave 
by parents of children born in 2005. Results from the report are referred to above. 
In addition, local authorities find the administration of the leave to be burdensome; 
two-thirds of employers are favourable to having negotiated rights but at the same 
time want simpler rules.  
mentioned: their work/educational situation (men 45 per cent, women 30 per cent)
their finances (39/28 per cent), the child (32/25 per cent), desire to reconcil
and family life (28/27 per cent), equality between parents (22/8 per cent), and day
care of the child (11/5 per cent) (Olsen, 2008). 
A third (34 per cent) of women and six per cent of men make use of the right t
flexible leave, postponing the leave until later, or extending the leave by reduc
the payment, or working part-t
 
The survey also reve
re
per cent of women were in favour of the re-introduction of quotas in Parental 
leave. Olsen interprets this lower support amon
a father’s quota would require women to give up a number of weeks currently 
available to them. The  higher support among fathers is related to a wish for more 
back-up when they discuss leave-taking with their employer or with colleagues 
 
 Research and publications on leav
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Although there are quite extensive statistics on the use of leave, Danish research 
into the take-up of lea
a
m
c
 
155

 
Datta Gup
the Nordic
ta, N., Smith, N. and Verner, M (2006) ‘Child care and parental leave in 
 countries: a model to aspire to?’, Review of Economics of the 
: 65-89 
ily-friendly policies in the 'Nordic model' with respect to 
arental care facilitated by maternal and 
or non-parental publicly provided care. It discusses three 
: is there a 'Nordic model', and is it worth the cost if effects on child 
ent and welfare are included? Is there a trade-off between family-friendly 
here serious negative boomerang effects of 
 women's position in the lab
et
dic 
at the workplace (20
Doctoral 
 L. Bloksgaard at Ålborg University.   
uing gender seg
n a
place by 
s in negations at the
is.aau.dk
010). Hans Hansen, Olli Kangas and Tine Rostgaard, 
nd take-up of Pa
leav
en, Norway, Finland
man
he 
earch suggests altern
way
nd 
measure welfare state designs and outcomes, and will use quantitative data to 
Household, Vol. 6, No. 1
This article evaluates fam
two modes of child care i.e. either p
parental leave schemes 
questions
developm
policies and family welfare, and are t
family-friendly policies on
model' a model to aspire to?  
or mark
? Is the 'Nor
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
 meaning of gender in negotiations 
The
03-2008). 
thesis by
This project investigates the contin
regatio
t the work
workplace, e.g. in 
focusing on the gender branding proces
ontact: 
 
negotiations on leave. C
lblo@ih
 
-2
Care architecture (2005
Danish National Institute of Social Research.  
A study of the institutional design a
rental 
, Ger
e in eight European 
y, England, T
countries (Denmark, Swed
Netherlands, Italy). The res
ative 
s to evaluate a
look at how different stylised families fare in the various welfare set-ups. Contact: 
tr@sfi.dk
 
 
 
 
 
156

2.9 
E
Pop
Total
GD  
 US$ 
stonia 
 
Katre Pall 
 
ulation (UNDP) 
 Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
1.3 million 
1.4 
15,478 PPP
P
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% of employed working part time (OECD/F)15
   Men 
2005 
2005 
 
52.3 per cent 
80 per cent 
 
   W
Ge
2007 
  No data 
omen  
nder employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2004 
  No data 
  No data 
Em
mothers (OECD/BB)16
 
 
ployment rate for 
   With child under 3 years 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
2005 
No data 
No data 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
37th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
18 (12) per cent 
85 (78) per cent 
 
1. 
 
s  
 
a. 
 (rasedus-ja sünnituspuhkus) (responsibility of the 
Ministry of Social Affairs) 
Length of leave (before and after birth)  
 One hundred and forty days: 30-70 days can be taken before birth of a child. If 
th, leave is shortened 
accordingly. 
Paym
) is paid to mothers who did not work during the 
rked prior to the birth of a child.  
Current leave and other employment-related policies to
support parent
Maternity leave
 
 
•
less than 30 days leave is taken before the expected bir
 
ent and funding 
 
• Hundred per cent of average earnings (calculated on employment in the 
previous calendar year). There is no ceiling on the benefit. The minimum wage 
(€280 per month in 2009
previous calendar year but have wo
                                                 
 The proportion employed part time (2008)=4.1 per cent for men and 10.4 per cent for 
omen (source: Estonian Statistical Office, 2008). 
 The employment rate (2008) for women with a child under six years=55 per cent (source: 
Estonian Statistical Office, 2008). 
15
w
16
 
157

• Funded from social insurance contributions.  
 
Flexibility in use 
 None except for when leave can be started before birth; taking leave is 
o employment or family circumstances) 
 
 
Varia
poor 
perso
 
• 
birth or birth with 
 
b. Pa
the
and after birth)  
Pay
Fle
 
 taken during two months before or two months after the birth of a child. 
thers with permanent or temporary 
 
Varia
oor 
or delegation of leave to 
 
 
•
obligatory. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related t
 
• All employed mothers are eligible for Maternity leave, including workers with 
temporary contracts if the contract lasts at least three months. Self-employed
people qualify for maternity benefit on the same conditions as workers. 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the mother.  
One hundred and fifty-four days in case of multiple 
complications. 
ternity leave (isapuhkus – literally ‘father’s leave’) (responsibility of 
inistry of Social Affairs) 
 M
 
Length of leave (before 
 
• Ten working days, to be taken during two months before the expected birth of a 
child or two  months after the birth of a child. 
 
ment and funding 
 
• No payment.   
 
xibility in use 
 
Can be
•
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
 All public servants and other employed fa
•
employment contracts.  
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); 
p
person other than the mother.  
 
• None. 
 
 
 
158

c. Parental leave (lapsehoolduspuhkus – literally ‘childcare leave’) 
esponsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs) 
Length of leave  
• 
 
Paym
payable, neither of which is specifically linked to 
Parental leave but is available to all families who meet the eligibility conditions. 
ayment (€38.5 per month), 
enefit until the child reaches three 
n-working parents (i.e. payment continues if 
es up employment).  
Flexib
 
• 
e. 
parental 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
ariation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
f child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
is eligible for Parental leave if parents do not use 
r career breaks 
 
(r
 
 
Until the child reaches three years. This entitlement is per family. 
ent and funding 
 
• There are two types of benefit 
• Parental benefit (vanemahüvitis) is paid at 100 per cent of average earnings 
(calculated on employment in the previous calendar year) for 435 days (i.e. 62 
weeks) from after the end of Maternity leave, with a ceiling equivalent to three 
times average earnings (€1,963 per month in 2009). The minimum benefit paid 
to working parents is the minimum wage (€280 per month in 2009). For non-
working parents, parental benefit is paid from the birth of the child at a flat rate 
(€280 per month) until the child reaches 18 months of age. 
Childcare benefit (lapsehooldustasu) is a flat-rate p
• 
paid from the end of payment of parental b
years of age to both working and no
a parent tak
• Both parental and childcare benefit are funded from general taxation.  
 
ility in use  
Parental leave may be used in one part or in several parts at any time until a 
child is three years of ag
• When a parent takes up employment after the birth of a child, the 
benefit is reduced.  
 
 
• Fathers are eligible for parental benefit when their child has reached 70 days of 
age.  
 
V
poor health or disability o
erson other than the mother.  
p
 
 The actual caregiver of a child 
•
leave themselves. In the case of a non-parental caregiver, he or she is eligible 
for childcare benefit, but not parental benefit.  
 
d. Childcare leave o
• An employee with a child under 14 years of age can take two weeks of unpaid 
leave per year.   
 
159

 
e. Other employment-related measures  
 
Ado
 
d for parents adopting a child under ten 
years at 100 per cent of average earnings. Adoptive parents are eligible for 
s, and qualify for parental benefit and 
childcare benefit. 
 
Tim
 
 day of leave per month with full 
nt.  
 supplementary period of holiday – three days per year for a 
Flexible wor
 they may aggregate these breaks and taken a longer 
 
2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
   
 Payment for Paternity leave was increased to 100 per 
cent of earnings in 2008, from a flat-rate payment of €4.2 a day. In 2009, payment 
 
3.
 
a. 
up leave.  
 
b. 
ption leave (lapsendamispuhkus) and pay 
• Seventy days of adoption leave per chil
Parental leave for a child under three year
e off for the care of dependants 
• Leave can be taken by either parent to care for a sick child under 12 years, with 
full earning replacement for up to 14 calendar days per episode of illness.  
• Parents with a handicapped child may take one
earnings replaceme
• Parents may take a
parent raising one or two children under 14 years and six days per year for a 
parent raising a child under three years, or three or more children under 14 
years. There is a flat-rate payment of €4.2 per day.  
• All payments funded from general taxation.  
 
king 
 
ith a child under 18 months can take a breastfeeding 
• Breastfeeding mothers w
break every three hours;
break once a day. The state compensates the breaks 100 per cent with the 
exception of mothers who receive parental benefit for raising a child. Funded 
from general taxation.  
 developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
The payment of parental benefit was extended from 225 days to 315 days in 2006 
and to 435 days in 2008.
was withdrawn. 
 Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave  
 
As Maternity leave is obligatory, 100 per cent of employed women take 
Paternity leave  
 
 
160

Fourteen per cent of fathers took up leave in 2006 and 2007, but in 2008, after 
payment was introduced, take-up of leave increased approximately four times, up 
to 50 per cent.  
Parental leave  
 
No official statistics about take-up of leave are collected. According to research, 
over 80 per cent of women take some Parental leave. Men account for four per 
cent of the recipients of paren
 
c. 
tal benefit.  
d. 
 
4.
a. 
ding use of Parental leave, focused mainly on women. No 
b.
   
 
    
e kogemuste analüüs (Impact 
r) 
 
sessing the impact of the 
 
Võrk, A. and Paulus, A. (2006) Peredele suunatud rahaliste toetuste mõju 
vaesuse leevendamisele Eestis: analüüs mikrosimulatsiooni meetodi abil. [The 
impact of benefits to families on child poverty in Estonia: micro simulation 
analyses].  Available at: 
http://www.sm.ee/est/HtmlPages/peretoetused_2007/$file/peretoetused_2007.pdf 
(in Estonian). 
The analysis reveals how different benefits targeted towards families with children 
affect child poverty in Estonia, with parental benefit having little impact. 
 
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
In 2007, 19 per cent of people who received benefit for caring for a sick child 
were men. This proportion has steadily risen by about one per cent every year. 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
General overview 
 
Leave policies and childcare arrangements have gained researchers’ attention 
recently as the issues of demographic changes and work-life balance have 
emerged in the political arena.  Previously, research on reconciliation of work and 
family life, inclu
significant research has been done on employers’ family-friendly policies.    
 
 Selected publications from January 2006, including results 
 from research studies   
Võrk, A. and Karu, M. (2006) Eesti vanemahüvitise mõju sündimus- ja 
ööturukäitumisele: hindamise võimalused ja esimest
t
of parental benefits on female labour force participation and fertility behaviou
(PRAXIS 
Working 
Paper 
25/2006). 
Available 
at: 
http://www.praxis.ee/data/toimetised_25_2006.pdf  (in Estonian). 
logy for as
This research proposes a methodo
implementation of parental benefit and presents the first findings including that, 
since the implementation of the new scheme, working mothers tend to have more 
second and third births.   
 
161

Karu, M., Kas
and Parental le
http://www.pra
earu, K. and Biin, H. (2007) Isad ja lapsehoolduspuhkus. [Fathers 
ave].  Tallinn: PRAXIS Centre for Policy Studies. Available at:  
xis.ee/data/Karu_Kasearu_Biin_Isad_ja_lapsehoolduspuhkus_PRA
 report, in Estonian).  
on the issue of fathers’ involvement in caring for children 
g to find out the reasons for fathers not taking up Parental 
an overview of the arguments that fathers use to explain 
leave, as well as the experiences and 
rental leave.  The authors conclude 
use their right to Parental leave and parental 
 the 
to share the Parental lea
 
 (either 
), or if it enabled them to s
m
 tööle? Na
ubje
sed ja 
 goes to work? Subjective expectations 
rent meanings given to work’], in: B. Vahe
. S
öö ja 
vanemate tööhõ
llinn
djate 
here the author interviewed 
 
 at least one child under th
ars 
mary 
 incentives, barriers and a
s in 
thers 
entify the different reasons behind their Maternity leave 
y revealed that women prefer to take on more 
r to satisfy their ambitions and do no
of 
a means of achieving
alis
e 
integrated and feel useful in society, and to receive acknowledgement. 
http://www.rahvastikuminister.ee/public/Raport_19jaan.pdf  (in Estonian). 
ily values and expectations concerning 
mily policies among 20- to 40-year-old Estonians. 
Võ
töö
misele 2004-2007 [Parental benefit: users and impact on 
bour and fertility behavior 2004-2007]. (PRAXISe  
. Tallinn: PRAXIS. 
 continuation of a study begun in 2006 using registry data to analyse the possible 
XIS.pdf (an online study
The study concentrates 
in Estonia, the aim bein
leave. The study gives 
their decision to take or not take up Parental 
attitudes of employers regarding men on Pa
that more fathers would 
scheme allowed 
benefit if
the mother
men 
simultaneously or in turns
ve with
tay at ho
e with a child older 
than one year or 18 months.   
 
Pajumets, M. (2007) ’Miks emme läheb
tööle antavad tähendused’ [‘Why mummy
iste s
ktiivsed ootu
and diffe
Pere. Pa
r and K
eeder (eds.) T
indlik töökorraldus ja laste
Keskliit.  
ive. Ta
: Eesti Tööan
A qualitative study on Parental leave w
mothers and
of age. The pri
fathers in 20 families with
focus was to analyse the
ree ye
ttitude
relation to mo
going to work, and to id
 
and employment decisions. The stud
than one role in orde
t work only out 
financial necessity: work is 
 self-re
ation, a way to b
Furthermore, long breaks from work undermine people’s competitiveness in the 
labour market.  
 
Oras, K. and Unt, M. (2008) Sündimust mõjutavad tegurid Eestis [Factors 
influencing fertility in Estonia). Tallinn: Office of the Minister for Population and 
Ethnic Affairs. Available at: 
A study analysing family planning, fam
fa
 
rk, A., Karu, M. and Tiit, E.-M. (2009) Vanemahüvitis: kasutamine ning mõjud 
turu- ja sündimuskäitu
la
Toimetised 43/2009)
A
impact of parental benefit on fertility and labour market behaviour.  
 
162

2.
Fi
 
Min
Popu
Total 
GDP 
10 
nland 
na Salmi and Johanna Lammi-Taskula  
 
lation (UNDP) 
Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
5.2 million 
1.8 
32,153 PPPUS$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 (UNDP) 
part time (OECD/F) 
   M
   W
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
56.9 per cent 
86 per cent 
 
  8.2 per cent 
15.5 per cent 
  5% points 
   As % male rate
% of employed working 
en 
omen  
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
 
   W
   W
 
ith child under 3 years 
ith child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
2005 
52.1 per cent 
80.7 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
2nd          
Atten
   Chi
   Children 3
dance at formal services (ECB)17
ldren under 3 years 
-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
26 (21) per cent 
77 (56) per cent 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
support parents 
 
a. 
th
 
Le
 
• 
leave; one calendar 
         
Maternity leave (äitiysvapaa/moderskapsledighet18) (responsibility of 
e Ministry of Social Affairs and Health and the Ministry of Labour) 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
One hundred and five working days (i.e. for all types of 
week consists of six working days): between 30 and 50 days can be taken 
before the birth. 
 
Pa ment and funding  
 
y
• Earnings-related benefit. During the first 56 days of leave, the payment is equal 
to 90 per cent of annual earnings up to a ceiling of €46,207, with a lower per 
                                        
statistics for 2007 show 27 per cent of children under three ye
17 National 
ars attending 
services and 72 per cent of three to five-year-olds; as there is a universal entitlement to 
services for children from birth, the relatively low attendance for children under three years is 
not due to lack of services, but shows in part the influence of leave policies. 
18 Names of leaves are given in Finnish and Swedish. Finland is a bilingual country with a 
Swedish-speaking minority. 
 
163

centage for higher earnings; after this initial period of leave, benefit is paid at 
70 per cent of earnings up to €30,033, again with a lower per centage for 
er. Mothers not employed and those whose 
6,513 before the birth get a minimum flat-rate 
allowance of €22.04 a working day (€551/month). 
sed benefits are funded by the sickness insurance scheme, 
financed by contributions from employers (73 per cent of the total cost) and 
budget. The minimum flat-rate 
allowances are funded from state taxation.  
Flexibility in use 
 
None.  
 Entitlements based on residence, i.e. paid to all women who have lived in 
or been insured in another EU member state, at least 180 days 
immediately before the date on which their baby is due. The basic formula is 
 due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
sability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
pe
ature birth, if the pregnancy has lasted at least 154 days and 
 30 days before the due day, the mother is entitled to benefit 
 
b. 
erskapsledighet) (responsibility of the 
in
ealth and the Ministry of Labour) 
 
higher earnings. Half of all mothers with an employment contract receive full 
pay during the first three months of the Maternity leave. During this period the 
daily benefit is paid to the employ
annual earnings are less than €
• Earnings-ba
employees (27 per cent). In 2009, employers paid two per cent of their total 
salary bill and employees 0.70 per cent of their taxable earnings; these per 
centages are subject to change in the state 
 
 
•
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
•
Finland, 
that a person who is entitled to family benefits is also entitled to leave. A 
woman is entitled to maternity benefit after her pregnancy has lasted 154 days. 
 
Variation in leave
poor health or di
rson other than the mother 
 
• In cases of prem
ends earlier than
and leave from the next day on for the following 105 days.  
• Leave can be delegated to the father if the mother due to illness is unable to 
care for the child; or to another person responsible for the care of the child if 
the mother dies and the father does not care for the child. 
Paternity leave (isyysvapaa/fad
istry of Social Affairs and H
M
 
Length of leave  
 
• Eighteen working days, plus a further 12 ‘bonus’ days for fathers who take the 
last two weeks of Parental leave. The 12 bonus days + two Parental leave 
weeks are called ‘father's month’ in the legislation since 2007.  
 
 
 
 
 
164

Payment (applied for the whole period of Paternity leave) and funding 
t, with payment equal to 70 per cent of annual earnings 
up to €30,034, with a lower per centage for higher earnings. Minimum 
Flexibility in use 
• 
 
 
Eligib
ployment or family circumstances) 
• 
 
Va
poor 
of leave to 
erson other than the mother 
• None. 
 
c. Pa
the M
 
Lengt
 
• 
 
Paym
 
• 
equal 
to 75 per cent of annual earnings up to €46,207, with a lower per centage for 
 leave, the payment is 70 per cent of 
earnings up to €30,033, with a lower per centage for higher earnings. Minimum 
ternity leave. 
 
Funding as for Maternity leave. 
Flexib
 
• 
• 
• 
the child has been taken care of at home 
by the mother or the father until the start of the ‘father's month’. 
 
• Earnings-related benefi
allowance as for Maternity leave. 
• Funding as for Maternity leave. 
 
 
The one to 18 days can be taken in four segments, the 12 bonus days in one 
segment. The ‘father's month’, including the bonus days, can be taken within
six months from the end of the Parental leave. 
ility (e.g. related to em
 
As for Maternity leave, but the father must also live with the child’s mother. 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation 
p
 
rental leave (vanhempainvapaa/föräldraledighet) (responsibility of 
inistry of Social Affairs and Health and the Ministry of Labour) 
h of leave  
One hundred and fifty-eight working days. This entitlement is per family.  
ent and funding 
Earnings-related benefit. During the first 30 days of leave, the payment is 
higher earnings. After this initial period of
allowance as for Ma
•
 
ility in use  
Each parent can take leave in two parts, of at least 12 days duration. 
Leave can be taken part time, at 40-60 per cent of full-time hours, but only if 
both parents take part-time leave and only with the employers’ agreement. 
Benefit payment is half of the benefit for full-time leave. 
The ‘father's month’ can be taken within six months from the end of the 
Parental leave period provided that 
 
 
165

Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 As for Maternity leave. 
Varia
poor 
perso
 
• 
. Either the father or the mother can use the extended 
leave, partly or wholly during the Maternity leave or the Parental leave period. 
mature birth the Maternity leave has started earlier than 30 working 
days before the expected date of delivery, Parental leave is extended by as 
m
• 
• 
 
d. Ch
 
• 
th. While 
 
and a means-tested supplement (up to €168 a month). The average home care 
Helsinki area, pay a municipal supplement to the home care allowance; in 
2
7
 
e. Other 
d measures  
 
Adoption le
 
• Adop
leave
child
than two months when the adoptive parents assume care for the 
c
d
having their own children. An adoptive parent for a child older than 12 months 
w
 
parental benefit. Adoptive parents are entitled to home care allowance for a 
p
io
child
 
 
 
 
 
•
 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the mother 
In the case of multiple births, the length of leave is extended by 60 days for 
each additional child
• If due to pre
any working days. 
If the mother does not take part in the care of the child, the father is entitled to 
parental benefit even if the parents no longer live together, provided that the 
father is responsible for childcare.  
If the mother dies and the father does not care for the child, the parental benefit 
can be paid to another person responsible for the care of the child. 
ildcare leave or career breaks 
Childcare leave, referred to as ‘Home care leave’ (hoitovapaa/ vårdledighet) 
can be taken from the end of Parental leave until a child’s third birthday. This 
leave can be taken in two parts, the minimum length being one mon
taking leave, a parent receives a home care allowance consisting of a basic 
payment of €314.28 a month, with an additional €94.09 for every other child 
under three years and €60.46 for every other pre-school child over three years
allowance per family in 2007 was €370.80 a month. Home care allowance is 
financed from municipal taxation. Some local authorities, especially in the 
00 , these supplements averaged €211 a month per family. 
employment-relate
ave and pay.  
tive parents of a child younger than seven years are eligible for Parental 
 of 234 working days after the birth of the child (or 200 working days if the 
 is older 
hil ). Fathers are eligible for the same Paternity and Parental leave as fathers 
ho is married to or co-habits with the parent of the child is not entitled to 
er d which ends two years after the Parental leave period started even if the 
 is older than three.
 
166

 
Time off fo
 
• B
w
whe
vård
no l
cour
greements, but often at 
f
e
entit
 
Flexible working 
 
2.
ays (2007). 
private day care for another child at the same time (2007). 
r the care of dependants 
et een two and four days at a time for parents of children under ten years 
n the child falls ill (temporary childcare leave, tilapäinen hoitovapaa/tillfällig 
ledighet), the length being regulated by collective agreements. There are 
imits on how often parents can take leave for this purpose during the 
se of a year. Payment is dependent on collective a
ull 
arnings. Parents with joint custody who do not live with the child are 
led to the leave. 
 
• 
Parents can work reduced working hours (partial childcare leave, osittainen 
hoitovapaa/partiell vårdledighet) from the end of Parental leave until the end of 
the child’s second year at school. The employee is entitled to partial childcare 
leave if s/he has been working for the same employer for at least six months 
during the past 12 months. The employee should negotiate the reduction in 
hours with the employer, and the employer can refuse only if the reduced 
working hours would lead to serious disadvantages for the organisation – in 
that case, working hours must be a maximum of 30 hours a week. Both parents 
can take partial childcare leave during the same period, but cannot take leave 
during the same time in the day. Employees taking partial childcare leave 
before the child’s third birthday or during the child's first and second year at 
school are entitled to a partial home care allowance of €70 a month.  
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
There have been no major changes in the leave schemes since 2006 but several 
minor ones, including:  
 
• 
A parent who does not live with the child but has joint custody is also 
entitled to temporary childcare leave to care for a sick child less than ten 
years of age (2006). 
• 
The per centage of earnings replaced by leave benefits has been raised, 
in the case of Maternity leave up to 90 per cent of earnings during the first 
56 days and in the case of Parental leave from 70 to 75 per cent of 
earnings during the first 30 days. If both parents take Parental leave, they 
both receive the raised benefit during the first 30 days of their leave 
(2007). 
• 
The Parental leave period for adoptive parents has been lengthened from 
180 to 200 d
• 
Same-sex parents in a registered relationship can share Parental leave 
(2007).  
• 
The addition to home care allowance for siblings has been raised by €10 
(2007). 
• 
A family can receive home care allowance for one child and support for 
 
167

• 
Adoptive parents are entitled to home care allowance also for a child older 
than three years for a period of two years after the Parental leave has 
started but not after the child starts school (2007). 
ave have been made. Finnish members of 
e Network on Leave Policy and Research, Minna Salmi and Johanna Lammi-
 one to be shared as the parents see fit. A Paternity 
leave of one to 18 days would remain in the scheme to be taken immediately after 
nemployed; and a rise in 
e partial home care allowance from €70 to €210 to encourage parents of young 
 
ears. One of the main aims of Finnish leave policy has 
ng been to encourage more men to take Parental leave. The reform would 
 
ange in the regulation 
• 
A new term, ‘father's month’, has been introduced into the legislation; this 
consists of the two last Parental leave weeks and the 12 bonus days 
which the father gets if he takes the two last Parental leave weeks (2007). 
Taking advantage of the ‘father's month’ is more flexible than it used to be 
as it can be taken until the child is 16 months old. 
• 
The minimum allowance for Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave was 
raised from €15.20 to €22.04 per working day and the basic payment of 
home care allowance was raised by €20 a month (2009). 
 
Several proposals to reform Parental le
th
Taskula, in their proposal to the Council for Gender Equality in November 2006, 
recommended a thorough reform where the various forms of leave (Maternity, 
Paternity and Parental leave) would be consolidated and renamed Parental leave. 
This Parental leave would last 18 months, and it could be taken until the child 
turns three, in one period or several with the minimum period being two months. 
The Parental leave would be divided into three six-month sections, one for the 
mother, one for the father and
the birth of the child as well as a period of 18 days Maternity leave before the birth 
of the child. A single parent would be entitled to the whole 18 months leave. The 
proposal also includes: a higher payment with a fixed per centage of 80 per cent 
of earnings for the whole leave period; a rise in the minimum flat-rate allowance to 
make it comparable with the minimum allowance for the u
th
children to work shorter hours. 
The proposal was based on research findings. The present leave period, which 
ends when the child is nine to ten months old, is not in line with knowledge on 
child development. Today, most mothers stay at home until the child is 18 to 24 
months old. Moreover, the Maternity and Parental leave periods have remained at 
the same length for 20 y
lo
improve the present situation not only for fathers but also for mothers and 
children. A specific quota for fathers is well founded as Nordic experience shows 
that fathers use leave periods which are explicitly specified for them and the family 
(or the child) otherwise would loose. The proposal does not include coercion as 
fathers could still choose only a short Parental leave period or only the Paternity 
leave. The proposal also aims at clarifying the present complicated leave schemes 
and payments. 
The proposal received attention in the media and the Council for Gender Equality 
included the proposal in its motions for the new government's programme. In its 
Family Policy programme, the Family Federation in Finland suggests a gradual 
realisation of the reform: first a lengthening of the leave into 12 months and a two-
month quota for fathers. The Federation also proposes a ch
 
168

of part-time Parental leave such that it would not be conditional on both parents 
taking the part-time leave. 
Several political parties proposed reforms in the leave schemes in their 
programmes for the parliamentary election in March 2007, but the propositions 
were often vague and general in nature. Of the six biggest parties, from which the 
government coalition would be formed, the three smaller ones suggested 
lengthening the Parental leave until the child is 12 months old; two of the three 
larger parties were more vague or modest and one offered no view. Lengthening 
of Paternity leave or the father's month was mentioned by one major and three 
minor parties. One major and three minor parties wanted to raise the level of the 
minimum allowance. All six parties wanted the expenses incurred by the employer 
to be shared equally by all employers.  
 
   
he government formed in April 2007 (comprising the Centre Party, the 
 
 November 2008 the network of female MPs presented a suggestion, signed by 
 its proposals for the governmental programme in 2007 the Ministry of Labour 
loyment contracts 
that influence mothers' participation in the labour market. 
T
Conservatives, the Greens and the Swedish People's Party) aims to extend 
Paternity leave by two weeks in 2010, and has raised the minimum flat-rate 
parental allowance and the home care allowance in 2009. The amount of the 
allowance during partial childcare leave will be raised €20 in 2010. The 
Government also intends to ‘review the possibility for a more thorough reform of 
the Parental leave schemes’. 
In October 2007 the Minister responsible for gender equality suggested in a 
Nordic Ministers meeting that the Finnish Parental leave scheme should be 
reformed according to the 6+6+6 proposal presented above. In March 2008 the 
Minister of Labour supported the idea of reform based on quotas, and her party, 
the Greens, have now suggested a 5+5+5 quota model.  
 
In
MPs from all parties represented in the Parliament, where the father's month 
would be extended to three months and the benefit level raised to 80 per cent of 
previous earnings for the whole 12-month period of Maternity, Paternity and 
Parental leave. In March 2009 several NGOs representing Finnish students as 
well as the youth and women's organisations of seven political parties suggested 
the 6+6+6 quota model.  
 
In
suggested a swift re-evaluation ‘of the expediency in the changing labour market 
situation of service and benefit arrangements, such as the Home care leave, 
which lead outside the labour market’. This suggestion follows that of the OECD 
which in Spring 2005 wrote in its report Babies and Bosses (Volume 4) that ‘the 
system of Home Care Allowance holds back labour supply growth’ and that ‘policy 
should consider reform options limiting benefit payments and / or duration’. 
However, these suggestions have not gained support in the political debate. 
Moreover, according to Parental leave surveys from 2001 and 2006, nearly all 
parents of young children support the home care allowance. Findings of the 
surveys and other studies also suggest that it is not the opportunities to take 
Home care leave but the availability of jobs and permanent emp
 
 
169

Since 1996, every chil
municipal childcare serv
d under school-age has been entitled to a place in a 
ice or a state-subsidised private service. Even though this 
nt is rather new and came about after a long and thorough 
ring the first years of the twenty first century it has again been 
which 
five per cent of eligible children attended childcare where 
t staying at home. The issue faded until raised again by the 
edia at the beginning of 2007; in surveys of leaders of childcare centres, some 
ers of two-year-olds wanted to keep the right to 
childcare, irrespective of whether their own child was taken care of at home or in 
ndance, so that flexible arrangements are not considered effective.  
 
ldcare services among one- and two-year-olds has risen during 
the past few years. In the beginning of 2009, local authorities in the capital area 
 remains to be seen what the present government will do with the subjective right 
y 
ervices. The plan aroused criticism, because it was seen as a step towards 
 
 
universal entitleme
olitical process, du
p
questioned. In 2004 the State Secretary of the Ministry of Finance suggested that 
the entitlement should not include children who have a parent at home either 
unemployed or on Parental leave. This suggestion led to a survey of the extent to 
hich childcare services were used by children with a parent at home, 
w
showed that only two to 
there was a paren
m
supported the idea to restrict the universal right of access. In March 2009, the 
issue was again raised in the media in connection with savings needed in 
municipalities due to the economic recession. 
 
But these suggestions are again at odds with the opinions of parents of young 
children. In surveys by STAKES from 2001 and 2006 a great majority (85-88 per 
cent) of mothers and fath
childcare. Moreover, in the public debate voices have also been raised for a high 
quality early childhood education, which would demand attention to accessibility 
and quality of care and education, instead of plans to restrict it. Local authorities 
have made savings by closing down small centres and concentrating services into 
bigger units. Groups of children in childcare are often too big and personnel too 
few; more resources are needed to secure a good environment for children. Many 
municipalities do not offer enough part-time services and not in a way to secure 
continuity for the child; indicators of effectiveness in childcare are based on full-
time atte
Attendance at chi
plan to raise the municipal supplement to the home care allowance to encourage 
home care of young children and reduce the pressure on childcare services. Also 
demand for private services, which has not been high in Finland, is encouraged by 
raising both the municipal supplement and the allowance for private childcare paid 
by the state. 
 
It
to childcare. All six major political parties mention these services as something 
they want to guarantee, some mention concrete measures to develop the 
services, and some the need to renew the legislation to specifically include the 
goal of early childhood education for childcare provision. The government 
promises to revise childcare legislation and develop more diverse forms of 
provision, e.g. part-time childcare. In Spring 2007 the government put forward 
plans to scrap the possibility of free childcare for low-income parents to encourage 
parents who stay at home not to use these services or to use only half-da
s
abolishing the subjective right to day care, and was withdrawn.  
 
170

3. 
 
a. 
b. 
rs, took 
e bonus leave period (i.e. they had also taken the last two weeks of the 
 
me level or socio-economic status. (Salmi et al., 
2009.)  
 
c. 
 
ly two to three per cent of fathers have taken leave 
over the years it has been available. Less than one per cent of mothers entitled to 
eave period even if the father did not take 
Parental leave in 2004–2007. Less than four per cent of mothers work to some 
e a month or less, while a fifth use 
Approximately 12 per cent of fathers take the father's month. The number of 
f
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
 
Almost all mothers use the leave. Two weeks of leave before and two weeks after 
the birth are obligatory.  Approximately 1.5 per cent of mothers entitled to 
Maternity leave have been employed during the leave period in 2006–2008. 
 
Paternity leave 
 
Today, the great majority of fathers take Paternity leave. In 2007, 48,262 men did 
so; in the same year there were 58,008 births.  The proportion of fathers taking 
Paternity leave has been increasing – from 46 per cent in 1993 and 63 per cent in 
2000 to 71 per cent in 2007. In 2007, the average length of the leave-taken was 
15 working days. But only 5,994 fathers, i.e. about nine per cent of all fathe
th
preceding Parental leave).   
Paternity leave is today taken by fathers irrespective of their socio-economic 
background, or that of their spouses (Salmi, Lammi-Taskula and Närvi, 2009). 
Fathers who take only Paternity leave tend to take slightly longer periods after the 
bonus leave was introduced in 2003 (Hämäläinen and Takala, 2007). Two-thirds 
of fathers take the whole three weeks' Paternity leave; men who are more likely to 
take the whole leave include fathers of first-born children, students and 
entrepreneurs.  Instead, length of Paternity leave does not any more correlate with 
the father's age, education or inco
Parental leave 
The 158 days of Parental leave is mostly taken by mothers. Almost all mothers 
take Parental leave whereas on
Parental leave did not take the whole l
extent during the leave period. 
 
The  arrangement, since 2003, under which there are bonus days of Parental 
leave for fathers who take the last two weeks of Parental leave has more than 
quadrupled the number of men taking Parental leave from 1,700 men in 2002 to 
5,700 in 2005 and 7,400 in 2007.  At the same time, the average length of leave-
taken by fathers has fallen; from 64 working days in 2002 to 37 in 2003 and only 
7 in 2007. Two-fifths of fathers taking leave us
2
at least five months. The most common length of leave-taken by fathers is 42 
days, which means that men take all days earmarked for fathers – but no more.  
 
athers taking longer Parental leave has not risen (Hämäläinen and Takala, 2007). 
The father's month has become more popular lately. In 2007, 6,000 men took their 
 
171

father's month, but during the first three-quarters of year 2008, already 7,000 men 
have done so (www.kela.fi/statistics). However, the role of the father's month in 
equalizing parental responsibilities is called into question as, in a clear majority of 
families, the mother stays at home during the father's month (Salmi et al., 2009). 
lf to be the main provider of the family (Salmi et al., 2009).  
mi-Taskula, 2003) . Both bonus leave and 
nger Parental leave are more often taken by men if twins or triplets are born 
 
 
d. 
 
                                                
 
Men with high education, employed in the public sector in middle-sised or big 
organisations, and whose partners also have high education, are more likely to 
take bonus leave – but the leave periods they take are shorter than those taken by 
men with less education (Hämäläinen and Takala, 2007). Overall, Parental leave 
is shared more often in families where both spouses have a high level of 
education and middle-sised or good income. Sharing is also more common 
among men over 30 years of age, and working in the public sector. The socio-
economic status of the father, sise of his workplace or number of children does not 
correlate with sharing of Parental leave. Taking all factors into account, a father's 
take-up of Parental leave is most probable if he is over 30 years and does not 
consider himse
 
Unlike Paternity leave, the length of Parental leave-taken by men is connected to 
their level of education and socio-economic position. Men with a high level of 
education, in skilled jobs or in superior positions take shorter periods of leave than 
men with a lower level of education and in blue-collar or less skilled white-collar 
positions. The position of men's spouses also plays a role: longer Parental leave 
is more rarely taken by men with a spouse in a blue-collar job; while fathers’ take-
up of Parental leave is most common in families where the mother has university 
education and/or high income (Lam
19
lo
(Hämäläinen and Takala, 2007). 
In 2003, the first year that the part-time option for taking Parental leave was 
available, 37 parents received the partial parental allowance, rising to 84 in 2004 
and to 117 in 2007. This means that about 0.1 per cent of families with a newborn 
child have used the new arrangement in its first five years and the interest has not 
increased from 2005 to 2007.  
Childcare leave or career breaks 
Almost all families (86 per cent) take advantage of the home care allowance at 
least for some time after Parental leave. Since 2006 statistics are available on use 
by women and men, showing that ‘Home care leave’ is used almost entirely by 
women. In 98 per cent of all families where one of the parents has taken care of 
the child supported by home care allowance, it was the mother. Earlier the share 
of fathers who take this leave was, based on individual studies, assessed to be 
two to three per cent (Lammi-Taskula, 2003). 
 
Recently, taking advantage of home care allowance has been less popular: in the 
third quarter of 2007, the allowance was paid for 65,000 children under three 
 
. 
19 
Lammi-Taskula, 
J. 
(2003) 
‘Isät 
vapaalla. 
Ketkä 
pitävät 
isyys- 
ja 
vanhempainvapaata ja miksi?’ [‘Fathers on leave’], Yhteiskuntapolitiikka, Vol.68, 
No.3: 293-298
 
172

years old, but in 2008 the figure was only 63,800 (www.kela.fi/statistics). Also 
partial care leave was taken by more parents and support for private childcare 
paid for more children than earlier. All these developments suggest that mothers 
tay at home with the child for shorter periods than earlier.    
Statistics also enable an assessment of take-up periods of home care allowance. 
hree 
years,
 periods taken have divided evenly during the past five years: 26-27 per 
). The proportion for the longest 
 from 2003 to 2007. The (few) male home care allowance 
of the shortest and longest periods than their female 
ounterparts, but they also have more 13-24-month periods (31-33 per cent) 
 a child under 
three years.  Partial care leave is mostly (94 per cent) used by mothers and is 
nths and a quarter for more than 12 months. Partial care 
ften by women with a high education level and high socio-
er period supported by the Home care allowance. The 
Home care allowance, therefore, seems to have become an income source for 
                                                
s
 
In families paid home care allowance at some point before their child turns t
20
cent take less than seven months, 21-25 per cent between seven and 12 months, 
27-29 per cent between 13 and 24 months, and 20-26 per cent longer than 24 
months (the maximum length being 26-27 months
periods has declined
recipients take less 
c
(calculations based on Statistical Yearbooks of the Social Insurance Institution 
2004-2007).   
 
Only ten per cent of mothers giving birth in 2004 returned to employment or 
studies right after Parental leave: on average mothers stayed at home until their 
child was 24 months old. Just less than half (46 per cent) of mothers were 
employed when the child was two years old, also just less than half of them were 
at home on care leave, on Home care allowance without a job waiting for them, or 
already on Maternity or Parental leave with another baby. Some women at home 
were officially unemployed or combined home care of children with studying or 
part-time work (Salmi et al., 2009).  
 
Earlier only a small number of families – 2,100 in 2003 – took advantage of partial 
Home care leave. After the reform making parents of younger school children 
eligible for the partial care allowance, the number of families increased and was 
10,800 in 2007; however, of these, only about 3,400 families had
most usually  taken (41 per cent) for not longer than six months; a third of the 
users take it for 6-12 mo
ave is taken more o
le
economic status, less often by young mothers – maybe because they do not have 
permanent employment (Salmi et al., 2009). 
 
The results of recent research confirm earlier findings that the length of women's 
leave periods depends on how easy it is to find employment. The leave schemes 
also seem to create two categories of women: women with higher levels of 
ducation and better employment prospects have more options, being able to 
e
choose between a shorter or a longer family leave period, maybe also between a 
period of part-time work and working full time; women with little education and less 
opportunities in the labour market have fewer alternatives. So, a woman with a 
fixed-term contract or without work prior to the birth of her child is more likely to 
stay at home for a long
 
20 These statistics exclude all families receiving home care allowance where the person taking 
care of the child is not a parent; however, these families only comprise two to three per cent 
of all recipients. 
 
173

unemployed women; rather than functioning as an alternative to the use of 
childcare services, as intended, it also serves as an alternative to unemployment 
(Lammi-Taskula, 200421; Salmi et al., 2009). 
 
e. 
 
 
4.
 
a. 
tal and Home care 
d practices in connection with leave-take-up. In 
ddition, decision-making between parents and men's and women's reasons for 
pment were studied with a longitudinal approach. Also 
 
b. elected publications from January 2006, including results from 
ntions in combination with economic development. 
    
Other employment-related measures 
There is no information available of the take-up of temporary childcare leave. 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Research on statutory leave entitlements and on take-up is done on the initiative 
of individual researchers; no systematic follow-up takes place except for basic 
statistics. Research has been focused on the take-up of Paren
leave and its connections with women's labour market participation, as well as on 
men's take-up of family leaves. Recent research has compared leave schemes 
and their take-up and consequences in the Nordic countries and also widened the 
focus to workplace attitudes an
a
leave-taking have been studied, as well as the consequences of leave-taking to 
the economic position of families. Recently, studies relying on register-based data 
have been undertaken where the consequences of women's leave-taking for their 
career and wage develo
recently, a study that focused on the everyday situations of parents in families and 
at work as well as on experiences of family leave in work organisations  and 
organisational practices to support leave-takers has been completed; it also  
followed the take-up of new forms of Paternity and Parental leave. 
S
research studies   
 
Haataja, A. and Nyberg, A. (2006) ‘Diverging paths? The dual-earner/dual-carer 
model in Finland and Sweden in the 1990s’, in: A.L. Ellingsæter and A. Leira 
(eds.) Politicising Parenthood in Scandinavia: Gender Relations in Welfare States. 
Bristol: Policy Press, pp.217-240.  
This chapter analyses changes in the policy models as well as the response to 
and effects of policy interve
 
Hiilamo, H. (2006) 'Woman-friendliness and economic depression: Finland and 
Sweden in the 1990s', in: A.L. Ellingsæter and A. Leira (eds.) Politicising 
Parenthood in Scandinavia: Gender Relations in Welfare States. Bristol: Policy 
Press, pp.171-194. 
                                             
ammi-Taskula, J. (2004) 'Äidit työmarkki
21 L
noilla – kahden kerroksen väkeä?' [‘Women in 
the labour market – people on two stories?’], Yhteiskuntapolitiikka, Vol.69, No.2: 202-206. 
 
174

This chapter investigates what impacts economic recession combined with 
d
a
 
L
c
P
P
T
N
a
f
h
ch as Parental leave? 
 
S
E
R
T
young children to 
a
p
e
 
H
p
F
f
T
s
s
r
p
 
H
i
O
R
T
P
t
Swedish Parental leave schemes, day care 
policies and employment. 
 
S
p
O
R
T
nalyses the socio-economic patterns of the gendered take-up of 
P
e
a
p
ifferences in childcare policy have had on the sustainability of the gender equality 
mbition in Finland and Sweden. 
ammi-Taskula, J. (2006) ‘Nordic men on Parental leave: can the welfare state 
hange gender relations?’, in: A.L. Ellingsæter and A. Leira (eds.) Politicising 
arenthood in Scandinavia: Gender Relations in Welfare States. Bristol: Policy 
ress, pp.79-100. 
his chapter compares current entitlements of fathers for Parental leave in the 
ordic countries, and analyses the ambivalence in cultural conceptions of gender 
nd parenthood that complicate negotiations in the family and workplace on 
athers' use of leave. What is the likelihood of changing gender relations with the 
elp of welfare policies su
almi, M. (2006) ‘Parental choice and the passion for equality in Finland’, in: A.L. 
llingsæter and A. Leira (eds.) Politicising Parenthood in Scandinavia: Gender 
elations in Welfare States. Bristol: Policy Press, pp.145-170. 
his chapter uses survey data from 5,000 Finnish families with 
nalyse the outcome of family policy reforms in the 1990s in a gender equality 
erspective, asking what is the relation between the reforms and parents' 
veryday practices and wishes. 
aataja, A. and Mattila-Wiro, P. (2006) Impact of alternative benefit levels and 
arental choices on the parents' income. Micro-simulation approach on the 
innish Parental leave (Discussion Papers 399). Helsinki: Governments Institute 
or Economic Research. 
he paper presents changes in the level of the Parental leave benefit scheme 
ince the 1990s and analyses spouses' income differences in different family 
ituations. The main aim is to evaluate a tripartite proposal in Spring 2006 to 
eform the scheme. Evaluations are made using micro-simulation methods at 
opulation level and in type-family calculations. www.vatt.fi 
aataja, A. (2007) ‘Parental leaves, childcare policies and mother's employment 
n Finland and Sweden: a comparison’, in: R. Myhrman and R. Säntti (eds.) 
pportunities to Reconcile Family and Work (Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, 
eports 2007:16). Helsinki: Helsinki University Printing House, pp.99-111. 
he article discusses examples of problems in international comparisons of 
arental leave schemes and women's employment and presents a summary of 
he comparisons of the Finnish and 
almi, M. and Lammi-Taskula, J. (2007) 'Family policy, labour market and 
olarization of parenthood in Finland', in: R. Myhrman and R. Säntti (eds.) 
pportunities to Reconcile Family and Work (Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, 
eports 2007:16). Helsinki: Helsinki University Printing House, pp.83-97. 
he article a
arental leave and the consequences of long leave periods combined with varying 
mployment prospects to a polarisation of parenthood between men and women 
s well as among women. Will the family policy reforms add to or decrease the 
olarisation of parenthood?  
 
175

 
red Conceptions 
nd Practices in Families with Young Children in Finland. (Research Report 166). 
in Finland, based on survey data from 3,232 
  
. and Kauppinen, K. (eds.) (2007) Perhevapaavalinnat ja 
en 
kustannukset 
sukupuolten 
välisen 
tasa-arvon 
jarruina 
nge for equality planning (2005-2008), by the Labour 
, the higher and more prolonged is the earnings penalty. A 
servable in the case of fathers due to their typically very 
e penalty in the Finnish private 
ity in working life?] Helsinki: Ministry of Social Affairs 
set of 102,055 fathers in 2001-2004. Fathers’ use of family leave is 
affected by numerous factors: parents’ labour market status and education, family 
Lammi-Taskula, J. (2007) Parental Leave for Fathers? Gende
a
Helsinki: STAKES.  
The study, a PhD thesis in Sociology, explores the gendered actualisation of 
statutory Parental leave rights 
mothers and 1,413 fathers of young children, collected in 2001-2002. The results 
indicate that although fathers' involvement in childcare is widely understood as 
important, in practice the mother's primacy in childcare is not challenged. The 
study suggests that individual leave rights for fathers are needed; and that the 
actualisation of father's childcare responsibility requires support by employers 
and work colleagues as well as questioning of prevailing gender relations in the 
everyday life of families. 
Lilja, R., Asplund, R
perhevapaid
työelämässä? [Do the choices and costs of family leave hamper gender equality 
in working life?]. Helsinki: Ministry of Social Affairs and Health. 
The report presents the key results of a joint research project, Combining work 
and family – a challe
Institute for Economic Research, the Research Institute of the Finnish Economy, 
the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health and the Social Insurance Institution of 
Finland financed by the European Social Fund and the Ministry of Social Affairs 
and Health. Using extensive statistical analysis, the project explores the costs of 
family leave in the private sector, at the company and individual level. The results 
indicate that the direct costs of family leave for companies are on average quite 
small, but that the indirect costs tend to have a negative impact on profitability 
especially in female-dominated industries; and that the earnings of mothers 
returning from family leave lag behind those of childless but otherwise similar 
women who have worked uninterruptedly, though these negative wage effects 
fade out rather quickly after re-entry into working life; however, the longer the 
family leave period
similar effect is not ob
short family leave spells. Results of the project are published in English: see 
Kellokumpu, J. (2007) Baby and pay: the family gap in Finland (Labour Institute 
for Economic Research (PT), Working papers 236). Available at: www.labour.fi;  
Napari, S. (2007) Is there a motherhood wag
sector? (Research Institute of the Finnish Economy (ETLA), Discussion papers 
No. 1107). Available at: www.etla.fi. 
 
Hämäläinen, U. and Takala, P. (2007) ‘Isien perhevapaat ja tasa-arvo' [Fathers’ 
use of family leaves and equality], in: R. Lilja, R. Asplund and K. Kauppinen 
(eds.) (2007) Perhevapaavalinnat ja perhevapaiden kustannukset sukupuolten 
välisen tasa-arvon jarruina työelämässä? [Do the choices and costs of family 
leave hamper gender equal
and Health. 
This chapter studies fathers’ choices between three options (taking no family 
leave, taking Paternity leave or sharing Parental leave with the mother), based on 
a data 
 
176

structure, firm characteristics, etc. Utilisation also increased with income despite 
the Finnish allowance system of decreasing compensation rate. 
 
Salmi, M., Lammi-Taskula, J. and Närvi, J. (2009) Perhevapaat ja työelämän 
tasa-arvo [Family leaves and gender equality in working life]. Helsinki: Ministry of 
Employment and the Economy. 
The report of a survey in 2006 of 1,435 mothers and 1,058 fathers of a child born 
he possibilities, obstacles and 
those of parents who had been on leave five 
 consequences of 
employees' leave-taking in work organisations in both private and public sectors, 
based on a survey of 551 personnel managers and 416 shop stewards as well as 
interviews with 15 personnel managers.  
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
Contradictory 
reality 
of 
the 
Child 
Home 
Care 
Allowance 
(CHCA)  
—  CHCA as an option for parents’ work-life choices and its consequences for 
their work careers (2006-2009). Katja Repo, Tapio Rissanen and Jorma Sipilä, 
University of Tampere.  
Child Home Care Allowance (CHCA) is a social policy that raises lots of political 
and emotional tensions among politicians, citisens and researchers. Despite their 
contradictory nature, different kinds of ‘payments for care’ schemes are achieving 
wider acceptance among users and on the political level. The project aims to 
illuminate the labour market consequences of the CHCA, the focus of the debate. 
The research questions are: 1) What kind of consequences does the CHCA have 
on parents’ work-life choices and later work careers? 2) How does the CHCA 
relate to the pursuit of reconciling work and family? 3) How does the allowance 
change the tools and meanings of social policy? The project also includes a cross-
national statistical comparison of the consequences of CHCA using data from 
three different welfare states: Finland, Norway and Sweden.  Contact 
Katja.Repo@uta.fi. 
 
The consequences of work insecurity on work-family relations and well-being 
(2008-2011). Johanna Närvi, Minna Salmi and Johanna Lammi-Taskula, THL; 
Minna Nikunen. Hanna Sutela, Jouko Nätti and Päivi Korvajärvi, University of 
Tampere; Anna-Maija Lehto, Statistics Finland. 
The project studies the prevalence and characteristics of different forms of 
insecure work and the consequences of work insecurity for work-family relations 
and well-being. The main question is how changing working life promotes or 
prevents women’s and men’s opportunities to act in the two life spheres and their 
chances to combine them. Both quantitative and qualitative data will be used, 
including interviews with parents of young children about the consequences of 
leave-taking to employment opportunities and position in the labour market. 
Contact minna.salmi@thl.fi  
 
Women's return to employment after family leave (2008−2010). Riitta Luoto and 
Aino Luotonen, UKK Institute; Kaisa Kauppinen, Finnish Institute of Occupational 
Health.  
in 2004, comparing their experiences of t
consequences of leave-take-up with 
years earlier. The study also looks at the practices and
 
177

The project fo
employment f
work and care
cuses on various factors affecting the timing of mothers' return to 
rom family leave, such as personal motivation and orientation to 
er; family-friendly practices at workplace; personal well-being and 
 challenges of the work-family balance. It includes a 
on focus groups of women on Parental leave and a survey 
-old children. Contact riitta.luoto@uta.fi
work ability; expected
qualitative part based 
of mothers of one-year
 
 
 
 
 
178

2.11 
Je
Po
o
 
 
France 
 
anne Fagnani and Danièle Boyer 
 
pulation (UNDP) 
tal Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
61.0 million
1.9 
T
GDP per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
30,386 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
s % male rate (UNDP) 
2005 
2005 
48.2 per cent 
   79 per
   A
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Women  
Ge
ap (OECD/BB) 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
 cent 
 
  5.0 per cent 
23.1 per cent 
13% points 
   Men 
nder employment g
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
ars 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
53.7 per cent 
63.8 per cent 
   With child under 3 ye
Gl
2008 
15th          
obal gender gap (WEF) 
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
31 (17) per cent 
94 (42) per cent 
   Children under 
 
 
a. 
ate
 of Ministry of 
ter birth) 
 weeks: at least three weeks before the birth, the remainder can be 
taken before or after.  
 
Hundred per cent of earnings, up to a ceiling of €2,859 a month in 2009.  
ees and 
employers. 
Flexibility in use 
• 
 
 
1. urrent leave and other employment-related policies to
support parents 
C
 
M
rnity leave (Congé de maternité) (responsibility
Labour, Social Affairs, Family, Solidarity and Urban Affairs)  
 
Length of leave (before and af
 
• 
Sixteen
 
Pa ment and funding 
y
 
•
• 
Funded from health insurance, financed by contributions from employ
 
 
Two weeks can be taken before or after birth. 
 
179

Eligibi
 
• 
 
Va
ti
poor h
person
 
• I
 increases to 12 
w
• M
 
b. Paternity leave (Congé de paternité) (responsibility of Ministry of 
ial Affairs, Family, Solidarity and Urban Affairs)  
Le
th
• 
 
Payme
Fle
 
Eligib
 
 
orkers. 
Pay
 
• 
lity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
All employees and self-employed workers. 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
n the case of multiple or premature births, the length of leave
eeks after birth. 
others having a third or higher order child receive 24 weeks of leave. 
Labour, Soc
 
ng
 of leave 
 
Two weeks.  
nt and funding 
 
• 
Payment and funding as for Maternity leave. 
 
xibility in use 
 
• 
Must be taken within the four months following the birth. 
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances)  
All employees and self-employed w
•
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
person other than the mother 
 
• 
None. 
 
c. Parental leave (Congé parental)  
 
Length of leave  
 
• 
Until the child reaches three years. Leave is an individual entitlement. 
 
ment and funding  
A benefit – Complément de libre choix d’activité’ (CLCA, Childrearing benefit) 
– is available to all families who meet the eligibility condition whether or not 
they are on Parental leave. It is a flat-rate payment (€553 per month in 2009), 
paid to families whose income is below a certain level (in practice, about 90 
 
180

per cent of families are eligible). However, to parents with only one child it is 
nd of the Maternity leave; in other families 
age). If the parent works part 
 choix d’activité (COLCA) – is 
ree children, the youngest born since 
nth (in 2009) is paid on condition that 
working completely. However the duration is only for one 
s can choose between COLCA and CLCA. 
B
a
c
m employers and employees. 
• 
Elig i
 
• 
y
• 
f
o
t
b
 due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
sability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
pe
n
ental leave (regulated by the 
Ad
 
agreements, employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
 
business grounds. 
• 
The ‘family tax credit’ (Crédit d’impôt famille, CIF), introduced in 2004, is a 
financial incentive provided to companies to encourage them to develop family-
friendly initiatives for their employees. The CIF stipulates that 25 per cent of 
related expenses are deductible from taxes paid by the company up to a ceiling 
of €500,000 per year and per company. Eligible expenses can include training 
programmes for employees on Parental leave and supplements paid to 
employees taking various forms of leave. 
only paid until six months after the e
it is paid until the child reaches three years of 
time, then the benefit is reduced. 
• 
Another benefit – Complément optionnel de libre
available to large families (with at least th
July 2006): an allowance of €790 per mo
one parent stops 
year. Large familie
• 
oth CLCA and COLCA are paid by the CNAF (Caisse nationale des 
llocations familiales), the French family allowance fund, financed by 
ontributions fro
 
Flexibility in use 
 
• 
Parents taking leave may work between 16 and 32 hours per week.  
If parents work part time, the CLCA payment is reduced. If both parents work 
part time, they can each receive CLCA but the total cannot exceed one full 
CLCA payment. For the higher allowance paid for large families (COLCA), one 
parent must stop work completely. 
 
ib lity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
All employees are eligible for Parental leave if they have worked at least one 
ear for their employer before the birth of a child.  
Eligibility for CLCA becomes more restrictive the fewer children a parent has: 
or example with three children the eligibility condition is to have worked for two 
ut of the five years preceding birth (two out of the four years for parents with 
wo children) but with only one child it is necessary to have worked without 
reak for two years preceding birth. 
 
Variation in leave
poor health or di
rso  other than the parents) 
 
re a child is seriously ill or disabled, Par
• Whe
Labour code) can be extended by a year. 
 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective
 
• Employers can refuse to let parents work part time if they can justify this on
 
181

 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
here is no statutory leave entitlement. 
 
e. 
Adoption leave and pay 
 
For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for 
 
Flexible wor
2.
uly 2006, the aim being to encourage fathers to take 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T
Other employment-related measures  
 
 
•
other parents. 
Time off for the care of dependants 
 
• 
Every employee is eligible for an unpaid leave (Congé de présence parentale) 
to care for a sick child under the age of 16 years. Legally, periods of leave 
cannot exceed three days (or five days in specific cases), but this is a 
minimum and most collective agreements have special arrangements, as in 
the public sector where employees can take 14 days a year to care for a sick 
child. 
• 
Allocation journalière de présence parentale: in cases of a serious disability or 
illness of a child under 20 years, every employee with at least one year of 
employment with an employer is entitled to paid leave to care for her/his child, 
or to work part time for a period of up to three years (the allowance is paid for 
a maximum of 310 days within a period of three years). The level of the 
allowance depends on the duration of work in the enterprise and on the family 
structure (in couples, if one parent stops work completely, the amount is €40 
per day in 2009 and €48 for a lone parent). A similar period of leave is 
possible for employees who need to care for a relative at the end of life, either 
a child or a parent living in the same house. 
 
king 
 
• 
No general statutory entitlement.  Employees in the public sector are entitled 
to work part-time for family reasons. 
• 
 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
COLCA was introduced in J
up this leave by providing them with a higher amount of money than CLCA. 
 
 
 
182

3. 
 
a. 
 b.
 
 c.
o on 
Parental leave. 
hanges in APE since July 1994, which extended eligibility to parents with two 
 
 in 1995. The economic activity 
est aged less than three years, 
r cent in 1994 to 53 per cent in 1998. It has been estimated 
at between 1994 and 1997 about 100,000 working mothers with two children left 
idence that women make up 98-99 per cent of parents 
taking leave. It also suggests that mothers who were in employment just before 
led to 
e they have a job guarantee; with high unemployment, most 
orking mothers who are not entitled to Parental leave cannot take the risk of 
 
emanding working conditions, for example atypical/non-standard working hours 
 taking Parental leave with CLCA 
is one way to escape a job with difficult working conditions that create difficulties 
for workers trying to combine paid and unpaid work. 
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
 
Although it is not obligatory, almost all mothers take up Maternity leave, although 
the length of leave-taken varies, with women in higher status employment taking 
less leave. 
 
 Paternity leave 
 
Around two-thirds of eligible fathers took leave in 2003 (Berger et al., 2006). 
 Parental leave and childrearing benefit 
 
It is impossible to calculate the number of parents on Parental leave because 
employers are not required to provide information about take-up. Statistics are 
limited to APE (a benefit replaced by CLCA for children born after January 2004) 
or CLCA, and it is not possible to find out how many recipients of APE are als
 
C
children and introduced the option of part-time work from the beginning of the 
payment period, contributed to a dramatic increase in the number of recipients,
reaching 581,000 in 2005 compared to 275,000
rate of mothers with two children, the young
decreased from 69 pe
th
the labour market to take advantage of APE. The incentive for low paid mothers to 
stop working is strong because of savings on childcare costs and other expenses. 
Research has also shown that mothers living in rural areas and small towns, 
where public childcare provision is scarce, claim APE more frequently.  
 
Research provides ev
taking Maternity leave are more likely to claim APE/CLCA if they are entit
Parental leave becaus
w
losing their job unless their partner has secure employment. This hypothesis 
received support from research conducted among mothers with three children who 
were receiving APE/CLCA. 
Mothers are more likely to claim Parental leave and CLCA when they face 
d
or ‘flexible’ hours imposed by employers. It has been hypothesised that one of the 
factors explaining the high take-up of APE is the deterioration in working 
conditions in recent years. From this perspective,
 
 
183

A number of factors help to explain why fathers are so reluctant to claim Parental 
leave, including: the unequal gender distribution of domestic and child-raising 
tasks within the family still persisting in France; traditional value systems; in most 
couples, the man earning more than the woman; and a workplace culture in the 
private sector that makes it difficult for a man, in particular at management level, 
to take Parental leave. The small number of fathers who take APE are mostly 
blue-collar workers or employees with a stable job beforehand. Compared to 
fathers who do not take APE, they are more likely to work in female-dominated 
b 
 
81,000, consisting of a 6 per cent 
duction in the number of non-employed parents receiving CLCA, but a 75 per 
 
4.
e January 2006 
 
a. 
tudies recently have addressed this issue. In the context of high 
 
of reconciling paid work and family life have been relegated to a 
 
b. Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
  research studies   
 et 
icolas, M., Olm, C. and Simon, M.-O. (2006) ‘La 
prestation d’accueil du jeune enfant (PAJE): un dispositif globalement apprécié 
par ses bénéficiaires‘, l’Essentiel, CNAF, No.46. 
                                                
sectors and to have partners with a higher level of education, a higher status jo
and higher earnings. 
Among parents who had their first child in 2004, 16 per cent received the CLCA. 
This low take-up may be due to several reasons: because mothers with only one 
child do not want to, or cannot, interrupt their professional life for a long time after 
Maternity leave; and because the scheme was quite new when these figures were 
collected and still not well known. However since 2001 the number of parents 
receiving CLCA has increased from 506,000 to 5
re
cent increase for part-time employed parents (who get a reduced benefit).22  
The number of recipients for COLCA remains very low: 2,400 in December 2007.  
 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
elated policies sinc
r
General overview 
 
Only a few s
unemployment and increased casualisation of the labour market, leave policy and
the wider issue 
secondary position on the policy agenda. Public opinion is more concerned with 
pensions and education and the impact of the economic crisis on their 
professional situation. 
  
 
Berger, E., Chauffaut, D., Olm, C. and Simon, M.-O. (2006) ‘Les bénéficiaires du 
complément de libre choix d’activité (CLCA): une diversité de profils’, Etudes
Résultats, DREES, No.510. 
The authors describe the different categories of CLCA recipients and put 
emphasis on the socio-economic variables related to decision-making processes.   
 
Chauffaut, D., Minonzio, J., N
 
22 Berger, E. (2008) ‘Les prestations familiales et de logement en 2007’, Etudes et     
Résultats, No.674. 
 
184

This study d
representative
and perceptio
raws on results of a national survey carried out among a 
 sample of families with one child aged under six years.  Attitudes 
ns towards PAJE (Prestation d’accueil du jeune enfant) are 
e authors focused on three main dimensions of the 
 consideration that one of the aims of PAJE was to 
ces system), information about the eligibility criteria 
 
, Pailhé, A. and Solaz, A. (2007) ‘Comment les employeurs aident-ils 
travail et famille’, Populations et Sociétés
‘Familles et Empl ye
out by 
public enterprises with at least 20 employees. Both 
rviewed and completed a
e 
endly measure
poli
e by 
 in the private 
ed an 
aternity or Paternity leave, whereas all 
ctor workers received their full salary.  
odes d’accu
la p
, droit 
l, No.12: 1283-1287. 
ns of the decision made by President Sarkozy 
ht to a place in a formal ch
 ser
It will 
round 300,000 places and the authors emphasise that this 
007) Diversité des modes de con
 
le pour les mères de jeunes enfants (Document de 
travail du CEE No. 94). Paris: Centre d’études de l’emploi, décembre 2007. 
e decision-making processes 
garding work/family life balance and that diversity in the arrangements made is 
 
am
e la conciliation 
avail – vie familiale de leurs salariés’, Recherches & Prévisions, No.92: 1-12. 
es employers’ attitudes and companies’ practices on the 
ork/life balance of their employees, drawing on data from the ‘Family and 
of the possible interactions between public policies and companies’ involvement in 
 
investigated and analysed. Th
scheme: simplicity (taking into
‘simplify’ the childcare allowan
and financial aspects. 
Lefèvre, C.
leurs salariés à concilier 
This research is b
, No.440. 
urs’, carried 
ased on a survey titled 
INSEE on private and 
o
employers and employees were inte
objective was to investigate family-fri
 questionnaire. Th
s and 
cies put in plac
companies. Only 35 per cent of companies
income supplement for employees on M
sector provid
public se
 
Paris, H. and Chauffaut, D. (2007) ‘M
opposable et autres options’, Droit socia
eil de 
etite enfance
The authors consider the implicatio
to introduce a statutory rig
ildcare
vice for 2013. 
require an increase of a
will be difficult to achieve. 
 
Perraudin, C. and Pucci, M. (2
ciliation entre vie
professionnelle et vie familia
Available at: 
http://www.ceerecherche.fr/fr/doctrav/conciliation_vie_professionnelle_familiale_m
eres_doc94.pdf
Based on an econometric analysis, this study examines the trade-offs made by 
mothers after the birth of a child, and demonstrates the significant role played by 
socio-economic status and working conditions in th
re
the rule. 
Eydoux, A., Gomel, B. and Letablier, M.-T. (2008) ‘Activités sociales et 
énagements temporels. l’action des entreprises en faveur d
tr
This article explor
w
Employers Survey’ carried out by the INSEE in 2005. It also addresses the issue 
work and family reconciliation. 
 
185

2.
Ge
Po
la
Total F
GD  p
 
29,461PPP US$ 
12 
rmany 
 
Daniel Erler 
 
pu tion (UNDP) 
ertility Rate (UNDP) 
er capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005
82.7  million 
1.3 
P
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
2005 
2005 
% 
   Men 
   W m
Ge
e
2007 
2004 
50.8 per cent 
77 per cent 
39.2 per cent 
13% points 
of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
 
2007 
 
  7.9 per cent 
o
en  
d r employment gap (OECD/BB) 
n
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   With child under 3 years 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
36.1 per cent 
54.8 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
11th          
Att
d
   C ld
   C
d
en ance at formal services (ECB) 
hi ren under 3 years 
 
2006 
 
18  (7) per cent 
hil ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
93 (27) per cent 
NB
e
 G rmany is a federal state 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
upport parents 
 
. Maternity leave (Mutterschutz) (responsibility of the Ministry for 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
Fourteen weeks: six weeks before the birth and eight weeks following the 
• 
reimburse the employer who pays the difference between the €13 per day and 
s
a
Family, Senior Citisens, Women and Youth) 
 
 
• 
birth. It is obligatory to take the eight weeks leave after birth. 
 
Payment and funding 
 
• 
Hundred per cent of earnings, with no ceiling on payments, for most 
employees. 
Maternity leave benefits (Mutterschaftsgeld) for employees covered by the 
public health insurance system are usually paid by health insurance 
companies; these companies pay €13 per day direct to the mother and 
the mother’s previous earnings. The costs to health insurance companies are 
financed by employer contributions. 
 
186

• 
t). 
 
Fle
en may continue with paid work until birth if they explicitly declare 
that it is their personal decision to do so. But for the two months after birth no 
 
Eligibi
ployment or family circumstances) 
• 
• 
re not eligible. 
Variati
multiple or premature births; 
po
h
person
births, the length of leave increases to 12 
weeks after birth. 
 
b. 
aternity leave  
 statutory leave entitlement. 
 
c. 
r
Senior Citisens, Women and Youth) 
ildbirth. This is a family entitlement. 
Pa
e
 
Parents on Parental leave receive an income-related ‘Childrearing benefit’ 
(Elterngeld23) for a period of 12 months, at a replacement rate of 67 per cent 
of a parent’s average earnings during the 12 months preceding childbirth. 
While no means test applies, there is a ceiling of €1,800 per month and the 
minimum payment is €300, even for parents without prior income. A parent 
                                                
Women who are privately insured or self-employed usually do not receive 
Maternity leave benefits. However they receive a single payment of €210 from 
the federal insurance agency (Bundes-versicherungsam
• 
The state provides Maternity leave benefits for unemployed women, usually 
the same amount than they receive from social assistance or unemployment 
insurance.  
xibility in use 
 
• 
None. Wom
paid work is allowed for reasons of health protection. 
lity (e.g. related to em
 
All women employees, including those employed part time, even if working 
below the statutory social insurance threshold. 
Self-employed workers a
 
on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. 
or ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
 
• 
In the case of multiple or premature 
• 
In certain circumstances (e.g. death or chronic illness of the parent), other 
relatives living with the newborn child may receive the benefit. 
 P
 
 There is no
Pa ental leave (Elternzeit) (responsibility of the Ministry for Family, 
 
Length of leave 
  
 
Until three years after ch
•
 
ym nt and funding 
 
•
 
23The term was originally Erziehungsgeld, but was changed to Elterngeld in 2007 – parents’ 
money – with the intention to make clear the shared parental responsibility of bringing up 
children, including that of fathers. 
 
187

with average earnings below €1,000 per month receives a low income benefit 
increase: for every €2 their monthly earnings are below €1,000, their 
childrearing benefit increases by 0.1 per cent.   
. Moreover, if another child is born within 24 months 
 by ten per cent. 
• 
The Elterngeld is funded from general federal taxation. 
Flexibility in use  
g benefit may be spread over 24 (+4) 
onthly benefit level is reduced so that the overall payment 
P
c
consent. Income from part-time work is taken into account for the calculation 
ve may be taken up to a child’s eighth birthday 
 
Re
n
• 
 
Eli bi
 family circumstances) 
ve: all parents gainfully employed at date of birth.  
aring benefit: all parents if not employed for more than 30 hours a 
po
 
person other than the parents 
    
• 
Both parents are equally entitled to the childrearing benefit but if the father 
takes at least two months of leave the overall length of benefit payment is 
extended to 14 months24
the childrearing benefit is increased
 
 
 
Instead of 12 (+2) months the childrearin
•
months, but the m
remains the same.   
• 
arents receiving a childrearing benefit may work up to 30 hours a week; if the 
ompany they work in has less than 15 employees, they need their employer’s 
of benefit entitlements.  
 
The final year of Parental lea
•
with the employer’s agreement. 
• 
Both parents are entitled to take leave at the same time and both can take up 
to two leave intervals. 
gio al or local variations in leave policy 
 
Parental leave legislation is federal. But four states (Länder) pay a means-
tested childrearing benefit extended to the third year of Parental leave ranging 
from €200 to €350 per month and child. 
lity (e.g. related to employment or
gi
 
 
Parental lea
•
• 
Childre
week. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to
 
• 
In case of multiple births the childrearing benefit is increased by €300 per 
month for each additional child.  
 
 
 
 
                                             
he benefits paid during the two months of obligatory Maternity leave following childbirth are 
luded in the 12 (+2) childrearing benefit period, effectively reducing the actual benefit 
riod available to both parents to ten (+2) months. 
24T
inc
pe
 
188

Ad
ag
d. 
 
e. 
Ad
Tim
Fle
 
None. 
 
2.
DU/CSU (Christian Democrat) parties 
had previously been highly critical of a reduction of the length of benefit payments 
and the introduction of dedicated leave periods for fathers. 
 
Certainly, the new Parental leave legislation contains a number of compromise 
solutions that are the direct result of the controversy that surrounded the reform. 
For example, the two newly instituted ‘daddy months’ are not, as originally 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
reements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
• 
Many collective and individual company agreements allow parents to utilise 
their Parental leave entitlement within 12 years or, in the public sector, within 
18 years after childbirth. 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
There is no statutory entitlement. 
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
option leave and pay 
 
• 
For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for 
other parents. 
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
• 
In case of sickness of a child (below 12 years of age) parents may take up to 
ten days of leave, receiving 80 per cent of earnings from their health insurer 
with no ceiling. The maximum annual leave period that may be taken per 
family is 25 days.  
• 
Relatives of care-dependent persons are entitled to ten days of short-term 
leave in case of an unexpected illness of a care- dependent relative as well as 
six months of long-term care leave. Both entitlements are unpaid. 
• 
Since February 2009 grandparents are entitled to unpaid Parental leave if their 
child, i.e. the parent of their grandchild, is younger than 18 years or still in 
education or vocational training. 
 
xible working  
 
•
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
The overhaul of the childrearing benefit in 2007 has been a paradigmatic policy 
shift for the German family policy context. The new Parental leave legislation, 
which took just one year to pass Germany’s complicated parliamentary process, 
not only introduced a 67 per cent income replacement rate for a reduced benefit 
period of one year; it also reserved two months of Parental leave for the exclusive 
use of fathers, despite the fact that the C
 
189

planned, deducted from
ast two months of lea
 the 12-month benefit period if the father does not take at 
ve. Instead the two months are added as a bonus to the 
 period, a solution which helped to deflect criticisms against 
g a punitive measure. A second major compromise has been 
ts within the CDU/CSU, which saw the reduction of paid Parental leave 
l attack on the traditional German home care model. Finally, the 
sic minimum payment to all parents, irrespective of prior 
duction of a cap on the maximum 
as a means to allay criticisms about the 
social inequity of an income-related parental allowance. 
verall, the new Parental leave legislation represents a major departure from 
tive state role in the provision of early childhood services 
re crucial for the economic sustainability of an ageing society. This is also 
e Parental leave law of 2007 was slightly modified enabling grandparents to take 
t such parents exhaust their paid leave entitlements after six months, 
hich may prevent parents from equally sharing their childrearing duties and may 
 
 
le
standard 12- month
addy months bein
d
the introduction of an option to spread the benefit payments over a period of 24 
instead of 12 months. This was a concession to strong social conservative 
curren
periods as a fronta
clusion of a ba
in
employment status, and the simultaneous intro
amount of individual benefit payments w
 
O
Germany’s traditional emphasis on the male breadwinner model. Driven by a 
growing concern about the country’s demographic decline and the comparatively 
low performance of Germany’s early education system, policy makers across the 
political spectrum have tentatively embraced the notion that a more equal division 
of labour and a more ac
a
evidenced by the current expansion of services for children under three years, for 
which the national government is providing local authorities with €4 billion 
between 2008 and 2013. 
 
An important innovation in 2008 was the introduction of a ten-day short-term leave 
entitlement combined with a six-month long-term leave entitlement for people with 
dependent relatives requiring care. Although the new entitlement is unpaid and 
thus falls short of the demands for paid leave by many social partners and the 
SPD (Social Democrat) party, it nevertheless represents an important political 
recognition of the needs of care dependent persons and their relatives. In 2009, 
th
leave to care for their grandchild, if the parents are younger than 18 years or still 
in education or vocational training. 
 
Whereas most experts, social partners and political parties appear to be satisfied 
with the effects of the new Elterngeld – particularly with the fact that the number of 
fathers taking leave has grown significantly and that the situation of low income 
families with a newborn child has actually improved – some criticisms remain. In 
particular, a group of almost 300 non-governmental organisations has repeatedly 
asked the current government to prolong the paid leave periods for parents who 
choose to work concurrently on a part-time basis during their paid leave period. At 
the momen
w
actually entrench established role models.  
 
 
 
 
 
190

3. 
a. 
 
b. 
t. 
e has more than tripled from 3.3 per cent in 2006 
 
efited from the low income component of 
4.
 
a. 
4 increased the flexibility of 
ave entitlements for both parents, they also reduced the number of parents 
Take-up of leave 
 
Maternity leave 
 
There is a 100 per cent take-up as it is prohibited to work for eight weeks after 
birth. 
Paternity leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlemen
 
c. Parental leave and childrearing benefit 
 
In 2002 overall take-up of childrearing benefit (Erziehungsgeld) stood at 92.4 per 
cent; 78.8 per cent of these cases extended the leave period beyond the first six 
months after childbirth, while 69.1 per cent took more than one year of leave. At 
the time, 8.5 per cent of Parental leave recipients were working on a part-time 
basis of up to 30 hours. 
 
The 2007 Parental leave reform had the explicit aim to raise the take-up of leave 
by fathers and recently published data by the Federal Statistics Office shows that 
he number of fathers taking leav
t
to 10.5 per cent in 2007. Take-up in the first quarter of 2007, i.e. immediately after 
the introduction of the new Elterngeld, was 6.7 per cent, rising to 12.4 per cent in 
the fourth quarter and 13.7 per cent by the middle of 2008.  The new Parental 
leave law has, therefore, been successful in raising take-up of leave by fathers. It 
has also reduced the number of people taking more than one year of paid leave, 
nother goal of the new law. In fact, just ten per cent of parents made use of the
a
option to prolong their paid leave to two years at 33.5 per cent of previous income. 
 
It is less clear if the switch from a flat rate to an earnings replacement benefit has 
improved the economic situation of average leave-takers. The statistics show that 
almost half of all recipients received just the minimum sum of €300 and among 
this group, a substantial part would have probably been better off with the former 
leave entitlement, which guaranteed them €300 for two years instead of one. An 
dditional 22.3 per cent of recipients ben
a
the new Elterngeld. In other words, for more than two-thirds of parents, the 
introduction of an earnings replacement benefit has had little or no positive impact 
from a financial point of view. For more details on the impact of recent leave 
reforms see the article ‘German leave reforms: acknowledging diversity?’ in 
Section 1. 
 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Whereas the Parental leave changes in 2001 and 200
le
 
191

eligible for benefit and in many cases the benefit level. Various research revealed 
r 
Economic Panel (GSOEP) and has been combining sociological and 
conomic theories for an analysis of the effects of Parental leave legislation on 
tified by empirical 
 
b. elected publications from January 2006, including results from 
panies. Results 
 K. (2006) ‘The Parental leave benefit reform in Germany: 
ket outcomes of moving towards the Scandinavian model’, 
A Discussion Paper, DP No.2372. Available at: http://www.iza.org
after childbirth. It offers evidence that each expansion induced 
women to delay their return to work, but that the expansions had little impact in 
the long-run on women’s labour supply. 
 
Destatis (Statistisches Bundesamt) (2008) Öffentliche Sozialleistungen Statistik 
zum Elterngeld. Anträge von Januar 2007 bis Juni 2008. Wiesbaden: Destatis. 
Available at: http://www.destatis.de. 
Official statistics on the utilization of Parental leave entitlements since the 
Elterngeld reform in 2007.  
 
RWI (Rheinisch-Westfälisches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung) (2008) Evaluation 
des Gesetzes zum Elterngeld und zur Elternzeit – Endbericht 2008. Available at: 
www.bmfsfj.de. 
Evaluation report on behalf of Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen 
und Jugend (BMFSFJ) looking at the impact of recent reforms on the use of leave 
by parents and their attitudes towards the new policy. 
 
that the combination of means testing, relatively modest benefit levels and 
comparatively long leave periods entailed significant ‘employment penalties’ fo
mothers and offered little incentives for fathers to get involved in childrearing. 
Increasingly research has been making use of longitudinal data like the German 
Socio-
e
household and individual behaviour. Indeed, the recent Parental leave reform may 
be seen partly as a reaction of policy makers to problems iden
Parental leave studies.  
S
research studies   
 
BMFSFJ (Bundesminsterium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und Jugend) (2006) 
Elterngeld und Elternzeit: Einstellungen der Verantwortlichen in deutschen 
Wirtschaftsunternehmen. Ergebnisse einer repräsentativen Umfrage [Childrearing 
enefit and Parental leave: attitudes of managers in German com
b
of a representative survey]. Berlin: BMFSFJ. 
A survey assessing the attitudes of employers towards the new childrearing 
benefit and Parental leave rights introduced in 2007. Generally employers saw the 
new measure in a positive light. 
 
Spiess, K. and Wrohlich,
costs and labour mar
IZ
Based on a micro-simulation model, the papers show that on average all income 
groups, couples and single households, benefit from the 2007 leave reform. 
 
Schönberg, U. and Ludsteck, J. (2007) ‘Maternity leave legislation, female labor 
supply, and the family wage gap’, IZA Discussion Paper, DP no.2699. Available 
at: http://www.iza.org. 
The paper analyzes the impact of expansion in leave coverage on mothers’ labour 
market outcomes 
 
192

Wiechmann, E
Geschlechterv
2008-101, Ber
. and Oppen, M. (2008) Gerechtigkeitsvorstellungen im 
erhältnis – Das Beispiel Elterngeld, WZB Discussion Papers, SP II 
lin. Available at: http://bibliothek.wz-berlin.de/pdf/2008/iii08-101.pdf
 the dynamics of current debates on social justice; it uses 
ding the recent Parental leave reform as an exemplary 
ium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und Jugend) (2008) 
MFSFJ. Available at: www.bmfsfj.de 
Official report by the Federal Ministry for the Family, the Elderly, Women and 
Youth summarising the results of the RWI’s evaluation reports. 
hahn, R. T. (2009) ‘Female labor supply a
sal effect of paying higher transfers for
f 
982. Available
p://w
f data from the German Socio-Econom
 paper 
has appar
tly had t e desired effect of 
cing the length of women’s labour market exit after childbir
any: taking a No
rn?
erman 
 of Parental Leave Policies: Children, 
e Labour Market. Bristol: P
ress
olitical dynamics of Parental leave reforms in Germany. 
rearing benefit (ongo
hei
es 
 EU commitment for ex-post impact assessments, the 
has commissioned RWI to conduct an ongoing evaluation 
ults published in 
t 
Discussion paper tracing
the discussions surroun
case. 
 
BMFSFJ (Bundesminister
Elterngeldbericht. Berlin: B
 
Bergemann, A. and Rip
nd Parental 
 a shorter period o
leave benefits: the cau
time’, IZA Discussion Paper, DP No. 3
 at: htt
ww.iza.org
Based on the analysis o
ic Panel, this
shows that the Elterngeld reform in 2007 
en
h
redu
th. 
 
Erler, D. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Germ
rdic tu
’, in: S. Kam
and P. Moss, P. (eds.) The Politics
Parenting, Gender and th
olicy P
. 
This chapter looks at the p
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
Evaluation of the new Child
ing). R
nisch-Westfälisch
Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung [North Rhine-Westphalian Institute of Economic 
Research]. 
As part of an ongoing
ederal Family Ministry 
f
of the effects of the new Childrearing benefit, with the first res
2008 (see above: RWI, 2008). These empirical evaluations will be repeated a
regular intervals. 
 
193

2.13 
G
 
Popula
Tot
GDP pe
2005 
11.1 million 
US$ 
reece 
 
Evi Hatzivarnava-Kazassi 
 
tion (UNDP) 
al Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
r capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
1.3 
23,381 PPP 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
P) 
 of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
   W
Gend r
2005 
2005 
 
43.5 per cent 
67 per cent 
 
t 
   As % male rate (UND
%
omen  
e  employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2004 
13.6 per cent 
32% points 
2007 
  4.1 per cen
Em
   Wi
 
   With 
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
th child under 3 years 
child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
49.5 per cent 
53.6 per cent 
Glo
l 
 
ba gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
75th         
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
3 years 
 
2006 
2006 
 
10 (8) per cent 
61 (20) per cent 
   Children under 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
1. Cur
sup
 
Note
i) on
ctive Labour Agreements signed between 
Servants. 
 
 
                                                
rent leave and other employment-related policies to 
port parents 
 on leave information: the information given below is based: 
 leave arrangements for employees in the private sector that are covered 
by laws and the National General Colle
the Federation of Greek Industries and the General Confederation of Labour, 
which set the minimum requirements for all the private sector.25  
ii) on leave arrangements for public sector employees that are covered by basic 
laws and the Code for Civil 
 
 
 
 
25 Collective Labour Agreements are signed between employers and confederations of large 
sub-sectors of the economy such as the bank sector or enterprises of the wider public sector 
ational General Collective Labour Agreement. 
such the electricity company. Such Agreements  usually have improved provisions with 
regard to the N
 
194

i. Private sector 
 
a. Maternity leave (Basic leave – Άδεια Μητρότητας; Special leave for the 
f maternity – Ειδική Άδεια για την Προστασία της 
 
leave (before and after birth) 
 leave: seventeen weeks: eight weeks must be taken before birth and 
eeks after birth.  
ave: six months, granted after Basic Maternity leave and before the 
 of the use of flexible working (reduced hours of daily work). 
 
P
 
ave: hundred per cent of earnings, with no ceiling in payment. 
nal General Collective 
e. 
pt for when leave can start: if birth takes place before 
 
ης Τέκνου) (responsibility of the 
ocial Protection) 
                                              
protection o
Μητρότητας) (both are the responsibility of the Department of 
Employment and Social Protection) 
Length of 
 
• 
Basic
nine w
• 
Special le
beginning
ayment and funding 
• 
Basic le
• 
Special leave: minimum daily wage agreed in the Natio
Labour Agreement, as well as social insurance coverag
• 
Basic leave: funded by the Social Security Fund and the Manpower 
Employment Organisation, which are financed by employer and employee 
contributions.  
• 
Special leave: funded by the Manpower Employment Organisation. 
 
Flexibility in use 
 
• 
Basic leave: none exce
the time envisaged, the rest of the leave can be granted after birth so long as 
the total time taken remains 17 weeks. 
• 
Special leave: if the parent, with the employer’s agreement, makes use of the 
right to take a continuous time off work instead of working reduced hours 
(see part e), then the ‘special leave for the protection of maternity’ is taken  
after this leave. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
person other than the mother 
 
•  None. 
b. Paternity leave (Άδεια Γέννησ
Department of Employment and S
 
• 
Two days paid leave at the time of the child’s birth, funded by the    
 
Employer.26  
 
  
 
 This and other periods of leave funded by the employer are considered to be part of normal 
orking time. 
26
w
 
195

c. Parental leave (Γονική Άδεια Ανατροφής) (responsibility of the 
l Protection) 
 
e
N
 
Flexibi
 
• Le
•
e
 
Elig il
• All
•
Va
ti
poor h
person
er child, the leave period is doubled for parents of twins and tripled 
•
p
• Pa
for
 
Additio
agreem
 
• Le
ea
d. Ch
• A parent can take time off work with full payment, up to an estimated three and 
three-quarter months, as part of a scheme which also allows parents to work 
reduced hours. For more details, see part e below – ‘flexible working’. 
Department of Employment and Socia
 
Length of leave  
• Three and a half months per child for each parent. Leave is an individual 
ntitlement. 
 
Payment 
 
•  one. 
lity in use  
ave may be taken up to the time the child turns three and a half years.  
ave may be taken in several blocks of time subject to agr
 L
eement with the 
employer. 
ity (e.g. rela
ib
ted to employment or family circumstances) 
 
 employees who have completed one year’s continuous employment with their 
present employer. 
 For an employee to be entitled, his/her spouse must work outside the home. 
 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the parents 
 
• As leave is p
for triplets. 
 Lone parents who have responsibility for a child are entitled to a Parental leave 
u  to six months. 
rents with a disabled child do not get additional Parental leave, but are eligible 
 carer’s leave (see e below – ‘flexible working’). 
nal note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ents; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
ave is granted for up to eight per cent of the total number of employees in 
ch enterprise in each year. 
 
ildcare leave or career breaks 
 
 
 
 
196

 
 
e. Other employment-related measures  
 dependants 
 
r per parent of unpaid 
she has two children 
and up to 14 days if he/she has more than three children. The leave is also 
r other dependent members of the family (e.g. a disabled spouse or 
adult children as well as disabled parents or unmarried sisters if their annual 
• 
 
Leave for parents of children with disability: one hour per day, if the parent 
e children need regular transfusion or haemodialysis: 
up to ten days per year paid leave, funded by the employer. 
per year paid leave. If the parent has three or more 
children the leave is eight days per year. The leave payment is funded by the 
 
Fle
 
u
n
aken as: two hours less per day for the first 12 months 
our less per day for another six months or in block(s) of time of 
 value within the 30 months period after Maternity leave. This last 
 blocks of leave, means that 
p to an estimated three and 
onths. This leave – titled ‘alternative use of reduced hours as 
re of children’ – is considered part of working time and paid 
 
 
 
 
 
Adoption leave and pay 
 
• 
For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for 
other parents. 
 
Time off for the care of
• 
Leave for children’s sickness: up to six days per yea
leave if the parent has one child, up to eight days if he/
granted fo
income is less than the basic income of an unskilled worker). 
Leave for visiting children’s school: four days paid leave per year for both 
parents for each child that attends school up to the age of 16, funded by the 
employer. 
•
asks for it (unpaid and only applied in enterprises with more than 50 
employees). 
• 
Leave for parents whos
• 
Leave for widows/ers or unmarried parents caring for children: in addition to 
other leave, six days 
employer. 
xible working 
• 
Parents are entitled to work one hour less per day for up to 30 months after 
Maternity leave, with f ll earni gs replacement. With the employer’s 
agreement this may be t
and one h
equal time
option, of converting reduced hours into a block or
a parent can take a number of months off work, u
three-quarter m
leave for the ca
accordingly with no ceiling in payment (funded by the employer). 
• 
Adoptive parents of children up to the age of six are entitled to flexible working 
or a childcare leave (see part d above). 
 
 
197

ii. Public sector 
 
Le
h and three after birth. For 
Fl
mains five   months. If birth 
ual birth 
ithout any respective reduction in the after birth leave. 
remature births; 
ation of leave to 
n the mother 
b. P
•
 
c. 
 leave (Άδεια χωρίς αποδοχές) (responsibility of the 
Department of Interior) 
ength of leave  
 Up to two years. Leave is an individual entitlement. 
Pay
 
 None except for the case of three or more children where three months of the 
leave are fully paid by the employer and funded through general taxation. In this 
case, only one parent is entitled to payment. 
a. Maternity leave (Άδεια Μητρότητας) (responsibility of the Department 
of Interior) 
 
gth of leave (before and after birth) 
n
 
 Five months: two months must be taken before birt
•
every child after the third, the length of post-natal leave is extended by two.  
 
Payment and funding 
 
• Hundred per cent of earnings, with no ceiling in payment. 
• Paid by the employer and funded through general taxation. 
 
exibility in use 
 
• If birth takes place before the time envisaged, the rest of the leave can be 
granted after birth so long as the total time taken re
takes place after the time envisaged, the leave is extended until the act
date w
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or p
disability of child or mother; lone parent); or deleg
poor health or 
erson other tha
p
 
• Pregnant women who need special therapy and have exhausted their sick leave 
are granted paid leave. 
 
aternity leave  
 
 No general entitlement. 
Parental
 
L
 
•
 
ment and funding 
•
 
 
 
 
198

F
•
 
Elig
 
 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
sability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
erson other than the parents 
• 
• 
• 
Add
a
• 
d.
  
 
 
 
e. 
 
Ad
•
lexibility in use  
 
 Leave may be taken at any time up to the time the child turns six years. 
ibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
• An employee can use this leave if his/her spouse does not make use of the 
childcare leave at the same time (see d below) 
• In cases of separation, divorce, widowhood or birth without marriage, only the 
parent that cares for the child is entitled to this leave. 
Varia
poor health or di
p
 
There is no variation in the length of leave in the case of twins or triplets. 
In the case of three or more children, three months leave are paid. 
Parents with a disabled child do not get additional Parental leave, but are eligible 
for leave for the care of dependants (see part e below). 
 
itional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
greements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
 
None. 
 
 
 Childcare leave (άδεια ανατροφής or μειωμένο ωράριο 
  εργασίας) 
• A parent can take nine months of childcare leave with full payment as an 
alternative option to a scheme which allows parents to work reduced hours. The 
leave is paid by the employer and funded through general taxation) and is
granted after Maternity leave. The leave does not constitute a personal 
entitlement and can be used by either or both parents within the total nine-month 
period. A husband is not entitled to this leave if his wife is not working. For a 
parent who is unmarried, widowed, divorced or has a severely disabled child, the 
leave is extended by one month. For more details, see part e below – ‘flexible 
working’. 
Other employment-related measures  
option leave and pay 
 
 Adoptive mothers are granted a three-month paid leave during the first six 
months after the adoption if the child is less than six years of age. One of the 
three months can be taken before adoption.  
 
 
 
 
 
199

Tim  off for the care of dependants 
•
•
•
•
egular transfusion or 
      
F
 
• 
• 
 
2
006 and other related 
 
re and greater length, flexibility and choice. 
ge agreed in the National General 
ollective Labour Agreement. Though this leave must be considered a positive 
e
 
 Leave for children’s sickness: none. 
 Leave for visiting children’s school: up to four days of paid leave for one child, up 
to five days for two or more children. If the children attend different levels of 
schools an extra day is granted. The leave is not a personal entitlement. i.e. if 
both parents work in the public sector, the total number of days is for both 
parents to share. 
 Leave for the care of children or a husband/wife with serious disability whom the 
employee supports: one hour less per day, paid.   
Leave for employees whose children or spouses need r
 
periodic therapy or whose children have a severe mental handicap or Down’s 
syndrome: up to 22 days per year paid leave.   
lexible working 
Parents are entitled to work two hours less per day if he/she has children of less 
than two years old and one hour less per day if he/she has children between two 
and four years old, with full earnings replacement. As mentioned above (part d) 
there is an alternative option for this leave which is nine consecutive months off 
work after Maternity leave.  
• Flexible working does not constitute a personal entitlement and can be used by 
either or both parents within the total entitlement period. A husband is not entitled 
flexible working if his wife is not working. 
• For a parent who is unmarried, widowed, divorced or severely disabled flexible 
working is extended by six months. In the case of the birth of a fourth child, 
flexible working is further extended by two years. 
• Adoptive parents of children up to the age of four are entitled to flexible working 
or alternatively childcare leave (see part d above). 
All paid leave is paid by the employer and funded through general taxation. 
. Changes in leave policy since 2
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
Reconciliation between work and family life in Greece has gained policy attention 
over recent years and has become more important as the integration of women 
and mothers in the labour market has become a main objective of policy. In this 
context, leave policy has also become important with increasing demands for 
more extended and more effective measures. Over the last two decades, there 
has been a trend towards mo
 
The most important recent development for employees of the private sector is 
Law 3655/3.4.08. According to the relevant article of this Law, a right for a ‘special 
leave for the protection of maternity’, equal to six paid months, is instituted. The 
leave is granted after the Maternity leave and before the beginning of the use of 
flexible working (reduced hours of daily work). During the duration of the special 
leave, the Manpower Employment Organisation pays the mother with a monthly 
sum that equals the minimum daily wa
C
 
200

development, it is restricted to mothers, being seen as an extension of Maternity 
ditions 
an the National General Collective Labour Agreements. Another issue is the use 
ve and foster parents; these parents are not included 
 had the same rights as other parents.  
9, the General 
•
 (from 17 to 18 weeks) and the 
possibility for mothers, if they so wish and on medical advice, to receive after 
 not used before birth. 
• The provision of the nine weeks of post-natal Maternity leave to which biological 
•
•
ent Organisation. 
• The payment of the leave for children’s sickness and its extension to 12 days per 
the parent has three or more children. 
• The extension of the prohibition of dismissal from work from the one-year period 
•
ee part e) to 
•
•
e with the EU Directive 73/2002. In 
leave.  
 
Issues arose with the implementation of the leave since it excludes many 
categories of employees in the private sector who are not covered by the National 
General Collective Labour Agreements but by special sectoral Labour 
Agreements, the rationale being that these agreements offer better con
th
of the leave by adopti
although previously they
 
For the National General Collective Agreement of 2008-0
Confederation of Labour of Greece proposed the following: 
 
 The extension of Maternity leave by one week
birth half of the leave
 
parents are entitled for adoptive mothers. Starting date of this leave would be the 
date that the adoptive mother takes responsibility for the care of the child. 
 The extension of Paternity leave to five days instead of two. Three of the five 
days should be taken just after birth and the rest during the period of 
confinement. Adoptive fathers should be entitled to the same leave with the 
adoption time as the starting point for the provision of the leave. 
 The payment of Parental leave and the coverage of the cost equally by the 
employer and the Manpower Employm
year if the parent has one child below 12 years of age, to 16 if the parent has two 
children, and to 24 if 
 
after birth to the period of the right to work reduced hours. 
 The extension of the leave of widows/ers or unmarried parents (s
divorced and separated parents who have the responsibility for the care of a 
child. 
 The extension of leave rights to foster parents. 
 The clarification that the leave for visiting children’s school (four days per year) is 
per child. 
  
Some of these proposals are not new, being raised in the past but not adopted. 
The National General Collective Labour Agreement 2008-09 accepted the 
proposal that foster parents be granted parental rights. Also, parents with 3+ 
children were given two more days per year for the care of sick children and other 
dependent family members. 
 
n the public sector, which in general has a more generous leave policy, the most 
I
significant development took place in 1999 when mothers were given the option to 
stay at home with their child for nine consecutive months after Maternity leave 
instead of choosing to have reduced daily working hours. Since January 2007 this 
option was extended to fathers, in accordanc
 
201

fact, the new Code for Civil Servants (Law 3528/07) includes new provisions for 
Maternity leave and other leave, including: 
• M
• P
p
• C
o
r
u
3.
 
 
4.
s since January 2006 
a. 
ments and childcare 
 se. Special mention must be given to the project Equal 
g the role of men in work and private life that is being 
 
b. 
s   
s masculines dans les 
conomic and 
mily aspects of equal opportunities between women and men. It was undertaken 
member organisations in seven EU member states. 
The Centre for Families and Children (KMOP) was the partner from Greece. The 
project was funded by DG EMPL/G/1 Horizontal and International Issues-Equality 
for Women and Men. One of the issues discussed was leave policy. 
 
ALKISTIS Project (2007) Flexibility in Family and Work:A Guide for Employers and 
Employees for the New Forms of Employment and the Reconciliation between 
Work and  Family Lives. Athens: KEK AKMI (in Greek).  
      This publication was produced within the context of the project   ALKISTIS of the 
second cycle of the implementation of the Community Initiative EQUAL (2005-
2006). The project’s main objective was the reconciliation of work and family lives.   
 
 
aternity leave extended by two months for each child after the third. 
arental leave (two years of unpaid leave until the child turns six years) is now fully 
aid for a period of three months on the birth of a third or subsequent child. 
hildcare leave (nine consecutive months off work) or alternatively reduced hours 
f work until the child turns four years is extended by six months in the case of 
educed hours of work or one month in the case of the off work option for an 
nmarried, widowed and divorced parent or a parent with serious disability.  
 
 Take-up of leave 
 There is no information on take-up of the various types of leave. 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policie
 
General overview 
 
Leave policies are a recent development and have not been as yet the focus of 
research or evaluation. Most available research has focused on the issues around 
conciling work/family including flexible working arrange
re
rather than leave per
partners: reconsiderin
implemented within the context of the EQUAL Initiative (See part 4b for more 
details). As can be seen from the selected bibliography, most of the work done 
was within the context of EU projects. 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
search studie
re
 
COFACE (2006) Hommes and Familles: Evolution des role
familles en Europe. Brussels: COFACE (also in English and Greek). 
This publication is based on a research project (2005-2006) on the e
fa
by a partnership of COFACE 
 
202

Symeonidou, 
Reconciliation
Athens: A. Sak
H. and Magdalinos, M. (2007) Family Policies in the EU Countries. 
 of Work and Family Life: A Cost-Benefit Analysis for Greece. 
koulas Publishers (in Greek).  
ter on different types of leave for parents and how these 
 behaviour. 
der Equality (KETHI) (2007) The Role of Fathers in the 
Reconciliation between Work and Family-Personal Lives, Athens: Congress Line 
This publication is based on the work of the project Equal partners: reconsidering 
 work and private life (2005-2006). The pro
as the 
nder Equality (KETHI) of 
nsnational 
form-Resource Centre for M
rwa
); th
mis
 and 
gal); and the National Ma
y fo
Rights 
 were the amily and Childcare Centre, 
Federation of Greek Industries and the Office for Gender Equality of the 
lity of Athens. The project was carried out in the
f the 
 Programme on 
er E
in this 
nd one of t e issues examined was the 
y priorities and Important Matters That Arise with Regard 
ily and Work. Athens: National Center of Social 
the context of the pr
etwork for Combating 
is  Re(Start), 2006’. 
    Fam
 
 
This book includes a chap
are related to reproductive
 
Research Centre for Gen
(in Greek). 
the role of men in
ject leader w
Research Centre for Ge
Greece and the tra
partners were: the Re
en (Νo
y); the CENTRUM 
PRAW KOBIET Women’s Rights Centre (Poland
e Com
sion for Equality
Women’s Rights (Portu
chiner
r Women’s 
(Cyprus). On the national level, partners
F
the 
Municipa
 framework o
European Community Fifth Action
Gend
quality. With
project a qualitative study took place a
h
take-up of leave.  
 
Mouriki, A. (2008) Polic
to the Reconciliation between Fam
Research (in Greek). 
A study implemented within 
Social Exclusion of Women – Alkist
oject ‘N
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
ily Protection: Labour and insurance provisions of employees of the public 
sector in the member states of the EU - comparative analysis (in progress). 
Institute of Labour of the General Confederation of Labour of Greece. 
This is a study funded by the Women’s Secretariat of the Superior Confederation 
of Civil Servants. 
 
Reconciliation of work and family: study for the identification of the needs of 
parents in Athens (in progress). L. Alipranti and E. Tsanira.
This study is focused on working parents, with typical or atypical work schedules, 
who have their children in kindergartens of the Athens municipality.   
 
 
203

2.14 
H
Ma
Pop
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
NDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
10.1 million 
1.3 
17,887 PPP US$ 
ungary 
rta Korintus 
 
ulation (UNDP) 
GDP per capita (U
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   A
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Women  
G
2005 
 
2007 
42.1 per cent 
 
  1.6 per cent 
  4.2 per cent 
15% points 
s % male rate (UNDP) 
2005 
73 per cent 
   Men 
2007 
ender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
E
   W
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
49.9 per cent 
mployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
ith child under 3 years 
 
2005 
 
13.9 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
60th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
 
 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
2006 
  8  (6) per cent 
79 (58) per cent 
 
.Current leave
nd other employment-related policies to 
 
inology: the Hungarian names for the Parental leaves discussed in 
ilable after 
eles, that is 
pbringing’. The Hungarian names for parental and childcare leaves (parts 1c and 
s GYES, GYED and GYET – literally refer only to the payment 
lement, although in practice they cover leave and payment (e.g. GYES is 
 
a. 
onsibility of the Ministry of 
s and Labour)  
Le
 Twenty four weeks: up to four weeks before birth. However only mothers are 
entitled to take one type of Parental leave until the child’s first birthday (see part 
1
 a
   support parents
 
Note on term
1c include the word gondozas, that is ‘care’. By contrast, GYET - ava
the child is older than three (see part 1d) – includes the word nev
‘u
1d) – abbreviated a
e
gyermekgondozasi segely, literally ‘childcare allowance’).  
M
S
aternity leave (szulesi szabadsag) (resp
ocial Affair
 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
 
•
1c) 
 
 
 
 
204

Payment (terhessegi-gyermekagyi segely) and funding 
• Seventy per cent of average daily earnings, with no ceiling on payments. In 
 is 
e.g. 
n sick leave for several months, or is self-employed and 
does not have an actual income), the payment is twice the amount of the official 
inimum wage. In this case, payment is made by the Treasury, not the 
National Health Insurance Fund.  
s from employers and employees.  
Fle
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
• All women are entitled to 24 weeks unpaid Maternity leave. 
 employees and self–employed women with at least 180 days of previous 
 of Maternity leave. 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
p
per
 
b
L
Pa
er’s average daily wage, with no ceiling on payments. 
Flexibility in use 
 None except for when leave can be started after birth. 
 
 
     
 
 
cases when there has been previous employment (i.e. the pregnant woman
eligible) but no actual income can be determined on the first day of eligibility (
the pregnant woman is o
daily m
• Funded from the National Health Insurance Fund, which is financed by 
contribution
 
xibility in use 
 
• The start date can be between four weeks before birth and the birth itself.  
 
 
 
• Women
employment are entitled to benefit payment for the period
 
oor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
son other than the mother 
 
• None. 
. Paternity leave27  
 
gth of leave 
en
 
• Five days, to be taken during the first two months of the child’s life. 
 
ment and funding 
y
 
 Hundred per cent of fath
•
• Funded from the National Health Insurance Fund, which is financed by 
contributions from employers and employees. 
 
 
•
 
                                            
27 Paternity leave has no separate name in Hungarian; it is just listed as one of the eligible 
reasons for leave days in the Code of Labour legislation. 
 
205

Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances)  
 
• All employed fathers. 
 
V
poo
pers
 
• 
c. 
 
T
benefit: (1) for non-insured parents, 
) for insured parents, Gyermekgondozasi 
nts except for GYED up to the child’s first 
birthday, which is an entitlement only for mothers. 
Le
•
a
b
ave period until the child’s second 
 
8. Twice this amount in case of multiple births, 
 the Treasury from general taxation. 
ings, up to a ceiling of HUF96,600 per month 
 
Flex
g GYES cannot work until the child’s first birthday, but can then 
 hours while still receiving the full benefit until the child’s third 
Elig
 
• GYES: all parents. 
• GYED: either of the parents living with the child is eligible as long as she/he has 
been employed at least for 180 days within the two years before the birth of the 
child; however, only one parent can actually take GYED. 
ariation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
r health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
on other than the father 
None. 
 
Parental leave (responsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Labour)  
here are two types of leave and 
Gyermekgondozasi segely – GYES; (2
dij – GYED. Both are family entitleme
 
ngth of leave  
 
 GYES 
. Until the child’s third birthday, for parents not insured.  
. From the end of GYED (child’s second birthday) until the child’s third birthday, 
for insured parents.  
• GYED: from the end of the Maternity le
birthday, for insured parents.  
 
Payment and funding 
• GYES: Flat-rate benefit equal to the amount of the minimum old-age pension, 
HUF28,500 per month (€97) in 200
regardless of their number. Funded by
• GYED: Benefit of 70 per cent of earn
(€329) in 2008. The ceiling is determined each year, as 70 per cent of twice the 
minimal daily wage. Funded from the National Health Insurance Fund, which is 
financed by contributions from employers and employees. 
ibility in use  
 
• A parent takin
ork unlimited
w
birthday. 
 
ibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
206

 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to
p
p
o
 
er
•
gin 
nd the benefit payment is doubled. 
n by grandparents from the first to the third birthday of the 
 looked after in her/his own home and if the parents agree to 
tlement. Grandparents taking GYES can work less than four 
hours daily, or without limitation if the work is done in the home, after the child 
 
d. 
leave or career breaks 
ts in a family with three or more children may take leave during 
e period between the third and eighth birthday of the youngest child 
e 
work is done in the home.  GYES and GYED are intended to promote childbirth 
nciliation of work and childrearing; GYET is considered an 
cknowledgement of parenthood as paid work. 
e. 
Ad
 
•
Tim
 
•
; 12-35 months – up to 84 days per child per year; 36-
Fle
•
aks per day for breastfeeding until a 
reak until a child is nine months old. In 
lied by the number of the twins. 
 
 
 
son other than the parents 
 
 GYES: parents of a child who cannot be admitted to a childcare centre due to 
illness can take leave until the child’s eighth birthday; parents of a child with a 
long-term illness or disability can take leave until the child’s tenth birthday (longer 
in discretionary cases); parents of twins are eligible until the children be
elementary school a
• GYES: can be take
child if the child is
transfer their enti
becomes older than three years of age. 
Childcare 
 
Either of the paren
th
(Gyermeknevelési támogatás – GYET). Benefit payment as for GYES. The person 
taking up GYET can work less than four hours daily, or without limitation if th
and support reco
a
 
Other employment-related measures  
 
option leave and pay 
 For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for other 
parents. 
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 There is an entitlement to leave, the length of which depends on the child’s age: 
under one year – unlimited
71 months – 42 days; six to 12 years – 14 days. Lone parents are entitled to a 
double period. Leave is a family entitlement and a benefit is paid at 70 per cent of 
earnings. 
 
xible working  
 
 Mothers are entitled to two one-hour bre
child is six months old; and one one-hour b
case of twins, the number of hours is multip
 
207

2. hanges in leave policy since 2006 and other related   
 
A change introduced in 2005 specifies that the person taking GYES cannot work 
rthday, but he/she can work unlimited hours after that while 
lso accessing the full amount of the benefit until the child’s third birthday. With 
3. 
 
a. 
 only statistics on the number of women receiving benefit. The average 
monthly number in 2007 was 29,253. It is thought that almost all eligible women 
b. Paternity leave 
 leave. 
 
c. 
f fathers taking 
 
 
d. 
C
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
until the child’s first bi
a
this change, GYES has, in effect, become more like a universal payment to 
parents of children under three who were not insured before having their child. 
 
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
 
There are
take leave. 
 
 
The total number of fathers taking leave during 2007 was 20,983, using 97,021 
days, an estimated six per cent of the number of mothers taking Maternity
Parental leave 
 
There are only statistics on the number of recipients of benefit. The average 
monthly numbers in 2007 were: 164,832, or 68.4 recipients per thousand women 
of fertile age, for GYES; 93,973, or 39 recipients per thousand women of fertile 
age, for GYED; and 42,776, or 17.7 recipients per thousand of women of fertile 
age, for GYET. There is no information on what proportion of parents take leave 
r how long they take; it is thought, however, that the number o
o
leave is very small; over the years, the number of male recipients of benefit has 
been between 1,000 and 3,000. While there are no data available on the 
proportion of parents taking leave, an estimate can be made on the basis that 
about ten per cent of children under three years were in childcare centres in 2007, 
so the remainder probably had a parent (predominantly mothers) taking up one of 
the Parental leave options. 
It is thought that mothers with higher education and better paid jobs take shorter 
periods of leave, especially as the last year of GYES is paid at a flat rate and 
because of the implications for careers of prolonged absence from work. Some 
indication of leave-taking is provided by data on the age of children entering 
bolcsode (nurseries taking children under three years of age); most children enter 
etween 18 months and two years of age. 
b
Other employment-related measures 
 
In 2006, the total number of sick leave days in Hungary was 32,981,000; 3.3 per 
cent of these were taken for sick children.  
 
208

 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
lated policies since
4.
 January 2006 
 
a. 
the availability of childcare services, and the influence of 
tal leave, and savings from this to be channelled into childcare 
ervices. 
 
b. 
e describes the characteristics of female employment in Hungary 
between 2000 and 2004, and concludes that the tendencies observed went 
 of labour market segregation, in 
Ignits, Gy. and Kapitány, B. (2006) ‘A családtámogatások alakulása: célok és 
 
06, which reflect the changes caused by macroeconomic conditions, 
hors conclude that during the transition years, the emergence 
f unemployment and the growing social inequality forced the support system of 
garian Central Statistical Office) (2006) Visszatérés a munkaerőpiacra 
re
General overview 
 
Many publications in 2007 focused on the system of childcare leave in Hungary. 
The length of leave, 
these on the labour market participation of women have been the main concern of 
most publications in this area. The sudden interest in the topic, especially by 
economists, can be partly explained by the OECD recommendations for Hungary 
(OECD, 2007), published in May 2007, which include reforms to reduce the 
duration of Paren
s
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Koncz, K. (2006) ‘A felzárkózás elmaradása: a magyar nők munkaerő-piaci 
helyzet’ [‘Missing of the catching up: the labour market position of Hungarian 
women’], Statisztikai Szemle (Statistical Review), Vol.84, No.7: 651-674. 
The articl
against the guidelines of the EU employment strategy. The labour market position 
of women is worse than that of men, e.g. difficulties of integration and 
reintegration to the labour market, in reproduction
the lack of equal chance in promotion, in evaluation of jobs and wages, and 
income differences. Positive employment-related actions for women are quite 
limited in number; initiatives, such as new legislation to prioritise pregnant women 
and women with young children, have not had satisfactory results. 
 
eszközök’ [‘The changes in family assistance: aims and means’], Demográfia, 
Vol.49, No.4: 383-401. 
The article follows the changes in the support system of family policy between
1989 and 20
financial possibilities and the different ideologies and aims of social policies of 
successive governments. It traces the changes in its share of GDP, in the most 
important elements of the concrete forms of assistance, and in the proportion of 
the total amount of family assistance accounted for by different forms of 
assistance. The aut
o
family policy to take over more and more the tasks of social policy.  
 
KSH (Hun
gyermekvállalás után [Returning to the labour market after having children]. 
Budapest: KSH (Hungarian Central Statistical Office). 
The Hungarian Central Statistical Office has used a special ad hoc module 
attached to the Labour Force Survey on five occasions since 1993 to follow the 
 
209

intentions and opportunities/possibilities of those who took up the different forms 
of childcare leave to (re-)enter the labour force. This publication reports the results 
of the survey done in 2005. 
gazdaságtudományi 
Intézet, 
Országos 
supply effects of employment-related provisions including childcare leaves 
and allowances. 
retnének a szülők? [Childcare 
tions, contributing to the debate about the OECD 
recommendations for Hungary to reduce the length of leaves and to develop 
 
Poland and Hungary after 1989’, Social Politics: International Studies in 
itical processes and gendered outcomes of welfare 
state formation in Hungary and Poland. The authors find that despite the 
 
The report concludes that more help should be given to parents to combine work 
h transfers to mothers; female 
labour supply was high under socialism, but decreased sharply during the 
transition to a market economy. The article analyses how this decrease can be 
  
Bálint, M. and Köllő, J. (2007) ’Gyermeknevelési támogatások’ [’Childcare 
supports’], in: K. Fazekas, Z. Cseres-Gergely and A. Scharle (eds.) Munkaerőpiaci 
Tükör 
2007. 
Budapest: 
MTA 
Köz
Foglalkoztatási Közalapítvány [Institute of Economics, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences], pp.24-74. 
The ’Munkaerőpiaci Tükör’ series is a yearbook published since 2000, which aims 
to provide information about main developments in the Hungarian labour market, 
and new research results. A section of the 2007 yearbook deals with the expected 
labour 
 
Bass, L., Darvas, A. and Szomor, E. (2007) Gyermeknevelési szabadságok és 
gyerekintézmények. Mi a jó a gyerekeknek, mit sze
leaves and childcare services. What is good for children, what would parents 
like?]. Available at: www.gyerekesely.hu  
The paper is an overview of childcare leaves and childcare services with some 
suggestions for alternative solu
services. 
Glass, C. and Fodor, E. (2007) ‘From public to private maternalism? gender and 
welfare in 
Gender, State & Society, Vol.14, No.3: 323-350.  
The paper compares the pol
differences in the substance of the policies (while maternalism is privatised in 
Poland, it is publicly supported and subsidised in Hungary), both regimes limit 
women’s labour market opportunities. 
OECD (2007) Economic survey of Hungary 2007: Improving reconciliation 
between 
work 
and 
family. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.oecd.org/document/29/0,3343,en_2649_37457_38616413_1_1_1_37
457,00.html
and family roles. Its recommendations include further work to identify and remove 
barriers to the creation of jobs with hours and flexibility that suit working parents; 
and reforms to reduce the duration of Parental leave, channelling savings into 
childcare services. 
 
Scharle, Á (2007) ’The effect of welfare provisions on female labour supply in 
Central and Eastern Europe’, Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis, Vol.9, No.2: 
157–174. 
Former socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe encouraged women to 
work full time and provided various in-kind and cas
 
210

explained by the structural changes in the labour market, and how much is due to 
the withdrawal of family benefits and services. 
Pongrácz, T. (2007) ’Gyermekvállalás, gyermektelenség és a gyermek értéke 
közötti kapcsolat az európai régió 
 
országaiban’ [’Correlation between childbirth, 
with the help of the results of 
PA II survey carried out in 14 countries between 2000 and 2003. In Central and 
 
, parenting and childhood across Europe around the millennium’, 
preferences on partnership and the proportion of children 
ving in single parent families. 
 
 
Kapitány, B. (2008) ’A „gyed-hatás’. Az 1985 és 1996 közötti családtámogatási 
rendszer termékenységre gyakorolt hatása’ [’The pronatalist effect of the 
Hungarian GYED system on fertility (1985-1996)’], Demográfia , Vol. LI, No. 1: 51-
78. 
This article presents a measure to estimate how the Hungarian family support 
system, with GYED as the main element, influenced fertility between 1985 and 
1996. Both the timing of childbirth and completed fertility were influenced by the 
pronatalist policy.  
 
Makay, Zs. (2008) ’Ki vigyáz a munkavállaló anya gyermekére? Az egy éven aluli 
gyermekek napközbeni ellátása Franciaországban’ [’Who cares for the children 
while their parents are at work? Analysis of the care of first and second born 
infants aged below one in France’], Demográfia, Vol.LI, No.2-3: 217-243. 
This presentation of French family policy measures suggests that all families 
where the parents work have equal access to paid childcare according to their 
resources. However, empirical results and statistical analysis show that mothers 
with low educational levels and unstable work are less likely to use paid childcare; 
parents in these families are more likely to care for a child themselves or ask for 
help from grand-parents or other family members. 
 
childlessness and the valuation of children in some European countries’], 
Demográfia, Vol.50, No. 2-3: 197-219. 
The paper examines the correlation between childbirth, childlessness and the 
valuation of children in some European countries 
P
Eastern Europe and in Cyprus the high valuation of children could be 
demonstrated, while in Western Europe a neutral, indifferent attitude could be 
seen. 
Spéder, Zs. (2007) ‘The diversity of family structure in Europe: a survey on 
partnership
Demográfia, Vol.L, No.5 (English edition):105-134. 
Reviewing data from different European surveys, the article addresses the 
question of whether European trends for fertility, marriage and divorce converge 
or diverge; it includes 
li
Blaskó, Zs. (2008) ’Az anya korai munkavállalásának hatásai a gyermek pszichés 
fejlődésére. Szakirodalmi áttekintés’ [’Does early maternal employment affect non-
cognitive children outcomes? A literature review’], Demográfia, Vol. LI, No. 2-3: 
259-281. 
This article reviews research on early maternal employment and children’s 
psychological development.  
 
211

Frey, M. (2009
Foglalkoztatás
market – in th
) ’Nők és férfiak a munkaerőpicaon – a Lisszaboni Növekedési és 
i Stratégia céljainak a tükrében’ [’Women and men in the labour 
e context of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs’], in: I. Nagy 
) Szerepeváltozások. Budapest: TÁRKI and Szociális és 
 pp.27-51. 
s labour market trends from the perspective of the 
the Lisbon Action Programmes for Growth and Jobs. It 
t has occurred in the 
éder, Zs. (2009) ‘A mu
ia
énzbeli 
er hatása a gyermekválla
ek megval
ns and child- r
 mo
s 
], in: I. Nag
 T
eds.) 
unkaügyi Minisztérium, 
of two waves of a Hungarian panel survey were used 
view 
ions and child-related 
badsággal ka
kérdések 
ó néhány államá an’ [‘Child are leave policies 
e other EU countries’], in: I. 
nd T. Pongrácz (eds.) 
t: TÁRKI and Szociális és Munkaügyi Minisztérium, 
pp. 65-78. 
nt and suitability of long leave periods.  
and T. Pongrácz (eds.
Munkaügyi Minisztérium
The chapter evaluate
employment targets of 
deals with gender mainstreaming and illustrates wha
Hungarian labour market between 2004 and 2007. 
 
Kapitány, B. and Sp
családtámogatási rendsz
nkaerőp
lási terv
c és a p
ósulására’ 
netary programme
[‘Influences of labour market conditio
on fertility intentions in Hungary’
elated
y and
. Pongrácz (
Szerepeváltozások. Budapest: TÁRKI and Szociális és M
pp. 79-94. 
Results 
of factor
to give an over
s influencing the realisation of fertility intentions. The chapter also 
discusses the possible influences of labour market condit
benefit programmes.  
 
Korintus, M. (2009) ‘A gyermekgondozási sza
pcsolatos 
Magyarországon és az Európai Uni
b
c
in Hungary and in som
Nagy a
Szerepeváltozások. Budapes
The chapter provides a short overview of leave periods in EU countries, and 
compares the Czech, Hungarian and Slovenian systems as case studies to 
nalyse the developme
a
 
212

2
Iceland 
 
P
Tota
GD
.15 
Thorgerdur Einarsdóttir and Gyda Margrét Pétursdóttir 
 
opulation (UNDP) 
l Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
P per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
0.3 million 
2.0 
36,510 PPP US$ 
Fem
   A
% o
   M
   
G
ale economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
s % male rate (UNDP) 
f employed working part time (OECD/F) 
en 
omen  
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
70.5 per cent 
86 per cent 
 
  8.0 per cent 
W
ender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2004 
25.4 per cent 
  8% points 
Em
   W
2005 
83.6 per cent 
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
ith child aged 0 to 5 years    
 
 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
4th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB)28
   Children u
  
 
 
nder 3 years 
 Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
2006 
No data 
No data 
 
1. C
rents 
iterally ‘birth leave’) is 
sed in law to refer to paid Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave. But in common 
market due to birth and childcare. When the father takes his leave, it is usually 
referred to as fedraorlof (Paternity leave). So even if the law makes no distinction 
Foreldraorlof refers to the unpaid leave included in part 1d under the heading of 
ve’, though it translates literally into ‘Parental leave’. The type of 
rights’. 
 
                                                
urrent leave and other employment-related policies to 
support pa
 
Note on terminology: In Icelandic the term faedingarorlof (l
u
parlance, the term is mostly used to refer to women’s absence from the labour 
between different types of leave-taken by mothers and fathers, a distinction is 
made in everyday usage. 
 
‘Childcare Lea
leave referred to in part 1c under the heading of ‘Parental leave’ is translated into 
English by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Security as ‘parents’ joint 
 
 
 
 
 
28 The access rate in 2005 was 53 per cent for children under three years and 94 
per cent for children aged three to five years (source: Statistics Iceland) 
 
213

a. Maternity leave (faedingarorlof) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
ocial Affairs and Social Security) 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
•
Pay
hole period of Maternity leave) and funding 
(€1,342 per month), for 
 
n 25 and 49 per cent of full-time hours, is at least ISK82,000 (€275) per 
 
 
 
e payment.  
he Maternity/Paternity leave fund, financed by contributions from 
ployees and self-employed workers; 1.08 per cent of total insurance 
Fle
weeks of leave following the birth. After that 
she can take leave on a part-time (50 per cent) basis and work part time. It is 
e in one continuous period or as several blocks of time 
(i.e. leave can be ‘uninterrupted’ or ‘interrupted’). 
E
ent or family circumstances) 
o have been economically active prior to childbirth are eligible for 
 
Va
 
p
ave to 
•
•
y leave can be extended by two months if the mother suffers any 
b
dingarorlof) (responsibility of the Ministry of Social 
Security) 
Length of leave 
• Three months. 
 
S
 
 
 Three months: one month may be taken before birth. 
 
ment (applied for the w
 
• Eighty per cent of earnings up to a ceiling of ISK400,000 
those who have been in the workforce during the preceding 12 months, ending six 
months prior to birth. The payment to a mother working shorter part-time hours, i.e.
betwee
month; and for a mother working longer hours, at least ISK114,000 (€383). As a
frame of reference, the minimum wage in Iceland is ISK157,000 (€527) per month
and maximum unemployment benefit is ISK149,000 (€500). Others (including
students) receive a flat-rat
• Funded by t
employers, em
contributions goes to this fund. 
 
xibility in use 
 
• The mother is obliged to take two 
also possible to take leav
• See part 1c. 
 
ligibility (e.g. related to employm
 
• ll women wh
A
leave. 
iation in leave due to child or family rea
r
sons (e.g. multiple or premature births;
oor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of le
person other than the mother 
 
 See part 1c. 
Maternit
 
complications during or after the birth. 
 
. Paternity leave (fae
ffairs and Social 
A
 
 
 
214

Payment (applied for the whole period of Parental leave) and funding 
 
• Same as for Maternity leave. 
Flexibi
 
• Sa
mu
 
Eli
il
) 
childbirth are eligible for 
leave. 
ariation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ne parent); or delegation of leave to 
• See part 1c. 
 
c. Par
ology at the start of part 1) 
esponsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Security) 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
• Three months after birth. 
Pa ment and funding 
• S
 
lexib
• Leave can be taken in one continuous period or as several blocks of time. 
Re
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
•
 
lity in use  
me as for Maternity leave, except for the obligatory two weeks that mothers 
st take after birth. 
gib ity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances
 
• All men who have been economically active prior to 
 
V
poor health or disability of child or mother; lo
person other than the mother 
 
 
ental leave (see note on termin
(r
 
 
 
 
y
 
ame as for Maternity leave. 
ility in use  
F
 
• The total of nine months leave (covering maternity, paternity and joint rights) can 
be used until 18 months after the birth.  
 
 
gional or local variations in leave policy 
 
• None. 
 
 
 As Maternity leave. 
 
 
 
 
 
215

Variation in leave due to c
oor health or disability of child 
hild or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
parents 
 also increases if the child has to stay in 
han seven days after the birth by that amount of time up to four 
homosexual couples can apply for leave. 
reer breaks (Foreldraorlof) 
 
e. 
Ad
child is 
im
Fle
 to make the necessary arrangements to 
circumstances. 
ve policy since 2006 and other related 
ously 
ort intervals between births (less than three 
t due for the leave period after the second birth).  
 
p
person other than the 
 
• 
In the case of multiple births, the length of leave increases by three months for 
each additional birth; it can be extended by the same amount if the child 
suffers from a serious illness. Leave
hospital more t
months. 
• 
 Lesbian or 
 
 
 
d. Childcare leave or ca
 
• 
Each parent may take 13 weeks unpaid leave until the child is eight years old.  
Other employment-related measures  
 
option leave and pay 
 
 
The same regulations as for parents having their own children if the 
•
younger than eight years when adopted. 
 
e off for the care of dependants  
T
 
 
None. 
•
 
xible working 
 
• 
Employers are required by law
enable men and women to balance family life and work, including the 
arrangement of work in a flexible manner and parents being able to take leave 
from work in case of serious or unusual family 
 
2. Changes in lea
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
In 2007 the legal directive on Parental leave was slightly amended. Previ
parents who had children with only sh
years) received reduced payments – 80 per cent of 80 per cent of their previous 
earnings (i.e. payments during Parental leave were used as a referent in 
calculating the amoun
 
Following elections in 2007 a coalition government was formed. Part of its 
agreement was to increase the amount of leave, but these plans have been 
dropped due to the economic crisis. The crisis also led to a change in Parental 
leave payments, which are now based on earnings for a 12 month period, ending 
six months prior to birth; the ceiling on payments was also lowered, from 
ISK535,700 in 2007 to ISK400,000.  
 
216

3. 
 
a. 
er cent of women applying for leave used the three months 
 
b. 
 
c. 
r every 100 mothers taking some leave, and fathers took about a third of all days 
gnated Parental leave; 
0.3 per cent of mothers took some period of parents’ joint rights. 
.2 per cent of women took leave in one 
ave in two or more parts.  
 
d. 
 
4.
 
a. General overview 
 
b. 
ent. 
Available 
at: 
ttp://www.jafnretti.is/Dten/_Files/island_gislihrafn_en.pdf
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
 
In 2006, 99.7 p
available. For more details see part 3c. 
Paternity leave 
 
See part 3c. 
Parents’ joint rights 
 
In 2006, 87.7 fathers took a period of leave (paternity and/or parents’ joint rights) 
fo
of leave-taken by parents (an average of 100 days leave compared to 185 for 
mothers). Overall, 19.7 per cent of fathers took some of the parents’ joint rights, 
and 18.5 per cent took less than their three months of desi
9
 
In 2006, 25.7 per cent of men and 34
uninterrupted period; the remainder took their le
Other employment measures 
 
Employers are not penalised if they do not make arrangements to enable men and 
women to balance family life and work, and there is no monitoring by the state of 
the implementation of this measure.  
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
Research on leave and other employment-related policies is increasing in Iceland. 
Some studies include cross-country comparison, which is reducing Iceland’s 
previous knowledge gap in this area.  
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Atlason, G. H. (2006) On reconciliation of gender equality and daily routines in 
Iceland: Icelandic report on the project ‘Between paid and unpaid work: family 
friendly policies and gender equality in Europe’, (ed. Jolanta Reingardiene). 
Vilnius: Social Research Centre. Vytautasmagnus University, Centre for Equality 
Advancem
h
 
217

This is the Icelandic part of a qualitative and quantitative cross-national survey 
conducted in May 2006. The survey investigated how families reconcile work and 
family life, and reveals that Icelandic society is a ‘stressful society’ with up to 90 
per cent of the respondents experiencing some conflict between work and family 
 
olanta Reingardiene (ed.) (2006). Between paid and unpaid work: family friendly 
aútgáfan, pp.201-210. 
ntun [Upbringing and Education], Vol.15,   No.2: 9-29.  
ttp://www.jafnretti.is/Dten/_Files/FOCUS%20-
stering Caring Masculinities. FOCUS 
whose aim is to 
xamine and improve men’s opportunities for balancing work and family life in 
s for men to take on caring 
sponsibilities, although to a different degree in the different countries. 
City of 
g Háskólaútgáfan, pp.435-444. 
retti.is/Dten/_Files/Nordic%20experiences%20with%20patental%20
responsibilities.  
J
policies and gender equality in Europe. Vilnius: Social Research Centre, 
Vytautasmagnus University Centre for Equality Advancement. Available at: 
http://www.jafnretti.is/Dten/_Files/BetweenPaidandUnpaidWork.pdf
Full report of the cross-national study referred to above. 
 
Eydal, G.B. (2006) ‘Feður og fjölskyldustefna’ [‘Fathers and family policy’], in: Ú. 
Hauksson (ed.) Rannsóknir í félagsvísindum VII [Research in Social Sciences]. 
Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands og Háskól
 
Eydal, G.B. (2006) ‘Þróun og einkenni íslenskrar umönnunarstefnu 1944-2004’ 
[‘Development and characteristics of Icelandic care policy 1944-2004’], Uppeldi og 
men
 
Gíslason, I. V. (2006) Fostering Caring Masculinities: Icelandic National Report. 
Akureyri: Jafnsréttisstofa. Available at: 
h
%20Icelandic%20National%20Report.pdf
 
Langvasbråten, T. and Teigen, M. (2006) Fo
– The European Dimension. Oslo: Institute for Social Research. Available at: 
http://www.jafnretti.is/Dten/_Files/FOCUS%20-%20European%20Report.pdf
Fostering Caring Masculinities (FOCUS) is an EU-funded project (the partner 
countries are Germany, Iceland, Norway, Slovenia and Spain) 
e
order to encourage men to take on more caring tasks. The project shows that 
there are major obstacles in all the countrie
re
 
Pétursdóttir, G.M. (2006) ‘Skreppur og Pollýanna: Um ólíka möguleika og sýn 
kynjanna innan vinnustaða Reykjavíkurborgar á samræmingu fjölskyldulífs og 
atvinnu’ [‘Mr. Step Out and Pollyanna: Different chances and views among men 
and women towards compromising family life and work among the 
Reykjavík workplaces’], in: Ú. Hauksson (ed.) Rannsóknir í Félagsvísindum VII 
[Research in Social Sciences]. Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands 
o
 
Valdimarsdóttir, F.R. (2006) Nordic experiences with Parental leave and its impact 
on equality between women and men. TemaNord 2006:531. Copenhagen: Nordic 
Council 
of 
Ministers. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.jafn
leave.pdf
 
 
218

Eydal, G. B. (2007) ‘Fæðingarorlof: Löggjöf og lífsstíl’ [‘Parental leave: legislation 
 of Parental leave 
íslason, I. V. and Holter, Ö.  (2007) Välfärdsstat i könsklämma: kön ekonomi och 
moted gender equality. The authors argue 
 refusal to 
ee men as gendered beings and therefore failure to implement policies which 
 rates. 
’ 
hen they 
ónsdóttir, B. (2007) Upplifun foreldra á fæðingarorlofi [Parents’ experience of 
tvinnu’ [‘‘‘Going global’. Reconciling family life and 
svísindum VIII [Research in Social 
ciences]. Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands, pp.381-390.  
hálfdrættingar og 
winners, junior partners and holism. Work 
ulture, family responsibility and gender relations within the City of Reykjavík 
orkplaces.]  
 this unpublished report, prepared for the City of Reykjavík Equal Opportunities 
ommission, the City’s equal opportunities and family- friendly policy is evaluated 
rough interviews with female and male supervisors and employees. 
and lifestyle’], in: G. T. Jóhannesson (ed, Rannsóknir í félagsvísindum VIII 
[Research in Social Sciences] Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands, 
pp.241-250. 
This conference paper introduces a recent study on the effects
on fathers’ involvement in caring. 
 
G
livskvalitet [Welfare states in a gender dilemma: gender, economy and quality of 
life], in: Ö. Holter (ed.): Män i rörelse. Jämställdhet, förändring och social 
innovation i Norden. Riga: Gidlunds Förlag, pp. 75-117. 
The Nordic welfare states have long pro
that the gender dilemma of the Nordic countries today is the de facto
s
would promote increased participation of men in family life. 
 
Gíslason, I. V. (2007) Parental leave: Bringing the fathers in. Developments in the 
wake of new legislation in 2000. Akureyri: Centre for Gender Equality. Available 
at: 
http://www.jafnretti.is/Dten/_Files/parentalleave.pdf
The report explores the effect of the Parental leave legislation on various aspects 
of society, such as working hours and birth
 
Gíslason, I.V. (2007) Maskulinitet eller sociala möjligheter [Masculinity or social 
possibilities], in: Ö. Holter (ed.) Män i rörelse. Jämställdhet, förändring och social 
innovation i Norden. Riga: Gidlunds Förlag. 
Using Iceland as an example, the author argues that when trying to explain the 
general social behaviour of men there is no need for the mystical ‘masculinity
concept. Social possibilities are what cause the behaviour of men and w
are changed men are not hampered by ideas about masculinity. 
 
J
Parental leave]. MA thesis. University of Iceland. 
 
Pétursdóttir, G. M. (2007) ‘‘‘Going global’. Útrás íslenskra hugbúnaðarfyrirtækja og 
samræming fjölskyldulífs og a
work in a global work environment within software companies’], in: G.T. 
Jóhannesson (ed.) Rannsóknir í félag
S
This conference paper explores the recent internationalisation of Icelandic 
software firms and its effect on reconciling work and family life among employees. 
 
Pétursdóttir, G.M. and Einarsdóttir, T. (2007) Fyrirvinnur, 
heildarhyggja. Um vinnumenningu, fjölskylduábyrgð og kynjatengsl innan 
vinnustaða Reykjavíkurborgar [Bread
c
w
In
C
th
 
219

 
Arnardóttir, A.A. (2008) ‘Fæðingarorlof frá sjónarhóli feðra og mæðra’ [‘Parental 
un Háskóla Íslands, pp.139-150. 
ttir (ed.) 
Rannsóknir í félagsvísindum IX [Research in Social Sciences]. Reykjavík: 
Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands. 
This paper explores why some fathers do not use their rights to leave.  
 
Eydal, G.B. and Gíslason, I.V. (ed.) (2008) Equal rights to earn and care: Parental 
leave in Iceland. Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands.  
The interplay between gender relations, the labour market, care and fertility is at 
the centre of debates on the future of Europe. This book intervenes in that debate 
by discussing the example of a country that took a radical step to change gender 
relations in a crucial area, namely the caretaking of babies. In 2000, Iceland 
introduced a major reform of Parental leave and in this book six authors present 
their findings on the impact of this reform. 
 
Eydal, G.B. and Ragnarsdóttir, R.S. (2008). Hvernig haga einstæðir foreldrar 
fæðingarorlofi? [How do single parents utilise their birth leave?], Rannsóknarstöð 
thjódmála, working papers no. 3. Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla 
Íslands. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.thjodmalastofnun.hi.is/Hvernig%20haga%20%20einst%C3%A6%C3%
B0ir%20foreldrar%20f%C3%A6%C3%B0ingarorlofi.pdf?bookId=100678
A quantitative and qualitative study of utilisation of Parental leave by single 
parents without joint custody. 
 
Gíslason, I.V. (2008) ‘Feðurnir og nútímavæðingin’ [‘The fathers and the 
modernization’], in: G.T. Jóhannesson and H. Björnsdóttir (ed.) Rannsóknir í 
félagsvísindum IX [Research in Social Sciences]. Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun 
Háskóla Íslands, pp.247-256. 
This conference paper explores how fathers’ status, in the public and private 
spheres, has changes in recent decades. 
 
Pétursdóttir, G.M. (2008) ‘Within the socially desirable aura of gender equality: 
Division of domestic labour and childcare’, in: G. T. Jóhannesson and H. 
Björnsdóttir (ed.) Rannsóknir í félagsvísindum IX [Research in Social Sciences]. 
Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofnun Háskóla Íslands, pp. 213-222 
This conference paper explores if and how recent legislative developments have 
affected men’s parental involvement. 
 
 
 
 
 
leave from the viewpoint of fathers and mothers’], in: G.T. Jóhannesson and H. 
Björnsdóttir (ed.) Rannsóknir í félagsvísindum IX [Research in Social Sciences]. 
Reykjavík: Félagsvísindastofn
This conference paper explores whether the recent legislative developments have 
been successful in ensuring to children care by both mothers and fathers.  
 
Eydal, G.B. (2008) ‘Fæðingarorlof, feður og fjölskyldustaða’ [‘Parental leave, 
fathers and family position’], in: G.T. Jóhannesson and H. Björnsdó
 
220

c. Ongoing res
 
Work cultures
earch 
, gender relations and family responsibility (2004-2009). Doctoral 
ét Pétursdóttir at the University of Iceland, funded by the 
uncil.  
larger transnational research network that includes Iceland, 
s a comprehens e case study of work cultures, gender 
d family responsibilities in the modern labour market, focusing on 
ork cultures and meanings of work due to deregulations of the 
eased international competition. Contact: gyd
thesis by Gyda Margr
Icelandic Research Co
The project, part of a 
Norway and Spain, i
iv
relations an
changing w
economy and incr
ap@hi.is. 
 
221

2.16 
Ire
To
ate (UNDP) 
D
ta (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
4.1 million 
2.0 
38,505 PPP US$ 
land 
 
Eileen Drew 
 
Population (UNDP) 
tal Fertility R
P per capi
G
Female economic act
As 
 male rate (UND
ivity, 15+ (UNDP) 
P) 
% of employed working 
 Women  
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
53.2 per cent 
74 per cent 
   
8.0 per cent 
25.4 per cent 
%
part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
  
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
31% points 
Em
thers (OECD/BB) 
   With child from birth to 5 years    
 
2005 
 
55.0 per cent 
ployment rate for mo
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
8th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   C ld
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
 
  (5) per cent 
93 (13) per cent 
hi ren under 3 years 
2006 
18
 
1. 
leave and other employment-related policies to 
arents  
 of the Department of Justice, Equality 
Len t
Pay
e
 
2009); 
 
Flexibility in use 
 
None except for when leave can be started before birth. 
 
Current 
upport p
s
 
a. 
aternity leave (responsibility
M
and Law Reform) 
 
g h of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
Forty-two weeks: at least two weeks must be taken before birth.   
 
m nt and funding  
• 
Seventy per cent of earnings (calculated by dividing gross earnings in the 
relevant tax year by the number of weeks worked), subject to a minimum of 
€230.30 per week and up to a ceiling of €280.00 a week for 26 weeks (
the remaining 16 weeks is unpaid. 
 
Funded from the Social Insurance Fund, which is financed by contributions 
•
from employers and employees. 
 
•
 
222

Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
To be eligible for maternity benefit, an employee or self-employed perswon 
has to meet certain conditions relating to payment of Pay Related Social 
I was paid in the 12-month period before the birth of the child. 
Varia
sons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 
None. 
 
b. Pat
 
 
c. ar
 
Le
th
 (i.e. an individual right). 
a
 
 
Fle
• 
• 
• 
n in separate blocks of a minimum of six continuous weeks 
ployer’s agreement. 
s agreement. 
Eligib
 
 
All employees who have completed one year’s continuous employment with 
Insurance (PRSI), for example to have been employed for 39 weeks during 
which PRS
 
tion in leave due to child or family rea
person other than the mother.  
 
•
ernity leave 
• 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
ental leave (responsibility of the Department of
P
 Justice, Equality 
and Law Reform) 
 of leave  
ng
 
Fourteen weeks per parent per child
• 
 
P yment 
• 
None. 
xibility in use  
 
• 
Leave may be taken up to the child’s eighth birthday.  
Increase in the maximum age of the eligible child to 16 years in the case of 
children with disabilities. 
Extension of the force majeure provisions to include persons in a relationship 
of domestic dependency, including same-sex partners.  
Leave may be take
or more favourable terms subject to em
• 
Under the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2008 parents who are 
employed by the same employer may transfer all or part of their Parental leave 
entitlements to the other parent, subject to the employer’
 
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
•
their present employer. 
 
 
 
223

Va
poor 
perso
 
• 
 Parents with a disabled child do not get additional Parental leave, but would be 
). 
Ad
agree
 
ovision for statutory codes of practice on the manner in which Parental leave 
d. 
 
 
e. 
 
 adoptive leave 
and/or additional adoptive leave in the event of the hospitalisation of the 
adopted child, subject to the agreement of the employer. 
• Section 10 provides for situations where an employee returns to work having 
postponed leave under Section 9 and is subsequently absent from work due to 
sickness.  
 
Time off for the care of dependants 
 
• Three days paid leave in any 12 consecutive months, up to a limit of five days 
in any 36 consecutive months (treated as force majeure). 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parents 
As leave is per child, the leave period is doubled for parents of twins and tripled 
for triplets. 
•
eligible for carer’s leave (see part 1e
 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
• 
Parental leave can be postponed for six months (to a date agreed on by both 
the employer and employee) if the granting of the leave would have a 
substantial adverse effect on the operation of the business. 
• 
An employee who falls ill while on Parental leave and as a result is unable to 
care for the child may suspend the Parental leave for the duration of the illness 
following which period the Parental leave recommences; 
 
Pr
•
and force majeure leave might be taken and the manner in which an employer 
can terminate Parental leave. 
 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
  
• No general statutory entitlement. 
Other employment-related measures  
• Adoption leave and pay 
 
• Forty weeks leave for adopting mothers or sole male adopters, with 24 weeks 
paid; payment and eligibility as Maternity leave. If the child is under three years 
of age at the time of adoption, unpaid Parental leave can be taken before the 
child reaches five years of age. However, if the child is aged between three and 
eight years at the time of adoption, the leave must be taken within two years of 
the adoption order. 
• Sixteen weeks unpaid adoptive leave. 
• Section 9 of the Act makes provision for splitting the period of
 
224

• Employees with 12 months continuous service can take a maximum of 65 
weeks unpaid leave to provide full-time care for a dependant (e.g. a child with a 
severe disability), either in one continuous period or as several blocks of time. 
Employees may work up to ten hours per week while on carer’s leave, subject 
to certain income limits. An employee on carer’s leave may be entitled to a 
means-tested carer’s benefit. 
 
xible working 
 
Fle
• Breastfeeding mothers can either adjust their working hours or, if breastfeeding 
facilities are provided at work, take breastfeeding breaks. 
. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
(including proposals currently under discussion) 
ere introduced from 1 March 2007, 
including increasing the maximum length to 42 weeks, 26 weeks of which are 
ame in to effect on 28 November 2005, 
provides for a number of improvements to the existing adoptive leave 
ch as:  provision for attendance by adoptive parent(s) at 
es and pre-adoption meetings without loss of pay; provision for 
 
lements a number of 
children with disabilities; an entitlement to tak
 
2
developments 
 
A number of changes to Maternity leave w
paid. 
 
The Adoptive Leave Act 2005, which c
arrangements su
reparation class
p
termination of additional adoptive leave in the event of illness, subject to the 
agreement of the employer; provision to postpone the period of adoptive 
leave/additional adoptive leave in the event of the hospitalisation of the child, 
subject to the agreement of the employer; provision that an employee's absence 
from work on additional adoptive leave will count for all employment rights (except 
remuneration, superannuation benefits) associated with the employment.  
In addition, the Parental leave (Amendment) Act 2006 imp
improvements to Parental leave. These include: raising the maximum age by 
which Parental leave must be taken from an eligible child's fifth to eighth birthday; 
an increase in the maximum age of the eligible child to 16 years in the case of 
e the 14 weeks Parental leave in 
separate blocks of a minimum of six continuous weeks, or more favourable terms 
with the agreement of the employer; and the extension of Parental leave 
entitlements to persons acting in loco parentis of an eligible child.  
 
 
225

There are commitments in the partnership agreement Towards 2016,29 adopted in 
2006, to review the level of statutory entitlements to Maternity and Paternity leave 
efore the end of 2008. This review is ongoing and also will be informed by 
ternity and Parental leave. The Irish 
overnment is also committed, in the Approved Programme for Government, to 
 
 
. 
 
n on take-up of leave. 
b. 
 
c. 
re eligible for Parental leave 
during the course of 2001. In all, it was estimated that 20 per cent of these eligible 
 
31
    
b
developments at EU level in relation to Ma
G
increasing paid Maternity leave by five weeks; making all leave after the first 26 
weeks available to either parent; and examining the possibility of introducing a 
statutory entitlement to Paternity leave and shared Parental leave. This will take 
note of comparative provisions and best practice across Europe. 
 
3. Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave  
a
There is no informatio
 
Paternity leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
Parental leave 
 
According to a MORI survey in 2001 for the Department of Justice, Equality and 
Law Reform30  on the uptake of Parental leave and force majeure leave to care for 
dependants, almost seven per cent of employees in the 655 organisations 
surveyed (517 in private and 138 in public sectors) we
employees had taken Parental leave. The survey showed that 84 per cent of 
Parental leave was taken by women. 
In a second study (Newmarket Consulting, 2001)
, involving case studies of 25 
organisations in Ireland, 62 out of 71 employees interviewed had heard of 
Parental leave, though the level was higher in the public sector than in the private 
                                             
Towards 2016 is the national strategic framework to address key economic and social 
llenges in Ireland. As with the previous six Social Partnership Agreements, Towards 2016 
uses principally on incomes, fiscal, social, economic and competitiveness policies. It was 
gotiated between the government and the social partners, organised into four pillars: Trade 
ions; Business and Employers; Farming; Community and Voluntary Pillar. Towards 2016 
olves a focus on the
29 
cha
foc
ne
Un
inv
 needs of children, young adults, people of working age, older people 
and people with disabilities; childcare, work/life balance and Parental leave are among the 
soc
info
 
30 
com
Jus
31 
Un
Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform. 
ial issues involved in discussions leading to the Towards 2016 Agreement. For more 
rmation see: http://www.taoiseach.gov.ie/index.asp?locID=181&docID=2755 
MORI MRC (2001) Uptake of Parental leave and Force Majeure Leave Report 
missioned by the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform. Dublin: Department of 
tice, Equality and Law Reform 
Newmarket Consulting (2001) Attitudinal Survey of Employees, Employers and Trade 
ion Representatives regarding the Provisions of the Parental leave Act 199. Dublin: 
 
226

sector organisations. The largest barrier to take-up of Parental leave was financial, 
noted by 63 per cent of interviewees. 
 
d. 
 
4.
 
 
a. 
recent development and are, as yet, incomplete. While 
rangements. However the issue of statutory rights and 
uration of leave are currently under review. Despite the introduction of Maternity 
n broad issues around reconciling work/family, including flexible working 
 
b. 
 studies   
fe 
6-
d 
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
There is no information on take-up. Nearly one-third of employers surveyed (29 
per cent) in the 2001 Department of Justice survey  had granted force majeure 
leave. The study by Newmarket Consulting (2001) noted that the duration of force 
majeure leave was considered by both employees and employers to be more 
restrictive than the previous informal system of compassionate leave. 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Leave policies are a 
Maternity, carer’s and Parental leave are now statutory entitlements, there is no 
statutory Paternity leave nor any right to request flexible working – although the 
public sector has such ar
d
leave and pay in 1994 there have been no specific studies on the use of this 
entitlement nor the take-up of carer's leave. More attention has been given to the 
Parental leave entitlement introduced in 1998. Most available research has 
focused o
arrangements and childcare rather than leave per se. 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
esearch
r
 
Drew, E. and Bacik, I. (2006) ‘Struggling with juggling: gender and work/li
balance in the legal professions’, Women's Studies International Forum, 29: 13
146. 
This article examines gender issues among Irish legal professions, showing that 
women lawyers find it difficult to achieve work/life balance and that a large 
proportion of lawyers had never taken any leave. The study highlights a similarly 
low take-up of flexible working arrangements due to possible loss of promotion 
opportunities and/or clients/earnings potential and the negative perceptions of 
their colleagues. 
 
Redmond, J., Valiulis, M. and Drew, E. (2006) Literature review of issues relate
to work-life balance, workplace culture and maternity/childcare Issues. Report No.
16. Dublin: Crisis Pregnancy Agency. 
This literature review includes sections on legislative and policy issues related to 
all types of Parental leave in Ireland, and compares rights and entitlements for 
parents here to other European countries. Issues of leave are connected with 
work-life balance, and related to how they help or hinder those facing a crisis 
 
227

pregnancy. Specific issues related to the negative perceptions of parents who 
take leave are explored in the literature on workplace culture. 
 
Drew, E. and Daverth, G. (2007) 'Negotiating work/life balance: the experience of 
fathers and mothers in Ireland', Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques, 
Vol. XXXVIII, No.2: 65-81.   
This paper reviews literature on parental work/family roles and shows how the 
labour market behaviour of fathers and mothers exhibits an asymmetrical pattern. 
It draws on empirical survey data to examine the degree of work/life balance 
adoption (working time patterns and leave arrangements) by fathers and mothers 
employed in five major Irish organisations. The paper then explores the impact of 
work/life balance arrangements on parents' careers and attitudes. It concludes by 
discussing the kinds of work/life balance interventions/measures necessary to 
address the equality issues that arise from uneven divisions of labour in the 
un/paid work roles of fathers and mothers. 
 
Fine-Davis, M.  (2007) Childcare in Ireland today: policy briefing paper to the Irish 
Congress of Trade Unions. Dublin:  Social Attitude and Policy Research Group, 
Trinity College Dublin. 
This paper provides an analysis of childcare policy in Ireland and makes 
recommendations to the trade union movement on the way it might influence 
future policy in this area. 
 
Fine-Davis, M., Craven, F., McCarthy, M., Holzworth, A. and O’Sullivan, M. (2008)  
An evaluation of the FÁS Initiative for Parents in Receipt of the One Parent Family 
Payment. Dublin: FÁS and Social Attitude and Policy Research Group, Trinity 
College. 
This report presents the results of a survey of 110 women in receipt of the One 
Parent Family Allowance in Dublin and Cork.  In the context of the overall study, 
the extent to which childcare is a barrier to accessing training and employment is 
studied. 
 
Dunne, L.A. Drew, E. and MacSweeney, R. (2009) An economic model for 
additional leave in Ireland. Dublin: Irish Congress of Trade Unions. Available at: 
http://www.ictu.ie/download/pdf/ictu_leaves_report2.pdf 
This Briefing Paper proposes and costs a leave model to: address the issue of the 
gender pay gap; provide fathers with the infrastructure so they can participate in 
family life; and facilitate the care needs of an ageing population. As a matter of 
equity, it also includes a period of leave for employees with no children. This 
model could be delivered at no additional cost to the Exchequer but it would 
involve an increase of one to two per cent on the standard tax rate for all 
employees. 
 
Drew, E. and Daverth, G. (2009) Living to work.....or working to live? The role of 
managers in creating work/life balance in Ireland. Dublin: Irish Congress of Trade 
Unions. Available at: http://www.ictu.ie/download/pdf/20090113ten4912.pdf 
This Briefing Paper examines how managers negotiate and understand work-life 
balance within four public and private sector Irish organisations, including their 
role in facilitating (or otherwise) work-life balance arrangements, through formal 
and informal policies and procedures. It shows the differential, and highly 
 
228

gendered, acc
that the trade 
ess to work-life balance among staff and recommends measures 
union movement might adopt to promote further work-life balance. 
 
229

2.17 
Ita
 
Dino G
GD
58.6  million 
1.3 
ly 
iovannini 
 
Population (UNDP) 
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
P per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
28,529(PPP US$) 
Fem
   A  
D/BB) 
2005 
2004 
62 per cent 
28% points 
ale economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
% male rate (UNDP) 
2005 
37.4 per cent 
s
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
   Men 
   Women  
Gender employment gap (OEC
 
2007 
2007 
 
  5.4 per cent 
29.9 per cent 
Em
   W
   Wit
ed 3-5 years 
2005 
50.6 per cent 
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
ith child under 3 years 
h child ag
 
2005 
 
47.3 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
67th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
 
2006 
 
   C
26 (16) per cent 
90 (66) per cent 
hildren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
 
1. Cu
ated policies to 
support parents 
a. 
aternity leave (Congedo di Maternità) (responsibility of the Ministry 
Le
Pa
 
Eighty per cent of earnings with no ceiling for salaried workers. For home 
ultural temporary labourers, earnings 
are 80 per cent of conventional earnings determined each year by the law; for 
by the Ministry of Labour, a higher ceiling.  
• 
Funded by INPS (National Department for Social Welfare), financed by 
rrent leave and other employment-rel
 
M
of Labour, Health and Social Policies and (for public employees) 
Ministry of Economy and Finance) 
 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
Twenty weeks: at least four weeks before the birth.  
 
yment and funding 
 
•
helps, self-employed workers and agric
non-fixed term workers, maternity leave depends on accredited contributions, 
though each professional sector has the possibility to determine, with approval 
contributions from employers and employees. Workers may be paid direct by 
INPS or else by their employer, who is recompensed by INPS.   
 
230

 
Flexibi
 
 
For employees and workers enrolled in ‘Gestione separata’,
 the 20 week 
ulsory, but there are two options for taking this leave: four 
weeks before the birth and 16 weeks after (upon presentation of a medical 
 
Eli
il
 
 All employees and self-employed women with social security membership, 
rkers enrolled in Gestione separata. 
Va
ti
poor h
person
I
 length of leave increases by 12 
weeks.  
Additional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ag
 
• P
t of earnings. 
I
with employers paying above the standard 80 per cent. 
 
b. Pa
lness; the child being left by the mother; or the child 
eing in the sole care of the father. Conditions are the same as for Maternity 
 
c. Par
le) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
abour, Health and Social Policies and (for public employees) 
Length of leave (before and after child’s birth)  
• 
r mothers and six months for fathers. Fathers taking three 
b) are entitled to one month of additional 
                                              
lity  
32
•
period is comp
certificate); and eight weeks before the birth and 12 after. The allowance is 
accorded to autonomous female workers from eight weeks before the birth to 
12 weeks after; Maternity leave, however, is not compulsory for this category. 
gib ity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
•
including wo
 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
 
• 
n the case of multiple or premature births, the
 
reements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
ublic sector employees receive 100 per cen
• 
n general national collective agreements guarantee 100 per cent of earnings, 
ternity leave  
 
There is no general statutory entitlement. However employed fathers may take 
three months paid leave following childbirth in the following circumstances: the 
mother’s death or severe il
b
leave. 
 
ental leave (Congedo Parenta
L
Ministry of Economy and Finance) 
 
 
Six months fo
months Paternity leave (see part 1
  
 
 The INPS enrols workers in Gestione separata (‘separate administration’) who 
o not contribute to other forms of welfare and who do not have any type of 
on, e.g. workers on a fixed-term research project. 
32
d
pensi
 
231

Parental leave. Leave is an individual entitlement, but the total amount of 
leave-taken by two parents cannot exceed ten months (or 11 months if the 
st three months Paternity leave as set out in part 1b). 
Pa
e
 
• 
• 
 
Flexib
e until a child is eight years old. There are two 
options for taking this leave: a single leave period up to a maximum of six 
• 
e at the same time. 
 
Eligib
 
 
All employed parents, except domestic workers and home helps. Self-
orkers are generally entitled to three months, which can be taken 
only during the first year after child’s birth.  
• 
 
Varia
poor 
perso
• 
 
Addit
yments are often supplemented by collective 
greements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
 
d. 
 
 None. 
 
father takes at lea
 
ym nt and funding 
Thirty per cent of earnings when leave is taken for a child under three years; 
unpaid if taken when a child is three to eight years, unless annual earnings are 
under approximately 2.5 times the amount of minimum earnings (€14,401.40 
in 2008), in which case parents are entitled to 30 per cent of earnings.  
Funded by INPS (National Department for Social Welfare). Workers may be 
paid direct by INPS or else by their employer, who is recompensed by INPS.   
ility in use  
 
• 
Leave can be taken at any tim
months; or shorter leave periods amounting to a maximum of six months. 
It is possible for each parent to take leav
• 
A lone parent is entitled to ten months leave.  
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
•
employed w
• 
The father is entitled to leave even if the mother is not, for example if she is a 
housewife. 
Parental leave of three months, to be taken within the first year of the child, is 
available to workers enrolled with Gestione separata by the INPS.  
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parents 
 
As the leave is per child, each parent is entitled to additional leave in the case 
of a multiple birth (e.g. the length is doubled for twins, tripled for triplets). Lone 
parent may take ten months leave. 
ional note (e.g. if leave pa
a
 
• Public sector employees receive 100 per cent of earnings during the first 30
days of leave. 
 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
•
 
232

e. 
Adopti
 l
 
• 
Par
other parents. The period of Maternity leave does 
of t
ational adoption, the leave can 
leav
chil
irthday; payment, 
per cent for 
chil
 
Tim  off for the care of dependants 
 
 Public or private employees are entitled to two years leave over the course of 
their entire working life in case of a serious need in their family, for example the 
r other relative, even if not co-resident. This leave is paid. 
 
mployees are entitled to work 
(one hour less per day if working six hours a day or less; two 
ay if working longer), with full earnings compensation. Fathers 
e it; if the mother is not 
employed; or if the father has sole custody of the child. Home helps, domestic 
tonomous workers are not entitled to reduced hours, but in this 
case too the father can work reduced hours. 
 
2.
ents (including proposals currently under discussion) 
Since November 2007, maternity leave has been available to workers enrolled 
with Gestione separata by the INPS. At the same time, Maternity and Parental 
leave have been extended to adoptive and foster parents. 
 
Other employment-related measures  
 
on eave and pay 
For adoptive and foster parents the same regulations for Maternity and 
ental leave apply as for 
not depend on the age of the child adopted and must start within five months 
he child entering the family; in case of intern
be taken also for overseas visits in connection with adoption. The Parental 
e for adoptive and foster parents can be taken within eight years of the 
d entering the family and not after his/her eighteenth b
generally, is 100 per cent of earnings for the first 30 days and 30 
the following five months, if taken within three years of the entrance of the 
d into the family. 
e
 
• Without limit for a child under three years; five days a year per parent for a 
child aged three to eight years. Unpaid.
•
disability of a child o
Fathers and mothers cannot take this leave at the same time. 
 
lexible working  
F
 
• Until a child is 12 months old, women who are e
reduced hours 
hours less per d
are entitled to use this benefit in certain conditions, for example: if the mother is 
self-employed or freelance; if the mother opts not to us
workers and au
• Employees (mothers and fathers) who have parental responsibility for a child 
under six years or a disabled child under 18 years have a legal right to apply to 
their employers to work flexibly (e.g. to reduce their working hours). Employers 
have a legal duty to consider these requests and may refuse them only ‘where 
there is a clear business ground for doing so … [and must give] a written 
explanation explaining why’. 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developm
 
 
233

A number of other changes were introduced in January and February 2008, 
• 
Allowing Maternity leave to be taken for overseas visits in the case of 
doptions. 
• 
Maternity, Paternity and Paternal leave can be taken if a child of 12 years 
3.
 
a. Maternity leave
 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 cent 
 
 
 
 
 
including:  
• 
Maternity leave is extended to five months to adoptive or foster parents, 
instead of the previous three months.  
international a
or over is adopted.  
• 
Paternity leave can be taken by fathers under the same conditions as 
mothers taking Maternity leave, e.g. by employees and and self-employed 
and by those enrolled in Gestione separata by the INPS. 
• 
Single fathers can receive up to ten months of Parental leave. 
• 
Parents returning from leave are entitled to improvements in working 
conditions from which they would have benefited if they had not been 
absent on leave.  
 
The law on Parental leave is due to be revised according to financial legislation 
passed in 2008 (Legge finanziaria 2008) with the aim of increasing payment and 
flexibility, but there are no further details. 
 
 
Take-up of leave 
  
 Maternity leave is compulsory for salaried workers. 
Paternity leave 
 
There is no information on the take-up of ‘optional leave’. 
Parental leave  
 
There is no comprehensive information on the take-up of Parental leave. Data 
from the INPS (National Department for Social Welfare) data for 2005, 2006 and 
2007 show that only about a quarter of employed mothers benefited from Parental 
leave during the first three years of their child’s life, and less than 10 per
used it after the child’s third year. Furthermore, only four per cent of eligible men 
benefited. An important obstacle to using this entitlement can be found in the low 
level of payment, which makes it difficult to take leave for longer periods. There is 
a need for better information and some of the legal procedures are not easy to 
understand. 
 
234

 
.
ployment-
childcare and domestic activities. Data for 2008 show that 
g prolonged 
 
 
 
 
 
studies reveal that younger generations have a 
 
accepted. In more than one-third of the Italian 
4  Research and publications on leave and other em
related policies since January 2006 
 
a. General overview 
 
Act No. 53/2000 introduced Parental leave as a right for both parents with the aim 
of promoting shared parenthood with the equal division of childcare activities 
between father and mother. Research shows that leave policies are often not well 
known or generally applied. Apart from inadequate knowledge, the concept of 
shared parenthood is still not widespread and there is a strong cultural resistance 
by men to sharing 
women contribute three-quarters of the time that couples assign to these family 
responsibilities. The organisation and doing of domestic work is still mainly left to 
women. 
 
The organisational context continues to be an obstacle to change. Emphasis is 
placed on long hours, rather than completing projects or tasks; takin
leave is not viewed positively; employers do not invest in women workers; and the
few men who try to be more aware of family needs are often stigmatised. The
culture of workplaces should improve and facilitate sharing in the home, treating
family and parenthood as important values and stages in the life of a worker, 
which it is important to consider in the organisation of work contexts. 
 
So, it is important to initiate a cultural change which values shared parenthood
and care in general. The politics of reconciliation cannot apply exclusively to
women. However, some research 
well-balanced orientation to work, education and social relations, considering
them all to be equally important spheres of life. And though the traditional 
breadwinner role for the father remains deeply embedded in policies and 
practices, the idea that being a good father is primarily about providing money is 
now held by only a minority; while the idea of paternity involving an increased 
share of caring is becoming more 
families where both parents work, models of equal sharing of caring are already 
operating. However, sharing varies with the age of children: sharing parenting is 
more common when there are older children, whereas the care of younger 
children still mainly falls to the mother, though fathers do tend to help more.  
 
Local research and other activities (such as conferences and publications) are 
promoted in Italian provinces by Equality Counsellors (Consigliere di parità). An 
example is the informative publication on parental leave – ‘Mothers at work, 
fathers at work: opportunities and rights’ – produced in the province of Reggio 
Emilia with the aim of raising knowledge of Parental leave rights. Since September 
2008, new mothers and fathers in the province are given a guide to rights and 
opportunities, in particular how to use Parental leave.  
 
Finally, an innovative research programme by the National Family Observatory 
has been underway since 2004. It consists of a theoretical and methodological 
 
235

analysis of case studies of good practices in services for families, to support their 
intelligent dissemination in a way that is sensitive to local contexts. 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results  
from research studies 
 
Donati P. and Prandini, R. (ed.) (2006) Buone pratiche e servizi innovativi per le 
famiglie
 
b. 
    
 on the law with respect to 
as of 
mands of care continue to be the principal factor 
 
 [Good practices and innovative services for families]. Milano: Feltrinelli.  
This volume is one in a series of publications that report the research and 
documentation activities of Osservatorio nazionale sulla famiglia [National Family 
Observatory], presenting information about the good practices in family-friendly 
policies. 
 
Lebra, A. and Franzin, P. (2006) Famiglia, maternità e lavoro – tutela, sostegno e 
protezione  [Family, maternity and work – tutoring, support and protection]. Milano: 
Feltrinelli  
The book contains information about laws and recent normative changes in 
maternity and paternity. 
 
Altieri, G. (ed.) (2007) Uomini e donne moderni. Le differenze di genere nel 
lavoro e nella famiglia: nuovi modelli da sostenere [Modern men and women. 
Gender differences at workplace and in the family: new models to be sustained]. 
Roma: IRES. 
The increase of women’s participation in the labour market has triggered social 
changes oriented towards gender equality. This volume gives a careful analysis 
of the current asymmetries between men and women in reconciling public and 
private spheres.  
 
Calafà, L. (ed.) (2007) Paternità e lavoro [Paternity and Work]. Bologna: Il Mulino. 
The book offers a comparative perspective
reconciliation of work and family and paternity, including the situations in Italy, 
Spain, England and France, and with contributions on private law, constitutional 
jurisprudence, and sociology. 
 
Cardinali, V. (ed.) (2007) Donne, madri e lavoratrici. Criticità e dilemmi delle 
lavoratrici femminili [Women, mothers, workers: critical problems and dilemm
women's employment]. Roma: ISFOL. 
This volume emphasises the need for more political attention paid to maternity. 
Maternity is still the main reason for women leaving their jobs and one of the most 
difficult situations for workplaces to manage, often being a source of 
iscriminatory practices. The de
d
determining female participation to the labour market, with welfare policies not 
allowing families to make shared choices from among a range of alternatives. 
 
Donati, P. (ed.) (2007) Famiglie e bisogni sociali: la frontiera delle buone prassi 
[Families and social needs: the border of the good praxis]. Milano: Franco Angeli. 
Another volume in the series from the Osservatorio nazionale sulla famiglia 
[National Family Observatory], monitoring social policy and other measures 
concerning the family, both at the national and local level.  
 
236

Fine-Davis, M., Fagnani, J., Giovannini, D., Hojgaard, L., and Clarke, H. (2007) 
Mulino. (Italian version of:  M. Fine-
alance. A Comparative Study in Four 
European Countries.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer Academic Publishers. Italian version 
edited by D. Giovannini, with an Appendix on Maternity, Paternity and Parental 
leave.) 
This book presents a comparative analysis of the dilemmas faced by working 
parents with young children in four European countries (France, Italy, Ireland and 
Denmark) including the results of a survey carried out in the countries, an 
overview of the latest research findings in the four countries and a synthesis of the 
policy situation in each country.  
 
Gavio, F. and Lelleri, F. (2007) ‘La fruizione dei congedi parentali in Italia nella 
pubblica amministrazione, nel settore privato e nel terzo settore. Monitoraggio 
dell'applicazione della legge n. 53/2000 dal 2001 al 2004’ [The development of 
Parental leaves in Italy in public administration, private sector and third sector. 
Monitoring of the application of the Law n. 53/2000 from 2001 to 2004], in: P. 
Donati (ed.) Famiglie e bisogni sociali: la frontiera delle buone prassi [Families 
and social needs: the border of the good praxis]. Milano: Franco Angeli. 
This chapter provides an overview of the latest research findings in Italy on 
workplace day care centres and Parental leave schemes. 
 
Arcidiacono, C. and Procentese, F. (eds.) (2008) Madri e padri tra famiglia e 
lavoro [Fathers and mothers between family and work]. Napoli: Filema Edizioni. 
The theme of this book is the reconciliation of work and family in Southern Italy, 
with particular attention to Naples and its province; by the use of similar methods, 
it permits comparison between this area and similar work conducted in Bologna 
some years ago (see Fine-Davies et al., 2007). 
 
Biondillo, G. and Colombo, C. (2008) Manuale di sopravvivenza del padre 
contemporaneo [Manual for the survival of the contemporary father]. Milano: 
Guanda.  
This book presents a conversation between two fathers who understand that their 
social condition should be transformed from an invisible to a conscious one. 
 
Cervelli, C. (2008) ‘Maternità e lavoro. Dissertazione sulla tutela delle lavoratrici 
madri’ [Maternity and work]. Roma: Aracne. 
The book provides information on maternity and considers the expectations in the 
Italian economic plan for 2007. 
 
Donati, P. and Prandini, R. (eds.) (2008) La cura della famiglia e il mondo del 
lavoro: Un piano di politiche familiari [Family care and the working world: A family 
policies plan]. Milano: Franco Angeli. 
In this volume, the Osservatorio Nazionale sulla Famiglia [National Family 
Observatory] focuses on reconciliation of employment and family care, including 
research representing the Italian contribution to the recent development of EU 
indicators. The research stimulated new family-friendly policies and launched the 
strategy of a ‘European Alliance for Families’. 
Padri e madri: I dilemma della conciliazione famiglia-lavoro [Fathers and mothers: 
dilemmas of the work-life balance]. Bologna: Il 
Davis, J. Fagnani, D. Giovannini, L. Hojgaard, and H. Clarke (2004).  Fathers and 
mothers: dilemmas of the work-life b
 
237

  
‘Dottor Lex’ (2
Norms for pare
009) ‘Maternità – Le norme per i genitori che lavorano’ [Maternity – 
nts who work]. Milano: Buffetti. 
r organisations, trade unions, 
This book aims to be a guide for parents, but also fo
work counsellors and labour organisers. 
 
 
238

2.18 
The Netherlands 
Hanne Groenendijk and Saskia Keuzenkamp 
Population (UNDP) 
To
GD
2005 
16.3 million 
 
 
tal Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
P per capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
1.7 
32,684 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
 Men 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
56.2 per cent 
77 per cent 
 
16.2 per cent 
  
   Women  
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2004 
60.0 per cent 
17% points 
Em
CD/BB) 
r 3 years 
 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
69.4 per cent 
68.3 per cent 
ployment rate for mothers (OE
   With child unde
   With child aged
Gl
2008 
9th          
obal gender gap (WEF) 
Att
rs 
clusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
45 (4) per cent 
89 (7) per cent 
endance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 yea
   Children 3-5 years (in
 
1.
other employment-related policies to 
upport parents 
a. Maternity leave (zwangerschaps- en bevallingsverlof) (responsibility 
cted date of delivery, the longer benefit period 
nings up to a ceiling equivalent to the maximum daily 
t for sickness benefit (€183). 
ntributing 4.15 per cent of 
d so effectively financing the fund for leave payment. 
 Current leave and 
s
 
of Department of Social Affairs and Employment) 
 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
Sixteen weeks, six weeks before the birth and ten weeks after the birth. (If the 
birth is later than the expe
preceding childbirth is not deducted from the benefit period after childbirth). 
 
Payment and funding 
 
• 
Hundred per cent of ear
paymen
 
Funded from the unemployment fund, which has been financed by 
contributions from employers and employees; but for 2009, the employees’ 
contribution was removed, leaving employers co
•
employees’ earnings an
 
 
239

Flexibility in use 
and four weeks before the expected date of 
delivery, but pregnant workers are not allowed to work from four weeks before 
Eli
 
• 
 
Self-employed women are entitled to 16 weeks payment up to a maximum of 
the statutory minimum wage (€1,381 a month before taxes).  
po
pe
 
b. 
Af
 
Le
 
 Two working days at the birth of a child. 
ayment and funding 
• 
rnings, with no ceiling on payments. 
 
Paid by the employer. 
 Leave can be taken within four weeks after the birth of the child. 
Eligib
ployment or family circumstances)  
Va
poor 
perso
 
• 
 
Addit
agree
 
• 
t 1c. 
 
• 
Leave can be started between six 
this date. 
 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
All women employees.  
•
100 per cent of 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the mother 
 
• None. 
Paternity leave (kraamverlof) (responsibility of Department of Social 
fairs and Employment) 
ngth of leave 
•
 
P
 
Hundred per cent of ea
•
 
Flexibility 
 
•
 
ility (e.g. related to em
 
• Male and female employees who are the partner of a woman giving birth or 
who acknowledge the child. 
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the father 
None. 
ional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
See par
 
240

 
c. Parental leave (ouderschapsverlof) (responsibility of Department of 
ocial Affairs and Employment) 
ength of leave 
 Twenty-six times the number of working hours per week per parent per child, to 
hild’s eighth birthday, e.g. a full-time job of 38 hours a week 
rs.  
Pay
e
A
(
€
• 
 
Eligib
 
 
Varia
poor 
pe
• 
 
Addit
agree
 Employers are permitted to deviate from the statutory entitlements by a 
er cent of previous 
earnings (including the tax reduction referred to in ‘payment and funding’ 
above). 
 
S
 
L
 
•
be taken up to the c
gives a leave entitlement of 988 hou
 
m nt and funding 
 
• 
ll parents taking Parental leave are entitled to a tax reduction of €690 a month 
i.e. half the statutory minimum wage a month in case of full-time leave) or 
3.99 an hour for each hour of leave. 
 
Flexibility in use  
 
• With the agreement of the employer, leave can be taken for more hours a week 
during a shorter period or for less hours a week over a longer period (e.g. on a 
half-time basis over 52 weeks). 
With the agreement of the employer, leave can be taken in two or three blocks 
of time. 
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
• All employees who have completed one year’s continuous employment with 
their present employer. 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parents 
 
As the leave is per child, each parent is entitled to additional leave in the case 
of a multiple birth. 
ional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
•
Collective Labour Agreement or (under certain conditions) by written 
agreement with the works council or staff representatives. In these cases, 
employees can be offered less than the statutory entitlement (for example, less 
payment, a shorter leave or no right at all) or more. For instance, in seven per 
cent of the Collective Agreements made in 2007, Parental leave was partly 
paid, at between 25 per cent and 100 per cent of previous earnings. In the 
public sector, Parental leave is paid at between 70 to 75 p
 
241

 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
d. 
 
e. 
Ad
ent of a child and up to 16 weeks after placement. 
 
For adoptive parents the same regulations for Parental leave apply as for 
Tim
st 
ployee with 
Fle
 
 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
Other employment-related measures  
 
option leave and pay 
 
• 
Each parent is entitled to four weeks leave when a child is placed for adoption 
(or long-term fostering), with payment equivalent to Maternity leave. 
• 
Leave can be taken during a period starting at two weeks prior to the 
placem
•
other parents. 
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
• Short-term leave up to a maximum of ten days a year can be taken to care for 
a sick child living at home, or a sick partner or parent. The employer is required 
to pay 70 per cent of the employee’s earnings. All employees are eligible, 
subject to three conditions: first, an employer can refuse to grant the leave if 
the interests of the organisation might be seriously harmed; second, care mu
be necessary because of illness; third, care has to be provided by the 
employee involved. 
• Employees with a child, partner or parent with a life-threatening illness are 
entitled to unpaid leave of up to six times their working hours per week. The 
right is conditional: an employer can refuse the leave if the organisation’s 
interests are seriously harmed. Employees who participate in the Life Course 
Savings Scheme can use their tax- supported savings to finance the period of 
unpaid leave. 
• In addition, a ‘reasonable amount of time’ can be taken by an em
very exceptional personal circumstances (e.g. a broken water pipe, a death in 
the family, a child suddenly taken ill). This so-called ‘emergency leave’ can last 
from a few hours to a few days, but terminates after one day if short-term leave 
(see above) is subsequently taken. The employer is required to pay 100 per 
cent of the employee’s earnings. 
 
xible working 
 
• Under the Working Hours Adjustment Act, all employees who have completed 
one year’s continuous employment with their present employer have the right 
to increase or decrease their working hours. The right to adjustment of working 
hours is, however, conditional: the employer can refuse to grant the request if 
the interests of the business or service might be seriously harmed; and the law 
does not apply to employers with less than ten employees. 
 
242

2.
en removed by a previous government in 2004. The main 
ced: the Life Course Savings Scheme (Levensloopregeling). It was 
n or an 
 
ave: employees are supposed to use the new 
adoption leave to six weeks in cases of international adoption. In June 2007, the 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
In February 2007 a new cabinet was installed, consisting of Christian Democrats 
(CDA), Social Democrats (PvdA) and more orthodox Christians (CU). It decided to 
re-establish the entitlement to a statutory maternity payment for self-employed 
omen, which had be
w
argument is the protection of mother and child; many self-employed had not taken 
out private maternity insurance, as anticipated, because insurance companies 
require a two-year waiting period. Statutory payment, re-introduced on 1 July 
2008, prevents the situation arising of self-employed pregnant women taking too 
short a period of leave for financial reasons, which may be dangerous for mother 
or child.  
 
Since 1 January 2006 a new savings scheme with a tax incentive element has 
een introdu
b
meant, first and foremost, to support the combination of employment and family 
responsibilities by offering tax reduction to workers using their savings in the 
scheme to pay for periods of leave. The intended effect was an increase in the 
labour participation of women and older workers; with the possibility of taking 
leave during stressful periods in their career, it was anticipated that they might 
work for more hours and/or for more years. Consequently tax provisions for 
collective early retirement schemes have been cancelled from 1 January 2006.  
 
This savings scheme offers employees a tax-supported way to finance longer 
periods of various types of unpaid leave. It does not, however, give any additional 
leave entitlements, beyond existing statutory rights. The right to additional leave of 
various kinds is left to negotiations between employers and employees, resulting 
 either a Collective Labour Agreement, a leave policy of the organisatio
in
individual agreement on various leave. The formulation of these agreements or 
policies (on the conditions for the right to unpaid leave, a maximum or minimum 
period, etc.) has been a first effect of the introduction of the scheme.  
Participation in the new savings scheme is an entitlement, but each individual 
employee must choose whether or not to use it. This life-course arrangement 
requires employees to take personal responsibility for the funding of longer 
periods of unpaid leave. State support is restricted to tax relief on savings. This 
emphasis on personal responsibility is an important aspect of the government’s 
view on long-term leave: employees are supposed to save for care leave, pre-
pension leave and all other periods of long-term leave that they might want to take 
during their working life. As a consequence, the proposal for a paid long-term care 
ave was changed into an unpaid le
le
Life Course Savings Scheme to finance such leave themselves. To a certain 
extent, the same approach of employee responsibility applies to Parental leave: 
tax relief is offered equivalent to 50 per cent of statutory minimum wage (€3.99 an 
hour or €690 a month maximum). Employees are supposed to finance additional 
payment out of their own savings.  
 
In May 2007 Democrats ’66 (D66) proposed an extension of the four weeks 
 
243

Green Party (Groen Links) proposed a bill to extend the Paternity leave from two 
working days to two weeks of leave, paid by the employer. The proposal of the 
Green Party has been discussed in Parliament, where the length of the proposed 
Paternity leave (ten days) as well as the proposed payment (by the employer) met 
Green Party now is preparing an amended bill for an 
ys of Paternity leave collectively funded out of the 
s. 
t of the statutory 
 
arental leave, that was previously unpaid, is now paid, albeit at 
 low level. 
d Care Act and the Adjustment of Working Hours Act. 
Arguments for modernisation are that, in the view of employers, these acts are too 
tailor-made enough for the differing needs of employees and 
mployers. The Minister also signalled the continuing demand for extra leave, e.g. 
es (and not only those who have completed one year’s continuous 
mployment with their present employer) have the right to leave – and giving 
ys of leave to be used for care in other situations or 
for other persons not otherwise specified. The exploration states that the amount 
length for unspecified others. In general the minister expects that more 
possibilities for flexible working hours and working from home might lessen or 
remove the need for leave. Before the summer of 2009 a more detailed report will 
strong opposition. The 
entitlement of five da
unemployment fund
 
Since 1 January 2009 the right to Parental leave has been doubled from 13 to 26 
weeks; the Minister of Youth and Family said he intended to give working parents 
more time to fulfil their parenting role. Another change from this date is that 
parents on Parental leave no longer need to participate in the Life Course Savings 
Scheme (see below) to be entitled to a tax reduction of 50 per cen
minimum wage (€690 a month for parents on full-time leave). This means that
since 2009 Dutch P
a
 
In December 2008 the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment presented an 
exploration of the possibilities to modernise legislation on leave and working 
hours, i.e. the Work an
complex and not 
e
for premature babies, bereavement, volunteering, informal care, attending dying 
relatives and friends. In stead of expanding the existing system of leave, the 
Minister wants to discuss the possibilities of a different system that is less 
complex, more flexible and at the same time broadens the entitlement to leave 
(offering leave to more employees and/or for more situations). The exploration 
contains ideas to be discussed in Parliament and with the social partners. 
 
One of the suggestions in the exploration is that Parental leave can be made more 
flexible by cancelling the statutory conditions for entitlement and use – so all 
employe
e
parents more choice in how they can take leave. For short-term care leave two 
options are sketched: the ‘merging model’ offers the same entitlements for the 
same situations as in the current system, but consolidated into one ‘basket of 
leave’, which employees can use as they prefer; while the ‘broadening model’ 
enables a total amount of da
of leave and the level of payment are to be discussed further, but without higher 
costs for government or employers. 
 
The ideas for long-term leave are not very elaborated. The current right to unpaid 
long-term leave of 13 weeks for children, parents and partners who are seriously 
ill might be replaced by the right to an unpaid long-term leave of unspecified 
 
244

be presented to Parliament, and revisions to the Work and Care Act and the 
Working Hours Act might come into force from January 2011. 
 
 
3.
 
a. 
ke up of Maternity leave. Because of 
 
b. 
 
c. 
others worked on average 64 
er cent of their working hours, fathers 80 per cent. The use of Parental leave has 
igures from Statistics Netherlands show that uptake of Parental leave is not only 
 but also among workers with middle and higher levels of 
 
h lower among Turkish, Moroccan and 
ntillean workers than among Surinamese and native Dutch workers. The two 
    
 Take-up of leave 
aternity leave 
M
 
o specific study has been done on the ta
N
the fact that all pregnant employees are entitled to (at least) 16 weeks of fully paid 
Maternity leave and are not allowed to work from four weeks before the expected 
date of confinement, take-up of 100 per cent might be expected. 
Paternity leave 
 
An employee survey found that 90 per cent of men entitled to Paternity leave took 
up some sort of leave: 51 per cent had taken the statutory Paternity leave, but 
most had taken holidays or leave accrued in lieu of pay (Van Luijn and 
euzenkamp, 2004)33. 
K
Parental leave 
 
In 2007, 119,000 female employees and 140,000 male employees (working 12 
hours or more per week) were entitled to Parental leave. Of women eligible for 
Parental leave, 42 per cent took leave (of which 55 per cent had a paid leave), 
averaging eight months and ten hours a week. Of men entitled, 18 per cent took 
leave (of which 59 per cent had a paid leave) for an average of ten months and 
eight hours a week.  During their period of leave, m
p
grown since 2001 (for men and women by seven to eight per centage points 
respectively), but the difference between men and women is still very much the 
same.  
 
F
higher among women,
education. The uptake of women with a higher level is 56 per cent, compared with 
17 per cent for women with a low level; the figures for men are 25 per cent and 
seven per cent respectively. 
In a comprehensive study on the position and participation of women from ethnic 
minorities in Dutch society (Keuzenkamp and Merens, 2006), attention is paid to 
the uptake of Parental leave by Turkish, Moroccan, Surinamese and Antillean 
working parents. Uptake is found to be muc
A
main reasons why respondents did not take up Parental leave are unfamiliarity 
                                             
Luijn H. and Keuzenkamp, S. (2004) Werkt verlof? Het gebruik van regeling voor verlof 
33 Van 
en aanpassing van de arbeidsduur. Den Haag: Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau. 
 
245

with the entitlement and the fact that there was no need to use it (others took care 
of the children). 
d. ther employment-related measures 
nd 13 
-taken up most (seven per cent of all 
m care leave (among working people who 
of seriously 
l relatives or friends did not take up leave, although they felt a need for this (52 
per cent of the women and 60 per cent of the men). Reasons included: it was not 
possible because of their work and (to a lesser extent) because of financial 
 
It is unclear whether leave payments came from employers or from personal 
savings in the Life Course Savings Scheme. In 2007 22,000 employees saved in 
this scheme to finance a Parental leave (CBS, Statline, 2007), but there are no 
figures for the numbers who actually financed their leave from this source in 2006. 
 
O
 
Short-term care leave and emergency leave 
Recent research, carried out by Statistics Netherlands in 2007 on behalf of the 
Ministry of Social Affairs (see also part 4a), found that 252,000 women and 
211,000 men took care of a sick member of their family for a short period; 31 per 
cent of the women and 36 per cent of the men who undertook such care took 
some sort of leave. Mostly this was a holiday (nine per cent of the women a
per cent of the men), but also nine per cent of the women and nine per cent of 
men took up short-term care leave, while four and three per cent respectively took 
up emergency leave (Merens and Hermans, 2009). 
 
The Netherlands Institute of Social Research (SCP) carried out a specific research 
project focusing on informal carers (Keuzenkamp and Dijkgraaf, 2009). One of the 
questions they looked into concerns the strategies that working informal carers 
used to enable them to combine work and care. Taking leave is a strategy that 
almost half of all carers use: 47 per cent has taken up some sort of leave in the 
year before the interview. However, most of the time this consists of using ‘regular 
leave’, such as holiday; only 19 per cent use one or more of the formal leave 
arrangements, with short-term care leave
working informal carers use short-term care leave). 
 
The study on ethnic minorities (Keuzenkamp and Merens, 2006) shows that there 
are no significant differences between women and men and between different 
ethnic groups in the uptake of short-ter
had a sick relative). 
 
Long-term care leave 
Research carried out by Statistics Netherlands for the Ministry of Social Affairs 
(see part 4a) found that in 2007, 240,000 women and 214,000 men took care of 
seriously ill relatives or friends on a regular basis and/or for a long period (more 
than two weeks). Sixteen per cent of the women and 18 per cent of the men took 
up some sort of leave. This was however not always the statutory arrangement: 
only one per cent of the women and two per cent of the men used long-term care 
leave, and seven per cent of women and six per cent of the men used short-term 
care leave (Merens and Hermans, 2009).   
 
The survey reported that 56 per cent of the employees who took care 
il
 
246

consequences; and a lack of information on the statutory leave arrangements 
red to above (Keuzenkamp and 
Dijkgraaf, 2009) found that only one per cent of working informal carers used long-
 year before the interview. However, it is likely that longer 
ave is used more often, since five per cent of the respondents said they had 
 recent qualitative study asked employers whether they see the WAA as 
eeds of the employees. The other half do not: adjustment of 
 is too narrow 
 
 
 
(SZW, 2006). 
 
The survey among working informal carers refer
term care leave in the
le
taken up ‘unpaid leave’ and a similar proportion ‘special leave’. 
 
The Working Hours Adjustment Act 
Many workers in the Netherlands work part time. The Netherlands Institute of 
Social Research has recently published two reports on part-time work in the 
Netherlands (Portegijs and Keuzenkamp, 2008; Portegijs et al., 2009). It is clear 
that part-time work is very popular (and for women even almost natural). Although 
the Working Hours Adjustment Act (WAA) is not irrelevant, it serves more to 
establish norms that are already in practice than to promote part-time work. 
 
A
important. Half of them do: especially those in care and education. They have 
difficulties in finding and keeping personnel and the WAA helps them to adjust 
orking hours to the n
w
working hours in their view is possible without the WAA, and many criticise the 
WAA because they feel the advantage is too much on the employee’s side. The 
employer can only refuse the request of the employee when the interests of the 
oyers this condition
business are ‘seriously harmed’, but for the empl
and too vague. They would like the WAA changed into a kind of directive with 
more possibilities of negotiation between employers and employees and of turning 
down the request (Bureau Bartels, 2008).  
 
Employees who increased or decreased their working hours were asked what the 
WAA had meant in the process of adjusting their time. The WAA was not well 
known amongst the employees and their employers, but it often played an 
important role as a background norm.  
 
Life Course Savings Scheme 
The use of the Life Course Savings Scheme is still very low. In 2007 390,000 
employees working at least 12 hours per week participated in the scheme (5.5 per 
cent of all employees who work at least 12 hours per week). An analysis in 2006 
showed that employees with higher education use the savings scheme more: 8 
per cent, compared with four per cent of employees with a lower level of 
education. Older employees participate more often than younger ones, men more 
often than women, and those working full time more often than part-time workers. 
Half of the participants in the Scheme say that they do so to finance early 
retirement and three out of ten do not know yet for what purpose they will use their 
savings. Six per cent say that they want to use the scheme to finance Parental 
leave and five per cent for a sabbatical (Statistics Netherlands, 2007). 
 
 
247

 
4.
 
a. 
loyment will measure the number of people who would like 
b. 
ch studies  
ns/summaries
eer ladders. It is also shown that labour force exits have 
age and 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
The Work and Care Act and the Working Hours Adjustment Act are aimed at 
giving more opportunities to reconcile work and family. In order to monitor the 
attainment of this goal, every two years a survey commissioned by the Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Emp
to combine work and care and the number of people actually doing so. This 
survey will also look into the number of employees in need of leave arrangements, 
the number actually using them, and the reasons for not combining work and care 
and for not using leave. The number and contents of collective agreements on 
leave arrangements are monitored in a yearly study by the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Employment. 
 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
resear
 
Keuzenkamp, S. and Merens, A. (2006) Sociale atlas van vrouwen uit etnische 
minderheden [The social atlas of women from ethnic minorities]. Den Haag: 
Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau. An English summary available at: 
ttp://www.scp.nl/english/publicatio
h
This report presents a broad overview of the position and participation of groups 
of women from ethnic minorities in the Netherlands, with most attention focused 
on women from the four largest groups (Turkish, Moroccan, Surinamese or 
Antillean origin). Their position and participation are compared with those of 
indigenous women and with those of men from the same ethnic group. Topics 
include: education, labour market participation, attitudes on women's role, 
combination of labour and care and the use of childcare and leave arrangements, 
income and health. 
 
Roman, A.A. (2006) Deviating from the standard: effects on labour continuity and 
career patterns. PhD dissertation. Utrecht University. 
This thesis comprises three empirical studies covering four types of career path 
detours: part-time work, non-participation (voluntary and unemployment) and 
institutional career breaks. The analyses show that part-time work is not 
onducive to climbing car
c
a long-term impact on earnings and socio-economic status, especially of women. 
Even ten years after the period of voluntary non-participation, the negative effects 
on the wages of women are still there. The Belgian career break system, however, 
shows a more positive balance. Men experience positive effects on w
wage growth after temporary hour reduction (part-time breaks), which bring them 
back up to the wage level prior to the break. Women experience a positive effect 
on their wage and wage growth after using a full-time career break and this effect 
persists over time. 
 
 
248

Beeksma, M., Van den Ameele, A.N. and Machiels-Van Es, A.J. (2007)  
(Faciliteiten) arbeid en zorg 2007. Een onderzoek naar CAO-afspraken met 
etrekking tot arbeid-en-zorgfaciliteiten in CAOs. Den Haag, Ministerie van 
 and distributing 
ssertation. 
 responsibilities 
ntitle a person to time and/or money or publicly subsidised facilities (e.g. Parental 
gazine 23 
e Savings Scheme. 
ortegijs, W. (ed.) (2008) Verdeelde tijd. Waarom vrouwen in deeltijd werken [A 
icture of part-time working]. Den Haag: Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau. English 
summary 
available 
at: 
http://www.scp.nl/english/publications/summaries/9789037703979.html.  
The report looks into the following questions: How has part-time working 
developed in the Netherlands, and what role did the government and the two 
sides of industry play in this? How does this development compare with that in 
other 
countries? 
To what extent do the hours worked by women correlate with their views on paid 
work, economic independence and the division of tasks between women and 
men? What reasons do women working part-time give for doing so? What 
opportunities exist for increasing the working hours of women? What are the 
experiences of labour organisations in attempting to raise the employment 
rate/duration of women? 
 
Portegijs, W. and Keuzenkamp, S. (eds.) (2008)  Nederland deeltijdland. Vrouwen 
en deeltijdwerk [Part-time working in the Netherlands]. Den Haag: Sociaal en 
Cultureel Planbureau. English summary available at:  
http://www.scp.nl/english/publications/summaries/9789037703467.html.  
This report presents an outline of recent developments in the labour force 
participation and working hours of women, and looks at how these developments 
relate to views on the role of women in the family and on the labour market. Not 
only women with young children prefer to work part time. Current research being 
carried out by the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP), focusing 
b
Sociale Zaken en Werkgelegenheid, October 2007. 
Report of a study on the number and contents of Collective Labour Agreements 
on leave arrangements. 
 
Koopmans, I. (2007) De beheersing en verdeling van het zorgrisico. 
Modernisering van de sociale zekerheid 1987-2007. [Managing
the care risk. Modernising social security 1987-2007]. PhD di
Amsterdam: Aksant.  
The central question in this dissertation is: What are the implications of the 
transition from a male breadwinner model to an adult worker model for the Dutch 
social security system? Two ways to integrate care into the social security system 
are examined: to guarantee social security rights to employees with care 
responsibilities (like adjustment of the Unemployment Insurance Act); and to allot 
a more independent place in the system to care, so that care
e
leave, the Life Course Savings Scheme, formal childcare) to enable him or her to 
care.  
 
Statistics Netherlands (2007) Levensloopregeling leeft nog niet (webma
April 2007). Available at: www.scp.nl. 
This article presents findings from the Labour Force Survey 2006 on the use of 
the Life Cours
 
P
p
 
249

among other t
intended to pro
 
hings on these part-time working women without young children, is 
vide greater clarity on this. 
Participatie: strategieën van werkende 
al carers to combine work and care’], 
nd J. Timmermans (eds.) Mantelzorg. 
07 [Informal care. An 
overview of the support given by and to informal carers in 2007] Den Haag: 
l Planbureau. English summary available at: 
http://www.scp.nl/english/publications/summaries/9789037704082.html 
nts results of a quantitative research project
 carers. 
cluding: structural adjustment
ploy
g 
rary adjustment (taking leave), individual 
 employer (e.g. flexible work) and solutions at home 
and care for young children). A research 
r in English is available on request (s.keuzenka
cp.n
 (eds.) (2009
anci
 2008 
aag: Sociaa
en Cultureel Planbureau / 
 Statistiek. English summary
ble
publications/summaries/97
7040
r, which is published eve
yea
 wide 
 picture of the situation of women in the 
Keuzenkamp, S. and Dijkgraaf, M. (2009) ‘
mantelzorgers’ [‘Strategies of working inform
in: A. de Boer, M. Broese van Groenou a
Een overzicht van de steun van en aan mantelzorgers in 20
Sociaal en Culturee
This report prese
 of informal
One theme concerns the strategies that working informal carers use to combine 
paid work with care, in
 of em
ment (stop workin
or reduce working hours), tempo
arrangements with the
(reducing time spent on household tasks 
pape
mp@s
l). 
 
Merens, A. and Hermans, B. 
) Em
patiemonitor
[Emancipation Monitor 2008]. Den H
l 
Centraal Bureau voor de
 availa
 at: 
http://www.scp.nl/english/
ito
89037
68.html 
s a
The Emancipation Mon
ry two 
rs, contain
range of statistics that present a
Netherlands. 
 
 
 
 
 
250

2.19 
Ne
 
Heather McDonald 
 
Population (UNDP) 
To
 F
GDP p
2005 
4.1 million 
w Zealand 
tal
ertility Rate (UNDP) 
er capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
2.0 
24,996 PPP US$ 
Femal
   As %
% of e
   Men 
   Wom
Ge
e
2007 
34.7 per cent 
e economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 male rate (UNDP) 
mployed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
2005 
 
60.4 per cent 
82 per cent 
 
en  
2007 
11.2 per cent 
nd r employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
17% points 
Emplo
   With child under 3 years 
2005 
45.1 per cent 
60.6 per cent 
yment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
 
 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
5th          
Att
d
   Child
   Child
en ance at formal services (ECB)34
ren under 3 years 
ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
No data 
No data 
 
1.
su
ve’, and can be transferred to a spouse or partner.  
 
a. 
d l
Len th
 
 
                                              
 Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
pport parents 
 
Note on terminology: ‘Parental leave’ is used as a generic term to cover Maternity, 
Paternity and extended leave for new parents. For example, the first 14 weeks of 
paid leave after the birth, usually taken by the mother, is not termed ‘Maternity 
ave’ but ‘paid Parental lea
le
Maternity leave (paid Parental leave: see ‘note on terminology’) 
(responsibility of the Department of Labour with Inland Revenue as 
e ivery agent for payment) 
 
g
 of leave (before and after birth) 
• 
Fourteen weeks. A woman can start to take leave from six weeks before the 
expected date of delivery. 
 
 
  
 
 T
 
nder three years and 99 per cent 
for three and four year olds (Source: New Zealand Ministry of Education). 
34
he attendance rate in 2007 was 43 per cent for children u
 
251

Pa ment and funding 
 
Hundred per cent of earnings, up to a ceiling of NZ$407.36 per week before 
• 
ss or earn less than the equivalent of ten 
hours pay at the highest rate of the minimum wage, receive a minimum rate of 
 per week. 
 
Funded from general taxation. 
Flexib
• 
ity leave can start earlier if it is necessary for the health of the mother or 
baby or where a mother cannot continue to perform her job safely or 
quately. Where a mother is directed by her doctor or employer to start 
Maternity leave early, she has the right to take eight weeks leave after the 
• 
• 
 
Eli
i
 
• 
t mothers who have worked for the same employer for an average of 
at least ten hours a week, and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in 
ected date of 
loyed a minimum of ten hours 
the six or 12 months immediately before the baby’s expected due 
Va
ti
poor h
person othe
er has a child who is subsequently adopted, both the 
arent/s and the mother may access paid leave. 
h of the mother), the spouse/partner may 
 payment. 
paid) leave of up to ten days can be taken by a mother before 
 
b. Pat
 
‘note 
on 
rminology’)(responsibility of the Department of Labour) 
 
 
One or two weeks depending on eligibility. 
y
 
•
tax is paid as Parental leave. 
Self-employed parents who make a lo
NZ$125.00
•
 
ility in use 
 
Matern
ade
expected date of birth, with the overall leave period extended accordingly.  
An employer and mother can agree for Maternity leave to start at any other 
time before the baby is due.  
The birth mother may transfer any or all of the payment for leave to an eligible 
spouse/partner (including de facto and same-sex partners). 
gib lity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
Expectan
every month, in the six or 12 months immediately before the exp
delivery.  
 
Self-employed mothers who have been self-emp
•
a week in 
date. 
 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
r than the mother 
 
 
Where an eligible moth
•
adoptive p
 
In certain circumstances (e.g. deat
•
receive the
 
Special (un
•
Maternity leave, for reasons connected with the pregnancy (e.g. for antenatal 
checks). 
• 
Different eligibility rules apply for junior doctors and teachers in state schools 
where multiple employments may be a feature, or a requirement of training. 
ernity 
leave 
(paternity/partner 
leave: 
see
te
•
 
252

 
Payment and funding 
 
• 
No direct payment, although an eligible spouse/partner can transfer their 
entitlement of the statutory payment. 
ility in use 
 
Flexib
 
nd 21 days after the actual date of birth. 
 
If agreed between an employee and employer, leave can start at any other 
s who have worked for the same employer for an average of at least 
ten hours a week, and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every 
er who meets the hours’ 
requirements and has worked for the same employer for 12 or more months is 
• 
e ‘note on terminology’) 
   (responsibility of the Department of Labour) 
 
Up to 52 weeks leave may be taken in the 12 months after birth, including any 
arental’) leave-taken; Paternity (‘paternity/partner’) leave is 
additional. Leave is a family entitlement. 
 
Payme
 
 
None. 
Flexibility in use  
• 
• 
us leave and can be started following 
maternity, paternity/partners leave or after a period of return to work; however 
d or one year after the 
parent has assumed the care of a child they intend to adopt. 
 
 
• 
Leave can be taken at any time in the period between 21 days before the 
expected date of delivery a
•
time. 
 
Eligibility 
 
• 
Employee
month, in the six months immediately before the baby’s expected due date are 
eligible for one week of leave.  A spouse/partn
entitled to two weeks leave. 
Self-employed workers who have been self-employed for a minimum of ten 
hours a week in the six or 12 months immediately before the expected date of 
delivery. 
 
c. Parental leave (extended leave: se
 
Length of leave  
 
•
Maternity (‘paid p
nt and funding 
•
 
 
Leave may be shared by both eligible parents. They can take their leave at the 
same time or consecutively. 
Extended leave is taken as continuo
the right to the leave ends when the child is one year ol
 
 
253

 
Eligibi
 
• 
arent assumes the care of a child under six years they 
intend to adopt. 
Va
po
pe
Ad
agree
mployer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
d. 
 
e. 
Ad
 Spouses/partners intending to adopt have the same leave entitlement as other 
e spouses/partners who are jointly adopting a child under the 
minate which parent will receive the payment. 
Tim
Fle
 right to request a 
variation to their hours of work, days of work or place of work. When making a 
request, the employee must explain how the variation will help them better 
lity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
Extended leave is available to employees who have worked for the same 
employer an average of ten hours a week, and at least one hour in every week 
or 40 hours in every month, in the 12 months before the expected date of 
delivery or the date a p
• 
Extended leave is not available to those with less than 12 months employment 
with the same employer.  
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parents 
 
• 
None.  
 
ditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; e
 
• 
Some collective agreements allow parents to access additional provisions, 
usually payments and longer leave periods; they are most commonly found in 
the public sector. Employment agreements are in addition to and cannot 
override statutory provisions overall. 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
• 
None. 
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
option leave and pay 
 
•
parents. Eligibl
age of six years can no
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
• 
After the first six months of continuous employment, an employee may take up 
to five days of sick leave per year, at 100 per cent of earnings from their 
employer with no payment ceiling. This leave can be used in the case of the 
employee’s or a dependant’s illness.  
 
xible working: the right to request and the duty to consider  
 
• 
Employees who have the care of another person and have been employed by 
their employer for a minimum of six months have the
 
254

care for the person concerned. Employers have a duty to consider a request 
and are able to refuse a request on one or more of the recognised business 
grounds or if it conflicts with a collective employment agreement. An employee 
can make a formal complaint only where they consider an employer has made 
a wrong determination about their eligibility to apply for flexibility or where the 
 not complied with the statutorily described process for 
 
2.
ow more women and their spouses/partners 
access to the provisions. On 1 July 2006 ‘paid Parental leave’ provisions (see 
gy) were made available to the self-employed. The eligibility 
riteria is broadly similar to that applying to employees as is the duration and 
 Protection Act 1987 was 
ndertaken. The Government publicly stated their intention to continue to expand 
 
ent’s position on Parental leave 
3. 
round the birth/adoption of a 
a. 
 
 workforce, and 
employer has
considering a request. 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
Maternity leave legislation was first introduced in New Zealand in the 1980s. In 
2002, 12 weeks paid leave was introduced, extended to 14 weeks in 2004 with 
relaxed eligibility requirements to all
note on terminolo
c
payment. 
 
In 2005/06 an evaluation of the experiences of mothers, fathers and employers 
with using the Parental Leave and Employment
u
leave entitlements, but no announcements of future changes were made ahead of 
the November 2008 general elections. There has been a change of government
and no statement has been made of the governm
policy. 
 
Take-up of leave 
 
Mothers, fathers and employers were surveyed in 2005/06 about their 
experiences of using leave around the birth/adoption of a child. Overall two-thirds 
f all women in paid work take up a period of leave a
o
child.  
 
Maternity leave 
 
The 2005/06 survey found eight in ten women in paid work six months before their 
expected date of delivery were eligible to take Maternity leave; at the time of the 
survey, self-employed parents were not entitled to paid leave and the Department
of Labour estimated their inclusion would still leave approximately ten per cent of 
employed mothers ineligible for leave. Eighty-three per cent of eligible women 
took paid statutory leave, averaging three months of leave. Of the remaining one-
third of women who do not take statutory leave, two-thirds took no leave at all 
(evenly divided between those who were eligible and ineligible) and one-third took 
other types of leave. Take-up of leave is affected by awareness of the provisions 
available, decision-making about whether to exit or remain in the
how many children are already in the family. 
 
 
255

Just over a fifth (22 per cent) of mothers took paid leave only. The remaining 78 
per cent took paid leave in combination with one or more other types of leave, e.g. 
annual leave, sick leave. Where this leave was also paid, mothers typically used it 
efore they began Maternity leave.  
 
b. 
 (four per cent). Only one per cent of fathers reported taking 
 
c. 
 Parental (‘extended’) leave (57 per cent). On average they returned to 
4.
 
a. 
b. 
om January 2006, including results from 
b
Paternity leave 
 
In 2005/06 most fathers – 82 per cent – were found to take some sort of leave 
around the birth of a child. Typically, however, fathers took paid leave such as 
annual leave (58 per cent) or other employer paid leave (21 per cent) rather than 
unpaid Paternity leave
statutory paid leave (which would have been transferred to them from the mother). 
Nearly half of fathers took less than a week of leave (46 per cent) and another 38 
per cent had up to two weeks leave. 
Parental leave  
 
Over half of mothers surveyed in 2005/06 who took paid leave, also took some 
npaid
u
work when their baby was six months old. A total of three per cent of fathers 
reported taking any Parental (‘extended’) leave. 
 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
The Department of Labour has undertaken two evaluations of amendments to the 
Parental leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 during the current decade. 
During this time there has also been considerable policy and public debate about 
the development of Parental leave in New Zealand.  
 
elected publications fr
S
research studies   
 
Callister, P., and Galtry, J. (2006) ‘Paid Parental leave in New Zealand: a short 
history and future policy options’, Policy Quarterly, Vol.2, No.1: 38-46. Available 
at: 
ttp://ips.ac.nz/publications/files/d9c058c506b.pdf
h
This paper tracks key historical milestones that led to the introduction of paid 
leave in New Zealand in 2002, and discusses labour market, gender equity and 
health rationales for the continued development of leave. In particular the authors 
consider the link between job protection and payment from a health promotion 
perspective, the importance of ensuring greater access to paid leave for fathers, 
and improved access to provisions for those outside the scheme. 
 
Department of Labour (2007) Parental leave in New Zealand – 2005/2006 
evaluation. 
Wellington: 
Department 
of 
Labour. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.dol.govt.nz/worklife/research/parental-leave.asp.  
 
256

This report provides the findings from three stages of the evaluation of leave in 
New Zealand: an environmental scan, qualitative focus groups and quantitative 
surveys of mothers, fathers and employers. 
 
Families Commission (2007) It’s about time – towards a Parental leave policy that 
gives New Zealand families real choice (Research Report No. 3/07). Wellington, 
New 
Zealand: 
Families 
Commission. 
Available 
at: 
mission.govt.nz/publications/research.php. 
his paper explores the components of a Parental leave policy that might best 
ls. 
 
Department of Labour (2008) Work-life balance and flexibility in New Zealand – a 
snapshot of employee and employer attitudes and experiences in 2008. 
Wellington, 
New 
Zealand: 
Department 
of 
Labour. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.dol.govt.nz/worklife/research/work-life-balance.asp  
This report presents findings from employee and employer surveys; it provides 
baseline data for a statutory review of flexible working arrangements legislation in 
2010. 
 
Crichton, S. (2008) Work Patterns after Paid Parental leave. Wellington, New 
Zealand: 
Statistics 
New 
Zealand. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.stats.govt.nz/leed/reports/default.htm   
Using longitudinal data from the Linked Employer-Employee Dataset this paper 
describes the employment and earnings patterns of 49,000 people who first 
received paid Parental leave between July 2002 and June 2005. Crichton found 
that 40 per cent of recipients were working six months after starting Parental 
leave, and nearly 70 per cent were working 13-18 months later. Overall three-
quarters of paid leave recipients returned to work within 12 months of starting 
Parental leave and two-thirds of those returned to work after taking six months 
leave or less. Many people reduced their earnings after returning to work, with a 
third earning considerably less than before. Around one-fifth of those returning to 
work were working for the same employer and had similar earnings 12-18 months 
after starting Parental leave. 
 
National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women (2008) Priority 
improvement to Parental leave. Wellington, New Zealand: National Advisory 
Council on the Employment of Women. Available at: www.nacew.org.nz  
The response to a request by the Minister of Labour for views on the priority for 
developing leave policy in New Zealand.  
 
Brough, P., O’Driscoll, M.P., and Biggs, A. (2009) ‘Parental leave and work-family 
balance among employed parents following childbirth: an exploratory investigation 
in Australia and New Zealand’, New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences Online, 
Vol. 
4, 
No. 
1: 
71-87. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.royalsociety.org.nz/Site/publish/Journals/kotuitui/2009/default.aspx  
This exploratory qualitative study investigated the perceived effects of Parental 
leave provisions, organisational and family support and job changes on work-
family balance among 81 Australian and New Zealand parents who had returned 
to paid employment after the birth of a child. The findings illustrate the advantages 
http://www.familiescom
T
meet the preferences of New Zealand families, recommending a policy and 
costing its proposa
 
257

of governmen
pressure (with
by parents to 
t intervention in paid Parental leave provisions and the reduced 
 negative personal and organisational consequences) experienced 
return to full-time employment promptly after childbirth. Along with 
upport leave-taking, employers can have a substantial 
parent’s return to work following childbirth is successful 
ee being retained. 
There is no known new research being undertaken in New Zealand on Parental 
 
policy interventions to s
influence on whether a 
and results in the employ
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
leave at this time.
 
258

2
Norway 
Pop a
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
NDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
4.6 million 
1.8 
41,420 PPP US$ 
.20 
 
Berit Brandth and Elin Kvande 
 
ul tion (UNDP) 
GDP per capita (U
Female economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   A
 m
% of em
   Men 
   Women  
2005 
2007 
63.3 per cent 
.5 per cent 
31.6 per cent 
  7% points 
s %
ale rate (UNDP) 
ployed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
 
2007 
87 per cent 
 
10
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   W
 ch
   With 
 
 
ith
ild under 3 years 
child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
2005 
No data 
No data 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
1st          
Attenda
   Children under 3 years 
2006 
No data 
nce at formal services (ECB)35
 
 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
No data  
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
pp
 
Note
y: there is no single agreed name for Maternity or Parental 
e 
leave 
before 
birth, 
dselspermisjon (birth leave) for the six weeks after and foreldrepermisjon 
leave period. The Ministry of Children and 
Equality, which grants the money for leave, refers to foreldrepengeperioden 
ren
 
a. Maternity leave (svangerskapspermisjon and fødselspermisjon – see 
ote on terminology) (responsibility of the Ministry of Children and 
quality) 
e Maternity leave.36 The information below is for that part 
arental leave reserved for women before and after birth; it is treated 
    
su
ort parents 
 on terminolog
leave. The Work Environment Act 2005 (the responsibility of the Ministry of Labour 
and Social Inclusion), which grants leave but not money, uses the name 
svangerskapspermisjon 
(pregnancy 
leave) 
for 
th
fø
(Parental leave) for the remaining 
(pa
tal money period).  
n
E
 
NB There is no separat
of P
                                             
35 The access rate in 2008 was 75 per cent for children under three years and 96 per cent 
for children aged three to six years (source: Statistics Norway). 
 
259

separately here, but is in effect part of the longer foreldrepengeperioden (parental 
 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
Nine weeks: three weeks before the birth and six weeks following birth. 
Pa ment (applied for the whole period of parental money) and funding  
• 
Hundred or 80 per cent of earnings (See part 1c). 
 
 
f her three weeks pre-birth leave), the remaining time 
ansferred to after the birth and is therefore lost. 
r six of the last ten months prior to delivery are 
eligible for leave and who have earned at least half the basic national 
r the previous year. Non-employed women 
receive a flat payment (currently corresponding to about €5,000). 
Varia
poor 
perso
 
 or child is ill and hospitalised after delivery, leave payment can 
 
b
a
of
 
L
 
addy days’ (+ eight weeks=father’s quota, see 
  
 
money period). 
 
•
 
y
 
•
Funded from general taxation. 
Flexibility in use 
 
• 
None. If the baby is born before the estimated delivery date (e.g. so that the 
mother only used two o
cannot be tr
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
All women employed fo
insurance benefit payment ove
 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
n other than the mother 
• 
If the mother
be postponed. 
. P ternity leave (commonly known as pappapermisjon) (responsibility 
 the Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusion) 
t
eng h of leave (before and after birth) 
• 
Two weeks after birth – ‘d
part 1c)  
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
Leave is available for pregnant women who must quit work because of 
emical, biological or physical hazards. To be eligible, these hazards must be 
cumented and the employer unabl
36 
ch
do
e to offer alternative work. It is paid at 
the same rate as sickness benefit. 
 
 
260

Paym
 
• 
‘D
ag
 
Flexibil
 
• 
N
 
Eligib
 
• 
A
pa
 or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
perso
 
• 
 
c. Pare
of C
 
Le
th 
 for fathers (fedrekvoten or ‘father’s quota’. 
 
Paym
 
• 
ceiling of six times the
r cent of earnings, the length of leave is 
•
•
•
 
Flex
 
• 
• 
 parental money 
period, as long as it is taken during the first three years after birth and the 
parent receiving the money is employed full time. Hospitalisation and vacation 
ent  
addy days’ are unpaid by government; pay depends on individual or collective 
reements. 
ity in use 
one.  
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
ll employed fathers have the right to leave, but payment is negotiated and 
id by the employer. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple
n other than the mother 
one.  
N
ntal leave (Foreldrepengeperioden) (responsibility of the Ministry 
hildren and Equality) 
of leave (before and after birth) 
ng
 
• 
46 or 56 weeks, depending on payment level (see ‘payment and funding’ 
below). Of these, nine weeks are for mothers (included above under Maternity 
leave, in part 1a) and ten weeks are
The remaining 27 or 37 weeks is a family entitlement and may be taken by 
either mother or father. See ‘flexibility’ below for options available to parents. 
ent and funding 
Parental money may either be taken at 100 or 80 per cent of earnings, up to a 
 basic national insurance benefit payment (NOK421,336 
a year, €48,640). If taken at 100 pe
reduced by ten weeks. 
 
Non-employed women receive a flat payment (currently about 
 
€5,000). 
 
Funded from general taxation. 
ibility in use 
Family entitlement: it is possible to choose a longer period of leave (37 weeks) 
paid at 80 per cent of earnings, or a shorter (27 weeks) paid at 100 per cent.  
After the first six weeks, it is possible to postpone part of the
may also qualify for postponement.  
 
261

• After the first six weeks, it is also possible for one or both parents to combine 
parental money period with part-time work; if parents take 
less than full benefit payment, this will prolong the period of parental money. 
ble to the 
mother, except in certain circumstances, e.g. if the father is ill or otherwise 
r if the mother and father do not live together. 
• The father’s quota may not be taken in the first six weeks of the parental 
 
Eligib
) 
ility rules are the same for fathers and mothers. They must be 
s) or study on a full-time basis. For the father’s quota, there is no 
a
due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
o
pe
 Family entitlement: when more than one child is born, parental money is 
d. 
 
e basis receive a 
all or part of the 
If both parents choose to combine parental money with part-time work, for 
instance each working half time, this will not result in a longer period. A 
written agreement from the employer is demanded in both cases. 
• Father’s quota: this period of leave (ten weeks) is not transfera
unable to care for the child o
money period, except for multiple births or adoption. Otherwise, fathers are 
free to choose at what time during the period to use it and whether to split the 
quota or use it in one block. Splitting requires agreement with the employer.  
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances
 
• The eligib
employed for six of the last ten months prior to birth and earn at least half the 
basic national insurance benefit payment over the previous year.  
• The father can use the 27/37 weeks of paid leave even if the mother is not 
eligible; but the mother is required to take up work (at least 75 per cent of full-
time hour
requirement that mothers go back to work, but the mother must have been 
employed for six of the last ten months prior to birth. 
 
riation in leave 
V
p or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parents 
 
•
increased by seven weeks for each child (with 80 per cent pay) or five weeks 
with 100 per cent pay. If the child dies during the parental leave period, parents 
will receive payment for six weeks of the period that is left.  
• Father’s quota: may be transferred to the mother if the father is ill and unable to 
care for the child, or if the mother and father do not live together. 
 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
• Each parent has the right to one year of unpaid leave after parental leave. 
• Parents with a child aged 12-36 months are entitled to receive a cash benefit 
(‘cash-for-care’ scheme) on condition they do not use a full-time place in a 
publicly-funded childcare centre. In 2009, the full benefit was NOK3,303 (€380) 
per child per month. Children who use centres on a part-tim
reduced benefit (e.g. if parents use no place, they receive 100 per cent of the 
benefit; if they use a place for 17-24 hours a week they receive 40 per cent of 
the full benefit). The main criterion for eligibility, therefore, is not parental 
employment status, but parents not using a particular service. 
 
 
 
262

e. Other employment-related measures  
 
y  
   
either parent. In addition, parents adopting 
children from abroad receive a cash benefit of NOK35,263 (€4,070). 
ependants 
 
k, or 15 if they have more than two children. Single parents 
to 20/30 days a year. For severely or chronically sick children, 
Fle
2.
 
 
nt to consider measures to ensure equal pay between women and 
men. One of its proposals was to increase men’s share of care by means of a 
e Men's Panel, proposed a compromise: a division of the 
Parental leave period into four parts, one for each parent and the remaining two to 
taken from the sharable leave which was reduced to 37 weeks. 
 for fathers using the 
 
rights for 
Adoption leave and pa
 
• The same regulations as for parents having their own children, except for the  
nine weeks of Maternity leave. The whole period, with the exception of the 
father’s quota, may be taken by 
 
Tim  off for the care of d
e
 
• Each parent of a child under 12 years has a right to ten days leave when
children are sic
have the right 
there are extended rights to leave until the child is 18 years old. Leave is paid 
by the employer at the same rate as sickness benefit. 
 
xible working 
 
• Breastfeeding mothers may reduce their working hours by two hours per day, 
with payment from the employer. 
• Parents have a right to part-time work to care for children, until children are ten 
years old.  
 
 Changes in leave policy and other related developments 
since 2006 (including proposals currently under discussion) 
Increased flexibility was introduced in January 2007 into the Parental leave 
(parental money) period and how it can be used. From 1 July 2008, self-employed 
parents have received parental money estimated at 100 per cent of their earnings. 
There was a lively political debate in 2008 about extending the father’s quota, 
stimulated by a proposal from the Committee on Equal Pay, which was asked by 
the governme
tripartite division of the Parental leave, following the Icelandic model, i.e. dividing 
the leave period equally between fathers, mothers and a third part to be shared 
between parents as they choose. This led to political discussions, with the Prime 
Minister and the Minister for Children and Equality being against the proposal. 
Another committee, th
share. From July 2009, the father’s quota was extended to ten weeks, and the 
maximum length of the leave to 56 weeks; two of the extra quota weeks were 
 
The issue most debated currently is improved eligibility
father’s quota. Today it is dependent on mother’s employment before birth, while it
is a stated political aim of many parties to have independent eligibility 
fathers.  
 
263

 
3. 
 
tal money; the remainder do not 
sed on data from public records 
gård, 2003)37. 
b. 
ent). 
 
 
introduction of the fathers’ quota less than four per cent of 
ds in 2007 show that 70 per cent of eligible fathers take more than five 
 
herefore, is 
 by mothers and has in practice become a Maternity leave. 
ve is dependent on the mother and her willingness to share: 
(e.g. 
his 
 
rental leave. While the fathers least likely to use the 
 
    
Take-up of leave 
a. Maternity leave 
 
Three out of four mothers have the right to paren
meet eligibility conditions. These figures are ba
(Danielsen and Lappe
 
Paternity leave 
 
The take-up rate is approximately the same as for the father’s quota (89 per c
c. Parental leave 
 the years prior to the 
In
fathers took some parental leave. Only a few years later, the take-up rate was 
over 70 per cent (Representative sample – own research from 1997), and data 
from public records (2003) show that 89 per cent of fathers take leave. Brandth 
and Kvande (2003)38 show the many aspects of fathers’ use of the fathers’ quota. 
After the extension of the father’s quota to six weeks in 2006, figures based on 
ublic recor
p
weeks; and that more and more fathers take six weeks. 
Until 2005 the father’s quota was four weeks; for this shorter period, the father’s 
quota only constituted 7.7 per cent of the total leave time used. Most fathers do 
not take more than their quota: only 15 per cent of fathers take any part of 
arental leave (i.e. in addition to the father’s quota). Parental leave, t
p
for the most part taken
ather’s use of the lea
F
mothers who have invested in education and have strong ties to working life 
work full time and have higher status work) are thus most likely to share. T
means that fathers are more likely to take some Parental leave when mothers 
have a high educational level, high income and work status, and full-time 
employment. 
However, some characteristics of the father are also associated with use of leave. 
The higher the father’s level of education, the more likely he is to use the fathers’ 
quota and other parts of Pa
quota are fathers with long working hours, in managerial positions or with a wife 
who works part time.  
                                             
Danielsen, K. and Lappegård, T. (2003) ‘Tid er viktig når barn blir født - om ulik bruk av 
net fødselspermisjon, Samfunnsspeilet 5, Statistisk sentralbyrå. 
37 
løn
38 Brandth, B. and Kvande, E. (2003) ‘Father presence in child care’, in: A.M. Jensen and 
L. McKee (eds.) Children and the changing family: between transformation and 
negotiation. London: Routledge Falmer. 
 
 
264

Moreover, a father’s sharing of Parental leave also depends on his own 
relationship to work. Fathers must often negotiate with their employers when they 
want to take more leave than the father’s quota, and the view that parental leave 
 
4.
ployment-
 
a. 
b. elected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Børve, H.E. (2007) ‘Pregnant bodies in a globalised working life’, European 
Journal of Women’s Studies, Vol.14, No.4: 311-326. 
This article focuses on what happens when Norwegian female employees face 
working conditions imported from other countries, in a globalised Norwegian 
company. 
 
Lappegård, T. (2008) ‘Changing the gender balance in caring: fatherhood and the 
division of parental leave in Norway’, Population Research and Policy Review, 
Vol.27, No.2: 139-153. 
Using register data from 1993-1997, the article shows that gender balance in 
breadwinning has a strong effect on fathers’ use of Parental leave.  
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
Det nye arbeidslivet: Nye arbeidstidsordninger blant fedre og mødre og blant 
foreldrepar [The new work life: New working hours among fathers and mothers 
and among couples]. Ragni Hege Kitterød and Randi Kjeldstad, Statistics Norway, 
Oslo. 
The project studies how mothers and fathers with children living at home organise 
their time for employment and what consequences this might have for time 
pressure and division of work among couples. Contact: Ragni Hege Kitterød at 
ragni.hege.kitterod@ssb.no
 
Fleksible arbeidskulturer og foreldres tidskonflikter [Flexible work life cultures and 
parental time conflicts]. Elin Kvande and Berit Brandth, Department of Sociology 
and Political Science, NTNU (Norwegian University of Science and Technology), 
Trondheim.  
Sub-projects include: care policies in different time regimes (Birgitte Johannesen); 
gender and care in a globalised work life (Hege Børve); Children’s time 
negotiations with parents in different working cultures (Brita Bungum); and time 
is really Maternity leave is to be found among some employers. Fathers therefore 
may experience their jobs as a hindrance to taking more leave. 
 Research and publications on leave and other em
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
The Norwegian Research Council has an ongoing programme on Work Life 
Research. As part of this programme, there are several projects that deal with 
care- and employment-related policies, which are listed below (See part 4c). 
 
S
 
265

cultures and p
Brandth at ber
 
arental time conflicts (Berit Brandth and Elin Kvande). Contact: Berit 
it.brandth@svt.ntnu.no or Elin Kvande at elin.kvande@svt.ntnu.no
eltakelse i arbeidsliv og hjemmeliv. [Gender, coping and 
nd home life]. Øystein G. Holter, Work Research Institute, 
ow employees with care responsibilities solve the conflicts 
hat are the consequences for realisation of 
ng life and for life quality and relations in 
oeholter@online.no
– nye begreper, nye reali
os
g 
 Anne-Lise Ellingsæter, Institute for Social 
 what ex
nd 
ys the 
l economy leads to a change in
 
 of employment. How does such a restructuring influence practice, norms 
se
  
Kjønn, mestring og d
participation in work a
Oslo. 
The study focuses on h
between working life and family life. W
resources and competence in worki
private life? Contact: Øystein Gullvåg Holter at 
 
Postindustriell arbeidstid 
teter? [P
t-industrial workin
hours – new concepts, new realities?]
Research (ISF), Oslo.  
The main question in this study is to
restructuring of work in the post-industria
tent a
in what wa
 the time
structure
and the social meaning of work and family? Contact: Anne Li
anne.l.ellingsater@samfunnsforskn
 Ellingsæter at
ing.no
 
 
 
 
 
266

2.21 
P
 
ka and Piotr Michoń 
 
Po
a
Tot
GD
e
38.2  million 
oland 
Irena E. Kotows
pul tion (UNDP) 
2005 
al Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
P p r capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
1.3 
13,847 PPP US$ 
Fe
ale
   M
   W
Gen er
2005 
52.3 per cent 
80 per cent 
 
 13% points 
m
 economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% of employed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
 
en 
omen  
 employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2007 
2004 
  6.0 per cent 
15.0 per cent 
d
Employment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
   With child under 3 years 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
No data 
No data 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
49th          
Att
   C
d
   C ild
 
endance at formal services (ECB) 
hil ren under 3 years 
ren 3-5 years (inclusive)
h
39
 
2006 
2006 
 
  2 (2) per cent 
28 (21) per cent
 
 
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
support parents 
a. 
erzyński) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
abour and Social Policy) 
Length of le
atory: up to two 
sed before the expected date of birth. 
Eight weeks in the case 
•
 
 
 
     
 
 
Maternity leave (urlop maci
L
 
ave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
Twenty weeks for a first birth, of which 14 weeks is oblig
weeks can be u
 
of baby’s death. 
 
If the child is born while the mother is on Parental leave, Maternity leave is two 
weeks shorter.  
•
                                           
39 he attendance rate for children aged three to five years (2006/7) = 45 per cent (source: 
Statistical yearbook, 2007). 
 
 
T
 
267

Payment and funding  
•
nths before birth, with no 
• 
ial Insurance Fund, financed by contributions by 
onal finance from the 
 
Flexibil
 
 
None except for when leave can be started before birth. 
r which the remaining 
entitlement can be transferred to the father. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
ity insurance at the start of leave. 
Va
i
poor h
person
 
• 
In the case of multiple births, leave is extended to 31 weeks for twins, 33 
druplets and 37 weeks for quintuplets.  
 
b. 
t
 
 
 
p wychowawczy) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
abour and Social Policy)  
 
Len
ment is per family. 
 
Pay
 
 child.  
 
 
Hundred per cent of average earnings for 12 mo
ceiling on payments. 
Funded from the Soc
employees and self-employed workers, with some additi
State to cover pension contributions. 
ity in use 
•
• 
The mother must take at least 14 weeks leave afte
 
• 
Insured employees, including all employees and self-employed women 
covered by social secur
 
riat on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
weeks for triplets, 35 weeks for qua
Pa ernity leave  
 No general statutory entitlement. 
c. Parental leave (urlo
L
gth of leave  
 
• 
Thirty six months. The entitle
ment and funding 
• 
A parental allowance (Dodatek z tytułu opieki nad dzieckiem w okresie 
korzystania z urlopu wychowawczego – supplement to family benefit due to 
taking care of child during Parental leave) of PLN400 (€89) per month is paid 
if monthly household income per capita does not exceed PLN504 (€112) The 
basic payment is for 24 months, but the period can be extended to 36 months 
where there is more than one
• 
Funded from general taxation.  
 
 
 
 
268

Flexibility in use 
 
• 
Leave can be taken until a child’s fourth birthday.  
• 
Parents can take leave in one continuous period or in up to four separate 
blocks. 
• 
Parents can take leave together for up to three months. 
• 
During the Parental leave period, parents may be employed and claim 
parental allowance, if working does not prevent them from caring for their 
children. A parent working while on leave can be employed by a different 
employer.  
 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
Employees with a work record of at least six months.  
Eli
Va
po
pe
 
d. 
     
 
There is no statutory entitlement. 
e. 
Ad
Tim
ronically ill) in the case of: an unforeseen 
closure of a nursery school, kindergarten, or school; or the illness or childbirth 
g permanently for the child is ill, in childbirth or stays in an 
in-patient healthcare institution. This leave is also paid at 80 per cent of 
 
  
Fl
 
 
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parents 
 
• 
Leave may be extended for another 36 months if a child is disabled or 
chronically ill and requires care, but can be taken no later than the child’s 
eighteenth birthday. A payment of PLN 583 (€130) per month is made in these 
cases and the payment period can be extended up to 72 months. 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
•
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
option leave and pay 
 
• 
The same regulations as for parents having their own children.  
• 
Parental allowance is paid if the adopted child is seven years old or younger.  
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
• 
An employee can take leave of up to 14 days per year to provide personal 
care for a family member, paid at 80 per cent of earnings.  
•  An employee can take leave to care for a child up to eight years of age (14 
years if the child is disabled or ch
of the spouse carin
earnings for up to 60 days. 
  
 
exible working 
• 
No general statutory entitlement. 
 
269

2.
 
nsion. Regulations introduced in 
ons (on 6 December 2008), Maternity leave will be extended gradually to 
gle births irrespective of order) and to 39 weeks (for multiple 
ese additional weeks are optional, so that Maternity leave will 
lso be possible to combine 
-time working, with payment proportional to 
so be entitled to this part of the Maternity leave.   
From 2004, fertility in Po
r
i
a
c
n
p
T
needs both higher fertility 
and increased employment of men 
c
r
 
T
tes. In 
the new round of the family policy programme, currently under consultation,
r
g
t
w
i
nity leave, outlined above, these include: parental allowance to be 
paid to a parent on Pare
c
c
b
f
a
o
 
3. T
 
a. M
 
T
t
I
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
Regulations approved in December 2006 extended Maternity leave to 18 weeks 
(for a first birth), 20 (for each successive birth) and 28 weeks (for multiple births) 
nd the government is planning a further exte
a
January 2009 further increased the length of Maternity leave and provided 
additional leave for multiple births. Following the approval by Parliament of new 
regulati
26 weeks (for sin
births) in 2014. Th
consist of two parts: obligatory and voluntary. It will a
he voluntary Maternity leave with part
t
the working time. Fathers will al
.  
land has started to grow gradually, though the total fertility 
ate remains very low (estimated as 1.34 in 2008). Despite this slight 
mprovement, policy measures to further increase fertility are under strong political 
nd public debates. Experts argue that besides reducing financial costs of 
hildren, measures which reduce incompatibilities between work and family are 
ecessary; these are the result of inflexible employment conditions, traditional 
atterns of sharing family responsibilities, and underdeveloped childcare services. 
hat argument is strengthened by the fact that Poland 
and women. Since both structural and cultural 
auses for these incompatibilities have been identified by experts, gender roles 
eceive more attention and the role of employers is highlighted as well.  
he term ‘a family-friendly employer’ has started to appear in public deba
 
econciliation issues were explicitly mentioned for the first time. The new 
overnment, which started at the end of November 2007, is continuing to work on 
he family policy changes. In the new regulations, approved in December 2008, 
ork-family reconciliation measures receive even more attention. In addition to 
mproved Mater
ntal leave, even if s/he combines leave and work, and if a 
hild attends a childcare centre; the enterprise social fund can be used to finance 
hildcare centres established by a firm as well as to refund costs of care covered 
y parents; and employers are exempted from payment of contributions to benefit 
unds for employees who return to work after Maternity and Parental leave. In 
ddition, Paternity leave will be introduced in 2010, starting at one week and paid 
n the same basis as Maternity leave.  
ake-up of leave 
aternity leave 
here are no regular statistics on use of Maternity leave, though it is obligatory to 
ake leave. Data on maternity allowances provided by the Social Insurance 
nstitution (Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) refer to the number of days paid 
 
270

a
d
s
and the number of days of Maternity leave used in a year has risen: from 22,262 
days in 2004 to 29,999 in 2007. Also the average payment has risen, from 
P
 
T
l
b. P
   
  Th
 
c. P
lar and coherent government statistics on the use of Parental 
005 but it dropped to 130,668 in 2006 and 126,178 in 2007.   
06; Matysiak, 2007). Amongst 
 
id mothers and mothers with low 
thers with university 
t with secondary education, and 61 per cent with the lowest 
omen with higher qualifications (specialists and managers) 
nd cannot be used to calculate the number of users since duration of leave 
epends on birth order. It is likely that, due to the increase in the number of births 
ince 2004, the number of mothers on Maternity leave in Poland also increased, 
LN42.49 a day in 2005 to PLN46.72 in 2007.  
here is no information on the number of fathers who take a period of Maternity 
eave. 
 
aternity leave 
ere is no statutory leave entitlement. 
arental leave 
 
There are no regu
leave and parental allowances. Statistics show the number of parents taking 
leave declined from 336,000 in 1993 to 139,000 in 2000; a major reason for this 
fall was the rapid decline in fertility, the number of births dropping from 547,700 in 
1990 to 378,300 in 2000. Another source shows that the number of persons 
returning to work from Parental leave and unpaid leave declined steadily from 
49,000 in 2000 to 41,000 in 2002 and 35,000 in 2005.  
 
Other statistics refer to the monthly average numbers receiving parental 
allowance: that number declined from 164,000 persons in 2000 to 63,000 in 
2003. Reforms of family benefits implemented in 2004 increased the number to 
140,000 in 2
 
Summing up, the available official statistics do not show the incidence of Parental 
leave among parents entitled to take leave, the proportion of parents who receive 
parental allowance, or the average duration of leave; and despite the fact that 
fathers have been entitled to Parental leave since 1996, no data about take-up 
are collected.  
 
A more precise picture of take-up of Parental leave comes from analyses of data 
collected in the second quarter of 2005 using a module added to the Labour 
Force Survey (Kotowska and Baranowska, 20
those entitled to take Parental leave, nearly 50 per cent of mothers but only 2.5
per cent of fathers took the leave.  Due to the low benefit level and means 
testing, Parental leave was most used by low pa
levels of education; leave was taken by 37 per cent of mo
education, 54 per cen
educational level. W
were also more reluctant to take leave than women employed in the personal 
service sector or offices.  
 
About 70 per cent of women who took Parental leave were entitled to parental 
allowance (i.e. their household income was low enough to be eligible). One in two 
women with tertiary education received parental allowance compared to 72 per 
 
271

cent of women with only secondary education and 81 per cent of women with the 
lowest level of education. Women living in villages were more likely to receive the 
allowance than their counterparts in towns (82 per cent and 64 per cent 
respectively).  
 
A substantial majority of mothers took full-time leave (80 per cent) despite the 
e (almost 93 per cent) did not take advantage of the option 
 
 
g Parental leave 
 of children under 
three years of age attended crèches, and 41 per cent of children aged three to 
me from 
 one child requiring 
 
 
of part-time work, it is clear there are strong incompatibilities 
ason for their decisions to stay out of the labour market. At the same time, 
t find a job.  
 
4.
 
a. 
ive perspective and referring to EU policy. Labour market 
ts and their possible impacts on family behaviours, as well as the 
effects of leave policies on employment careers, have also received attention. 
right, since 2003, for part-time employment during the leave period. Similarly, 
most women on leav
to take leave in more than one block of time.
Among reasons for not taking Parental leave, mothers indicated financial reasons 
more often than fathers (30 per cent of mothers vs. 14 per cent of fathers). 
However, reasons related to employment seem to be more relevant than financial 
pacts of takin
ones. Concerns about possible negative career im
and preferences to stay in employment were raised by 37 per cent of mothers 
and 30 per cent of fathers. Urban residents were more concerned about these 
negative effects.  
 
In discussion on take-up of Parental leave, the underdevelopment of institutional 
childcare services cannot be ignored. In 2005 only 2 per cent
five years attended kindergartens. These figures are low compared to other EU 
member states. In addition, no childcare subsidies are offered to families. The 
estimated cost of childcare to a minimum income earner ranges from 23 per cent 
of earnings to 82 per cent and for a person with an average monthly inco
8.5 per cent to 30 per cent. Childcare is therefore less affordable to single and/or 
minimum income families and/or for families with more than
childcare.  
If one also takes into account the rather inflexible work arrangements and the 
limited provision 
between work and parenthood in Poland. The family policy can be labelled as an 
‘imposed home care’ model: employed parents have mostly to rely on themselves 
and the support of relatives to ensure childcare. In the 2005 survey, nearly 45 per 
cent of mothers of children below three years of age, who were not in work, 
stated that difficulties in reconciling work and care for small children were the 
main re
nearly one-third of mothers could no
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Recent years have brought a rising interest in leave policies and work-family 
arrangements both in research and public discourse. Studies of developments in 
family life and changes in family policy in Poland have been carried out, often 
taking a comparat
developmen
 
272

Moreover, in studies on reconciling work and family life, gender issues and the 
role of employers are increasingly under consideration. Another important 
development in research on family policy is an increasing use of sample surveys 
designed to study opinions on existing policy measures, the use of these 
 
b. 
 
wska, I.E. (2006) ‘Poland’, in: N. van Nimwegen and G.Beets (eds.) Social 
ildcare services by individuals and employment characteristics of 
kujące pełnienie ról zawodowych i rodzinnych [Polish Man, psycho-
ociological factors influencing fulfilling family and professional roles]. Białystok: 
ave are more likely to participate actively in unpaid 
 
measures and support for different policy options. 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Balcerzak-Paradowska, B., Szymborski, J. et al. (2006) Sytuacja demograficzna 
Polski i założenia polityki ludnościowej w Polsce – Raport 2004 [Demographic 
situation of Poland and assumptions to population-related policy in Poland: Report 
2004]. Warsaw: Governmental Population Council. Available at: 
http://www.stat.gov.pl/bip/389_43_PLK_HTML.htm
The report includes a programme of population-related policy prepared by the 
group of experts nominated by the Governmental Population Council. After 
evaluating demographic changes in Poland and policy responses, the programme 
proposes goals and measures for different domains. As well as policies related to 
ageing and migration, the programme focuses on family policy. 
Koto
Situation Observatory, Demography Monitor 2005, demographic trends, socio-
economic impacts and policy implications in the European Union, report 72. The 
Hague: Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic Institute, pp. 276-283. 
The report presents an evaluation of the most important population-related policy 
issues in Poland and information on recent changes in policy. 
 
Kotowska, I.E. and Baranowska, A. (2006) Praca a obowiązki rodzinne w 2005 r. 
[Work and family in 2005, information and statistical analyses]. Warsaw: Central 
Statistical Office. 
The publication presents results of the special cross-sectional survey on 
reconciliation between work and family life, carried out in 2005 as an ad hoc 
module in the Labour Force Survey, following Eurostat recommendations. The 
analysis deals with family-supportive work arrangements, use of Parental leave 
and use of ch
users.  
 
Kwiatkowska, A. and Nowakowska, A. (2006) Mężczyzna polski, psychospołeczne 
czynniki warun
s
Wydawnictwo Wyższej Szkoły Ekonomicznej w Białymstoku.  
The report presents results from a study on fatherhood with special attention paid 
to professional and family responsibilities. The majority of fathers expressed a 
strong belief that to give up work when children are small is a bad solution. 
Fathers who used Parental le
work at home and perceive more activities (like ironing, washing, preparing food) 
as gender neutral. 
 
273

Michoń, P. (2006) ‘Familisation and defamilisation policy in 22 European 
countries’, 
paper 
presented 
at 
the 
4th 
Annual 
ESPAnet 
Conference, 
ransformation of the Welfare State: Political Regulation and Social Inequality 21-
s for women's labour market 
awodowego [Women working part-time; the 
onsequences for family and professional life]. Warsaw: IPiSS (Institute of Labour 
nd opportunities for mothers are discussed. 
ście wzrostu 
zietności i zatrudnienia kobiet’ [‘Remarks on family policy in Poland in the context 
ulating both fertility 
crease and higher employment of women. These measures diminish the 
 possibilities of flexible work 
n article by  C. Saraceno – ‘Family policies in Europe: a comparative 
prespective’. 
 
uration of leave and leave 
T
23 September 2006, Bremen. Available at: http://www.espanet2006.de/  
The paper compares state policies towards working families in 23 European 
OECD countries and their potential consequence
activity. It develops and uses a welfare state typology based on the theoretical 
concept of familisation and defamilisation, focusing on the caring function of a 
modern family and its consequences for women labour market activity.  
 
Głogosz, D. (2007) Kobiety Zatrudnione W Niepełnym Wymiarze Czasu Pracy, 
Skutki dla życia rodzinnego i z
c
and Social Issues).  
The book presents a comprehensive overview of socio-economical characteristics 
of part-time employment of women in Poland; also work-life balance, sharing work 
and responsibilities in the household a
 
Kotowska, I.E. (2007) ‘Uwagi o polityce rodzinnej w Polsce w kontek
d
of increases in fertility and women’s employment’], Polityka Społeczna, No.8: 13-
19. 
Debates on increased fertility in Poland cannot ignore that simultaneously there is 
a strong pressure on increasing employment, especially for women. The article 
focuses on determinants for reconciling labour market participation and family, 
considered in terms of structural and cultural conflicts. By referring to results of 
empirical studies in the field, it is argued that those measures which reduce 
indirect costs of motherhood are of primary relevance for stim
in
structural conflict (the institutional setting not adequately adjusted to women’s 
employment) and cultural conflict (the perception of gender roles neglecting the 
increasing participation of women in the labour force). They include: the 
development of institutional childcare, gender-neutral
organisation and part-time employment, leave and social benefits as well as 
promotion of the dual earner-dual carer family model and gender equality in 
employment.  
NB This issue of Polityka Społeczna (Polish monthly journal on social policy) was 
published in English as a special issue. Focused on family policy in Poland, it 
includes a
 
Kotowska, I.E., Słotwińska-Rosłanowska, E., Styrc, M. and Zadrożna, A. (2007) 
Sytuacja kobiet powracających na rynek pracy po przerwie spowodowanej 
macierzyństwem i opieką nad dzieckiem [Mothers returning to work after job 
breaks related to Maternity and Parental leave, research report]. Warsaw:  Polish 
Association of Social Policy. 
The report presents results of a survey, conducted in 2007, of women working in 
non-agricultural sectors who gave birth in the years 1995-2004, focusing on their 
arrangements for reconciling family and work. Mothers were also asked their 
references and evaluation of existing practices, d
p
 
274

allowances. Mothers’ opinions were compared with employers’ opinions dra
from a sample survey of firms, also conducted in 2007.  
 
wn 
 responsibilities in Poland 
from the household and individual perspectives. Financial and care transfers as 
are also 
r 
conomic and educational activities and 
family].Warsaw: Scholar Publishing.  
alysis of the LFS-based survey on reconciliation between 
ork and family life (see Kotowska and Baranowska, 2006). 
 
 
Kotowska, I.E. and Matysiak, A. (2008) ‘Reconciliation of work and family under 
different institutional settings’, in: C. Höhn, D. Avramov and I. E. Kotowsska (eds.) 
People, Population Change and Policies: Lessons from the Population Policy 
Acceptance Study. New York: Springerl, pp.327-350. 
The Population Policy Acceptance Survey data were used to analyse work-family 
life arrangements from two perspectives: a desirable increase in female 
employment and a highly desirable rise in fertility. The practised and preferred 
work-family arrangements were studied in terms of the family-partnership models 
by employment patterns, with special emphasis being placed on institutional 
settings. 
 
Kotowska, I.E., Jóźwiak, J., Matysiak, A. and Baranowska, A. (2008) ‘Childbearing 
trends and policies: Polish case study’, in: T. Frejka, J. Hoem, T. Sobotka and L. 
Toulemon (eds.) Childbearing Trends and Policies in Europe,  Demographic 
Research 19, Special Collection, Max Planck Gesellschaft, Vol.19: 795-854. 
The main trends in family-related behaviours in the years 1989-2005 (i.e. fertility 
decline and changes in its patterns, a decreasing propensity to marry, 
postponement of marriage and a slowly increasing frequency of divorces and 
separations) are discussed, taking into account labour market developments and 
family policy including measures to increase fertility.  
 
Kotowska, I.E., Sztanderska, U. and Wóycicka, I. (eds.) (2007) Aktywność 
zawodowa i edukacyjna a obowiązki rodzinne [Economic and educational 
activities and family]. Warsaw: Scholar Publishing. 
This edited book, drawing in particular on the Labour Force Survey, extensively 
discusses economic and educational activity and family
well as time allocation between employment, education and family 
covered. Analyses are made in the context of the main population and labou
market developments after 1989.  
 
Matysiak, A. (2007) ‘Organizacja czasu pracy i opieki’ [‘Work and care’], in: I.E. 
Kotowska, U. Sztanderska and I. Wóycicka (eds.) Aktywność zawodowa i 
edukacyjna a obowiązki rodzinne [E
Further data from an
w
 
Muszyńska, M. (2007) Structural and cultural determinants of fertility in Europe. 
Warsaw: Warsaw School of Economics. 
Differences in fertility levels in Europe are discussed by referring to various 
theoretical concepts and empirical studies on incompatibility between women’s
employment and fertility. The theoretical model developed by the author makes a 
distinction between structural and cultural factors and describes their effects on 
fertility decisions and fertility at the macro level. Some models are empirically 
justified and referred to selected typologies of welfare state.   
 
275

Michoń, P. (20
mothers in the
Akademii Ekon
08) Praca Matek w Polityce Krajów Unii Europejskiej [Labour of 
 policy of European Union countries]. Poznań: Wydawnictwo 
omicznej w Poznaniu. 
ork-life balance policy in 27 EU countries. Special 
ups of policy tools: familisation of care – family-related 
 Parental, childcare leave and benefits); defamilisation 
nd tax allowances; defamilisation of care – childcare 
o statutory school age.  
marchewka – uprawnienia ojców do 
zinnych i ich wpływ na pod
y 
lements to family-related le
 t
s 
of availability, 
ion 
mily-
tention paid to the impact the leave has 
konkurencyj
firm
ania 
cy [Company’s work-life b
e po
r for 
ing work social environ
(20
orota 
d Social Issues). 
 wobec różnych form
i na
ch 
hildcare-related attitud
 
Comparative analysis of w
attention is paid to three gro
leave (Maternity, Paternity,
of cost – family benefits a
facilities for children from birth t
 
Michoń, P. (forthcoming, 2008) ‘Kij i 
korzystania z urlopów rod
and carrot – fathers’ entit
ział prac
aves and
w rodzinie’ [‘Stick 
heir consequence
for division of work in family’].  
The article discusses the problem 
evolut
and use of fa
related leaves for fathers, with special at
for the division of work within a family.  
 
c. Ongoing research 
     
ako czynnik 
Programy Praca-Życie j
ności 
 i kształtow
społecznego środowiska pra
ct
alanc
licy as a facto
D
competitiveness and affe
ment] 
07-2009).  
Głogosz, IPiSS (Institute of Labour an
 
 
Postawy i preferencje rodziców
adowolenie z życia [Parents’ c
 opiek
es and preferences and their
d dzieckiem a i
z
life satisfaction] (2008-2009). Piotr Michoń, Poznan University of Economics. 
 
276

2.22 
P
 
) 
 (UNDP) 
GD
p
2005 
2000/5 
10.5 million 
1.5 
ortugal 
 
Karin Wall and Mafalda Leitão 
Population (UNDP
Total Fertility Rate
P er capita (UNDP) 
2005 
20,410 PPPUS$ 
Fe
l
   As %
% o e
   Men 
   Wom
Gende
ma e economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 male rate (UNDP) 
mployed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
2005 
 
55.7 per cent 
79 per cent 
 
f 
en  
r employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2007 
2004 
  6.3 per cent 
14.3 per cent 
14% points 
Em lo
   W h
   With
p
ers (OECD/BB) 
it  child under 3 years 
 child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
69.1 per cent 
71.8 per cent 
yment rate for moth
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
39th           
Attend
   Child
   Child
ance at formal services (ECB) 
ren under 3 years 
ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
33 (31) per cent 
75 (66) per cent 
 
1. Cu
su
in February 2009 and 
ajor changes were introduced in leave policy (see details in part 2). ‘Maternity 
da
Pa
 
a. Ini
 
ding’ below). It is obligatory for the mother to take 45 
 
rrent leave and other employment-related policies to 
pport parents 
 
Note on terminology: A new Labour Law came into effect 
m
leave’ has been replaced by the ‘Initial Parental Leave’; Paternity leave and 15 
ys optional Parental leave for fathers has been replaced by Fathers Only 
rental leave. 
tial Parental leave (licença parental inicial – formerly ‘Maternity 
leave’, see note on terminology) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
Labour and Social Solidarity) 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
One hundred and twenty or 150 calendar days, depending on payment level 
(see ‘payment and fun
days following the birth; the remaining period may be divided between 
parents by mutual agreement. An extra 30 days is available if both parents 
share the leave. See ‘flexibility’ below for options available to parents.  
  
 
277

 
Paym
 
• 
ce
the case of parents not sharing 
ea
• 
F
em
 
f Initial Parental leave before 
atory for mothers (‘Mother’s 
 Parental leave’, licença parental exclusiva da mãe). 
d fathers may divide the Initial Parental leave after the obligatory 
 
ther (or 
the mother’s obligatory 45 days) may take all 120 days at 100 
e is no 
themselves 150 days at 100 
. the father must 
st 30 consecutive days or two periods of 15 consecutive days of 
ce-versa); 3) parents may divide between 
ng 
ds 
r, or vice versa). 
Eli
• 
335 for 120 consecutive days or €268 for 150 consecutive days but 
nemployment benefit. 
Va
ti
poor h
erson
 
• In the case of multiple births, the leave period is extended by one month for 
every additional child. 
• In case of death/mental illness/physical incapacity of the parent who is taking 
leave at the moment, the other parent is entitled to the (remaining) leave to 
which the other parent would otherwise be entitled (this is called: ‘Initial 
ent and funding 
One hundred and twenty days at 100 per cent of earnings or 150 days at 80 per 
nt of earnings, with no ceiling on payments, in 
leave; or 150 days at 100 per cent of earnings or 180 days at 83 per cent of 
rnings, with no ceiling on payments, in the case of parents sharing leave.  
unded from social security, financed by contributions from employers and 
ployees. 
Flexibility in use  
 
• 
Mothers have the option to take up to 30 days o
birth; 45 days immediately after birth are oblig
Only Initial
 
Mothers an
•
six weeks for mothers; the minimum period for gender sharing of leave (30 
calendar days) may be taken as 30 consecutive days or two periods of 15 
consecutive days. 
The initial parental leave may be taken in the following ways: 1) the mo
•
the father, after 
per cent of earnings or all 150 days at 80 per cent of earnings, i.e. ther
sharing of leave; 2) parents may divide between 
per cent of earnings on condition of sharing the leave (e.g
take at lea
leave alone, without the mother, or vi
themselves 180 days at 83 per cent of earnings on condition of gender shari
of leave (e.g. the father must take at least 30 consecutive days or two perio
of 15 consecutive days of leave alone, without the mothe
 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
All women/men employees with a record of six months (continuous or 
intermittent) of insurance contributions. Mothers and fathers who have no 
record of contributions or insufficient contributions are entitled to a monthly 
benefit of €
only if their family income is below 80 per cent of the index of social support 
(€419.22 in 2009).  
• Self-employed workers who contribute to social security and unemployed 
women/men receiving u
 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
p
 
278

Parental leave to be taken by one of the parents in case of other parent’s 
impossibility’). A minimum of 30 days leave is granted to the father in case of 
mother’s death/mental/physical incapacity. 
 A working grandparent is entitled to 30 days leave follo
•
wing the birth of a 
o an adolescent still living at home. 
 poor health or health risks for the mother and child, the pregnant 
m
period of risk last
This does n
150/180 days of the Initial Parental leave.  
b. 
ather’s Only Parental leave’ (licença parental exclusiva do pai – 
of 
e Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity) 
Length of leave  
• T
a
M
 
Pa ment and funding 
 One hundred per cent of earnings with no ceiling. 
Flexibility in use 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
• 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
0 optional days which father can take 
while the mother is on initial parental leave. 
 
 
 
 
 
grandchild t
 In cases of
•
other is entitled to receive maternity benefits before birth for as long as the 
s (this leave is called ‘health risk leave during pregnancy’). 
ot imply the loss of 120/
 
‘F
formerly ‘Paternity leave’, see note on terminology) (responsibility 
th
 
 
en obligatory working days to be taken during the first month after birth. Plus 
n extra optional ten working days to be taken with the mother while she is on 
other’s Only Initial Parental leave.  
y
 
•
 
 
• 
Five of those 10 days must be taken consecutively immediately after birth.  
 
 
As Initial Parental leave. Fathers who have no record of or insufficient 
contributions are entitled to ten days obligatory leave paid (daily payment 
corresponds to 80 per cent of 1/30th of IAS (IAS -  indexante de apoios 
sociais – is a measure of social support introduced in 2008 and set at €419.22 
in 2009). 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
person other than the mother 
 
• 
The ten obligatory days will be increased by 2 days for every additional child in 
case of multiple births; the same for the 1
 
 
 
279

c. ‘A
‘P
M
 
Leng
 
• 
 
Paym
 
 for three months for each parent. 
 
Eligib
Va
poor 
perso
 
• 
ch may be extended 
 
Add
agree
ions or rights to postpone)  
• 
ployer has a right to 
postpone the leave of one of the parents. 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
• 
dditional Parental leave’ (licença parental complementar – formerly 
arental leave’, see note on terminology) (responsibility of the 
inistry of Labour and Social Solidarity) 
th of leave  
Three months per parent. The leave is an individual and non-transferable 
entitlement.  
ent and funding 
• 
Twenty-five per cent of average earnings
 
Flexibility in use  
 
 
The three months leave may be taken up to the child’s sixth birthday. It can be 
taken in the following ways: a) on a full-time basis for three months; b) on a 
half-time basis for a period of 12 months per parent; or c) on an alternating 
basis, i.e. working half time and full time up to a maximum of three months full-
time per parent.  
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
•
 
• 
As Initial Parental leave. 
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parents 
When there is a severely handicapped or chronically ill child, including adopted 
children and living-in stepchildren, one of the parents is entitled to six months 
leave (licença para assistência a filho com deficiência ou doença crónica – 
leave to care for a handicapped or chronically ill child), whi
to four years. This leave can only be taken by one of the parents and it is paid 
at 65 per cent of earnings, with a maximum payment equivalent to the national 
minimum wage (€450 per month in 2009). 
itional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclus
 
Where both parents work for the same employer, the em
 
After Additional Parental leave, and only if this leave is taken, one of the 
parents may take up to two years of ‘childcare leave’ (licença para assistência a 
filho – formerly ‘special parental leave’) on a full-time basis, extended to three 
years when there is a third or subsequent child. The leave is unpaid. However, 
 
280

unlike Additional Parental leave’, which is an individual entitlement, this special 
leave can only be taken by one parent who must prove that the other partner is 
employed or incapable of working. Moreover, while parents on Additional 
Parental leave continue to be considered as employees with full rights and 
e to care for handicapped or chronically ill 
. The 
 
e. Ot
res 
Adop
 
• 
 30 days for every subsequent child 
 
Time 
 
• 
his is a family 
entitlement to be divided between parents as they choose, and paid at 65 per 
 
Fle
 
•
 
guarantees as if they were working (for example, they continue to be entitled to 
holidays which they can take at the end of the leave period), in the case of 
‘childcare leave’ (and of leav
children), there is a suspension of the work contract: all rights and guarantees 
are suspended but the worker’s right to return to his/her job is safeguarded
period of childcare leave is also taken into account in the calculation of old-age 
and invalidity pensions. 
her employment-related measu
 
tion leave and pay 
In cases of adoption of a child under age fifteen, the adopting parent is entitled 
to leave on the same conditions as for Initial Parental leave. If there are two 
adopting parents, the leave may be divided between them. In case of multiple 
adoptions leave will be extended by
adopted. In case of death of the adopting parent, leave may be transferred to 
the spouse, who can take as an alternative a minimum of 14 days leave. 
off for the care of dependants 
Up to 30 days per year can be taken to care for sick children under the age of 
12 years, with no age limit in the case of a child who is chronically ill or 
disabled; plus 15 days per year to care for a sick child above age 12 (if older 
than age 18 the child must belong to same household). T
cent of earnings. Both entitlements are increased by one day for every second 
and subsequent child. If the child under the age of 12 years is in hospital care, 
this entitlement lasts for as long as the child is in hospital.  
• Up to 15 days unpaid leave per year to care for a spouse, or a close relative 
(parents, grandparents, siblings, even if not living in the same household). 
Workers in the public sector are entitled to nearly full payment (they lose one-
sixth of their earnings).  
• An extra 15 days unpaid leave per year to care for a severely handicapped or 
chronically ill spouse.  
• Grandparents are also entitled to miss work in order to substitute parents in 
caring for sick children (number of days not yet defined). 
xible working  
 Parents are entitled to two hours ‘nursing’ leave per day during the first year 
after birth, with no reduction of earnings (dispensa para amamentação e
aleitação – leave to breast feed or to feed). This is a family entitlement. The 
leave may be taken by one parent, either the mother or the father, usually in 
two different periods: one hour in the morning and one hour in the afternoon 
(unless negotiated otherwise with the employer). Parents may also share the 
 
281

nursing leave by taking one hour each per day. In cases of multiple births, 
leave is increased by 30 minutes for every child. In case of mothers who are 
actually breastfeeding their child this two hours reduction lasts for as long as 
the child is breastfed. 
•
If there is a handicapped or chronically ill child below one year of age, one of 
•
•
ntitled to miss work (up to three times) in order to be 
present at meetings related to the adoption. 
•
•
 are 
•
ditional Parental leave (‘part-time work for an employee with family 
 or disabled child). 
 
2. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
velopments affecting work/family balance have been 
irst, the expansion of early childhood education and care 
t dual earner families with young children, with specific goals to 
09: to reach a coverage rate of 33 per cent for the under three 
ty and 
 
the parents (as long as the other is employed) may also apply for a five-hour 
reduction in the working week. 
 Parents are entitled to four hours leave per school term to go to their children’s 
school until children reach 18 years of age, with no reduction of earnings. 
 Adopting parents are e
 Fathers are entitled to miss work (up to three times) to accompany their 
spouses in prenatal appointments. 
 Parents with children below 12 years (no age limit in the case of a child who is 
chronically ill or disabled living in the same household) are entitled to ‘flexible 
working’ which means that the employee may choose, within certain limits, 
when to start and finish daily work. Employees may work up to six consecutive 
hours and up to ten hours daily as long as the normal weekly hours of work
fulfilled. Both parents are entitled to this ‘flexible working schedule for an 
employee with family responsibilities’. 
 Also where there are children below 12 years (no age limit in case of a child 
who is chronically ill or disabled living in the same household), one of the 
parents (or both for alternative periods of time) is entitled to part-time work after 
taking Ad
responsibilities’). Part-time work can be taken on the following basis: working 
half time during five days a week or working three full days per week. 
Employers and employees can agree on another basis. Part-time work may be 
extended up to two years (three years in the case of third and subsequent 
child, four years in the case of chronically ill
 
Two main policy de
emphasised recently. F
services to suppor
be achieved by 20
years age group, a 90 per cent coverage rate for the three to five years age 
group and a 100 per cent coverage for children aged five years; and to offer all 
primary school children out-of-school childcare services. Second, increasing 
Maternity and Paternity leave within a framework of more equal sharing between 
mothers and fathers. New labour legislation  was approved by the government in 
January 2009 and came into effect in February 2009. The new law introduces 
major changes in leave policy, with the extension of paid leave strongly linked to 
the principle of more gender sharing of leave. More specific changes include: 
 
1. Terminology. Subsection IV of the Labour Law, previously titled ‘materni
paternity protection’, is now called ‘parenthood’, and article 35º, titled ‘maternity 
leave’ in the former legislation, is now called ‘parental protection’. The terms 
‘Maternity leave’ and ‘Paternity leave’ disappear from Portuguese leave policy 
 
282

and are replaced by the term ‘Parental leave’, a concept which is expected to be 
more neutral from the gender point of view. Thus the term ‘Maternity leave’ has 
been replaced by the term ‘Initial Parental leave’. This leave is extended to six 
of gender sharing (see above).  
id leave based on the principle of more gender sharing of 
e entitled to six months (180 calendar days) instead of five 
onth of leave is taken up by the other parent.  In practice 
children up to 12 years, instead of 10 years, while 15 days of unpaid 
3. 
 
 
id Maternity leave. This per 
centage is expected to increase in 2008/2009 since a Social Maternity benefit was 
 social contributions. In fact the total number of 
women on paid maternity leave in 2008 (78,345), including women that claimed 
,170) and women that claimed Social Maternity benefit 
 in comparison substantially since 2007 (71,866) due to the 
arnings instead of four months at 100 per cent) has 
months but only in case 
 
2. An increase of ‘Father’s Only leave’: ‘Paternity leave’ changes its designation 
to become ‘Father’s Only Parental leave’ and increases from five to 20 working 
days of obligatory leave (also paid at 100 per cent). This also means that the 
amount of time parents can be on leave together with their newborn child is 
increased to one month.  
 
3. The extension of pa
leave. Parents ar
least one m
months if at 
this extra month is aimed at fathers who may not only take leave ‘with the mother’ 
for one month (at 100 per cent), but are also encouraged to take another month 
without the mother (at 83 or 100 per cent). Another innovation is that fathers are 
entitled to leave from work to accompany mothers to prenatal appointments. 
 
4. The payment of Additional Parental leave (formerly Parental leave) at 25 per 
cent of earnings for three months (each parent). In practice, this means that 
parents, if they shared the Initial Parental leave, may stay at home with a child for 
one year (six months at 83 per cent of earnings and six months at 25 per cent of 
earnings).  
 
5. The right to leave to care for a sick child. The right to paid leave was extended 
to care for 
leave can be taken for a child over 12; grandparents are also entitled to leave to 
substitute parents in caring for sick children.  
 
6. ‘Adoption leave’ which increases from 100 calendar days to the same amount 
as Initial Parental leave (120/150 days plus 30 days depending on sharing of 
leave).  
 
Take-up of leave 
a. Maternity leave 
It is estimated by the Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity that about two-thirds 
of mothers (70 per cent, in 2007) are eligible for pa
introduced in 2008 (see part 1a, about maternity benefit eligibility) for mothers with 
no record or insufficient record of
maternity benefit (71
7,175), has increased
(
number of women that became entitled to the new Social Maternity benefit. 
 
The percentage of mothers taking the longer leave period introduced in 2005 (i.e. 
five months at 80 per cent of e
 
283

been increasing since 2006. While in 2006, 24 per cent of mothers on Maternity 
mained at 
n 
of 
as 
 
haring. 
b. 
ke-up of Paternity leave. 
er of births; but in relation to the number of women eligible for Maternity 
ave, the proportion of fathers taking five days Paternity leave increases to 65 per 
y days, 
ompared with 37,552 in 2007. If, again, we calculate take-up in relation to 
c. 
ave has been unpaid, until 
cent changes, take-up is estimated to be very low. 
 
4. 
 
a. 
leave decided to choose the 150 days leave period, in 2007 and 2008 36 and 42 
per cent of women (eligible for maternity benefit) chose the longer option. 
 
Parental sharing of the four or five months of Maternity leave has re
extremely low levels, though it has increased slightly over the last four years. I
2004 only 391 fathers shared some of the leave, rising to 554 in 2007. For 2008 it 
is estimated that 610 fathers shared leave. In summary, the four or five months 
an 
leave after childbirth still seem to be considered as ‘Maternity’ leave rather th
‘shared’ leave. It will be interesting to see what impact the recent changes in leave
policy will have on gender s
 
Paternity leave 
 
Since 2002 there has been a steady increase in the ta
The five-day Paternity leave (introduced in 1999 and made obligatory in 2004) 
was used in 2000 by 11 per cent of fathers, increasing to 26 per cent in 2002 and 
to 35 per cent in 2003. Since then, the proportion of fathers who take the five days 
Paternity leave has increased about two per cent per year: 37 per cent in 2004, 39 
per cent in 2005, 41 per cent in 2006 and 45 per cent in 2007. These per 
centages are based on the number of fathers who take leave in relation to the 
numb
le
cent (2007). It should be noted that take-up is underestimated as these statistics 
exclude employees with special social protection regimes, e.g. civil servants, bank 
workers. 
 
The same trends may be observed for the 15 Additional Paternity leave days (the 
optional ‘Daddy days’ introduced in 1999). In 2001 only four per cent of fathers 
chose to take the 15 days and this increased to 14 per cent in 2002 and to 24 per 
cent in 2003. Since then take-up rates have been increasing slowly: to 28 per cent 
in 2004, 30 per cent in 2005, 33 per cent in 2006, 37 per cent in 2007. Estimates 
for 2008 confirm these trends: 38,441 fathers took up the 15 dadd
c
mothers eligible for leave, then the proportion increases to 54 per cent in 2007. 
 
Parental leave  
 
There is no information on take-up of leave. But as le
re
Research and publications on leave and other employment-related 
policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Most research has been on the broad question of the reconciliation of work and 
family life rather than specifically on leave policy, though most studies include 
information on such policies. 
 
284

 
b. 
on for Equality in Labour and Employment. 
 
. 
d C. Lyonnette (eds.) Women, Men, Work and Family in 
Palgrave Macmillan, pp.190-209. 
his chapter focuses on women’s occupational patterns and work-family 
s and 
Lyonnette 
(eds.) Women, Men, Work and Family in Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
atterns to work/family articulation in seven 
n European countries (Portugal, Spain, UK, 
rance, Germany, Sweden and the Czech Republic). 
na prospettiva comparative’ [‘Leave policy models and 
his article analyses cross-national variations in Parental leave policy in 19 
European countries. On the basis of comparative evidence describing leave 
arrangements and their connections to other work/family issues, it identifies six 
main leave policy models. 
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
Guerreiro, M.D., Lourenço, V. and  Pereira, I.  (2006) Boas práticas de  
conciliação entre a vida profissional e a vida familiar. Manual para as Empresas 
[Good practices for the conciliation of work and family life. A handbook for 
employers]. Lisbon: CITE (Commissi
This book describes and analyses good practices of work/family balance in 
various Portuguese firms. 
-
Guerreiro, M.D. and Pereira, I. (2007) ‘Women’s occupational patterns and work
family arrangements: do national and organisational policies matter?’ in: R
Crompton, S. Lewis an
Europe. Basingstoke: 
T
arrangements. It draws upon a study carried out in Portugal on various service 
organisations, in all of which a significant number of women are employed in 
different occupations. The main aim of the chapter was to identify and analyse the 
different work-family policies and practices existing in those organisation
their relationship with the working parents’ strategies towards their jobs and family 
life. 
 
Wall, K. (2007) ‘Main patterns in attitudes to the articulation between work and 
family life: a cross-national analysis’, in: R. Crompton, S. Lewis and C. 
Macmillan, pp.86-115. 
Drawing on data from the ISSP Family and Gender Survey (2002), this chapter 
explores the diversity in attitudinal p
countries (Portugal, Spain, Czech Republic, West Germany, Great Britain, France 
and Sweden). By establishing a country analysis as well as a cross-national one, 
the main objective is to understand the attitudinal diversities and contrasts which 
are developing in European society in relation to work/family articulation. 
 
Wall, K. and Amâncio, L. (2007) Família e género em Portugal e na Europa. 
Lisboa: Imprensa de Ciências Sociais. 
This book provides a cross-national analysis of attitudes to family life and gender 
roles and of work/life stress in seve
F
 
Wall, K. (2008) ‘I modelli di politiche relative ai congedi e l’articolazione 
lavoro/famiglia in Europa: u
the articulation of work and family in Europe: a comparative perspective’], Rivista 
Sociologia e Politiche Sociali, Vol.II, No.I: 283-308 (special issue edited by I. 
Crespi and S. Bould on Family, Gender and Work: policies and practices in the 
European context). 
T
 
285

 
hcoming) ‘Family change and family policy in Europe’, in: S. 
d A. Kahn (eds.) Family Change and Family Policies in Southern 
n Portugal analyses six main topics: family formation; family law; 
employment and 
s; the politics and 
do, A. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Portugal and Spain: two pathways 
in Southern Europe’, in: P. Moss and S. Kamerman (eds.) The Politics of Parental 
Leave: Children, Parenting, Gender and the Labour Market. Bristol: Policy Press. 
pares the development of leave po
 Portugal and Spain.  
ocial care (2007-200
ted by 
s, in collaboration with ICS/University of 
K. Wall), University of Torino (C. Saraceno, M. Naldini), University of 
borg (U. Bjornbe
SI (
r).  
derstand how
ers 
or atypical 
amily life. T
ojec
nd policy-making in six dif
cou
 carry out 
g on two types of workers and caring needs: parents 
endent elderly
 of refugees and wo
lass
parative perspective 2008-2010, 
 of Lisbon 
The aim of this research is to explore the impact of distance on the experiences of 
working-class migrants and refugees living in Australia and in Portugal who care 
parents back home, of their capacity (ability, opportunity) to 
assist primary caregivers, of the influence of cultural differences in expectations 
ery of distant care, 
is type of caregiving. 
cyllene.uwa.edu.au
 
 family policies (2008-2009),
Wall, K. (fort
Kamerman an
Europe. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
The chapter o
families and the division of labour (including analysis of 
parenting policies); family income; families and social service
institutionalization of family policies. 
 
Wall, K. and Escobe
This chapter com
licies in
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
WOUPS (Workers under pressure and s
de Martin, CNRS/University of Renne
9), coordina
Clau
Lisbon (
Utrecht (T. Knijn), University of Gote
The aim of this research project is to
rg), W
 work
C. Klenne
with long 
 un
e work and f
working hours reconcil
he pr
t will look at the 
development of policies a
qualitative studies focusin
ferent 
ntries and
with young children and workers caring for a dep
 
 relative. 
Transnational care practices
Australia and Portugal: a com
rking-c
 migrants living in 
University
and University of Western Australia. 
for ageing, disabled parents in their home countries. This research addresses the 
questions of their motivation to contribute to practical, emotional and personal 
care of their elderly 
and obligation of care and notions of independence on the deliv
and of the structural constraints that shape the forms of th
Contact: lmerla@
Council of Europe questionnaire on
 coordinated by 
Karin Wall and Fred Deven, with the collaboration of Lia Pappamikail, Mafalda 
The aim of this project has been to build up a database on family policies 
 on leave policy) in the member countries of the Council of 
Europe. The database includes 40 countries and will be online in June 2009. A 
 
Leitão and Sofia Marinho.  
(including a section
first comparative report analyses policies in 39 countries.    
 
286

2.23 
R
o
GD
2005 
144.0  million 
ussian Federation 
Zhanna Kravchenko 
 
 
opulation (UNDP) 
P
T tal Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
P per capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
1.3 
10,845 PPP US$ 
Fe
   A
 of
yed working part time (OECD/F) 
Gender employment gap (OECD/BB) 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
 
No data 
No data 
No data 
male economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
s % male rate (UNDP) 
 emplo
2005 
2005 
54.3 per cent 
80 per cent 
%
   Men 
   Women  
Em
OECD/BB) 
 With child under 3 years 
 
2005 
 
No data 
ployment rate for mothers (
  
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
No data 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
42nd           
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
 3 years 
 Children 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
No data 
No data 
   Children under
  
NB The Russian Federation is a federal state 
 
 
1.
sup
 
a. M
    (r
    D
 
Le
 
endar days before and 70 calendar days after childbirth.  
a
• One hundred per cent of average earnings during 12 months before the 
beginning of the leave, up to a ceiling of RUB23,400 (€535) per month. 
• Funded by the employer and Social Insurance Fund, which is largely financed 
from employers’ contributions, supplemented by transfers from the federal 
budget and the Mandatory Health Insurance Fund. 
 Current leave and other employment-related policies to 
port parents 
aternity leave (отпуск по беременности и родам) 
esponsibility of Ministry of Healthcare and Social 
evelopment) 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
• 
Seventy cal
 
P yment and funding 
 
 
287

Flexibility in use 
 
• 
None. 
bility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstanc
 
Eligi
es) 
insured women (including self-employed), unemployed women, students 
and military servants. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
oor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
births, the length of leave increases to 85 days before 
the birth, and to 110 days after. 
 
b. P
 по уходу за ребенком) (responsibility of 
in
r childbirth. Leave is a family entitlement. 
s, up to a ceiling of 
• 
• 
ed workers, and from the state 
budget for those who are not insured, e.g. students, unemployed.  
lexibility in use 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
All 
p
person other than the mother 
 
• In the case of multiple 
• In the case of premature births, the length of leave increases to 86 days after 
birth. 
aternity leave 
 
• No statutory entitlement. 
 
c. Parental leave (отпуск
istry of Healthcare and Social  Development) 
M
 
gth of leave 
Len
 
• Until three years afte
 
Payment and funding  
 
• Forty per cent of average earnings until child is 18 month
RUB7,194 (€165) per month and with a minimum payment of RUB1,799 (€40), 
also paid to unemployed. The payment is doubled for the second and each 
subsequent child. The payment is not taxable. Regional governments have the 
right to establish the amount of payment within these upper and lower limits. 
The payment is adjusted for inflation twice a year. 
There is no payment if the leave is extended to 36 months. 
Funded by the Social Insurance Fund for insur
 
F
Parents taking leave may work part time. 
 
288

 
Regional or local variations in leave policy 
 
• The 89 regional governments can determine the level of payment within the 
maximum and minimum levels set by the central government; there are no 
official statistics about regional variations in practice. 
gibility 
• Any caregiver, regardless of the attachment to the labour market, including 
students and unemployed. 
 
Eli
 
a
po
pe
 
d. 
   
 
. O
yment-related measures 
Ad
 
    
 Ti
 
   
 Fl
 
• 
 
V riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births, 
or health or disability of child or mother, lone parent), or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parent 
• Leave can be delegated to grandparents or any other guardian caring for the 
child.  
• Unemployed parents have the right to choose between unemployment or 
Parental leave benefit; the former is for a shorter period but may be at a higher 
rate depending on various conditions.  
Statutory child or carer leave or career breaks 
• No statutory entitlements. 
ther emplo
e
     
option leave and pay 
• The same regulations as for other parents, without pre-birth paid leave. 
me off for the care of dependants 
• The length of paid leave to care for a sick child under the age of 15 years varies 
according to the previous employment record of the parent and the age of the 
child. For a child under the age of seven years, up to 60 days leave may be 
taken per year, with 45 days for older children. Payment is made at 60 per cent 
of average earnings with an employment record under five years, 80 per cent 
with an employment record of five to eight years and 100 per cent with an 
employment record over eight years 
exible working 
Mothers are entitled to take breaks during work to rest and feed their children, 
with no reduction of earnings. These should be taken not less than once every 
three hours, and for no less then 30 minutes. 
  
 
289

2. 
    
icy was confronted by the overwhelming impoverishment 
of the population and the major role of public policies in preventing socio-
s recognised. It was necessary to employ a comprehensive 
pproach to transform the inherited system of social security and provision that 
 work-related 
provision, and assumed a system of full employment and the dominance of the 
the economy. Social policy changes coincided with a 
f the public administration system, which defined the 
ernment, i.e. national, regional and local. 
at number of actors involved in the 
sian Federation includes 89 regions), this process took a long 
 being evaluated by both scholars and policy makers. The 
 
l Insurance Fund). The Employment Fund was subsequently 
cies are now financed from the 
state budget. Each fund has its specific mechanisms for collecting and distributing 
 subject to common principles, for example: contributions are 
via a unified social tax that equals 26 per cent 
contracts). 
Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related  
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
The ability of the Russian state to spend on welfare and other support measures 
has been in decline for several decades. The government’s commitment to 
providing social welfare was low before the transformation started, because other 
sectors received a higher priority status, and throughout the 1990s and early 
2000s, arrears of wages, pensions and benefit payments became common. 
However it would be mistaken to reduce the transformation of social policy to 
mere cuts in funding and services. The system has undergone more complex and 
roader change. 
b
 
In the 1990s, social pol
economic risks wa
a
was based on contradictory principles of both universal and
public sector in 
ansformation o
tr
responsibilities of the three levels of gov
With the large sise of the country and the gre
process (the Rus
ime and is still
t
successes and failures of both reforms – social policy and administration – were 
strongly interconnected, and created a complex landscape of social policy 
governance. 
The transformation of the Russian welfare system started with the creation of four 
non-governmental insurance funds intended to collect revenue and provide social 
security in four major risk situations causing temporary or permanent withdrawal 
from the labour market: retirement (the Pension Fund), unemployment (the 
Employment Fund), health (the Mandatory Health Insurance Fund) and other 
ituations (the Socia
s
abolished in 2001, and its functions transferred to the Ministry of Labour and 
Social Development of the Russian Federation (currently Ministry of Healthcare 
and Social Development); all labour market poli
resources, but all are
wage-related; employers contribute 
of their payments to employees; and there is a universal entitlement, including 
those groups of the population that are not and may never be part of the labour 
market, who are financed directly from the state budget (e.g. the state contributes 
to the Mandatory Health Fund for those who are not insured via employment 
 
This background information is essential for understanding how Parental leave 
regulations are constructed and how accessible the benefits are to the population. 
The system of Parental leave regulations was established in its present form by 
1989. The subsequent major transformation occurred in funding in the early 
 
290

1990s, as outlined above. Further important changes took place in 2005-2007. 
First and foremost, the previous flat-rate benefit during paid Parental leave was 
hanged to a) an earnings-related benefit for those who are insured, and b) a flat-
d parents, 
as followed by guidelines about how the replacement 
, establishing at the national level the maximum and 
3. 
 
a. 
e 
 
b. 
 
. P
ubsequent chid (Arkhangel’skii et al., 200541). There is no information on the use 
athers. 
 
4.Research and publications on leave and other employment-    
    related policies since January 2006 
 
a. General overview 
 
Research on Parental leave is rare; means-tested elements of family policy and 
childcare provision hasreceived the main attention. The analysis is usually done 
within the framework of feminist critique of the labour legislation; actual practice of 
                                                
c
rate benefit for those who for some reason are not (e.g. unemploye
students). This regulation w
tes should be calculated
ra
minimum payments, within which regional governments were allowed to make 
their own arrangements in response to a federal law, in 2004, that recognised 
gional variations in socio-economic conditions by increasing the opportunities 
re
for regional governments to contribute to the revenues of funds and to participate 
in the process of their redistribution.  
 
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leav
 
Since all mothers are eligible, it is assumed all mothers take leave. 
Paternity leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. 
arental leave 
c
 
Data are scarce and come from social surveys rather than official statistics. The 
Max Planck Institute reports that the average length of leave-taken by parents until 
their children were 18 months of age in 2004 was five to six months (Max Plank 
Gesellschaft, 200640), or roughly 30 per cent of the potential time. Russian data, 
obtained from a survey conducted in one of the Russian regions (Novgorodskaja 
oblast) in 2003, present a very different picture, suggesting an average length of 
ave of 15.5 months out of the available 18, and falling in length with each 
le
s
of leave by f
 
40  Max Planck Gesellschaft (2006) The contextual database of the Generations and Gender 
Program. Available at: http://www.demogr.mpg.de 
41 Arkhangel’skii, V.N., et al. (2005) Demograficheskoe povedenie i ego determinatsiia: po 
resul'tatam 
sotsiologo-demograficheskogo 
issledovaniia 
v 
Novgorodskoi 
oblasti 
[Demographic behaviour and its factors:based on the results of a socio/demographic survey 
conducted in Novgorod oblast]. Moskva: TEIS. 
 
291

the taking up of Parent
the focus so fa
 
al leave and relationships with employers has not been in 
r. 
m January 2006, including results   
, R. (2007) 'Reform of in-kind benefits in Russia: high 
ll gain', Journal of European Social Policy, Vol.17, No.2: 153-166. 
) Postcommunist Welf re States: R
 Po
sia and 
Y: Cornell University Press
nsformation, ch
, an
n 
l Studies in Ge
tate
nko, Z. (2008) Family (versus) Policy. C
ng 
 Care in 
ellecta AB. 
an overvie
official regulations for 
in Russia, in
 Parental leave. The 
sults of a survey (ISSP) investigating normative ideas 
n of work and care, as well as evidence from a small-
ay practices of reconciling work and care. 
ublic support for work
ren
J. 
nity and Social Policy
al a
pe 
changes in criteria for eligibility and levels of provision, as 
n. It is focused on two 
b. Selected publications fro
    from research studies   
 
Alexandrova, A. and Struyk
cost for a sma
 
Cook, L.J. (2007
a
eform
litics in Rus
Eastern Europe. Ithaca, N
. 
 
Teplova, T. (2007) 'Welfare state tra
a
ildcare
d women's wo
Vol.14, 
rk i
Russia', Social Politics: Internation
nder, S
 & Society, 
No.3: 284-322. 
 
Kravche
ombini
Work and
Russia and Sweden. Stockholm: Int
Doctoral dissertation, which presents 
amily policy 
w of 
different elements of f
cluding
analysis also includes re
io
about appropriate divis
scale ethnographic study on everyd
 
Kravchenko, Z. (2009) 'On p
Aidukaite (ed.) Poverty, Urba
ing pa
: Centr
ts in Russia', in: 
nd Eastern Euro
Compared. Hauppauge, NY: NOVA Science Publishers, pp.99-114. 
This study explores the transformation of family policy from the early 1990s to the 
early 2000s, including 
well as effects on poverty levels among families with childre
elements of family policy – Parental leave regulations and financial transfers. 
 
 
 
292

2.
Sl
 
Nada 
Po ula
e (UNDP) 
 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
2.0  million 
1.2 
22,273 PPP US$ 
24 
ovenia 
Stropnik 
 
tion (UNDP) 
p
Total Fertility Rat
GDP per capita (UNDP)
Fe
   A
% 
 e
Ge
 
 
No data 
No data 
ta 
42
2005 
2005 
53.6 per cent 
80 per cent 
male economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
s % male rate (UNDP) 
mployed working part time (OECD/F)
of
   Men 
   Women  
2007 
2007 
nder employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
No da
loyment rate for mothers (OECD/BB)43
Emp
   With child under 3 years 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
2005 
No data 
No data 
 
 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
51st           
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   C
   C
 
 
hildren under 3 years 
hildren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
2006 
29 (26) per cent 
81 (66) per cent 
 
1. C
ted policies to 
 
a. M
L
 
Length of le
  
rior to the leave. If the 
during a period shorter than 12 months, 55 per cent of 
age is taken into account for the missing period. There is no 
     
 
urrent leave and other employment-rela
support parents 
aternity leave (porodniški dopust) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
abour, Family and Social Affairs) 
ave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
One hundred and five calendar days (15 weeks): four weeks (28 days) before 
the birth and 11 weeks following birth.
 
Payment  
 
• 
Hundred per cent of average earnings, based on earnings on which Parental 
leave contributions were paid during the 12 months p
contributions were paid 
the minimum w
                                           
 2007, eight per cent of employed men and 12 per cent of employed women worked part 
urce: Slovenian Statistical Office). 
omic activity rate (2005) for women with a child under three years=73 per cent; three 
ears=87 per cent (source: Eurydice, 2009, Tackling Social and Cultural Inequalities 
Early Childhood Education and Care in Europe: Figure 2.6). 
42 In
time (so
43 Econ
to five y
through 
 
293

ceiling, and the minimum is 55 per cent of the minimum wage. Women not 
insured at the time the leave starts, but who have been insured for at least 12 
months in the last three years before the start of Maternity leave, receive 55 to 
105 per cent of the minimum wage (approximately €324 to €619 per month), 
e been insured for in the last three years. 
•
Funded partly from Parental leave insurance that forms part of social security 
 contributions to Parental leave insurance are 0.1 per cent of gross 
earnings for employees and the same for employers. In 2008, Parental leave 
 
Flexibility in use 
    The part unused before the birth may be claimed after childbirth if the birth 
t
visaged date. 
g’ for insurance conditions for payment. 
Var
io
poor h
person
 
•
for a child in accordance with the decision of the Centre for Social Work or the 
judgement or provisional order of the court) if the mother dies, abandons the 
aternity leave with the 
mother’s consent in cases where the mother who gives birth to the child is 
 18 years and has the status of an apprentice, a pupil or a student. 
In that case, Maternity leave lasts 77 days less the age of the child (in days) 
father is 
entitled to Maternity leave if he actually nurses and cares for the child. 
b. 
y leave (očetovski dopust)  (responsibility of the Ministry of 
L
o
 
Length o
 
• Nin
y
onths. 
 
depending on the period they hav
 
insurance;
insurance covered 11 per cent of leave costs (estimated); the remaining costs 
came from the state budget. 
 
•
ook place before the en
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
•   See ‘payment and fundin
 
iat n in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
 Leave can be delegated to the father or another person (who nurses and cares 
child or is incapable of living and working independently.  
• The father or one of the grandparents is also entitled to M
younger than
when the father or the grandparent commences Maternity leave. The 
 
Paternit
ab ur, Family and Social Affairs) 
f leave  
ety calendar days (about 13 weeks). Fathers are required to take at least 15 
s of full-time leave during the child’s first six m
da
Pa ment and funding 
 
y
• 
During the first 15 days of the Paternity leave, 100 per cent of average 
earnings based on earnings on which Parental leave contributions were paid 
during the 12 months prior to the leave, up to a ceiling of 2.5 times the 
average wage in Slovenia (approximately €3,876 per month), with a minimum 
 
294

payment of 55 per cent of the minimum wage (approximately €324 a month). 
For the remaining 75 days the father is paid social security contributions 
e, see part 1a. 
 
Flexibil
• 
to 70 per cent of the eligible calendar days. 
deprived of his parental right or prohibited from 
• 
ternity leave if he uses Maternity 
 
c. Par
arstvo otroka) (responsibility of 
 
Length
 
 
Payme
•
earnings 
based on earnings on which Parental leave contributions were paid during 
 up to a ceiling. For persons not insured at 
the time the leave starts, but who have been insured for at least 12 months 
re the start of leave (Maternity, Paternity or 
Parental, whichever taken first), see part 1a. 
Fle
• 
One parent is entitled to take leave. If the parents wish to share the leave, 
they have to agree in writing 30 days prior to the expiry of Maternity leave. If 
the parents cannot reach agreement on the use of Parental leave or their 
based on the minimum wage (approximately €130 per month). For fathers not 
insured at the time the leave starts, but who have been insured for at least 12 
months in the last three years before the start of the leav
• 
Funding as for Maternity leave. 
ity in use 
 
Seventy-five calendar days may be taken as full-time leave up to the child’s 
third birthday. If they are taken as individual days, the length of the leave is 
equal 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
As for Maternity leave. 
 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
person other than the mother 
 
• 
The father is not entitled to Paternity leave if: the mother has given birth to a 
dead child; he was legally 
having contacts with the child; or the child lives with the mother or another 
person and the father does not nurse or care for the child. 
The father is not entitled to first 15 days of Pa
leave. 
ental leave (dopust za nego in v
the Ministry of Labour, Family and Social Affairs)  
 of leave  
• 
Two hundred and sixty calendar days (about 37 weeks) per family.    
nt and funding 
 
 
As for the first 15 days of Paternity leave, i.e. 100 per cent of 
the 12 months prior to the leave,
in the last three years befo
• 
Funding as for Maternity leave. 
 
xibility in use 
 
 
295

decision is not to the benefit of the child, the Centre for Social Work makes a 
decision on this matter taking into account what is in the best interests of the 
child. 
• 
Parental leave may be taken as 520 days of a half-time leave combined with 
rmal working hours per day). If Parental leave is 
taken half time, the benefit paid is reduced accordingly. 
• 
 
Eligibilit
 
• 
 due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
per
 
• 
• 
d by 90 days in the case of the birth of a child 
s
• 
ey 
h
• 
entre for Social Work or the judgement or provisional order of 
the court is entitled to Parental leave, reduced by the number of days the 
mother and the father have already used. 
•
If the mother is a student below 18 years of age and has the status of an 
a
• 
r she does not care for the child. 
statutory entitlement. 
e. 
part-time work (half of the no
• 
Up to 75 days may be taken at any time up to the child’s eighth birthday, full-
time or part-time leave or by individual days. In this last case, the length of the 
leave is equal to 70 per cent of the eligible calendar days. 
Both parents may use full-time Parental leave at the same time in the case of 
multiple births, birth of a child in need of special care, or if they already have 
at least two children below eight years of age or a child in need of special 
care. 
y (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
As for Maternity leave. 
 
Variation in leave
son other than the parents 
In the case of a premature birth, the leave is prolonged by as many days as 
pregnancy was shortened.  
In the case of multiple births, Parental leave is extended by 90 days for each 
additional child. It is also extende
uffering from physical or mental impairment. 
Leave is extended by 30 days if parents already have two children below eight 
years of age; by 60 days if they have three children; and by 90 days if th
ave four or more children of this age.  
Another person who nurses and cares for a child in accordance with the 
decision of the C
 
pprentice, a pupil or a student, one of the grandparents (who himself/herself 
is insured for Parental leave) may take leave. 
A parent does not have the right to Parental leave if custody of the child is 
awarded to another parent and he o
 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
There is no 
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
Adoption leave and pay 
 
 
296

• 
One hundred and fifty calendar days (about 21 weeks) for a child aged one to 
four years; 120 days (about 17 weeks) for a child aged four to ten years. 
Payment and eligibility as for Parental leave.  
 
Tim
ember (spouse and children, own or adopted) who is ill. 
Generally, seven working days of leave may be taken for each episode of 
rking. 
Flexible working 
• 
A parent who is taking care of a child below the age of three years, or of a 
 age of 18 years with a severe physical disability or a moderate 
ility, has the right to work part time. The hours worked 
 full-time working hours. There is no 
minimum wage are 
urs not worked.  
is taking care of two children may extend the right to work part 
Ot
ng the labour market in order to take care of four or more 
titled to have social security contributions (based on the 
 
2.
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
• 
An insured person is entitled to take leave to care for an immediate co-
resident family m
illness per family, but 15 working days may be taken for a child of up to seven 
years of age or a moderately, severely or very severely mentally and 
physically disabled child. Exceptionally, if required due to the health condition 
of the sick family member, the period may be extended to 14 and 30 working 
days, respectively, or longer in extreme cases (up to six months). 
• 
Leave is paid at 80 per cent of average earnings over the preceding 12 
months. It cannot be lower than the guaranteed wage (approximately €238) or 
higher than the wage which the person would receive if he/she were wo
 
 
child below the
or severe mental disab
must be equal to or longer than half
payment, but social security contributions based on the 
paid for the ho
• 
A parent who 
time, with social security contributions paid based on the minimum wage for 
the hours not worked, until the younger child reaches the age of six years. 
• 
Breastfeeding mothers who work full time have the right to a break during 
working time lasting not less than one hour a day. Payment is the same as for 
Parental leave. 
 
her 
 
• 
A parent leavi
children is en
minimum wage) paid from the state budget until the youngest child reaches 
the age of ten years. 
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
The Parenthood Protection and Family Benefits Act (2001) was revised in May 
2006. Maternity leave must now start 28 days prior to the expected delivery date 
(without the former possibility to start it 42 days before the delivery date), thus 
making the leave following childbirth longer. In order to enable more fathers to 
take paid Paternity leave, at least 15 days of full-time Paternity leave must be 
taken during a child's first six months (and not only during Maternity leave, i.e. till 
 
297

the child's age of 11 weeks). The rest of the 75 days can be used up to the child’s 
third birthday (before it could be used until the child reached eight years), which is 
intended to encourage fathers to devote more time to their very young children.  
 
Since May 2006, the parent leaving the labour market in order to take care of four 
or more children has been entitled to have social security contributions (based on 
age compensation: 1) farmers, their household members 
and other persons who have farming as their only or main activity (profession), if 
ing part time, and having social 
based on the minimum wage paid from the state budget for 
 until the younger child reaches the age of six years. 
3. 
 
a. 
 
 
b. Paternity leave 
 obstacles on the employers' side 
(Rener et al., 2005; Stropnik, 2005
). 
c. 
nt of 
    
the minimum wage) paid from the state budget until the youngest child reaches 
the age of ten years. 
 
In January 2007, two categories of persons were added to those entitled to 
Parental leave with w
covered by mandatory pension and invalidity insurance; and 2) unemployed 
persons included in public works. From the same date, a parent who is taking 
care of two children may extend the right to work
security contributions 
the hours not worked,
 
 
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
All insured mothers take Maternity leave.  
 
Sixty-three per cent of fathers took up to 15 days of Paternity leave in 2003 (when 
it was introduced), 72 per cent in 2004, some two-thirds in 2005, and about three-
quarters in 2006-2008. Ten per cent of leave-takers took more than 15 days in 
2006, and 15 per cent in 2008. Research suggests that most fathers do not take 
more than 15 days of Paternity leave because their earnings are not fully 
compensated during the rest of it. There are also
44
 
Parental leave 
 
All mothers take Parental leave. In 2003, 2.2 per cent of fathers took a part of it, 
as compared to 0.75 per cent in 1995 and only 0.6 per cent in 1999. This shift 
may be attributed to higher awareness of fathers’ rights following the introduction 
of Paternity leave. Use of leave has continued to increase, with five per ce
fathers taking Parental leave in 2006, and about 5.6 per cent in 2008. Given full 
                                          
  
 
44 
Slo
ne
Fa
. Stropnik, N. (2005) Stališča prebivalstva kot 
od
[Pe
family policy in Slovenia]. Ljubljana: Inštitut za ekonomska raziskovanja. 
Rener, T., Švab, A., Žakelj, T. and Humer, Ž. (2005) Perspektive novega očetovstva v 
veniji: vpliv mehanizma očetovskega dopusta na aktivno očetovanje [The perspectives of 
w fatherhood in Slovenia: impact of parental leave on active fatherhood]. Ljubljana: 
kulteta za družbene vede, Univerza v Ljubljani
raz novih trendov v starševstvu in podlaga za preoblikovanje družinske politike v Sloveniji 
ople's attitudes as a reflection of new trends in parenthood and the basis for reshaping of 
 
298

wage compensation while taking leave, the reasons for low participation of fathers 
may be found in the traditional division of tasks within the family, attitudes in the 
society (not the declared ones but rather those that rule people's behaviour), the 
absence of a positive image of the father who takes over more family 
responsibilities, and employers' expectations of their male employees. 
 
nik, 2005). Since fathers usually take only part of the leave (if 
reatening women's 
 
4.
 
a. 
al., 2008).  
 
b. 
nik, N. (2006) ‘Medgeneracijski transferji dohodkov’ [‘Inter-generational 
Paternity leave and fathers having the same entitlement to Parental leave as 
mothers do not significantly influence mothers to return earlier to work after their 
leave period (Strop
any at all), absence due to Parental leave keeps on th
professional careers.  
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Apart from basic statistical data on Parental leave, the DIALOG project 
(http://www.bib-demographie.de/ppa/IndexDialogStart.htm; resulting in the IPPAS 
database covering 14 European countries) provides information for 2000 about 
attitudes among 20 to 64-year-olds towards the current Parental leave 
arrangements, personal experience and preferences and possible impact on 
fertility of improved Parental leave. Most research conducted since 2000 has been 
based on the IPPAS database. Recent analyses cover up to 14 European 
ountries (Stropnik et al., 2006; Stropnik and Sambt, 2007; Stropnik et 
c
 
In Slovenia, which has one of the lowest fertility rates in the world, research on 
leave is very important due to the possible positive effects of this policy on 
decisions to have more children. However, some relevant information needed for 
in-depth research is still missing.  There are recent efforts to evaluate the impact 
on fathers' behaviour of introducing Paternity leave. Gender roles (fathers' take-up 
of Parental and Paternity leave, for instance) and equal opportunities on the 
labour market are of particular research interest.
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
 
trop
S
iIncome transfers’], in: A. Črnak-Meglič (ed.) Otroci in mladina v prehodni družbi 
[Children and Youth in the Transition Society]. Ljubljana: Ministrstvo za šolstvo in 
šport and Urad Republike Slovenije za mladino / Maribor: Aristej, pp. 77-99.  
This chapter examines earnings compensation for Parental leave in the context of 
intergenerational transfers in Slovenia.  
 
Stropnik, N., Sambt, J. and Kocourková, J. (2006) ‘Preferences for improved 
Parental leave and higher child allowance’, paper given at the European 
Population Conference 2006, Liverpool.  
The paper is based on analysis of the International Population Policy Acceptance 
Survey database which covers 14 European countries. It shows to what extent 
 
299

improved Parental leave arrangements for employed women and a substantial 
rveys (2000-2003).  
ch support exists for 
proved Parental leave arrangements for working women and a substantially 
vnega okolja [Work and Family – in 
 and argues that the 
sulting problems and risks can only be solved through dialogue between 
ede. Available at: 
http://dk.fdv.uni-lj.si/magistrska/pdfs/mag_Voga-Pristav-Bobnar.PDF 
This Master's thesis deals with changes in the family related to fatherhood and 
parental roles in the late modern society. While the modern family is still 
characterised by an asymmetric gender division of family roles and tasks, the 
phenomenon of new fatherhood is ever more evident in practice and is supported 
by policies in some countries that are compared and evaluated. There is evidence 
that the introduction of Paternity leave in Slovenia has contributed to a positive 
change in fathers' behaviour and to better acceptance of men fulfilling the father's 
role. 
 
Stropnik, N., Sambt, J. and Kocourková, J. (2008) ‘Preferences versus actual 
family policy measures’, in: C. Höhn, D. Avramov and I. E. Kotowska (eds.) 
People, Population Change and Policies: Lessons from the Population Policy 
Acceptance Study. Volume 1. Berlin: Springer, pp. 391-410. 
Attitudes and preferences regarding Parental leave and child allowance 
arrangements are compared with actual schemes. There is only a weak 
correlation between actual duration of Parental leave in different countries and 
people's evaluation of its sufficiency, which points to the importance of cultural 
norms, female employment patterns, and equal opportunities for understanding 
people's attitudes and expectations. No common pattern was found regarding the 
preferred mode of taking Parental leave.  
rise in child allowance are supported and considered to be priority family policy 
measures by women and men aged 20 to 49 years; and identifies factors 
determining these views. The results are explained in the context of policy 
arrangements at the time of the national su
 
Stropnik, N. and Sambt, J. (2007) ‘Parental leave and child allowances: attitudes, 
preferences and possible impact’, Revija za socijalnu politiku, Vol.14, No.3: 347-
371. Available at: 
 http://www.rsp.hr/ojs2/index.php/rsp/article/viewFile/714/670  
Comparing 14 European countries, this paper considers preferred alternative 
forms of Parental leave and child allowance; how mu
im
higher child allowance; and what possible impact the improvements in these two 
measures may have on deciding to have children. 
 
Kanjuo Mrčela, A. and Černigoj Sadar, N. (eds.) (2007) Delo in družina – s 
partnerstvom do družini prijaznega delo
partnership towards a family-friendly work environment]. Ljubljana: Fakulteta za 
družbene vede. 
The book deals with work-life balance from the viewpoint of the changing roles 
and position on the labour market of men and women
re
stakeholders (employees, employers, the state, etc.). It includes research on the 
economic impact of family-friendly policies for various stakeholders.  
 
Voga, J. N. and Pristav Bobnar, E. (2007) Očetovski dopust kot prispevek k 
novem očetovstvu in starševstvu [Paternity leave as a contribution to new 
fatherhood and parenthood]. Ljubljana: Fakulteta za družbene v
 
300

 
Stropnik, N. a
evidence of 
nd Šircelj, M. (2008) ‘Slovenia: Generous family policy without 
any fertility impact’, Demographic Research, Vol. 19, Special 
vailable 
at: 
www.demographic-
f  
ell-developed family policy, particularly 
ucation and care, almost no impact on 
lacement level since 
r education than men 
and perceive motherhood as a drawback in the labour market. Almost all parents 
in Slovenia are employed full time, even those with small children, yet the 
 division of roles persists in the fam
lovenia: discussant comments’, in: P. Moss and M. Korintus 
ve Policies and Related Research 2008 
 Research Series No. 10
ndon: Department for 
 
Reform
pp.37-4 . 
Available 
at: 
//www.berr.gov.uk/files/file47247.pdf 
 answer the question of whether a three-year leave period is too long or 
ngary and Slovenia are compared, and major 
cribed. The reasons why Slovenia did not 
ar Parental leave are discus
rševstvo med trgom dela in enakimi m
loveniji 
market and equal opportunities in Slovenia]. 
upravo. 
h parental insurance and the righ
 from it in 
untries with 
the best regulations and practices for work-family reconciliation. 
Collection 
7: 
1019-58. 
A
research.org/volumes/vol19/26/19-26.pd
Though Slovenia has a relatively w
Parental leave and early childhood ed
fertility has ever been observed. Fertility has not reached rep
the end of the 1970s, and young women today achieve highe
traditional gender
ily.  
 
Stropnik, N. (2008) ‘S
(eds.) International Review of Lea
(Employment Relations
0). Lo
Business, 
Enterprise 
and 
Regulatory
, 
3
http:
Trying to
not, Parental leave provisions in Hu
differences in the national contexts des
opt for a two- or three-ye
sed.  
 
Mirnik Hiti, E. (2008) Sta
ožnostmi v S
[Parenthood between the labour 
Ljubljana: Fakulteta za 
This Master's thesis deals wit
ts derived
Slovenia and some EU countries, the objective being to identify the co
 
301

2
S
 
Lis
 
Population (UNDP) 
2005 
47.9 million 
.25 
outh Africa 
a Dancaster, Tamara Cohen and Marian Baird 
 
Total Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
GDP per capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
2.8 
11,110 PPP US$ 
Female economic activity, +15 (UNDP) 
   As % male rate (UNDP) 
% 
m
   Men 
   Wom
Gender
2005 
2005 
45.9 per cent 
58 per cent 
of e
ployed working part time (OECD/F)45
en  
 employment gap (OECD/BB) 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
 
No data 
No data 
No data 
Employ
   W
 
   W
 
ment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
 
 
ith child under 3 years 
ith child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
2005 
No data 
No data 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
22nd          
Atte
a
   Ch d
   Child
nd nce at formal services (ECB) 
il ren under 3 years 
ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
 
2006 
2006 
 
No data 
No data 
NB. So
     
                    
uth Africa is a federal state, with nine provinces  
   
 
1.
nd other employment-related policies to 
 
Not
by 
Con
nine
the
sec
the
chil
term
sec
em
pro
leav
          
 Current leave a
support parents 
e on leave information: leave entitlement in South Africa is primarily governed 
one main statute that applies to the whole country, namely, the Basic 
ditions of Employment Act (BCEA).  Individual provinces (of which there are 
 in South Africa) do not have authority to amend these provisions. By virtue of 
 authority given to the Minister of Labour in terms of the BCEA, a number of 
toral determinations have been made to cater for the unique circumstances in 
 following industries: forestry, farm workers, domestic workers, hospitality, 
dren in performing arts, learners employed on a learnership agreement in 
s of the Skills Development Act (75 of 1997), wholesale and retail, private 
urity, contract cleaning, civil engineering, small business (less than ten 
ployees) and the taxi sector. The majority of these agreements contain leave 
visions identical to those in the BCEA.  Only where these sectors provide for 
e that is different from that stipulated in the BCEA is it noted here.  
 
                                       
08, 12 per cent of employed women worked less than 30 hours per week (source: 
rly LFS by Stats SA). 
45 In 20
Quarte
 
302

The
stan
stat
in b
be 
in S
cessarily a reliable 
indu
cou
bar
rea
ve (responsibility of the Department of Labour) 
Len
 
 
• 
(or earlier if a medical 
practitioner certifies it necessary for her health or that of her unborn child) 
hild, unless a medical 
practitioner or midwife certifies that she is fit to do so.  
                            
 the unfair dismissal provisions of 
• 
An employee who has a miscarriage during the third trimester of pregnancy 
carriage or stillbirth. 
 
P
unding 
Unemployment Insurance 
Fund (UIF).  This is for contributors only. The Unemployment Insurance Act 
ut not to employees working less than 24 hours a month for an 
ation must be made eight weeks 
). 
 
Compulsory contributions to the UIF are made by employers and employees 
on a monthly basis and each contributes one per cent of the employee’s 
earnings, up to a maximum of ZAR12,478 (€1,080) per month. Most 
employees entitled to statutory Maternity leave are also entitled to receive 
 leave provisions in the BCEA and Sectoral Determinations are minimum 
dards that can be improved upon through collective bargaining, usually in 
utory forums called bargaining councils. Information/data on leave provisions 
argaining council agreements is difficult to obtain as there does not appear to 
an accessible database housing the agreements of all the bargaining councils 
outh Africa. Bargaining Council Agreements are also not ne
indicator of employer provision because bargaining councils do not exist for all the 
strial sectors in the country and even in those sectors that do have bargaining 
ncils, not all employers in the industry are necessarily members of the 
gaining council or are covered by the scope of the collective agreements 
ched there. 
 
a. Maternity lea
 
gth of leave (before and after birth) 
Four months. An employee may commence Maternity leave at any time from 
four weeks before the expected date of birth 
and may not work for six weeks after the birth of her c
• 
An employee’s right to return to the same or comparable job after a 
pregnancy-related absence is protected in
the Labour Relations Act. 
or who bears a stillborn child is entitled to Maternity leave of six weeks after 
this event, whether or not the employee had already commenced Maternity 
leave at the time of the mis
 
ayment and f
 
• 
Statutory Maternity leave is unpaid in the BCEA.  There is provision for 
maternity payment to eligible employees from the 
and Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act apply to all employers and 
employees, b
employer, learners, public servants, foreigners working on contract, 
employees who get a monthly state pension, and workers who only earn a 
commission. Payment for Maternity leave is on a sliding scale ranging from 31 
per cent to 59 per cent of earnings depending on level of earnings.  It is for a 
maximum period of 17.32 weeks and applic
before the birth of the child. Payment of maternity benefits does not reduce the 
amount of payment for other benefits that an employee is entitled to claim 
from the Fund (namely illness, unemployment and death benefits
Unemployment insurance benefits for Maternity leave are not subject to 
taxation. 
•
 
303

maternity benefits from UIF. The main exception is employees in national and 
provincial government. However, public service employees are entitled to four 
id, it can be assumed to be so by virtue of the fact that contract workers are 
entitled to fully paid Maternity leave in this Determination.  
 also receives cash benefits from another source (for example 
nly receive a benefit from the UIF if she receives less 
 that source. The amount she would then 
ortfall between the amount received from 
alary.  
Fle
 
 leave: i) at any time from four weeks 
ss otherwise agreed; or ii) on a date 
a midwife certifies that it is necessary for 
ealth or that of her unborn child.  
Eli
il
 
• 
• 
 
pe
 
• 
 
 Add
   
a re
e may take an additional 184 calendar days of 
•
co
a
o
u
• 
F
e
• 
P
 
 
 
months Maternity leave under the terms of a July 2007 Determination on leave 
in the public service; although this does not explicitly state that leave is fully 
pa
• 
If a contributor
her employer), she will o
than her normal monthly salary from
receive from the UIF will cover the sh
the outside source and her normal s
 
xibility in Use  
  
• 
An employee may commence Maternity
before the expected date of birth, unle
from which a medical practitioner or 
the employee’s h
 
gib ity (e.g related to employment or family circumstances)  
An employee is not eligible for statutory Maternity leave if working for less 
than 24 hours a month for her employer.  
Independent contractors and self-employed women are not eligible.  
 Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
poor health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the mother 
None. 
itional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective  
ements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
g
 
•
Employees in the public servic
 
unpaid leave. 
 
A survey (Elsley, 2007) of 361 enterprise level agreements and 31 bargaining 
uncil agreements found that the duration of Maternity leave in collective 
greements mirrors the four consecutive months stipulated in the BCEA and 
nly about seven per cent of agreements specifically provided for additional 
npaid Maternity leave of about two months. 
ive per cent of the Bargaining Council Agreements and three per cent of 
nterprise level agreements provide on average between 25 per cent and 33 
per cent of payment towards Maternity leave by employers (Benjamin, 2007). 
See also ‘flexible working’ (part 1e) for the Code of Good Practice on the 
rotection of Employees during Pregnancy and After the Birth of a Child.  
 
304

b. Pate
 
The
the
ility leave (see part 
 
c. Par
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
e. Oth
 
Adoptio
 
• 
• 
 
Time o
 
• 
nth period (five days for domestic workers). An employee 
r than four months and work at least four 
 
rnity leave   
re is no statutory leave entitlement, though fathers who wish to take leave at 
 time of the birth of their child can use their family responsib
1e). 
ental leave  
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement.  
 
 
There is no statutory entitlement. 
er employment-related measures 
n leave and pay 
There is no statutory leave for adoption of a child. There is, however, a right to 
claim unemployment insurance benefits for time off work for adoption 
purposes. Only one parent can make application for adoption benefits and the 
child adopted must be under two years of age. The failure to provide statutory 
adoption leave means that if an employer refuses to grant an employee 
adoption leave it effectively nullifies the provision of adoption payment from 
the UIF. 
Employees in the public service are entitled to leave of 45 working days when 
adopting a child under the age of two years by virtue of the July 2007 
Determination regulating leave in the public service.  Although this 
determination does not explicitly state that this leave is fully paid, it can be 
assumed to be so by virtue of the fact that contract workers are entitled to fully 
paid adoption leave in this Determination. These employees are permitted to 
extend this leave by 184 calendar days of unpaid leave.  
ff for the care of dependants 
An employee is entitled to family responsibility leave when the employee’s 
child is born; when the employee’s child is sick; or in the event of the death of 
the employee’s spouse or life partner, or the employee’s parent, adoptive 
parent, grandparent, child, adopted child, grandchild or sibling. This leave is 
fully paid by the employer and is available for a maximum period of three 
days in a 12-mo
must have been employed for longe
days per week in order to qualify for this leave. 
 
• 
Employees in the public service are permitted to utilise three days family 
responsibility leave for the birth of a child of a spouse or life partner, or in the
event of the sickness of a child, spouse or life partner. They are entitled to 
utilise up to five days leave per annual leave cycle for the death of a spouse, 
life partner, child or immediate family member. Total family responsibility 
leave cannot exceed five days. The Determination does not stipulate that this 
 
305

leave is paid but it can be assumed to be so by virtue of the fact that the 
Determination specifically permits a further 184 calendar days to be utilised 
as unpaid leave if an employee has exhausted their family responsibility 
leave, subject to the approval of the Head of Department.  
• 
By virtue of a Ministerial Determination regulating conditions of employment in 
small businesses, employers who employ fewer than ten employees are 
permitted to reduce the amount of annual leave granted to an employee by 
the amount of family responsibility leave granted to that employee.       
 
xible working 
 
Fle
• 
No general statutory entitlement. 
actice are guidelines for employers and do not have the 
The Code of Good Practice on the Protection of 
ring Pregnancy and After the Birth of a Child provides that 
t consider granting rest periods to employees who experience 
onsider that tiredness 
bility to work overtime. 
s that arrangements should be made for pregnant and 
s to be able to attend antenatal and post-natal clinics 
 that employers identify and assess 
workplace hazards to the pregnant mother and/or to the foetus and consider 
action. The Code of Good Practice on the Integration of 
Employment Equity into Human Resource Policies and Practices adds that an 
 and safety adjustments and 
antenatal care leave.  
ible environment for employees 
nsibilities’. This is specified to include ‘considering flexible 
nd granting sufficient family responsibility leave for both 
regnant and breastfeeding workers and workers with family 
2.
y since 2006 and other related 
a focus on increasing 
•    Codes of Good Pr
status of legislation.
Employees du
employers mus
tiredness associated with pregnancy and should also c
associated with pregnancy may affect an employee’s a
It also state
breastfeeding employee
during pregnancy and after the birth of the child and recommends that 
arrangements be made for employees who are breastfeeding to have breaks 
of 30 minutes twice a day to breastfeed or express milk for the first six months 
of a child’s life. It further recommends
appropriate 
employer should provide reasonable accommodation for pregnant women 
and parents with young children, including health
• 
The Code of Good Practice on the Integration of Employment Equity into 
Human Resource Policies and Practices requires employers to endeavour to 
provide ‘an accessible, supportive and flex
with family respo
working hours a
parents’. In addition, the Code of Good Practice on Arrangement of Working 
Time states that the design of shift rosters must be sensitive to the impact of 
these rosters on employees and their families and should take into 
consideration the childcare needs of the employees. It adds that 
arrangements should be considered to accommodate the special needs of 
workers such as p
responsibilities.  
 
 Changes in leave polic
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
There have been no policy changes to the provision of Maternity or family 
responsibility leave for over ten years. However, on 14 February 2009 the Minister 
in the Presidency, Dr Manto Tshabalala Msimang, announced that legislation on 
Maternity and Paternity leave was in need of review with 
 
306

men’s roles in parenting and recognising the need for an equal sharing of 
 no formal proposals have been drafted as at February 2009. 
parate 
inistry in parliament to focus on women’s empowerment and transformation of 
 
3. 
 
a. Maternity
 
b. 
ponsibility’ leave used for this purpose or for the take-up of  Paternity 
ave provided for in collective agreements. 
c. 
 
4.
 
a. General overview 
arch examining statutory leave entitlements in South 
 
b. 
rrangements’, South African Journal of Economic and Management 
responsibilities between men and women. She has stated that fathers should be 
given two weeks Paternity leave and that paid Maternity leave should be 
considered, although
She also noted in a speech to the National Gender Machinery on the 16 February 
2009 that South Africa needed to question whether or not it had signed the ILO 
Convention on Workers with Family Responsibilities (it has not) and if not, to put 
this process on track for 2009. She is also driving the establishment of a se
m
gender relations and has launched a ‘50:50 campaign’ aimed at increasing female 
representation in political processes and decision-making positions. 
Take-up of leave 
 leave 
 
There is no information on the take-up of Maternity leave.  
Paternity leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. There is no information on the take-up of 
‘family res
le
 
Parental leave 
 
There is no statutory leave entitlement. There is no information on the take-up of 
Parental leave provided for in collective agreements. 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related policies since January 2006 
 
There is a shortage of rese
Africa. There is no information on employee take-up of existing leave entitlements.  
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research studies   
Dancaster, L. (2006) ‘Work-life balance and the legal right to request flexible 
working a
Sciences, Vol.9, No.2: 175-186.  
This article discusses the UK right to request flexible working arrangements. It 
notes the gap in work-family research in South Africa and that research in South 
Africa on flexible working arrangements has focused mainly on flexible and 
atypical working arrangements as efficiency measures rather than as tools for 
enhancing work-life integration. It also highlights the need for integrated state 
policy on work and family in South Africa. 
 
307

 
Benjamin, N. (2007) ‘Mainstreaming gender standards in collective bargaining’ in: 
Bargaining Indicators 2007: A Collective Bargaining Omnibus. Cape Town: Labour 
 Report Two. Unpublished report 
r UNRISD Political Economy of Care Project. Available at: www.unrisd.org. 
.  
socio-
emographic trends and characteristics of household composition, fertility and 
ge and non-wage bargaining outcomes 
 collective bargaining agreements. The sample included 31 bargaining councils 
 typically involving a single employer and one or 
cle explores the scope for the extension of labour rights to workers in the 
formal sector. In particular, it addresses the meaning of labour rights protection 
 
atistical evidence on care and non-care work across six 
ountries (Gender Development Paper No 4). Geneva: UNRISD. 
cial Economy of Care. 
Research Service.  
This chapter is part of an annual publication designed to assist trade unions in 
collective bargaining through the provision of information on collective bargaining 
outcomes on a range of wage and non-wage issues. The focus of this chapter is 
specifically on raising the gender standards for low-wage women workers.  
 
Budlender, D. (2007) Analysis of time use data on work/care regimes and macro 
data on the care diamond. South Africa Research
fo
This report uses the 2000 Time Use Survey to estimate the value in time and 
money of unpaid care work and uses this information for comparisons with the 
value of paid care work, all paid work, GDP and taxation
 
Budlender, D. and Lund, F. (2007) Setting the context: South Africa Research 
Report One. Unpublished report for UNRISD Political Economy of Care Work 
Project. Available at:  www.unrisd.org. 
This report gives an overview of the country, characteristics of poverty and 
inequality and main policy changes over the time of transition.  It also gives 
d
mortality. 
 
Elsley, T. (2007) ‘Outcomes of collective bargaining in South Africa’, in: 
Bargaining Indicators 2007: A Collective Bargaining Omnibus, pp 79-98.  Cape 
Town: Labour Research Service.   
This chapter focuses on an analysis of wa
in
out of an estimated 49 functioning bargaining councils in South Africa and 
collective agreements from 361 unique bargaining units that could be 
characterised as engaging in decentralised bargaining (bargaining outside of 
bargaining council structures),
more trade unions. 
 
Benjamin, P. (2008) ‘Informal work and labour rights in South Africa’. Industrial 
Law Journal, Vol.29: 1579. 
This arti
in
for self-employed and wage workers in informal work and the justifications for 
extending these rights to these categories of workers. It also examines the roles
that public and private institutions could play in extending labour rights to informal 
workers. 
 
Budlender, D. (2008) The st
c
This paper summarises and compares findings from analysis of time use data 
from Argentina, Nicaragua, India, the Republic of Korea, South Africa and 
Tanzania for a project of the UN Research Institute for Social Development 
(UNRISD) on Political and So
 
308

 
Dancaster, L. and Baird, M. (2008) ‘Is work-family integration adequately 
addressed in South African labour law?’, Industrial Law Journal, Vol.29: 22–42.  
The focus of this paper is on legislative options for the combination of work and 
care in South Africa. It highlights the inadequacy of legislative provisions 
governing leave options (leave for care emergencies, Maternity leave, Paternity 
ave and Parental leave) and flexible working arrangements. The inadequacy of 
n South African law is determined in the light of selected 
rs and the care needs (in particular HIV/AIDS care) that 
of the labour force. In contrast to 
many studies of part-time work in other countries, this study found evidence of a 
significant wage premium for female part-time employment in South Africa.  
 
Cohen, T. and Dancaster, L. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Family responsibility 
discrimination litigation – a non-starter?’, Stellenbosch Law Review, Vol.2.  
This paper explores reasons for the failure of the ‘family responsibility’ provision of 
the Employment Equity Act to be used to argue cases for flexible working 
arrangements and proposes the introduction of positive laws regulating flexible 
working arrangements for South Africa.    
 
Cohen, T. and Dancaster, L. (forthcoming 2009) ‘The rights of employees with 
family responsibilities to request flexible working arrangements – the failings of the 
Employment Equity Act’, in: O. Dupper and C. Garbers (eds.) Equality in the 
Workplace. Lansdowne: Juta. 
This chapter on the failing of family responsibility discrimination litigation in South 
Africa is part of a collection of papers focusing on equality in the workplace 
following from a conference ‘Equality in the Workplace: Reflections from South 
Africa and Elsewhere’ at Stellenbosch Institute for Advanced Study, September 
2008.   
 
Lund, F. (2009) The provision of care by non-household institutions, South Africa: 
South Africa Research Report 3. Geneva: UNRISD. Available at: www.unrisd.org 
This report focuses on the provision of care by non-household institutions, in 
particular the state, the private sector, and the organised social sector and uses 
this to assess the nature of the ‘care diamond’ and to reflect on central concepts 
in welfare regime theory.   
 
Smit, R. (2009) ‘Family policy in Southern African countries: Are working parents 
reaping any benefits?’ Paper presented at the International Conference on Parent 
Education and Parenting held at the University of North Texas, Denton, Texas, 
USA, 12-14 February, 2009. 
le
work-family provisions i
ternational comparato
in
exist in South Africa. The paper also looks at drivers for increased state 
intervention in work-family policy in South Africa. 
 
Posel, D. and Muller, C. (2008) ‘Is there evidence of a wage penalty to female 
part-time employment in South Africa’, South African Journal of Economics, 
Vol.76, No.3: 466-479. Available at: www.econrsa.org. 
This paper investigates female part-time employment in South Africa using 
household survey data from 1995 to 2004. The data shows that women are over-
represented in part-time employment, and that the growth in this employment has 
been an important feature of the feminisation 
 
309

This paper examines family-relate
Parental leave and childcare polici
establishing a better fit between e
Development Community (SADC) 
d policies (Maternity leave, Paternity leave, 
es) that give working parents more choices in 
mployment and family life in Southern African 
member states. Policy recommendations are 
ce the work/family life integration of working parents with young 
terminants of work-fami
ts in 
tions (2006-2009). Doctoral thesis by Lisa Dancaster, 
h Division, University of KwaZulu Natal, 
an.  
 study, undertaken through the University of Sydney, aims to fill the 
 arrangements in South A
sations 
e of such arrangements in over 300 
ican stock excha
ont
aster 
made to enhan
children. 
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
Organisational characteristics as de
ly arrangemen
South African organisa
Health Economics and HIV/AIDS Researc
Durb
This PhD
existing gap in data on work-family
frican organi
by providing information on a rang
organisations listed on the South Afr
nge. C
act: Lisa Danc
at dancaste@ukzn.ac.za. 
 
310

2.
Anna Escobedo 
Popu
Total 
GDP 
26 Spain 
 
 
lation (UNDP) 
Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
43.4 million 
1.3 
27,169 PPP US$ 
Fema
   As 
% of 
   Men
   Wo
Gend
le economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
 % male rate (UNDP) 
employed working part time (OECD/F) 
 
men  
er employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2005 
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
2004 
59.3 per cent 
84 per cent 
 
  3.8  per cent 
20.9 per cent 
  9% points 
Empl
   Wit
 
52.6 per cent 
oyment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
h child under 3 years 
 
2005
 
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
54.2 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
17th          
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
 
 
   C
2006 
39 (19) per cent 
hildren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
91 (44) per cent 
 
1. Cu
su
 
a. Ma
y prestación por maternidad) (responsibility 
 
Lengt
 
6 a month in 2009.  
• 
 
lexibility in use 
 
• The start date for taking leave before birth can vary. 
rrent leave and other employment-related policies to 
pport parents 
ternity leave (Permiso 
of the Ministry of Labour and Immigration)  
h of leave (before and after birth) 
Sixteen weeks: six weeks must be taken following t
• 
he birth, while the remaining 
ten weeks can be taken before or after birth. By consolidating an entitlement to 
reduced working hours, mothers can in practice extend Maternity leave by two 
to four weeks (see part 1e, permiso de lactancia, originally to support 
breastfeeding). 
 
Pa ment and funding 
 
• Hundred per cent of earnings up to a ceiling of €3,16
y
 A flat-rate benefit (€527.24 per month or €17.57 per day) is paid for 42 days to 
all employed women who do not meet eligibility requirements. 
Financed by social insurance contributions from employers and employees. 
•
F
 
311

• Mothers, including those who are self-employed, may take leave part time 
except for the six weeks following birth. 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or
 
 family circumstances) 
omen are entitled to Maternity leave, but conditions must be met 
ave benefit (all employees can 
 payment for 42 days after delivery): for example, the mother 
cial security contributions at the beginning of the leave; 
xible for women working part 
e other hand self-employed mothers are exempted from paying 
rity contributions while on Maternity leave. 
Va
poor 
pe
• 
y leave is 
ransfer up to ten of their 16 paid weeks of 
M
 
nefit is extended from 42 to 57 days for lone mothers, 
leave entitlements, 
•
or in Catalonia can choose between extending 
M
is approximately 17 mo
 
 
 
• All employed w
to qualify for the earnings-related Maternity le
receive a flat-rate
needs to be making so
or be receiving unemployment contributory benefit; or in the first year of the 
Parental leave, and have contributed to social security at least 180 days in the 
previous seven years, or 360 days during working life. Women under 21 years 
do not need any previous period of social security contribution, and women 
between 21 and 26 only 90 days, in the last previous seven years, or 180 days 
during working life. This requirement is more fle
time. On th
social secu
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the mother 
 
In the case of multiple births (or multiple adoption or foster), or birth (or 
adoption or foster) of a child with some disability, working mothers have the 
right to two extra weeks of leave per newborn child from the second onward, 
and the family benefits from an additional lump sum benefit.  
 In the case of a premature birth or infant hospitalisation, Maternit
•
extended up to 13 weeks. 
 Employed mothers have the right to t
•
aternity leave to the father on condition that they take six weeks after giving 
birth, that their partner fulfils contributory requirements, and that the transfer 
does not endanger their health. Leave can be completely transferred or partly 
transferred, so both parents share part-time leave. 
The non-contributory be
•
large families, multiple births or disabilities.  
 If the mother dies, the father can take the Maternity 
•
independently of the mother’s previous employment situation and entitlements. 
 If the baby dies, Maternity leave is not reduced. 
 
Additional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
agreements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone)  
 
 Employees in the public sect
•
aternity leave by 16 weeks or reducing working time by a third until the child 
nths old; both are paid. 
 
312

b. 
t
(re
) 
Le
 
Pa
 
•
ions from employers and employees, 
except for the first two days that remain paid by employers or the self-
Fle
 
• 
ve). Fathers who need to travel in their work have two extra days, 
paid by the employer (this does not apply in the public sector).  
aternity leave (permiso de paternidad) can be used during or 
immediately after the end of Maternity leave. This does not apply in the public 
e the 15 days are considered as a whole, to be taken at the time of 
(C
• Fa
 
Regional or local variations in leave policy 
 
A number of regional governments have improved entitlements (see part 2 
 leave that has to be taken at the 
end of Maternity leave. 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
• 
 
Varia
poor 
perso
 
• 
holds with a 
disabled person.  
option or fostering) 
or in case the child has a disability. 
 of it).  
Pa ernity leave (permiso de paternidad, permiso por nacimiento) 
sponsibility of the Ministry of Labour and Immigration
 
ngth of leave (before and after birth) 
• Fifteen days.  
 
yment and funding 
 One hundred per cent of earnings, paid by the Social Security Fund with the 
same ceiling as for Maternity leave. 
• Financed by social insurance contribut
employed in the private sector. 
 
xibility in use 
The first two days have to be used at the time of birth (permiso por nacimiento, 
i.e. birth lea
• The 13 days of P
sector, wher
birth as a general rule (except when the specific regional government 
omunidades Autónomas) or institution regulates differently).  
thers can use Paternity leave part time with employer agreement. 
 
•
below). For example, public sector workers in Catalonia receive five days at 
birth (as birth leave), and a month of Paternity
 
 
All employees fulfilling contributory requirements (i.e. at least 180 days in the 
previous seven years, or 360 days during working life). 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the father  
Leave is extended from 15 to 20 days for large families or house
• 
Two more days are paid in the case of multiple birth (or ad
• 
The entitlement is gender-neutral to encompass homosexual and lesbian 
couples, where this leave can be taken by the member of the couple who did 
not use the Maternity leave (or most
 
313

• 
In the case of public employees in Catalonia (see above), lone mothers can 
dditional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
pe
 
 
See ‘regional or local variations’ for improved conditions offered by some 
cia por cuidado de hijos) (responsibility of the 
inistry of Labour and Immigration) 
Lengt
 
t year, return to the same job position is 
 
 
• 
r. 
 
 
to the number of periods of leave that can be taken until the 
child is three years, with no minimum period. 
Regio
 
er month); in Castilla-León (€527 per month in 2008, but 
restricted to families with an annual income below €30,000); in Navarre (when 
bled child, €330 per month for one year, or until 
the child is three years in the case of large families); and in Castilla-La Mancha 
 
Eli
 
• 
workers are not eligible. 
use the extra month for fathers at the end of Maternity leave.  
 
A
agreements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the parents  
•
regional governments for their employees. 
 
c. Parental leave (Exceden
M
 
h of leave (before and after birth) 
• Each parent is entitled to take leave until three years after childbirth. Leave is 
an individual right. During the firs
protected; after the first year, job protection is restricted to a job of the same 
category.  
 
Payment and funding 
•
None.  
Workers taking leave are credited with social security contributions, which 
affect pension accounts, health cover and new Maternity or Paternity leave 
entitlements, for the first two years in the private sector and for the whole 
period in the public secto
Flexibility in use  
• There are no limits 
 
nal or local variations in leave policy 
• Since 2000, a number of regional governments have introduced flat rate 
benefits (see part 2 below). For example: in the Basque Country and Balearic 
Islands (€200 per month for mothers and €250 per month for fathers in 2008) 
and La Rioja (€250 p
having a second child or a disa
(employed women in the private sector can receive €600 per month up to 
€3,000 per year and men €900 per month up to €7,000 per year).  
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 All employees, though employees on temporary contracts can only claim leave 
that is shorter than their contract period. Unemployed and self-employed 
 
314

 
Varia
multiple or premature births; 
po
 
• 
 
Addit
agree
perso
 
• 
• 
l governments for their employees. 
ve or career breaks 
 
 
e. Ot
 
Adop
 
• 
 
Time 
 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent) 
Social security contributions are credited for a longer period (from 30 to 36 
months) in families with more than three children or with two children one of 
whom has a disability. 
ional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parents 
• If both parents work for the same company, the employer can put restrictions 
on both parents using leave at the same time if this is justified for production 
reasons. 
In the public sector the job position is protected for two years, and in the third 
year within the same municipality. 
See ‘regional or local variations’ for improved conditions offered by some 
regiona
 
d. Childcare lea
• 
Unpaid career breaks are recognised in the labour and public employees’ 
regulations (excedencia voluntaria). The only protection offered is to be able to 
claim the right of return to an equivalent job place before the end of the leave, 
once there is a vacancy. This job protection works much better in the public 
than in the private sector.  
her employment-related measures 
tion leave and pay  
• The same regulations as for other parents for the adoption or fostering of 
children under six years or children with additional needs (e.g. disabilities, 
international adoptions). 
Public employees involved in an international adoption have the right to two 
months of paid leave, including basic payment without benefits, when the 
process requires that the adoptive parents stay in the country of origin of the 
future adoptive child. 
off for the care of dependants  
• Two days leave per worker (permiso por enfermedad grave de un familiar) to 
care for a seriously sick child or for other family reasons (serious illness, 
hospitalisation or death of a relative to a second degree of consanguinity or 
affinity), paid for by the employer. The entitlement is extended to four days if 
travelling is required for work (e.g. the workplace is in a different municipality). 
However there is no agreement on what ‘serious illness’ means. For public 
sector employees this entitlement is extended to three days (five days if 
 
315

travelling is required) for the care of first degree relatives (e.g. partner, children 
or parents, includeding in-laws).  
 Each worker may take up to two years of leave (excedencia por cuidado de
• 
 un 
familiar) or working hours reduced by between an eighth and a half (reducción 
egree relative (child, partner or parent including in laws); they can also 
 
Fle
working day; the public sector and many 
mployees can benefit from this working time reduction 
 
mothers, can reduce 
nings, 
following the end of Maternity and Paternity leave, that is approximately until a 
de jornada por cuidado de un familiar) to take care of a dependent relative (up 
to the ‘second degree of consanguinity or affinity’) due to severe illness, 
disability, accident or old age. The leave or reduced hours has been unpaid; 
but since mid- 2007, when the leave is to care for a person with assessed high 
dependency, the informal carer on leave can claim a payment of €487 per 
month. Workers taking leave are credited with social security contributions, 
which affect pension accounts, health cover and new leave entitlements, for the 
first year of full-time or part-time leave.  
• Public employees can extend the unpaid leave to care for a relative for up to 
three years, with the whole period credited with social security contributions 
and related social protection benefits. Furthermore, they can work half time for 
up to one month without loss of earnings in the case of a very serious illness of 
a first d
benefit from extra flexibility in working time as do parents of children under 12 
years. 
xible working 
 
• During the first nine months after the child's birth (12 months in the public 
sector), employed mothers are entitled to one hour of absence during the 
working day without loss of earnings, which is paid by the employers (permiso 
de lactancia, originally to support breastfeeding). This absence is paid for by 
the employer. The period can be divided into two half-hours or be replaced by a 
half-hour shortening of the normal 
collective agreements allow the full hour shortening of the normal working day. 
If both parents are working, the mother can transfer this right to the father or 
partner. All employed mothers can consolidate this reduction in working time as 
full-time leave, thus in practice extending their Maternity leave between two to 
four weeks. 
• A working parent can reduce his/her working day by between an eighth and 
half of its normal duration to care for a child until the eighth year or to look after 
a disabled child (reducción de jornada por guarda de un hijo). Employees may 
decide, within their usual work schedule, the extent and period of the working 
time reduction. It is defined as an individual right, and there is no payment, but 
workers taking this ‘part-time leave’ are credited with up to two years full-time 
social security contributions (which affect pension accounts, and new leave 
entitlements). Public e
until the child is 12 years, and have guaranteed some working time flexibility to 
adapt for example to school hours.  
• A number of regional governments have introduced payments to parents 
reducing their working hours. For example: Basque Country, Navarre, La Rioja, 
Balearic Islands, Galicia and Castilla-La Mancha and Castilla-León provide flat-
rate payments to support this measure proportional to the working time
reduction; public employees in Catalonia, both fathers and 
their working hours by one third for one year without reducing their ear
 
316

child is 17 months old; similarly, they may reduce their working hours by a third 
with a 20 per cent earnings reduction or by a half with a 40 per cent earnings 
reduction if they have a child under six years or care for a disabled relative. 
 Changes in leave po
 
2.
licy since 2006 and other related 
tation of women and men in politics, gender equality plans in public and 
riv
 
reco
i
balance
improve
Sec
t
fath
 
system
 
In 2
7
the 
e
mujeres
sector (
reg
e
el Est
een 
ystem with equal and 
developments  (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
The 2007 Spanish Gender Equality Law foresees measures such as balanced 
epresen
r
p
ate companies, and a generic right to work-life balance. The section on 
nc liation of work, personal and family life orientates policies towards a better 
 of family responsibilities between women and men. The main 
ment is the introduction of a two-week Paternity leave paid by Social 
uri y (with the commitment to reach four weeks by 2012); it is the first time that 
ers have received an individualised entitlement paid by the social insurance 
.  
, a reform of leave arra
00
ngements in Spain was made in the framework of 
G nder Equality Law (Ley Orgánica 3/2007, para la Igualdad efectiva de 
 y hombres) followed by a new general law regulating work in the public 
Ley 7/2007, del Estatuto Básico de Empleado Público) and a new law to 
ulat  self-employment and its social protection (Ley 20/2007, de 11 de julio, 
atuto del Trabajo Autónomo). Practical details from these laws have b
d
incorporated into social security regulations in March 2009 (RD 295/2009, de 6 de 
marzo, por el que se regulan las prestaciones económicas del sistema de la 
Seguridad Social por maternidad, paternidad, riesgo durante el embarazo y riesgo 
durante la lactancia natural). 
 
Coverage has been improved by lowering the previous eligibility conditions and 
the introduction of a flat rate maternity benefit for 42 days for employed mothers 
who do not meet contributory requirements needed for the normal Maternity leave 
benefit. Although Maternity leave is not extended in time, except in cases of 
hospitalisation of the baby, generalising the possibility to consolidate the old 
‘breastfeeding leave’ as full-time leave will in practice enable women to extend 
Maternity leave by two to four weeks. Unpaid flexibility is also extended: unpaid 
working time reduction (now from one-eighth to a half of working time) can be 
used until the child is eight years in the private sector or 12 in the public sector, 
instead of six years old; and the unpaid family leave to care for ill relatives has 
been extended from one to two years in the private sector and three years in the 
public sector.  
 
Groups advocating for gender equality (mainly women’s groups, with support of 
trade unions, and men’s groups) created a platform in 2005 to promote the new 
Paternity leave, but wanted it to be longer than the measure approved. This 
platform continues and aims now at developing a leave s
non-transferable rights between men and women (Platform for equal and non–
transferable Parental leave  
www.nodo50.org/plataformapaternidad/en_about/about-us).  
 
 
317

Some groups (e.g. parents in favour of breastfeeding and wanting to spend more 
time with babies, organisations of large families) are asking to extend Maternity 
leave from 16 week to six months, and launched in 2007 a legislative initiative that 
failed, as they had little representation in the Parliament and not much connection 
or support from trade unions.  
 
Even though these legislative reforms continue to introduce many small 
improvements and detailed changes, they still do not address a number of key 
issues: 
ers have a new opportunity to be involved in fathering at home 
weeks, this is a short period to produce structural 
des and practices.  
• 
Leave for usual children’s illnesses is unsolved. Only two days are 
r acute sickness or hospitalisation on behalf of employers. 
 
dencia). The law introduced in mid-2007 a new mechanism for 
tion of informal carers of highly dependent relatives, which 
cept those with severe handicaps or chronic illnesses. In the 
current economic recession the implementation of the dependency law is being 
slowed down, and some of the expected benefits delayed.  
 
General national elections in March 2008 raised the debate on family policy. The 
programmes presented by all parliamentary political parties for the election 
campaign included for the first time proposals to improve Parental leave 
arrangements and ECEC services. These included: one month of Paternity leave 
 
• 
Under usual conditions, the total duration of paid leave around birth (or 
adoption or fostering) by public social security is still only 18 weeks (16 for 
the mother and two for the father that can be used simultaneously), which 
is very short from the perspective of the baby’s health and care. 
• 
Unpaid Parental leave is used by few families (six per cent), and for short 
periods (six months on average). 
• 
Atypical workers (temporary employees, the self-employed and others) are 
inadequately covered. 
• 
Though fath
for at least for two 
changes in attitu
available fo
 
The present Government gives priority to extending centre-based provision of 
early childhood education and care (ECEC), and there has been no coordination 
or connections made between legislation covering leave policy and ECEC 
services.  
 
On the other hand, a connection has been made between leave policy and the 
2006 Law to promote autonomy and care of dependants (Ley 39/2006, de 14 de 
diciembre, de promoción de la autonomía personal y atención a las personas en
situación de depen
he professionalisa
t
includes a €487 monthly wage and social security protection. Users of the leave 
arrangements for family reasons will be able to apply for this benefit, if the relative 
they care for is assessed as highly dependent (RD 615/2007, por el que se regula 
la Seguridad Social de los cuidadores de las personas en situación de 
dependencia). However the logic is rather to activate and somehow to 
‘professionalise’ housewives with low employment opportunities (on average in 
their fifties), rather than to give respite and affordable leave opportunities to 
employees. The law excludes children under three years from the definition of 
dependents, ex
 
318

(PSOE, Socialist Party); six months Maternity leave + three months Paternity 
ave (left-wing/ Green coalition); one year of paid Parental leave at 50 per cent of 
s that civil groups are emerging in favour of family plurality and more 
support for families with children, with new demands such as longer paid leave to 
00,000 new ECEC places for children under three years. Its programme 
lso includes extending Paternity leave by two weeks and unpaid part-time 
 
3. ake-up of leave 
 
a. 
 first 
as 31 per cent. Increased coverage is 
t and better coverage of atypical 
 
b. 
no information on take-up rates. But from March 2007, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
le
previous earnings (centre Christian democrat coalition); and the creation of a 
Family Ministry to review family policy (Popular Party, main right-wing national 
party). Beside
enable babies to spend longer at home, while protecting the family’s employment 
and financial situation.  
 
The Socialist Party won the elections with a working majority. Its social policy for 
families with young children is oriented towards services with a commitment to 
create 3
a
flexibility for parents working in the private sector until children are 12 years old. 
But it does not include any proposal to improve Parental leave. The introduction of 
an earnings-related well-paid and effective Parental leave scheme has an 
important part to play, as the wide range of low flat-rate benefits implemented by 
the regional governments offer unequal access, and cannot promote the principle 
of gender equality. 
T
Maternity leave 
 
Maternity leave benefit covered 71 per cent of the births in 2008 (author’s own 
calculations based on data provided by the Social Security Institute and the 
Spanish Statistical Institute). Coverage has been improving since 1995 (the
year for which data are available) when it w
due both to growing female employmen
employment situations due to regulatory reforms. Fathers share some Maternity 
leave in less than two per cent of cases and in 27.5 per cent of adoption cases. 
Paternity leave 
 
Most fathers are eligible for Paternity leave according to the Labour Force Survey 
data. While payment for fathers taking Paternity leave was made only by 
employers, there was 
fathers receive two weeks payment from Social Security, also covering the self-
employed.  Around 56 per cent of fathers of newborns have used the new 
measure in 2008 (author’s own calculations). The number of men claiming 
Paternity leave benefits is 80 per cent of the number of women receiving Maternity 
leave benefits. 
 
 
319

c. 
rs and 35 per cent of mothers with children under three 
ears old.46  
 
. However it represents only about two per cent of children under three 
years old, a relevant age since leave can be taken until children reach three 
ers, with a median duration of 184 days, and four per cent fathers with 
median duration of 172 days; 36 per cent of fathers and 26 per cent of mothers 
s the use of Parental leave is connected to a 
t (Escobedo and Navarro, 2007).  
 
d. 
07).  
    
Parental leave 
 
In 2007, 57 per cent of employees were eligible for Parental leave, which means 
around 55 per cent of fathe
y
In 2008, 32,038 people started some period of Parental leave; fathers made up 
eight per cent of users. This corresponds to six per cent of the births in that year, 
an increase since 1995 (the first year for which data are available) when it was 1.7 
per cent
years. 
 
Between 1989 and 2005 it has been estimated that 96 per cent of users have 
been moth
used this unpaid Parental leave for less than three months. Eleven per cent of 
user mothers and 25 per cent of user fathers do not return to the same company, 
which means that in these case
change of employmen
 
Qualitative research indicates that users are mainly women after their Maternity 
leave ends, in some cases taking leave for a short period until a childcare 
arrangement is available (for example if the Maternity leave ends in May and a 
place in an early education nursery is only available in September), and in other 
cases for a longer period (Flaquer and Escobedo, 2009). But only 13 per cent of 
users took leave for more than one year in the period studied, 1989 to 2005. 
Other employment-related measures 
 
The fact that Parental leave and working time reduction are not paid limits their 
use, even among those who have a secure job. The influence of payment can be 
seen from the high use made of the fully paid working time reduction of one-third 
of usual working hours for parents of children under one year old, available for 
public employees in Catalonia. Furthermore, this measure has evolved between 
2003 and 2006 towards an equal use between men and women (Escobedo and 
Navarro, 20
 
Otherwise the use of unpaid working time reduction is limited. It has been 
estimated that 32 per cent of formally employed mothers having a first child in 
2003 reduced their working time during some period in the following three years. 
Half of them resumed full-time work after seven months, while one-third (11 per 
cent) remained on part-time employment after three years, when only two per cent 
of the employed mothers had the protected and reversible working time reduction 
                                          
  
 
46 
wn estimate based on Labour Force Survey data from Eurostat and from the Spanish 
tatistical Institute taking into account that only employees with permanent contracts can 
lly benefit from Parental leave, i.e. self-employed, family and temporary workers are 
xcluded. For non-national employees (14 per cent of all employees), an additional barrier 
ay be that they need an employment contract to renew residence permission, but that 
e considered to be non-employed if on Parental leave.  
O
S
fu
e
m
they would b
 
320

on the same working contract they had had at the birth. This can be explained by 
 employment in Spain and by the fact that employers 
er with a child under two years old (Escobedo 
d Navarro, 
 
 
is 
 
4.
lts 
 
a. 
w more data and evaluation 
 
 on a yearly basis since 1995 by the 
 
the high rate of temporary
ave incentives when hiring a moth
h
et al., forthcoming 2009).  
 
Leave to care for dependent relatives has been available from 2001 onwards. It is 
estimated that between 2001 and 2005 about 9,000 employees used it (1,800 per 
year), of whom 82 per cent were women, with a median duration of 62 days, and 
18 per cent men with an median duration of 55 days (Escobedo an
007).  
2
Finally there are no data on the use of short leave in case of acute illness/accident 
of children or relatives, nor on other types of Career breaks. Employers have no
obligation to keep records, and the government has no statistics as no payment 
involved.  
 Selected publications from January 2006, including resu
from research studies   
General overview 
 
Leave arrangements are becoming a research topic in Spain, particularly the use 
of leave arrangements by mothers and fathers, and their impact on gender and 
social equality, in the labour market and on fertility decisions. There has been a 
research fund on Social Protection since 2006, supporting research on leave 
arrangements. Until recently leave policy reforms have been adopted without 
valuation of their impact on use and users; no
e
research are available. In addition, in 2006, the Ministry of Labour created a new 
continuous database with a sample of four per cent of all social security 
contributors with selected data on their work and social security affiliation life 
course (Muestra Continua de Vidas Laborales); results are starting to be 
published as shown below. The database is being improved and is now 
supplemented with tax and household data. It still provides limited information on 
leave arrangements; however, for the first time it does provide detailed information 
about unpaid Parental leave, leave to care for a relative, and working time 
reduction.  
therwise, the few indicators published
O
National Institute of Social Security provide little information (e.g. total social 
security expenditure by region and the number of administrative records initiated 
each year, with the per centage of those for fathers; but with no other information 
such as duration of leave, flexible use or characteristics of users). There is a clear 
data gap on the use and impacts of the various regional flat-rate benefits and full- 
or part-time additional schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
321

b. Selected publications from January 2006, including results 
    
vicios para la primera 
earch 
s.  
 
ing parents and family 
xploratory 
 
 Jurídic. Bellaterra: UAB – Cálamo 
roducciones Editoriales, pp.89-110.  
Examines the origin and consolidation of Maternity leave insurance during the 
second Spanish Republic (1936-39). 
from research studies 
 
Escobedo, A. (2006) ‘El sistema de licencias parentales para el cuidado de 
los menores’ [‘Leave arrangements for the care of minors], in: X. Roigé (ed.) 
Familias de ayer, familias de hoy: Continuidades y cambios en Cataluña 
[Yesterday’s families, today’s families: continuity and change in Catalonia].  
Barcelona: Icaria – Institut Català d’Antropologia, pp.235-264 
A historical overview of the regulation of leave arrangements in Spain. 
 
Balaguer, I. and Arderiu, E. (2007) Calidad de los ser
infancia y estimación de la demanda. Colección: Estudios, 53 [The quality of early 
childhood services and an estimate of demand]. Madrid: Ministerio de Trabajo y 
Asuntos Sociales.  
The book gives an updated and critical overview on how early childhood 
education and care services are developing in Spain. It provides new res
data on non-regulated provision, which has grown in the 2000s in a context of 
changing and decentralised regulation. The book estimates service demand for 
children under three years of age taking into account parental employment trends 
and use of leave arrangement
 
Borràs, V., Torns, T. and Moreno, S. (2007) ‘Las políticas de conciliación: políticas 
laborales versus políticas de tiempo’, Papers Revista de Sociología, No.83: 83-96. 
The article reviews work and family reconciliation policies at company level, their 
limitations, and the stimulus that the European Employment Strategy has
represented in Spain. The authors explore working time policies as explanatory 
drivers for reconciliation policies at company level. 
 
Escobedo, A. and Navarro, L. (2007) Perspectivas de desarrollo y evaluación de 
las políticas de licencias parentales y por motivos familiares en España y en la 
Unión Europa [Perspectives of leave policies for work
reasons in Spain and the EU]. Madrid: Spanish Social Security FIPROS Research 
Fund. Available at: 
www.seg-ocial.es/stpri00/groups/public/documents/binario/097543.pdf E
evaluation of the Spanish system of leave arrangements for family reasons in the 
context of the EU, based on statistical work using a social security affiliated 
sample (Continuous Sample on Working Lives 2004) and on a review of available 
ocumentation and administrative data.  
d
 
Escobedo, A. and Navarro, L. (2007) ‘Una evaluación del sistema de licencias 
parentales y por motivos familiares en España desde la perspectiva de género’ 
[‘Gender evaluation of leave arrangements for working parents and family reasons 
in Spain’]. Working paper presented at the Working Group on Gender at the 
. Barcelona, 15 September 2007.  
Spanish Congress of Sociology
Gala, C. (2007) ‘El seguro obligatorio de maternidad’, in: M. Ysàs, M.J. Espuny, et 
al. (eds.) Segona República i Món
P
 
322

 
Gala, C. (2007) La conciliación de la vida laboral y familiar del personal de las 
entidades locales.[The reconciliation of work and family life by public employees in 
local administration] Estudios de Relaciones Laborales, No.2. Barcelona: 
CEMICAL-Diputación 
de 
Barcelona 
(Consorci 
Estudis 
i 
Mediació 
de 
nd collective bargaining at the 
vel of local administration all over Spain in the field of reconciliation of work and 
arasa, S., Baizán, P., González, M.J., Jódar, P. and Lapuerta, I. (2007) Equidad 
en under 
ree years old and their families in the European Union. Bellaterra: Universitat 
nd individualised leave 
 the perspective of law, philosophy and 
political science – to contrast the conceptualisation of motherhood and fatherhood 
 en el siglo XXI. Colección: Estudios de Hacienda Pública. [Economy and 
ender equality: challenges for the public finances in the 21st century]. Madrid: 
Estudios 
Fiscales. 
Available 
at 
ion/Temas/Genero/Libro_Genero.pdf
l’Administració Local, Diputació Barcelona).  
This book is based on a study of the regulations a
le
family life, which mostly relates to leave arrangements. (There is also a Catalan 
version focusing on the situation in Catalonia published as Estudis de Relacions 
Laborals, No.4. CEMICAL, Diputació de Barcelona.) 
 
S
distributiva en el acceso a los recursos de tiempo en España: El caso de las 
excedencias para atender a la primera infancia y a familiares dependientes. 
Madrid: Spanish Social Security FIPROS Research Fund. Available at:  
www.seg-ocial.es/stpri00/groups/public/documents/binario/113296.pdf 
Report of research that analyses social inequality in access to time resources and 
policies in Spain, focusing on the case of unpaid Parental leave and unpaid leave 
to care-dependent relatives.  
 
Escobedo, A. (2008) Leave policies and public systems of care for childr
th
Autònoma de Barcelona Departament de Sociologia, Facultat de Ciències 
Polítiques i de Sociologia. 
Doctoral dissertation examining how, from the 1970s, gender-neutral family-
related leave has been in development in Europe as a key element in emerging 
care and work arrangements in society. Earnings-related a
arrangements represent a societal option towards constructing a right to care and 
the development of a universal adult breadwinner-and-caregiver citisen, 
underpinning the emerging post-industrial family system. 
 
Igareda, N. et al. (2008) From maternity protection towards a care legislation. 
Madrid: Spanish Social Security FIPROS Research Fund. Available at: 
www.seg-ocial.es/stpri00/groups/public/documents/binario/115785.pdf 
Final report of research – conducted from
in the leave policies and in Spanish society.  
 
Pazos, M. (ed.) (2008) Economía e igualdad de género: retos de la Hacienda 
Pública
g
Instituto 
de 
ww.ief.es/Investigac
w
Contributions to a seminar organised by a research institute of the Spanish 
Ministry of Public Finances including analyses of Parental leave, early education 
and care policies, and gender equality, particularly based on Sweden and Spain, 
but with other international references.  
 
 
323

Zufiaur, J.M., Meil, G., Moreno, M.C., Tobío, C. and Frades, J. et al. (2008) Hacia 
un nuevo modelo de protección a las familias en España. Madrid: Spanish Social 
Security 
FIPROS 
Research 
Fund. 
Available 
at: 
www.seg-
mal Work: The 
Hidden Work Regime in Europe. New York: Routledge, pp.143-168. 
use and duration of Parental leave in 
Spain, based on the Continuous Sample on Working Lives. The results suggest 
is de cambios y 
discontinuidades a partir de la muestra continua de vidas laborales [Employment
paths and trajectories for mothers and fathers living in households with under 3s]. 
Madrid: Spanish Social Security FIPROS Research Fund.  
The report is based on a longitudinal analysis between 2002-2006 of the 
Continuous Sample on Working Lives using an event history approach, and 
focuses on households with a first child born in 2003. It characterises patterns of 
employment continuity and discontinuity, including the use of leave arrangements 
and work-time reduction for childcare purposes or the use of unemployment 
benefits. It also includes a comparative analysis of the European Labour Force 
Survey on the employment impact of parenthood according to gender, educational 
attainment, number and age of children. 
 
Wall, K. and Escobedo, A. (forthcoming 2009) ‘Portugal and Spain: two pathways 
in Southern Europe’, in: S. Kamerman and P. Moss (eds.) The politics of parental 
leave policies: Children, parenting, gender and the labour market. Bristol: Policy 
Press. 
 
c. Ongoing research 
 
Evaluation of the Catalan Law on conciliation of personal, family and labour life of 
the personnel working for the administration of the Government of Catalonia 
(2007-2009). Anna Escobedo, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. 
The project examines the use of the supplementary measures introduced by the 
Catalan government in April 2002 in the public sector. A second stage is 
social.es/Internet_1/Estadistica/Documentacion/FondodeInvestigacio48073/Estudi
osFIPROS/estudios2007fipros/index.htm  
This report presents and discusses the Spanish model of family policy, including 
services, leave arrangements and family benefits.  
 
Flaquer, L. and Escobedo, A. (2009) 'The metamorphosis of informal work in 
Spain: family solidarity, female immigration and development of social rights', in: 
B. Pfau-Effinger, L. Flaquer and P. Jensen (eds.) Formal and Infor
 
Lapuerta, I., Baizán, P. and González, M.J. (2009) ‘Tiempo para cuidar, tiempo 
para trabajar: análisis del uso y la duración de la licencia parental en España’, in:  
V. Navarro (ed.)  La situación social en España. V.III. Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva.  
This paper analyses the extent to which individual characteristics, the workplace 
situation, and regional policies influence the 
that the Spanish Parental leave scheme increases gender and social inequalities, 
as it reinforces gender role specialisation and supports the reconciliation of work 
and family life among workers with a good position in the labour market. 
 
Escobedo, A., Navarro, L. and Flaquer, L. (forthcoming 2009) Itinerarios laborales 
de madres y padres en hogares con menores de 3 años. anális
 
 
324

envisaged, based on qualitative methodology and a more in-depth approach. 
.Escobedo@uab.es  
ing working hours: employment decisions after childbirth in Spain 
 Universidad Pública de Navarra. 
 transition from full-time employment to working time 
ased on a large sample of parents who had a child 
d June 2007 An event history approach is used with a 
fferent 
uction 
xt matter in Spain? The effects of flat rate be
n 
 Irene Lapuerta, Uni
d P
 
 leave in Spain has
me
vide 
ulating its 
e re
ses to 
in the vari
in Pa
ontact: irene.lapuerta@unavarra.es
as e iguald
 gé
010). 
 Complutens
versi
 about Welfare States and Gender Equality, with a focus 
leave policies, other work
 po
arket 
fit system  can help to iden
lfare
rns from 
en@singenerodedudas.com 
 
Contact: Anna
 
Parents’ reduc
(2008-09). Irene Lapuerta,
The aim is to analyse the
reduction after childbirth b
between January 2005 an
. 
competing risk model whereby a person can make a transition to three di
destinations: employment with time reduction; employment without time red
or withdrawal from paid work. Contact: 
 
irene.lapuerta@unavarra.es
Does the regional conte
nefits o
ública de Navarra. 
parental leave use (2008-2009).
The limited take-up of Parental
versida
 led so
 regions to pro
flat-rate benefits with the objective of stim
what extend these regional policies expla
use. Th
search analy
ation 
rental leave use in 
Spain. C
 
Estado de bienestar, políticas públic
Doctoral thesis by Carmen Castro at the
ad de
nero (2008-2
e Uni
ty, Madrid. 
This doctoral research is
on how the combination 
-family
licies, labor m
regulations and tax-bene
s
a gender perspective. Contact: carm
tify we
 state patte
 
 
325

  
2.27 
S
Lin a
uvander and Philip Hwang 
 
Total Fertilit
GD
p
2005 
9.0 million 
weden 
 
 Haas, Anders Chronholm, Ann-Zofie D
d
Population (UNDP) 
y Rate (UNDP) 
P er capita (UNDP) 
2000/5 
2005 
1.7 
32,525 PPP US$ 
Fem l
   A %
% of e
ent gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2007 
2004 
  9.5 per cent 
19.7 per cent 
     4% points 
a
s 
 male rate (UNDP) 
mployed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
2005 
 
58.7 per cent 
87 per cent 
 
e economic activity (UNDP) 
   Men 
   Women  
Gender employm
Employment
   W h
er cent 
81.3 per cent 
 rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
it  child under 3 years 
 
2005 
 
71.9 p
   With child aged 3-5 years 
2005 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
3rd          
Attendance 
47
   C ld
   C
d
27) per cent 
at formal services (ECB)
hi ren under 3 years 
 
2006 
 
44 (
hil ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
92 (58) per cent 
 
a. 
havandeskapspenning) 
(responsibility 
of 
the 
 
er or not to take part of the paid parental insurance benefit 
take indefinite leave paid at 80 
 to the foetus and no other work can be made 
a
inju
 
 
 
                                                
1. Current leave and other employment-related policies to  
    support parents 
 
Maternity 
leave 
(
Ministry of Social Affairs) 
It is obligatory for women to take two weeks leave before or after delivery; they 
can decide wheth
eriod of leave. Pregnant women can 
during this p
per cent of earnings if a job is a risk
available. If a job is physically demanding and therefore hard for a pregnant 
woman to perform, she is eligible to take up to 50 days of leave during the last 60 
d ys of pregnancy) paid at 80 per cent of income if they work in jobs considered 
rious or involving risk to the foetus. See footnote for Parental leave. 
 
47 The attendance rate in 2007 was 86 per cent for children aged one to five years; 78 per 
cent for children children aged one to three years and 98 per cent for four and five year olds 
(source: Skolverket). 
 
326

b. Paternity leave (pappadagar Ledighet och ersättning i samband med 
barns födelse) (responsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs)  
Length
 
• 
u
over in the
te in 
c
s home. 
ing 
leave).  
employed make contributions for this purpose and the government 
 
Fle
i
 
• 
 
Eli
il
 
• 
 of time in employment. 
 
The benefit is gender neutral, being for the second parent or another close 
Va
ti
poor h
person
 
•  
 
c. Par
oc
)  
y days of paid leave. Sixty days are reserved for the 
 
 
 
 of leave  
Ten days (+ 60 days = fathers’ quota, see ‘Parental leave’). Designed to be 
sed to attend delivery, care for other children while mother is in hospital, stay 
 hospital in a family room after childbirth and/or participa
hildcare when the mother come
 
Payment and fund
 
• 
Eighty per cent of earnings up to a ceiling of SEK321,000 (€29,862) per year 
(see footnote for Parental 
• 
Payments come from the Swedish Social Insurance Agency; employers and 
the self-
meets any shortfall.   
xib lity in use 
Can be used at any time during the first 60 days after childbirth.  
gib ity (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
All employees are eligible, irrespective
•
person if the second parent is unknown. 
 
ria on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
 other than the mother 
Leave is doubled for fathers of twins. 
ental leave (föräldraförsäkring) (responsibility of the Ministry of 
ial Affairs
S
 
Length of leave (before and after birth) 
 
 
Four hundred and eight
•
mother (mammamånader or a ‘mother’s quota’) and 60 days reserved for the 
father (pappamånader or a ‘father’s quota’). Out of the remaining 360 days 
half are reserved for each parent; if days are transferred from one parent to 
another, the parent giving up his or her days must sign a consent form. 
• 
In addition, each parent is entitled to take unpaid leave until a child is 18 
months. 
 
 
327

Pa ment and funding 
 of earnings up to a 
ceiling of SEK428,000 per year (€39,817) (2009); the remaining 90 days at a 
• 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
full time, half time, quarter time or one-eighth 
time, with the length of leave extended accordingly (e.g. one day of full-time 
leave and four days of quarter-time 
leave in one continuous period or as several blocks of time. 
 Parental leave has the right to stay away from work for a 
Eligib
 Parental leave, but paid leave at 80 per cent of 
SEK180 a day for 
 
Varia
poor 
pe
o
 
Families with multiple births are entitled to additional paid leave (in the case of 
twins, an additional 90 days at 80 per cent of earnings and 90 days at a flat 
rate of SEK180 a day; for every further child, an additional 180 days at 80 per 
    
y
 
• 
For eligible parents (see below), 390 days at 80 per cent
flat-rate payment of SEK180 a day (€17). A special formula has been 
introduced (1 January 2008), reducing earnings by three per cent before 
counting the 80 per cent of earnings. This applies to all parts of the parental 
insurance48.  Non-eligible parents receive SEK180 a day for 480 days.  
Funding as for Paternity leave. 
Flexibility in use  
• 
The length of leave is counted in days (rather than weeks or months) to 
enhance flexibility of use. 
Paid and unpaid leave can be combined to enable parents to stay at home 
longer. 
Paid leave can be taken at any time until a child’s eighth birthday or   the end 
of the first school year. 
Parents can take paid leave 
leave becomes two days of half-time 
leave). 
• 
Parents can take 
An employee taking
maximum of three periods each year. 
 
ility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
All parents are entitled to paid
earnings requires parents to have had an income of over 
240 days before the expected date of delivery or adoption. A parent remains 
qualified to the same level of Parental leave if an additional child is born or 
adopted within 30 months of the birth or adoption of an earlier child; this is 
economically significant mainly to parents who reduce working hours (and 
income) after the first child. This is commonly referred to as the ‘speed 
premium’. 
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parents 
rs
 
•
cent of earnings). 
• 
If only one parent has custody of the child, he or she can use all the Parental 
leave days. 
                                             
he payment of all types of leave at 80
48 T
 per cent of earnings is reduced by three per cent, 
o that the actual level received is 77.6 per cent of earnings. 
s
 
328

 
Additional note (e.g. leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
agree
 
• 
collective bargaining 
agreements in the public sector and is becoming more commonplace in the 
pays ten 
 
d. 
 
eously with Parental leave and is 
 
e. 
Ad
Tim
 Temporary Parental leave (tillfällig föräldrapenning) is available at 120 days per 
en under the age of 12, and for children aged 12 to 15 
e. This is paid at 80 per cent of earnings; it is a family 
t can be used to care for sick children. Sixty of these days also 
stay home with young children if the regular caregiver is sick. 
 
me under this 
category of temporary Parental leave. 
 
 
 
                                                
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
Parental leave pay has already been negotiated in 
private sector.  A common collective agreement is that the employer 
per cent extra under the ceiling (i.e. workers receive 90 per cent of earnings)
and up to 90 per cent above the ceiling (Lindquist and Wadensjö, 2005).49 
 
Childcare leave or career breaks 
• 
In 2008, a municipal child-raising allowance (vårdnadsbidrag) was reinstituted. 
Municipalities may provide a benefit of up to SEK3,000 (€279) per month for 
parents with a child aged one to three years who do not use publicly-funded 
childcare services and for whose child 250 days of Parental leave are used. 
The allowance cannot be used simultan
conditional on the other adult in the household (not necessarily the other 
parent) working or studying.    
Other employment-related measures  
 
option leave and pay 
 
• Cohabiting adoptive parents get five days each at the time of adoption; a single 
adoptive parent gets ten days, considered to be part of temporary (paid) 
Parental leave (tillfällig föräldraledighet) (see below). 
 
e off for the care of dependants 
 
•
child per year for childr
with a doctor’s certificat
entitlement and i
can be used to 
Since 2001, it can be offered to someone outside the family, if they are an 
eligible person in the social insurance system, to care for a sick child if parents 
cannot miss work. The ten days ‘pappadagar’ (see 1b) also co
 
nomi 
Available 
at: 
49 Lindquist, G. S. and Wadensjö, E. (2005) Inte bara socialförsäkringar – Komplettrande 
ersättningar vid inkomstbortfall.  Rapport till expertgruppen för studier i samhällseko
[Not only social insurance – complementary income replacement at loss of income. Report 
to 
the 
expert 
group 
for 
studies 
in 
national 
economy, 
2005:2]. 
Stockholm: 
Regeringskansliet, 
Finansdepartementet. 
www.regeringen.se/sb/d/5225/a/52073
 
 
329

Flexible working  
 
• Until a child reaches the age of eight years or completes the first grade of 
school parents have the right to reduce their normal working time by up to 25 
per cent; there is no payment for working reduced hours. 
 
. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
currently under discussion) 
 
ination cannot begin until a parent has returned to 
50
 
re equally between the mother and the father of the child; this measure 
3. 
 
 
 
 
                                                
2
    developments (including proposals 
In 2006, an amendment to Parental leave legislation strengthened Parental leave 
rights by prohibiting employers from refusing an applicant a job on the grounds 
that the person wants to take leave in the future.  An amendment to the Security 
of Employment Act in 2006 protects individuals on Parental leave from layoffs 
during their leave; notice of term
work  (Jämställdhets Ombudsmannen, 2006
); this rule, however, does not apply 
to jobs that are considered to be short term.   
 
In September 2006, a centre-right government was elected. This government 
introduced several changes in 2008. In January, a reduction of three per cent was 
applied to the benefit payment made for leave previously set at 80 per cent of 
earnings; this cost-cutting exercise effectively reduced the payment level to 77.6 
per cent. The government also proposed a ‘gender equality bonus’ 
(jämställdhetsbonus) to offer an economic incentive for families to divide Parental 
leave mo
went into effect in July 2008. The bonus offers the parent who has stayed at home 
the longest a bonus when she/he goes back to work and the other parent uses the 
Parental leave. This also applies to parents who do not live together. The bonus is 
likely to encourage low (and medium) income fathers to take more Parental 
leave.51 Also in 2008, a municipal child-raising allowance (vårdnadsbidrag) was 
reinstituted.  
 
Take-up of leave 
 
a. Maternity leave 
 
Between 1994 and 2004, around 25 per cent of pregnant women took pre-birth 
leave for an average of 38 days (Reformerad Försäkring, 2005).52  
 
50 JämO [Jämställdhetsombudsmannen - Gender equality ombudsman] (2006).  Pappornas 
A.-Z. (2008) Hur påverkar jämställdhetsbonus och vårdnadsbidrag 
gskassan, 2006-06-09.   
5:73. 
föräldraledighet ökar långsammare, January 17. Available at: www.jamombud.se.news. 
51 Duvander, 
barnfamiljernas ekonomi? [How will the Equality Bonus and Child-raising Allowance affect 
families’ economic situations?] Försäkrin
52 Reformerad försäkring [Reformed social insurance] (2005) Statens offentliga utredningar 
[Official government reports], 200
 
330

b. 
gures exist on the proportion of 
 childrearing benefit 
 
ays used by men has 
ion of a father’s quota in 1995 (one month) and its extension 
 
 
thers.  Fathers who work in the 
d. 
    
Paternity leave 
 
In 2004, about 80 per cent of fathers took Paternity leave, for an average of 9.7 
days out of the ten days available (ibid.). It should be noted that only employed 
fathers are eligible for Paternity leave, and no fi
eligible fathers using this leave.  
 
c. arental leave and
P
 
Almost all families use paid Parental leave in Sweden today. Although it is 
possible to use this benefit until a child reaches the age of eight years or the first 
school year is ended, the majority of parents take the main part of the leave 
before their child reaches the age of two (all children are entitled to a childcare 
place from 12 months of age).  
Ninety per cent of fathers of children born in 1998 took Parental leave, mainly 
starting when their children were 13 to 15 months of age.  Mothers, however, still 
take most Parental leave, although the proportion of total d
been increasing. In 1987, fathers took about seven per cent of total Parental leave 
days that year; by 2008, it had increased to 21.5 per cent (Försäkringskassan, 
00853). The introduct
2
in 2002 (to two months) have both led to more fathers taking more leave; the
second month had a less dramatic effect than the first (Reformerad försäkring, 
200554). 
Fathers with more education take more Parental leave, as do fathers whose 
partners have higher levels of education and higher income. Fathers taking no 
leave are more likely to have been born outside Sweden but the foreign-born 
fathers who use leave use longer leave than Swedish-born fathers. Unemployed 
fathers generally take less leave than other fa
public sector are more likely to take leave, perhaps because they get more 
compensation as a result of collective bargaining. Fathers are more likely to take 
Parental leave for a first child (ibid
 
.).
 
Other employment-related measures 
 
Mothers are more likely than fathers to work part-time hours; 50 per cent of 
employed mothers with two children with the youngest being one to two years old 
worked part-time in 2005, compared to only seven per cent of employed fathers 
(Statistiska Centralbyrån, 200755). However, no official statistics are kept 
concerning whether parents working part time are using their entitlement to work 
reduced hours, or whether they were working in part-time jobs to begin with.   
 
                                             
53 
Ag
54 
utredningar 
[Of
55 
men].  Available at: www.scb.se 
Försäkringskassans årsredovisning 2008 [Annual report of Swedish Social Insurance 
ency], 2008.  
Reformerad försäkring [Reformed social insurance] (2005) Statens offentliga 
ficial government reports] 2005:73.   
Statististika Centralbyrån (2007) På tal om kvinnor och män [Talking about women and 
 
331

When temporary Parental leave is used to care for sick children, it is more often 
used by mothers (64.4 per cent of days taken in 2008) (Försäkringskassan, 2008). 
 Research and publications on leave and o
 
4.
ther employment-
 
a. 
 
b. 
06, including results from 
nd second births for parents with different 
vels of education. However, foreign-born parents did not change their fertility 
 
 
 
tions’ during economic 
ownturns; it is posited that Parental leave policy where eligibility is based on a 
icy has not affected the negative impact 
 sector and 
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
The research conducted during the three decades of Swedish Parental leave has 
mainly focused on comparing mothers’ and fathers’ use of Parental leave, as a 
major issue has been the unequal sharing of Parental leave days between women 
and men.  Over time, the impact of Parental leave on various outcomes, notably 
fertility, has received increased attention. During recent years the costs of 
roviding payments for parents taking leave has also been in focus; as part of this 
p
debate, misuse of various insurance payments has been investigated, among 
them the payment to parents taking leave to care for sick children (see for 
example Engström et al., 2006, below).  
Selected publications from January 20
research studies   
 
Andersson, G., Hoem, J. and Duvander, A. (2006) ‘Social differentials in speed-
premium effects in childbearing in Sweden’, Demographic Research, Vol.14: 51-
70.  
Research on the so called ‘speed-premium’ in Parental leave indicates evidence 
for a causal effect of this policy change on childbearing behaviour. In general, it 
shortened the interval between first a
le
behaviour as much as Swedish-born parents.   
Björklund, A. (2006) ‘Does family policy affect fertility? Lessons from Sweden’, 
Journal of Population Economics, Vol.19: 3-24. 
Data on completed fertility of Swedish women born 1925-1958 are compared with 
women in six other European societies to investigate the impact of Parental leave 
as a type of economic incentive to bear children. Contrary to common belief, 
Swedish women’s tendency to practise close spacing of children appears to be a 
long-term historical tendency, unrelated to leave policy which allows women to 
take leave without going back to work for a second child if children are born close 
together. Swedish fertility rates dipped below other na
d
full year of prior employment reduces births in the short term; individuals wait until 
they can work to qualify for the most generous compensation.  Over time, the 
steadily more generous Parental leave pol
education still has on women’s fertility rates in Sweden.   
 
Bygren, M. and Duvander, A. (2006) ‘Parents’ workplace situation and fathers’ 
Parental leave use’, Journal of Marriage and Family, Vol.68: 363-372.   
Data from Statistics Sweden on couples’ use of Parental leave in Stockholm in 
1997 showed that fathers took less leave if they worked in the private
 
332

in smaller workplaces.  Fathers’ leave-taking was greater when both fathers and 
. 
rching the 
oderately long leave on a couple’s second- and third-birth 
ropensity, but no such effect of a father's taking very long Parental leave.  
se of temporary parental benefits for the 
g [Institute 
 analysis uses 1999 government data from 34,416 households 
r the income ceiling for 
ompensation, the researcher recommends the raising of the income ceiling to 
role labour unions have played in both of these areas also is detailed.  
their partners worked at workplaces where fathers had taken leave previously
They conclude that employers need to be considered when resea
gender-based division of childcare in Swedish families.    
 
Duvander, A. and Andersson, G.  (2006)  ‘Gender equality and fertility in Sweden: 
a study on the impact of the father’s uptake of Parental leave on continued 
childbearing’, Marriage and Family Review, Vol.39, No.3-4: 121-242.    
This article examines the relationship between the father’s and the mother’s use 
of leave and the continued childbearing of a couple, based on longitudinal 
information on registered Parental leave use and childbearing of all intact 
partnerships in Sweden during 1988-99. The authors found a positive effect of a 
father’s taking m
p
 
Engström, P., Hesselius, P. and Persson, M. (2006) Överutnyttjande i tillfällig 
föräldrapenning för vård av barn [Misu
care of children]. IFAU-Institutet för arbetsmarknadspolitisk utvärderin
for 
Labour 
Market 
Evaluation]: 
Rapport 
2006:9. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ifau.se/upload/pdf/se/2006/r06-09.pdf
This report analyses data on suspected cheating regarding the use of temporary 
Parental leave, used typically to care for sick children. A previous study found a 
lower rate, between six and ten per cent.  This time parents’ use of sick days was 
compared to attendance records at childcare and schools; if the child was in 
attendance and the parent took a sick day, misuse was recorded.  The result 
shows that up to 22.5 per cent of the paid benefit probably is used by parents who 
do not follow the rules, with men more likely than women to misuse this benefit – 
28 per cent compared to 19 per cent. 
 
Amilon, A. (2007) ‘On the sharing of temporary Parental leave: the case of 
Sweden’, Review of Economics of Households, Vol.5:385-404. 
This economic
containing two employed parents and at least one child under 12, where at least 
one day of temporary leave was taken.  Results showed more equal sharing of 
temporary leave in households where women had more socio-economic 
resources which appear likely to lead to their having more bargaining power; 
these resources included education, current income and future income.  Since 
couples shared less when fathers’ incomes were ove
c
ensure more equal sharing of temporary Parental leave.   
 
Carlson, L. (2007) Searching for equality: sex discrimination, Parental leave and 
the Swedish model with comparisons to EU, UK and US law. PhD thesis. 
University of Stockholm. Uppsala: Iustus. 
This law dissertation compares the Swedish approach to the problem of economic 
equality to the approaches found in EU, UK and US law.  The focus is on 
describing the development of equal treatment and equal pay legislation that 
promotes economic independence of women through paid work as well as 
Parental leave policy that encourages men to do more unpaid family work. The 
 
333

 
Chronholm, A. (2007) ‘Fathers’ experience of shared Parental leave in Sweden’, 
: Articuler vie familiale et vie professionelle: une entrée par les pères. 
uvander, A. and Evertsson, M. (2007) Föräldraledighet och arbetslivskarriär – en 
rafiska rapporter 2007:3.  Stockholm: Statistiska centralbyrån.   
aas, L. and Hwang, P.  (2007)  ‘Gender and organizational culture – correlates 
igates the influence of two ideologies about gender, the doctrine 
eyer, A. (2007) Studies on the Swedish parental insurance. PhD thesis. Lund:  
ental leave is discussed from a 
chances of 
dvancement in the labour market. The third focuses on what influences parents’ 
satisfaction with the sharing of Parental leave. If parents’ labour market situation 
in
Recherches sociologiques et anthropologiques, No.2, 2007. Louvain-La-Neuve: 
Université catholique de Louvain. 
This article focuses on a study of fathers who had taken more than four months of 
paid Parental leave. It gives a description of both the background to their decision 
to take a long period of Parental leave and their experiences during their leave. 
The study showed that both parents wanted to share the leave and that many 
couples had decided to do so before the child was born. A majority of the fathers 
were very positive and stressed both the importance of getting a close relation to 
their child and the possibilities for the mother of the child to be able to get back to 
work or studies. 
 
D
studie av mammors vägar i arbetslivet [Parental leave and careers – a study of 
mothers’ progress in the labor market]. 
Demog
Using longitudinal data from the Swedish Level of Living Survey, 1974-2000, 
research on 1,459 women revealed that women take longer Parental leave with 
first and second children than they do with later children; women take longer leave 
when they have a less prestigious job and when they work in the public sector.  
Taking longer leave (19 months or more) was associated with women’s lesser 
likelihood of being promoted to more prestigious jobs.  Women were also less 
likely to be promoted after taking leave if they returned from staying home with a 
third or later child, if they had less education, and if they worked in the public 
sector. The study was not able to identify if employer attitudes played a role in 
women’s likelihood of promotion after leave.   
 
H
of companies’ responsiveness to fathers in Sweden’, Gender & Society, Vol.21, 
No.1: 52-79.   
This article invest
of separate spheres and masculine hegemony, on the responsiveness to fathers 
shown by Sweden’s 200 largest corporations in 1993. ‘Father friendliness’ was 
measured with 16 items, many concerning fathers’ access to Parental leave.  
Father-friendly companies had adopted values associated with the private sphere 
and prioritised women’s entrance into the public sphere. 
 
M
Department of Economics, Lund University. 
This dissertation contains three essays on different aspects of Swedish parental 
insurance. In the first, the sharing of temporary Par
gender perspective showing that men in general have stronger bargaining power 
than women. The second features a comparison of single and cohabiting mothers’ 
use of temporary Parental leave, showing that single mothers with higher 
educational levels take less temporary Parental leave to improve their 
a
 
334

largely influences the sharing of leave, they are less likely to be satisfied than if 
other reasons are given. 
 
Månsdotter, A., Lindholm, L., and Winkvist, A. (2007) ‘Paternity leave in Sweden – 
costs, savings and health gains’, Health Policy, Vol.82: 102-115.  
Analysing male mortality rates for men who took paid Parental leave in 1978, 
researchers found that men who took leave had a 16 per cent lower risk of death; 
men who took 31-60 days had a lower risk of 25 per cent, and men who took 61-
90 days had a 29 per cent lower risk. Men who took more than 90 days did not 
have a lower risk. These findings controlled for age, income, education and 
country of birth. The researchers speculate that men taking leave may have more 
healthy lifestyles (e.g. decreased alcohol consumption) and lower divorce rates.  
he longer, healthier lives of men seem likely to offset the costs of the Parental 
ay, with the mother taking as much as she can, 
since fathers tend to make more money than mothers. Working-lass fathers’ lower 
atherhood as a 
 
Haas, L. and Hwang, P. (2008) ‘The impact of taking Parental leave on fathers' 
participation in childcare and ties with children: lessons from Sweden’, 
Community, Work & Family, Vol.11, No.3: 85-104. 
This article investigates whether taking Parental leave is associated with fathers' 
greater responsibility for childcare and closer ties with children. The findings 
suggest that positive effects of leave-taking on fathers’ participation in childcare 
occur more often when fathers have taken 90 days or more of leave.   
 
T
leave programme. 
 
Plantin, L. (2007) ‘Different classes, different fathers? On fatherhood, economic 
conditions and class in Sweden’, Community, Work & Family, Vol.10, No.1: 93-
110.   
A qualitative study of 30 couples found that parents under economic pressure – 
from being unemployed, involuntarily working part-time, as well as from instability 
in the labour market and cutback in welfare benefits – often choose to divide 
Parental leave in a traditional w
likelihood of taking Parental leave is seen as a reaction to this economic pressure 
as well as differences in the social construction of fatherhood by class; middle-
class fathers were more likely than working-cass fathers to see f
‘radical experience’, a ‘reflexive project’, and an opportunity to develop 
themselves (an emphasis on government campaigns to urge fathers to take 
leave). 
 
Almqvist, A.-L. (2008) ‘Why most Swedish fathers and few French fathers use 
paid Parental leave: an exploratory qualitative study of parents’, Fathering, Vol.6, 
No.3: 192-200.   
An interview study of 20 French couples and 35 Swedish couples revealed that 
Swedish men tended to exhibit a ‘child-oriented masculinity’, and reported that 
how parents took leave was a matter for negotiation. French men, on the other 
hand, exhibited traditional ‘hegemonic masculinity’, and did not see taking leave 
as an option.  In both settings, the family’s economic situation played a role in how 
much leave men took.   
 
335

Haas, L. and
Parental leave
Council on Fa
 Hwang, C.-P. (2008) ‘Trade union support for fathers’ taking 
 in Sweden’, Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National 
mily Relations, Little Rock, USA.   
Swedish companies suggests 
g the norm of the traditional 
id Parental leave, through 
fathers about legal rights, 
 
negotiating 
contracts 
offering 
additional 
hers. Unions more actively promoted fathers’ 
 dominated
bership and
 
ty and union responsiveness to me
 
worlds? Fatherhood and
ity in 
Fathering, Vol.6, No.1: 20-38.   
in 13 national campaigns t
 
taking Parental leave in Sweden (most waged by 
ocial 
portraye
rms of their ‘identities, 
 results suggest that images of 
n progressive, only recently have these 
 a more radical shared resp
y of men for childcare 
oice). 
 ‘Consequences o  fathers’ Parental leave use: 
n’, in: I. Söderling (ed.) Finnish Year
tion 
lation Research Institute, pp.51-6
Fathers’ Parental leave use is often assumed to affect gender equality both at 
out in 2003 with a sample of approximately 4,000 parents 
arch question is whether fathers who have used 
arental leave are more likely to have shorter working hours during their children’s 
ave not used the leave; the second question 
 whether the contact between separated fathers and their children is associated 
Par
ter working hours later in the child’s life 
nd more contact between separated fathers and their children.  
This 2006 study of 254 local unions in large private 
that one-fourth to one-third of unions are challengin
(male) worker by promoting fathers sharing pa
prioritizing working fathers’ concerns  educating 
,
facilitating use 
of 
leave, 
and
compensation for leave-taking fat
participation in Parental leave when m
and when membe
en
 mem
 leadership
r activi
high.  
mbers’ concerns were
 
Klinth, R. (2008) ‘The best of both 
 gender equal
Swedish Paternity leave campaigns, 1976-2000, 
This qualitative study of material used 
o promote
the National S
fathers’ 
Insurance Office) examines how men are 
rights, and responsibilities as par
d in te
ents’.  While
fathers in these campaigns have bee
publicity efforts promoted
onsibilit
(rather than freedom of ch
 
Duvander, A. and Jans, A. (2009)
f
evidence from Swede
book of Popula
Research, Helsinki: The Popu
2.  
home and in the labour market, while in the home, fathers’ Parental leave is 
expected to improve father-child contact later on in the child’s life. In this study, 
using a survey carried 
of children born in 1993 and 1999, the associations between fathers’ Parental 
leave use and further adaption to family life and contact with children are 
investigated. The first rese
P
first years compared to fathers who h
is
with the father’s previous Parental leave use. The findings indicate that fathers’ 
ental leave is associated with both shor
a
 
336

2.28 
Marga
Popula
Total F
GDP p
United Kingdom 
 
ret O’Brien and Peter Moss 
 
tion (UNDP) 
ertility Rate (UNDP) 
er capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
60.2 million 
1.7 
33,238 PPP US$ 
Femal
   A %
% o e
   Men 
   Wom
Ge
e economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
2005 
55.2 per cent 
s 
 male rate (UNDP) 
f mployed working part time (OECD/F) 
en  
2005 
 
2007 
2007 
80 per cent 
 
  9.9 per cent 
38.6 per cent 
nder employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2004 
10% points 
Em
   With
   With
2005 
58.3 per cent 
ployment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
 child under 3 years 
 child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
 
52.6 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
13th        
Attendance at formal services (ECB) 
   Children under 3 years 
   Children 3-5 years (inclusive
 
2006 
 
33 (5) per cent 
) 
2006 
89 (24) per cent 
 
1. urrent leave and other employment-related policies to 
a. 
at
 
Length
 
eks. The 
 unpaid. 
 
 
 
                                                
C
support parents 
 
M
ernity leave (responsibility of the Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills56) 
 of leave (before and after birth) 
 
• 
Fifty-two weeks. A woman can start to take her leave from the beginning of the 
eleventh week before her baby is due. 
 
Pa ment and funding 
 
y
 
Ninety per cent of woman’s average earnings for six weeks with no ceiling + a
flat-rate payment of £117.18 (approximately €150) for 33 we
•
remaining 13 weeks are
 
 
56 See page 86 for discussion of responsibility of Department of Work and Pensions for 
maternity pay 
 
337

Flexibility in use 
 
• 
None except for when leave can be started before birth. 
who meet a 
minimum earnings test, are eligible for ‘Statutory Maternity Pay’ (SMP) 
ngs, whichever is the lesser.  
 
Women who are not eligible for SMP (e.g. have recently left work, changed j  
r are self-employed and have worked for 26 weeks out of the 66 
preceding the expected week of childbirth) may be eligible for a Maternity 
Contributions (NICs) from 
employers and employees. It is paid by employers who are reimbursed by HM 
 
Variati
poor h
 or delegation of leave to 
erson other than the mother 
(e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
agreements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
• 
imum. For example, 
in 2007, 53 per cent of workplaces with five or more employees offered extra-
utory Maternity leave and 16 per cent provided higher than the minimum 
Maternity pay (Hayward et al., 2007).  
b. aternity leave (responsibility of the for Department for Business, 
nd Skills) 
Le
h
 
T
f the child’s life. 
F
• F
 
 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
All women employees are eligible for 26 weeks ‘Ordinary Maternity leave’ 
(OML) plus a further 26 weeks of ‘Additional Maternity leave’ (AML). Women 
employees and employed earners who have worked for their employer for 26 
weeks, into the fifteenth week before the baby is due, and 
consisting of six weeks’ payment at 90 per cent of average weekly earnings, 
with no ceiling, plus 33 weeks of flat-rate payment at £117.18 (€150) a week 
or 90 per cent of earni
•
jobs, o
Allowance of 39 weeks at the flat rate of £117.18. 
• 
SMP is financed through National Insurance 
Revenue & Customs. 
on in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
ealth or disability of child or mother; lone parent)
p
 
• None. 
 
Additional note 
 
Many employers’ provisions go beyond the statutory min
stat
 
P
Innovation a
 
ngt  of leave 
• 
wo weeks to be taken during the first eight weeks o
 
Payment and funding 
 
• 
lat-rate payment of £117.18 (€130) a week. 
unded as for Maternity leave. 
 
 
 
338

Flexibility in use 
 
• None except for when leave can be started after birth. 
Eli
 
• 
employees who meet three conditions: they are the biological father of 
ave responsibility 
for the child’s upbringing; they have worked continuously for their employer for 
Variation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
po
perso
 
• 
 
Addit
agree
 
007, 18 per cent of workplaces with five or more employees 
offered extra-statutory Paternity leave and 19  per cent provided higher than 
7)  
 
c. 
f the Department for Business, Innovation 
r parent per child (i.e. an individual right), with a maximum 
Paym
 
 
• 
 
yees who have completed one year’s continuous employment with 
 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances)  
Male 
the child or the mother’s husband or partner; they expect to h
26 weeks ending with the fifteenth week before the baby is due. 
 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the father 
None. 
ional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ments; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
• 
A minority of employers’ provisions go beyond the statutory minimum. For 
example, in 2
the minimum Paternity pay (Hayward et al., 200
Parental leave (responsibility o
and Skills) 
 
Length of leave  
 
 
Thirteen weeks pe
•
of four weeks leave to be taken in any one calendar year. 
 
ent 
None. 
•
 
Flexibility in use 
 
• 
Leave may be taken in blocks or in multiples of one week, up to four weeks 
per year. 
Leave may be taken up to the child’s fifth birthday. 
Eligibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• 
All emplo
their present employer and who have, or expect to have, parental 
responsibility for a child. 
 
 
339

Varia
poor 
perso
 
• 
heir 
child’s eighteenth birthday. They may also take leave a day at a time if they 
 As the leave is per child, each parent of twins gets 26 weeks. 
 
Additio
agreem
 
• T
th
e
e will 
work in a particular workplace’.57 A survey in 2003 for the government found 
 
 
ther 13 weeks’ unpaid 
leave. There is also a right to paid Paternity leave for the adopter not taking 
Time
 
• 
                                                
tion in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
n other than the parent 
Parents of disabled children get 18 weeks leave, which may be taken until t
wish.  
•
nal note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by collective 
ents; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
he statutory scheme is referred to by government as a ‘fallback scheme’ since 
e government’s intention is that ‘wherever possible employers and 
mployees should make their own agreements about how Parental leav
that employers in 11 per cent of workplaces provided Parental leave beyond 
the statutory minimum; this mainly involved increased flexibility in how leave 
could be taken, with only a quarter of the 11 per cent – three per cent of all
workplaces – providing some payment (Woodland et al., 200358).  
• Employers may postpone granting leave for up to six months ‘where business 
cannot cope’. 
 
d. Childcare leave or career breaks 
 
There is no statutory entitlement. 
 
e. Other employment-related measures 
 
Adoption leave and pay 
• One adoptive parent is eligible for 52 weeks’ leave paid at a flat-rate payment 
of £117.18 (€130) a week for the first 39 weeks, and a fur
adoption leave. 
 
 off for the care of dependants 
Employees may take ‘a reasonable amount of time off work to deal with 
unexpected or sudden emergencies and to make necessary longer term 
arrangements’.59 The legislation does not define what is ‘reasonable’, ‘since 
 
57 Department of Trade and Industry, Parental leave, summary guidance. Available at: 
onds, N., Thornby, M., Fitzgerald R. and McGee A. (2003) The 
http://www.dti.gov.uk/employment/balancing-work-family-responsible/parental-
leave/index.html
58   Woodland, S., Simm
Second Work-Life Balance Study: Results from the Employers’ Survey. London: Department 
of Trade and Industry. 
59 Department of Trade and Industry, Frequently asked questions about time off for 
dependents. Available at: 
 
340

this will vary with the differing circumstances of an emergency’ (ibid.). 
Emergencies are specified as including ‘if a dependant falls ill or has been 
injured or assaulted’ or ‘to deal with an unexpected disruption or breakdown of 
Fle
s need to have worked for 
their employer for 26 weeks. Employers have a legal duty to consider these 
 
. Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
luding proposals currently under discussion) 
 
 October 2006 extended the pay period of statutory Maternity 
and statutory adoption pay from six to nine months, in respect of parents whose 
ch
In 
ca
of extending the current right to request flexible working to parents of older children 
(si
Re
pa
co
 
Th
en
to six months Additional 
Paternity leave during the child’s first year, if the mother returns to work before 
up all her leave and pay entitlements or returns to work early. There have been 
care arrangements’ or ‘to deal with an unexpected incident involving the 
employee’s child during school hours’. There is no entitlement to payment. 
 
xible working: the right to request and the duty to consider 
 
• 
Employees (mothers and fathers) who have parental responsibility for a child 
aged 16 and under, a disabled child under 18 years or who care for an adult 
have a legal right to apply to their employers to work flexibly (e.g. to reduce 
their working hours or work flexitime). Employee
requests and may refuse them only ‘where there is a clear business ground 
for doing so … [and must give] a written explanation explaining why’.60  
2
developments (inc
Changes introduced in
ildren were due to be born or placed for adoption on or after 1 April 2007.  
 
April 2007, the right to request flexible working was extended to employees who 
re for an adult. In November 2007 an independent review of the benefits and costs 
x to 17 years) was announced. Following recommendations from the Walsh 
view (2008)61 the right to request flexible working has been extended to all 
rents of children aged 16 years and under (from 6 April 2009), despite earlier 
ncerns about implementation in the economic downturn.   
e government’s stated ambition is still to introduce the following measures by the 
d of the current UK Parliament (i.e. no later than May 2010): 
 
• extend statutory maternity and adoption pay to a full year; 
• introduce a new right to allow fathers to take up 
the end of her Maternity leave (i.e. the father’s right is conditional on the mother 
not using her full entitlement to Maternity leave). Some of this APL can be paid 
if the mother has some of her entitlement to maternity pay remaining at the time 
of her return to work. It will be the choice of the mother as to whether she takes 
                                                                                                                                            
http://www.dti.gov.uk/employment/balancing-work-family-responsible/time-off/index.html
e off for 
rkandfamilies/flexible-working/faq/page21615.html
Available 
at: 
ttp://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file46092.pdf
60 Department of Trade and Industry, Frequently asked questions about tim
dependents. Available at: 
http://www.dti.gov.uk/employment/wo
61 Walsh Review (2008) Right to request flexible working: a review of how to extend the right  
to 
request 
flexible 
working 
to 
parents 
of 
older 
children. 
h
 
341

a series of consultations on the detail of the scheme62, with the Government’s 
most recent response to APL administration published in January 2008.63 
Implementation of APL continues to prove complex. The relevant government 
department announced, in March 2009, that it remains the Government’s goal ‘to 
introduce these changes (APL and the extension of paid Maternity leave) by the 
end of this Parliament. However the implementation date has not yet been 
decided. In the meantim
 
e to give employers some clarity and further time to make 
eir preparations the Government has decided that these changes will not be 
 
3. 
 
a. 
 Millennium Cohort, a large sample of children born in 2000, 
er cent of employed mothers took Maternity leave (rates were 
rs has declined (La Valle et al., 2008). In 2007 the 
lic sector; those in professional and associate professional posts and in 
    
th
implemented in April 2009 … We will now start planning implementation for babies 
due on or after April 2010. This should not be taken to imply any timing decisions 
have been taken. It is simply a pragmatic approach.’64
 
In April 2009 a national debate about Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave 
options has been stimulated by the proposals from the Equality and Human Rights 
Commission (2009) to radically overhaul leave provision.   
Take-up of leave 
Maternity leave 
 
An analysis of the
dicates that 81 p
in
higher in Scotland) and that 83 per cent of these mothers had returned to work by 
nine to ten months after the birth of the cohort  baby (Dex and Ward, 2007). 
 
The extension to the period of Maternity leave in 2003 led to an increase in the 
length of leave-taken; the proportion of mothers taking 18 weeks leave or less fell 
from 42 per cent in 2002 to nine per cent by 2005, while the proportion of mothers 
taking five to seven months leave rose from a third to a half and the proportion 
taking more than nine months increased from nine per cent to one-quarter 
(Smeaton and Marsh, 2006). But recent analysis suggests that the amount of 
aternity leave-taken by mothe
M
median duration of Maternity leave was 26 weeks, in contrast to a median of 31 
weeks in 2002. In addition, a substantial minority (16 per cent) took less than the 
statutory minimum entitlement (i.e. less than 26 weeks). 
 
As no statutory payment was available after 26 weeks of Maternity leave, financial 
considerations were most probably influencing maternal leave patterns. Longer 
durations of Maternity leave are found for mothers working in larger organisations, 
he pub
t
                                             
TI (2006) Work and Families: choice and flexibility – Additional Paternity leave and pay. 
ailable at: 
p://www.dti.gov.uk/employment/workandfamilies/add-paternity-leave/index.html 
BERR (2008) Response to ALP Consultation. Available at: 
p://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file44293.pdf 
62 D
Av
htt
63  
htt
  HMRC (2009) Important information relating to Additional Paternity leave and pay. 
vailable at: http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/statutory-notices/paternity-leave-pay.htm
64
A
 
 
342

the top household income band. (La Valle et al., 2008). In general, a long 
aternity leave period (i.e. between 30 and 40 weeks) is associated with having a 
(La Valle et al., 2008) shows that 88 per cent of 
others who worked in the year before childbirth received some form of maternity 
ent) had received the most generous 
dditional Occupational Maternity Pay 
 hours a 
b. 
her types of leave (e.g. 
nnual leave). This utilization data is similar to earlier studies; for instance the 
s, the statutory Paternity leave entitlement; just under one-
ird (31 per cent) were off for fewer than ten days; and one-fifth (19 per cent) took 
 
More than two-thirds (67 per cent) of fathers were paid for all of the days that they 
 per cent of fathers with the 
 
M
better paid job, being in a workplace with more work-life balance policies, working 
for a large organisation, having more years of continuous service, and having a 
partner. The Millennium Cohort Study also found that those taking the shortest 
duration of Maternity leave were more likely to be lone mothers, those in low level 
occupations, with partners in low level occupations, and low qualified mothers 
(Dex and Ward, 2007). 
 
The most recent survey data 
m
pay. The largest group of mothers (41 per c
ay package, that is, SMP combined with a
p
(OMP) provided by the employer. OMP was most commonly paid by large private 
and public sector organisations, unionised workplaces, those offering a range of 
work-life balance provisions and to mothers with the highest earnings and those 
who worked full time. Mothers who received no maternity pay (12 per cent) were 
those in the least advantageous employment condition – elementary occupations, 
ith an hourly gross pay below £5 (€5.5) and working fewer than 15
w
week. These updated findings are in line with the earlier survey by Smeaton and 
Marsh (2006). 
 
Paternity leave 
 
The most recent nationally representative information on Paternity leave activity is 
provided by the proxy data given by mothers in the Maternity Rights 2007 Survey 
(La Valle et al., 2008). A fathers’ survey is planned for 2009. This survey shows 
that 91 per cent of fathers took time off around the time of the baby’s birth. The 
study did not distinguish between Paternity leave and ot
a
Millennium 2000 Cohort showed that 93 per cent of employed fathers took some 
leave around the time of birth (45 per cent Paternity leave and 50 per cent annual 
leave) (Dex and Ward, 2007). 
 
The 2007 Survey found that among fathers taking time off, the largest group (50 
per cent) took ten day
th
more than ten days off. An employer’s survey recorded that in 56 per cent of 
workplaces, fathers ‘topped-up’ their Paternity leave to take more than the 
statutory two weeks by utilising annual leave/holiday entitlements (Hayward et al., 
2007). 
took off work around the time of the baby’s birth, 14 per cent were paid for some 
of the days and 19 per cent were not paid; 72 per cent of fathers in the top income 
group had all their leave paid for in contrast to 42
lowest salary. Leave-taking duration was greater for high income fathers and men 
who were not self-employed. 
 
 
343

c. 
arental leave is not used widely, at least in the first 17 months of a child’s life; 
arental leave 
 
. Other employment-related measures 
here is no national information on overall take-up of other employment-related 
, 2006) 
shows that 47 per cent of mothers work flexitime compared to just 17 per cent in 
41 per cent in 2002 to 20 per cent.  
    
Parental leave  
 
P
and, if used, it is only taken for short periods. In 2005, 11 per cent of mothers had 
taken some Parental leave since the end of Maternity leave (up from eight per 
cent in 2002); more than half took just one week of unpaid parental leave, 12 per 
cent two weeks and a further 18 per cent three weeks or more. Eight per cent of 
fathers (who described themselves as entitled) had taken some P
within 17 months of their child’s birth, three-quarters for less than a week
(Smeaton and Marsh, 2006).  
 
d
 
T
entitlements, such as use of flexible working, as such data are not routinely 
collected. A 2002 survey found that 60 per cent of mothers and 52 per cent of 
fathers knew about the right to request flexible working, but only ten per cent of 
this group reported having used the entitlement (Hudson et al., 200465). 
 
The results of the Second Flexible Working Employee Survey 2005 (Holt and 
Grainger, 200566) show that almost a quarter of employees with dependent 
children under six years have asked to work flexibly, rising to 36 per cent amongst 
women with a child under six years.  Only around 11 per cent of these requests 
were declined, compared to 20 per cent before the law was introduced. A 2005 
survey of maternity and paternity rights and benefits (Smeaton and Marsh
2002, and almost triple the number of new fathers now work flexibly.  It also shows 
that the proportion of mothers who have changed their employer when returning to 
ork has halved from 
w
 
Results from the latest Work-Life Balance Employee Survey (2006) indicate that 
nine per cent of employees stated that they had caring responsibilities for adults, 
with women more likely to have caring responsibilities at 12 per cent compared to 
men at nine per cent. Forty two per cent of employees stated that they were aware 
of the introduction of the right to request flexible working from 1 April 2007 
(Hooker et al., 2006). 
 
Results from the 2007 Work-Life Balance Employer survey show an across the 
board increase in the availability of flexible working arrangements – 95 per cent of 
workplaces had at least one provision, in contrast to 83 per cent in 2003 (Hayward 
et al., 2007). However, take-up had not increased at the same pace: 42 per cent 
                                             
65 Hudson, M., S. Lissenburgh and M. Sahin-Dikmen (2004) Maternity and Paternity 
ights in Britain 2002: Surv
R
A
ey of Parents. London: Department of Work and Pensions. 
k/employment/research-
evaluation/errs/page13419.html
 
vailable at: http://www.dwp.gov.uk/asd/asd5/ih2004.asp
66 Holt, H. and Grainger, H. (2005) Results from the Second Flexible Working Employee 
Survey (Employment Relations Research Series Number 39).  London: Department of 
Trade 
and 
Industry.  
Available 
at:  
http://www.dti.gov.u
 
344

of workplaces reported take-up of two or more flexible working practices, an 
increase from 36 per cent in 2003.  
 
In terms of the right to request flexible working, 40 per cent of employers report 
receiving requests in the previous 12 months, with only nine per cent of these 
requests refused. The most frequently requested flexibility was to work part-time 
or reduced working hours for a limited period and the most frequent reason for 
 
4.
licies since January 2006 
 
a. 
ly recently into the UK: Parental 
nd pay, first introduced in 1976, and there have 
 
b. 
 studies   
5
oyment/research-
nt of Trade and Industry. 
refusal was the potential for work disruption (Hayward et al., 2007). 
 Research and publications on leave and other employment-
related po
General overview 
 
Most leave policies have been introduced relative
leave and time off for the care of dependants in 1999; adoption and Paternity 
leave and the right to request flexible working in 2003. There is, therefore, limited 
research on these statutory entitlements, and also only limited official information 
on take-up, with none on unpaid leave entitlements. The longest established 
ntitlement is Maternity leave a
e
been a number of studies over time (in 1979, 1988, 1996, 2002 and 2005) looking 
at the use of this entitlement and showing how this has increased as more women 
use leave to maintain continuous employment when having children. In the 
absence of official contemporaneous records, annual surveys and UK cohort 
studies are providing useful sources of information on patterns of take-up.  
Selected publications from January 2006, including results from 
research
 
Brewer, M. and Paull, G. (2006) Newborns and new schools: critical times in 
women’s employment (DWP Research Report, No. 308). London: Department of 
Work and Pensions. Available at http://www.dwp.gov.uk/asd/asd
This report investigates how and when differences develop in work behaviour 
between men and women, focusing on the period immediately after childbirth and 
during the initial years of family development; includes rate and speed of return to 
work among women after childbirth, and considers impact of maternity pay. 
 
Casebourne, J., et al. (2006) Employment rights at work: survey of employees 
2005 (Employment Relations Research Series, No. 51). London: Department of 
Trade and Industry. Available at:  http://www.dti.gov.uk/empl
evaluation/errs/page13419.html 
This report examines employees’ awareness, knowledge and exercise of their 
employment rights as well as where employees go to seek information and advice 
about their rights at work. 
 
Hooker, H., Neathy, F., Casebourne, J. and Munro, M. (2006) The third work-life 
balance employees survey: Executive Summary (Employment Relations Research 
Series No. 58). London: Departme
 
345

This report is the third in the series, and examines employee take-up of work-life 
balance practices and the impact of employer provision.  
  
Smeaton, S. and Marsh, A. (2006) Maternity and paternity rights and benefits: 
survey of parents 2005 (Employment Relations Research Series No. 50). London: 
Department 
of 
Trade 
and 
Industry. 
Available 
at: 
ttp://www.dti.gov.uk/employment/research-evaluation/errs/page13419.html
ts’ u
oth statutory and additional benefits provided by 
eport presents results on maternal and paternal employment and caring 
ehaviours for a nationally representative sample of babies born between 
 
rvey: Executive Summary (Employment Relations Research Series 
 and 
rs’ 
mployment decisions (Department for Work and Pensions Research Report No. 
Maternity Rights Survey 
overnment Equalities Office (2009) Flexible working: benefits and barriers. 
erceptions of working parents. London: Government Equalities Office. Available 
at: http:// www.equalities.gov.uk. 
h
This report presents results from the latest in a government-commissioned series 
of surveys of parents, beginning in 1979, including paren
se of Maternity, 
Paternity and Parental leave, b
employers. 
 
Dex, S. and Ward, K. (2007) Parental care and employment in early childhood 
(Working Paper Series No. 57). Manchester: Equal Opportunities Commission. 
Available at:  
http://www.eoc.org.uk/Default.aspx?page=15568
This r
b
September 2000 and December 2001. It provides evidence of child well-being 
gains where fathers take lave.  
 
Hayward, B., Fong, B. and Thornton, A. (2007) The third work-life balance
employer su
No. 
86). 
London: 
Department 
for 
Business 
(BERR). 
Available 
at: 
http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file42645.pdf  
This report is the third in the series, and examines employer awareness, provision 
and attitudes to work-life balance arrangements. Reports of employee take-up 
(flexible working patterns and leave behaviour) at workplace level are also 
covered.  
 
Tanaka, S. and Waldfogel, J. (2007) ‘Effects of Parental leave and working hours 
on fathers’ involvement with their babies: evidence from the UK Millennium Cohort 
Study’, Community, Work and Family, Vol.10, No.4: 409-426.   
Using the UK Millennium Cohort Study, the analysis finds that taking leave
working shorter hours are related to enhanced father involvement with the baby. 
Four specific types of paternal activities are investigated: being the main 
caregiver; changing diapers; feeding the baby; and getting up during the night.  
 
La Valle, I., Clery, E. and Huerta, M.C. (2008) Maternity rights and mothe
e
496). London: Department for Work and Pensions. Available at: 
http://www.dwp.gov.uk/asd/asd5/rports2007-2008/rrep496.pdf  
The report presents the results of the latest study in the 
series, which has monitored take-up of maternity benefits and mothers’ post-birth 
employment decisions since the late 1970s.  
 
G
P
 
346

Using an online survey with a representative sample of working parents of children 
nder 16 years in Great Britain, the report presents parents’ views on the benefits 
of flexible working and the barriers against use. The majority of parents feel their 
relationship with their children would improve if they could work flexibly, but two-
thirds expressed concern about requesting flexible working from employers. 
General awareness of the right to request flexible working was low.  
 
Hegewisch, A.  (2009)  Flexible working policies: a comparative review. London: 
Equality 
and 
Human 
Rights 
Commission. 
Available 
at: 
www.equalityhumanrights.com 
UK flexible working policies are compared to those in several countries, with a 
special focus on France, Germany and the Netherlands whose approach is 
universal with flexible working rights open to all employees. Access to flexible 
working in these countries is more likely to be governed by collective bargaining 
and workplace agreements than in the UK, where, the author suggests, the ‘soft’ 
legislative framing of the right to request contributes to its gendered pattern of 
use.  
 
Equality and Human Rights Commission (2009) Working Better Phase 1 Report: 
Meeting the changing needs of families, workers and employers in the 21st 
century. London: Equality and Human Rights Commission. Available at: 
http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/publicationsandresources/Pages/Working
Better.aspx 
A policy analysis of UK flexible working patterns and Maternity, Paternity and 
Parental leave in an international context using new financial estimates, parental 
survey data and expert evidence. The report includes a set of recommendations, 
supported by cost estimates, for a three stage radical overhaul of leave provision 
in the UK to 2020 with a goal of increasing take-up by low earners and introducing 
a more holistic approach to Parental leave, with equal access for both parents.  
 
Biggart, L. and O’Brien, M. (forthcoming 2009) Fathers’ working hours: parental 
analysis from the third work-life balance employee survey 2006 and maternity and 
paternity rights and benefits: survey of parents 2005 (Employment Relations 
Occasional Paper). London: Deaprtment for Business, Innovation and Skills. 
An analysis of fathers’ working hours and use of flexible work options in the Third 
Work-Life Balance Employee Survey (2006) and the Maternity and Paternity 
Rights and Benefits Survey of Parents (2005). Findings show an increase in 
fathers’ adoption of flexible working options since the First Work-Life Balance 
Survey 2000 baseline, but little change in the diversity of flexible options used.  
 
O’Brien, M.  (forthcoming 2009) ‘Fathers, Parental leave policies and infant quality 
of life: international perspectives and policy impact’, Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 624 (July). 
A comparative analysis of fathers’ patterns of leave-taking across 24 countries, 
including the UK, between 2003 and 2007, which presents a new typology of 
father-care sensitive leave models. 
 
 
 
 
u
 
347

 
 
 
 
348

2.29 
Sh
Popu
Total 
GDP 
United States 
 
eila B. Kamerman and Jane Waldfogel 
 
lation (UNDP) 
Fertility Rate (UNDP) 
per capita (UNDP) 
2005 
2000/5 
2005 
299.8 million 
2.0 
41,890 PPP US$ 
Fema
   As 
% of 
   Men 
   W
Gend
le economic activity, 15+ (UNDP) 
% male rate (UNDP) 
employed working part time (OECD/F) 
2005 
2005 
 
50.8 per cent 
77 per cent 
 
omen  
er employment gap (OECD/BB) 
2007 
2007 
2004 
  7.6 per cent 
17.9 per cent 
12% points 
Empl
   Wit
   Wit
oyment rate for mothers (OECD/BB) 
h child under 3 years 
h child aged 3-5 years 
 
2005 
2005 
 
54.2 per cent 
62.8 per cent 
Global gender gap (WEF) 
2008 
27th          
Atten
   Chi
   C
dance at formal services (ECB) 
ldren under 3 years 
d
 
2006 
 
No data 
hil ren 3-5 years (inclusive) 
2006 
No data 
NB United States is a federal state 
 
1. Cu
lated policies to 
Me
h
 
LA. Details of FMLA are given below: 
Le
e (before and after birth) 
Pa
ent and funding 
• U
 
 
 
rrent leave and other employment-re
support parents 
 
Note on leave policy: there is no statutory right to any of the types of leave or 
other statutory measures covered in country notes. The federal Family and 
dical Leave Act (FMLA) provides leave for a variety of reasons including: 
ildbirth or the care of a newborn child up to 12 months; for the placement and
c
care of an adopted or foster child; for the care of a seriously ill child, spouse or 
parent; or for a serious health condition of the employee that makes him/her 
unable to work for more than three consecutive days. The federal Department of 
Labor is responsible for FM
 
ngth of leav
 
• 
Up to 12 weeks in a 12-month period. 
 
ym
 
npaid. 
 
349

Flexibility in use 
Re
ode Island) and 
 more employees up to five weeks of paid 
re for a newborn or adopted child. New Jersey has also 
 leave law (see details in part 2). 
Eli
Va
po
pe
 
 
lective 
tor employees are covered). 
 
• 
FMLA may be taken in one continuous period or divided into several blocks of 
time. 
 
gional or local variations in leave policy 
 
 
Five states (California, Hawaii, New Jersey, New York, Rh
•
Puerto Rico have Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) programmes, 
sometimes referred to as cash sick leave benefits. These provide workers with 
partial compensation (about the same level as unemployment insurance 
benefit, i.e. about half of earnings, $262 (approximately €198) a week on 
average in 2003) to replace loss of earnings caused by short-term non-job-
related disability and mostly cover ten to12 weeks of absence from work 
around the time of childbirth, including four weeks before and six to eight 
weeks after. TDI programmes cover about a quarter of the labour force. 
• 
California is the first state to enact a comprehensive paid family leave law. 
Beginning in July 2004, the state provides all workers covered by the state’s 
Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) programme (described below) with up to 
six weeks of a partially paid leave (55-60 per cent of earnings up to a maximum 
of US$840 (€634) a week in 2004) following childbirth, adoption or care of a 
seriously ill child, parent, spouse or domestic partner. These benefits are 
funded by employee contributions, and benefit levels are adjusted annually as 
wages increase. It costs a minimum wage-earner an additional $11.23 (€8) a 
year for this benefit while the estimated average additional cost is $46 (€35). 
• 
The State of Washington enacted a paid family leave law in March 2007, 
granting workers in firms with 25 or
leave annually to ca
enacted a paid family
 
gibility (e.g. related to employment or family circumstances) 
 
• FMLA covers all employees working for a covered employer (see below) and 
who have worked for that employer for at least one year (even if not for a 
continuous period) and for at least 1,250 hours over the preceding 12 months. 
 
riation in leave due to child or family reasons (e.g. multiple or premature births; 
or health or disability of child or mother; lone parent); or delegation of leave to 
rson other than the mother 
• None. 
 
Additional note (e.g. if leave payments are often supplemented by col
agreements; employer exclusions or rights to postpone) 
 
• 
Private employers and non-profit organisations with less than 50 employees 
are exempt (all public sec
 
 
 
 
350

 
2.
r discussion; it was not discussed during the campaigns for the 
prehensive paid family leave law 
(see part 1) in April, 2007. In March 2008, New Jersey became the third state in 
ffer paid family leave for all its workers, after California and 
tion will extend the state’s existing temporary disability 
working parents who choose to have one parent stay home 
 
3. 
cess to at 
    
 Changes in leave policy since 2006 and other related 
developments (including proposals currently under discussion) 
 
No changes in leave policy at federal level have taken place recently or are 
currently unde
Presidency. A number of states, however, have taken initiatives. 
 
The Washington State legislature enacted a com
the United States to o
ashington. The legisla
W
insurance (TDI) system to provide workers with up to 12 weeks of TDI benefits at 
two-thirds of prior wages up to $502 (€379) a month to cover leave to care for a 
newborn, adopted or foster child, or sick child, parent, spouse, or partner. The 
measure will be financed by employee payroll deductions that will cost every 
worker in New Jersey a maximum of 64 cents a week, or US$33 a year starting on 
1January 2009. All workers who contribute to the programme will have the 
opportunity to draw benefits starting 1 July 2009. The New York State legislation, 
also building on its TDI policy, is proposing similar but less generous legislation, 
replacing half of prior wages up to a maximum of $170 (€128) a week. 
 
Minnesota, Montana and New Mexico have active At-Home Infant Care policies 
roviding low-income 
p
for the first year of a newborn or adopted child's life, with a cash benefit offsetting 
some portion of the wages forgone.   
Take-up of leave 
 
Because of the qualifying conditions, only about 58 per cent of workers in private 
firms are eligible for FMLA, with lower coverage for low wage workers, workers 
with young children, and working welfare recipients (Ross Phillips, 200467). About 
0 per cent of working parents between the ages of 18 to 54 have ac
8
least some paid leave either through statutory provision, collective agreements or 
individual workplace policies, especially older workers. But as FMLA does not 
include any payment, workers who are eligible for the leave often do not take it 
68
69
(Commission on Family and Medical Leave, 1996
; Waldfogel, 2001
; Cantor et 
al., 200170). Thus though the law provides de facto Parental leave entitlements, 
                                             
s, K. (2004) Getting Time Off: Access to 
67 Ross Phillip
Leave Among Working Parents (Series 
B, No. B-57). Washington, DC: Urban Institute, NSAF New Federalism. 
68 Commission on Family and Medical Leave (1996) A workable balance: report to the 
congress on family and medical leave policies. Washington, DC: Women’s Bureau, U.S. 
hly 
T. 
milies and employers: family and medical 
Department of Labor. 
69 Waldfogel, J. (2001) ‘Family and Medical Leave: evidence from the 2000 surveys’, Mont
Labor Review, September: 17-23.  
70 Cantor, D., Waldfogel, J., Kerwin J., McKinley Wright, M., Levin, K., Rauch J., Hagerty, 
and Kudela, M.S. (2001) Balancing the needs of fa
leave surveys, 2000 Update. Rockville, MD: Westat.  
 
 
351

studies have found that it has had generally small effects on leave usage by new 
mothers (Ross, 199871; Waldfogel, 199972; Han and Waldfogel, 200373) and no 
discernible effects on leave usage by new fathers (Han and Waldfogel, 2003). The 
 
4.
rch and publications on leave and other employment-
 
a. 
amerman continues to carry out a programme of research on 
ate 
formation on child-related leave policies (among other child and family policies). 
 
b. 
tions from January 2006, including results from 
early half provide no Paternity leave or leave for adoption. 
epomnyaschy, L. and Waldfogel, J. (2007) ‘Paternity leave and fathers’ 
olvement 
with 
their 
young 
children: 
dence from the ECLS-B’, Community, Work and Family, Vol.10, No.4: 425-451.  
The article examines the associations between fathers' leave-taking and fathers' 
involvement with their children nine to ten months post-birth. The authors find that 
fathers who took longer leaves immediately after the birth are more involved with 
their infants nine to ten months later. 
 
                                                
fact that the law extended coverage but had so little impact on usage suggests 
that there are limits to the extent to which families are willing and able to use 
unpaid leave. 
 Resea
related policies since January 2006 
General overview 
 
Sheila B. K
comparative Maternity, Paternity, Parental, and family leave policy studies and 
monitors developments in the advanced industrialised countries, the countries in 
transition to market economies, and developing countries. She (and previously, 
her now deceased colleague Alfred J. Kahn) co-directs the Columbia University 
Clearinghouse on Child, Youth, and Family Policies that provides up-to-d
in
For more information, see www.childpolicyintl.org
Selected publica
research studies   
 
Lovell, V. (2007) Maternity leave in the United States: paid parental leave is still 
not standard, even among the best U.S. employers. Washington, DC: Institute for 
Women’s 
Policy 
Research. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.iwpr.org/pdf/parentalleaveA131.pdf
Nearly one-quarter of the 100  best employers for working mothers provide only 
four or fewer weeks of paid Maternity leave and half provide six weeks or less, 
using data provided by the Working Mother Media Inc. and Working Mothers' 
magazine. N
 
N
inv
evi
 
71 Ross, K. (1998) ‘Labor pains: the effects of the family and medical leave act on recent 
mothers’ returns to work after childbirth’, paper presented at the Population Association of 
America Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois, April 1998. 
72 Waldfogel, J. (1999), ‘The impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act’, Journal of Policy 
Analysis and Management, Vol.18, No.2: 281-302. 
73 Han, W.-J. and Waldfogel, J. (2003) ‘Parental leave: The impact of recent legislation on 
parents’ leave-taking’, Demography, Vol.40, No.1: 191-200. 
 
352

Han, W.-J., Ruhm, C., W
mothers’ employment afte
27. 
The article uses data from the ECLS-B, a new n
aldfogel, J. and Washbrook, E. (2008) ‘The timing of 
r childbirth’, Monthly Labor Review Vol.131, No.6: 15-
ationally representative sample of 
content.cgi?article=1526&context=key
ertain directly or indirectly to employer 
 particular attention to family and medical leave 
sts to businesses and estimates of potential gains 
(forthcoming 2009) ‘Parental leave 
  
rged with data from other months of the CPS to describe trends in 
hich 
these behaviours are associated with Parental leave policies. The period 
ch policies were expanded at both 
 leave has increased 
over 10,000 children born in 2001, to examine variation in the timing of women’s 
post-birth employment. The authors examine how mothers’ employment post-birth 
varies by their race/ethnicity, family structure, education level, age, and prior birth 
history. 
 
Levine, L. (2008) Leave benefits in the United States: CRS report for Congress 
(updated 7 May 2008). Washington DC: Congressional Research Service. 
Available at: 
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/view
_workplace 
This report reviews federal statutes that p
provision of leave benefits, with
policies in the USA, the direct co
to employers. The report concludes that workers with a greater need for leave – 
parents with very young children – are the least likely to have access to leave. 
 
Han, W.-J., Ruhm, C. and Waldfogel, J. 
policies and parents’ employment and leave-taking’, Journal of Policy Analysis 
and Management.
The paper utilises data from the June Current Population Survey (CPS) Fertility 
Supplement me
parents’ employment and leave-taking after birth and analyse the extent to w
examined – 1987 to 2004 – is one in which su
the state and federal level. The main finding is that increased
the amount of time that new mothers and fathers spend on leave, with effects that 
are small in absolute terms but large relative to the baseline for men and much 
greater for college-educated women than for their counterparts with less 
schooling. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
353

Annex 1 
 
 The exchange of information about leave policies adopted in individual countries 
nal organisations.  
 The cross-national analysis of such policies. 
licy 
and research. 
• Providing a source of regularly updated information on policies and research. 
 
Terms of reference of the network 
 
The network will pay particular attention to employment-related policies intended to 
support parents and others with care responsibilities (including for adult relatives); 
including Maternity, Paternity and Parental leave, leave to care for sick or disabled 
relatives, and entitlements to work reduced hours. But attention will also be paid to 
policies available to the whole population to improve work/life balance, such as 
‘career breaks’ and ‘time accounts’. 
 
The scope of its work will include: 
• the background, rationale and implementation of policies;  
• the form they take and the assumptions and values that underlie them;  
• their use (both overall and among different subgroups of the population) and what 
factors influence use;  
• their consequences (benefits and costs) for individuals, families, employers and 
the wider society;  
• how employers and workplaces respond to workers taking leave, and manage in 
their absence; and  
• the relationship of leave policies to other policy areas (e.g. the provision of 
services for children and their families).  
 
 
 
 
A 
formal 
network 
of 
experts on leave policies 
and research 
 
Purposes of the network 
•
and by internatio
•
• The exchange of information about research on leave policies, including findings 
and conclusions. 
• Providing a forum for the cross-national discussion of issues and trends in po
 
354

Activities 
 
The basic activity of the netwo
 network. Attendance will be ope
rk is an annual seminar, organised by the members of 
n to all network members, though consideration 
l need to be given to some ‘rationing’ of attendance if demand gets too high.  
lection of papers (both from annual seminars and other papers 
thors’ permission).  
of a network website, including regularly updated information on 
leave policies and research (e.g. a bibliography of publications). 
means to develop cross-national research proposals. 
more specialist issues, supporting 
sues and edited book volumes. 
particular 
al organisations. The main condition is expertise and 
t, and a willingness to contribute to the work of the network. 
the
wil
 
Other activities will be built onto this annual seminar. There are many possibilities, 
including for example: 
 
• A regular publication containing updated information on leave policies and 
research, and a se
reproduced with au
• The development 
• Using the network as a 
• Other events and activities, e.g. seminars on 
the preparation of special journal is
 
Participation 
 
esearchers, policy makers and others from both 
The network is open to r
ountries and internation
c
interest in the subjec
 
 
355

Annex 2 
 
Network members at April 
  
 
Alexander  
stitute of Family Studies 
chool of Economics and Political Science, University of New South Wales 
unsw.edu.au
ce and International Studies, University of Queensland 
.whitehouse@uq.edu.au
ut für Familienforschung  
hristiane.rille-pfeiffer@oif.ac.at
enniscentrum WVG (Team WO), Departement Welzijn, Volksgezondheid & Gezin 
ven@wvg.vlaanderen.be
t de Sociologie (ANSO), Université Catholique de Louvain 
ulier@uclouvain.be
ologie (ANSO), Université Catholique de Louvain 
ura.merla@yahoo.fr
epartment of Sociology and Anthropology, Carleton University, Toronto  
ndreadoucet@sympatico.ca
 
2009
 
Australia
Michael  
Australian In
Michael.Alexander@aifs.gov.au
 
Deborah Brennan  
S
d.brennan@
 
Gillian Whitehouse  
School of Political Scien
g
 
Austria 
Christiane Rille-Pfeiffer 
Österreichisches Instit
c
 
Belgium 
Fred Deven 
K
freddy.de
 
Bernard Fusulier,  
Unité d’Anthropologie e
bernard.fus
 
Laura Merla 
Unité d’Anthropologie et de Soci
la
 
Canada 
Andrea Doucet 
D
A
 
356

Diane-Gabrielle Tremblay 
u Québec à Montréal 
zech Republic 
urková  
Demography and Geodemography, Faculty of Science, Charles 
 
mme, PRAXIS Centre for Policy Studies; and PhD 
tudent, Department of Sociology and Social Policy, University of Tartu 
ru@praxis.ee
ent of Social Security, Ministry of Social Affairs; and Ph.D. student, 
logy and Social Policy, University of Tartu  
atre.pall@sm.ee
and Welfare (THL), Helsinki 
ohanna.lammi@thl.fi
L), Helsinki 
rsity of Paris 1, Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne 
gnani@univ-paris1.fr
e.de
olfgang Erler 
R  
Télé-université, Université d
tremblay.diane-gabrielle@teluq.uqam.ca
 
C
Jirina Koco
Department of 
University, Prague 
koc@natur.cuni.cz
 
Denmark
Tine Rostgaard 
Social Forsknings Instituttet (Danish National Institute of Social Research) 
tr@sfi.dk
 
Estonia 
Marre Karu 
Labour and Social Policy Progra
s
marre.ka
 
Katre Pall 
Departm
Department of Socio
k
 
Finland 
Johanna Lammi-Taskula 
National Institute for Health 
J
 
Minna Salmi  
National Institute for Health and Welfare (TH
minna.salmi@thl.fi
 
France 
Jeanne Fagnani  
CNRS MATISSE, Unive
fa
Germany 
Daniel Erler 
European Strategy Development, Familienservice GmBH 
daniel.erler@familienservic
 
W
Anakonde Gb
erler@anakonde.de
 
 
 
357

Greece 
Evi Hatzivarnava-Kazassi,  
d Solidarity 
.gr
 Labour (SZMI) 
arta.korintus@szmi.hu
logy and Gender Studies, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 
inarsd@hi.is
étursdóttir 
der Studies, University of Iceland, Reykjavik 
 
dies, Trinity College 
ileen.Drew@tcd.ie
rsity of Modena and Reggio Emilia 
iovannini.dino@unimore.it
k,  
inistry of Social Affairs and Employment, 
ser.nl
ociaal en Cultureel Planbureau (SCP) 
p.nl
epartment of Sociology and Political Science, NTNU (Norwegian University of 
nology) 
lin Kvande  
nd Political Science, NTNU (Norwegian University of 
y) 
Institute of Social Protection an
ehatzivarnava@ikpa
 
Hungary 
Marta Korintus  
Institute of Social Policy and
m
 
Iceland 
Thorgerdur Einarsdóttir  
Department of Socio
e
 
Gyda Margrét P
Department of Sociology and Gen
gydap@hi.is
 
Ireland
Eileen Drew 
Department of Statistics/Centre for Gender and Women’s Stu
Dublin  
E
 
Italy 
Dino Giovannini  
Faculty of Education, Unive
g
 
Netherlands 
Hanne Groenendij
M
h.groenendijk@
 
Saskia Keuzenkamp  
S
s.keuzenkamp@sc
 
Norway 
Berit Brandth  
D
Science and Tech
Berit.Brandth@svt.ntnu.no
 
E
Department of Sociology a
Science and Technolog
Elin.Kvande@svt.ntnu.no
 
 
358

Poland 
ena Kotowska 
f Economics 
iotr Michoń 
iotr.michon@ae.poznan.pl
nces, University of Lisbon 
arin.wall@ics.ul.pt
tropnikn@ier.si
Autonomous University of Barcelona  
nna.escobedo@uab.es
nd Society, Skövde University 
nders.chronholm@his.se
sity 
u.se
 
rch Unit, Institute of Education University of London 
eter.Moss@ioe.ac.uk
United States of America 
Sheila B. Kamerman,  
School of Social Work, Columbia University, New York 
sbk2@columbia.edu
Ir
Warsaw School o
iekoto@sgh.waw.pl
 
P
Poznań University of Economics 
P
 
Portugal 
Karin Wall 
Institute for Social Scie
K
 
Slovenia 
Nada Stropnik  
Institute for Economic Research  
s
 
Spain 
Anna Escobedo  
Department of Sociology, 
a
 
Sweden 
Anders Chronholm  
Department of Technology a
a
 
Linda Haas  
Department of Sociology, Indiana University-Indianapolis  
Lhaas@iupui.edu
 
Philip Hwang  
Department of Psychology, Göteborg Univer
philip.hwang@psy.g
 
United Kingdom
Peter Moss 
Thomas Coram Resea
P
 
Margaret O’Brien 
School of Social Work and Psychosocial Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich 
m.o-brien@uea.ac.uk
 
 
359

 
 
Jane Waldfogel 
School of Social Work, Columbia University, New York 
jw205@columbia.edu
 
Other contributors to country notes 
 
France 
Danièle Boyer 
National Family Allowance Office (La Caisse nationale des allocations familiales) 
ortugal 
atal 
daniele.boyer@cnaf.fr
 
New Zealand 
Heather McDonald 
Athena Research 
heatherm@athenaresearch.co.nz
 
P
Mafalda Leitão 
Institute for Social Sciences, University of Lisbon 
mafalda.leitao@ics.ul.pt) 
 
Russian Federation 
Zhanna Kravchenko 
Södertörn högskola, Sweden 
zhanna.kravchenko@sh.se
 
South Africa 
Marian Baird 
Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Sydney 
m.baird@econ.usyd.edu.au
 
Tamara Cohen 
School of Law, University of KwaZulu Natal 
cohen@ukzn.ac.za
 
Lisa Dancaster 
Health Economics and HIV/AIDS Research Division, University of KwaZulu N
dancaste@ukzn.ac.za
 
Sweden 
Ann-Zofie Duvander 
Demography Unit, Department of Sociology, University of Stockholm; and National 
Social Insurance Agency 
ann-zofie.duvander@forsakringskassan.se
 
360

Employment Relations Research Series 
Reports published to date in the BIS Employment Relations Research Series are 
listed below. Adobe PDF copies can be downloaded either from the Employment 
Market Analysis and Research web pages:  
www.berr.gov.uk/employment/research-evaluation/errs (click on the ‘Employment 
Relations Research Series’ pages on the right-hand side). 
Or via the BIS Publications page: www.bis.gov.uk/publications
(click ‘Browse by Subject’, then select ‘Employment Relations Research’) 
For printed copies, you can place an order via the Publications page above 
Alternatively please call the BIS Publications Orderline on 0845 015 0010  
(+44 845 015 0010) and provide the publication’s URN, or email them at: 
publications@bis.gsi.gov.uk  with your details. 
: publications@bis.gsi.gov.uk
Anyone wishing to be added to our mailing list for printed copies of this series should 
email their details to us at
   
RN 98/507.  June 1998 
 URN 
ey, Amanda Gosling, Julian McCrae and 
tten and Paul Ryan.  URN 98/943.  February 
tions. Jill Smith, Paul Edwards and Mark Hall. URN 99/512. July 1999 
n and Sheila Honey. URN 99/770. July 1999 
ls, 
No. 11  Implementation of the Working Time Regulations. Fiona Neathey and 
James Arrowsmith.  URN 01/682.  April 2001 
 
No. 1 
 Involving employees in Total Quality Management: employee attitudes and 
organisational context in unionised environments. Margaret Collinson, Chris Rees, 
Paul Edwards with Linda Inness.  U
No. 2 
 Industrial Tribunals, workplace disciplinary procedures and employment 
practice. Jill Earnshaw, John Goodman, Robin Harrison and Mick Marchington. 
98/564.  February 1998 
No. 3 
 The dynamics of union membership in Britain – a study using the Family 
and Working Lives survey. Richard Disn
Stephen Machin.  URN 98/807.  January 1999 
No. 4 
 The individualisation of employment contracts in Britain. William Brown, 
Simon Deakin, Maria Hudson, Cliff Pra
1999 
No. 5 
 Redundancy consultation: a study of current practice and the effects of the 
Regula
No. 6 
 The employment status of individuals in non-standard employment.  
Brendan Burchell, Simon Deaki
No. 7 
 Partnership at work.  John Knell.  URN 99/1078.  September 1999 
No. 8 
 Trends in earnings inequality and earnings mobility 1977-1997: the impact 
of mobility on long-term inequality. Abigail McKnight.  URN 00/534.  February 2000 
No. 9 
 Costs and benefits of European Works Councils Directive.  Tina Weber, 
Peter Foster and Kursat Levent Egriboz.  URN 00/630.  February 2000 
No. 10  Explaining the growth in the number of applications to Industrial Tribuna
1972-1997. Simon Burgess, Carol Propper and Deborah Wilson.  URN 00/624.  April 
2001 
 
361

No. 12  Collective bargaining and workplace performance: an investigation using 
the Workplace Employee Relations Survey 1998. Alex Bryson and David Wilkinson.  
Applicants and Employers).  URN 03/999.  February 2004 
gust 2002 
7.  
e 2 – Case studies (and appendices). J Kodz et al.  URN: 03/1228.  November 
erry and Jill Smith. 
ows.  
llow-up study. Fiona 
s. 
98. Helen Rainbird, Jim Sutherland, Paul Edwards, Lesley Holly and Ann 
y: Results from the Employer Survey. 
.  August 2004 
URN 01/1224.  November 2001 
No. 13  Findings from the 1998 Survey of Employment Tribunal Applications 
(Surveys of 
No. 14  Small firms' awareness and knowledge of individual employment rights. 
Robert Blackburn and Mark Hart.  URN 02/573.  Au
No. 15  Awareness, knowledge and exercise of individual employment rights.  Nigel 
Meager, Claire Tyers, Sarah Perryman, Jo Rick and Rebecca Willison.  URN 02/66
February 2002 
No. 16  Working long hours: a review of the evidence. Volume 1 – Main report.  
Volum
2003 
No. 17  Evaluation of the Partnership at Work Fund.  Mike T
URN 03/512.  May 2003 
No. 18  Retirement ages in the UK: a review of the literature. Pamela Mead
URN 03/820.  July 2003 
No. 19  Implementation of the Working Time Regulations: fo
Neathey.  URN03/970.  July 2003 
No. 20  The impact of employment legislation on small firms: a case study analysi
Paul Edwards, Monder Ram and John Black.  URN 03/1095.  September 2003 
No. 21  Employee voice and training at work: analysis of case studies and 
WERS
Munro.  URN 03/1063.  September 2003 
No. 22  The Second Work-Life Balance Stud
Stephen Woodland, Nadine Simmonds, Marie Thornby, Rory Fitzgerald and Alice 
McGee.  URN 03/1252.  October 2003 
No. 23  The business context to long hours working. T, Hogarth, W.W. Daniel, 
A.P.Dickerson, D. Campbell, M.Wintherbotham, D. Vivian.  URN 03/833. November 
2003 
No. 24  Age matters: a review of the existing survey evidence. Dr. Peter Urwin.  
URN 03/1623.  February 2004 
No. 25  How employers manage absence. Stephen Bevan, Sally Dench, Heather 
Harper and Sue Hayday.  URN 04/553.  March 2004 
No. 26  The content of new voluntary trade union recognition agreements 1998-
2002: Volume one – An analysis of new agreements and case studies. Dr Sian 
Moore, Dr Sonia McKay and Helen Bewley.  URN 04/1084
No. 27  The Second Work-Life Balance Study: Results from the Employees’ 
Survey. Jane Stevens, Juliet Brown and Caroline Lee.  URN 04/740.  March 2004 
No. 28  2003 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 04/743.  April 2004 
 
362

No. 29  Trade union recognition: statutory unfair labour practice regimes in the USA 
and Canada. John Godard.  URN 04/855.  March 2004 
No. 30  Equal opportunities policies and practices at the workplace: secondary 
  August 2004 
s.  URN 04/1071.  August 
n plan 2004. Employment 
e, J.A. Latreille and K.G. Knight.  URN 04/1530.  August 2004 
nalysis report. Tania Corbin.  URN 04/1920.  December 2004 
n-Aznar. URN 08/575.  March 
eidi Grainger.  URN 05/606.  April 2005 
.  April 2005 
ey of employers. Dr Sian Moore, Dr Sonia 
search.  URN 05/1019. July 2005 
5 
mber 2005 
N 05/1491.  October 2005 
analysis of WERS98. Tracy Anderson, Neil Millward and John Forth.  URN 04/836.  
June 2004 
No. 31  A survey of workers’ experiences of the Working Time Regulations. BMRB 
Social Research.  URN 04/1165.  November 2004 
No. 32  The evaluation of the Work-Life Balance Challenge Fund. Adrian Nelson, 
Kathryn Nemec, Pernille Solvik and Chris Ramsden.  URN 04/1043.
No. 33  Findings from the Survey of Employment Tribunal Applications 2003. Bruce 
Hayward, Mark Peters, Nicola Rousseau and Ken Seed
2004 
No. 34  Employment relations monitoring and evaluatio
Market Analysis and Research. URN 04/1256.  September 2004 
No. 35  Findings from the 1998 survey of representatives in Employment Tribunal 
cases. P.L.Latreill
No. 36  Employment attitudes: Main findings from the British Social Attitudes 
Survey 2003. Harjinder Kaur.  URN 04/1868.  December 2004 
No. 37  Job separations: A survey of workers who have recently left any employer. 
Volume one – Main a
No. 38  Equal opportunities, employee attitudes and workplace performance: 
Findings from WERS 1998. John Forth and Ana Rinco
2008 
No. 39  Results of the Second Flexible Working Employee Survey. Heather Holt 
and H
No. 40  2002 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 05/582.  April 2005 
No. 41  2004 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research.   URN 05/1018
No. 42  The age dimension of employment practices: employer case studies. 
Stephen McNair and Matt Flynn.  URN 05/863.  June 2005 
No. 43  The content of new voluntary trade union recognition agreements 1998-
2002. Volume two – Findings from the surv
McKay and Helen Bewley.  URN 05/1020. May 2005 
No. 44  Employment Relations monitoring and evaluation plan 2005, Employment 
Market Analysis and Re
No. 45  Review of research into the impact of employment relations legislation. 
Linda Dickens, Mark Hall and Professor Stephen Wood. URN 05/1257. October 200
No. 46  People, Strategy and Performance: Results from the Second Work and 
Enterprise Business Survey. The Work Foundation.  URN 05/1392.  Septe
No. 47  ‘Small, flexible and family friendly’ – work practices in service sector 
businesses. Lynette Harris and Carley Foster. UR
 
363

No. 48  2005 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Volume 1 and 
Volume 2.  Employment Market Analysis and Research.  URN 06/627 (Volume 1) 
 Pamela Meadows.  URN 05/674.  April 2006 
sessments. Employment 
ters, Ken Seeds and Carrie Harding. 
ployment Tribunal 
6 
asebourne and Miranda Munro.  URN 07/714. March 
ey: Executive summary. URN 07/715 
nt Fitzner 
Employment 
reille. URN 07/1149. July 2007 
cing June 2006 version, URN 
unal cases. 
economic shocks. Vassilis Monastiriotis. 06/1799. December 2006 
No. 66  Labour market flexibility and sectoral productivity: a comparative study. 
Vassilis Monastiriotis. 06/1799. December 2006 
and 06/669X (Volume 2).  March 2006 
No. 49  Survey of employers’ policies, practices and preferences relating to age. 
Hilary Metcalf and
No. 50  Maternity and paternity rights and benefits: survey of parents 2005. 
Deborah Smeaton and Alan Marsh.  URN 06/836.  March 2006. 
No. 51  Employment Rights at Work: Survey of Employees.  Jo Casebourne, Jo 
Regan, Fiona Neathey, Siobhan Tuohy.  URN 06/ 837.  April 2006. 
No. 52  2001 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 06/927.  July 2006 
No. 53  1999 Compendium of Regulatory Impact As
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 06/955.  July 2006 
No. 54  Findings from the Survey of Claimants in Race Discrimination Employment 
Tribunal Cases. URN 06/1059. Mark Pe
September 2006 
No. 55  The Experience of Claimants in Race Discrimination Em
Cases. Jane Aston, Darcy Hill and Nil Djan Tackey. URN 06/1060. April 2006 
No. 56  How have employees fared?  Recent UK trends.  Grant Fitzner.  URN 
06/924.  June 2006 
No. 57  International review of leave policies and related research. Peter Moss and 
Margaret O'Brien (editors).  URN 06/1422.  June 200
No. 58 The Third Work-Life Balance Employee Survey: Main findings. Hülya 
Hooker, Fiona Neathey, Jo C
2007 
The Third Work-Life Balance Employee Surv
(replacing July 2006 version, URN 06/1372/ES). March 2007 
No. 59  The right to request flexible working: a review of the evidence. Gra
and Heidi Grainger. URN 07/840. March 2007 
No. 60  2000 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. 
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 06/1164.  July 2006 
No. 61  The settlement of Employment Tribunal cases: evidence from SETA 2003. 
Paul L. Lat
No. 63  The First Fair Treatment at Work Survey: Executive summary – updated. 
Heidi Grainger and Grant Fitzner. URN 07/803 (repla
06/1380). March 2007 
No. 64  Review of judgments in race discrimination Employment Trib
Alison Brown, Angus Erskine and Doris Littlejohn. URN 06/1691. September 2006 
No. 65  Employment flexibility and UK regional unemployment: persistence and 
macro
 
364

No. 67  1997-1998 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research.  URN 06/1840.  September 2006 
No. 68  Union modernisation fund: interim evaluation of first round. Mark Stuart, 
orde and David Spencer. URN 06/2125. December 2006 
Suter. URN 07/598. February 2007 
RN 07/599. February 2007 
. April 2007 
es, Fiona Macdonald and Dionne Arts. 
ia 
adeem and Hilary Metcalf. URN 07/826. July 2007 
No. 78  Mapping the recruitment agencies industry. Experian Business Strategies. 
URN 07/1259. October 2007 
No. 80  International Review of Leave Policies and Related Research. Peter Moss 
and Karin Wall, eds.URN 07/1232. July 2007 
No. 81  Doing the right thing? Does fair share capitalism improve workplace 
performance?. Alex Bryson and Richard Freeman. URN 07/906. May 2007 
No. 83  The costs and benefits of Employment Tribunal cases for employers and 
claimants. Kathy Armstrong and David Coats. URN 07/1151. July 2007 
No. 84  The influence of legal representation at Employment Tribunals on case 
outcome. Geraldine Hammersley, Jane Johnson and David Morris. URN 07/1150. 
July 2007 
No. 85  Developing an Index of Labour Market Adaptability. David Tinsley and 
Vassilis Monastiriotis. URN 07/1144. November 2007 
No. 86. The Third Work-Life Balance Employer Survey: Main findings.  Bruce 
Hayward, Barry Fong and Alex Thorton. URN 07/1656. December 2007 
No. 87. The impact of employee representation upon workplace industrial relations 
outcomes. Sian Moore, Ali Tasiran and Steve Jefferys. URN 08/1037. September 
2008 
Andy Charlwood, Miguel Martinez Lucio and Emma Wallis. URN 06/1803.  
September 2006 
No. 69  Employee representation in grievance and disciplinary matters – making a 
difference? Richard Saundry and Valerie Antcliff. URN 06/2126. December 2006 
No. 70  Changing job quality in Great Britain 1998 – 2004. Andrew Brown, Andy 
Charlwood, Christopher F
No. 72  Embedding the provision of information and consultation in the workplace: a 
longitudinal analysis of employee outcomes in 1998 and 2004. Annette Cox, Mick 
Marchington and Jane 
No. 73  Patterns of information disclosure and joint consultation in Great Britain – 
determinants and outcomes. Riccardo Peccei, Helen Bewley, Howard Gospel and 
Paul Willman. U
No. 74  2006 Compendium of Regulatory Impact Assessments. Employment 
Market Analysis and Research. URN 07/669
No. 76  Reassessing the ‘family-friendly workplace’: trends and influences in Britain, 
1998-2004. Gillian Whitehouse, Michele Hayn
URN 07/827. July 2007 
No. 77  Work-life policies in Great Britain: What works, where and how? Sad
N
 
365

 
366
No. 88  Implementing information and consultation: early experience under the ICE 
Regulations. Mark Hall, Jane Parker, John Purcell, Michael Terry and Sue 
Hutchinson. TURN 07/1388. September 2007T 
No. 91 Offshoring and wage inequality in the UK, 1992-2004. Claudia Canals. TURN 
07/1667. TDecember 2007 
No. 92 The Union Modernisation Fund: an interim progress report. Mark Stuart, 
Andy Charlwood, Miguel Martinez Lucio and Emma Wallis. TURN 08/639. March T2008 
No. 96 Characteristics of Rejected Employment Tribunal Claims: Paul L. Latreille. 
URN 09/812. June 2009 
No. 97 Implementing information and consultation in medium-sized organisations. 
Mark Hall, Sue Hutchinson, Jane Parker, John Purcell and Michael Terry. 
TURN 
08/969. October T2008 
No 99 
Vulnerable Workers Pilots’ Evaluation: Interim findings from the evaluation 
of the vulnerable worker pilots at the end of Year 1. Liz Griffin. URN 08/1055. 
October 2008 
No. 99 Citizens Advice Client Research: Final Report. Derek Mitchell, Alpha 
Research. URN 08/1056.  September 2008 
No.100 International review of leave policies and related research 2008. Peter Moss 
and Marta Korintus. URN 08/1057. July 2008 
No.101 Something for nothing? Employment Tribunal claimants’ perspectives on 
legal funding. Richard Moorhead and Rebecca Cumming. URN 09/813. June 2009 
 


Department for Business, Innovation & Skills.  www.bis.gov.uk
First published September 2009.  © Crown copyright.  09/09/NP.  URN 09/1175.