SYMPOSIUM: THE POLITICS OF PHILANTHROCAPITALISM
Why Philanthro-Policymaking Matters
Robin Rogers
Published online: 28 July 2011
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
A rich man without charity is a rogue; and perhaps it
would be no difficult matter to prove that he is also a fool.
Henry Fielding (1707–1754)
Six hundred billion dollars is a lot of money, at least for
most people. I am not a prime target for charity fundraisers;
but still: $600,000,000,000.00. My eyes get tired looking at
the number. In 2010, Bill Gates and Warren Buffet
announced, in what became known as the Giving Pledge,
that 40 American billionaires had pledged to give at least
half of their wealth to charity in their lifetime or at their
death. If, as Gates and Buffett hope, all of America’s
billionaires sign the Giving Pledge, they would give away
six hundred billion dollars.
The Giving Pledge does not specify how the charitable
money should be spent, but it is clear that Gates and Buffett
think that coordinated giving is more effective than a
scattershot approach. In 2009, about a year before the
introduction of the Giving Pledge, a select group of the
super wealthy met in New York to decide which of the
world’s problems were most pressing and should be the
target of high-power philanthropic giving. Paul Harris of
the Guardian called it, “[T]he most elite club in the world
”(5/31/09) The group, dubbed the Good Club, was
convened by Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and David
Rockefeller and is reported to include Ted Turner,
Michael Bloomberg, George Soros, and other of the
same level of wealth and influence. The meeting was
arguably the most important moment in the emergence of
philanthrocapitalism. Harris noted, “[T]he implications of the
development of philanthro-capitalism are profound. It was
fitting that the Good Club was meeting near the UN. The club
members’ extreme wealth makes it as powerful as some of the
nations with seats inside that August chamber.” For those
unfamiliar with the term, philanthrocapitalism is the use
of business tools and market forces, especially by the
very wealthy, for the greater social good.
The Good Club identified global population growth as
the problem to target. This is not a choice of a group
concerned with public opinion. It veers into the murky
waters of women’s reproductive rights and religious,
cultural, and ethnic politics, and, not least, eugenics. It also
highlighted the homogeneity of the world’s billionaires.
Only 20 of the approximately 1011 billionaires in the world
are women, about 2%. By definition they are all extremely
wealthy and about half are American.
Supporters of philanthrocapitalism gloss over the
demographics of philanthropists. They talk about social
programs working or not working—being effective or
ineffective. They focus on how good programs can be
scaled up and best practices widely disseminated. Critics
of philanthrocapitalism do not focus on the amount of money
being donated or—although this is less uniformly true—the
use of business practices in philanthropy and its search for
simple solutions. Critics focus on the policymaking and
agenda setting power of the super wealthy.
In other words, supporters and critics of philanthroca-
pitalism talk past each other because they are not talking
about the same things. The most controversial aspects of
philanthrocapitalsim are related to the policymaking and
agenda setting powers of the new global elite. These are
R. Rogers (*)
Queens College/the Graduate Center,
The City University of New York,
65-30 Kissena Blvd.,
Flushing, NY 11367, USA
e-mail: robinrogers99@gmail.com
Soc (2011) 48:376–381
DOI 10.1007/s12115-011-9456-1

issues that relate to what I term philanthro-policymaking
and are not core issues of philanthrocapitalism as defined
by its major proponents.
I propose that we identify the informal global policy-
making powers of philantrocapitalists and disentangle it from
the concept of philanthrocapitalism; they are related but not
identical. The Giving Pledge and the Good Club provide
useful if imperfect illustrations of how I propose we use the
two terms: The Giving Pledge is philanthrocapitalism. The
Good Club is philanthro-policymaking.
Philanthrocapitalism
In 2008, at Campbell Apartment, a small, sophisticated New
York City bar tucked in Grand Central station above the bustle
of 42nd street, a party was held for the release of Mathew
Bishop and Michael Green’s book Philanthrocapitolism:
How the Rich Can Save the World. The small room was
filled with not only powerful people but also great
minds. Bill Clinton mingled like a popular college
professor at the Harvard Club. The atmosphere was
collegial, intellectual, and optimistic despite the rapidly
blossoming financial crisis outside. Bishop, US business
editor at the Economist, coined the term in a 2006 article
“The Birth of Philanthrocapitalism,” which made it the
idea of the moment.
Some commentators noted the inauspicious timing of
Philanthrocapitalism’s 2008 release. In the economic
crisis, non-profits scrambled to get funding in a weak
and foreboding economic climate. Bernard Madoff and
others had decimated the financial stability of prominent
foundations, individuals, and organizations. In the short
term, perhaps the timing was inauspicious. Bishop and
Green’s argument that business techniques are inherently
superior to government and charity looked silly in the
middle of the government’s arguably charitable bailout of
the banks. In the long-term, however, the crisis created
greater opportunity to bring business sensibilities and
market forces into charity by crippling the old ways.
Oddly, a later edition of Philanthrocapitolism had a new
subtitle: How Giving Can Change the World. Were they
retreating from their assertion that the rich can save the
world? They certainly had not changed it because they
thought it sounded better. The new subtitle was undeniably
awful. Or was it, as I believe, more a reflection of the
authors’ lack of interest in discussing what it means for the
rich to save the world?
The rich have always shaped social programs. The
American philanthropic system, particularly foundations
emerged out of a worldview that separated public and
private, industry and charity, male and female. The wealthy
gave to charity in part to atone for whatever were conceived
of as the sins of business. Philanthrocapitalists want to
bring the virtues of businesses to charity. I do not think we
can understand the effects of contemporary large-scale
philanthropy on global governance, human rights, poverty
and health without focusing on the role of the very rich.
In our emerging social and economic systems, bound-
aries are breaking down. Now everything is rushing
forward and jumbling together. Blurring and broken
boundaries make the current divide between business and
charity almost impossible to sustain. It is a relic from
another time. J. Gregory Dees and Beth Battle Anderson in
their work on “sector-bending” suggest that we may see
more social entrepreneurs employing non-profit, for profit,
and hybrid structures to create solutions to social problems.
They note that: “This envisioned world may be blurry and
indistinct, and even uncomfortable for some who are used
to characterizing the business world as greedy and the
nonprofit sector as pure and altruistic.” Dees and Anderson
suggest that the changes bring new opportunities, but ones
that need to be assessed carefully before, in their words,
“jumping on this bandwagon.” The blurring of sector
boundaries and the use of private wealth to solve social
problems—two hallmarks of philanthrocapitalism—make
sense in the contemporary context. This does not preclude
serious discussion about the political and social ramifica-
tion sector-bending and other changes on the body politic.
The United States has been a leader in expanding political
rights. Our functioning democracy, as imperfect as it is, holds
to the ideal that all people should have an equal voice.
Philanthrocapitalism is based on a rather flat assumption that
what matters are results rather than process. Philanthropy, of
course, is not the role of government and cannot be—because
it is based on voluntary donation—representative. These
aspects of philanthropy are not problematic as long as their
political and social ramifications are taken seriously and not
brushed off as trivial barriers to progress.
Philanthro-Policymaking
The global elite today is very, very rich. Chrystia
Freeland, global editor-at-large of Reuters, who, in her
own words, has “spent the better part of the past decade
shadowing the new super-rich,” notes that “[T]he rich of
today are also different from the rich of yesterday,” She
writes: “Our light-speed, globally connected economy
has led to the rise of a new super-elite that consists, to a
notable degree, of first- and second- generation wealth …
Perhaps most noteworthy, they are becoming a transglobal
community of peers who have more in common with one
another than with their countrymen back home.” It is this new
breed of economic elites, plutocrats to use Freeland’s
term, that has the money, power, and will to transform
Soc (2011) 48:376–381
377

societies. Gates, Pierre Omidyar and Jeff Skoll, among
others, are giving significant portions of their accumulated
wealth to tackle the world’s social problems. Armed with vast
capital and networking capabilities they have been able to
disseminate new ideas to a wide audience with tech savvy
promotions—and make their philanthropic causes both
grassroots (i.e. ONE campaign) and celebrity driven (i.e.
Bono, Clinton etc.). The technologies they created make it
possible to donate to charitable causes—or just “like” them—
on Facebook. The new philanthropists bring new ways of
thinking in addition to their money.
These are heady times. Quoting Peter Lindert, an
economist at the University of California at Davis, Freeland
notes that the economic changes we have seen in the last
three decades are unprecedented: “Britain’s classic indus-
trial revolution was far less impressive than what has been
going on in the last 30 years” in terms of productivity and
disruptive innovation. The liberalization of global trade and
the revolution in information technology are generating
changes that Freeland sees, as do I, as being good on
balance but also profoundly uneven.
Money, Markets, and Measurement
If you want to understand philanthrocapitalism, start with the
three M’s: Money, Markets, and Measurement. Some might
add a fourth, Management. The first M, money, is the idea
that the wealthy, particularly the super wealthy, should take
greater responsibility for using their wealth for the common
good. This often is paired with an explicit call for
philanthropists to be more “hands on” in their giving. The
second M, markets, is the idea that market forces should sort
effective social programs from ineffective social programs.
The third M, measurement is the idea is that resources should
be used in a targeted and rational way based on data in order
to identify and scale successful social programs.
Is Philanthrocapitalism New or Just Good Branding?
There is debate over whether philanthrocapitalism really is
a new approach to philanthropy or simply an extension of
traditional practices under a new brand label. (A distinction
can be made between philanthropy and charity, but I will be
using them more or less interchangeably in this essay for
the sake of simplicity.) I think that bracketing philanthro-
capitalism off from previous approaches to philanthropy is
analytically useful because it highlights some of the ways in
which philanthropy is evolving during a period of signif-
icant technological and social change. I am nevertheless
sympathetic to those who argue that philanthrocapitalism is
a repackaging of old philanthropic ideas and practices.
There is clearly an awareness of branding within the
movement. It is interesting to note that the term Social
Innovation was chosen for the Obama administration’s Social
Innovation Fund over the term “Social Entrepreneur.” The
prevailing view was that the term “Social Entrepreneur”
connoted the business elite while “Innovation” signaled more
of a grassroots movement. This is parallel to the replacement
of the term “Venture Philanthropy” with “Philanthrocapitalism.”
This also seems to be replacing a term—“Venture”—
associated with the very wealthy, with a more accessible
term “Capitalism.”
International Philanthrocapitalism
Philanthrocapitalism tends to target problems that cut across
national boundaries, such as AIDS, Malaria, illiteracy, and
population growth. Attempts at social engineering across
different cultures may have unintended consequences and
face resistance on the grounds of self-determination. In
2005 nearly one out of every ten foundation dollars—an
estimated $3.8 billion, more than twice the total of a decade
ago—was spent abroad. Should the global rich have more
power to determine social policy for the poor if they agree
to pay for it? Will we, the voters, still have a voice in how
they are governed? In a global economy, who constitutes
“we”? If wealth continues to shift from the West to the East,
as it appears to be doing, will those of us in the West still be
comfortable with such concentrated power?
It seems foolish to question philanthropists who feed
starving children or try to prevent malaria in countries with
less government capacity than the U.S. Yet hazards exist.
Internationally, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
have a long history of wrestling with the complexity of aid.
Alex Larsen, Haiti’s Minister of Health, noted that NGOs
were functioning in his country as a kind of shadow
government without accountability. In a country with such
great need and so little governmental capacity as Haiti after
the earthquake, expressions of concern about a shadow
government may seem irrelevant, but the issue of account-
ability does deserve attention.
Consider the growing economies of China and India.
Bill Gates and others are working to promote philanthropy
among the newly wealthy in these countries—whose levels of
wealth, we should note, are extraordinary even by Western
standards. Some of the new Asian economic elites have
shown an interest in building philanthropic infrastructure, but
there has also been resistance, particularly in China. Ivy
Mungcal a newsletter writer/blogger at Devex Manila, quotes
a newspaper in China explaining this resistance: “If there
is no transparent mechanism to ensure the money
collected by charity organizations is reasonably used, if
people encounter ridiculous difficulties when attempting
378
Soc (2011) 48:376–381

to donate their assets, and if non-government charitable
organizations are always considered a threat to the
government that cannot be trusted, then it’s not just the
wealthy but everyone that will hesitate before giving to
charity.” There are cultural and institutional barriers to
exporting philantrocapitalism without question. It is also
possible that in a capitalist system that is not democratic,
such as China, there are even more direct ways for an
economic elite to shape policy.
If philanthrocapitalism becomes a more powerful global
force, there may be more incentive for the Chinese to
participate. If China becomes a more powerful economic
force, the social vision of its billionaires will become a
more influential part of philanthrocapitalism. We might do
well to adopt the Veil of Ignorance assumed in John Rawls’
A Theory of Justice when considering these questions. What
system would we find just if we did not know our position
in it? It is more than an academic exercise. We do not know
what our position in the global economy may be within a
very short time period.
What Could Be Bad about Good?
Proponents of philanthrocapitalism tend to label its critics,
even friendly critics, as lunatics who oppose goodness and
reason, probably hate apple pie, and maybe kick puppies.
Former Ford Foundation director Michael Edwards is
concerned about the impact of philanthrocapitalism on
social cohesion, democracy, and the ability of non-profits
to respond to unsexy social problems. He advocates going
back to a system in which a civic space is distinct from the
market and government. Similarly, Peter Frumkin argues
that some of the logic used to translate business practices to
nonprofits is flawed and that much of the language of
venture philanthropy is really just new jargon for existing
practices. Chrystia Freeland, as previously mentioned,
notes the growing economic and political power of a group
she calls plutocrats. Neither Edwards, Frumkin, nor Free-
land strike me as unreasonable or opposed to goodness, but
they are treated roughly in such debates. Oddly, within the
pro-philanthrocapitalism camp there is, as Edwards has
noted, a “mock civility that turns honest conversation into
Jell-O.”
Muhammad Yunus
Consider the recent case of Muhammad Yunus, a Nobel Prize
winner and pioneer in Micro finance. Micro finance grants are
a broad category of very small grants—typically several
thousand dollars but as low as $100 or even lower—given to
small businesses such as basket makers without collateral in
low income areas. Often, and quite controversially, micro
finance loans are made at very high interest rates, even 100%.
Muhammad Yunus is the founder of the not-for profit Grameen
Bank. He recently criticized for-profit micro finance banks.
The January 15, 2011 philanthrocapitalism.net blog addressed
Yunus’s criticism of for-profit micro finance by saying: “It may
not have been as terrifying as Francisco Goya’s depiction of
Cronus devouring his children, but the article by microfinance
pioneer Muhammad Yunus in today’s New York Times had
disturbing echoes of the story from Greek mythology of the
titan who, fearing that his offspring will overthrow him, eats
them instead.” What is so discouraging about this post is that
Yunus is not only a respected pioneer of micro finance, but
only 1 week prior, he was still the darling of philanthrocapi-
talism.net as they, rightly, criticized the Bangladesh govern-
ment for their apparent attempt to takeover Grameen Bank
and force Yunus out. One week later, they literally turned
him into a monster because he advocated a position with
which they disagree. Admittedly, I am an academic and
our rules of discourse and debate are supposed to be
different than those of business and politics—philanthro-
py too. Nonetheless, this kind of attack is beneath the
dignity of the people involved. It really stands in the way
of the important work that all of those involved are
trying to do—including those engaging in the attacks.
Building the Infrastructure of Philanthrocapitalism
The Indian philanthropist, Uday Khemka, remarked,
“Relative to the corporate environment, we are in the 1870s.
But philanthropy will increasingly come to resemble the
capitalist economy…. I want to help develop the infrastruc-
ture of philanthropy.” It is a new world. The welfare state and
traditional philanthropy are no longer well matched to global
structures. New infrastructure must be built. In the United
States, the federal budget is consumed by entitlement
programs and many of the states are nearly bankrupt. The
Government cannot fund major new social policies. At the
same time, changes in technology make innovative solutions
to social problems both more attainable and easier to
disseminate. All social change comes to life at the street-
level—in banking practices, accounting systems, tax policy,
and so on. Here are some key areas to watch.
Capital Markets
Clara Miller, President and CEO of the Non-Profit Finance
Fund (NFF) and George Overholser, formerly of NFF, have
been leaders in developing non-profit equity systems that
they argue are needed to bring the capacity of non-profits to
a level at which they are sustainable without an endless
Soc (2011) 48:376–381
379

scramble for new funding. In his classic whitepaper
“Building is not Buying,” Overholser argues: “Building an
enterprise is fundamentally different than buying from an
enterprise. And yet, standard nonprofit accounting sheds no
light on the building vs. buying distinction. I believe that
this missing distinction is a major reason why a market for
nonprofit growth capital has failed to materialize.”
NFF has been one of the leaders in the development of a
non-profit capital market. As the for-profit and non-profit
sectors blend, these institutions are likely to become much
more important. The conceptual work being done by Miller,
Overholser, and others on non-profit capital markets and
new accounting structures, will more than likely end up
being more central to for-profit-nonprofit hybrids than to
traditional charities.
Nonprofit Stock Markets
Others, such as Howard Husock, Vice President of Policy
Research at the Manhattan Institute, and Steven H. Goldberg,
author of Billions of Drops in Millions of Buckets, are
working to create something akin to a non-profit stock
market and to help “scale up” successful non-profits based
on evidence. There is an important and easily missed
distinction between a capital market (bank oriented) and a
“stock” market (investor oriented) , but simultaneous efforts
to develop them both point to the perceived, and probably
actual, need to bring the non-profit sector more in line with
the for-profit sector. I am very skeptical of the feasibility of a
non-profit stock market. (See my “Nonprofit Stock Markets
and Social Citizenship,” Society, Vol. 44–3, March/April
2007.) But I think the issues of how to measure social good
and evaluate non-profits that are being sparked by this idea
are valuable.
In terms of accurately measuring “what works”—as
one would need to do in Husock’s and Goldberg's
formulations—some problems lend themselves to being
solved using scientific evidence. Vaccines, for example,
can prevent or substantially reduce devastating diseases.
There is a problem: a disease. It has an identifiable cause:
a virus. And it can be prevented or limited with an
intervention: a vaccine. But there may be other issues such
as the lack of infrastructure to deliver the vaccines that do
not always lend themselves to evidence-based solutions.
With complex problems, such as the one identified by
the Good Club, global population growth, it is much less
clear. What is the problem? Too many women having
children? The wrong women having children? Women
having children they do not want? Women having children
others do not want? A lack of education for women? A
lack of birth control? Too few abortions? What is the
cause? Poverty? Promiscuity? Religion? Power? God?
Illiteracy? What is the solution? Education? Empowering
women? A one-child policy? Eugenics? Philanthropists
have a right, perhaps even a moral obligation, to address
complex problems as well as simple ones. But for
complex problems the solution can rarely be determined
by empirical measures alone.
B Corps and the Third Bottom-Line
Businesses schools are also championing the idea of a
“third bottom line” of social and ecological wellbeing. It is
hard to know right now how much of this is a feel good
trend and how much will translate meaningfully into
constructive change. Some advocate for shifts in the U.S.
tax laws to permit more blending of profit and social good,
such as the B Corps. As explained on the B Corps website:
www.bcorporation.net: “B Corporations address two critical
problems: Current corporate law makes it difficult for
businesses to take, community, and environmental interests
into consideration when making decisions; and the lack of
transparent standards makes it difficult for all of us to tell
the difference between a 'good company' and just good
marketing” (http://www.bcorporation.net/why). B Corps are
businesses, not non-profits, but they also blur the line
between sectors. I suspect that the outcome of the
movement will result in changes in tax law rather than
business practices.
The Social Innovation Fund
The Obama administration is advancing philanthrocapitalist
reform through its Social Innovation Fund (SFI). As
described on the national service website, the SFI is “[A]
new way of doing business for the federal government
that stands to yield greater impact on urgent national
challenges. The Social Innovation Fund targets millions
of public-private dollars to expand effective solutions
across three issue areas: economic opportunity, healthy
futures and, youth development and school support. This
work will directly impact thousands of low-income
families and create a catalog of proven approaches that
can be replicated in communities across the country.”
The fund is small, $50 million, and has had its critics.
One criticism is that it funnels money to groups that are
very well connected in the social innovation movement
and have a strong lobbying presence. There is merit to
this criticism, but the Social Innovation Fund also faces a
landscape in which the “radical new innovators” are a
well-networked group of people who came up together
with many key players in the present administration. A
lot of these players are graduates of Harvard and/or
380
Soc (2011) 48:376–381

Stanford Business School and are very much a part of
the intellectual circles in which the ideas of philanthro-
capitalism are now being generated.
Paul Light, a Professor at NYU and one of the reviewers
of the first round of SIF grants wrote in a 2010 Washington
Post column that he had concerns about one of the grantees.
Although he had an overall favorable view of the selection
process, he did see evidence that one applicant may have
received favorable treatment, and he made his case for more
transparency in the selection process. Steve Goldberg
responded by noting that Light had “raised questions about
just 1 of 69 applicants, which can be investigated by the
responsible oversight agency, the Office of Grants Policy
and Operations.” Both Light and Goldberg make valid
points—Light speaks more to the long-term institutional
question of transparency in government/ social innovation
partnerships. Goldberg speaks more to the question of how
ethically the SIF operated in one specific case. What is
useful about this debate is that Light and Goldberg make
their substantive points clearly and improve the public
discourse.
What Next?
Ideally, these new institutional structures will be built with an
awareness of larger social questions. Should the government
fund, in the form of lost revenue due to tax deductions, the
social visions of an elite few? Are restrictions on private
giving for social good ever appropriate? There are important
discussions to be had over the best ways in which to structure
the interactions between the government and philanthropy.
These issues are not just theoretical. They already affect
public schools in New Jersey in addition to small textiles
businesses in Bangladesh.
The world looks nothing like it did even 20 years ago.
We are in a period of startling social change. Democracy
may go the way of the concept of privacy, not rejected so
much as made obsolete. Wealth is becoming even more
concentrated in the hands of a few who, particularly in the
West, are selecting and funding global social initiatives that
are akin to global public policy. I suggest that we do not
argue over these facts but accept them as given. The
question is what do we do now?
We should first disentangle philanthro-policymaking
from philanthrocapitalism. The conflation of the two has
made it difficult to articulate concerns about civil society in
ways that do not yet appear to be anachronistic—rooted in
voluntary associations and town hall meetings. Civil society
and human rights are not natural consequences of capital-
ism, philanthropic or otherwise. I also do not believe they
are mutually exclusive.
A capitalist economy within a functioning democracy,
in my view is the best system that humanity has
achieved to date. But capitalism does not guarantee
democracy. Similarly, philanthrocapitalism could exist
within a free and fair political system or one governed
by a plutocracy.
Political scientists, sociologists, philanthropists, jour-
nalists, and all who participate in these discussions,
applied or theoretical, must put philanthro-policymaking
on the public’s radar. I am not suggesting an exposé of
bad behavior. I am suggesting an honest, even-handed
discussion that will generate the knowledge needed to
navigate the global institution building now taking
place.
Acknowledgement
Robin Rogers would like to acknowledge her
research assistant Maisha Lopa and the support of Macaulay Honors
College.
Robin Rogers is an associate professor of sociology at Queens
College and the CUNY Graduate Center. She is writing a book on
Philanthro-policymaking.
Soc (2011) 48:376–381
381