The Green Party: Emerging from the Political
Wilderness?
Neil Carter
Department of Politics, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK.
E-mail: ntc1@york.ac.uk
In November 2007, the membership of the Green Party in England and Wales
voted overwhelmingly in favour of replacing its collective leadership with a more
conventional structure of party leader and deputy leader. This organisational
change reﬂected the increasing electoral focus of the Green Party. Despite a dismal
record in UK general elections, the Greens have made some electoral advances in
second-order elections in recent years and have slowly moved away from the
political margins. But can they overcome the plurality vote electoral system to
secure an MP at Westminster? This article examines the electoral record of the
Greens, analyses why they have struggled to secure electoral success and assesses
their future prospects.
British Politics (2008) 3, 223–240. doi:10.1057/bp.2008.5
Keywords: Green Party; environment; British elections
Introduction1
In November 2007, Green Party members in England and Wales voted
overwhelmingly to replace its system of collective leadership with a more
conventional leadership structure of Leader and Deputy Leader.2 It was a
decision that, on the face of it, represented a major compromise of the party’s
commitment to participatory democracy and its traditional suspicion of the
very notion of having a ‘party leader’. Will this decision come to be regarded as
a signiﬁcant shift in the direction and, crucially, the electoral fortunes of the
Green Party? For although the UK boasts the oldest Green Party in Europe,
the Greens have struggled to achieve any signiﬁcant electoral success and have
performed feebly in general elections. However, there have been some modest
advances in recent years, with Greens elected to the European Parliament,
Greater London Authority (GLA), and a steady increase in local councillors.
The Scottish Green Party has been represented in all three Scottish
Parliaments, and the Scottish National Party (SNP) was able to form a
government in 2007 only with support from the two Green MSPs. More
generally, since 2006 public concern about the environment, particularly
climate change, has been at the highest level since the peak of interest in
British Politics, 2008, 3, (223–240)
r 2008 Palgrave Macmillan Ltd 1746-918x/08 $30.00
www.palgrave-journals.com/bp

1989–90 and there has been a sharp intensiﬁcation in the party politicisation of
the environment. Thus the leadership referendum decision came at a time when
the Green Party is slowly becoming a more credible electoral force and there
has been a resurgence in the electoral salience of the environment. This article
examines the electoral record of the British Greens,3 analyses why they have
struggled to make electoral headway and assesses their future prospects.
Green Party Electoral Performance4
The Green Party’s performance in general elections has been mostly dismal (see
Table 1). It has failed to get a Green elected to the House of Commons, or even
come close to doing so.5 Formed in 1973 as ‘People’, just a handful of
candidates contested the two 1974 general elections. It changed its name to the
Ecology Party in 1975 and, in order to attract more national publicity,
presented a slate of over 50 candidates in the 1979 general election, which
secured 5-minute party political broadcasts on radio and television. Between
1979 and 1997, the Green Party’s (the name it adopted in 1985) average share
of the vote in those seats it contested was between 1.0 and 1.5%, its share of the
overall UK votes cast was less than 0.5% and it lost every deposit. The main
development over this period was a steady increase in the number of seats
contested, which peaked at 256 in 1992, when the Greens, boosted by
impressive performances in the 1989 European Parliament election (see below)
and in local council elections, hoped to make a breakthrough in the
Westminster election. After failing to do so, the party entered a period of
consolidation, putting up only 95 candidates in 1997.
In 2001, with more candidates, the average vote share doubled to 2.9% and,
at last, 10 deposits were saved. The party attracted a record vote of 283,414 in
the 2005 general election, representing an average share of 3.4% in those seats
contested and 1% of the overall vote. Perhaps most signiﬁcantly, having saved
Table 1 Green Party UK general election performance 1974–2005
No. of
candidates
Average % vote
in seats contested
No. of deposits
saved
Highest % share
in any seat
Feb 1974
5
1.8
0
3.9
Oct 1974
4
0.7
0
0.8
1979
53
1.5
0
2.8
1983
108
1.0
0
2.9
1987
133
1.3
0
1.3
1992
256
1.3
0
1.3
1997
95
1.4
0
4.3
2001
145
2.9
10
9.3
2005
203
3.4
24
22.0
Neil Carter
The Green Party
224
British Politics 2008 3

a record 24 deposits, there were signs that Greens were building local pockets
of support. The best result was in the Brighton Pavilion constituency, where
the Green candidate, local councillor Keith Taylor, gained 22% of the vote to
ﬁnish third, pushing the Liberal Democrat into fourth place. It was, by a long
way,
the
best
ever
Green
performance
in
an
individual
Westminster
constituency, and was supplemented by saved deposits in two neighbouring
constituencies. Ten of the saved deposits were in London. Elsewhere, they were
mostly in urban seats, some with large student populations, including Bath,
Bristol South, Leeds West, Norwich South and Sheﬃeld Central. Strong
performances in several constituencies in Glasgow and Edinburgh may have
been further helped by the presence of seven MSPs (see below).
The Greens have achieved greater success in elections to the European
Parliament. After attracting an average share of the vote in 1979 and 1984 that
was just slightly higher than for general elections, the Green Party secured an
astonishing result in the 1989 election. With candidates contesting all 78
constituencies for the ﬁrst time, the Greens gained 14.9% of the vote (2,292,718
votes) and saved every deposit. Green candidates polled over 20% in 17
constituencies, ﬁnishing second ahead of Labour in six and ahead of the Social
and Liberal Democrat candidates in all but one seat. This result was
remarkable both because the Greens had never before attracted even 5% of
the vote in any national election, and because it was at that time the highest
share of the vote won by any European Green Party in a national contest
(Rootes, 1995a, 69). Yet the plurality voting system then used meant that no
Green MEP was elected (Table 2).
The introduction of a regional list system of proportional representation for
the 1999 European election was the trigger for the ﬁrst Green MEPs to be
elected. Overall, the Greens averaged 6.3% of the vote, saving every deposit,
and securing just enough in the London (7.7%) and the south-east (7.4%)
regions to secure two MEPs, Jean Lambert and Caroline Lucas, respectively.
Ironically, the party’s highest share of the vote was in the south-west (8.3%),
Table 2 Green Party UK European parliament election results 1989–2004
Share of overall vote
MEPs
1979
3.7a
0
1984
2.6b
0
1989
14.9
0
1994
3.2
0
1999
6.3
2
2004
6.1
2
aAverage vote for the three candidates.
bAverage vote for the seventeen candidates.
Neil Carter
The Green Party
225
British Politics 2008 3

but it was not enough to gain a seat because the south-west elected fewer
members than the more populous London and south-east regions. Five years
later, the Green performance was almost identical: a national vote share of
6.1% saw both MEPs re-elected in London (8.4%) and the south-east (7.9%).
Over the last decade, the Greens have also competed with some success in
elections to the Scottish Parliament. The ﬁrst contest in 1999 saw one Green
MSP, Robin Harper, elected in the Edinburgh region, but in 2003 the Greens
gained 6.8% of the vote in the eight regional lists to get seven MEPs elected.
Four years later, although the Greens appeared to be doing very well in pre-
election polls, in the event their regional list vote fell to 4.0% and only two MSPs
were elected — in Edinburgh and Glasgow. By contrast, the Greens have had no
success in elections to the Welsh Assembly, attracting only 3.5% in the ﬁve
regional lists in both 2003 and 2007. In 2007 the Green Party secured its ﬁrst seat
in the Northern Ireland Assembly — just 2 years after the ﬁrst three councillors
were elected in the province. A further product of the Labour Government’s
constitutional reform programme, the Greater London Assembly, provided
another opportunity: three Greens were elected to the 25 person assembly in
2000 with 11.1% of the top up votes, and two were elected (with 8.4%) in 2004.
At the local level, the number of Green party councillors has slowly risen.
By the early 1980s, in county and district elections the party was consistently
putting up several hundred candidates who attracted roughly 4–6% of the vote,
although several exceeded 10% in individual wards (Parkin, 1989, 221–229). A
handful of candidates were elected and several councillors defected from other
parties, so that by 1991 there were 29 Green councillors on diﬀerent authorities
around the country (Rootes, 1995a, 78). Progress remained painfully slow: 10
years later this ﬁgure had only increased to 44 (Carter and Rootes, 2001, 104).
Subsequently, things have got steadily better: by 2005 there were 69 Green
councillors on 30 diﬀerent authorities (Carter and Rootes, 2006, 477) and in
2007 the party reached triple ﬁgures with 110 councillors. Again, it is
signiﬁcant that there are several concentrations of Green councillors: after the
2007 elections, there were 12 Green councillors on Brighton and in Lancaster
city councils, and 10 on Norwich and Oxford city councils (www.greenparty.
org.uk/news/2991). In recent years, Greens have joined coalition administra-
tions running councils in, inter alia, Castle Morpeth, Lancaster, Leeds and
Oxford. In Scotland, after the introduction of a single transferable votes system
to local elections, eight Greens were elected in May 2007 — ﬁve in Glasgow
and three in Edinburgh.
Explaining Green Performance
The Green Party has failed to achieve the electoral success of its sister parties
elsewhere, particularly in the EU15. The comparative analysis of Green Party
Neil Carter
The Green Party
226
British Politics 2008 3

development and electoral performance has identiﬁed a number of structural,
institutional and political variables that help explain variation between
countries (Kitschelt, 1988; Rootes, 1995b; O’Neill, 1997; Mu¨ ller-Rommel,
1998; Carter, 2007). As it is diﬃcult to detect signiﬁcant diﬀerences in broad
structural factors — the degree of economic development, material standards
of living, levels of public concern about the environment — between the UK
and her neighbours in Northern Europe, it seems sensible to concentrate on the
key institutional and political variables, such as the electoral system, the rules
governing party funding, federalism, social movement activity and party
competition.
Electoral system
Small parties ﬁnd it diﬃcult to break into the British plurality voting electoral
system because most individual constituency contests are dominated by the
major parties. In general elections, people are especially unwilling to ‘waste’
their votes on a party with little chance of winning a seat. Where a small party
can concentrate its vote geographically, as with the Welsh and Scottish
nationalists, it has a better chance of gaining representation, but the Greens
have been unable to establish any similar regional base.
The signiﬁcance of the electoral system is underlined by the impact of the
introduction of proportional representation in second-order elections, which
immediately saw the election of Greens to the European Parliament, the
Scottish Parliament and the Greater London Assembly. Suddenly, the Green
Party began securing the vote share of between 5 and 10% that has delivered
electoral success to green parties elsewhere in Europe. Other factors may have
contributed to these successes. Green parties across the EU have consistently
performed better in European elections than in domestic contests, suggesting
that voters may regard the environment as an issue that is best dealt with at a
supranational level and that the presence of Green MEPs would therefore be
desirable. More generally, second-order elections are often treated by the
electorate as an opportunity to cast a protest vote for a small party against the
government and other established parties, as illustrated by the Green success in
the 1989 European Parliament election. It is impossible to disentangle these
motivations from the impact of proportional representation, as the latter
would probably have encouraged the former. Yet it is clear that the use of
proportional representation in these contests greatly beneﬁted the Greens.
Of
course,
as
the
Welsh
Assembly
demonstrates,
the
presence
of
proportional representation is no guarantee of green success. Elsewhere, both
Norway
and
Denmark
have
electoral
systems
based
on
proportional
representation and electorates with high levels of environmental consciousness
and postmaterial values that might appear to provide ideal conditions for green
Neil Carter
The Green Party
227
British Politics 2008 3

parties to ﬂourish, yet they have failed to do so.6 However, if the introduction
of proportional representation for British general elections is not a suﬃcient
condition for a signiﬁcant Green breakthrough in the foreseeable future, it is
probably a necessary one.7
Party funding
Where countries have generous state funding of parties linked to the
achievement of a speciﬁc share of the vote, as in Germany, green parties have
encountered few ﬁnancial constraints on contesting elections, operating an
eﬀective organisation and even running professional campaigns. The absence
of state funding for parties in the UK means that a party with no big ﬁnancial
donors — such as businesses or trade unions — will usually endure a ‘hand-to-
mouth’ existence, unable to contest most seats and having little money
available to fund professional marketing and campaigning activities. The
British electoral rules further discriminate against small parties through the
requirement to pay a d500 deposit for each candidate in a general election,
returnable only if a candidate receives 5% of the vote. Thus, when the Green
Party contested 256 constituencies in 1992 general election, the loss of every
deposit left it with a huge bill to pay. Indeed, prior to the 1997 general election
some Green activists argued that the party should conserve its limited ﬁnancial
resources (for the 1999 European elections). In the event, a much smaller slate
of candidates was presented — and again every deposit was forfeited. Despite
the subsequent improvement in party fortunes, the Greens still felt able to
contest less than a third of seats in the 2005 general election.8
Federalism
Federalism has been identiﬁed as contributing positively to Green Party
development in, for example, Germany, Austria, Belgium and Switzerland
(Mu¨ ller-Rommel, 1998, 149). The advantage of a federal structure is that the
existence of elected state or regional political authorities provides multiple
opportunities for emerging parties to articulate their political demands,
establish a presence and gain publicity, as a potential stepping stone to
national-level success. Until recently, the British unitary state provided few
such access points for the Greens and other small parties. However, the Labour
Government’s extensive programme of constitutional reforms resulted in the
creation of new legislatures in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — and
London — which have strong echoes of federalism. This quasi-federal structure
has undoubtedly beneﬁted the Greens, bringing electoral success, a political
presence and even some policy inﬂuence. In London, Ken Livingstone has
regularly worked with Green members, particularly on environmental issues
Neil Carter
The Green Party
228
British Politics 2008 3

such as the congestion charge. The accession of a minority SNP administration
after the 2007 Scottish Parliament election was made possible only by a
‘Cooperation Agreement’ in which the two Green MSPs voted for SNP leader,
Alex Salmond, as ﬁrst minister in exchange for an agreement to take action
against ‘climate change pollution’ and to oppose the construction of new
nuclear power stations. In addition, the SNP supported a Green MSP, Patrick
Harvie, as Chair of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change
Committee.
Links with new social movements
In several countries, new social movement activity was an important catalyst
for the development of green parties. The broad coalition of environmental and
leftist groups that formed the anti-nuclear movements of the 1970s and 1980s
was particularly conducive to Green Party formation in Germany, France,
Finland and Italy, while the Austrian and Swedish green parties emerged from
referendum campaigns against nuclear power (Rootes, 1995b, 237). Conse-
quently, green parties in these countries were rooted in a wider political
network and had a large pool of potential supporters. By contrast, as the
brainchild of a small discussion circle of concerned conservative environmen-
talists, the British Green Party had no social movement origins. Nor did it ﬁnd
it easy to build such links subsequently. The Labour Party, at least historically,
had a relatively inclusive attitude towards dissident social movements.
Consequently, groups such as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament were
encouraged to focus their eﬀorts on persuading Labour to change its policy
rather than building links with a Green Party that was regarded as an irrelevant
single-issue political force (Ru¨ dig and Lowe, 1986). Moreover, although
Britain boasts a large environmental movement, members of the professional
environmental lobby make a virtue of their non-partisan status, believing that
it will allow them to exercise greatest inﬂuence over the major parties. They
have speciﬁcally resisted working closely with the Green Party largely out of
fear that close association with an outsider party on the political fringe might
reduce their access to government or risk alienating their membership, but also
because the Greens have been dismissed as irrelevant (and often unreliable).
Since the mid-1990s, the Greens have made a concerted eﬀort to build links
with contemporary social movements, such as the anti-roads protesters,
opponents of airport expansion and anti-GMO protesters. However, unlike in
Germany, for example,
not only did workers, unemployed people, ethnic minorities and so on ignore
the party, but the very people who were supposed to be ‘Other-minded’ — the
Neil Carter
The Green Party
229
British Politics 2008 3

New Social Movement activists, New Left people, the educated middle
classes — largely abstained from joining the party (Talshir, 2002, 262).9
Some individuals heavily involved in direct action campaigns did join the
Green Party — and some were elected as councillors — but most, while not
actively hostile to the Green Party, were ambivalent about political parties and
generally eschewed the conventional political process. Thus, the Green Party
has had few natural allies to draw on as it struggled to establish itself as a
signiﬁcant political force.
Party competition
The state of political or party competition is a critical factor in Green Party
development (Kitschelt, 1988; Rootes, 1995b, 241–247). The absence of
political opportunities has meant that the focus of environmental politics in the
UK has been on the established parties and the environmental lobby, rather
than the Green Party. Party competition has left little space for the Greens to
occupy and few opportunities for them to exploit the main issue where they
might impress — the environment. Historically, the Conservative and Labour
parties have proved adept at providing a suﬃciently broad church to
incorporate a wide range of ideological positions and, in the case of Labour,
to be receptive to dissident social movements. During the 1980s and the early
1990s when the Green Party was emerging, the pre-Blair Labour Party had not
yet shifted sharply to the political centre, so there was no equivalent vacuum on
the left for the Greens to occupy, as was the case, for example, in West
Germany.
Nor was the environment a major source of conﬂict between the parties. The
Conservative and Labour parties, at least until recently, have adopted a
preference-accommodation strategy aimed at preventing the environment
becoming the subject of party competition (Carter, 2006). When environment-
alism began to gain wider support during the 1980s, they engaged in a limited
process of party politicisation of the environment, which saw them develop a
modest range of environmental policies, but made little attempt to compete on
the issue. The signiﬁcance of party competition is illustrated by the 1989
European election, when the Greens won 15% of the vote. For a brief period,
an unusual combination of political opportunities allowed the Green Party to
piggy-back on the rapid growth in public concern about the environment
through 1988–90 and to beneﬁt from a strong protest vote against the
incumbent Conservative government, a continuing distrust of the Labour Party
and the weakness of the newly formed Liberal Democrats (Rootes, 1995a).
Subsequently, traditional material issues, such as the poll tax and the
deepening recession, crowded out the environment, and this window of
Neil Carter
The Green Party
230
British Politics 2008 3

opportunity quickly closed again. The lesson of the 1989 European Parliament
election for the Liberal Democrats, when they ﬁnished behind the Greens in all
but one constituency, was that if the circumstances were right, the Greens
could challenge them for the protest vote. Consequently, since 1992 the Liberal
Democrats have tried to negate this threat by embracing the environment more
fully and more enthusiastically than their rivals, making it a key issue in
successive manifestos and election campaigns (Carter, 2006). Consequently, the
Greens have faced tough competition for disaﬀected ‘environmental’ voters
from the Liberal Democrats and from the Scottish and Welsh nationalist
parties, who have all made some attempt to appeal to the environmentalist vote.
Two important developments in party competition have opened up new
political opportunities for the Greens. First, the Labour Government’s
programme of constitutional reforms has had an impact on the conﬁguration
of party competition — at least beyond Westminster. Both the Greens and
UKIP secured the election of MEPs for the ﬁrst time, while the establishment
of the Scottish Parliament ushered in an era of genuine ﬁve-party (six party in
the 2003–2007 Parliament) politics in a British legislature.
Secondly, there has been a rapid party politicisation of the environment
since mid-2006. Several developments contributed to this transformation,
notably the growing concern about climate change following the release of the
Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change (Stern, 2006) and the 4th
scientiﬁc assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC, 2007). David Cameron as Conservative leader has also played an
important part, and his well-publicised environmental initiatives elicited
a positive response from other parties (Carter and Ockwell, 2007, chapter 5).
Summary
When looking for explanations for the electoral failings of the Green Party, it is
hard to get past the plurality voting electoral system as the principal barrier to
progress. Notwithstanding the other, not inconsiderable, obstacles, the absence
of proportional representation would still represent an almost insuperable
barrier to gaining even a small presence at Westminster. Nevertheless, changes
in some of these institutional and political factors have opened up new political
opportunities that the Greens have been able to exploit. The next section
analyses the capacity of the Green Party itself to make the most of these
opportunities and assesses its future electoral prospects.
Future Prospects
What are the electoral prospects for the Greens? What have the Greens done
and what can they do to improve their political inﬂuence? Green parties
Neil Carter
The Green Party
231
British Politics 2008 3

everywhere have encountered strong pressure to respond to the logic of
electoral competition (Kitschelt, 1989, 41) by adjusting party organisation,
programmes and strategy to maximise electoral support. This section examines
the extent to which the Green Party’s electoral ambitions and the wish to be a
more eﬀective political force have led to changes in its original principles, in
terms of its organisational structure and ideology, and where this leaves its
electoral strategy and prospects.
Green
parties
elsewhere
have
faced
serious
tensions
between
their
unconventional ‘new politics’ organisational structures based on radical
principles of grassroots democracy and the pursuit of electoral success. As
green parties gained entry to parliament across much of the EU through the
1980s and 1990s, and subsequently to government in several European
countries,10 they reformed or abandoned some participatory democratic
mechanisms in favour of more hierarchical, bureaucratic and professional
structures characteristic of established parties (Doherty, 2002; Rihoux, 2006).
Although their political marginalisation by the electoral system has meant that
the Greens have not been subjected to the same intensity of pressure to change
as their sister parties elsewhere, nevertheless similar tensions have led to ﬁerce
internal conﬂicts and signiﬁcant reforms of the party structure.
The Green Party’s original organisational structure was ﬁrmly based on
participatory democratic principles. The party conference was the main
decision-making body, with executive power given to a 25-person party
council. All members could attend and vote at local and regional meetings, and
at national conference. The party had no leaders, initially electing six speakers
and three party chairs. Key party posts were rotated, with a maximum of 3
years in any single job. Members could hold one party post at a time (Kemp
and Wall, 1990, chapter 2; Burchell, 2002, 109). Even though the main aim
through the 1980s was to communicate the green message to the wider public
rather than to win elections, tensions over party organisation grew. The ﬁrst
serious attempt to introduce a more centralised party organisation, the
MainGreen initiative in 1986, failed (Kemp and Wall, 1990, 29–30; Burchell,
2002, 114), but its core aims — to improve party eﬃciency, project a better
image and provide leadership — mirrored the classic critique of the grassroots
model.
The unexpected success in the 1989 European election brought in a ﬂood of
new members and generated unrealistic expectations about an imminent
electoral breakthrough. It prompted an inﬂuential group of leading party
members, including Jonathan Porritt, Sara Parkin and Jean Lambert, to
launch the Green 2000 initiative with the aim of capitalising on the surge of
support for the party by securing representation in the House of Commons by
2000 (or soon thereafter). The rationale for its proposals to centralise the party
structure was that the existing organisational structures and rules were
Neil Carter
The Green Party
232
British Politics 2008 3

complex, ineﬃcient and unprofessional, and the lack of leaders with whom the
public could identify would hamper the party’s electoral progress. Green 2000
was opposed by a decentralist group that preferred locally based campaigning,
which was not election-driven. The victory of Green 2000 supporters at the
1991 party conference resulted in the formation of a smaller 10-person national
executive committee, a 28-member regional council to hold the executive
committee accountable, a single party chair and two elected principal speakers.
The reforms had no discernable impact on the party’s disastrous performance
at the 1992 general election. The ﬁerce recriminations in the wake of this
debacle intensiﬁed the internal factionalism, prompting Parkin to resign and
Porritt to step down, and within a year Green 2000 had eﬀectively disbanded.
Although the decentralist wing subsequently held the ascendancy, it made
no concerted attempt to overthrow the core elements of the reforms
bludgeoned through by Green 2000, which largely remain in place today.
More importantly, the party too has largely learnt to live at peace with itself.
Many of the criticisms of the Green 2000 initiative were about the way its
supporters tried to push the reforms through, rather than the reforms
themselves (Burchell, 2002, 123; Doherty, 2002, 104). Subsequently, supporters
of Green 2000 accepted that imminent parliamentary representation was never
on the cards and that a gradualist, local-based strategy was more realistic;
conversely, many decentralists acknowledged that the party did need to
become more professional and to present a better image of itself to the public
(Burchell, 2002, 115).
The introduction of proportional representation for the European Parlia-
ment and the new devolved legislatures has acted as a catalyst for a sharper
focus on electoral objectives since 1999. Election campaigning has increasingly
made use of the small group of relatively high-proﬁle personalities, notably the
two MEPs and Darren Johnson (the leader of the Green group on the GLA
and Green candidate for Mayor of London in 2004), and local councillors.
Perhaps inevitably these successes led to greater electoral ambitions, which
prompted an internal party debate about the need for a more conventional
leadership structure. During the referendum campaign in Autumn 2007,
supporters of the leadership motion argued that it would: (1) enable the party
to ‘get our message across much more eﬀectively, because people don’t relate to
abstract ideas, they relate to the people who represent them’; (2) help the party
‘to be more easily understood because we will no longer have to constantly
explain strange job titles and unfamiliar structures to a confused public’; (3)
leaders will have to do more than just talk to the media — they will ‘vote on the
Executive, take part in collective decision-making and be held accountable’.11
It seems that the referendum debate — although lively and with some vocal
opposition to the proposal — unfolded in a way that did not generate the kind
of conﬂict associated with the Green 2000 era. Perhaps the generational
Neil Carter
The Green Party
233
British Politics 2008 3

replacement of members means that newer membership cohorts are less
committed to the grassroots democratic principles (Rihoux, 2006, 94)? Either
way, the large (73%) majority in favour of establishing a leadership role
indicates that the dominant mood of members is to ensure that the party can
exploit every opportunity to maximise its electoral potential and political
impact.12
In this respect, the ideological divisions that generated internal tensions in
the past seem to have dissipated. During the 1990s the ideology of the Green
Party shifted from a quite narrow ‘ecological’ perspective to adopt a wider ‘new
politics’ approach and an increasingly social justice inﬂuenced outlook
(Talshir, 2002, 251). Broadly speaking, the Green 2000 faction represented
the traditional ecological roots of the party, with a dominant policy focus on
environment protection and a strong commitment to the familiar slogan that
‘Green politics is neither Right nor Left, but in front’.13 The demise of Green
2000 and ascendancy of the decentralists, who included a vocal left-wing
faction, saw the party adopting a wider political and social agenda, tackling
issues like unemployment, homelessness, poverty and public services. This
programme went hand-in-hand with the attempts (noted above) to build links
with a range of new social movements. By the end of the decade, the Greens
were actively embracing a social justice agenda so that they increasingly looked
like the kind of new politics Green Party that Kitschelt (1988) describes as ‘left-
libertarian’. Crucially, the intensity has disappeared from the rhetorical
internal battles over whether or not the party should be ‘left-wing’.
Yet, although Green Party may have shifted its outlook, the electorate tends
not to regard environmental politics in partisan terms. Table 3 shows that none
of the major parties is perceived as obviously better than its rivals on the issue.
Despite championing the environment since the early 1990s, the Liberal
Democrats have managed to build up only a slender lead over Labour and the
Conservatives. Indeed, it is this lack of ownership of the issue by any party that
would have given David Cameron the conﬁdence to seize on the environment
as an issue that he believed he could exploit to his advantage. Yet, by
September 2007, after more than a year of championing the environment,
Table 3 Party with the best policies on protecting the natural environment?
Conservative
Labour
Liberal Democrats
None/don’t know
Sept 2003
9
14
18
45
Sept 2004
7
13
16
47
Sept 2006
12
12
16
44
Sept 2007
11
8
22
39
Source: MORI http://www.ipsos-mori.com/polls/trends/bpoki-environment.shtml (accessed
1.02.2008).
Neil Carter
The Green Party
234
British Politics 2008 3

Cameron’s eﬀorts seemed to have exerted only a limited impact on voter
perceptions of how major parties stand on the environment. If anything, the
Liberal Democrat lead had strengthened.14 Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to
assess how the Green Party performs on this question because polling
organisations conﬂate the ﬁgure for respondents stating that the Greens are
best on the environment with those declaring ‘None/don’t know/another
party’. It is possible that the large number of responses in this ﬁnal column may
include a signiﬁcant minority stating that the Greens are best on the
environment. Certainly, during the previous peak of concern about the
environment in 1989–90, Gallup polls reported the Green Party as best on
the environment (King, 2001, 111). This ﬁnding may help explain why, until
the appearance of Cameron, the two major parties, fearful that any electoral
rewards arising from an increased salience for the environment might simply
have accrued to the Liberal Democrats or the Greens — the two parties with
the most progressive policies — simply avoided competing on the issue.
Despite embracing a broader left-libertarian agenda since the demise of
Green 2000, the Greens are not widely regarded by the British electorate or
even the media as a radical left-wing party. The common jibe from right-wing
European politicians that Greens resemble watermelons because they are
‘Green on the outside, red on the inside’ has only limited resonance in Britain
(or anywhere else now?). Thus in the 1989 European Parliament election when
the Greens performed so well, the party drew voters from all three parties
(Ru¨ dig and Franklin, 1992, 43).15 While it would be wrong to conclude too
much from one unusual second-order election 20 years ago when the Greens
were a largely unknown entity and still held a predominantly ‘ecological’
orientation, the limited recent evidence regarding the voting record of Green
voters suggests that this ﬁnding may still hold true. Surveys of both the 2003
and 2007 Scottish Parliament elections found that those individuals voting
Green in the regional list shared their constituency vote among the other
parties, although very few voted Conservative (see Table 4). These data should
be treated with great caution because of the small sample sizes; indeed, the gaps
between, say, Labour and the Liberal Democrats may not be statistically
signiﬁcant. Moreover, the Scottish experience, where disillusioned Labour
voters have additional options with the SNP and the Scottish Socialist Party,
may not transfer readily south of the border. Nevertheless, it does indicate that
the Greens can attract support from across the centre-left political spectrum,
which contradicts the common assumption in political circles that the Greens
are most likely to attract disillusioned Labour voters (in 2007 the Scottish
Greens themselves speciﬁcally targeted Labour constituency voters in a bid to
persuade them to cast their list vote for the Greens).
These data send out the key message that the Greens have the potential to
attract support from several sources, which would seem to vindicate the current
Neil Carter
The Green Party
235
British Politics 2008 3

long-term strategy of overcoming the plurality vote system for the House of
Commons by slowly building up pockets of strength wherever grassroots
activity proves successful.
Indeed, an analysis of the Green performance in the 2005 general election
seems to vindicate this strategy with the ﬁnding that ‘where the Green vote
increased on its 2001 vote Labour suﬀered most, but that where the Greens put
up a candidate for the ﬁrst time in 2005, it was the Liberal Democrats who were
most aﬀected’ (Curtice et al., 2005, 246). It is true that the biggest pockets of
Green strength so far have been mostly in Labour-dominated areas, but that
may be primarily a conjunctural outcome of Labour having such a large
governing majority and — in 2005 — the presence of many disillusioned voters
looking for an alternative party to support. The steady growth in the number
of Green councillors is concentrated in a handful of towns, such as Brighton,
Lancaster, Norwich and Oxford, where the Greens are now a very visible
political presence. These pockets of strength suggest that if a foothold is
established at local level by eﬀective grassroots activism, it can then be used as
a platform to overcome the obstacles posed by the plurality system, building on
the presence of local councillors and an observable Green Party inﬂuence over
local policy. The 2005 general election indicated that the strategy might be
having
some
limited
impact. Certainly,
some
of the
strongest
Green
performances were in constituencies where there were several Greens on the
local council and which the party had targeted for several years. In particular,
the third place in Brighton Pavilion and the saved deposits in two neighbouring
seats, reﬂected a base of support that had already delivered six seats on
Brighton council. Admittedly, the Greens also did well in several seats where
they had no signiﬁcant local presence. Certainly the Greens saved several
deposits in seats with large student populations — irrespective of whether or
Table 4 Scottish Parliament elections 2003 and 2007: How Green voters cast their constituency
vote
2003 No. of respondents
2003 %
2007 No. of respondents
2007 %
Conservative
3
5.1
5
7.0
Labour
14
23.9
17
22.0
Liberal Democrat
19
31.8
29
38.2
SNP
10
16.7
20
25.8
Other
13a
22.5
5
7.0
Total
59
100
77
100
aIncludes Green and Scottish Socialist party voters.
Sources: 2003 date from ScotCen survey; 2007 data from Scottish Election Survey www.
scottishelectionstudy.org.uk.
Neil Carter
The Green Party
236
British Politics 2008 3

not there were local councillors — where their appeal may have been enhanced
by their strong opposition to the Iraq war.
The future prospects for this strategy seem reasonably bright, especially as
the party seems to be adopting a more instrumental, hard-headed approach to
getting an MP elected. Thus, in Brighton Pavilion, its top target seat, Caroline
Lucas MEP and Principal Speaker in 2007–08 has been selected as candidate
for the next general election, defeating Keith Taylor, who had steadily built up
the Green vote by contesting the constituency in two successive elections.
Lucas is certainly the party’s most high-proﬁle politician and arguably its most
eﬀective public performer. Her prospects were improved by the strong Green
performance in the 2007 local elections, when it doubled its presence on
Brighton council to 12 councillors and gained 30% of the vote share in the
wards making up the Brighton Pavilion constituency. Another top target is
Norwich South where in 2007 the Greens secured 10 seats in Norwich Council,
coming ﬁrst in votes cast across the wards making up the Norwich South
constituency. A third target seat is Lewisham Deptford, where the high-proﬁle
candidate Darren Johnson secured 11.1% of the vote in 2005. In all three
constituencies the Greens will hope to improve their vote and their placing,
while Lucas must have a realistic outside chance of turning third place into
victory.
Conclusion
Greens remain a marginal force in British politics, punished by the iniquity of
the plurality voting system — but their electoral fortunes have taken an
upward turn since 1999 as a result of the Labour Government’s devolution
and electoral reform programmes. How far they can continue to make
progress depends in large part on institutional and political factors beyond
their control, but new political opportunities have arisen due to shifts in the
conﬁguration of party competition and the ascent of environmental issues up
the political agenda. Important changes in the organisational structure and
strategy of the Green Party over the last 15 years, including the recent
referendum vote in favour of electing a party leader, have probably placed it in
a better position to exploit these opportunities. The Green Party does still
look and feel diﬀerent — and that is probably good among an electorate that is
historically more volatile and more critical of the established parties than at
any time in the post-war era — but with a leader, a growing number of higher-
proﬁle representatives and an increasing presence across a swathe of sub-
national legislatures and councils, the party is not so diﬀerent that it frightens
voters away.
But the Greens face a dilemma. One option is to continue, as in the 2005
general election campaign, to adopt a broad set of left-libertarian policies
Neil Carter
The Green Party
237
British Politics 2008 3

within which the environment is just one priority area alongside, for example,
opposition to the war in Iraq and defending public services and free speech
(Carter and Rootes, 2006, 475). The Greens then did best in seats with
relatively large numbers of young people, those with degrees, those professing
to have no religion and people without access to a car — typically, the young,
well-educated professional living in an urban environment (Curtice et al.,
2005, 246), a ﬁnding supported by evidence (albeit based on a very small
sample) from those voting for the Greens in the 2003 Scottish Parliament
election (Curtice, 2006, 115–118). It is a voter proﬁle that may well be
receptive to a left-libertarian agenda, which, as all three top target seats are
currently held by Labour, may prove most eﬀective in attracting disaﬀected
Labour voters.
An alternative strategy is to play up the Greens’ image in the eyes of the
electorate as a single issue ‘ecological’ party in order to exploit the resurgence
of environmental politics and appeal to voters across the political spectrum. To
date, the recent resurgence of interest in the environment has not obviously
beneﬁted the Greens. Good results in the 2007 local elections and Northern
Ireland Assembly were countered by a marked decline in vote share in the
Scottish Parliament election, while support in Wales remained static. Opinion
polls since 2004 show no signiﬁcant change in national support for the Greens,
which has generally hovered at around 2–3% among those respondents naming
a preferred party (e.g. MORI: http://www.ipsos-mori.com/polls/trends/voting-
all-trends.shtml). Yet Cameron’s bid for the green vote indicates that
Conservative strategists believe that there is a non-partisan environmental
vote to be won. Inevitably, Green prospects will be shaped by whether or not
the two major parties are prepared to make the environment a central issue at
the next election or, as at every previous general election, it disappears oﬀthe
radar during the election campaign.
Or perhaps the Greens can ride both horses? Either way, as long as the
plurality voting system continues to be used for the House of Commons it is
hard to fault the current long-term strategy of slowly building up support from
the grassroots.
Notes
1 I would like to thank Brian Doherty and Chris Rootes for their helpful comments on a
draft of this article and Rob Johns for supplying survey data on the Scottish Parliamentary
elections.
2 Although the new system is not clear cut, members approved a proposal stating that ‘There
shall be a Leader and Deputy Leader or Co-Leaders of the Green party’; that is, a pair of
candidates could stand as joint Co-Leaders instead of Leader and Deputy Leader. The Scottish
Green Party, which separated from the Green Party in England and Wales in 1990, retains two
‘Co-Convenors’.
Neil Carter
The Green Party
238
British Politics 2008 3

3 Unless stated otherwise, when reference is made in this article to the ‘Green Party’ or the
‘Greens’ since 1990, it refers to the Green Party in England and Wales.
4 The data in this section on electoral performance are drawn from a number of sources, but
notably Rallings and Thrasher (2007).
5 Cynog Daﬁs was elected MP for Ceredigion on a joint Plaid Cymru/Green ticket in 1992,
although the Greens later withdrew from this local agreement. Daﬁs remained a Nationalist MP
until he resigned his seat in 2000 to become a PC member of the Welsh Assembly.
6 Kitschelt (1988) puts this failure down to party competition. He categorises green parties as
‘left-libertarian’ political parties, so the emergence of the left-libertarian Socialist Peoples’
Parties in both Norway and Denmark in the 1960s left no space for the nascent green parties to
occupy in the 1980s.
7 Les Verts managed a breakthrough in the non-proportional French electoral system in 1997,
but only because Jospin’s Socialists needed allies, and the system of second round voting gave
the Greens some bargaining power.
8 Another factor here is that there are not enough local party organisations and active members
to give adequate support to a full slate of Green candidates.
9 So did everyone else: after membership peaked at over 18,500 in 1990, it plummeted to 5,500 in
1993 (Evans, 1993) and slipped even lower through the mid-1990s, before staging a limited
recovery in recent years.
10 Since 1995 green parties have joined national government coalitions in Belgium, Czech
Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy and Latvia.
11 Extracts taken from a joint letter sent by Caroline Lucas, Darren Johnson and Sian Berry on
behalf of the Green Party Yes Campaign.
12 The Green Party website reports that turnout was ‘just under 50%’ of a membership that in
2006 was between 7 and 8,000 (http://www.greenparty.org.uk/news/3249, 30 November 2007).
13 Although there were diﬀerent strands within Green 2000: for example, Porritt unambiguously
represented this narrower ecological inheritance whereas Parkin was more inﬂuenced by the
broader new left German Green policy package.
14 An ICM poll in March 2007 showed the parties almost neck-and-neck: Conservative 16%,
Labour 14%, Liberal Democrats 14%, but there is no ICM trend data to compare change over
time (http://www.icmresearch.co.uk/media-centre-archive.php?month=March&year=2007).
15 The European Election Study found that 25% of Green voters in 1989 had voted Conservative
in the 1987 general election, 27% Alliance, 19% Labour, 7% Green and 15% had not voted
(Ru¨ dig and Franklin, 1992, 42).
References
Burchell, J. (2002) The Evolution of Green Politics, London: Earthscan.
Carter, N. (2006) ‘Party politicisation of the environment in Britain’, Party Politics 12(6): 747–767.
Carter, N. (2007) The Politics of the Environment: Ideas, Activism, Policy, 2nd edn, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Carter, N. and Ockwell, D. (2007) New Labour, New Environment? An Analysis of the Labour
Government’s Policy on Climate Change and Biodiversity Loss, York: Centre for Ecology, Law
and Policy: http://www.york.ac.uk/res/celp/webpages/projects/foe/introduction.htm.
Carter, N. and Rootes, C. (2001) ‘One step forward? Greens and the environment in the 2001
British general election’, Environmental Politics 10(4): 103–108.
Carter, N. and Rootes, C. (2006) ‘The environment and the greens in the 2005 elections in Britain’,
Environmental Politics 15(3): 473–478.
Neil Carter
The Green Party
239
British Politics 2008 3

Curtice, J. (2006) ‘A Chance to Experiment?’, in C. Bromley, J. Curtice, D McCrone and A. Park
(eds.) Has Devolution Delivered?, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 109–122.
Curtice, J., Fisher, S. and Steed, M. (2005) ‘The Results Analysed’, in D. Kavanagh and D. Butler
(eds.) The British General Election of 2005, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 235–259.
Doherty, B. (2002) Ideas and Actions in the Green Movement, London: Routledge.
Evans, G. (1993) ‘Hard times for the British Green Party’, Environmental Politics 2(2): 327–333.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007) Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis, 4th Assessment Report, http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg1.htm.
Kemp, P. and Wall, D. (1990) A Green Manifesto for the 1990s, London: Penguin.
King, A. (ed.) (2001) British Political Opinion, London: Politico’s.
Kitschelt, H. (1988) ‘Left-libertarian parties: explaining innovation in competitive party systems’,
World Politics 40(2): 194–234.
Kitschelt, H. (1989) The Logics of Party Formation: Ecological Politics in Belgium and West
Germany, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Mu¨ ller-Rommel, F. (1998) ‘Explaining the electoral success of green parties; a cross-national
analysis’, Environmental Politics 7(4): 145–154.
O’Neill, M. (1997) Green Politics and Political Change in Contemporary Europe, Aldershot:
Ashgate.
Parkin, S. (1989) Green Parties, London: Heretic Books.
Rallings, C. and Thrasher, M. (eds.) (2007) British Electoral Facts, 1832–2006, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Rihoux, B. (2006) ‘Governmental participation and the organizational adaptation of green parties:
on access, slack, overload and distress’, European Journal of Political Research 45: S69–S98.
Rootes, C. (1995a) ‘Britain: Greens in a Cold Climate’, in D. Richardson and C. Rootes (eds.) The
Green Challenge, London: Routledge, pp. 66–90.
Rootes,
C.
(1995b)
‘Environmental
Consciousness,
Institutional
Structures
and
Political
Competition in the Formation and Development of Green Parties’, in D. Richardson and C.
Rootes (eds.) The Green Challenge, London: Routledge, pp. 232–252.
Ru¨ dig, W. and Franklin, M. (1992) ‘Green Prospects: The Future of Green Parties in Britain,
France and Germany’, in W. Ru¨ dig (ed.) Green Politics Two, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, pp. 37–58.
Ru¨ dig, W. and Lowe, P. (1986) ‘The withered ‘‘Greening’’ of British politics: a study of the ecology
party’, Political Studies 34: 262–284.
Stern, N. (2006) Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change, London: H.M. Treasury: http://
www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/stern_review_economics_climate_change/
sternreview_index.cfm.
Talshir, G. (2002) The Political Ideology of Green Parties, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Neil Carter
The Green Party
240
British Politics 2008 3