THE INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 
From August 30th to September 6, nineteen hundred and fifty, 
an International Congress of Mathematicians was held at Harvard 
University under the auspices of the American Mathematical Society. 
In addition to the principal host, Harvard University, the following 
acted as co-hosts: The American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Bos-
ton College, Boston University, the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, and Tufts College. 
This was the first International Congress of Mathematicians held 
in the United States since that assembled in connection with the 
Chicago World's Fair in 1893. At that time an international gather-
ing of mathematicians met at Northwestern University under the 
presidency of Professor William E. Story of Clark University. Pro-
fessor Felix Klein of the University of Göttingen attended this Con-
gress as the official representative of the German government and 
brought with him a number of papers by prominent foreign mathe-
maticians. These papers formed an important part of the program of 
the meetings which were attended by twenty-five mathematicians. 
The 1950 Congress was the first International Congress of Mathe-
maticians held on the North American Continent since that in To-
ronto in 1924. 
At the International Congress in Oslo in 1936, the American dele-
gation invited the mathematicians of the world to hold their next 
general gathering in the United States in 1940. Plans had been prac-
tically completed for such a gathering at Harvard University when 
the outbreak of World War II necessitated the cancellation of the 
Congress. At the close of the War in 1945, the Council of the Society 
at once began discussion concerning the possibility of a gathering 
of the mathematicians of the world. Those guiding the policies of the 
American Mathematical Society were insistent that there should be 
no international congress until such a time that the gathering could 
be truly international in the sense that mathematicians could be in-
vited irrespective of national or geographic origins. On December 10, 
1947, the Council of the Society voted unanimously to accept the 
recommendation of the Emergency Committee for the International 
Congress of Mathematicians that steps be taken at once to elect offi-
cers and committees for the next congress. 
Early in 1948, the following officers of the Congress were elected: 
President Designate: Oswald Veblen, Institute for Advanced Study; 
1 

2 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
(January 
Secretary: J. R. Kline, University of Pennsylvania; Associate Secre-
tary: R. P. Boas, Jr., Mathematical Reviews. 
Garrett Birkhoff was elected chairman of the Organizing Commit-
tee with W. T. Martin as vice chairman. The other members of this 
committee, as finally constituted, were: A. A. Albert, J. L. Doob, 
G. C. Evans, T. H. Hildebrandt, Einar Hille, J. R. Kline, Solomon 
Lefschetz, Saunders MacLane, Marston Morse, John von Neumann, 
Oswald Veblen, J. L. Walsh, Hassler Whitney, D. V. Widder, and 
R. L. Wilder.1 
Invitations to send delegates to the Congress were sent to national 
academies and royal societies, universities and colleges, and to the 
mathematical societies throughout the world. In the case of all na-
tional academies and royal societies of countries with which the 
United States Government maintained diplomatic relations, these 
invitations were transmitted through the diplomatic mail pouch of 
the State Department. The various mathematical societies cooper-
ated by distributing to their members invitations to and literature 
about the Congress which was furnished to them by the Secretariat. 
In attempting to maintain the non-political nature of the Congress, 
many serious difficulties had to be overcome. In the solution of these 
problems, officers of the Congress found the various officials of the 
Department of State most sympathetic and helpful. As a part of the 
effort to keep the Congress apolitical, they tried to secure a visa for 
every mathematician who notified them about any visa difficulties 
before cancelling his passage. As far as they know only one mathe-
matician from any independent nation was prevented from attending 
the Congress because he failed to pass a political test and this man did 
not notify the officers of the Congress about his difficulties. Only two 
mathematicians from occupied countries failed to secure visas. 
Mathematicians from behind the Iron Curtain were uniformly pre-
vented from attending the Congress by their own governments who 
generally refused to issue passports to them for the trip to the Con-
gress. Their non-attendance was not due to any action of the United 
States Government. 
Just before the opening of the Congress there was received from the 
President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences the following cablegram : 
"USSR Academy of Sciences appreciates receiving kind invitation for Soviet 
scientist take part in International Congress of Mathematicians to be held in Cam-
bridge. Soviet Mathematicians being very much occupied with their regular work 
1 R. G. D. Richardson and J. L. Synge were also originally members of this Com-
mittee. Dean Richardson died July 17,1949, while Professor Synge resigned from the 
Committee when he left the United States to assume his position at the Institute for 
Advanced Study in Dublin in August 1948. 

i95i] 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
3 
unable attend congress. Hope that impending congress will be significant event in 
mathematical science. Wish success in congress activities. 
S. Vavilov, President, USSR Academy of Sciences." 
This cablegram was read at the opening plenary session of the Con-
gress which was held on Wednesday afternoon in the Sanders Theatre 
of Harvard University. This session was opened by Professor Garrett 
Birkhoff as Chairman of the Organizing Committee of the Congress. 
After the short address of welcome by Professor Birkhoff, Professor 
T. A. Skolem of the University of Oslo presented the name of Profes-
sor Oswald Veblen for the Presidency of the Congress. Professor Veb-
len was unanimously elected and then delivered his presidential ad-
dress. This address will appear in full in the Proceedings of the Con-
gress; these the Editorial Committee hopes will be published within a 
year. Immediately after this address, Professor Harald Bohr of the 
University of Copenhagen spoke on behalf of the Committee to award 
the Field's Medals.2 The medals were awarded to Professors Laurent 
Schwartz of the University of Nancy and to Atle Selberg of the Insti-
tute for Advanced Study. Professor Bohr gave an excellent résumé of 
the work of Schwartz on distributions and of the work of Selberg on 
the Riemann zeta function and his elementary proof of the celebrated 
prime number theorem. Professor Bohr's paper will appear in full in 
the Proceedings of the Congress. 
There were in attendance at the Congress 2302 persons. These were 
distributed as follows: 
American and Canadian members attending 
1429 
Americans and Canadians attending as associate members. 
539 
Members outside United States and Canada attending.... 
271 
Associate members outside the United States and Canada 
attending 
63 
2302 
In addition there were a number of mathematicians who became 
members of the Congress but did not attend the gathering at Cam-
bridge. Some of these joined fully expecting to be present but were 
prevented from attending either by illness or other unavoidable cir-
2 At the International Congress at Toronto in 1924 it was decided that at each 
international mathematical congress two gold medals should be awarded. Professor 
J. C. Fields, the Secretary of the 1924 Congress, presented a fund to subsidize these 
medals. They were first awarded in Oslo in 1936. The Committee to select the winners 
of the 1950 medals was: Professor Harald Bohr (Chairman), Professors L. V. Ahlfors, 
Karol Borsuk, Maurice Frechet, W. V. D. Hodge, A. N. Kolmogoroff, D. Kosambi, 
Marston Morse. 

4 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
(January 
cumstances while others assumed membership to support an enter-
prise which they considered most worthy. The statistics in this con-
nection are as follows: 
American and Canadian Congress members who did not at-
tend 
158 
Associate American and Canadian Congress members who 
did not attend 
29 
Congress members outside United States and Canada who 
did not attend 
50 
Associate members outside United States and Canada who 
did not attend 
11 
Total Congress members who did not attend 
248 
Total Congress membership 
2550 
The following countries outside the United States and Canada were 
represented : 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Burma, Chile, 
China, Columbia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt, Eire, England, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, India, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, 
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Scotland, 
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Uruguay, Ven-
ezuela, Yugoslavia. 
Every state in the Union was represented except South Dakota. 
THE SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM 
In addition to the contributed ten-minute papers and the stated 
addresses, which were delivered on invitation of the Organizing Com-
mittee, the scientific program of the Congress included four confer-
ences on the following topics: Algebra, Analysis, Applied Mathemat-
ics, and Topology. The chairman of each section for contributed 
papers was given the privilege of inviting not more than three per-
sons to deliver thirty minute addresses in his section. 
STATED ADDRESSES 
The following stated addresses were delivered by invitation of the 
Organizing Committee: 
A. A. Albert: Power-associative algebras. 
Arne Beurling: On null-sets in harmonic analysis and f unction the-
ory. 
S. Bochner: Laplace operator on manifolds. 

i95i] 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
5 
H. Cartan: Sur les fonctions analytiques de variables complexes. 
S. S. Chern: Differentiate geometry of'fiber bundles. 
H. Davenport: Recent work in the geometry of numbers. 
Kurt Gödel : Rotating universes in general relativity theory. 
W. V. D. Hodge: Topological invariants of algebraic varieties. 
Heinz Hopf : Die n-dimensionalen Sphëren und projektiven RHume 
in der Topologie. 
Witold Hurewicz : Homology and homotopy theory. 
S. Kakutani: Ergodic theory. 
M. Morse: Recent advances in variational theory in the large. 
J. von Neumann: Shock interaction and its mathematical aspects. 
J. F. Ritt: Differential groups. 
A. Rome: The calculation of an eclipse of the sun according to Theon 
of Alexandria. 
L. Schwartz: Distributions and principal applications. 
A. Wald: Basic ideas of a general theory of statistical decision rules. 
A. Weil: Number-theory and algebraic geometry. 
H. Whitney: r-dimensional integration in n-space. 
N. Wiener: Comprehensive view of prediction theory. 
R. L. Wilder: The cultural basis of mathematics. 
0. Zariski: The fundamental ideas of abstract algebraic geometry. 
CONFERENCES 
In recent years mathematicians have been much impressed by the 
success of the conference method of presenting research in various 
fields in which vigorous advances have been made or are in progress. 
In such conferences there is a well-coordinated program of formal lec-
tures and open informal discussion. At the International Congress the 
Organizing Committee decided to hold four conferences in the follow-
ing fields: Algebra, Analysis, Applied Mathematics, and Topology. 
A number of the Stated Addresses listed above were integrated into 
the work of the Conferences. 
A. Algebra Conference. The Algebra Conference was under the 
Chairmanship of Professor A. A. Albert. 
There were four sessions, devoted to: 
1. Algebraic geometry. In this session Professors A. Weil and O. 
Zariski gave their Stated Addresses. 
2. Groups and universal algebra. The speakers were G. Birkhoff, 
H. Zassenhaus, S. MacLane, R. Baer, and C. Chevalley. 
3. Structure theory of rings and algebras. The Stated Address of 
A. A. Albert was part of this session. Other speakers in this confer-
ence were R. Brauer, N. Jacobson, J. Dieudonné, and T. Nakayama. 

6 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
[January 
4. Arithmetic algebra. Principal speakers in this session were E. 
Artin, W. Krull, M. Deuring, and M. Krasner. 
B. Analysis Conference. This Conference was under the Chairman-
ship of M. Morse and there were four sessions devoted solely to 
analysis with an additional section in which the participants of the 
Topology Conference were joined. This was held on Friday evening, 
September 1. The sessions were devoted to: 
1. Analysis in the large. The speakers were L. Bers, S. Bergman, 
L. Cesari and T. Radó, and C. B. Morrey. 
2. Extremal methods and geometric theory of functions of a com-
plex variable. The speakers were L. V. Ahlfors, A. C. Schaeffer and 
D. C. Spencer, M. M. Schiffer, H. Grunsky, R. Nevanlinna, and 
G. Szegö. 
3. Algebraic tendencies in analysis. This subconference consisted 
of reports of various aspects of the main topic of algebraic tendencies 
in analysis. A panel of experts surveyed the field and then prepared 
a report. This report of the panel was presented to the Congress by 
the spokesman of the group. Two sessions, one on Monday afternoon 
and the other on Tuesday, were devoted to this subconference. The 
topics treated were: 
a. Group representations. Spokesman, R. Godement. 
b. Topologie Algebra. Spokesman, I. Kaplansky. 
c. Measure Theory. Spokesman, P. R. Halmos. 
d. Spectral Theory. Spokesman, N. Dunford. 
e. Applied Functional Analysis. Spokesman, N. Aronszajn. 
f. Ergodic Theory. Spokesman, S. Kakutani. 
4. The Joint Session with the Topology Conference was devoted 
to analysis and geometry in the large. The speakers were J. Leray, 
G. de Rham, and A. Lichnerowicz. 
C. Conference in Applied Mathematics. This conference was under 
the Chairmanship of J. von Neumann. There were three sessions de-
voted to: 
1. Random processes in physics and communications. The speak-
ers were C. E. Shannon and S. M. Ulam. 
2. Partial differential equations. The speakers were J. von Neu-
mann, R. Courant, S. Goldstein, W. Heisenberg, W. Prager, J. J. 
Stoker. Professor von Neumann's address was the one which he pre-
sented by invitation of the Organizing Committee. 
3. Statistical Mechanics. In this session there was the Stated Ad-
dress of N. Wiener. In addition W. Feller gave a 45 minute address. 
D. Topology Conference. This conference was under the chairman-
ship of Hassler Whitney and was divided into four sessions. 

1951Î 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
7 
1. Homology and homotopy theory. The speakers were W. Hure-
wicz, S. Eilenberg, J. H. C. Whitehead, and G. W. Whitehead. Pro-
fessor Hurewicz's address was given by invitation of the Organizing 
Committee. 
2. Fiber bundles and obstructions. The speakers were P. Olum, 
W. S. Massey, G. Hirsch, and E. Spanier. 
3. Differentiate manifolds. The speakers were S. Chern, E. 
Ehresmann, B. Eckmann, and C. B. Allendoerfer. Professor Chern's 
address was the Stated Address which he was invited to give by the 
Organizing Committee. 
4. Topological groups. The speakers were P. A. Smith, Deane 
Montgomery, K. Iwasawa, A. Gleason, and R. H. Fox. 
CONTRIBUTED PAPERS 
There were the usual sessions for the presentation of contributed 
papers. Each member of the Congress was given the privilege of sub-
mitting one paper for presentation in person. Presentation by title 
was not permitted. The contributed papers were distributed among 
seven sections, listed below. In addition, the Chairman of each sec-
tion was permitted to invite not more than three persons to deliver 
thirty minute addresses in his section.8 In all 372 contributed papers 
were presented at the Congress. 
Section I, Algebra and theory of numbers. Professor H. A. Rade-
macher was the chairman of this Section in which 58 contributed 
papers were presented. The following thirty minute addresses were 
given on invitation of the Chairman: 
K. Mahler: Farey sections in the fields of Gauss and 
Eisenstein. 
H. Selberg: The general sieve method and its place in prime number 
theory. 
H. D. Kloosterman: The characters of binary modular y congruence 
groups. 
Section II, Analysis. 
Professor G. C. Evans was the chairman of 
this Section in which 126 contributed papers were presented. The 
following invited addresses were given by invitation of the Chairman: 
H. A. Rademacher: Remarks on the theory of partitions. 
H. Bohr: A survey of the different proofs of the main theorems in the 
field of almost periodic 
functions. 
S. Mandelbrojt: Théorèmes d'unicité de la théorie des fonctions. 
Section III, Geometry and topology. Professor S. Eilenberg was the 
chairman of this Section in which 56 contributed papers were pre-
8 An exception was later permitted in the section on Logic and Philosophy, where 
four persons presented these longer papers. 

8 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
[January 
sented. The following invited addresses were given by invitation of 
the Chairman: 
L. A. Santaló: Integral geometry in general spaces (read by C. B. 
Allendoerfer). 
B. Segre: Arithmetical properties of algebraic varieties. 
Section IV, Probability and Statistics, Actuarial Science, Economics. 
Professor J. L. Doob was the chairman of this Section in which 27 
contributed papers were presented. The following invited addresses 
were given by invitation of the Section Chairman : 
C. Bose: Mathematical theory of factorial designs. 
P. Levy: Processus laplaciens et équations différentielles stochas-
tiques. 
S. N. Roy: On some aspects of statistical inference. 
Section V, Mathematical physics and applied mathematics. Professor 
Richard Courant was the chairman of this Section in which 74 con-
tributed papers were presented. The following invited addresses were 
given by invitation of the Chairman: 
C. G. Darwin : The refractive index of an ionized gas. 
F. Rellich: Störungstheorie der Spektralzerlegung. 
H. Lewy: Developments at the confluence of analytic boundary condi-
tions. 
Section VI, Logic and philosophy. Professor Alfred Tarski was the 
chairman of this Section in which 16 contributed papers were pre-
sented. The following invited addresses were given by invitation of 
the Chairman: 
T. Skolem: Remarks on the foundation of set theory. 
A. Tarski: Some notions and methods on the borderline of algebra and 
metamathematics. 
A. Robinson: Applied symbolic logic. 
S. C. Kleene: Recursive functions and intuitionistic mathematics. 
Section VII, History and education. Professor C. V. Newsom was 
the chairman of this Section in which 15 contributed papers were 
presented. The following invited address was given by invitation of 
the Chairman: 
G. Pólya: On plausible reasoning. 
THE SOCIAL PROGRAM 
The entertainment of the members of the Congress was in the 
hands of an Entertainment Committee, whose chairman was L. H. 
Loomis. The other members of the Committee were C. R. Adams, 
Mrs. L. V. Ahlfors, Mrs. G. D. Birkhoff, J. A. Clarkson, Mrs. W. C. 
Graustein, F. B. Hildebrand, Evelyn M. Hull, J. R. Kline, E. R. 

i95i] 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
9 
Lorch, Mrs. W. T. Martin, E. B. Mode, G. A. O'Donnell, Mrs. H. B. 
Phillips, Helen G. Russell, J. H. Van Vleck, Mrs. J. L. Walsh, Mrs. 
D. V. Widder, Mrs. Norbert Wiener. 
The members and associate members of the Congress were housed 
in the dormitories of Harvard University. Excellent meals were 
served in the Harvard Union. The local members of the Entertain-
ment Committee arranged a fine exhibition of mathematical models 
and a book exhibit at the Harvard Cooperative Society. In addition 
to tours of Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology there were trips to historic and modern Boston as well 
as to Lexington and to Concord. 
On the opening night there was a reception for all members of the 
Congress at the Fogg Art Museum of Harvard University. On the 
following evening the Busch String Quartet gave a concert in the 
Sanders Theatre. At the same time Professor Howard Aiken, the de-
signer of the Harvard Computing Machine, gave an interesting lec-
ture on computing machines. 
On Friday afternoon the mathematicians and their friends were 
the guests of Wellesley College at a tea. At the same time a restricted 
number of members of the Congress were admitted to the Harvard 
Observatory at Oak Ridge. On Saturday evening, September 2, 
there was an informal dance in Lowell House, while other members 
of the Congress attended a Beer Party in Memorial Hall. 
There were no sessions of the Congress on Sunday, September 3. 
In the afternoon, Boston University received the members of the 
Congress and an organ recital was provided in the Daniel L. Marsh 
Chapel of the University. In the evening Richard Dyer-Bennet gave 
a concert of ballads of various nations in Sanders Theatre. 
On Monday evening, September 4, the committee arranged for a 
concert in Symphony Hall by Miss Helen Traubel. The concert was 
enthusiastically received by the audience and Miss Traubel received 
a tremendous ovation at the end of the performance. 
The Congress banquet was held on Tuesday evening, September 
5, in the Sever Quadrangle. Professor Marston Morse was the 
Toastmaster and Dr. Detlev Bronk, President of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences, gave the principal address. Other speakers were 
Edward Crane, the Mayor of Cambridge; Dr. James R. Killian, the 
President of Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Professor 
W. V. D. Hodge, of Cambridge University; and Professor Percy 
Bridgeman of Harvard University. Professor Hodge expressed the 
sincere appreciation of our foreign members of the Congress to their 
American hosts for their splendid hospitality. 

10 
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF MATHEMATICIANS 
On Wednesday evening, September 6, the mathematicians were 
the guests of the Director and Board of Trustees of Gardner Museum 
at a farewell party. 
On Wednesday morning, September 6, there was held a final 
plenary session of the Congress in Sanders Theatre. Professor M. H. 
Stone gave a report on the conference which had been held in New 
York City immediately preceding the International Congress for the 
purpose of considering the formation of an International Mathe-
matical Union. He reported that Statutes and By-Laws had been 
adopted and that these would be submitted to the proper scientific 
groups in the various national or geographic areas in which there 
was significant mathematical activity. When a specified number of 
groups have signified their acceptance of these Statutes and By-
Laws, the Union will be declared in existence and a meeting of the 
General Assembly arranged. 
Professor van der Corput, on behalf of the delegation from Hol-
land, presented a cordial invitation to the International Congress to 
hold its next meeting in that country in 1954. The Congress unani-
mously voted to accept the gracious invitation of our Dutch col-
leagues. After addresses there was an address of appreciation by 
President Harald Cramer of the University of Stockholm. After Pro-
fessor A. A. Albert had presented a resolution of thanks to Harvard 
University and the various committees of the Congress which was 
adopted unanimously, the Congress adjourned. 
The Congress was undoubtedly the largest gathering of persons 
ever assembled in the history of the world for the discussion of 
mathematical research. However, the real measure of its success lies 
not in the large number of persons present, but in the excellence of 
its scientific program and in the contributions which it made to the 
cause of closer cooperation among scientists and to the cause of 
international good will. 
J. R. KLINE, 
Secretary, International Congress of Mathematicians 
