 
Mark Harrison, ed.. The Economics of World War II: Six Great Powers in International
Comparison. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. xxiii + 307 pp. $49.95, cloth,
ISBN 978-0-521-62046-8. 
 
Reviewed by Geofrey T. Mills 
Published on EH.Net (July, 1999) 
Scholars and students of World War II will
find this collection of essays an extremely useful
addition to their libraries. The essays cover the six
major  antagonists  of  the  war:  Germany,  Japan,
Italy, the Soviet Union, the UK and the U.S. The ed‐
itor  succeeds  in  achieving  a  major  goal  of  the
book which is to "provide a text of statistical ref‐
erence for students and researchers interested in
international and comparative economic history,
the history of WWII, the history of economic poli‐
cy,  and  comparative  economic  systems."  While
this is an ambitious goal, these essays provide in‐
sight into these issues, and, where possible, an‐
swers to important questions. 
Mark  Harrison  has  organized  this  book
around  three  key  questions:  What  contribution
did economies make to war preparedness and to
winning or losing the war? What was the effect of
wartime experiences on post war fortunes? Did
those who won the war then lose the peace? Giv‐
en these questions, economic growth as effected
by military mobilization becomes a central theme
of  the  book.  In  general,  all  six  authors  devote
space not only to the economics of the war econo‐
my, but also to the periods before the war and to
the consequences of World War II on long-run
economic fortunes. 
In the introduction, Harrison provides an ex‐
tensive overview of the book. This essay is essen‐
tially an extended quantitative discussion of the
economic and military elements of the war. In
essence, this section outlines the stark economic
realities  of  conducting  an  extended  large  scale
war and concludes that a major reason, if not the
prime reason, the allies were victorious was due
to their overwhelming advantage in the material
and logistic aspects of the conflict. Harrison also
penned the article on the Soviet economy. This
piece is an impressive statistical analysis of the
Soviet  war  effort  and  its  impact  on  post-war
growth. Harrison does not conclude that the col‐
lapse of the Soviet economy in the 1980s was a re‐
sult of its success against Germany, but he does in‐
dicate that success in World War II entrenched an
inefficient production system and extended credi‐
bility to a generation of leaders positively associ‐
ated with the defense industry. The result may
well have been a first world military set upon a
third world economic system, and this arrange‐
ment could not be sustained indefinitely. 

Hugh Rockoff's article on the United States
fills a gap in the literature on the World War II
years,  especially  the  1939-1943  period.  Rockoff
concentrates, not unexpectedly, on the conversion
from civilian consumption to war production and
the trade-offs necessary in this transition. Com‐
pared to the other countries detailed in this vol‐
ume, the U.S. was afforded the most leisurely ap‐
proach to rearming since its frontiers were not
threatened. While he looks at a large array of sta‐
tistics, Rockoff tends to focus his analysis on a to‐
tal factor productivity model and concludes that
no single factor accounts for the rise in output.
Success came from an across-the-board effort to
mobilize  resources.  One  major  contribution
which Rockoff offers has to do with the source of
America's post-war prosperity. He concludes that,
while war economics certainly played some role
in post-WWII growth, the most likely explanation
for the prosperity was a change in the macroeco‐
nomic regime. The Great Depression and World
War II effectively converted the economics profes‐
sion to a Keynesian viewpoint whereby the gov‐
ernment was seen as a positive force in the eco‐
nomic affairs of the nation. He concludes that the
most long lasting legacy of the war was this Key‐
nesian viewpoint which reshaped the intellectual
and institutional operations of macroeconomics
and relied upon monetary and fiscal policy tools
for  the  prevention  of  inflation  and  unemploy‐
ment. 
Stephen Broadberry and Peter Howlett offer
an essay on the UK entitled "Victory at all Costs."
The title is indicative of the economic effort which
Britain bent to the war effort. Their analysis indi‐
cates the huge scale of mobilization which the
Brits  undertook--some  55.3  percent  of  GDP  of
1943. This section takes into consideration all as‐
pects of the British economy and is refreshing in
its completeness and attention to close economic
analysis. They conclude that, not unsurprisingly,
the war effort in Britain was dominated by a Key‐
nesian outlook, one which placed great faith in
government controls. 
One of the main virtues of this volume is its
attention, in a single location, to the totalitarian
states.  The  essays  on  Germany  by  Werner
Abelshauser;  Italy,  by  Vera  Zamagni;  Japan,  by
Akira Hara; and Russia, by Harrison, all stand in
stark contrast to those on the U.S. and UK. The ar‐
ticles on Japan and Italy are especially welcome
because material on these countries is relatively
unavailable in English, and the comparative ap‐
proach here makes these essays both significant
and  enlightening.  All  four  of  these  pieces  deal
with the problems of managing a huge war effort
with a totalitarian mechanism. 
Decision making was in the hands of a small
set of people, but there was, in all cases, a surpris‐
ingly large amount of input. Hara points out that
the Japanese had an especially difficult time man‐
aging their far flung empire with limited natural
resources. And especially interesting in all cases is
the respective discussion of the long run impact of
the war given the mass levels of destruction, occu‐
pation, and/or defeat which the war wrought on
these countries. 
Harrison has put together an extremely use‐
ful book on comparative economic history. The six
essays are all very well done, and all conclude
with sections outlining the impact of the war on
post-war growth. This book adds to our under‐
standing of war economics and the shape of the
world economy in the second half of the twentieth
century. 
Copyright (c) 1999 by EH.NET and H-Net. All
rights reserved. This work may be copied for non-
profit educational uses if proper credit is given to
the  author  and  the  list.  For  other  permission,
please contact the EH.NET Administrator (admin‐
istrator@eh.net;  Telephone:  513-529-2850;  Fax:
513-529-3308). 
H-Net Reviews
2

If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at
http://eh.net/ 
Citation: Geofrey T. Mills. Review of Harrison, Mark, ed. The Economics of World War II: Six Great
Powers in International Comparison. EH.Net, H-Net Reviews. July, 1999. 
URL: https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=3250 
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No
Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. 
H-Net Reviews
3
