EXHIBITION A look at the 
collections of Italian geologist 
and spy Luigi Marsili p.581
TECHNOLOGY Improving the 
way digital devices talk to 
one another p.580
ENVIRONMENT Rachel 
Carson’s Silent Spring still 
resonates, 50 years on p.578
PUBLIC HEALTH The alarming rise 
of HIV/AIDS in homosexual 
men in China p.576
Stop squandering helium
Establish a global agency to build a sustainable market for this precious commodity, 
say William J. Nuttall, Richard H. Clarke and Bartek A. Glowacki. 
I
n recent months, researchers have 
struggled to obtain supplies of liquid 
helium for running and cooling their 
equipment. A UK newspaper reported in 
March how the shortage had led one scien­
tist to waste £90,000 (US$142,000) because 
he could not run experiments on his neutron 
beamline for three days1. The scientist criti­
cized buyers of party balloons for frittering 
away the gas. But the blame does not lie there. 
Helium is an extraordinary commodity. 
Its use in advanced technologies — from 
cryogenics and arc welding to space rockets 
and silicon-wafer manufacture — means 
that worldwide demand for this inert gas is 
growing rapidly. But we are not conserving 
this resource well. Natural gas remains the 
richest and most accessible source of helium; 
extracting it in industrial quantities from the 
air would be extremely costly. But too often, 
natural-gas plants treat helium as a value­
less gas and vent it to the atmosphere. One 
large-scale plant producing liquefied natural 
gas can waste more helium than all the party 
balloons in the world. 
The helium that is extracted is in the 
hands of a few players. This, combined with 
the fact that there is little spare capacity, leads 
to intermittent supply shortages. The US 
government’s decisions to stockpile helium 
in the 1960s and sell it off in the 1990s have 
constrained prices artificially. Economic 
incentives for the natural-gas industry to 
invest in the separation of helium have 
been insufficient, and although advances in 
fossil-fuel production methods should 
be making helium separation easier, this 
opportunity is not being seized.
As demand for helium grows in Asia 
and new separation plants come online in 
other countries, the US domination of the 
helium market will wane. An international 
body is now needed to oversee global plans 
for helium. We must extract and geologi­
cally stockpile the helium from gas reserves 
now, and postpone the use of air-extraction 
methods for as long as possible. 
Helium was first liquefied by Dutch 
physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1908, 
aiding his 1911 discovery of superconductiv­
ity in mercury cooled by helium to very 
The US government’s helium reserve near Amarillo, Texas, meets around one-third of world demand for the gas.
J. MARSHALL/FORT WORTH STAR-TELEGRAM/MCT/GETTY
3 1  M A Y  2 0 1 2  |  V O L  4 8 5  |  N A T U R E  |  5 7 3
COMMENT
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

low temperatures. (Superconducting 
magnets remain a major component of 
today’s demand.) In 1906, US chemists 
Hamilton Cady and David McFarland had 
discovered that helium was associated geo­
logically with natural gas2, and along with 
chemical engineer Clifford Seibel, they 
handed expertise and leadership in helium 
production to the United States (see ‘Supply 
and demand’).
A NOBLE STRATEGY
Realizing helium’s potential as a lifting gas, 
the US government was the first to extract 
and store it for strategic purposes — such 
as airships, rocket-fuel propellant and elec­
tronics manufacture. A vast helium store 
was instigated at the Bush Dome reservoir in 
the Cliffside gas field near Amarillo, Texas. 
After passing the US Helium Act Amend­
ments of 1960, the government purchased 
large amounts of the gas from private com­
panies and stored it. By the early 1970s, the 
helium stockpile amounted to more than 
20,000 tonnes (see ‘Helium sales on the 
rise’). This remained one of the few sources 
of commercial helium until 1977, when 
plants opened in Odolanow, Poland, and 
Orenburg, Russia. 
By the 1990s, however, both the stockpile 
and the associated federal debt were seen 
as excessive. In the Helium Privatization 
Act of 1996, the US Congress resolved to 
retain a small, strategic reserve of around 
2,800 tonnes; since 1998, more than half 
of the remainder has been sold off by the 
US Bureau of Land Management. Today, 
roughly one-third of global helium demand 
is met by the Amarillo reserve. 
Market modelling suggests that, by 2030, 
demand for helium in technological uses 
may double3. Yet there is sufficient helium 
in the ground to meet our long-term needs. 
Global geological reserves are estimated at 
approximately 8 million tonnes. Released by 
radioactive minerals at a rate of thousands 
of tonnes each year, helium is trapped by 
rock in natural-gas fields at levels ranging 
from a few parts per million to as much as 
7% by volume. Annual production runs at 
approximately 30,000 tonnes; in 2011, 77% 
of all helium came from the United States 
(down from 84% in 2004)4. 
Yet the natural-gas industry pays scant 
attention to helium. The global wholesale 
helium market turns over roughly $1 bil­
lion annually, a tiny sum in comparison 
with the $1 trillion generated by natural 
gas every year. All too frequently, helium 
remains blended throughout the gas sup­
ply chain until it is vented when natural gas 
is burnt. Unlike fossil fuels, where unused 
supplies remain in the ground for later use, 
any helium that is not separated is lost. 
RISING PRICES
Helium prices are a function of supply and 
demand. In addition to the US government, 
the market is dominated by six companies: 
Paris-based Air Liquide, Air Products in 
Pennsylvania, Linde Group and Messer (both 
in Germany), Matheson in New Jersey and 
Connecticut-based Praxair. Although this 
number is sufficient for global competition, 
some firms effectively have a monopoly in 
certain regions. US government intervention 
creates uncertainty for all these companies, 
who also have to respond to rapid changes 
and trends in natural-gas extraction. 
There is also a wide variety of helium 
consumers with their own perceptions of 
need and of how much they are willing to 
pay. For some, such as operators of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) equipment for 
medical diagnosis, helium is an essential 
business requirement. For others, it is merely 
a discretionary spend. 
These factors combine to create market 
anxiety. A sense of crisis can descend quickly 
when upstream supply problems occur — as 
happened in 2004 after an accidental explo­
sion at a helium-producing facility in Skikda, 
Algeria, which killed 27 people. Algeria has 
only recently finished rebuilding the Skikda 
facilities, and is just about to return to the 
helium business. 
All these reasons have led to an increase 
in average helium prices. They would 
The United States holds more 
than one-third of the world’s 
helium, but new natural-gas 
plants in other countries are 
shifting production east.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND
USA 34%
Qatar 21%
Algeria 18%
Russia 14%
Rest of world 9%
WORLD
HELIUM
RESERVES
Canada 4%
GLOBAL USES
OF HELIUM
BY VOLUME
Controlled 
atmospheres
Analysis
Airships
and weather
balloons
Leak
detection
Cryogenics 
(including MRI)
29%
Welding
17%
Heat transfer
14%
Party
balloons
8%
Pressurization
and purging
11%
5%
5%
6%
5%
Helium is used in cryogenic systems, such as in the study of large-scale quantum effects.
SOURCE: US BUREAU LAND MGMT/INDUSTRY ESTIMATE 2012
P. GOETGHELUCK/SPL
5 7 4  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  4 8 5  |  3 1  M A Y  2 0 1 2
COMMENT
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

be even higher in a normal competitive 
market, but under US law, the Bureau of Land 
Management increased helium prices by 
only as much as the (inappropriately low) 
consumer price index. Suppressed prices 
deter upstream investment. 
As each crisis hits, helium users face a tri­
lemma — to pay high prices, to shut down 
facilities temporarily or to find a substitute 
for helium. But managing demand will not 
fix the real tragedy of helium venting. In the 
longer term, helium production and storage 
need to be expanded and embedded within 
the natural-gas industry. 
ENERGY TRENDS
Transformations that are under way in the 
natural-gas industry offer opportunities 
and challenges for the helium market. The 
increasing use of natural gas for electric­
ity generation means that energy compa­
nies are investing billions of dollars in new 
facilities. This growth could be a boon for 
helium production, if separation technol­
ogy were routinely fitted to new plants. 
Cryogenic processing of liquefied natural 
gas (at around 112 K) greatly improves the 
extraction of helium, even when source con­
centrations of helium are as low as 0.015%, 
but it is not always done. Because most other 
by-products condense at these cold temper­
atures, helium can comprise up to half the 
waste gas purged from a natural-gas plant5. 
Other trends in the industry hold less 
promise for helium production. Most shale 
gas — produced by hydraulic fracturing (or 
fracking) of impermeable rocks to extract 
trapped natural gas — contains almost 
no helium because its molecules are small 
enough to diffuse through shale rocks. 
Greater US production of shale gas means 
that the country can produce enough gas 
to exceed its national demand, which has 
shifted thoughts towards exporting liquefied 
natural gas rather than importing it6. If such 
export plants are built, extra helium can be 
recovered from helium-rich source gas. 
Energy decisions that are being made now 
by the United States will affect the global 
helium market. The future of the federal 
helium reserve is currently being consid­
ered by Congress: the Helium Stewardship 
Act proposes the retention of the Amarillo 
reserve beyond 2015 (when the 1996 act 
expires) by decreasing sales and improving 
management of the reserve. 
An influential 2010 report7 by the US 
National Academy of Sciences concluded 
that the helium sell-off was not in the 
national interest: if it continued, the United 
States would have to import helium from the 
Middle East and Russia in 10–15 years. The 
committee recommended that researchers 
should be given priority access to helium 
reserves, as well as funds for technology 
upgrades to reduce their helium usage. But 
these are short-term measures that centre on 
the United States. 
Helium is a global and long-term issue. 
Both its demand and its supply bases are 
shifting east. Although US helium use has 
long been static, use is growing significantly 
in countries such as China and South Korea, 
and production facilities are coming online 
in the Middle East. In 2013, the world’s larg­
est helium-refining unit will open in Qatar, 
capable of producing more than 20% of global 
helium8. The long-term role of the United 
States in the helium business is far from 
certain, but decline seems likely. US policy 
towards both helium and natural gas will be 
important in determining the pace of shifts in 
global markets.
GLOBAL REACH
The time has come for the world to establish 
an international oversight body for helium 
that will set up new strategic reserves and 
expand helium production by recovering 
the noble gas at all major sources. 
An international helium agency, operat­
ing along similar lines to the International 
Energy Agency, could draw on multiple 
strategic stocks around the world to attenu­
ate market shocks and their accompanying 
price rises. Should unforeseen crises arise, the 
agency could develop best practices for pre­
serving supply, such as prioritizing custom­
ers or rationing. A global agency is urgently 
needed to address the long-term issues facing 
the supply and demand of this precious ele­
ment. In particular, many helium-bearing gas 
fields have a low energy content, so incentives 
to develop these fields may be needed. 
Helium extraction should become the 
norm for existing liquefied natural-gas 
plants and for all new ones, particularly 
where the source gas is rich in the element. 
We propose a competitive market for helium 
in a global economy, with supply largely in 
private hands. The role of the private sector 
enhances helium security through free trade 
and market efficiency in allocating resources. 
The US model that existed before privatiza­
tion in 1996 — a combination of private 
companies and an administered strategic 
reserve — offers a useful template. 
The near-term future of helium will be 
one of expanded demand coupled with 
ongoing uncertainty in supply. Whether this 
growth in demand will be sufficient to moti­
vate investments in upstream supply is far 
from clear. For this reason, we recommend 
that global attention is devoted to these 
issues before we squander this exceptional 
element through neglect. ■
William J. Nuttall is a senior lecturer in 
technology policy at Judge Business School, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
1AG, UK. Richard H. Clarke is a cryogenics 
and helium specialist at the Culham Centre 
for Fusion Energy, Abingdon, Oxfordshire 
OX14 3DB, UK. Bartek A. Glowacki is 
a reader in the Department of Materials 
Science and Metallurgy, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3QZ, UK. They 
are the editors of The Future of Helium as a 
Natural Resource (Routledge, 2012). 
e-mail: wjn21@cam.ac.uk
1.	 McKie, R. The Observer (18 March 2012).
2.	 Sears, B. in The Future of Helium as a Natural 
Resource (eds Nuttall, W. J. Clarke, R. & Glowacki, 
B. A.) 15–47 (Routledge, 2012). 
3.	 Cai, Z., Clarke, R., Glowacki, B. A., Nuttall, W. J. & 
Ward, N. Resour. Policy 35, 77–89 (2010).
4.	 Peterson, J. B. in The Future of Helium as a 
Natural Resource (eds Nuttall, W. J. Clarke, R. & 
Glowacki, B. A.) 48–54 (Routledge, 2012). 
5.	 Andrieu, F. et al. The Ras Laffan Helium 
Purification Unit (Air Liquide, 2006); available at 
http://go.nature.com/e9fsy1
6.	 Rascoe, A. Reuters (16 February 2012).
7.	 National Research Council Selling the Nation’s 
Helium Reserve (National Academies Press, 
2010).
8.	 ‘Noble gas’ RasGas Magazine 30, 10–11 (2010). 
0
5
10
15
20
25
1935
1945
1955
1965
1975
1985
1995
2005
Helium (thousand tonnes per year)
Production
Shipments
Annual production and sales of helium from the US federal reserve in Amarillo, Texas. After building 
up the reserve in the 1960s, legislation in 1996 required the nation to sell oﬀ its helium stockpile. 
HELIUM SALES ON THE RISE
Helium
stored
Removed
from
storage
SOURCE: US BUREAU LAND MGMT/S. J. MAIONE
3 1  M A Y  2 0 1 2  |  V O L  4 8 5  |  N A T U R E  |  5 7 5
COMMENT
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved