VU Research Portal
What drives Euroskepticism? Party-public cueing, ideology and strategic opportunity
Hooghe, E.A.E.B.
published in
European Union Politics
2007
DOI (link to publisher)
10.1177/1465116507073283
document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication in VU Research Portal
citation for published version (APA)
Hooghe, E. A. E. B. (2007). What drives Euroskepticism? Party-public cueing, ideology and strategic
opportunity. European Union Politics, 8(1), 5-12. https://doi.org/10.1177/1465116507073283
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
E-mail address:
vuresearchportal.ub@vu.nl
Download date: 05. Jan. 2026

 
http://eup.sagepub.com/
European Union Politics
 
http://eup.sagepub.com/content/8/1/5
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1177/1465116507073283
 2007 8: 5
European Union Politics
Liesbet Hooghe
Opportunity
What Drives Euroskepticism? : Party-Public Cueing, Ideology and Strategic
 
 
Published by:
 
http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:
European Union Politics
Additional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://eup.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Email Alerts: 
 
 
http://eup.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Subscriptions: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Reprints: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Permissions: 
 
 
http://eup.sagepub.com/content/8/1/5.refs.html
Citations: 
 
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

What Drives Euroskepticism?
Party–Public Cueing, Ideology and
Strategic Opportunity
Liesbet Hooghe
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
5
European Union Politics
DOI: 10.1177/1465116507073283
Volume 8 (1): 5–12
Copyright© 2007
SAGE Publications
Los Angeles, London, New Delhi 
and Singapore
On the surface, not much has changed in the European Union (EU). Its well-
oiled institutional machinery continues to produce directives, regulations,
and decisions. Business goes on as usual. But the rejection of the European
Constitutional Treaty in the heartland of Europe in the spring of 2005 was 
a watershed. The permissive consensus that shielded the machinery’s
operators from accountability is not just under strain; it is broken.
At stake here is not merely a particular outcome but the way in which
decisions are made.1 Since the 1990s, European integration has become
measurably more contentious – in the media, in social movements, and, most
prominently, among national political parties and public opinion (De Vreese,
2003; Franklin and Van der Eijk, 2004; Hooghe and Marks, 2006; Imig and
Tarrow, 2001; Pennings, 2006; Ray, 2007; and Kriesi in this issue). At the same
time, more democratic control over EU decision-making – stronger national
parliamentary oversight, greater powers for the European Parliament,
majority voting in the Council, and more EU referendums – has brought
political parties and the public into EU decision-making. The era in which
relatively insulated elites bargained grand treaties in the shadow of an
uninterested and generally approving public has come to an end.
Public contestation therefore constrains the bargains that can be made,
and this creates a limited zone of acquiescence for policy choice (Stimson,
1999). Propositions that fall outside this zone are likely to be shot down. When
the public and parties take a stance, other actors are induced to respond. On
issues that are salient for parties and public opinion, elites, in particular
leaders in government, try to anticipate the effect of their decisions on the
domestic mood. Hence public opinion about European integration is a ﬁeld
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

of strategic interaction among party elites in their competition for political
power (Hooghe and Marks, 2007).
Politicization, ideology, and strategy
This special issue puts two topics on the table. The ﬁrst is concerned with the
preferences of political parties as regards European integration. To what
extent are parties driven by strategic incentives in the context of electoral
competition; to what extent are they driven by durable ideological commit-
ments? The second topic concerns the linkages between parties and public
opinion: to what extent do voters and political parties cue each other? Whose
preferences are driving European decisions – those of voters or those of politi-
cal parties? Although these two sets of questions have been pursued
independently in scholarly research, they are intimately connected – an
answer to one question presupposes an answer to the other.
One compelling line of argument is a bottom-up view of preference
formation in which voters’ preferences provide a structure of incentives for
party positioning in the context of electoral competition. This is the dominant
view in analysis of party positioning, particularly from a rational choice
perspective (Downs, 1957). The idea here is that at least a minority of voters
have stable and transparent attitudes that affect their vote choice (Zaller,
1992). The bottom-up view can be extended to public opinion (Stimson, 1999).
Political parties respond to the public mood on European integration, and
this constrains decisions to a zone of acquiescence that cannot depart too far
from the median voter (Carrubba, 2001).
A diametrically opposite, but equally plausible, line of argument is that
political parties cue mass publics. From Seymour Martin Lipset and Stein
Rokkan (1967) to Stefano Bartolini (2005), it has been argued, and empirically
shown, that the structure of party competition is both resilient and powerful
in shaping party positioning. In this view, political parties are organizations
with historically rooted orientations that guide their response to new issues
(Marks and Wilson, 2000). Elites, not masses, have coherent ideological maps
with which they can make sense of highly technical and multifaceted issues,
such as those arising from European integration (Druckman, 2001; Jennings,
1992). Citizens can rarely grasp the complexities of an issue and look to public
actors, particularly political parties, for cues (Ray, 2003; Steenbergen and
Jones, 2002).
The implication of the latter view is that it usually takes epochal change
to redraw the battle-lines. We know that the structure of domestic com-
petition powerfully constrains attitudes towards European integration
European Union Politics 8(1)
6
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

(Aspinwall 2002; Marks and Steenbergen, 2004; Marks et al., 2006). A party’s
orientation to European issues can be predicted fairly accurately if one knows
where that party stands on an economic Left/Right dimension and a non-
economic or new politics dimension. But how these dimensions relate to a
party’s views on European integration may change – though slowly – in
response to changes in the EU, and how these intersect with the domestic
structure of conﬂict. Hence, as the European Union has mutated from a trade
regime to a federal-type polity, partisan and public attitudes have shifted
(Eichenberg and Dalton, 2007; Marks and Wilson, 2000). In the early decades
of European integration, Euroskepticism2 was rooted in opposition to market
integration (Gabel, 1998). Since the Maastricht Treaty, it has taken on an
additional dimension: defense of the national community (Hooghe and
Marks, 2007; Kriesi, in this issue). Change in the character of European inte-
gration may also affect domestic contexts differently. Extensive European
authority in market regulation looks more attractive to market liberals in
social democratic regimes than to their ideological allies in market liberal
regimes (Brinegar et al., 2004; Marks, 2004). Likewise, strengthening supra-
nationalism may be more compatible with some collective conceptions of
national identity than with others (Diez Medrano, 2003). Hence this view
argues that economic interest and identity shape the views of political parties,
but that the causal weight and the direction of these factors vary across time
and space.
This conception of slow-paced, ideologically ﬁltered change in party
positioning is radically different from one that conceives of party preferences
primarily as adjustment to electoral-strategic incentives. The latter view opens
up the possibility that parties may shift positions on Europe as they go in and
out of government, scent electoral gain, and use Europe as a lever to exploit
dissent in their opponents, or as a strategy to alter the political agenda.
Each of these views is nuanced. The bottom-up view focuses on voters
as a source of party positioning. Parties can receive an intelligible signal from
voters even if a majority of voters do not comprehend an issue. As long as 
a minority of voters have structured views, parties may be able to pick up a
signal from a noisy background. But the issue must be salient enough for a
minority of voters. Top-down theory views parties as sources of information
for voters. If parties send weak or mixed signals, either because they wish to
avoid competing on an issue or because they are internally divided, this
should reduce their cueing capacity.
Analyses of party/voter cueing and party positioning are inter-
dependent. One purpose of this special issue is to bring these two topics
together and to spur both contributors and readers to rethink their
conclusions about the dynamics of politicization in the European Union.
Hooghe
What Drives Euroskepticism?
7
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

Overview of the special issue
To what extent does cueing on European integration take place, and, if it does,
in what direction? What is the role of ideology and of electoral-strategic
incentives in party positioning on European integration? Prior research has
produced contradictory answers to both questions. The contributions in this
special issue advance a variety of methods to probe these questions.
Marco Steenbergen, Erica Edwards, and Catherine de Vries develop a
model that investigates the relative strength of top-down and bottom-up
cueing. Their conceptual point of departure is that these types of cueing are
complementary, and that their relative strength depends on characteristics of
the electoral and party system, party elites, and party supporters. Contrary
to popular perceptions, the authors ﬁnd scant evidence that political elites are
out of touch with citizens or with EU policies. That said, there are clear
differences among parties: extremist parties appear the strongest cuers and
mainstream parties the weakest. The reason, the authors claim, is that main-
stream parties attract relatively few opinion leaders and, when opinion
leadership is weak, so are bottom-up as well as top-down linkages. Modeling
conditional reciprocal causation poses problems of endogeneity and esti-
mation. The authors tackle these by means of an instrumental variable
approach embedded in dynamic simultaneous equations models to estimate
bottom-up and top-down effects over a time-span of almost two decades
(1984–2002).
Matthew Gabel and Kenneth Scheve examine party cueing among main-
stream parties. Since mainstream parties collect the lion’s share of the vote,
their linkage with voters is decisive in how politicization affects European
integration. They argue that these parties send out multiple cues rather than
a single cue. A major source of this divergent party cueing is internal party
dissent. Internal bickering creates incentives for party supporters to ﬁlter cue-
taking: it frees party supporters from adhering to a single party line, and
invites them to use their own beliefs to select among diverse party cues. The
argument builds on John Zaller’s (1992) insight that, where elite cues diverge,
citizens accept cues consistent with their interests, values, and political pre-
dispositions. Parties are not unitary actors, yet being divided does not
necessarily deprive them of inﬂuence. This argument provides a neat expla-
nation for the apparent disconnect between pro-EU parties and Euroskeptic
followers in, say, constitutional referendums.
The Constitutional Treaty referendums of 2005 constitute a perfect
occasion for observing how parties negotiate ideological credibility and
electoral-strategic opportunity. As Ben Crum shows, the dilemma is severe
for mainstream opposition parties whose ideology leads them to support
European Union Politics 8(1)
8
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

European integration, but whose opposition status induces them to ﬁght the
government. Crum ﬁnds that parties gave more weight to ideology than to
strategic posturing, because pro-European mainstream opposition parties
tended to side with government parties on the ‘Yes’ side. However, collusion
with the government cost opposition parties dearly, in that it undermined
their ability to cue party supporters. One reason for this is factionalism, an
argument consistent with Gabel and Scheve. Factionalism alone, though,
cannot explain the depth of the party–voter disconnect. Crum suggests that
voters approach European integration primarily as a second-order issue, that
is to say, as a strategic test ground for national government popularity. That
makes it difﬁcult for opposition parties to argue a ‘Yes’ vote for the Consti-
tutional Treaty on ideological grounds, since it is a government project. Hence,
where opposition parties do not play the standard opposition game, they may
invite their supporters to turn to protest parties, which exploit the EU issue
for their own strategic purposes.
Analyzing media reporting on national elections campaigns, Hanspeter
Kriesi evaluates the strength of government/opposition dynamics versus
ideology in inﬂuencing the salience and direction of party positioning on
European integration in six West European countries – Austria, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the UK. Kriesi ﬁnds considerably
more support for ideology than for government/opposition dynamics.
Euroskepticism, he argues, is part and parcel of a broader ‘new cultural
cleavage’ that pits the losers from globalization against the winners. However,
the extent to which parties blame this sense of loss on European integration
varies across countries. The linkage is strongest in the UK and Switzerland,
where Euroskepticism resonates with deep-seated national cultural anxieties,
and where the European issue has consequently become central in restructur-
ing the party system. It is too early to tell whether European integration will
become the universal battleground for winners and losers of globalization.
Whereas the preceding authors are primarily interested in mainstream
parties, Seth Jolly sets his sights on a peculiar subgroup of fringe parties,
namely regionalist parties. Non-mainstream or fringe parties are often
considered to be the kernel of Euroskepticism, and there are good ideologi-
cal and electoral-strategic reasons for this. But regionalist parties do not
appear to live by this law. As a group, they are consistently more pro-
European than are other small party groups and nearly as pro-European as
Christian democrats, socialists and liberals. This holds across time, space, and
EU policy. Why is that so? Jolly demonstrates that regionalist parties favor
European integration over and beyond ideological compatibility or electoral
incentives because European integration makes smaller states more viable. A
multi-level European Union is an unwitting ally against central governments.
Hooghe
What Drives Euroskepticism?
9
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

The special issue ends with a reﬂective forum piece by Simon Hix, which
sets out a rationalist institutionalist framework for understanding Euro-
skepticism. Echoing a basic assumption underlying most contributions here,
Hix argues that Euroskepticism is best conceived as a rational response by
citizens (and parties) for whom centralized EU power is a threat to their
interests – not as deep-seated dissent from the political system. Support of
and opposition to European integration are two sides of the same coin – both
are contextual responses to changing interests. The upshot is that the
Euroskeptics of today may become tomorrow’s Euro-supporters if their
fortunes were to improve in the EU’s competitive multi-level polity. Although
Hix probes the economic underpinnings of Euroskepticism, his framework
provides a useful starting point for a dynamic comparative analysis of non-
economic as well as economic sources of EU positioning among citizens and
parties.
Notes
1
In that sense, the neo-functionalists were right in arguing that European inte-
gration is self-transforming (Haas, 1958; Schmitter, 1969). As European
integration deepened, so the character of the process itself changed.
2
We have decided to leave the contributors to the special issue free to choose
the spelling of the word ‘Euros(k)(c)epticism’. Both versions are correct,
though one tends to ﬁnd the ‘c’ spelling on the European side of the Atlantic
and the ‘k’ spelling on the American side.
References
Aspinwall, Mark (2002) ‘Preferring Europe: Ideology and National Preferences on
European Integration’, European Union Politics 3(1): 81–111.
Bartolini, Stefano (2005) Restructuring Europe: Centre Formation, System Building,
and Political Structuring between the Nation State and the European Union.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brinegar, Adam, Seth Jolly, and Herbert Kitschelt (2004) ‘Varieties of Capitalism
and Political Divides over European Integration’, in Gary Marks and Marco
Steenbergen (eds) European Integration and Political Conﬂict, pp. 62–89.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carrubba, Clifford (2001) ‘The Electoral Connection in European Union Politics’,
Journal of Politics 63(1): 141–58.
De Vreese, Claes (2003) Framing Europe: Television News and European Integration.
Amsterdam: Aksant Academic Publishers.
Diez Medrano, Juan (2003) Framing Europe: Attitudes to European Integration in
Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
European Union Politics 8(1)
1 0
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

Downs, Anthony (1957) An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper &
Row.
Druckman, James N. (2001) ‘On the Limits of Framing Effects: Who Can Frame?’,
Journal of Politics 63(4): 1041–66.
Eichenberg, Richard and Russell Dalton (2007) ‘Maastricht’s Blues: The Trans-
formation of Citizen Support for European Integration, 1973–2004’, Acta
Politica, forthcoming.
Franklin, Mark and Cees van der Eijk (2004) ‘Potential for Contestation on
European Matters at National Elections in Europe’, in Gary Marks and Marco
Steenbergen (eds) European Integration and Political Conﬂict, pp. 32–50.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gabel, Matthew (1998) Interests and Integration: Market Liberalization, Public
Opinion, and European Union. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Haas, Ernst (1958) The Uniting of Europe. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hooghe, Liesbet and Gary Marks (2006) ‘Europe’s Blues: Theoretical Soul-
Searching after the Rejection of a European Constitution’, PS: Politics and
Political Science 39(2): 247–50.
Hooghe, Liesbet and Gary Marks (2007) ‘A Postfunctional Theory of European
Integration: From Permissive Consensus to Constraining Dissensus’, British
Journal of Political Science, forthcoming.
Imig, Doug and Sidney Tarrow (eds) (2001) Contentious Europeans: Protest and
Politics in the New Europe. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Jennings, M. Kent (1992) ‘Ideological Thinking among Mass Publics and Political
Elites’, Public Opinion Quarterly 56(3): 419–41.
Lipset, Seymour Martin and Stein Rokkan (1967) ‘Cleavage Structures, Party
Systems and Voter Alignments: An Introduction’, in Seymour M. Lipset and
Stein Rokkan (eds) Party Systems and Voter Alignments: Crossnational Per-
spectives, pp. 1–64. New York: Free Press.
Marks, Gary (2004) ‘Conclusion: European Integration and Political Conﬂict’, in
Gary Marks and Marco Steenbergen (eds) European Integration and Political
Conﬂict: Citizens, Parties, Groups, pp. 235–59. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Marks, Gary and Marco Steenbergen (eds) (2004) European Integration and Political
Conﬂict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marks, Gary and Carole Wilson (2000) ‘The Past in the Present: A Cleavage Theory
of Party Positions on European Integration’, British Journal of Political Science
30(3): 433–59.
Marks, Gary, Liesbet Hooghe, Moira Nelson and Erica Edwards (2006) ‘Party
Competition and European Integration in East and West: Different Structure,
Same Causality’, Comparative Political Studies 39(2): 155–75.
Pennings, Paul (2006) ‘An Empirical Analysis of the Europeanization of National
Party Manifestos, 1960–2003’, European Union Politics 7(2): 257–70.
Ray, Leonard (2003) ‘Reconsidering the Link between Incumbent Support and Pro-
EU Opinion’, European Union Politics 4(3): 259–79.
Ray, Leonard (2007) ‘Mainstream Euroskepticism: Trend or Oxymoron?’, Acta
Politica, forthcoming.
Schmitter, Philippe C. (1969) ‘Three Neofunctional Hypotheses about Inter-
national Integration’, International Organization 23: 161–6.
Hooghe
What Drives Euroskepticism?
1 1
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 

Steenbergen, Marco and Bradford S. Jones (2002) ‘Modeling Multilevel Data
Structures’, American Journal of Political Science 46(1): 218–37.
Stimson, James (1999) Public Opinion in America: Moods, Cycles, and Swings.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Zaller, John (1992) The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
About the author
Liesbet Hooghe holds the Chair in Multilevel Governance, Department
of Political Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and is also Professor of Political
Science at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
European Union Politics 8(1)
1 2
 at Vrije Universiteit 34820 on April 6, 2011
eup.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
