SPECIAL FEATURE: EDITORIAL
Sustainability science: bridging the gap
between science and society
Sustainability science: bridging the gap between science
and society
Arnim Wiek • Francesca Farioli • Kensuke Fukushi •
Masaru Yarime
Received: 20 December 2011 / Accepted: 20 December 2011 / Published online: 17 January 2012
 Springer 2012
Sustainability scientists continue to struggle with over-
coming the reactive environmental protection paradigm
and focusing on the urgent and complex challenges that
threaten the long-term vitality and integrity of societies
around the globe (Rayner 2011).1 These challenges are no
longer ignorable, as they have triggered ﬁerce debates and
controversies across all sectors and classes of society,
ﬁnally inﬁltrating the ivory towers of academia. Yet, public
attention is captivated by the entertaining media episodes
on these catastrophes and hardly any attention is paid to the
catastrophes’ underlying structures and root causes. Recent
examples include Fukushima’s nuclear power plant ﬁasco
and the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico that divert
attention from the key drivers, namely, the insatiable
energy consumption in industrialized nations; the eco-
nomic ideologies of safety and security that justify military
interventions and arms trade, which continue to increase
and spread in spite of humanitarian rhetoric and global
recession; the continuous urbanization, with the majority of
the world’s population now living in urban areas, thereby,
perpetuating the discredits and exploits of rural areas; the
silent discounting of our children’s future through indus-
trial food, resulting in more than a quarter of all children in
industrialized nations being obese or overweight, with the
majority staying obese as adults (Wiek et al. 2011b).
While research and education slowly recognize the
importance of shifting their efforts to such challenges and
their root causes (Jerneck et al. 2011; Spangenberg 2011;
Wiek et al. 2011a), sustainability scientists lack experience
and expertise in contributing to feasible and effective solution
options. The concept of linking knowledge to action for
sustainability was initiated a decade ago (Kates et al. 2001)
and has been reiterated since then (Komiyama and Takeuchi
2006; van Kerkhoff and Lebel 2006); yet, too many scholars
still believe that this link will miraculously emerge. However,
it is obvious that it requires a very different type of research
and education (Sarewitz et al. 2010; Wiek et al. 2011a):
namely, research that generates knowledge that matters to
people’s decisions and engages in arenas where power
dominates knowledge; and education that enables students to
be visionary, creative, and rigorous in developing solutions
and that leaves the protected space of the classroom to con-
front the dynamics and contradictions of the real world.
Against this background, the community of sustain-
ability scientists is confronted with two essential questions.
First, what is a reasonable mission for sustainability sci-
ence, considering that research and education are valuable
but not sufﬁcient contributions to solving sustainability
A. Wiek (&)
School of Sustainability, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ 85287-5502, USA
e-mail: arnim.wiek@asu.edu
F. Farioli
CIRPS Interuniversity Research Centre for Sustainable
Development, Sapienza University of Rome,
Piazza San Pietro in Vincoli, 10, 00184 Rome, Italy
K. Fukushi
Integrated Research System for Sustainability Science (IR3S),
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8654, Japan
M. Yarime
Graduate Program in Sustainability Science (GPSS),
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwanoha 5-1-5, Kashiwa,
Chiba 277-8563, Japan
1 Steve Rayner’s communication at the ‘‘Accelerating Sustainability’’
conference at the Center for Interactive Research on Sustainability
(CIRS), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
November 4, 2011.
123
Sustain Sci (2012) 7 (Supplement 1):1–4
DOI 10.1007/s11625-011-0154-0

problems? Second, recognizing these constraints, how can
sustainability science optimally contribute to solving sus-
tainability problems, and what are the necessary changes in
personal attitudes and institutional structures to support
these efforts? In response to these questions, it has widely
been recognized that collaboration and partnerships with
and across different stakeholder groups are critical condi-
tions for sustainability science and its real-world impacts
(Blackstock et al. 2007; Whitmer et al. 2010; Spangenberg
2011; Talwar et al. 2011).
This Special Issue focuses on the opportunities and
challenges of these partnerships as a means toward trans-
formational change. The Special Issue stems from and
expands on the outcomes of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on Sustainability Science (ICSS 2010) that took place
in Rome, Italy, June 23–25, 2010, organized by the Inter-
university Research Centre for Sustainable Development
(CIRPS) at Sapienza University of Rome, in collaboration
with the Integrated Research System for Sustainability
Science
(IR3S), the United Nations
University, and
Arizona State University.2 Embedded in a broad review of
the state of sustainability science, the conference focused
speciﬁcally on how sustainability science can leverage and
alter the current relations between research, business,
government, and civil society to develop and implement
solution options to sustainability challenges. The ICSS
2010 addressed these issues in plenary sessions, through a
workshop for doctoral students, and an open deliberative
session among representatives from research, industry, and
civil society. The conference was opened by Elinor Ostrom
(with a video message in an interview style), highlighting
the importance of systemic problem analysis, developing
multiple synergistic solutions, and learning from failures—
all of which needs to happen in strong partnerships across
different stakeholder groups.3
The articles compiled in this Special Issue shed light on
different themes and facets of these collaborative efforts.
The ﬁrst two articles address epistemological and metho-
dological challenges speciﬁc to sustainability science
projects. The article by Wiek et al. (2012) presents a
comparative appraisal of ﬁve representative sustainability
science projects, using a set of accepted evaluative criteria
derived from theoretical and conceptual studies. The
results indicate project accomplishments regarding prob-
lem focus and basic transformational research methodol-
ogy, but also highlight deﬁcits regarding stakeholder
participation, actionable results, and larger impacts. The
article details potential improvements of the evaluated
projects to seize the full potential of transformational
sustainability science. While this article identiﬁes multi-
stakeholder collaboration as a general methodological and
procedural challenge in sustainability science projects, the
article by Lang et al. (2012) systematically explores col-
laborative (transdisciplinary) procedures and principles.
The authors illustrate the barriers to implementing these
principles in various sustainability science projects from
around the world. The results suggest that there is con-
vergence towards general design principles for transdis-
ciplinary sustainability research, but that a great deal of
experience is necessary in order to cope with the various
potential pitfalls that can undermine impactful collabora-
tion. The article concludes with a plea for more evaluative
and
comparative
studies
that
make
transdisciplinary
experiences and insights accessible and applicable for
the growing community of sustainability scholars and
practitioners.
The next three articles explore different collaborative
settings. The article by Shiroyama et al. (2012) explores
general multi-agent governance efforts towards sustain-
ability. It critically discusses different forms and levels
of collaboration and the role of knowledge integration.
Challenges and coping strategies are illustrated by means
of two cases studies, one on reducing emission from
deforestation and forest degradation, and one on global
phosphorous management. The article by Orecchini et al.
(2012) analyzes university–industry collaboration for a
transition
towards
sustainability,
based
on
scientiﬁc
frameworks and practical experience gained from con-
crete collaborative processes. The article concludes with
recommendations for successful collaboration within the
framework of sustainability science, including pragmatic
methods for knowledge integration, multi-year collabo-
rations, inclusive communication, and impact assess-
ments of collaborations. The article by Benessia et al.
(2012) critically reﬂects on the current dominant concept
of
sustainability
science
and
outlines
an
innovative
conceptualization through a plurality of epistemologies,
languages, styles of research, experiences, and actions. The
article explores a scenario in which sustainability is fruit-
fully hybridized with a plurality of artistic and cultural
expressions and modes of experience-based knowledge; this
hybrid is suggested as a new kind of collective diagnose and
praxis for addressing sustainability challenges.
The following article by Han et al. (2012) can be framed
as an exploration of how the aforementioned partnerships
could be utilized in addressing challenges of urban sus-
tainability. It outlines a sustainable urban future by means
of a low-carbon society, coping with extended life expec-
tancy, and bridging the urban–rural divide. The article
highlights the valuable insights that might result from such
visioning efforts, but also acknowledges the limitations of
the proposed vision, including its exclusive suitability only
for highly industrialized regions like Japan or central
2 See http://icss2010.net.
3 See http://sustainability.asu.edu/research/proﬁles/ostrom.php.
2
Sustain Sci (2012) 7 (Supplement 1):1–4
123

Europe, and that its implementation might come with some
unintended negative consequences.
The article by Yarime et al. (2012) extends the previous
insights into the realm of sustainability education. It
explores how sustainability programs at different univer-
sities prepare their students for established and novel career
trajectories, in which collaborative and integrative capacity
and competence gain more and more relevance. Academic
development, institutionalization, and collaboration with
stakeholders need to be implemented in academic pro-
grams in coherent ways. A key insight from this article is
that the academic educational system, which is largely not
designed to train students to become agents and innovators
for social change, requires fundamental reforms rather than
incremental adjustments in order to seize the full potential
of sustainability science. The integration of education,
research, and contributions to society will be of particular
importance in transforming higher educational institutions
for sustainability.
Finally, the article by van der Leeuw et al. (2012) takes a
critical and provocative view at academia in its attempt to
become relevant in sustainability efforts. The diagnosis is
deﬂating: anachronistic pedagogy, mismatched incentives,
and insular products and communications that leave aca-
demic institutions poorly positioned to contribute signiﬁ-
cantly to solving sustainability problems. The paper points
out that rhetoric still outweighs contributions to real-world
sustainability transitions, while acknowledging that sus-
tainability science offers new inclusive methods of research
and practices involving relevant communities throughout
problem-solving processes in meaningful ways. Innovations
and reforms in academia need to cut deep and be fast in order
to successfully and sustainably compete against the ever-
accelerating destruction of societies and environments.
Sustainability science holds a promise—to children and
future generations, to marginalized and disenfranchised
groups, to the environment (beyond materials and energy
ﬂuxes). But as the ﬁrst decade of its inauguration comes to
a closure (Kates et al. 2001), it is time to honestly and
critically review the achievements and failures in sustain-
ability science: where do we stand in fulﬁlling this prom-
ise, and are we trying hard and smart enough? This Special
Issue pays particular attention to the link between science
and society in sustainability efforts and indicates some
accomplishments. Yet, it mainly suggests that current
sustainability science efforts do not sufﬁciently engage
with the affected and responsible stakeholder groups, and
fail in contributing signiﬁcantly to solution options and
transformational change. The articles compiled here out-
line various ways forward, including innovative episte-
mologies and methodologies (from problem-focused to
solution-focused research; from searching what to do, to
determining how to do it; from the power of techno-science
to new kinds of hybrid knowledge and practice through
extended participatory processes), institutional reforms
(incentives and reward structures for researchers and
practitioners), and novel training schemes (not only for
students but also for faculty and practitioners). A key
success factor for moving forward with a transformational
sustainability science agenda is the creation and strength-
ening of local, regional, and global networks of researchers
and practitioners that are willing to set aside disparities in
power, authority, and reputation in order to make demon-
strable progress towards sustainability.
Acknowledgments
The guest editors would like to thank the Edi-
tor-in-Chief Professor Kazuhiko Takeuchi for the opportunity and the
encouragement to edit this Special Issue as well as Darek Gondor and
Osamu Saito (Editorial Ofﬁce) for tireless and competent support
during the editorial process.
References
Benessia A, Funtowicz S, Bradshaw G, Ferri F, Medina CP, Raez-
Luna EF (2012) Hybridizing sustainability: towards a new praxis
for the present human predicament. Sustain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:
10.1007/s11625-011-0150-4
Blackstock KL, Kelly GJ, Horsey BL (2007) Developing and
applying a framework to evaluate participatory research for
sustainability. Ecol Econ 60:726–742
Han J, Fontanos P, Fukushi K, Herath S, Heeren N, Naso V, Cecchi
C, Edwards P, Takeuchi K (2012) Innovation for sustainability:
towards a sustainable urban future. Sustain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:
10.1007/s11625-011-0152-2
Jerneck A, Olsson L, Ness B, Anderberg S, Baier M, Clark E et al
(2011) Structuring sustainability science. Sustain Sci 6:69–82
Kates RW, Clark WC, Corell R, Hall JM, Jaeger CC, Lowe I et al
(2001) Sustainability science. Science 292(5517):641–642
Komiyama H, Takeuchi K (2006) Sustainability science: building a
new discipline. Sustain Sci 1(1):1–6
Lang DJ, Wiek A, Bergmann M, Stauffacher M, Martens P, Moll P,
Swilling M, Thomas C (2012) Transdisciplinary research in
sustainability science—practice, principles and challenges. Sus-
tain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/s11625-011-0149-x
Orecchini F, Valitutti V, Vitali G (2012) Industry and academia for a
transition towards sustainability: advancing sustainability sci-
ence through university-business collaboration. Sustain Sci
7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/s11625-011-0151-3
Sarewitz D, Kriebel D, Clapp R, Crumbley C, Hoppin P, Jacobs M
et al (2010) The sustainable solutions agenda. Consortium for
Science, Policy and Outcomes (CSPO), Arizona State University
and Lowell Center for Sustainable Production, University of
Massachusetts, Lowell
Shiroyama H, Yarime M, Matsuo M, Schroeder H, Scholz R, Ulrich
A (2012) Governance for sustainability: knowledge integration
and multi actor dimensions. Sustain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/
s11625-011-0155-z
Spangenberg JH (2011) Sustainability science: a review, an analysis
and some empirical lessons. Environ Conserv 38:275–287
Talwar S, Wiek A, Robinson J (2011) User engagement in sustainability
research. Sci Public Policy 38:379–390
van der Leeuw S, Wiek A, Harlow J, Buizer J (2012) How much time
do we have? Urgency and rhetoric in sustainability science.
Sustain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/s11625-011-0153-1
Sustain Sci (2012) 7 (Supplement 1):1–4
3
123

van Kerkhoff L, Lebel L (2006) Linking knowledge and action for
sustainable development. Annu Rev Environ Resour 31:445–477
Whitmer A, Ogden L, Lawton J, Sturner P, Groffman PM, Schneider
L et al (2010) The engaged university: providing a platform for
research that transforms society. Front Ecol Environ 8(6):
314–321
Wiek A, Withycombe L, Redman CL (2011a) Key competencies in
sustainability: a reference framework for academic program
development. Sustain Sci 6:203–218
Wiek A, Withycombe L, Redman CL, Banas Mills S (2011b) Moving
forward on competence in sustainability research and problem
solving. Environ Sci Policy Sustain Dev 53:3–13
Wiek A, Ness B, Brand FS, Schweizer-Ries P, Farioli F (2012) From
complex systems analysis to transformational change: a com-
parative appraisal of sustainability science projects. Sustain Sci
7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/s11625-011-0148-y
Yarime M, Trencher G, Mino T, Scholz RW, Olsson L, Ness B,
Frantzeskaki N, Rotmans J (2012) Establishing sustainability
science in higher education institutions: towards an integration
of academic development, institutionalization, and collabora-
tions with stakeholders. Sustain Sci 7(Suppl). doi:10.1007/
s11625-011-0157-5
4
Sustain Sci (2012) 7 (Supplement 1):1–4
123