 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTAMENTO DE ECONOMÍA 
DOCUMENTO DE TRABAJO 
 
 
 
“The Institutional Foundations of Public Policy:  
A Transactions Approach  
with Application to Argentina ” 
Mariano Tommasi y Pablo T. Spiller 
  D.T.: N° 29 
 
 
 
                                2000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vito Dumas 284, (B1644BID) Victoria, Pcia. de Buenos Aires, Argentina 
      Tel: 4725-7053  Fax: 4725-7010 
Email: economia@udesa.edu.ar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS  
OF PUBLIC POLICY:  
A TRANSACTIONS APPROACH  
WITH APPLICATION TO ARGENTINA* 
 
 
Pablo T. Spiller 
 
University of California, Berkeley  
& 
Center of Studies for Institutional Development (CEDI),  
Fundación Gobierno y Sociedad 
 
 
Mariano Tommasi 
Universidad de San Andrés 
Center of Studies for Institutional Development (CEDI),  
Fundación Gobierno y Sociedad 
 
 
                                                          
* This paper is dedicated to the memory of Guillermo Molinelli, who as friendly critic and invaluable 
source of knowledge challenged each and every aspect of this project.  We are indebted to Matías 
Iaryczower, Sebastián Saiegh, Mark Jones, Valeria Palanza, Juliana Bambaci, and Gisela Gin  for valuable 
input into this project.  We received useful comments from Joan Nelson and from seminar participants at 
Berkeley, CEDI, Universidad T. Di Tella, the Meeting of the International Society for New Institutional 
Economics in Tuebingen, and the Meeting of the Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Association 
in Rio de Janeiro. 

 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS  
OF PUBLIC POLICY:  
A TRANSACTIONS APPROACH  
WITH APPLICATION TO ARGENTINA 

ABSTRACT 
 
Public policies are the outcomes of complex intertemporal exchanges among politicians.  The basic 
institutional characteristics of a country constitute the framework within which those transactions are 
accomplished.  We develop a transactions theory to understand the ways in which political institutions 
affect the transactions that political actors are able to undertake, and hence the policies that emerge.  
 
We argue that Argentina is a case in which the functioning of political institutions has been such that it 
prevented the capacity to undertake efficient intertemporal political exchanges.  We use positive political 
theory and transaction cost economics to explain the workings of Argentine political institutions, and to 
show how that maps into low-quality policies. 
 
 
 

 
2
 
1.  INT RODUCT ION 
 
Political institutions are the rules of the political game and, thus, are crucial in the 
determination of public policies. Expectations about future policies are key determinants 
of economic behavior and outcomes. Thus, to understand a society’s economic 
performance, it is necessary to develop an understanding of its policymaking process. In 
this paper we present a transactions approach to study the impact of political institutions 
on public policy determination.  We use this approach to explain key features of 
policymaking and policies in Argentina.1 
 
The main thrust of (of what we might call) a “transaction approach to public policy” is 
that public policy is the result of a series of intertemporal political transactions. As such, 
understanding public policy requires understanding the determinants of the underlying 
political transactions. We borrow from Transaction Cost Economics the dual emphasis on 
the importance of intertemporal considerations in (political) exchanges, and a micro-
analytic approach to the study of transactions. Efficient intertemporal transactions require 
the appropriate alignment of the political actors’ temporal incentives. These incentives, in 
turn, are determined by the nature of the country’s institutions.  In analyzing the workings 
of political institutions, we adopt a “general equilibrium” approach, looking at the overall 
set of incentives and constraints faced by key political actors. 
 
Since the way these transactions are implemented is affected by the need to safeguard the 
interests at stake, a country’s institutional characteristics impact on the substance, nature 
and feasibility of political transactions.  The realized transactions and their nature 
characterize, in turn, the emerging public policies.  Environments that do not provide for 
the adequate enforcement of political exchanges, will generate high transaction costs, as 
political actors will have to design complex mechanisms to protect their rent allocation.  
The associated high implementation costs imply that many political transactions will not 
be implemented, and those that may be implemented will tend to generate relatively high-
cost (inefficient) public policies.  These may turn out to be too rigid (i.e., not capable of 
adjusting to changing economic circumstances) and also too unstable (i.e., too dependent 
on political outcomes). Societies with such environments will tend to generate poor-
quality public policies, with the consequent impact on economic and societal 
performance.   
 
Our framework draws from insights in the literature on transaction cost economics, in 
particular the work of Oliver Williamson and followers, and on its applications to 
politics, suggested by North (1990) and Dixit (1996).  While North and Dixit emphasize 
transactions among citizens (or pressure groups) and politicians, we emphasize 
                                                          
1 Given its well known economic, political and social underperformance, Argentina is an interesting case 
study for this type of exercise. It is also a case where it is almost universally agreed that it would be very 
hard to explain performance without reference to its political economy and to some particular features of its 
policymaking process.  See for instance Dominguez (1998), Erro (1993), and Waisman (1987). 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
3
transactions among politicians.2 In that sense, our work is closer to the pioneering papers 
by Weingast and Marshall (1988) and Moe (1990b), and Moe and Caldwell (1994).3  
 
Transaction cost economics, as developed by Williamson (1979, 1985 and 1991) and 
others, attempts to understand economic organization, taking economic transactions as 
the unit of analysis. In most of that work, characteristics of the institutional environment 
are taken as given (such as the workings of the Judiciary), and a deep analysis of the 
features of different economic transactions is undertaken.  This micro-analytical approach 
to transactions, endogenizes (explains) the governance structures that support those 
transactions (distribution of ownership, contracts, etc.).4  
 
In our transactions approach to public policy, the focus is on the institutional 
characteristics of a given country.  This requires a micro-analytic approach to political 
institutions, and for that we draw from, and contribute to, the literature on positive 
political theory.5  The features of particular political transactions are very different from 
one to the other (it is not the same to grant a one-time cash transfer to victims of some 
natural disaster, than to privatize a complex network industry plagued by cross subsidies).  
In this framework, the governance structure for each political transaction, is endogenized, 
and it depends on its characteristics and on the characteristics of the institutional 
environment.  These endogenously derived features of political transactions are, indeed, 
the features or characteristics of public policies. 
 
Along the way, we suggest a way to characterize features of public policies, that although 
shares a resemblance with those emphasized by political scientists (for instance, Cox and 
McCubbins 1999), and by some economists (Rodrik 1989, 1995 and 1997), it is different 
from the standard focus on the content of economic policies in economics.  Normally the 
political economy literature concerns itself with the substance – namely, the inner 
features of policies (i.e. will agriculture be subsidized or taxed, will exports be subsidized 
or taxed, which sectors will get protection from international competition, etc.).6  In this 
paper we focus on the outer features of policies, like their predictability, their 
adaptability to changing circumstances, their consistency across policy areas, and some 
                                                          
2 Roughly, we are assuming that agency problems among citizens (or groups) and politicians are 
“orthogonal” to the analysis.  Although clearly not the case, this issue is left for future work.  See Persson, 
Roland and Tabellini (1997) and Careaga and Weingast (2000) for some interesting interactions with that 
dimension. 
3 See also Epstein and O’Halloran (1999) for a recent application and generalization. 
4 In Levy and Spiller (1996), the institutional characteristics of countries vary, and the features of the (now 
political) transaction, the regulation of utilities, are held constant.  In those cases, the governance structure 
of that particular political transaction is endogenized to the features of each institutional environment. 
5 See for instance Cohwey and McCubbins (1995), Moe and Caldwell (1994), Palmer (1995), Shugart and 
Carey (1992), McCubbins, Noll and Weingast (1987), Weingast and Marshall (1988). 
6 For an exception, see Rodrik (1995), who analyzes six countries that implemented “the same policy,” 
export subsidization, but with widely varying degrees of success.  Rodrik relates success to features such as 
the consistency with which the policy was implemented, which office was in charge, how this was bundled 
or not with other policy objectives, and how predictable the future of the policy was.  

 
4
related “qualities.”  Some of these policy features can, at least for analytical purposes, be 
discussed independently of their substance. 7 
 
We close the introduction with a caveat. We do not attempt a formal empirical test of our 
theory here. In this study, we provide some evidence of general properties of policies in 
Argentina and a few more detailed examples of specific policies.  Much more structured 
comparisons of properties of policies across issues and polities is, though, badly needed.  
Some work in this direction has been done by students of  “State Capacity” (most notably 
Evans, 1995). We hope this paper will help in providing some additional theoretical focus 
for such studies. 
 
2. T HE T HEORY:   
POLICY DET ERMINAT ION AS A T RANSACT ION GAME 
 
A. Generalities 
 
< Figure 1: The Framework> 
  
Figure 1 presents our analytical framework in a schematic form.   We take as exogenous, 
for the purposes of this analysis some basic institutional features of a constitutional 
nature (including the electoral regime), as well as their (past) temporal stability or 
instability.8   Taking those features as given, we use elements of positive political theory 
to describe and understand the actual functioning of political institutions (legislatures, 
executives, judiciaries, bureaucracies, intergovernmental  relations). The transactions 
approach calls attention to the incentives that those basic institutional features generate 
for the key actors in each of these “institutions.”9 
 
The institutional performance and the organization resulting from those “exogenous” 
characteristics of the institutional environment, in turn provide the governance structure 
for political exchanges, that is the political set of rules that condition and enforce them, if 
                                                          
7 Recently, Cox and McCubbins (1999) have presented a related approach to public policy. Drastically 
simplifying their argument, they suggest that the determinants of public policy come to a trade-off between 
the ability to change policy (“decisiveness” -D) and the ability to commit to policy (“resoluteness” -R).  
Adding an intertemporal perspective, however, could substantially change the analysis. At a given point in 
time, an extra player with the institutional capacity to block moves, and possibly different preferences, 
increases R.  But, when seen from an intertemporal perspective, the appearance of such a player might 
increase rather than decrease D.  The very fact that the other political actors know that there is a long term 
player who will be likely to enforce current transactions, increases the capacity to enter into agreements 
(i.e., produce necessary policy changes) today, hence also increasing, rather than decreasing, D. 
 
8 For instance, we take as exogenous the duration of democratic and dictatorial spells in any given 
country’s past. 
9 For instance, we will argue that the particular incentives of the key political players in Argentina, are the 
combined result of its electoral rules, some features of its federal structure and federal arrangements, some 
“constitutional” capabilities of the presidency, as well as the history of military interruptions.  The 
interrelation among these factors (often not considered in cross-national empirical work) is crucial to 
understand the performance of Argentina’s polity. 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
5
at all. This, in turn, determines the derived governance of specific political transactions 
and, hence, the features of the resulting policies. 
 
The functioning of political institutions also impacts, more directly, on the qualities of 
public policies, via the incentives it provides for key actors (e.g. legislators, bureaucrats) 
to invest in the development of individual or collective capacities in substantive policy 
areas. 
 
In this section we try to investigate the way in which features of the political environment 
determine the nature of policies.  We do that in the context of a heuristic model.  Some 
aspects of the model are formalized in Spiller and Tommasi (2000). 
 
B.  Basic Model 
 
Imagine a group of political actors playing an infinite game, in which they have to make 
collective decisions, decisions that have distributive consequences.  These decisions will 
have different characteristics, such as duration, degree of reversibility, temporality of 
payoffs, fungibility, and so on.10 
 
The game contains elements of conflict of interest (different players have different 
payoffs as function of policies), but also some commonality of interests, which can be 
captured as shocks (i.e., economic uncertainty) that call for policy adjustments.11  As an 
example, imagine that we are deciding a policy which consists of proportional income 
taxes to be used to finance a public good.   If people have the same preferences but 
different incomes, richer people will want lower taxes (conflict of interest), but 
everybody would want for the policy to be responsive to things such as the cost of 
providing public goods. 
 
There is also political uncertainty about which political actors will be particularly 
powerful to affect policy at any point in time.  This can be captured by some form of 
random “recognition rule” a la Baron and Ferejohn (1989), Alesina (1988), or Dixit et al 
(2000).  For simplicity, let us focus on an example with two players, in which every 
period each of the players has a probability ½ of being the one who gets to decide 
(public) policy. 
 
Define first best policies as those that would be agreed upon in a complete contract 
before the world starts running.  It is easy to show that these optimal policies will not 
depend upon the realization of political uncertainty (i.e., the identity of this period’s 
agenda setter in the world of Baron-Ferejohn).  It is also easy to show that if these actors 
were infinitely lived and had discount rates low enough, they would be able to (self) 
                                                          
10 Below we will extend to the case in which these actors not only participate in the collective decision 
making process, but also have the capacity to undertake some “individual” actions / investments -- as in the 
case of provincial governors who have policy jurisdiction at home, or of legislators who could invest in 
being well informed about complex technical aspects in some policy area.  These actions will also have 
temporal properties as described in the previous paragraph. 
11 These shocks may come from international markets, policy decisions in other countries, technological 
changes, diseases, social and demographic changes, etc. 

 
6
enforce first-best policies as a Nash equilibrium.12  The highest discount rate that would 
sustain cooperation – i.e., the likelihood of observing cooperative outcomes -- 
will depend on several other features of the game.  Among them, we would emphasize 
the number of actors, the distribution of their preferences, their ability for unilateral 
actions, as well as the details of the policymaking procedure.13  
 
If the discount rate is high enough, cooperation will not be sustainable, and the 
equilibrium will be non-cooperative.  In such equilibrium, policies will depend on who 
wins the political lottery, and welfare will be lower than in the cooperative case. 
 
We can add to this infinite game a prior stage in which (by unanimity) players can make 
some agreements (sign some contracts).  If complete enforceable contracts were feasible, 
they will contract on first best policies.  Restrictions on the set of feasible (i.e. 
enforceable) contracts will be interpreted as determined by the institutional environment 
as well as by the nature of the issues in question (for instance, whether there is an 
independent Judiciary or not, whether the economic shocks are observable and verifiable 
or not, etc.). Suppose, for instance, that agreements can be enforced, but that the 
realization of economic shocks is not verifiable.  In that case, it will not be possible to 
sign contracts that prescribe (economic) state – contingent actions. Thus, only simple 
“rules” can be agreed upon.  Under some conditions, those simple rules (such as “fixing” 
a constant policy forever) will deliver welfare levels larger than those obtained in the 
discretionary non-cooperative Nash equilibrium (Spiller and Tommasi, 2000).  
 
We can conclude from this very simple exercise that, when self-enforcement is feasible, 
policies will be efficient: they will be flexible enough to accommodate changing 
economic and social realities, but not subject to political opportunism .  On the other 
hand, when the transactions environment does not foster cooperation, we will have excess 
policy volatility (in response to political shocks), as well as some policy rigidities built as 
protection from political opportunism. 
 
The reasoning can be extended by enlarging both the set of explanatory variables (the Xs) 
as well as the space of feasible actions (i.e., policy characteristics, the Ys), which we do 
next.   
 
C.  Adding explanatory variables 
 
In the discussion above we focused on variables such as the discount rate in explaining 
political cooperation.  We can modify the description of the game in several dimensions 
                                                          
12 For brevity, in what follows we concentrate on comparing one equilibrium in the Pareto frontier with the 
infinite repetition of the one-shot (non-cooperative) equilibrium, even though the game has many 
equilibria.  More precisely, the statements about the likelihood of achieving one or the other equilibria 
should be interpreted as claims about how the set of equilibria depends on features of the game.  See Spiller 
and Tommasi (2000). 
13 The number of actors with veto power over a decision is a usual concern in positive political theory  -- 
see for instance Tsebelis (1995) and  Cox and McCubbins (1999).  Here we embed those considerations in 
an intertemporal framework, in which there are things other than the number of effective veto players that 
matter for the nature and qualities of policy outcomes. 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
7
relevant for the mapping to institutional environments.  We can group those extensions 
as: (1) expanding the set of possible commitment technologies, and (2) enlarging the set 
of “cheating opportunities”. 
 
Regarding enforcement technologies, we already mentioned the possibility of 
instrumenting policy rules, via an ex-ante contract.  An alternative mechanism which, if 
available, might mitigate the impact of political conflict, is “delegation”, as in the 
literature on central bank independence or regulatory agencies.  Under some conditions, 
political actors can delegate the implementation of their political agreements to an 
“independent bureaucracy” with certain features.  Of course this “technocratic panacea” 
is complicated by many practical problems, but if those problems are not too severe, 
some amount of delegation can improve upon the non-cooperative discretionary outcome.  
Additionally, if there was an impartial umpire capable of enforcing some agreements 
(i.e., and independent Court with certain characteristics), cooperation would be more 
likely.   
 
The possibility of political cooperation and, hence, of efficient public policies will be 
increased by the availability of some such enforcement technologies.  Precisely the 
opposite result would obtain if the game is “complicated” by introducing cheating 
opportunities.  Those would include: asymmetric information about the economic shocks, 
or the possibility of some actors undertaking unobservable ex-post actions that “undo” 
some of the distribution agreed upon in the centralized bargain.  (For instance, the 
national executive having discretion over the details of the geographical allocation of 
funds for given programs).14  The more feasible these actions are, the higher the 
probability of a break up in cooperation, and the higher the probability of “short-sighted” 
policies.  
 
Governance structures (such as the internal organization of Congress, the design of 
administrative agencies, or specialized decision making arenas) might evolve to minimize 
the transaction costs associated with political transactions, and hence to enforce the rights 
arising from them.  But the evolution of those structures to minimize transaction costs, 
i.e., institutional induced enforcement, will in turn depend on the overall set of incentives 
and capacities of the same political actors.15  The capacity to knit the complex 
intertemporal exchanges necessary to decide and implement effective public policies will 
be affected by the “arena” or institutional umbrella for those exchanges. Legislatures are 
organizations specifically designed to carry out such transactions, but whether the 
legislature is the arena in which these transactions take place depends crucially on the 
legislators’ incentives.  In cases like Argentina or Mexico, Presidential systems where 
individual legislators’ property rights have traditionally been weak, the legislature will 
not tend to be a crucial arena. Thus, important political exchanges either do not take 
place, or they take place in other less institutionalized (more uncertain, and harder to 
                                                          
14 This is indeed the case in Argentina, as we will describe later (see also Radics et al 1999 and Strasser 
1999). 
15 In the Argentine case, since Congress is not the arena where the most crucial intertemporal political 
exchanges are made, and since individual legislators do not have powerful policy-related incentives, such 
institutions designed to protect political property rights a la Weingast-Marshall have not emerged.  See  
more below. 

 
8
monitor, observe and enforce) settings, such as meetings of the President or of cabinet 
ministers with some key players (governors, interest-group representatives, and the like). 
 
In a federal country it will also be necessary to identify the interplay between the game of 
national policymaking, and the game of nationally funding provincial spending.  The 
exact nature of that interaction will depend on issues such as the degree of vertical fiscal 
imbalance, the provincial or national centered-ness of elections (at the national and 
provincial level), etc. 
 
D.  Enriching the action space 
 
To summarize, the set of explanatory variables, the Xs could be enlarged to include many 
determinants of the quality of the transactions environment, beyond the discount rate.  
The action space (the Ys) can also be enlarged and made more complex, in order to 
capture other relevant features of policies and of the policymaking process. One such 
extension would be to enrich the intertemporal properties of policies; which rather than 
being chosen anew every period, could be linked intertemporally by technical reasons 
(building a bridge today provides utility over several periods), legal reasons (a law is in 
place until changed by another law), or economic reasons (present fiscal actions have 
future effects through intertemporal budget constraints).  In such richer policy space, 
other implications will emerge.  One that comes naturally and is of uttermost relevance in 
some discussions is that:  welfare improving policy reforms might not be undertaken in a 
“bad transaction environment.”16 
 
Another extension would be to include not only collective decisions but also individual 
policy actions (as in the governors example, or across ministers, etc.).  Those actions 
could be characterized by their impact on present and future payoffs of the actor 
undertaking them and of other players.  From there, further implications from the 
transaction environment to properties of public policies could be obtained.  For brevity, 
let us summarize some of those implications as the following proposition (see Spiller and 
Tommasi, 2000, for details): Bad transaction environments will foster (1) non-
cooperative individual actions, (2) under-investment in “good things,” and (3) inefficient 
actions. 
 
3. APPLYING T HE T HEORY 
 
The above model can be utilized in several types of applications. We can imagine a table 
which has:  (1) as rows, sets of political-institutional variables characterizing a country 
(the X’s); (2) as columns, different policy issues characterized by a number of properties 
(temporality of exchanges, volatility of the underlying economic environment, 
observability of the shocks, nature of interests involved, etc); and (3) inside the cells, the 
features of the resulting equilibrium policies. 
 
                                                          
16 For a collection and review of some such results, see Sturzenegger and Tommasi (1998). 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
9
Levy and Spiller (1996) have provided one exercise in which the “issue” (privatization of 
telecoms”) is kept constant, and the effects of alternative political environments is 
analyzed.  One can take the political-institutional environment as given, and look at the 
variety of policy features across issues (the political version of the Williamsonian 
exercise).  In the research agenda reflected in this paper, we are concentrating on 
understanding in detail the set of X´s characterizing one country, Argentina, and the 
resulting “generic” characteristics of  “all” the resulting policies. 
 
Before we dip into the description of the Argentine case, let us provide a few hints of the 
variables one should be looking for in performing these exercises more generally.  First, 
with regard to the explanatory (political) variables.  The variables that arise from the 
model are: 
- 
Institutional veto points 
- 
Variables determining who holds those institutional veto points at each point in time 
(related to the parameters of the stochastic political shock)17 
- 
Length of horizons and their determinants 
- 
Institutional features (constitution, budget procedures, informal practices, etc) that 
permit unchecked moves by some actors  
- 
Independence and “strength” of Supreme Court or equivalent 
- 
Characteristics of the bureaucracy18 
- 
Political instability 
 
Our approach also suggests looking at the interactions, extent of substitution and 
complementarities, across all these determinants -- i.e., to the institutional general 
equilibrium --, as we will try to argue in the application to Argentina.  
 
The institutional environment could provide better or worse protection of political 
property rights.  In countries where institutions are organized in such a way that political 
actors’ property rights are well protected (as in Weingast and Marshall, 1988) many 
policies / political transactions can be implemented fairly efficiently, that is without need 
to resort to awkward safeguards.19  In countries with lesser protection of political actors’ 
property rights, even the possibility of implementation will depend on the features of the 
political transactions necessary to implement any given policy. 
 
Public policy, as a transaction, involves multiple parties, both at the design and 
implementation stages. Policies normally imply a stream of benefits and costs.  The 
potential for opportunistic behavior during the transaction induces politicians to develop 
“institutions” to safeguard their side to those transactions.  
                                                          
17 See de Figueiredo (1997) and Dixit et al (2000) for models with interesting insights in this dimension. 
18 Many of these things are themselves endogenous to other more fundamental constitutional and historical 
factors (an extended notion of the “genetic code” in Moe and Caldwell, 1994).  Part of our agenda is to 
understand those determinants, but, as explanation of current features of policies, some of those 
characteristics can be taken as exogenous. 
19 This is, of course, a comparative statement (in the spirit of Williamson 1991).  We are aware that 
political bargains in the US political system are safeguarded by a variety of “bureaucratic monstrosities” 
(Moe 1990 and 1997).  But, we will argue, these policies may have to be implemented with even bigger 
monstrosities in other institutional environments, like the Argentine one. 

 
10
 
Relevant features of the transactions that are important in determining its implementation 
difficulties are: 
 
- 
number (and cohesiveness) of relevant political actors involved 
- 
degree of irreversibility:  can the assets associated with the transaction be withdrawn 
before they have any value?  (for instance, it is more difficult to “control” dam 
building than road maintenance) 
- 
temporality: long lasting versus repeated versus one-shot (dam building versus road 
maintenance versus disaster relief; those benefiting from dam building can be 
expected to renege on deals) 
- 
measurability: can parties observe what’s going on? (public education vs. road 
maintenance) 
- 
universality:  wide vs. narrow interests (pensions/public education vs. subsidies to 
cotton growers) 
 
The characteristics of the required political transactions will lead the actors to build 
alternative governance structures to enforce those transactions.   
 
Transactions with low implementation costs will generate policies with few safeguards.   
Transactions with higher implementation costs will be implemented with costly 
safeguards. For instance, privatizing a malfunctioning sector with substantial cross 
subsidies. In this case, safeguards will have to be developed to protect the widespread 
rents arising from cross-subsidies.20 Other instances of transactions requiring safeguards 
are related to federal fiscal arrangements, where to prevent ex-post opportunistic policies, 
programs are moved out of the annual budget discussions via earmarked taxation. 
 
Finally, we have cases in which the implementation costs are so high, that potentially 
welfare-improving policies or institutional changes do not take place.  The failure to 
implement badly needed provincial tax reforms is explained in Saiegh and Tommasi 
(2000) as a consequence of the incapacity of the federal government not to bail out those 
provinces that failed to implement those reforms.  The required reforms had the nature of 
a long term investment, with costs up front and benefits which would only accrue 
gradually, creating ample room for opportunistic behavior by provincial and national 
authorities. 
 
4.  CHARACT ERIST ICS OF PUBLIC POLICIES IN ARGENT INA 
 
Coming back to our specific application, in what follows we will argue that the political-
institutional environment in Argentina has prevented the development of efficient 
intertemporal political transactions, and this has generated bad public policies.  Let us 
start by summarizing some of the implications of the theory, in the following proposition. 
 
Proposition 1: 
                                                          
20 This type of safeguards is behind the difficult regulatory problems in both the telecommunications and 
water sectors in Argentina.  See Abdala and Spiller (2000). 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
11
 
If the institutional environment (the features of the game) is such that conditions are not 
given for the agreement and enforcement of efficient intertemporal political exchanges, 
then inefficient, awkward and opportunistic policies would be prevalent. To prevent 
opportunistic behavior it is likely that a large portion of the rents would be distributed 
ahead of time, making them insensitive to shocks (i.e., these will be inefficient, rigid 
policies). The part that is left to be sensitive to shocks will tend to be manipulated by the 
player with the ability to move “ex-post” (opportunistic policies).  Thus, policies will be 
characterized by: 
 
1. Pursuance of short term benefits for the enacting coalitions, as well as non-
cooperative individual actions (“Short termism”) 
 
2. Inflexible rules, procedures and structures for “long term” policies. (Straight-jackets 
to prevent opportunism) 
 
3. Some desirable policy reforms never take place. (Some trades are not made at all; 
leading to “indecisiveness” in the language of Cox and McCubbins, 1999)  
 
4. Underinvestment in capacities, leading to lower quality policies.21 
 
Point 2 could be interpreted as excessive defensive investment, while points 3 and 4 refer 
to insufficient productive investment. 
 
In the rest of the paper we argue that Argentina is a case in which a generalized 
incapacity to strike efficient intertemporal political exchanges has induced very defective 
public policies, and we explain the reasons behind that incapacity to instrument 
intertemporal agreements.  In this section we briefly describe the dependent variable, the 
characteristics of public policies. 
 
As stated in the introduction, we are focusing on outer properties of polices.  Those 
include their flexibility to adjust to changing underlying circumstances, their volatility in 
response to political changes, as well as other features such as “coherence” and other 
dimensions of “quality.”  Coherence relates to the degree of consistency with other 
related policies, that is, the degree that different policies operating over the same realities 
have a logic and operational consistency. 22   Quality is, of course, a fuzzy concept, but 
area specialists can often judge and agree on some qualities of policies.  
 
There is enough circumstantial evidence to characterize Argentina’s public policies as 
being of low and heterogeneous quality, incoherent, sometimes unstable, and other times 
too rigid.  The sudden policy changes and erratic application of statutes, has generated a 
widespread feeling of judicial insecurity (the opposite of the rule of law, Weingast 1993), 
                                                          
21 Legislators and their staff with little or no policy expertise would be one example.   Governors that do 
not invest in building up their local tax administrations would be another. 
22 This dimension is related to the notion of  “Balkanization” in Cox and McCubbins (1999). 

 
12
with important disincentives for investment, and thus damaging the economic 
performance of the country. 
 
These properties of policies are difficult to measure, and even more difficult to compare 
across countries. In this section we attempt to provide some suggestive evidence.  Figure 
2 presents a very rough measure of volatility of economic policy from Freedom House, 
where Argentina is the 7th most volatile case in a sample of 106 countries. 
 
< Figure 2: Volatility of Policies> 
 
More generally, few observers will disagree that Argentina produces public policies of 
lower quality than many other countries.  Consider monetary policy.  During the high-
inflation times of the late 1980s, it was obviously of lower quality than that of the 
Bundesbank or the US Federal Reserve, as well as many other countries.  Current 
monetary policy in Argentina (the convertibility policy, a straitjacket introduced in 1991 
that prevents the undertaking of monetary or exchange-rate action) is also a low quality 
policy, although probably the best feasible policy given history and other characteristics 
of the institutional environment.  
 
Argentina’s macro policy instability is a well-known fact. But policy instability has also 
operated at the micro level. Acuña (1991), for example, has documented the 
unwillingness of industrialists to invest in building export capacity, at times in which they 
were offered rather generous export promotion policies.  That unwillingness seems to 
have been due to their uncertainty about the stability of those policies. 
 
Public policy is also incoherent.  Rodriguez Larreta and Robredo (1999) and Abdala and 
Spiller (2000) describe in detail the incoherences in anti-poverty and regulatory policies.  
Both show substantial “balkanization.” Regulatory policy is made in an ad-hoc, and 
decentralized, fashion.  The regulatory process is conducted by a bureaucracy with 
substantial executive interference, and with only partial congressional involvement.23 
Contrasting to the commonalties across sectors in regulatory policies in the UK or Chile, 
in Argentina each sector has had its own way of being regulated, reflecting the discretion 
of, and lack of coordination among, the sectoral secretaries.  Policies also show large 
changes without changes in congressional mandates.24  Saiegh and Tommasi (1999) show 
that Argentina' s version of fiscal federalism shows excess rigidity (more on this below).  
Public policy, while being incoherent, shows both instability in some dimensions and 
excess rigidity in others.  To understand the reason for this seemingly contradictory set of 
policy features, an understanding of political institutions is in order. 
 
                                                          
23 That is not to say that Congress was not relevant for the privatization process. Contrary to some 
simplistic accounts of the Argentine process of market oriented reforms, Congress was substantially 
involved (Llanos,  1998; Bambaci et al, 1999; Abdala and Spiller, 2000). Although Congress may try, and 
even succeed, in blocking privatizations, it cannot control them once they are under way.   
24 It is not uncommon to observe that the political appointees (Minister or Secretary) make use of this 
discretion orienting the resources to their provinces of origin. This is especially pervasive (in terms of 
stability) when the rotation of the political appointees is high, as it can be seen in the National Secretariat 
for Social Development, where in the last 6 years four different Secretaries have been appointed.  

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
13
 
 
5. A BRIEF INT RODUCT ION T O ARGENT INA´ S POLIT ICAL 
INST IT UT IONS 
 
We will argue that some institutional characteristics of Argentina, as well as its history of 
political instability, have been important determinants of the actual workings of 
government, and hence of the nature of public policies.  In this section we provide a very 
brief introduction to Argentina’s constitutional structure, electoral system and political 
history. 
 
As the US, Argentina’s political system tends to generate a relatively fragmented polity. 
It is a federal republic, with a presidential form of government and a bicameral 
legislature. 25   A main difference with the US, and indeed a crucial one, is the way 
legislators are elected.  Differing from the US, the members of the Chamber of Deputies 
(currently 257) are elected from multi-member districts (the 23 provinces and the federal 
capital) for four year terms. The deputies are elected from closed party lists using the 
d' Hondt divisor form of proportional representation. One-half of the Chamber is renewed 
every two years, with every district renewing one-half of its legislators (or the closest 
equivalent).   
 
As in the US, the 24 “provinces” receive a number of deputies in proportion to their 
respective populations.  The Argentine system, however, tends to over-represent the 
smaller provinces much more than in the US.  There are two restrictions to proportional 
representation: (1) no district (province) can receive fewer than five deputies, and (2) no 
district can receive fewer deputies than it possessed during the 1973-76 democratic 
period.  As a result of these rules the least populous provinces are highly over-
represented in the Chamber.  
 
Senators have also been elected in a very different way than in the US.  As in the US, 
prior to the 1994 constitutional reform, all of the country' s provinces, and its federal 
capital, were represented by two senators.26  Differing from the US, however, senators 
were elected indirectly for nine year terms by the provincial legislatures using the 
plurality formula, except in the Federal Capital where they were selected via an electoral 
college. 
 
A major difference with the US is that (intra-party and general) electoral rules have made 
provincial governors (as party leaders) individually and collectively, very powerful 
actors. They control large budgets, and exercise influence on important public policy 
areas, like education, health and public safety. (Jones, 2000, pp. 3-4).  Furthermore, as we 
                                                          
25 Argentina’s original constitution dates from 1853 and it became fully “operational” (being ratified by all 
the provinces of the time) in 1862.  Argentina consists today of 23 provinces and the federal capital city of 
Buenos Aires – which after the Constitutional reform of 1994 became autonomous. 
26 Since the constitutional reform of 1994, the Senate is composed of 72 members, with every province 
(and the federal capital) represented by three senators which will be elected directly, with the stipulation 
that no one party can occupy more than two of a province' s seats in the Senate. Until 2001 these senators 
will continue to be elected indirectly by the provincial legislatures 

 
14
explain below, federal fiscal finances are characterized by large fiscal imbalances: 
provinces have large spending responsibilities, but most of their funding comes from a 
common pool of resources collected by the National government on behalf of itself and 
the provinces.  These two features together – (1) governors are important actors in 
national policy, and (2) the national government is an important actor in provincial public 
finances – are the backbone of a very particular policymaking game, which we describe 
later. 
 
For many years (except during military dictatorships and proscriptions) the two dominant 
political parties in Argentina have been the Partido Justicialista (PJ, also known as the 
Peronist Party) and the Union Civica Radical (UCR).  In addition to the PJ and UCR, 
other important actors in the Chamber are small center-right provincial parties that tend 
to compete in only one province (where they are often the dominant, or main opposition, 
party). 
 
Argentina’s first constitutional president took office in 1862. The formal machinery of 
democracy, elections and checks and balances operated in Argentina until 1930, the first 
time that a military coup succeeded in removing a constitutionally elected president.  
Between 1930 and 1982 twelve presidents (both de jure and de facto) were taken out of 
office by force, with no two different democratically elected presidents following each 
other in a normal manner until the accession of President de la Rúa in December 1999.  
The sources of Argentina’s institutional instability have been explored by numerous 
scholars with different interpretations (see Waisman (1987) and (1999)).   We treat 
institutional instability as exogenous for the purposes of this paper, in which we attempt 
to explain the current (i.e., since the return to democracy in 1983) features of public 
policies. 
 
6. T HE WORKINGS OF POLIT ICAL INST IT UT IONS AND T HE 
POLICY PROCESS IN ARGENT INA 
 
A.  General Picture 
 
The purpose of this section is to provide a concise presentation of our theory of 
Argentina’s polity.  The main thrust of the transactions approach is that public policies 
are the outcomes of complex intertemporal exchanges among politicians.  The framework 
presented in section 2 suggests that efficient intertemporal political transactions require 
either self enforcement or institutional arrangements that facilitate enforcement.  In the 
absence of either type of enforcement, intertemporal political exchanges will be 
characterized by short-termism, inflexible rules, indecisiveness, and underinvestment in 
capacities, leading to low quality policies.  We claim that Argentina is such a case, and 
that its historical political instability, basic constitutional features, electoral rules and 
federal fiscal features, are key determinants of such inability to develop efficient long-
term public policies.  
 
In the theoretical discussion we identified a series of elements which affect the capacity 
to knit efficient intertemporal political exchanges.  They include:   the number of political 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
15
actors with power over a given decision; their intertemporal linkages, including the 
length of their horizon (conversely, their impatience); the characteristics of the arenas in 
which they undertake key political exchanges; the availability of enforcement 
technologies such as the possibility of delegating the intertemporal implementation of 
political decisions to independent and capable bureaucracies, or the presence of an 
independent enforcer such as a strong and unbiased Supreme Court; and other features 
such as whether some key actors can undertake unobservable moves which affect the 
payoffs of other players. 
 
We argue below that many of those features “took the wrong values” in the Argentine 
case.   Key political actors have tended to act with short horizons.  Historically, this was a 
consequence of political instability.  But the past instability left an imprint through path 
dependent behavior in Congress, Courts, the Bureaucracy, as well as the actions and 
expectations of non-governmental actors.  On top of that, features of the electoral regime 
conspire against a strong, long-lived and powerful national Congress, weakening what 
could constitute a crucial arena for intertemporal political exchanges. 
 
Electoral rules that transfer political power away from legislators and national parties 
towards provincial party organizations, generate short horizons for legislators. Weak 
(constitutional, judicial, and budgetary) restraints to unilateral actions by the executive 
tend also to undermine political players’ ability to enter into efficient intertemporal 
political exchanges. Weak restraints on moves by the National government on issues that 
affect the provinces had the same effect in intergovernmental relations; the importance of 
this was magnified by the fact that provinces have a heavy financial dependence from the 
center. 
 
The historically extreme political instability of the nation contributed to the lack of 
judicial, and thus constitutional, restraints to executive action.  A professional 
bureaucracy, well supervised by Congress, could be an alternative channel for the 
intertemporal enforcement of political agreements, but Argentina does not have such a 
bureaucracy either.   
 
The combination of lack of legislative incentives, the ability for unilateral moves by the 
executive, and the power of provincial leaders, all have moved crucial political bargains 
away from the national legislature and into other arenas.27  Often these bargains take 
place in Executive quarters, in meetings of the President with governors, or occasionally 
in meetings of national political party leaders.  Since those arenas do not have particular 
institutional stickiness, they do not allow key political actors to enforce bargains 
intertemporally. 
 
                                                          
27 This problem relates to the intermixing of national and provincial policies.  Paradoxically, the President 
depends “too much”  on provincial political leaders, at the same time that the provinces are heavily 
dependent financially from the central government.  There are some general-equilibrium interactions at 
play here, since some awkward features of the federal fiscal regime are maintained due to the inability to 
carry out reforms, which in turn is due to the political transaction costs we are emphasizing. 

 
16
In the following subsections we bring the focus to some of the “components” of the 
general picture briefly sketched above. 
 
B. Congress: Professional Politicians, Amateur Legislators 
 
A crucial component for self enforcement is missing in Argentina.  Legislators, key 
administration officials, bureaucrats, and justices all have short term horizons. The short 
horizons of legislators can be seen by the very high rate of turnover in the legislature. 
Figure 3 shows that tenure in Congress for the average legislator is very short.28 The 
figure shows that legislative tenure was increasing until the first Perón administration.  
Since then tenure has been very short.  Table 1 shows that the probability of reelection 
for the average deputy is less than 20%.29  Table 1, shows, also, the workings of electoral 
mechanisms.  The Table shows that legislators’ turnover is not the result of voters’ 
rejection, but rather of the fact that most legislators simply do not show up in the 
provincial party list.30  Indeed, those who show up have a reasonable chance of being 
reelected. It is the fact that so few of them seek reelection that brings about such a low 
probability of reelection.    
 
<Figure 3: Tenure of legislators> 
<Table 1: Reelection probability in Argentina and elsewhere> 
 
Thus Table 1 shows that legislators’ career objectives cannot be based on maintaining 
and improving their position in Congress.  Instead Table 2 shows that  legislators find 
Congress only a stepping stone in their political careers, where they spend at most one or 
two terms, moving then to more politically lucrative activities in the provinces, party or at 
the federal government.31   While they may be professional politicians, as legislators they 
are amateurs. As professional politicians in an environment in which their future is 
disconnected from direct electoral success, Argentine legislators’ incentives are aligned 
with the interests of their provincial party, unless they have gained substantial provincial 
visibility at which time they actually can challenge the provincial party boss as well.  
Thus, the incentives of provincial party bosses are to manage the careers of their back-
benchers so as to promote them while maintaining their own control over the provincial 
party.  Thus, their incentives to move them from political job to political job.  
 
<Table 2: Career path of legislators> 
 
The mobility generated by the electoral rules limits legislators’ incentives to invest in 
policy making expertise and, in general, to undertake actions with long term implications. 
                                                          
28 This is also the case for legislative leaders, defined as the 15 legislators in the Chamber of Deputies with 
the longest tenure at each point in time.  While until the Perón Administration, their average tenure has 
been 13 years, since then it has fallen to just about 7 years. 
29 A similar figure can be obtained for senators.  See Jones, Saiegh, Spiller and Tommasi (2000). 
30 Since provincial parties do not normally hold primaries to decide on their roster for the national 
congressional elections, it is not voters who reject the legislators. 
31 The Table shows that Peronist deputies tend to return to provincial administrations more than Radical 
deputies, who tend to return to the National Party.   The reason is that during the time, the Radicals held 
very few governorships, limiting the potential for career development at the provincial administrations. 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
17
Legislators in general have little incentive to undertake any type of legislative action, 
unless the legislative action is motivated by direct provincial interests.  The lack of direct 
voters’ scrutiny implies that legislators have very little incentive to specialize.  Table 3 
shows that legislators tend to belong to a large number of committees, thus specialization 
is not taking place. Table 4 shows that legislators tend to last less than a whole legislative 
period in each committee, even in as important committees as Labor, Regional 
Economies, and Budget and Finance. 
 
<Table 3: Number of committees by deputy> 
<Table 4: Length of service by committee> 
 
 
 
C.  Federalism: A Fiscal Pact With T he Devil 
 
The history of Argentina, as that of the US, is inextricably intertwined with the issue of 
Federalism.32   In spite of the fact that modern Argentina is a large fraction of a Spanish 
viceroyalty, at the time of independence in 1810, military and fiscal technologies were 
such that fairly strong independent provinces were what was left after the Spaniards were 
gone. After several decades of violent struggle and powerful ideological debates, the 
“United Provinces of the South” became one federal nation and adopted a Constitution 
similar to the American one. 
 
Unlike the US, though, over time the federal fiscal regime adopted some characteristics 
that we could describe (following Careaga and Weingast 2000) as a “Fiscal Pact with the 
Devil.”33  Argentine fiscal federalism over the last several decades has been characterized 
by a very high degree of fiscal imbalance, a repeated tendency of the federal government 
to bailout provinces that run into financial problems, and a tax-sharing agreement full of 
rigidities and loopholes which is the source of poor incentives for provincial and national 
governments.34 
 
In the last decade, the Federal Tax Sharing Agreement (FTSA) and other transfer 
mechanisms financed more than 75% of total spending for the average province.35  There 
are large variations around that average, with 11 out of 23 provinces financing less than 
20% of their spending with their own taxes, while three provinces financed more than 
45% of their spending with own revenues (see Figure 4).  These shares have evolved over 
                                                          
32 For a more detailed discussion of Federalism in Argentina, see Iaryczower, Saiegh and Tommasi (1999).  
33 Iaryczower, Saiegh and Tommasi (1999) attempt to endogeneize that evolution.  The 1853 Constitution 
established that the federal government would use taxes on foreign trade to finance its expenditure, while 
provinces will have property, income and sales taxes.  Over time, for both economic and political reasons, 
the national government increased its role in the tax collection process, and currently collects taxes on 
foreign trade, personal and corporate income, sales, property, etc.  The process by which these taxes are 
subsequently “devolved” to the provinces has been regulated by the FTSA. 
34 See Saiegh and Tommasi (2000), Nicolini et al (1999), Jones et al (2000), World Bank (1996), Schwartz 
and Liuksila (1997). 
35 Total subnational spending oscillates around 2/3 of consolidated government spending (excluding 
pensions), i.e., it is twice as large as spending by the national government. 

 
18
time in a distributive fashion, from the earlier times of hard budget constraints and richer 
provinces spending more, to a current situation where public spending in the poorer and 
small provinces being twice as large as in the most advanced ones.  This, in turn, has 
been the result of the “centralization” of federal fiscal decision making, and of the 
overrepresentation of small provinces in the national Congress. 
 
<Figure 4: Vertical Fiscal Imbalances > 
 
This fiscal situation implies that although, as described earlier,  the President has to get 
together with provincial governors to negotiate national policies,  most provinces are 
heavily dependent upon decisions made in the Capital city, increasing the political 
bargaining power of the President in what constitutes a perverse fiscal-political game. 
 
The discretionary budget powers of the President and, even, of lower level national 
officials, have contributed to generate irresponsible fiscal behavior at the provincial level, 
which is even today considered to be one of the main threats to the macroeconomic 
stability painfully gained over the last few years.36   Those problems were heavily 
compound during the times of high inflation, when it was virtually impossible to track 
down the real value of any nominal flow.37 
 
Even though individual provinces have at times been beneficiaries of the discretion of the 
national government, it is clear to everyone that the net game is highly inefficient.38  In an 
attempt to curtail that discretion, they have tended to increase the rigidity of the FTSA, 
and hence its incapacity to adjust to changed economic circumstances. 
 
These features, as well as the practice of earmarking some taxes for specific programs 
with clear regional distributional effects (subsidies to special activities), has lead to a very 
rigid, yet very convoluted system of federal tax collection and distribution, which has 
been christened the “Argentine fiscal labyrinth,” illustrated in figure 5. 
 
<Insert Figure 5: Fiscal Labyrinth > 
 
It is important to emphasize again the reinforcing (or general equilibrium) interactions 
between the features of Argentina’s fiscal federalism, and the overall incapacity to 
implement efficient intertemporal political exchanges.  On the one hand, as emphasized 
in this section, the peculiar features of the federal fiscal system (such as the high degree 
of vertical fiscal imbalance) are a factor that impinges upon the capacities to instrument 
effective policies in the national arena.  At the same time, the high transaction-costs that 
                                                          
36 See Jones, Sanguinetti and Tommasi (2000), World Bank (1996), First Boston Report (May 2000). 
37 The provinces insisted and eventually succeeded in claiming to receive daily transfers from the nationally 
collected taxes. 
38 Saiegh and Tommasi (1998) report evidence of provincial governors explicitly recognizing this situation 
in discussions about possible reforms to the FTSA. 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
19
have characterized the Argentine political economy, have contributed to the evolution 
and maintenance of this peculiar system of fiscal federalism.39 
 
D.  A Bureaucracy without a Long-T erm Principal 
 
One possible mechanism for the intertemporal enforcement of political agreements is 
through delegation to a relatively independent, yet accountable, bureaucracy. Argentina, 
however, has not developed such a bureaucracy.  The lack of any long term principal, can 
be seen, following Spiller and Urbiztondo (1994), as a key factor behind the lack of a 
professional bureaucracy. By definition, Executives are transient in (almost) all 
presidential systems; and as already explained, Congress is not a long-term principal in 
Argentina since legislators are not that interested in controlling the Administration.40 
 
The bureaucracy, as a consequence, faces no long term incentives, facilitating shirking 
and requiring intrusive administrative controls to avoid corruption, further reducing its 
ability to generate timely and effective policies.  Each new Executive, unable to motivate 
the permanent bureaucracy, has nominated large numbers of political appointees, often 
under much more flexible labor agreements (creating indeed a parallel albeit transient 
bureaucracy). This has increased bureaucratic rotation, multiplying the effect of the 
historically high rotation of Presidents, and impeding the development of norms of 
cooperation among different branches of the bureaucracy.  This has, in turn, decreased 
the quality and coherence of the bureaucracy and of the resulting policies.  See Figure 6. 
 
<Figure 6: Bureaucratic quality> 
 
The incapacity to motivate the permanent bureaucracy has been reinforced by the 
presence of a constitutional clause (art. 14 bis) that establishes “stability of public 
employment”, which imposes large difficulties to fire public employees.  This has been 
circumvented by the development of a “parallel bureaucracy.”  The parallel bureaucracy 
undertakes the same actions as the normal bureaucracy is designed to, but unable to, 
undertake.  The rotation at the ministerial and secretarial levels implies rotation at the 
“parallel bureaucracy” as well, limiting the extent of institutional knowledge, and the 
development of cooperation across ministries and secretariats, deepening the 
heterogeneity in policy quality, and the lack of policy coherence.41 
 
E.  A Friendly Supreme Court 
 
                                                          
39 This point is illustrated in Saiegh and Tommasi (2000), where transaction-cost reasoning is used to 
explain the failure of the attempts to substitute highly distorting taxes, and of the attempts to “decentralize” 
taxation power to the provinces. 
40 As Krehbiel (1991) argues, legislators tend to undersupply that kind of public good, an effect that is 
magnified in Argentina since legislators only tend to provincial party leaders who, in turn, are not 
interested in this. 
41 The parallel bureaucracy is widespread, but difficult to measure. Bambaci, Spiller and Tommasi (2000) 
report information for a single agency.  In that case, the parallel bureaucracy, which consists of all those 
under special “contracts” represent well above 50% of total employment, and a larger fraction of the wage 
bill, as these tend to be better paid (but shorter lived) employees. . 

 
20
The workings of judicial institutions have direct implications for the feasibility of private 
contracting.  Judicial institutions impact as well on the nature and feasibility of 
arrangements among private parties and governments, and for the issue that interests us 
here, for arrangements among political agents. 
 
The ability of the judiciary to restrain political agents from undertaking opportunistic 
actions vis-à-vis each other depends on the relative political power of the various players.  
In particular, a judiciary whose reviews of the constitutionality of a legislative or 
administrative act can be easily dismantled, whether by legislative action, or by fiat, 
would seldom develop a doctrine of judicial review of such actions. Judicial review of 
such actions would only result in legislative or administrative reversals of their decisions 
and may even trigger political retaliation.  In such restraining scenarios, Justices, then, 
will learn to follow their political masters. 
 
On the other hand, a judiciary facing a fragmented polity, one that will face difficulties in 
overturning judicial decisions, will over time develop doctrines favoring judicial review 
of administrative and legislative acts. 42  This theory would suggest that courts will not 
tend to reverse government acts in the presence of unified governments, like strong 
parliamentary systems, while they will tend to be more aggressive in the presence of 
divided government, like presidential systems.43   
 
Judicial activism, however, measured by the extent of reversal of government acts, 
depends not only on the opportunities faced by the court (i.e., how fragmented are its 
policy competitors), and hence on its doctrines, but also on its current political alignment.   
Political alignment, in turn, depends on the nomination process and on its turnover.  
Courts whose tenure are very short will naturally tend to be politically aligned, while 
Courts whose tenure is indefinite or very long, may alternate between political alignment 
and political opposition to the sitting government. 
 
Differing from most other countries, the Argentine judiciary, at least since the mid 1940s, 
has exhibited a very high level of rotation.  During that same period, and because of 
electoral results and de-facto administrations, governments have had an unusual level of 
control over the Federal legislature.  As a consequence, it is possible to say that over the 
last half of the last century, the Argentine court was not independent.  This lack of 
independence facilitated the ability of the executive to exceed its constitutional powers, 
and hence to limit the credibility needed for long term contracts, whether among private 
or public agents.44  As a result, this lack of independence limited both private 
investments, and efficient long term policies. 
 
Table 5 shows that the Argentine Supreme Court in the second half of the last Century 
was one of the courts with the shortest average tenure in the world.  Indeed, since 1960 
                                                          
42 For a “Pavlovian” theory of judicial independence, see, Spiller (1996). 
43 For evidence on judicial restrain and promotion in strong parliamentary systems see Ramseyer and 
Rasmusen (1997) who provide evidence that in Japan, justices promotion depends on their support of the 
government, and Salzberg (forthcoming), who provides similar evidence for the United Kingdom. 
44 In the language of O’Donnell 1993: 1367, it did not provide “horizontal accountability.”  

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
21
until the mid 1990s, the average Argentine justice lasted less than four years in its post.  
The average tenure of argentine justices is similar to that of Pakistan, Peru, Sri Lanka, the 
Dominican Republic, and Zambia, countries not associated with long term stability and 
the predominance of the rule of law.   
 
<Table 5: Tenure of the Court, comparative > 
 
Figure 7, shows, however, that this is a feature of the last 50 years.  The Figure shows 
that after WWI, the Argentine Court was on its way to become not too distinct from its 
US counterpart.   Indeed, since its creation in 1863 and until the mid 1920s, the average 
tenure of the Argentine Court systematically increased, when the average tenure of its 
members reached the same level as that in the US.  The later political instability 
drastically reduced the tenure of justices on the bench.  Only recently has tenure started to 
climb back to prior levels. 
 
<Figure 7: Judicial tenure Argentina/US > 
 
Figure 8 shows that the impeachments brought about against the sitting Court members 
during the first Perón administration had a lasting impact. Since then, the norm of not 
manipulating the membership in Court has been lost.  New military presidents had no 
qualms in removing civilian appointed justices, and similarly, civilian presidents had no 
qualms in removing justices appointed by prior military regimes.  At the return to 
democracy, newly elected presidents picked their own Justices.  The first time since 1946 
in which a President might have faced an opposition Court, President Menem expanded 
the court from five to nine members allowing himself a “working” judicial majority. 
Figure 8 shows that a substantial number of Presidents since 1946 were able to name at 
least two thirds of the Court justices.  Indeed, the control over the court was such that 
since Perón until the administration of De la Rúa which started in 1999, no President 
faced a Court with a majority appointed by a political adversary. 
 
<Figure 8: Percentage of Justices named by friendly administration > 
 
Thus, the lack of independence of the Court during the second half of the last century is 
related to its unusually close political alignment with the executive, which reflects the 
political instability of Argentina during the period. Indeed, as democracy sets in, justices 
are going to last longer, and judicial independence will reassert itself, with the potential 
for further limiting of executive discretion.45 
 
 
F.  I nteractions 
 
The lack of legislative specialization described above, implies that Congress cannot 
delegate an action to the Executive and expect to supervise or monitor it closely.  Thus, 
actions that are delegated to the executive are those that do not have drastic regional 
                                                          
45 For an empirical analysis of Supreme Court decision making in Argentina, see Iaryczower, Spiller and 
Tommasi (2000.) 

 
22
impacts, or whose delegation are unavoidable, including budget preparation and 
execution.  The inability to monitor and control budgetary execution, implies that the 
administration has substantial discretion in the execution of the budget.  Thus, little 
attention is placed in the legislature to budgetary details, and most budgets, once 
presented, are approved with relatively minimal amendments.46  
 
Indeed, since the beginning of the XXth Century, and apart from the administrations ofr 
President Perón and Ménem, Congress has rarely approved in time the Budget sent by the 
Executive.47  In practice, then, the Executive has operated with large amounts of 
budgetary discretion.  Even in the post-stabilization 1990’s, where ex ante budgets started 
being approved in time, ex post control has not been exercised.  Table 6 shows this last 
point. The so-called Cuenta de Inversión, the ex post budget verification, has not been 
dealt with promptly enough to be an operational instrument for Congress to verify the 
fulfillment of the budget contract by the Executive. 
 
<Table 6:  Budgets executions approved in time (ex post control) 1984-1999> 
 
We have referred already to several sources behind the Executive’s ability to make 
unchecked unilateral moves (which can undo previous agreements): the fact that the 
Supreme Court has tended to be politically aligned to the president, the lack of a strong 
and independent bureaucracy, and budget practices.   Additionally, this power has been 
based on some “constitutional” capacities and practices, amounting to legislative powers 
of the president.  These practices have evolved partly out of the history of political 
instability, which has tended to focalize in the Executive processes that, in a more stable 
environment, would have naturally drifted towards the legislature.48 They are also due, in 
part, to some explicit constitutional capacities and to some constitutional lacunae and 
their interpretation.49  We include in this category the fact that the Constitution names the 
President as the Chief of the Public Administration, the fact that the President is endowed 
with the capacity to “regulate” the laws from Congress,50  and more recently, the practice 
of issuing Decretos de Necesidad y Urgencia (Decrees of Need and Urgency, DNU’s).51  
 
                                                          
46 The budget preparation process is conducted mostly in the Cabinet, which is the entry point for most 
pressure group activity.  It is not uncommon for provincial governors to visit the Minister of the Economy, 
his secretaries, or other ministers, trying to get favorable treatment for their provinces in National 
allocations and decisions. (Jones 2000b). 
47 Furthermore, there were times in which the President did not even bother to send the Budget Proposal to 
Congress (Molinelli et al, 1999).   This was common during the high-inflation periods. 
48 Acuña (1995), De Riz (1986). 
49 These lacunae in constitutional interpretation are, of course, not independent of the relative weakness of 
the Supreme Court we have referred to. 
50 The expression in Spanish is “reglamentar las leyes,”  what we would call completing the legislative 
contract.  See Carey and Shugart (1998), Ferreira Rubio and Goretti (1998) and Molinelli at al (1999). 
51 The first two attributions were assigned by former article 86 of the Constitution, while the latter was a 
practice of Executive legislation, whose constitutionality has been vividly debated in Argentina.  The 1994 
Constitution includes the first two and attempts to regulate (yet, giving to it constitutional status) the 
DNU´s in article 94.  DNU´s were rare in the past, President Alfonsín (1983-1989) increased their use, 
while President Menem tended to abuse them, leading to the attempt at regulating them in the constitutional 
reform.  See Ferreira Rubio and Goretti (1998),  Molinelli at al (1999), Bidart Campos (1995). 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
23
As a matter of fact, one of the reasons why the Executive has tended to issue as many 
DNUs, is, curiously, the fact that the President does not control Congress either.  Even 
though Congress does not have strong capacities for fine tuning policy formulation or 
controlling its implementation, it is still in charge of passing laws, and as such, it has the 
ability to act as a blunt veto player.52 The inability of the Argentine Congress to fine tune 
the control of the administration, is paralleled by the inability of the administration to 
manage the Congress. Electoral rules make it difficult for the administration to control 
the legislature, even when the government party controls one or both chambers.53  Since 
electoral rules generate a naturally fragmented legislature (see Table 7) presidents need 
develop workable coalitions by adding to their own party members, legislators from 
independent regional parties.  As Table 7 shows, since the return to democracy in 1983, 
all administrations had an own-party contingent of around 50%.  But this support was 
only nominal.  
 
<Table 7: Parties in the legislature over time> 
 
Given the fragmented nature of party discipline, Presidents have needed to buy the 
support of their own congressmen through “provincial” politics.54  Since governors 
control, in the chamber, normally more than one legislator,55 popular governors from the 
government party are pivotal players, and garnering their support for presidential 
initiatives becomes not only crucial, but more important, expensive. Since legislators 
respond to their provincial party bosses, attempting to get support from individual party 
legislators against his or her governor would be very hard to achieve.56   
 
The combination of block-buying votes with the fact that legislative contingents have 
been of around 50% since the return to democracy, helps to understand the very salient 
role of governors in national politics (Jones, Saiegh, Spiller and Tommasi, 2000). 
 
G.  I mplications 
 
The lack of long-term horizons and of institutionally-induced enforcement (via Courts or 
bureaucratic implementation), implies that many political transactions are not going to be 
implemented, and that those that are will have higher transaction costs than in 
                                                          
52 See Jones, Saiegh, Spiller and Tommasi (2000). 
53 In practice, these difficulties were superseded only in exceptional political times, like the first 
Administration of President Perón. 
54 Bambaci, Saront and Tommasi (2000), following Gibson and Calvo (1997) and Corrales (1999), describe 
the exchanges that President Menem had to do with Peronist provinces in order to get his market-oriented 
reforms through Congress. 
55 As mentioned, the minimal number of chamber members per province is five. 
56 On the other hand, gathering support from legislators whose provincial party does not control the 
provincial government is easier, as the provincial party boss cannot offer as much advancement to his or 
her own legislators as can the President via the federal government.  Provincial party bosses who are not in 
government have poor currency with which to compensate their legislators.  They cannot offer jobs in the 
provincial Administration or judicial systems, and hence must rely on the national party for party or 
patronage appointments at the national level.  The Administration, however, can offer promises of such 
jobs at the federal level, countering the power of the provincial party boss. 

 
24
environments where politicians have longer horizons and where institutionally-induced 
enforcement is feasible.   
 
Congressional protection of regional interests requires very rigid, and even awkward 
looking policies, like earmarking some taxes for specific programs (i.e., subsidies to 
special activities) or activities with clear regional distributional effects.   
 
Public policies in Argentina are characterized by two seemingly contradictory features: 
they are either extremely volatile and short term, being modified with changes in the 
composition of the administration, 57 or they are extremely inflexible, limiting their 
adjustment to changing economic circumstances. 58  The first type of policies limits 
incentives of the private sector to undertake long term investments, while the second type 
assures that ineffective policies will tend to have longer than necessary shelf lives.59   
 
Similar reasons bring about bureaucratic decision making which is incoherent, lacking 
cohesiveness and not built on consensus-building. Hence, both the design and 
implementation of policy generate an environment which is not propitious for long term 
growth and stability.   
 
7. CONCLUDING COMMENT S  
  
Rather than re-capping the main themes of the paper, we conclude with observations on 
two issues: implications for comparative analysis and considerations about Argentina’s 
present and future. 
 
As Oliver Williamson emphasized for economic transactions, political institutions and 
the associated political transactions, have a complex texture.  Hence, in order to uncover 
the real determinants of a polity’s performance, it is necessary to perform detailed micro 
analysis of the incentives of key political players, which goes beyond the level of 
aggregation usually considered in cross-country comparative analysis.  Argentina has, in 
practice, some behavioral features that are closer to what is generally perceived as arising 
in the block-category “parliamentary systems”:  weak legislators’ incentives to oversee 
the bureaucracy, and in general to perform legislative duties; the dependence of 
legislators on party faction bosses; and the dominance of the cabinet in the budgetary 
process; among others. Laver and Shepsle (1994) emphasized developing “a richer and 
more systematic theoretical treatment of cabinet government in parliamentary 
democracies;” as if “cabinet government” were antithetic with presidential democracies.  
Our study of the Argentine case suggests otherwise.  Also, Persson, Roland and Tabellini 
(1998) in their work on size and composition of government as a function of political 
                                                          
57 This does not require a change in the President.  Enough that there is a change of Minister of Secretary.  
Such changes may bring drastic expenditure changes, redistributing their available funds to their provinces 
or other “constituencies.”   (See box on Social Policies). 
58 As examples, consider the rigidities associated with the Tax-Sharing Agreement, or with the Trade 
Unions “owning” the Health System. 
59 As an example, consider the lack of reform of the provincial tax systems described in the section on 
Federalism. 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
25
regimes, tend to assign Argentina and other Latin American countries to the block 
category of “presidential systems”, while according to the budget procedure they model, 
Argentina should fall in the other group. 
 
Also, it is important to understand the interactions across different inherited political 
characteristics, what we might call general equilibrium effects.  For example, it is clear 
that all presidential systems (or all parliamentary systems for that matter) do not generate 
the same type of incentives in legislators.  Electoral rules are key factors, but may not 
easily be generalized into two or three categories (i.e., simultaneity of elections may be 
important in one situation, and a second order effect in another).  Presidents have vast 
differing powers (see Shugart and Carey, 1992), but their power depends also on 
legislators’ incentives and those of other political players, and even on issues such as the 
nature of financial arrangements in multi-layered government.  As another example, a 
formal reading of Argentine constitution would suggest that the Argentine Courts should 
be quite independent, but that turns out not to have been the case. Just counting veto 
points does not suffice to provide insights on institutional performance. 
 
What does our analysis suggest about possible institutional reforms that would improve 
the environment for policymaking in Argentina? We focus on two areas.  First, we noted 
that Congress is the weak link in the policy determination process.  Even though part of 
the weakness is correcting itself with the uninterrupted democratic spell, there are at least 
two other important factors: First, reforms to electoral rules, specially (intra-party 
selection process) to reduce the role of regional party bosses; and second, a regulation of 
the legislative instruments of Executive, construing them as narrowly as the Constitution 
permits.  The combined effects of these two sets of institutional changes, together with 
the disappearance of the threat of military coups, could produce legislators with longer 
horizons and with stronger incentives to actively participate in National policy making.60 
Neither reform, though, is politically feasible under normal circumstances, suggesting 
that the current situation is indeed an equilibrium.61 
 
 
 
                                                          
60 It is worth pointing out that the recent virtuous circle has been supported by the fact that, with the 
disappearance of inflation, budgets have started to have some meaning as an instrument of intertemporal 
compromise. 
61 We are skeptical of current proposals to improve the workings of the Argentina public administration 
(and Judiciary), which do not take these deeper political determinants into consideration. 

 
26
Bibliography 
 
Abdala, Manuel and Pablo Spiller (2000) Instituciones, Contratos y Regulación en Argentina.  Fundación 
Gobierno y Sociedad, Buenos Aires:  Editorial Temas. 
 
Acuña, C.H. (1995) "Introducción. La nueva matriz política argentina", en Acuña C.H. (comp.) La nueva 
matriz política argentina. Ed, Nueva Visión, Bs.As. 
 
Acuña, Carlos (1991) “La relativa ausencia de exportaciones industriales en la Argentina.  Determinantes 
políticos y sus consecuencias sobre la estabilidad y el tipo de democracia esperables”  Realidad Económica 
Nº 100, Buenos Aires. 
 
Alesina, Alberto (1988) “Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with Rational Voters”  
American Economic Review 78 (4), 796-805. 
 
Bambaci, J., T. Saront and M. Tommasi (1999) “The Political Economy of Economic Reforms in 
Argentina,”  Working Paper nº 28, CEDI. 
 
Bambaci, J.,  P. Spiller and M. Tommasi (2000) “Bureaucracy and Public Policy in Argentina” Mimeo, 
CEDI. 
 
Baron, David and John Ferejohn (1989) “Bargaining in Legislatures” American Political Science Review  
83:  1181-1206. 
 
Bidart Campos, G. (1995) Tratado Elemental de Derecho Constitucional Argentino. Tomo IV:  La reforma 
constitucional de 1994.  EDIAR, Buenos Aires. 
 
Careaga, Maite and Barry Weingast (2000) “The Fiscal Pact with the Devil: A Positive Approach to Fiscal 
Federalism, Revenue Sharing, and Good Governance” Mimeo, Stanford. 
 
Carey, John and Matthew Shugart (1998) Executive Decree Authority  Cambridge University Press.   
 
Cortes, Rosalia and Adriana Marshall  (1998) "Growth Strategy Requirements and Institutional Barriers in 
the Restructuring of Social Policy - The Case of Argentina", Paper prepared for delivery at the 1998 
meeting of the Latin American Studies Association, Chicago, Illinois, September 24-26 
 
Cowhey, Peter and Matthew McCubbins (1995) Structure and Policy in Japan and the United States.  
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Cox, G. and M. McCubbins (1999) “Political Structure and Economic Policy :  The Institutional 
Determinants of Policy Outcomes” Ch. 2 in  Political Institutions and the Determinants of Public Policy 
Mimeographed.  UCSD. 
 
de Figueiredo, Rui (1997) “Electoral Competitions, Political Uncertainty and Policy Insulation”  Mimeo, 
Berkeley. 
 
De Riz, L. (1986) "Dilemas del parlamento actual", en De Riz et al. El Parlamento Hoy, Estudios CEDES, 
Bs.As. 
 
Dixit, Avinash (1996) The Making of Economic Policy:  A Transaction-Cost Politics Perspective,  
Cambridge, MIT Press. 
 
Dixit, Avinash, Gene Grossman and Faruk Gul (2000) “The Dynamics of Political Compromise” Journal of 
Political Economy 108(3): 531-68. 
 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
27
Dominguez, Jorge (1998) “Free Politics and Free Markets in Latin America”  Journal of Democracy, 
October, 9(1), 70-84. 
 
Epstein, L. y S. O’Halloran (1999) Delegating Powers : A Transaction Cost Politics Approach to Policy 
Making Under Separate Powers (Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions), Cambridge University 
Press.   
 
Erro, D.G. (1993) Resolving the Argentine paradox: politics and development, 1966-1992, Boulder- CO, 
Lynne Rienner. 
 
Evans, Peter (1995)  Embedded Autonomy:  States and Industrial Transformation.  Princeton University 
Press. 
 
Ferreira Rubio, D. and M. Goretti (1998) “When the President Governs Alone.  The Decretazo in 
Argentina, 1989-93” in J. Carey and M. Shugart (1998) Executive Decree Authority  Cambridge University 
Press.   
 
Gibson, Edward, and Ernesto Calvo (1997) “Electoral Coalitions and Market Reforms:  Evidence for 
Argentina”  Paper presented at the seminar Democracy, Economic Reforms and Institutional Design, CEDI, 
Fundación Gobierno y Sociedad, Buenos Aires, June. 
 
Iaryczower, M., P. Spiller and M. Tommasi (2000) “Judicial Decision Making in Unstable Environments: 
The Argentine Supreme Court, 1936-1998.”  Mimeo, CEDI. 
 
Iaryczower, M., S. Saiegh and M. Tommasi (1999) “Coming Together:  The Industrial Organization of 
Federalism.” Documento de Trabajo No 30, CEDI. 
 
Iaryczower, M. y M. Tommasi (1999) “Nueva Institucionalidad Fiscal Federal. Propuestas de Reforma 
Institucional al Federalismo Fiscal”, en M.A. Broda y M. Tommasi (comps.) Hacia una nueva 
institucionalidad del federalismo fiscal en Argentina. Cómo reducir la variabilidad del crecimiento y del 
empleo, Buenos Aires, CEA.    
 
Iaryczower, M., S. Saiegh y M. Tommasi (1998)  “Algunas consideraciones sobre diseño óptimo de 
instituciones fiscales federales” en Economica, XLIV, 3: 145-183.  La Plata 
 
Jones, M., S. Saiegh, P. Spiller and M. Tommasi (2000)  “Professional Politicians, Amateur Legislators.  
The Argentine Congress during the XXth Century”  Mimeo, CEDI. 
 
Jones, Mark (2000b) "Political Institutions and Public Policy in Argentina: An Overview of the Formation 
and Execution of the National Budget," in Stephan Haggard and Mathew D. McCubbins, eds., Presidents, 
Parliaments and Policy.  New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Jones, Mark P. (2000). "Explaining the High Level of Party Discipline in the Argentine Congress," in Scott 
Morgenstern and Benito Nacif, eds., Legislative Politics in Latin America. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.   
 
Jones, M.  P. Sanguinetti and M. Tommasi (2000) “Politics, institutions, and fiscal performance in a federal 
system: an analysis of the Argentine provinces.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 61, 305-333. 
 
Krehbiel, Keith (1991) Information and Legislative Organization.  Ann Arbor:  University of Michigan 
Press. 
 
Laver, Michael and Kenneth Shepsle (1994) Cabinet Ministers and Parliamentary Government.  Cambridge 
University Press. 
 

 
28
Levitsky, Steven (2000) “The ‘Normalization’ of Argentine Politics”  Journal of Democracy, Volume 11, 
Number 2, April. 
 
Levy, B. and P.T. Spiller (1996) “The Institutional Foundations of Regulatory Commitment: A 
Comparative Analysis of Telecomunications Regulation”, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 
Vol. 10, No 2. 
 
Llanos, Mariana (1998) “El presidente, el congreso y la política de privatizaciones en la Argentina,” 
Desarrollo Económico, Vol. 38, Nº 151. 
 
McCubbins M, R. Noll and B. Weingast (1987) “Administrative Procedures as Instruments of Political 
Control”  Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 3: 243-77. 
 
Moe, Terry (1990) “The Politics of Structural Choice:  Toward a Theory of Public Bureaucracy” in O. 
Williamson Organization Theory:  From Chester Barnard to the Present and Beyond.  New York:  Oxford 
University Press. 
 
Moe, Terry (1990b) “Political Institutions:  The Neglected Side of the Story” Journal of Law, Economics 
and Organization  6: 213-53. 
 
Moe, Terry (1997) “The Positive Theory of Public Bureaucracy” in D. Mueller Perspectives on Public 
Choice.  Cambridge University Press. 
 
Moe, Terry and Michael Caldwell (1994) “The Institutional Foundations of Democratic Government:  A 
Comparison of Presidential and Parliamentary Systems”  Journal of Institutional and Theoretical 
Economics 150/1, 171-195. 
 
Molinelli, Guillermo, Valeria Palanza and Gisela Sin (1999) Congreso, Presidencia y Justicia en Argentina. 
Materiales para su estudio, Buenos Aires, CEDI/Fundacion Gobierno y Sociedad, Editorial Temas. 
 
Nicolini, J.P., J. Posadas, J. Sanguinetti, P. Sanguinetti and M. Tommasi (1999) “Decentralization, Fiscal 
Discipline in Sub-National Governments, and the Bailout Problem:  The Argentine Case.” , mimeo, CEDI. 
 
North, Douglass (1990)  “A Transaction Cost Theory of Politics”  Journal of Theoretical Politics 2(4): 355-
367. 
 
O’Donnell, Guillermo (1993) “On the State, Democratization and Some Conceptual Problems:  A Latin 
American View with Glances at Some Postcommunist Countries”  World Development Vol 21 (8): 1355-
1369. 
 
Palmer, Matthew (1995) “Toward an Economics of Comparative Political Organization :  Examining 
Ministerial Responsibility”  Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 11 (1) 
 
Personn, T., G. Roland and G. Tabellini (1997) “Separation of Powers and Political Accountability”  
Quarterly Journal of Economics  112:  1163-1202. 
 
Personn, T., G. Roland and G. Tabellini (1998) “Comparative Politics and Public Finance” forthcoming, 
Journal of Political Economy. 
 
Porto, Alberto. (1990). Federalismo Fiscal: El Caso Argentino. Buenos Aires, Instituto Torcuato Di Tella, 
Editorial Tesis. 
 
Radics, Stein, Blejer and Sallustro (1999) “Procesos Prespuestarios: Reglas de Procedimiento y 
Transparencia”  Documento de Trabajo nº 32, CEDI. 
 

THE INSTITUTIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY: ARGENTINA 
 
29
Ramseyer, Mark and Eric Rasmusen (1997) “Judicial independence in a civil law regime: the evidence 
from Japan”, Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, Volume 13 (2) October, pp. 259-286.  
 
Rodriguez Larreta, H. and G. Robredo (1999) El desafío de la igualdad.  Ed. Temas, Buenos Aires 
 
Rodrik, Dani (1989) Credibility of Trade Reform: A Policy Maker's Guide," The World Economy 12(1), 
March. 
 
Rodrik, Dani (1995) "Taking Trade Policy Seriously: Export Subsidization as a Case Study in Policy 
Effectiveness," in A. Deardorff, J. Levinson, and R. Stern (eds.), New Directions in Trade Theory, Ann 
Arbor, University of Michigan Press. 
 
Rodrik, Dani (1997) “The ‘Paradoxes’ of the Successful State," European Economic Review (Alfred 
Marshall Lecture), April. 
 
Saeigh, Sebastian and Mariano Tommasi (2000) “An Incomplete-Contracts Approach to Intergovernmental 
Transfer Systems in Latin America” In World Bank, Decentralization and Accountability of the Public 
Sector. 
 
Saiegh, Sebastian and Mariano Tommasi (1998)  “Federal Fiscal Institutions in Argentina:  A Case Study 
in the Transaction-Cost Theory of Politics”  Documento de Trabajo 11,  CEDI, Fundación Gobierno y 
Sociedad, Buenos Aires. 
 
Saiegh, Sebastian and Mariano Tommasi (1999) “Why is Argentina’s Fiscal Federalism so Inefficient?  
Enterying the Labyrinth”  Journal of Applied Economics, Buenos Aires, May, Volume II (1), 169-209. 
 
Salzberg, E. (forthcoming)  "The English Court of Apeal: decision-making characterist and promotion to 
the House of Lords", Research in Law and Policy Studies. 
 
Schwartz, G. and C. Liuksila (1997) “Argentina” in T. Ter-Minassian (ed.) Fiscal Federalism in Theory and 
Practice  Washington :  International Monetary Fund. 
 
Shugart, Matthew and John Carey (1992) Presidents and Assemblies:  Constitutional Design and Electoral 
Dynamics.  Cambridge, England:  Cambridge University Press. 
 
Spiller, Pablo (1996) “A Positive Political Theory of Regulatory Instruments: Contracts, Administrative 
Law or Regulatory Specificity?" USC Law Review. 
 
Spiller, Pablo and Mariano Tommasi (2000) “Institutions, Intertemporal Political Agreements, and Public 
Policies.”  Mimeo, Universidad de San Andrés. 
 
Spiller, Pablo and Santiago Urbiztondo (1994), “Political Appointees vs. Career Civil Servants: A 
Multiple-Principals Theory of Political Institutions,” European Journal of Political Economy. 
 
Strasser, Carlos (1999) Democracia y desigualdad. Sobre la “democracia real a fines del siglo XX, Buenos 
Aires, CLACSO. 
 
Sturzenegger, Federico and Mariano Tommasi (1998) The Political Economy of Reform.  MIT Press. 
 
Tsebelis, George (1995) “Decision Making in Political Systems:  Veto Players in Presidentialism, 
Parliamentarism, Multicameralism and Multypartism”  British Journal of Political Science  25. 
 
Vispo, A.  (1999) Los entes de regulación.  Problemas de diseño y contexto.  Aportes para un urgente 
debate en la Argentina.  Buenos Aires, Norma. 
 

 
30
Waisman, Carlos (1999) in Democracy in Developing Countries : Latin America Larry Diamond, Jonathan 
Hartlyn, Juan J. Linz (Editors).  Lynne Rienner Publishers 
 
Waisman, Carlos H. 1987. Reversal of development in Argentina: postwar counterrevolutionary policies 
and their structural consequences. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
 
Weingast, Barry (1993) “Constitutions as Governance Structures:  The Political Foundations of Secure 
Markets”  Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 149(1): 286-311. 
 
Weingast, B.W. y W. Marshall (1988) “The Industrial Organization of Congress; or, Why Legislatures, like 
Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets?”, en Journal of Political Economy, 96 (11).  
 
Williamson, Oliver (1979) “Transaction Cost Economics:  The Governance of Contractual Relations”  
Journal of Law and Economics  22 (October):  233-61. 
 
Williamson, Oliver (1985) The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York:  Free Press. 
 
Williamson, Oliver (1991)  “Comparative Economic Organization:  The analysis of discrete structural 
alternatives”  Administrative Science Quarterly  36: 269-296. 
 

Figure 1:  The Framework 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Investments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inherited Institutional 
Features 
     Constitution 
     Electoral Regime 
     Federal Arrangements 
Institutional 
(In)stability 
Functioning 
of 
Political 
Institutions 
Governance of 
Political 
Transactions 
Features 
of Policies 

Figure 2: Volatility of Economic Policies
Variation in the 'economic freedom index' in 105 selected countries, 1970-1997
Russia
Nicaragua
Ghana
Peru
Uganda
El Salvador
Argentina
Bolivia
Turkey
Chile
Iran
Zambia
Myanmar
Portugal
Hungary
China
Pakistan
Philippines
Trinidad & Tob.
Jamaica
Bangladesh
Syria
Iceland
Tanzania
Egypt
Mauritius
Sri Lanka
Dominican Rep.
Mexico
Brazil
Ecuador
New Zealand
Botswana
Indonesia
Israel
Rwanda
Algeria
Tunisia
United Kingdom
India
Kuwait
Congo, Dem. R.
Italy
Costa Rica
Venezuela
Sierra Leone
Honduras
Morocco
Thailand
Kenya
Paraguay
Spain
Ireland
Haiti
Zimbabwe
South Korea
France
Madagascar
Burundi
Norway
Pap. New Guinea
South Africa
Sweden
Gabon
Nigeria
Malta
Greece
Guatemala
Average
Colombia
Togo
Singapore
Panama
Denmark
Belize
Austria
Fiji
Malawi
Jordan
Australia
Taiwan
Finland
Malaysia
Japan
Oman
Congo, Rep. Of
Cyprus
Niger
Senegal
Cent
Benin
Cote d'Ivoire
Barbados
Uruguay
Netherlands
Belgium
Mali
Luxembourg
United States
Bahamas
Canada
Nepal
Bahrain
Cameroon
Germany
Switzerland
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Variation Coeffic

 
Figure 3:
Average Tenure in the Deputies’ Chamber during Democratic
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
1900 1904 1908 1912 1916 1920 1924 1928 1933 1937 1941 1947 1951 1955 1961 1965 1975 1985 1989 1993 1997
Tenure
(years)
Total Tenure
Data since 1984
Source: Created by the authors using data from theSecretaríaParlamentaria,HCD (1991)
and Molinelli,Palanza and Sin (1999) tables 2.83
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Vertical Fiscal Imbalances, 1999
Formosa
La Rioja
Jujuy
Corrientes
Santiago del Estero
Chaco
Catamarca
San Juan
Misiones
Tucuman
Salta
Entre Rios
San Luis
La Pampa
Tierra del Fuego
Chubut
Rio Negro
Santa Fe
Santa Cruz
Cordoba
Average
Mendoza
Buenos Aires
Neuquen
Ciudad de Buenos Aires
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Source:

 
igure 5:  The Fiscal Labyrinth 
 
Excedente en forma mensual
proporcionada
COPARTICIPACIÓN 
BRUTA
COPARTICIPACIÓN 
BRUTA
PROVINCIA DE BUENOS AIRES
Hasta 650 millones anuales, distrib. Mensual, 
inc. a su coparticipación. Destino específico.
440 
millones
IVA
BIENES 
PERSONALES
ACTIVOS
(residual)
INTERNOS
Y OTROS 
COPARTICIPADOS
20 
millones
120 
millones
GANANCIAS
previa detracción
580
millones anuales
PROVINCIAS 
SIN BUENOS AIRES
NACIÓN
A.T.N.
COPARTICIPACIÓN
NETA
Fdo. Desq. Fiscales
$48,5 millones
mens. desde 1993
I.N.T.A.
COMBUSTIBLES
Gasoil, diesel-oil, kerosene
y gas natural comprimido
SOBRE EL 
SALARIO
Obras infraest.
Energ.Eléct.
y/u Obrs.Púb.
Cop. 
Vial
FO.NA.VI.
Fondo
Educativo
I.N.D.E.R.
F.E.D.E.I.
Fondo subsidiario 
Compensaciones 
Regionales
ENERGÍA
INTERNOS
SEGUROS
T. ESTADÍSTICA
IMPUESTOS 
COM. EXTERIOR
COMBUSTIBLES
Naftas, 
Gasolinas, 
Solvente,
Aguarrás
y productos 
compuestos
por mezcla de 
hidrocarburos
que califiquen 
como naftas
21%
79%
PROVINCIAS
6 millones 
mensuales en 1996
1,1%
9,9%
20%
100%
89%
90%
50%
10%
11%
4%
2%
66%
64%
57,05%
1%
41,95%
15%
85%
10%
29%
35%
65%
50%
42%
17,4%
29%
8,7%
2,9%
40%
60%
SEG.SOC.
PROVINCIAS
MUNICIPIOS
SEG.SOC.
NACIONAL

Figure 6: "Weberianess Scale" (Bureaucratic Coherence and Competence) in 35 Developing
Countries
Kenya
Republica Dominicana
Guatemala
Nigeria
Argentina
Siria
Ecuador
Haiti
Zaire
Uruguay
Chile
Peru
Portugal
Philipines
Israel
Morrocco
Turkey
Brazil
Egypt
Cote d´Ivorie
Sri Lanka
Tailand
Colombia
Mexico
Costa Rica
Tunez
Greece
India
Spain
Malasia
Hong Kong
Pakistan
Taiwan
Korea
Singapur
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
"Webberianess Scale" (bureaucratic coherence and competence)
Source: 
represents higher bureaucratic coherence and competence.

 
Figure 7: Average Tenure of Supreme Court Justices in Argentina and the US
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1863 1869 1875 1881 1887 1893 1899 1905 1911 1917 1923 1929 1935 1941 1947 1953 1959 1965 1971 1977 1983 1989 1995
U.S.
Argentina
Lineal (U.S.)
 

 
Figure 8: Maximum Percentage of Supreme Court Justices Appointments by Incumbent
President, 1862-1999
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Mitre
J. Celman
Roca
De la
Plaza
Uriburu,
J.F.
Ramírez
Lonardi
Illia
Cámpora
Videla
Alfonsín
Perón
Presidents
 
 

 
Table 1 
Reelection of Legislators  
in Selected Countries in America and Europe 
Country 
% seeking 
reelection 
% elected 
(from 
candidates) 
% reelected 
Argentina (1997) 
26 
67 
17 
Brazil (1995) 
70 
62 
43 
Chile (1993) 
76 
78 
59 
Mexico (1997) 
0 
 
0 
U.S. (1996) 
88 
94 
83 
Italy (1953-72)  
s/d 
s/d 
82 
Great Britain (1950-74) 
s/d 
s/d 
81 
West Germany (1957-76) 
s/d 
s/d 
70-75 
Panama (1999) 
s/d 
s/d 
49 
Colombia (1990) 
s/d 
s/d 
48 
Source: Morgenstern (1998); Archer and Shugart (1997); Molinelli, 
Palanza and Sin (1999) 
 
 

 
Table 2 
Carreer Path of Deputies (1991-1995), in mid-1998  
Position 
Total 
PJ 
UCR 
Party Activity 
22 
6 
16 
National Deputy 
17 
11 
6 
Private Sector 
13 
8 
5 
Provincial Legislator 
10 
6 
4 
National Senator 
9 
4 
5 
Provincial Executive 
9 
6 
3 
National Executive 
8 
8 
0 
Labor Leader 
5 
5 
0 
Desertor 
3 
2 
1 
Died 
2 
2 
0 
In Prision/Fugitive  
2 
2 
0 
President of Commercial Asoc. 
1 
1 
0 
Carreer Diplomat 
1 
1 
0 
Governor 
1 
0 
1 
Major 
1 
1 
0 
Local Council 
1 
0 
1 
Party President 
1 
1 
0 
Vice-Governor 
1 
0 
1 
Vice President 
1 
1 
0 
Total 
108 
68 
44 
Source: Jones (1998) 
 
 

 
Table 3 
Number of Committees by Deputy, 1983-97 
Minimum, Maximum and Actual Committee Slots per Capita 
Years 
Minimum 
No. of 
Slots to be 
filled per 
capita 
Difference 
between 
minimum 
and actual 
per capita 
slots 
Actual 
No. of 
Slots 
filled per 
capita 
Difference 
between 
maximum 
and actual 
per capita 
slots  
Maximum 
No. of Slots 
to be filled 
per capita  
1983-1985 
1.65 
0.9 
2.55 
0.44 
3 
1985-1987 
1.65 
1.03 
2.68 
0.31 
3 
1987-1989 
1.83 
0.94 
2.77 
0.51 
3.29 
1989-1991 
1.83 
1.02 
2.85 
0.43 
3.29 
1991-1993 
1.92 
1.19 
3.12 
0.32 
3.45 
1993-1995 
2.15 
1.49 
3.64 
0.19 
3.84 
1995-1997 
2.21 
1.2 
3.42 
0.51 
3.93 
Source: Data on the Deputies’ Chamber, CEDI 
 
 
 

Table 4 
Length of Service by Committee 
 
Committee 
Average Length of Service* 
Agriculture and Livestock 
1.6 
Budget and Finance 
1.6 
Commerce 
1.5 
Communications 
1.5 
Constitutional Affairs 
1.7 
Criminal Legislation 
1.4 
Education 
1.6 
Energy and Fuel 
1.6 
Family, Women and Minority 
1.5 
Finance 
1.6 
General Legislation 
1.5 
Housing 
1.4 
Impeachment 
1.4 
Industry 
1.5 
International Affairs and Cult 
1.5 
Justice 
1.6 
Labor Legislation 
1.8 
Local Affairs  
1.5 
National Defense 
1.7 
Natural Resources 
1.4 
Public Works 
1.5 
Regional Economies 
1.4 
Requests, Powers and Rules 
1.3 
Science and Technology 
1.4 
Social Security 
1.5 
Social Services and Public Health 
1.6 
Transport 
1.7 
 
* Legislative periods. 
Source: Data set ‘Cámara de Diputados’, CEDI 

 
Table 5 
Tenure of Supreme Court Justices in Several Countries * 
Country 
Years 
 
Country 
Years 
U.S. 
12.51 
 Italy 
4.78 
Australia 
9.58 
 Colombia 
4.43 
Chile 
9.19 
 Nigeria 
4.35 
Norway 
9.15 
 Malawi 
4.21 
Holland 
8.41 
 Ghana 
3.87 
Israel 
8.35 
 Kenya 
3.85 
Canada 
8.24 
 Zimbabwe 
3.84 
Belgium 
7.95 
 Peru 
3.81 
Ireland 
7.82 
 Pakistan 
3.73 
Germany 
7.52 
 Argentina 
3.71 
Guyana 
7.16 
 Sri Lanka 
3.65 
Singapur 
7.10 
 República Dominicana 
3.62 
New Zeland 
7.08 
 Camerún 
3.61 
Malasia 
6.70 
 Zambia 
3.51 
Trinidad & Tobago 
6.50 
 Sudan 
3.14 
France 
6.48 
 India 
3.04 
South Africa 
6.29 
 Lesotho 
2.84 
Average Sample 
6.15 
 Botswana 
2.20 
Great Britain 
6.08 
 Rwanda 
2.13 
Jamaica 
5.95 
 Guatemala 
2.08 
Brazil 
5.65 
 México 
2.02 
Bangladesh 
5.15 
 Honduras 
2.01 
Philipines 
5.09 
 Paraguay 
1.45 
Mauricio 
5.01 
 Ecuador 
1.39 
Nicaragua 
4.98 
 
 
 
(*) Average tenure of Supreme Court Justices in each year  
Source: Elaborated by the authors based on data from the Henisz (1998) data 
set. 
 

  
Table 6 
Ex Post Control of the Budget Process by Congress 
Years Elapsed Before Approval of "Cuenta de Inversion" 
Budget 
Year 
Date of 
Committee 
Introduction 
(delay, in years) 
Approval Date 
(Delay in Years) 
Total Delay 
(years) 
1984 
March 88 (4) 
Sept 90 (2) 
6 
1985 
June 88 (3) 
Sept 90 (2) 
5 
1986 
August 88 (2) 
May 92 (3) 
5 
1987 
June 89 (2) 
June 93 (3) 
5 
1988 
Nov 91 (30) 
June 93 (1) 
4 
1989 
Dec 91 (2) 
July 93 (1) 
4 
1990 
Feb 91 (2) 
June 94 (2) 
4 
1991 
Nov 93 (3) 
Feb 95 (1) 
3 
1992 
May 94 (2) 
June 96 (20) 
4 
1993 
Sept 94 (1) 
May 98 (3) 
4 
1994 
July 95 (1) 
Pending 
- 
1995 
August 88 (2) 
Pending 
- 
1996 
Sept 97 (1) 
Pending 
- 
1997 
Sept 98 (1) 
Pending 
- 

 
Table 7.a: Number of Parties in the Senate, 1916 - 98 
Year 
Number of 
Parties 
Effective Number 
of Parties (1) 
% of seats from 
the larger party 
% seats of the 
President’s party 
1916 
4 
1.3 
85.7 
7.1 
1917 
4 
1.5 
80.0 
13.3 
1918 
4 
1.5 
82.1 
10.7 
1919 
4 
2.2 
60.9 
26.1 
1920-21 
4 
2.4 
56.0 
32.0 
1922 (2) 
4 
2.3 
55.6 
55.6 
1922 (2) 
4 
2.3 
56.5 
56.5 
1923 
6 
2.7 
50.0 
50.0 
1924 
7 
4.3 
     29.6 (4) 
29.6  
1925 
7 
4.2 
34.6 
23.1 
1926 (2) 
7 
4.2 
32.1 
25.0 
1926 (2) 
7 
4.0 
30.7 
26.9 
1927 
6 
3.9 
33.3 
25.9 
1928 
5 
3.3 
38.5 
38.5 
1929-30 
5 
3.3 
38.5 
38.5 
1932-34 (2) 
7 
2.9 
53.3 
     73.3 (5) 
1932-34 (2) 
7 
3.1 
50.0 
     73.3 (5) 
1935-37 (2) 
8 
3.6 
43.3 
     73.3 (5) 
1935-37 (2) 
8 
3.4 
43.3 
     76.7 (5) 
1938-40 (2) 
8 
3.9 
41.4 
     62.1 (5) 
1938-40 (2) 
8 
3.9 
40.7 
     63.0 (5) 
1941-43 
6 
3.9 
34.6 
     57.7 (5) 
1946 
1 
1.0 
100.0 
100.0 
1952 
1 
1.0 
100.0 
100.0 
1953-54 
1 
1.0 
100.0 
100.0 
1955 
1 
1.0 
100.0 
100.0 
1958-60 
1 
1.0 
100.0 
100.0 
1961-62 
4 
1.1 
93.5 
93.5 
1963-65 
14 
3.1 
54.3 
54.3 
1973 
7 
2.2 
63.8 
63.8 
1974 y 75 
10 
2.3 
63.8 
63.8 
1983-86 (3) 
7 
2.7 
45.7 
39.1 
1986-89 (3) 
7 
2.7 
45.7 
39.1 
1989-92 (3) 
6 
2.5 
56.3 
    56.3 (6) 
1992-95 (3) 
9 
2.3 
62.5 
62.5 
1995-98 (3) 
13 
2.7 
55.1 
55.1 
(1) 
Based on the Laakso – Taagepera (1979) index, using proportions based on total rather than ideal proportions.  
(2) 
The year is repeated to indicate changes during the year. 
(3) 
Data to May 1 of the year following the senatorial period (until 1993), and since 1996 to March 1 in the last period of the 
table.  
(4) 
In 1924 there were 2 parties/bloques with equal number of senators, being this number the greatest (Conservadores and 
UCR).  
(5) 
The data refer to the percentages of the “Concordancia”, formal alliance of the following parties: Demócrata Nacional, 
UCR Antipersonalista y Socialista Independiente (the latter only for the period 1935-37).  
(6) 
This refers to the Menem administration.  
Source: Molinelli, Palanza and Sin (1999) Table 2.120 

Table 7.b 
Number of Parties in the Deputies’ Chamber, 1916 - 99 
Year 
Number of 
Parties 
Effective Number 
of Parties (1) 
% of seats from 
the larger party 
% seats of the 
President’s party 
1916 
16 
4.6 
37.9 
    37.9 (2) 
1918 
10 
3.5 
48.7 
48.7 
1920 
15 
3.0 
55.3 
55.3 
1922 
14 
2.5 
60.7 
60.7 
1924 
15 
3.9 
47.1 
47.1 
1926 
14 
4.9 
39.7 
39.7 
1928 
14 
2.7 
59.0 
59.0 
1930 
14 
2.4 
63.6 
63.6 
1932 
10 
4.4 
35.7 
     53.5 (3) 
1934 
14 
4.0 
38.7 
     52.9 (3) 
1936 
14 
4.5 
35.3 
     43.6 (3) 
1938 
10 
3.2 
40.8  
     40.7 (3) 
1940 
9 
3.0 
48.1 
     35.4 (3) 
1942 
10 
3.5 
40.6 
     43.2 (3) 
1943 
10 
3.5 
40.6 
     43.2 (3) 
1946-47 
12 
3.7 
39.2 
69.0 
1948-49 
4 
1.7 
70.7 
70.7 
1950-51 
4 
1.4 
84.8 
84.8 
1952-53 
2 
1.2 
90.6 
90.6 
1955 
2 
1.2 
92.0 
92.0 
1958 
3 
1.7 
71.1 
71.1 
1960 
5 
2.1 
57.7 
57.7 
1961 
7 
2.3 
53.0 
53.0 
1963 
23 
4.9 
37.5 
37.5 
1964 
13 
5.4 
37.6 
37.6 
1965 
14 
4.7 
35.6 
35.6 
1973-76 
21 
2.5 
59.7 
59.7 
1983-85 (4) 
11 
2.2 
50.8 
50.8 
1985-87 (4) 
19 
3.0 
51.6 
51.6 
1987-89 (4) 
23 
2.8 
45.4 
45.4 
1989-91 (4) 
24 
2.9 
47.2 
     47.2 (5) 
1991-93 (4) 
26 
3.2 
45.1 
45.1 
1993-95 (4) 
22 
2.8 
49.4 
49.4 
1995-97 (4) 
26 
3.0 
51.0 
51.0 
1997-99 (4) 
23 
3.3 
46.3 
46.3 
(1) Based on the Laakso – Taagepera (1979) index, using proportions based on total rather than ideal 
proportions.  
(2) The year is repeated to indicate changes during the year. 
(3) The number refers to the UCR, the party of President Yrigoyen, who took office in Ocober 1916. 
(4) The data refer to the percentages of the “Concordancia”, formal alliance of the following parties: 
Demócrata Nacional, UCR Antipersonalista y Socialista Independiente (the latter only for the 
period 1935-37).  
(5) This refers to the Menem administration.  
Source: Molinelli, Palanza and Sin (1999) Table 2.121  
 
