Depoliticisation: Principles, Tactics and Tools
Matthew Flindersa and Jim Bullerb
aDepartment of Politics, University of Sheﬃeld, Sheﬃeld S10 2TN, UK.
E-mail: m.v.ﬂinders@sheﬃeld.ac.uk
bDepartment of Politics, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
E-mail: jrb6@york.ac.uk
Although the concept of depoliticisation has existed as an important theme in a
range of disciplines for some time, in recent years it has become a signiﬁcant issue
for scholars interested in European politics, governance and public policy. Within
the same period depoliticisation has been championed by government ministers and
proposed by think tanks and pressure groups at the national level as a solution to
both public policy and constitutional challenges. At the global level depoliticisation
has been promoted by the World Bank and United Nations as a means through
which developing countries can enhance state capacity and market credibility.
However, the wider literature on depoliticisation has arguably failed to oﬀer any
deﬁnitional clarity. Nor has it sought to tease apart and deconstruct the concept of
depoliticisation in order to distinguish between diﬀerent types of depoliticisation
tactics or understand the interplay between them. This article gleans insights from a
number of disciplines and synthesises the wider literature in order to oﬀer a multi-
level analytical framework. This framework, it is suggested, facilitates a deeper
understanding of contemporary depoliticisation strategies, tools and tactics while
also providing an insight into shifts in contemporary modes of governance.
British Politics (2006) 1, 293–318. doi:10.1057/palgrave.bp.4200016
Keywords: depoliticisation; arena-shifting; governance; accountability; public
policy
‘‘Depoliticisation is the oldest task of politics Ranciere,’’ (1995, 19).
Introduction
Although the concept of depoliticisation has existed as an important theme in
a range of disciplines for some time (see Table 1), in recent years it has become
a signiﬁcant issue for scholars interested in British politics, governance and
public policy. Within the same period depoliticisation has been proposed by
think-tanks and pressure groups as a solution to both public policy (Kings
Fund, 2003) and constitutional challenges (Demos, 1998), and has been
described by the European Policy Forum (2000, 11) as ‘one of the most
promising developments since the last war — the depoliticisation of many
government decisions’. At the global level the World Bank has advocated
British Politics, 2006, 1, (293–318)
r 2006 Palgrave Macmillan Ltd 1746-918x/06 $30.00
www.palgrave-journals.com/bp

large-scale depoliticisation as a central aspect of building state capacity and
market conﬁdence (e.g. World Bank, 2000) while the United Nations organises
conferences and seminars with such themes as ‘depoliticising the civil service’
(United Nations, 2003).
However, the increased use of depoliticisation as a key concept within
modern governance debates has not been matched by analyses that attempt to
deﬁne or clarify the meaning or content of the concept, let alone the variety of
processes, institutions and relationships that commonly form its empirical
manifestation. With very few exceptions the depoliticisation literature has
remained the terrain of Sartori’s (1970) ‘unconscious thinker’ and therefore
oﬀers a classic case study of the challenges of conceptualisation not just within
diﬀerent sub-disciplines of politics but also between and across cognate
disciplines. As Sartori emphasised, concepts must be suﬃciently precise to be
meaningful in comparison; hence we need a ﬁling system, organising
perspective, taxonomy or ‘conceptual containers’ through which scholars can
achieve conceptual travelling (i.e. the appropriate application of reﬁned
concepts
to
new
areas)
while
avoiding
conceptual
stretching
(vague,
amorphous, often eviscerated, conceptualisations).
The focus of this article is therefore primarily conceptual. It complements
the authors’ research on the inter-relationship between depoliticisation and
context, agency and structure (Buller and Flinders, 2005) and the impact of
depoliticisation
strategies
on
established
frameworks
of
representative
Table 1 Depoliticisation: an inter-disciplinary overview
Discipline
Example
International politics
Meyer-Sahling, 2004
Gender studies
Togeby, 1995
Critical/social theory
Habermas, 1996
American politics
Blinder, 1997
Central banking
Marcussen, 2005
Business studies
Wong et al., 2004
Economics
Sheﬀrin, 1978
History
Huang, 1999
Environmental politics
Hobson, 2004
Development studies
White, 1996
Third-world studies
Feldman, 2003
Anthropology
Douglas, 1999
Discourse analysis
Lam, 2005
Social policy
Cain, 1993
Sociology
Boggs, 2000
Political theory
Pettit, 2001, 2004
Philosophy
Ranciere, 1995
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
294
British Politics 2006 1

democracy (Buller and Flinders, 2006) by seeking to achieve a degree of
deﬁnitional clarity and precision through the construction of a multi-level
framework. This will allow scholars in a range of disciplines to distinguish
between diﬀerent types of depoliticisation tactics, account for the rise and fall
of particular tactics across time and space, while also understanding the
adoption of speciﬁc tactics and tools by politicians and the manner in which
various forms of depoliticisation may interact and complement each other.
Although this article is empirically grounded in relation to British governance
it is a central contention of the authors that the analytical framework and
issues raised are of a far wider relevance.
This article has a simple three-part structure. The ﬁrst section examines the
deﬁnitional debates surrounding the concept of ‘depoliticisation’. The second
and substantive section oﬀers an analytical framework that dissects the concept
into three-component parts (principles, tactics and tools) before outlining three
distinct forms of ‘depoliticisation tactics’ (institutional, rule-based and
preference shaping), and examines how these can be employed in a mutually
supportive manner. The ﬁnal section reﬂects on the boundaries and limits of
the concept and attempts to highlight speciﬁc issues demanding further
empirical and conceptual research.
Deﬁning Depoliticisation
In many ways this article is not about conceptualisation but re-conceptualisa-
tion: it attempts to provide a coherent understanding and analytical framework
for a concept that is already in widespread use. However in deﬁnitional
terms the wider literature on depoliticisation is largely barren. Contemporary
scholars who have employed the concept as a central element of their
work, such as Ranciere (1995), Gounari (2004), Boggs (2000), Douglas (1999)
and Pettit (2004), write with a ﬂuidity and verve that clearly denotes some
kind of shared understanding or constellation of values and processes but yet
never seeks to explicate the core essence of the term. An analysis of the
wider literature allows us to harvest these shared values and processes
which produces a set of common themes — for example, the role and power of
a dominant rationality, shifts in political reasoning, the reallocation of
functions and responsibilities to independent bodies or panels of experts, and
the exclusion of politics through the adoption of ‘rational’ practices.
Burnham’s (2001, 128) deﬁnition of depoliticisation as ‘the process of placing
at one remove the political character of decision-making’ complements the
common themes and processes to be found in the wider inter-disciplinary
literature.
Synthesising the wider literature leads us to suggest that depoliticisation can
be deﬁned as the range of tools, mechanisms and institutions through which
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
295
British Politics 2006 1

politicians can attempt to move to an indirect governing relationship and/or seek
to persuade the demos that they can no longer be reasonably held responsible for a
certain issue, policy ﬁeld or speciﬁc decision. In order to justify this position it is
necessary to brieﬂy comment on a number of issues that ﬂow out of this
deﬁnition.
First, depoliticisation is something of a misnomer. In reality the politics
remains but the arena or process through which decisions are taken is altered
(i.e. the form of politics changes or the issue is subject to an altered governance
structure). Frequently, the processes or procedures that are commonly referred
to under the rubric of depoliticisation might therefore more accurately
be described as ‘arena-shifting’. A paradoxical feature of the literature listed
in Table 1 is that none of it seeks to suggest that any of the issues under
analysis became any less ‘political’ through the application of depoliticisation
tactics. Depoliticisation, as a concept, therefore employs a very narrow
interpretation of ‘the political’ that largely refers to the institutions and
individuals commonly associated with representative democracy (legislatures,
elected politicians, etc.).
Following on from this, and secondly, the retention of an indirect governing
relationship is a critical caveat within the concept of depoliticisation (Burnham,
2001, 127). It is politicians who make decisions about what functions should be
‘depoliticised’, and the subsequent selection of appropriate tactics and tools.
Politicians also commonly retain signiﬁcant indirect control mechanisms (e.g.
appointments), reserve powers (e.g. immediate authority in certain situations)
or discretion (e.g. the creative interpretation of rules). Moreover, it is
politicians who may from time to time face pressures to either justify their
choices or even repoliticise certain issues in terms of adopting a direct
governing relationship.
Third, in terms of understanding the rationale or political beneﬁts,
depoliticisation can be understood as a means of reducing certain political
transaction costs. As such, this strategy is thought to confer three main beneﬁts
on those actors looking to deploy it.
First, from a public policy perspective, reducing the direct control of
politicians, either though institutional delegation or the minimisation of
discretion, is commonly assumed to be a desirable state of aﬀairs as politicians
are portrayed as self-interested vote maximisers who are tied into a short-term
electoral cycle (see Kiewiet and McCubbins, 1991). Depoliticisation therefore
helps to alter market expectations regarding the credibility of policy-making
(Majone, 2000). Second, the adoption of an indirect governing relationship
provides a way of reducing political overload (King, 1975; Birch, 1984) that
may in some circumstances empower ministers with a greater strategic
capacity. Finally, from a political position, depoliticisation can help to insulate
politicians in oﬃce from the adverse consequences of policy failure. Some
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
296
British Politics 2006 1

problems will be either controversial or intractable (or both), so much so that
any decision runs the risk of making matters worse rather than better. In such
situations, politicians (looking to protect their electoral position) may seek to
shift the onus of action onto other groups or organisations (and with it, the
potential for blame). Depoliticisation can therefore be interpreted as a
defensive risk management technique (see Hood, 2002, 32).
To recap, ‘politicised’ modes of governance in this context appear to be
most commonly characterised by the principles of direct state intervention,
management and control of the economy and society. Whereas, ‘depoliticised’
modes of governance generally represent the adoption of a relationship
(institutional, procedural or ideological) that seeks to establish some sort of
buﬀer zone between politicians and certain policy ﬁelds. It is possible to
identify a range of terrains that have, at various times, shifted between what
have been termed ‘politicised’ and ‘depoliticised’ modes of governance. During
the nineteenth century, for example, various reforms were introduced in a
number of countries to ‘depoliticise’ the national administration through the
introduction of open recruitment and promotion on merit, a signiﬁcant
reduction in political patronage and the establishment of independent civil
service commissions (e.g. British Civil Service Commission in 1855). In the late
twentieth century similar reforms have been instituted in a number of
developing countries (Shepherd, 2003).
Ranciere (1995) goes as far as to suggest that politics is, at base, a conﬂict
between parties competing to institute diﬀerent forms of depoliticisation,
but their inability to eliminate conﬂict and social division means that there
are actually two fundamental and opposed forms of politics: one depoliticising
and the other repoliticising. Politics is thus constituted (according to
Ranciere) through an essential tension between depoliticising and repoliticising
tendencies as competing elites seek to shift certain issues either within or
beyond the boundaries of conventional visible politics. However, suggesting
a distinction between politicised and depoliticised forms of governance risks
suggesting a binary distinction that is a crude characterisation of a complex
relationship (see Blinder, 1997). Depoliticisation commonly refers to a
rebalancing or a shift in the nature of governance relationships that is a
matter of degree — not a move from land to sea, but from cave to mountain
or valley to plateau.
This section has provided a deﬁnition of depoliticisation that has been
gleaned from the insights of the wider literature. Although this deﬁnition is
designed to oﬀer an initial starting point, a framework for future reﬁnement, its
strength in terms of this article is that it has the beneﬁt of opening up a
discussion about the tools or tactics available to politicians who wish to adopt
an indirect mode of governance. These tools and tactics form the focus of the
next section.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
297
British Politics 2006 1

Depoliticisation: Principles, Tactics and Tools
The aim of this section is to give the concept of depoliticisation greater
discriminating power through taxonomical infolding — an orderly and graded
series of reﬁned categories (within a framework that exposes inter-relation-
ships, change and complementarity) thereby providing the basis for collecting
and comparing adequately precise information. It is possible to suggest that
depoliticisation has three elements. First, at the core of any depoliticisation
tactic is an acceptance that the principle (macro-political level) of depoliticisa-
tion is an appropriate one for governments to pursue through the policy-
making process. Second, the principle of depoliticisation should be distin-
guished from the tactic (meso-political level) used to realize this goal at any one
moment. The word ‘tactic’ has been selected over ‘strategy’ as it suggests a less
rational and more instrumental approach. As we shall see below, there are
diﬀerent tactics for implementing the objective of depoliticisation and these can
vary across time and space, even when acceptance of the principle remains
constant. Finally, as already noted, the principle and tactics of depoliticisation
will be ‘supported’ by a particular tool or form (micro-political level). These
policy supports are likely to be the most transient part of a depoliticisation
tactic,
‘pulled
in’
to
operationalise
a
particular
technique
and
then
discontinued in the event of implementation failure. However, there may be
cases when the link between a particular depoliticisation tactic and its policy
support may be so tight that failure in the latter may lead to a discrediting of
the former. These three elements or levels of depoliticisation are set out in
Figure 1.
Once the principle of depoliticisation has been adopted in a particular policy
area a choice has to be made concerning the most appropriate tactic, or
mixture of tactics, to employ. This article oﬀers three distinct depoliticisation
tactics (see Table 2).
The next three sub-sections examine each of these tactics in more detail.
Institutional depoliticisation
Institutional depoliticisation is possibly the most frequently employed tactic. A
formalised principal–agent relationship is established in which the former
(elected politician) sets broad policy parameters while the latter (appointed
administrator or governing board) enjoys day-to-day managerial and specialist
freedom within the broad framework set by ministers. Institutional depoliti-
cisation
—
cast
frequently
around
the
creation
of
‘non-majoritarian’
institutions (see Majone, 2001; Thatcher and Stone Sweet, 2002) — is designed
to release the agent (and its sphere of responsibility) to some extent from short-
term political considerations — vote seeking, populist, short-term pressures to
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
298
British Politics 2006 1

which elected politicians are subject. It is notable that a signiﬁcant aspect of
British governance since the election of a Labour government in May 1997 has
involved the application of institutional depoliticisation to a broad range of
policy areas (see Table 3).
No
Yes
Tactical Choice
Institutional 
Rule-Based 
Preference  
Shaping 
Non-ministerial 
department
Independent statutory 
body 
Non-departmental 
public body 
External e.g. 
Exchange Rate 
Mechanism
Internal e.g. 
Golden Rule 
Globalisation 
Neo-liberalism 
New Public 
Management 
Macro-Political Level 
Meso-Political 
Level  
Micro-
Political Level
Examples  
Principled Commitment to 
Depoliticisation?
Figure 1
Flowchart of depoliticisation choices.
Table 2 Depoliticisation tactics
Depoliticisation
tactic
Form
Example
Institutional
Principal–agent relationship created
between minister and ‘independent’
agency
Police Complaints Commission
Rule-based
The adoption of explicit rules into the
decision-making process
Exchange Rate Mechanism
Preference-shaping
The espousal of a rhetorical position
that seeks to portray certain issues as
beyond the control of national
politicians
Globalization
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
299
British Politics 2006 1

In all the policy areas listed in the ﬁrst column of Table 3 ministers have
rationalised and legitimated the decision to transfer powers and responsibilities
to the new institutions listed in the second column through arguments based on
the need to ‘depoliticise’ decision-making and place certain issues beyond the
conventional political arena. A well-known historical example of this
institutional depoliticisation involved the creation of the nationalised industries
in Britain immediately after the Second World War. This case is instructive of
the democratic implications and tensions that are frequently encountered when
this tactic is selected. It also provides an opening into some of the conceptual
and normative issues mentioned below.
During the period 1945–1951 the Labour government implemented a far-
reaching programme of nationalisation. The reasons given for creating
nationalised industries underpin many of the arguments frequently oﬀered to
legitimate the adoption of institutional depoliticisation tactics today. Certain
issues, it was argued, demand esoteric knowledge and a degree of operational
ﬂexibility rarely found in bureaucratically dense ministerial departments. The
electoral cycle encouraged politicians to focus on short-term measures; thereby
undermining the long-term strategic capacity demanded by the management of
business like organisations. Indeed, private sector conﬁdence in the organisa-
tion could only be fostered, it was argued, by locating control of the body
beyond the day-to-day political control of ministers. The favoured institutional
tool was the public corporation, which, theoretically at least, appeared to oﬀer
an acceptable balance of independence, accountability and control. The BBC,
Central Electricity Board, and London Passenger Transport Board had all
Table 3 New labour and institutional depoliticisation
Policy area
Institutional tool of depoliticisation
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Parades Commission, Independent Police Board
Health
National Institute for Clinical Excellence
Monetary policy
Monetary Policy Committee
Postal network
Postal Services Commission
Crime
Sentencing Guidelines Council
Food
Food Standards Agency
Constitution
House of Lords Appointments Commission, Electoral Commission,
Information Commissioner, Judicial Appointments Commission.
Police
Independent Police Complaints Commission
Employment
Low Pay Commission
National lottery
National Lotteries Commission
Statistics
Statistics Commission
Railways
Strategic Rail Authority
Education
Qualiﬁcation and Curriculum Authority
Source: Flinders, 2004a.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
300
British Politics 2006 1

previously been established as public corporations in order to insulate the
organisations from constant political interference. It was presumed that the
board of each public corporation would be free from continual and direct
political pressure, as ministers would not be responsible to Parliament for
operational matters. The political and constitutional implications of this
development did not go unnoticed. In 1937 Robson warned, ‘Politicians of
every creed, when confronted by an industry or a social service which is giving
trouble or failing to operate eﬃciently, almost invariably propose the
establishment of an independent public board’.
Ministers did, however, enjoy substantial powers in relation to nationalised
industries over such issues as appointments, policy frameworks and invest-
ment. These directive and reserve powers were designed to preserve a link
between the nationalised industries and Parliament via ministers, while at the
same time maximising the operational autonomy of the industries. However,
despite this formal arrangement, ministers were unwilling, or even unable due
to parliamentary pressure, to govern at a distance. Critically, it became clear
that ministers were exercising inﬂuence on the boards not through formal
channels but via informal yet no less important processes. This ministerial
direction — ‘government by luncheon’ — was exerted beyond the public gaze
and the formal statutory relationship acted as a veil for de facto ministerial
control. A situation was thus created in which the beneﬁts of independence
(expertise, ﬂexibility, etc.) were impaired by ministerial involvement. This
arguably contributed to the relative ineﬃciency of the nationalised industries;
therefore stimulating even greater ministerial and parliamentary interest.
Accommodating accountable management by boards within the convention of
ministerial responsibility to Parliament was always problematic. Despite
Morrison’s 1954 attempt to display the potency of parliamentary account-
ability for public boards, his list of parliamentary control mechanisms was,
according to Goodhart (1955, 55), ‘more formidable in length than content’.
The perceived need for greater accountability to Parliament led to the creation
of the Select Committee on the Nationalised Industries in 1951 (see Daniel,
1960).
This brief review of the experience of the nationalised industries raises a
number of issues that are of direct relevance to contemporary debates
concerning depoliticisation. First, it demonstrates the importance of the
speciﬁc form or tool of institutional depoliticisation. Put another way,
nationalisation per se is not problematic — but the precise manner in which
it was implemented meant that the arm in the arm’s-length relationship was
frequently very short. This leads into the second issue: a distinction needs to be
made between an organisation’s theoretical autonomy and the autonomy it
enjoys in practice (see Bouckaert and Peters, 2004). This raises the point made
above that it may frequently be useful to make an analytical distinction
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
301
British Politics 2006 1

between the principled commitment to depoliticisation by a politician or party
and the practical implementation of a policy that purports to realise that
principle. This leads, secondly, to an appreciation of the epistemological and
methodological challenges of measuring informal political inﬂuence. The
inﬂuence may be explicit or subtle. An accusation of explicit interference in an
independent regulatory organisation that was unequivocally created to operate
beyond political control has been made in relation to the Audit Commission in
Britain. In 2003, the organisation’s outgoing Chairman, Sir Andrew Foster,
complained that sustained and ‘improper’ informal political pressure had been
placed on the Audit Commission by ministers (The Times 12 February 2003).
Similar criticisms have been made by Greg Dyke (2005) regarding his tenure as
Director General of the British Broadcasting Corporation between June 1999
and January 2004, a public corporation established explicitly to operate
beyond the inﬂuence of party politics. A more subtle form of inﬂuence would
be the now fairly regular high-proﬁle speeches by the British Chancellor of the
Exchequer or the First Secretary to the Treasury in which the government’s
views on how the economy should be handled are set out on the eve of a
meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank of England.
Clearly measuring the actual inﬂuence, if any, of these speeches is extremely
problematic.
Third, even within this form of institutional depoliticisation politicians
enjoy great ﬂexibility in relation to which form or model of institutional
depoliticisation
is
employed.
This
may
involve
E´stablissements
publics
Nationaux or autorite´s administatives inde´pendantes in France, non-depart-
mental public bodies, executive agencies or non-ministerial departments in
Britain, ‘organismos autonomos’ or ‘entitades publicas empresariales’ in Spain,
or ‘autorita adminstrative indepdendente’ or ‘agenzie’ in Italy (for a review see
OECD, 2001; Flinders, 2004b). The speciﬁc tool of institutional depoliticisa-
tion is important as this may not only establish the degree of actual day-to-day
independence the institution has from elected politicians (i.e. a permanent
institution with legally entrenched powers compared with an informal ad hoc
advisory board) but it may also aﬀect the public’s perception of whether an
issue has actually been depoliticised. In 2004 the British Minister for Rural
Aﬀairs acknowledged the importance of this distinction when announcing his
decision to create the new uniﬁed agency for rural policy as a statutory
executive non-departmental public body. He justiﬁed this decision due to the
fact that it was ‘equally important not only that the agency was independent of
politicians, but that it is seen to be independent by the public’ (Hansard, 24
February 2004).
Fourth, attempts to ‘depoliticise’ issues can stimulate greater legislative
attention than would otherwise have been the case. And yet a clear ﬁnding of
the OECD’s (2001) comparative research into ‘distributed public governance’
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
302
British Politics 2006 1

(agencies, independent authorities and other ‘independent’ public bodies) was
that most legislatures have failed to develop a capacity to oversee public bodies
that exist beyond the departmental core. It is, however, important to
understand that in many countries, especially those established upon the
constitutional convention of ministerial responsibility, the legislature was
always intended to have a limited role with ministers acting as gatekeepers — a
buﬀer between members of the legislature and the wider state system (Flinders,
2004c). A paradox of institutional depoliticisation is that the process of
delegation away from elected politicians may well stimulate greater political
and legislative attention than would otherwise have been the case.
And yet the creation of numerous ‘independent’ bodies raises questions
concerning organisational form in relation to institutional depoliticisation. The
delegation of functions along a ‘spectrum of autonomy’ — with ministerial
departments at one end and purely private bodies at the other, and executive
agencies,
non-ministerial
departments,
non-departmental
public
bodies,
strategic health authorities, a vast range of statutory, non-statutory and
‘unrecognised’ bodies, and increasingly complex forms of public–private
partnerships in between these two poles (to take the British case as a
representative example of broader trends) — clearly raises a number of
conceptual and empirical issues (Greve et al., 1999). At which point along the
spectrum does an issue actually become depoliticised? A non-departmental
public body may enjoy more autonomy than an executive agency but given the
minister’s policy, appointment and reserve powers, can the former organisa-
tional form really be used as a tool of depoliticisation? Moreover, it is clear
from past experience and more recent research that a ‘rhetoric-reality gap’
commonly exists in relation to institutional depoliticisation (Van Gramberg,
2002). Depoliticisation should not therefore be seen as necessarily part of the
‘hollowing out’ or evisceration of the state, but may be more accurately
interpreted as an aspect of the transformation of the state — a key explanatory
variable in relation to recent research on the ‘unbundling’ (Pollitt and Talbot,
2004) or ‘unravelling’ (Hooghe and Marks, 2003) of the state. Moreover, the
degree of true ‘depoliticisation’ is questionable when the independent body
operates within a frequently narrow and prescriptive policy framework set by
ministers — ‘the reality is that tight prescription is achieved through the choice
of policy framework’ (Van Gramberg, 2002, 12). This issue will be discussed
further in the conclusion; the next sub-section examines rule-based depoliti-
cisation.
Rule-based depoliticisation
As the sub-title suggests, rule-based depoliticisation tactics involve the
adoption of a policy that builds explicit rules into the decision-making process
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
303
British Politics 2006 1

that constrain the need for political discretion. Faced with constant demands
for action, a public commitment to ‘tie one’s hands’ in this way can help
insulate politicians from societal pressure. Such rules should be designed so as
to be as neutral and universal as possible. Rules that discriminate (or are
thought to discriminate) in favour of certain groups or against others are likely
to generate a sense of iniquity and provoke societal protest, leading to
constraints on elite action. However, once set up, policy implementation can be
reduced to the ‘technical’ task of monitoring and occasionally adjusting these
targets with little or no need for political negotiation. Some of the most
prominent examples of rule-based depoliticisation tactics in British politics can
be found in the area of monetary policy (see also Epstein’s (2002) research on
depoliticisation of monetary and agricultural policy in Poland).
One of the earliest examples of this technique was Britain’s membership of
the Gold Standard in the nineteenth and early twentieth century (see Kettell,
2004). At this time, it was commonly believed that adherence to an exchange
rate target within this system would regulate the British economy with little
need for political intervention. For example, if British policy-makers were
faced with a situation (as they often were in the 1920s) showing a loss of
manufacturing output and increasing unemployment, supporters of the Gold
Standard asserted that the mechanism would automatically correct itself,
leading to an improvement in economic conditions. In these circumstances of
depressed industrial activity, the value of sterling would eventually decline to
the point where reserves of gold would be exported abroad. The resulting loss
of revenue would lead to an increase in interest rates which, in turn, would
attract foreign funds. The expected decline in investment activity resulting from
higher interest rates would lead to a process of destocking and a fall in the
domestic price level. This outcome would curtail imports, stimulate exports
and
the
balance
of
trade
and
domestic
economic
activity
would
be
‘automatically adjusted’ (Winch, 1969, 83). It should be noted that in practice,
this ‘rule’ never operated as automatically or benignly as this description
suggests. But it was the appearance as well as the reality of this policy
instrument that mattered to politicians (Scammell, 1985). This distinction will
be returned to below.
A more recent example of this rule-based technique was monetarism, which
became fashionable in Britain in response to the growing problem of inﬂation
experienced in the 1970s. Monetarism contravened the economic orthodoxy of
the time, which claimed that high inﬂation was in large part due to the
increasing wage rises secured by trade unions, especially in the public sector.
The problem according to monetarists was not that these unions were
demanding these increases, but that they were being funded by the government
through the expansion of the money supply. Monetarists argued that if the
money supply could be controlled, there would eventually be a corresponding
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
304
British Politics 2006 1

reduction in price levels experienced by the consumer. To operationalise this
policy, the Treasury published a Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS)
in 1980 containing targets for the growth of dM3 (the preferred measure of
the money supply at this time) as well as interest rates and public expen-
diture. Workers who continued to demand wage rises above the rate of
inﬂation would be automatically forced to change their expectations or price
themselves out of a job. From a governing perspective, the need for an incomes
policy and with it, direct and continuous political negotiations with trade
unions would be nulliﬁed. Whole areas of economic policy could be
depoliticised (see for example, Lawson, 1992, 66–67, 1021, 1025, 1040;
see also Kydland and Prescott, 1977; Ham, 1981; Barro and Gordon, 1983;
Browning, 1986, 261).
As a tool for this rule-based depoliticisation tactic, monetarism was beset by
constant implementation problems before it was abandoned in the mid-1980s.
Both Geoﬀrey Howe (Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1979–1983) and Nigel
Lawson (1983–1989) never established a reliable relationship between the level
of the money supply and the rate of inﬂation in the economy. Targets for dM3
were constantly overshot, yet inﬂation was brought down from nearly 22% in
1980 to below 4% by 1983. Other targets or rules including M0, M1 and PSL2
were tried but proved to be equally unsatisfactory. Ironically, it was the
Conservative government’s own free market reforms that were partly
responsible for undermining this depoliticisation technique. In the ﬁrst-half
of the 1980s, moves to liberalise the ﬁnancial services industry distorted
monetary targets as a reliable gauge for charting inﬂation trends. For example,
legislation-reducing controls in the banking sector encouraged these institu-
tions to expand into the personal mortgage market, thereby unleashing a ﬁerce
wave of competition with existing building societies. The growth in lending that
followed had unforeseen eﬀects: it led to month-on-month increases in the
money supply when Bank of England oﬃcials had only expected a one-oﬀ
boost (Smith, 1987, 40; Lawson, 1992, 448).
In this context, Conservative politicians returned to exchange rate policy as
a method of depoliticisation in this area. The exchange rate system thought to
provide this governing advantage was the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM)
of the European Community. By ﬁxing the parity of sterling to all other ERM
currencies (with certain ﬂuctuation bands) ministers hoped to remove the
possibility of devaluation and, at the same time, discipline business and the
unions into containing their costs. Indeed, this rule-based policy was
introduced to bolster leadership autonomy not only from societal groups,
but also from the Conservative rank and ﬁle itself. Many MPs (particularly on
the left of the party) had become increasingly vocal about the need for some
government intervention to alleviate the high levels of bankruptcies and
unemployment being experienced by British industry at this time. In a
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
305
British Politics 2006 1

memorandum to Howe in 1981, Lawson was already viewing ERM member-
ship in party political terms:
those of our colleagues who are most likely to be pressing for the relaxation
of monetary discipline, are those that are keenest on the UK joining the EMS
(European Monetary System). In other words, we turn their swords against
them (Lawson, 1992, 111–112; 1058; see also Scott, 1986, 198; Howe, 1994,
639).
ERM membership lasted even less time than monetarism. Britain became a
member of this semi-ﬁxed exchange rate system in October 1990. By September
1992, the policy had to be abandoned after it proved to be unsustainable. Part
of the problem was that economic conditions in Britain had begun to diverge
signiﬁcantly from those in Germany, the dominant country in the ERM. While
the Treasury sought to ease monetary policy for those businessmen and
homeowners who were struggling in the middle of recession, the Bundesbank
increased interest rates to deal with the inﬂationary pressures building up in the
German economy as a result of uniﬁcation. When the pound came under
sustained pressure in the days leading up to ‘Black Wednesday’, an
announcement by Norman Lamont (Chancellor, 1990–1993) that he was
going to raise interest rates to 15% to defend sterling was met with incredulity
on the ﬁnancial markets. Ministers stood helpless as the Bank of England spent
d3 billion in a failed attempt to prevent the currency falling through the ﬂoor of
its target range. The political reputation of the Conservatives never recovered
(for a discussion, see Stephens, 1996).
The experience of ‘Black Wednesday’ has led to increased scepticism
concerning the utility of rule-based techniques in the area of monetary policy in
recent years. While the Treasury still attempts to constrain public expectations
through the employment of targets, since 1997 these have been accompanied by
tools of institutional depoliticisation noted above. Under the Blair govern-
ment, monetary policy is now guided by an inﬂation target (2% as measured by
the Harmonised Consumer Prices Index). But responsibility for the achieve-
ment of this rule has now been devolved onto the Bank of England, which has
been granted operational independence to carry out this task (Balls and
O’Donnell, 2002). Indeed, the Treasury under Gordon Brown has developed
an argument claiming that adherence to ﬁxed monetary rules is now counter-
productive in the new world of ﬁnancial globalisation which engulfs all nations.
Faced with this ﬂuid international environment, policy-makers need ﬂexibility
in the short-term to respond to economic shocks, or another episode like
Black Wednesday could occur once again. However, the ability to introduce
discretionary measures will only be possible (that is to say, not punished by
the ﬁnancial markets) if it takes place within an institutional framework
that commands credibility and public trust. The Treasury has even coined a
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
306
British Politics 2006 1

phrase for this new approach — ‘constrained discretion’ (Balls, 1998; Brown,
1999, 2000; Glyn and Wood, 2001).
This approach appears all the more justiﬁed if one considers the Treasury’s
own experience in the area of ﬁscal policy since 1997. As with monetary policy,
decision-making in this area is constrained by the existence of rules. The
Golden Rule stipulates that the government will only borrow to fund
investment. Current spending must be ﬁnanced from tax receipts and the
budget must be balanced over the economic cycle. The Sustainable Investment
Rule requires that net public sector debt be kept stable as a share of GDP (at
a level of no more than 40%). Unlike monetary policy however, the
implementation of these ﬁscal rules is not controlled or monitored by an
independent body like the Bank of England. Not surprisingly perhaps, Gordon
Brown’s decision (in July 2005) to revise the beginning of the current economic
cycle from 1999 to 1997, has led to charges that he is manipulating the rules to
allow himself to borrow $12.5 billion more to meet the Golden Rule. For some
City economists, the credibility of the ﬁscal rules has been damaged beyond
repair (Giles, 2005). Other commentators have begun to call for the creation of
an independent institution to supervise the conduct of ﬁscal policy in the future
(Osborne, 2005).
Preference shaping depoliticisation
The ﬁnal form of depoliticisation discussed in this article involves the
invocation of preference shaping through recourse to ideological, discursive
or rhetorical claims in order to justify a political position that a certain issue or
function does, or should, lie beyond the scope of politics or the capacity for
state control. Preference shaping as a form of depoliticisation has clear
connections with Mary Douglas’ (1999) work on cultural theory, risk and
depoliticisation. Douglas has emphasized how a dominant rationality can be
(silently) constructed in which certain factors, options or possibilities can be
systematically deleted from public discourse and normative judgements
presented as neutral rationality. A clear link also exists with Marcussen’s
(2005) work on central banking and his argument that a dominant discourse
has created a broad consensus that politicians should not intervene in the
sphere of central banking and that anyone arguing against this position is
immediately labelled as ‘irrational’. On this there is a clear association with
Jurgen Habermas’ (1996, 62) work on depoliticisation and the public sphere,
The depoliticisation of the mass of the population and the decline of
the public realm as a political institution are components of a system
of domination that tends to exclude practical questions from public
discussion.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
307
British Politics 2006 1

The beneﬁt of depoliticisation through preference shaping is that it involves
investing no structural (institutional depoliticisation) or legal (rule-based
depoliticisation) capital. In essence a stance is adopted in which a preference-
shaping position is employed to justify a refusal to intervene or regulate a
certain issue. This tactic may involve the construction of a position in which the
availability of a political choice is denied in favour of either an insistence that a
certain issue is beyond the domain of political control, or that a single rational
and technically correct solution to a speciﬁc problem exists. Storey (2004) has
demonstrated
how
the
World
Bank
discursively
constructs
debate
by
determining what policies are (and are not) acceptable and how it seeks to
depoliticise the presentation of these policy choices through portraying them as
a neutral, technical exercise and, by so doing, creates ‘choiceless democracies’.
At the European level the research of Wodak (2000) on policy making within
the European Union reveals a strong emphasis by the drafters of policy papers
on persuading people of the merits of pre-agreed positions, by depicting
normative policy choices as neutral expert opinion, rather than stimulating
debate or oﬀering choice. At the national level the work of Fairclough (2000,
172) has suggested that political discourse in the public sphere has shifted from
being characterised by ‘disagreement, dissent and polemic’ towards the
suppression, exclusion and marginalisation of disagreement.
However, the maintenance of this depoliticisation tactic may consume high
levels of political capital as politicians may be repeatedly forced to justify their
position. Although a government may seek to avoid or deﬂect responsibility for
an issue it is possible that the public may still seek to ascribe blame on the
government for non-intervention or the adoption of an inappropriate rule-
based or institutional depoliticisation tactic. In practice, preference-shaping
depoliticisation tactics involve the construction of a new ‘reality’ in which the
role of national politicians, particularly at the national level, is presented as
having been, to some extent, eviscerated by external forces or broad societal
factors. These forces limit the ﬂexibility of national politicians and reduce their
role to managing and enforcing rule-based tactics or policy stances which are
designed to alleviate the negative consequences of trends for which national
politicians cannot reasonably be held responsible. The signiﬁcant aspect of this
third tactic is that it relies on the dissemination of normative beliefs that may
be extremely powerful even though the empirical evidence on which they are
based is debated — the creation of what could be termed an atmythsphere.
Governments may seek to espouse or over-emphasise a distinct aspect or
interpretation of an ideology in order to increase the potency of the line of
reasoning
being
presented.
The
preference-shaping
tactic
is,
therefore,
potentially far-reaching in that it attempts to reﬁne and change public
expectations about both the capacity of the state and the responsibilities of
politicians.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
308
British Politics 2006 1

It is suggested that an example of this preference-shaping tactic is the
Labour government’s recourse to arguments concerning globalisation in
order to justify certain decisions or non-decisions. The work of Colin Hay
and others (Hay and Rosamond, 2002; Watson and Hay, 2003; Hay and
Smith, 2005) on the discourses and discursive construction of policy restraints
suggests that a crude conception of globalisation with its attendant ‘logic
of no alternative’ has dominated the discourse adopted by the Labour
government. They argue that it has appealed to the image of globalisation
as a non-negotiable external economic constraint (or what we might call
preference-shaping depoliticisation tactic) in order to render contingent policy
choices about which the government may have enjoyed policy ﬂexibility but
for which they wished to abdicate or transfer responsibility beyond the
domestic polity (for a broader discussion of the inter-relationship between
depoliticisation and globalisation see Boggs, 2000). In essence, the rhetoric
of globalisation, it has been suggested, has been employed as a tactic or tool
through which the potentially negative political consequences of policy
choices can be neutralised through the creation of an ideological context in
which issues are depicted as being beyond the political control framework of
national politics.
Although New Labour’s association with the discourse of globalisation may
serve as a particularly stark and prominent example of this tactic it is possible
to isolate other preference-shaping stances. The dominance of New Public
Management (NPM) during the 1980s and 1990s formed a powerful
legitimating rationale or principled position upon which governments around
the world could radically reform their state structures. The rhetoric and
language of NPM with its emphasis on dismantling bureaucracies and
empowering managers could be presented as normatively neutral while also
being, at that time, diﬃcult to argue against. In reality NPM was laden with
normative judgements and assumptions regarding the role of the state and the
utility of markets. NPM was for Pollitt (1983, 49) the ‘acceptable face of New
Right thinking with regard to the state’. The strength of this third tactic is that
once disseminated into the popular and political consciousness it can be
resilient in the face of empirical or ideological challenges. As Watson and Hay
(2003, 291) note, ‘in theoretical and, perhaps more importantly, empirical
terms, the crude ‘business school’ globalisation thesis has been exposed for the
myth that it undoubtedly is. Yet, in terms of political rhetoric, it continues to
exert a powerful inﬂuence’.
Preference shaping highlights the fact that depoliticisation is far more
complicated than existing authors have arguably allowed for. It also
demonstrates the ontological and epistemological challenges in understanding
depoliticisation
strategies.
Take,
for
example,
a
scenario
in
which
a
government convinces the public that it can no longer control the economy
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
309
British Politics 2006 1

due to wider global trends despite the fact that in reality is still has a number of
signiﬁcant control mechanisms at its disposal. If one emphasises the
importance of rhetorical or ideological strategies then this situation may well
be deﬁned as one of depoliticisation due to the fact that the public believes that
depoliticisation has occurred. However, if one focuses on institutional
capacities and reserve powers then the same situation could well be understood
as not being one of depoliticisation at all.
As already suggested, the explication of such distinct depoliticisation tactics
risks over-simplifying the complexity of modern governance. Within any sector
at any time it may be possible to identify a mixture or amalgam of tactics.
Moreover, the three examples outlined above may not be exhaustive as a list of
depoliticisation tactics. Nor should they be viewed as mutually exclusive. A
government may pursue a number of diﬀerent depoliticisation tactics at any
one time; with the preference-shaping tactic providing a macro-political context
or rationale; the rule-based tactic operating at the meso-political level and
within a certain policy area; and, the institutional tool operating at the micro-
political level and in response to speciﬁc incidents or demands (see Figure 2 for
an example). (Although in reality, each of these tactics is unlikely to be
conﬁned to one level and one level only).
Clearly, the borders in the depoliticisation ﬂow chart set out in Figure 1. can
only be drawn fairly loosely and although it may be possible to sub-divide the
macro-, meso- and micro-levels into a greater number of slices, we concur with
Sartori (1970) that ‘three slices are suﬃcient for the purposes of logical
Key
Tactic 
Tool
A  
Agent
Institutional
Monetary Policy Committee 
B 
Structure 
Rule-based 
Golden Rule 
C 
Context
Preference-shaping 
Globalisation 
A
B 
C 
Figure 2
Interdependent depoliticisation tactics: context, agency and structure in monetary policy.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
310
British Politics 2006 1

analysis’. However, the attempt to dissect the concept of depoliticisation into
its component parts and then highlight three distinct methods or depoliticisa-
tion ‘tactics’ has generated a number of themes and issues which will feed into
the next and concluding section.
Depoliticisation: Reﬂections, Boundaries and Limits
The primary aim of this article has been to explore the concept of
depoliticisation in order to achieve some deﬁnitional clarity and a greater
awareness of the range of tactics and tools that politicians may employ.
Speciﬁcally, this article has attempted to return to basic issues of logic,
language and thinking in order to develop an overarching image of the way
ideas or abstract principles ﬁt into the policy process and a clearer conception
of how and why these principles, tactics and tools may change or inter-relate. It
is possible to suggest that Figure 1 provides at least a starting point towards the
taxonomical infolding and conceptual precision that Giovanni Sartori so
eloquently appealed for 35 years ago.
The framework is analogous to Hall’s (1993) distinction between basic
instruments (micro-political level or ‘tools’ in our analysis), basic techniques
(meso-political level or ‘tactic’) and paradigms (macro-political level or
‘principle’). Indeed, Hall’s analysis of policy learning and change complements
much of what has been suggested above — ﬁrst- and second-order changes
(tools and tactics) do not necessarily involve third-order (principle or
paradigmatic) change. Politicians may, we have argued, retain a principled
commitment to depoliticisation while adopting new tactics and/or tools to
operationalise this commitment. At the same time, the replacement of a
particular tool supporting depoliticisation, is not the same as saying that there
has been a change in the tactic more generally. The principle and tactical
approach to depoliticisation may stay the same: what is needed is a new tool
at the micro-level to ‘operationalise’ these constant governing calculations.
The British government’s decision in October 2001 to place Railtrack in
administration and re-take control of the British railway infrastructure, for
example, did not represent the government losing faith in the principle of
depoliticisation nor the tactic of institutional depoliticisation but it did
represent the government adopting a new tool to implement these policy
stances. In this case a public interest company — Network Rail. Similarly, the
work of Hay and Smith (2005) on globalisation has demonstrated that political
actors employ not one discourse but a range of discourses in a highly strategic
preference-shaping game.
A marked feature of recent state reforms at both the national and European
level is that governing elites (both politicians and senior oﬃcials) have
explicitly stated their principled commitment to depoliticisation. In 2003 Lord
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
311
British Politics 2006 1

Falconer, for example, the British Secretary of State for Constitutional Aﬀairs
set out a key governing principle for the Labour government:
What governs our approach is a clear desire to place power where it should
be: increasingly not with politicians, but with those best ﬁtted in diﬀerent
ways to deploy it. Interest rates are not set by politicians in the Treasury but
by the Bank of England. Minimum wages are not determined in the DTI, but
by the Low Pay Commission. Membership of the House of Lords will be
determined not in Downing Street but in an independent Appointments
Commission. This depoliticising of key decision-making is a vital element in
bringing power closer to the people.
At the European level the concept of depoliticisation formed a central
component of the 2001 White paper on European Governance (COM 428; see
Flinders, 2004b). Indeed, depoliticisation appears to have developed something
of a momentum as an increasing number of scholars and public oﬃcials suggest
that the rationale for severing the link between elected politicians and
monetary policy, for example, apply just as forcefully to many other areas of
government policy (Blinder, 1997; Headmasters and Headmistresses Con-
ference (UK) 2004). In terms of understanding depoliticisation as a form of
statecraft, therefore, this article has attempted to oﬀer a degree of deﬁnitional
and analytical clarity — an organising perspective around which future
research in the ﬁeld can be constructed. By way of reﬂecting on the limits or
boundaries of the concept and hopefully stimulating complementary research
in the ﬁeld it may be useful to brieﬂy highlight three issues — alternative tactics
and tools, failure recognition and political power.
In a tentative discussion like this it is possible that a number of alternative
depoliticisation tactics or tools have been overlooked. Four possible candidates
might
be
labelled
constitutional,
judicial,
conventional
and
scientiﬁc.
Constitutional depoliticisation refers to the removal of certain issues or policy
ﬂexibility from the jurisdiction of elected politicians through an entrenched and
legally binding constitution. The decision by a political elite to abide by the
decisions of a court in relation to a speciﬁc and highly salient issue, such as
stem cell research, assisted suicide or the right to life, could also be seen in
many ways as a form of judicial depoliticisation. There is also the situation in
which the main political parties within a democracy adopt an informal
convention to keep a certain issue oﬀthe political agenda. From the 1920s
through to the 1960s the main political parties in Britain had an informal
agreement or convention that questions relating to policy in Northern Ireland
would not be raised in Westminster. A similar convention held true in Britain
from the late 1950s–2001 in relation to not making political capital from race
and immigration issues. This tactic, what could be termed depoliticisation by
convention, has therefore served to depoliticise some of the most potentially
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
312
British Politics 2006 1

explosive issues in twentieth century British politics. Marcussen (2005) has
suggested a fourth form of depoliticisation through what he calls ‘scientisation’
in which a dominant rationality evolves to such an extent that certain policy
ﬁelds have moved beyond depoliticisation to the point that they have become
apoliticised in that there is no longer a debate about even the principle of
depoliticisation and it is diﬃcult to foresee a situation in which politicians
would seek to move back to a direct mode of governance.
It is not clear whether constitutional, judicial, conventional depoliticisation
or even ‘scientisation’ are tactical choices (meso-level) in their own right or if
they should be interpreted as variants or tools (micro-level) of existing tactics.
For example, judicial depoliticisation could be viewed as a rule-based strategy
of ‘tying one’s hands’, whereas depoliticisation through convention and
scientisation could be understood as a form of preference shaping. The
intention here is not to answer these questions but simply to point out that
Figure 1 is likely to require future reﬁnement.
A discussion of additional forms or types of depoliticisation clearly leads us
into a discussion of the limits or boundaries of the concept by virtue of the
likelihood that a greater number of governing strategies are likely to be
included beneath this umbrella concept. The issue of boundaries or conceptual
evisceration is further clouded by the fact that depoliticisation and politicisation
may actually take place concurrently. The simple transfer of functions and
responsibilities to the European Union from member states oﬀers an example
of this conundrum. The role of the Council of Ministers and the growing
scrutiny powers of the European Parliament might suggest that the upward
transfer of functions should not be perceived as ‘depoliticisation’ as the
functions are being moved to another ‘politicised’ environment. However, the
impact of this process may well be interpreted as one of depoliticisation for the
nation state as national politicians have arguably lost a degree of direct control
over those functions. Even if functions are transferred to the European Union
there is reason to doubt that this should immediately be interpreted as a
politicised environment. Hix’s (1998, 54) research on the ‘new governance
agenda’ leads him to conclude that, ‘The EU is transforming politics and
government at the European and national levels into a system of multi-level,
non-hierachichal, deliberative and apolitical governance via a complex web of
public/private networks and quasi-autonomous agencies’ (emphasis added).
Similarly Chalmers (2005, 1) states, ‘Transnational depoliticisation is a
growing phenomenon, but its crucible is the European Union’.
A ﬁnal challenge for those interested in developing the concept of
depoliticisation concerns the epistemological and methodological challenges
presented by attempting to understand or gauge the impact of the concept in
empirical terms. Accumulating practical evidence demonstrating the existence
of depoliticisation strategies and its consequences is problematic; requiring as it
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
313
British Politics 2006 1

does the analysis of non-observable behaviour (i.e. preference shaping, public
perceptions,
informal
political
inﬂuence/control).
These
methodological
challenges and issues of causation may become more apparent as scholars
attempt to detect subtle shifts and changes in statecraft. Understanding macro-
political changes in terms of a move away or towards a principled or ‘third
order’ commitment to depoliticisation may, for example, demand more
sophisticated
methods
of
analysis
than
those
required
for
identifying
modiﬁcations at the level of tactics or tools.
Hall (1993, 279) suggests that third-order change of this kind is likely to
reﬂect a very diﬀerent process, marked by a fundamental change in the
overarching terms of policy and political discourse. The work of Hay (1999) is
useful as he deﬁnes the concept of ‘crisis’ (which can lead to change) as an
accumulation of contradictions leading to a moment of decisive intervention.
However, the question of whether crisis occurs (and change takes place) is not
simply an objective one. Just because existing tactics and tools experience
contradictions does not mean that change automatically takes place. Rather,
what constitutes a contradiction or a problem in itself implies a subjective
judgement. It follows that any decision concerning which contradictions or
problems require a response will also imply an act of subjective judgement.
Comparative case study analysis might usefully examine the generation of
multiple arguments or narratives concerning the nature of certain problems
and prescriptions for reform and the process through which depoliticisation
(broken down into the level of principle, tactic and tool) became or was
retained as the favoured mode of governance.
Despite the challenges of research methods, frameworks and boundaries,
depoliticisation, carefully employed, oﬀers fertile conceptual territory in which
to expand our knowledge and understanding of contemporary governance
processes. This is because depoliticisation is most closely associated with the
(re)distribution and understanding of power in modern societies. Indeed there
are clear correlations between the three depoliticisation tactics outlined above
and Stephen Lukes’ (1974) seminal work on power, particularly his ‘radical
approach’. ‘Decision-making’ power is clearly related to institutional depoli-
ticisation as decision-making capacities are transferred to ‘independent’ public
bodies; whereas Lukes’ ‘non-decision making’ power is clearly related to rule-
based depoliticisation in that politicians agree to abide by set frameworks and
therefore forgo or signiﬁcantly diminish their discretion. Finally, Lukes ‘radical
view’, which involves power being retained and controlled through processes of
thought control, has a clear resemblance to the tactic of preference-shaping
depoliticisation.
Referring to Lukes’ scholarship on power usefully encourages us to assert
that the value and potential of ‘depoliticisation’ stem from the fact that it
provokes new questions about the political realm and the evolution of the
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
314
British Politics 2006 1

public sphere; it may help explain new forms of statecraft and governmentality
while also lifting the veil of political power beyond the state (Rose and Miller,
1992), or what Morison (1998) refers to as ‘fugitive power’. From this the
concept may help get beyond facile debates regarding ‘big’ vs ‘small’
government and help foster more sophisticated positions about diﬀerent forms
and styles of government and governance. The concept could also elucidate
new tools of governance while also helping gauge their impact in terms of
popular engagement, levels of trust and public expectations (for a review see
Mair, 2005). The concept may give fresh meaning to current debates while also
oﬀering new perspectives on perennial problems. Depoliticisation may create
democratic problems (Poggi, 1990; Boggs, 2000; Mouﬀe, 2000; Gounari, 2004)
and it may paradoxically oﬀer great democratic potential (Pettit, 2001, 2004).
However, without seeking to disentangle the concept into its component
elements or strands its potential is likely to remain unrealised. This article
represents an initial endeavour in this direction.
Acknowledgments
Work on this article was facilitated by ﬁnancial support from the Leverhulme
Trust (Grant no. FRFG/2005/0112). Earlier versions were presented to
seminars at Nuﬃeld College, Oxford, and Stanford University. We thank the
participants at each of these seminars and the anonymous referees for their
helpful comments and suggestions.
References
Balls, E. (1998) ‘Open macroeconomics in an open economy’, Scottish Journal of Political Economy
45(2): 113–132.
Balls, E. and O’Donnell, G. (2002) Reforming Britain’s Economic and Financial Policy: Towards
Greater Economic Stability, London: Palgrave.
Barro, R. and Gordon, D. (1983) ‘Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy’,
Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 101–121.
Birch, A. (1984) ‘Overload, ungovernability and delegitimation’, British Journal of Political Science
14: 135–160.
Blinder, A. (1997) ‘Is government too political?’ Foreign Aﬀairs Nov/Dec: 115–126.
Boggs, C. (2000) The End of Politics, New York: Guildford Press.
Bouckaert, G. and Peters, G.B. (2004) ‘What is Available and What is Missing from the Study
of Quangos?’, in C. Pollitt and C. Talbot (eds.) Unbundling Government, London: Routledge,
pp. 22–51.
Brown,
G.
(1999)
Mais
Lecture:
the
Conditions
for
Full
Employment,
19th
October
(www.treasury.gov.uk/press).
Brown, G. (2000) Lecture to the Royal Economic Society, 13th July (www.treasury.gov.uk/press).
Browning, P. (1986) The Treasury and Economic Policy, 1964–85, London: Longman.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
315
British Politics 2006 1

Buller, J. and Flinders, M. (2005) ‘The domestic origins of depoliticisation in the area
of British economic policy’, British Journal of Politics and International Relations 7(4):
526–544.
Buller, J.
and
Flinders,
M. (2006) ‘Democracy,
Depoliticisation
and
Arena-Shiﬁng’,
in
T. Christensen and P. Laegreid (eds.) Autonomy and Regulation: Coping with Agencies in the
Modern State, London: Edward Elgar.
Burnham, P. (2001) ‘New Labour and the politics of depoliticisation’, British Journal of Politics and
International Relations 3(2): 127–149.
Cain, R. (1993) ‘Community based AIDS services: formalization and depoliticization’, Inter-
national Journal of Health Services 23(4): 665–684.
Chalmers, D. (2005) ‘Risk, anxiety and the European mediation of the politics of life’, European
Law Review 30(1).
COM 428 (2001) European Governance: A White Paper, Brussels: European Commission.
Daniel, G. (1960) ‘Public accountability of the nationalised industries’, Public Administration 38(1):
27–35.
Demos (1998) Modernising the Monarchy, London: Demos.
Douglas, M. (1999) ‘The Depoliticisation of Risk’, in Implicit Meanings, London: Routledge,
pp. 218–231.
Dyke, G. (2005) Inside Story, London: Pernennial.
Epstein, R. (2002) ‘International Institutions and the Depoliticization of Economic Policy in Post-
Communist Europe’, ECPR, Turin.
European Policy Forum (2000) Making Decisions in Britain, London: European Policy Forum.
Fairclough, N. (2000) ‘Dialogue in the Public Sphere’, in S. Sarangi and M. Coulthard (eds.)
Discourse and Social Life, Harlow: Longman, pp. 21–42.
Falconer, L. (2003) Speech to the Institute for Public Policy Research, London.
Feldman, S. (2003) ‘Paradoxes of Institutionalism: the Depoliticisation of Bangladeshi NGOs’,
Development in Practice 13(1): 5–26.
Flinders, M. (2004a) ‘Delegated governance in Britain’, Public Administration 82(4): 883–909.
Flinders, M. (2004b) ‘Delegated governance in the European union’, Journal of European Public
Policy 11(3): 520–544.
Flinders, M. (2004c) ‘Icebergs and MPs: delegated governance and parliament’, Parliamentary
Aﬀairs 57(4): 767–784.
Giles, C. (2005) ‘City frowns on chancellors bending of the golden rule’, The Financial Times,
19 August.
Glyn, A. and Wood, S. (2001) ‘Economic policy under New Labour: how social democratic is the
Blair government?’ Political Quarterly 72(1): 50–66.
Goodhart, A. (1955) English Law and the Moral Law, London: Stephens and Son.
Gounari, P. (2004) ‘Contesting Common Sense Discourse: Language, Politics and Democracy’,
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, The Pennsylvania State University.
Greve, C., Flinders, M. and Van Thiel, S. (1999) ‘Quangos — what’s in a name? — deﬁning
quangos from a comparative perspective’, Governance 12(2): 129–147.
Habermas, J. (1996) ‘The Scientization of Politics and Public Opinion’, in W. Outhwaite (ed.)
The Habermas Reader, London: Polity Press, pp. 44–52.
Hall, P. (1993) ‘Policy paradigms, social learning and the state’, Comparative Politics 25(3):
275–296.
Ham, A. (1981) Treasury Rules: Recurrent Themes in British Economic Policy, London: Quartet
Books.
Hay, C. (1999) ‘Crisis and Political Development in Postwar Britain’, in D. Marsh, J. Buller, C.
Hay, J. Johnston, P. Kerr, S. Mcanulla and M. Watson (eds.) Postwar British Politics in
Perspective, London: Polity, pp. 87–107.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
316
British Politics 2006 1

Hay, C. and Smith, N. (2005) ‘Globalisation and the EU in the UK and Ireland’, West European
Politics 28(1): 124–159.
Hay, C. and Rosamond, B. (2002) ‘Globalisation, European integration and the discursive
construction of economic imperatives’, Journal of European Public Policy 9(2): 147–167.
Hix, S. (1998) ‘The Study of the EU II’, Journal of European Public Policy 5(1): 38–65.
Hobson, K. (2004) ‘Sustainable consumption in the UK: the ‘responsible consumer’ and
government at ‘arm’s-length’, Journal of Environment and Development 10(3): 121–139.
Hood, C. (2002) ‘The risk game and the blame game’, Government and Opposition 37(1): 15–37.
Hooghe, L. and Marks, G. (2003) ‘Unravelling the central state, but how?’ American Political
Science Review 97(2): 233–243.
Howe, G. (1994) Conﬂict of Loyalty, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Huang, J. (1999) The Politics of Depoliticization in Republican China, Bern: Peter Lang.
Kettell, S. (2004) The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Policy-Making, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Kiewiet, R. and McCubbins, M. (1991) The Logic of Delegation., Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
King, A. (1975) ‘Overload: problems of governing in the 1970s’, Political Studies 23: 289–296.
Kings Fund (2003) A New Relationship Between Government and the NHS, London: Kings Fund.
Kydland, F.E. and Prescott, E.C. (1977) ‘Rules rather than discretion: the inconsistency of optimal
plans’, Journal of Political Economy 85(3): 473–489.
Lam, W.-M. (2005) ‘Depoliticization, citizenship and the politics of community in Hong Kong’,
Citizenship Studies 9(3): 309–322.
Lawson, N. (1992) The View From Number Eleven, London: Bantam.
Lukes, S. (1974) Power: A Radical View, London: Macmillan.
Mair, P. (2005) Popular Democracy and the European Union Polity, EUROGOV European
Governance Paper No.C-05-03.
Majone, G. (2000) ‘The credibility crisis of community regulation’, Journal of Common Market
Studies 38(2): 273–302.
Majone, G. (2001) ‘Non-majoritarian institutions and the limits of democratic governance’, Journal
of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 157(1): 57–78.
Marcussen, M. (2005) ‘Transcending Politics’, SCANCOR/IPSA Seminar, Stanford University.
Meyer-Sahling, J. (2004) ‘Civil service reform in post-communist Europe: the bumpy road to
depoliticisation’, West European Politics 27(1): 71–103.
Morison, J. (1998) ‘The case against constitutional reform’, Journal of Law and Society 25(4):
510–535.
Morrison, H.T (1954) Parliament and Government, London: Oxford University Press.
Mouﬀe, C. (2000) The Democratic Paradox, London: Verso.
OECD (2001) Distributed Public Governance: Agencies, Authorities and other Autonomous Bodies,
OECD: Paris.
Osborne, G. (2005) ‘Achieving Lower, Simpler Taxes’, speech to the Social Market Foundation,
7th September.
Pettit, P. (2001) ‘Deliberative democracy and the case for depoliticising government’, University of
NSW Law Journal 24(3): 724–736.
Pettit, P. (2004) ‘Depoliticizing democracy’, Ration Juris 17(1): 52–65.
Poggi, G. (1990) The State: Its Nature, Development and Prospects, Cambridge: Polity.
Pollitt, C. (1983) Managerialism and the Public Services, Oxford: Blackwell.
Pollitt, C. and Talbot, C. (eds.) (2004) Unbundling Government, London: Routledge.
Ranciere, J. (1995) On the Shores of Politics, London: Verso.
Robson, W. (1937) Public Enterprise, London: Allen and Unwin.
Rose, N. and Miller, P. (1992) ‘Political power beyond the state’, British Journal of Sociology 43(2):
173–205.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
317
British Politics 2006 1

Sartori, G. (1970) ‘Concept misformation in comparative politics’, American Political Science
Review 64(4): 1033–1053.
Scammell, W. (1985) ‘The Working of the Gold Standard’, in B. Eichengreen (ed.) The Gold
Standard in Theory and History, London: Methuen, pp. 87–114.
Scott, A. (1986) ‘Britain and the EMS: an appraisal of the report of the treasury and civil service
committee’, Journal of Common Market Studies 24(3): 187–201.
Sheﬀrin, S. (1978) ‘Habermas, depoliticization and consumer theory’, Journal of Economic Issues
12(4): 785–797.
Shepherd, G. (2003) ‘Civil Service Reform in Developing Countries’ World Bank/United Nations
Conference ‘Depoliticising the Civil Service’, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Smith, D. (1987) The Rise and Fall of Monetarism, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Stephens, P. (1996) Politics and the Pound, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Storey, A. (2004) ‘Depoliticising development: promoting choiceless democracies’, Paper from the
‘Whose Rules Rule? The IMF and World Bank at 60’ Dublin.
Thatcher, M. and Stone Sweet, A. (2002) ‘The politics of delegation: non-majoritarian
institututions in Europe’, West European Politics 25(special issue): 1.
Togeby, L. (1995) ‘Feminist attitudes in times of depoliticization of women’s issues’, European
Journal of Political Research 27: 47–68.
United Nations (2003) ‘Depoliticising the civil service’, Eleventh International Anti-Corruption
Conference, 27th May, New York.
Van Gramberg, B. (2002) Liberation Vs Market Driven Management in Victorian Local
Government, Victoria University School of Management, Working Paper Series No.11.
Watson, M. and Hay, C. (2003) ‘The discourse of globalisation and the logic of no alternative’,
Policy & Politics 31(3): 289–305.
White, S. (1996) ‘Depoliticising development’, Development in Practice 6(1): 6–15.
Winch, D. (1969) Economics and Politics, London: Fontana.
Wodak, R. (2000) ‘Recontextualization and The Transformation of Meanings’, in S. Sanagi and
M. Coulthard (eds.) Discourse and Social Life, Harlow: Longman, pp. 53–68.
Wong, S., Opper, S. and Hu, R. (2004) ‘Shareholding structure, depoliticization and ﬁrm
performance’, Economics of Transition 12(1): 29–66.
World Bank (2000) Bolivia: From Patronage to Professional State, Report No. 20115-BO.
Matthew Flinders and Jim Buller
Depoliticisation
318
British Politics 2006 1