 
Douglas R. Weiner. A Little Corner of Freedom: Russian Nature Protection from
Stalin to Gorbachev. Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 1999. xiv +
556 pp. $45.00, cloth, ISBN 978-0-520-21397-5. 
 
Reviewed by Stephen V. Bittner 
Published on H-Russia (March, 2000) 
Readers of Douglas R. Weiner's superb new
study of the Soviet nature-protection movement,
A Little Corner of Freedom will find an absorbing
cast of characters: a school teacher turned biolo‐
gist who steers a shockingly intrepid group of en‐
vironmental activists through the difficult years
of Stalinism; a pragmatic bureaucrat who won‐
ders why Soviet nature cannot be "souped up" to
meet the demands of socialist construction; a par‐
ty hack in environmentalist garb who is caught
(and photographed) fishing with an illegal casting
net on the Oka River; a General Secretary who
asks from the Central Committee podium whether
squirrels and bears care for the company of scien‐
tists; and a chorus of European bison, eider geese,
raccoon dogs, muskrats, and other assorted flora
and fauna, whose plight in the Soviet Union's na‐
ture preserves (zapovedniki) provides the essen‐
tial backdrop for much of the book. 
While  weaving  these  and  other  characters
into a richly textured and engaging narrative that
runs to nineteen chapters and four-hundred odd
pages, Weiner makes a unique and provocative
contribution to the burgeoning literature on pop‐
ular resistance and protest in the Soviet Union.[1]
Nature-protection, Weiner argues, constituted an
independent  and  critical-minded  social  move‐
ment that survived the reigns of Stalin and his
successors (pp. 1-3). The survival strategies em‐
ployed by this movement, and the identity politics
which were at its core, comprise Weiner's central
lines of inquiry. 
A Little Corner of Freedom stands as a sequel
to Weiner's previous monograph on Soviet nature
protection  in  the  1920s  and  early  30s,  and  is
grounded in an eclectic body of primary-source
data.[2] Weiner cites many of the archives which
have become de rigueur for historians in the Sovi‐
et field (GARF, RTsKhIDNI, RGAE), but also several
private  collections  belonging  to  prominent  ac‐
tivists, as well as the archives of institutional cu‐
riosities  like  the  Moscow  Society  of  Naturalists
(MOIP), and the newspaper Literaturnaia gazeta. 
Much to his credit, Weiner is careful to point
out instances where these materials contradict or
tweak observations made in his first study, partic‐
ularly his previous distinction between the "aes‐
thetic-ethical"  and  "scientific-ecological"  tenden‐

cies in the early-Soviet nature-protection move‐
ment (pp. 61-62). In addition, A Little Corner of
Freedom is distinguished by a refreshingly ambi‐
tious chronology. Weiner begins his narrative in
the early 1930s, when V. N. Makarov assumed the
reins of the All-Russian Society for the Protection
of Nature (VOOP), and ends it in 1991, after glas‐
nost and perestroika had eclipsed the agenda of
the nature-protection movement by transforming
the Soviet political landscape. 
Weiner  orients  his  analysis  of  this  period
around the evolution of the Soviet network of za‐
povedniki -- those supposedly inviolable preserves
that served as the primary focus of the nature-
protection movement. Zapovedniki "were among
the  rare  physical  and  social  spaces...that  had
largely escaped the juggernaut of Stalin's 'Great
Break," Weiner argues, and thus came to repre‐
sent an "archipelago of freedom" for the field sci‐
entists who labored on their behalf (p. 38). This
freedom was embodied both in symbolic terms --
i.e., zapovedniki represented "the free and untu‐
tored flow of life" which had been "denied to hu‐
man society in Stalin's Russia" (p. 4) -- and in the
more real sense that zapovedniki were dedicated
to the long-term study of ecological processes, and
thus fell squarely into the realm of science. 
This scientific claim on nature protection was
premised on the concept of "biocenosis," which
held that individual ecological communities (i.e.,
zapovedniki) existed in self-regulating equilibria.
When managed by scientists, these communities
could be used as "baselines" (etalony) to measure
the extent of degradation on lands that had been
subjected to human exploitation (pp. 28-29, 37),
and presumably, to determine the most resource-
friendly means for further exploitation. As Wein‐
er points out, this holistic view of a static natural
world holds little validity as a scientific doctrine
(and  was  frequently  denounced  by  ideological
watchdogs  as  reactionary),  but  because  it  was
widely embraced by field scientists, the fates of
zapovedniki and  "scientific  public  opinion"
(nauchnaia obshchestvennost') became inextrica‐
bly bound. For many of the scientists active in na‐
ture-protection,  the  struggle  to  protect/restore/
augment the network of zapovedniki represented
nothing less than the struggle to protect the au‐
tonomy of science. In other words, nature-protec‐
tion was emblematic of the "sacred duty of re‐
sponsible scientists before nauka" (p. 29). 
Much of the storyline of A Little Corner of
Freedom, therefore, concerns the struggle among
old-guard activists to protect the prerogatives of
"scientific public opinion." During the 1930s and
40s, this struggle manifested itself in the ambiva‐
lence of the leadership of the All-Russian Society
for the Protection of Nature (VOOP) toward occa‐
sional calls to rid the organization of its "clublike
atmosphere," and to create a truly "mass organi‐
zation" (pp. 57, 163-64, 171). (VOOP had served as
the chief institutional front for nauchnaia obshch‐
estvennost' in nature-protection affairs since the
1920s.) 
"The ideal of nauchnaia obshchestvennost',"
Weiner notes, "...was not a truly democratic one,
for it regarded the educated --especially the scien‐
tific--elite as the truly authentic and enlightened
representative  of  all  society"  (pp.  72-73).  This
barely latent exclusivity, as well as VOOP's ensu‐
ing failure to accommodate the party's own no‐
tions of obshchestvennost', did not escape the at‐
tention of higher authorities. A series of bureau‐
cratic investigations and reshufflings in the late
1940s and early 50s led to Makarov's dismissal,
and  to  a  merger  with  Leonid  Leonov's  Green
Plantings  Society  (pp.  143-47,  161-81).  By  the
mid-1950s,  many  of  the  old-guard  activists had
abandoned VOOP altogether, fleeing to the Mos‐
cow Society of Naturalists (MOIP), which provided
an atmosphere more intimate than its transmogri‐
fied predecessor (p. 195). 
This ongoing struggle to maintain the elitist
ethos of nauchnaia obshchestvennost' is central to
Weiner's  understanding  of  the  question  which
frames much of his book, but which is especially
H-Net Reviews
2

relevant for the chapters concerning the Stalin pe‐
riod: Why did the Soviet regime tolerate a move‐
ment which was, at the very least, "implicitly sub‐
versive" to the imperatives of socialist construc‐
tion, and often openly ambivalent about the par‐
ty/state  monopoly  on  decision  making?  Weiner
admits in the introduction that a unitary answer
to this question might never emerge, but he clear‐
ly favors one of the several hypotheses which he
offers in its absence. For the most part, nature-
protection activists "presented a convincing im‐
age of harmless and somewhat ridiculous cranks
and oddballs-- chudaki" (p. 18). A chapter later he
adds the following observation: "Such figures, if
the Party elite thought about them at all, must
have been objects of gentle ridicule. Ultimately, as
a 'class,' they were not serious enough to be worth
liquidating" (p. 50). 
This reading promises to be one of the more
controversial elements of Weiner's study, but it
provides a certain symmetry to his analysis of
nauchnaia  obshchestvennost'.  For  the  image  of
"cranks and oddballs" to have been effective as a
protective mechanism, it was imperative that the
nature-protection movement maintain its "club‐
like" exclusivity, as the political stakes associated
with  a  "mass  organization"  (i.e.,  one  that  had
ceased to be "scientific") were simply too great. In‐
stances of apparent lunacy in VOOP--a request to
travel to a conference in Vienna in 1937 (pp. 1-2),
praise for the American ideal of conservation in
1938 (p. 53), and a combative inquiry into a tree-
cutting campaign run by the state-security appa‐
ratus in 1948 (pp. 2, 137-38)--were acceptable only
because the language of nature protection was
mostly devoid of political meaning. "Despite occa‐
sional  arrests  and  episodic  characterizations  of
the movement as a hotbed of counterrevolution‐
ary 'bourgeois professors,'" Weiner notes, "it was
hard for the regime to perceive these entomolo‐
gists,  herpetologists,  mammalogists,  botanical
ecologists, and biogeographers as sources of effec‐
tive political speech. Marginality thus became a
guarantor of the survival of scientific public opin‐
ion as a social identity" (p. 9). 
Through much of the text, Weiner carefully
points out the cracks in this interpretation (and
thereby underlines the absence of a "unitary" ex‐
planation), but he is clearly hesitant to abandon
the primacy of the "crank and oddball" image for
the  ultimate  survival  of  the  nature-protection
movement (p. 444). One of the more sizeable fis‐
sures in this interpretation, nevertheless, appears
as a constant tension between image and action
within the movement. While nature-protection ac‐
tivists may have fostered protective, crazy-profes‐
sor personae on the political stage, they were re‐
markably smooth operators behind the scenes, re‐
lying on patronage (pp. 69-70, 107-108, 189-90),
and the discursive strategies which Weiner calls
"protective coloration" (pp. 41-42, 101-102, 124-25)
and "instrumental shame" (pp. 249, 309-310) to
advance their agenda. 
The movement's reliance on patronage is es‐
pecially  important,  as  it  helps  break  down  the
sense  of  irreconcilable  differences  between
regime and activist which characterizes much of
Weiner's  analysis  of  the  Stalin  period  (pp.  38,
88-93). Although it is clear that many in the high-
party  leadership  had  little  patience  for  nature
protection (Khrushchev, for instance, helped over‐
see the dismantlement of the zapovednik system
in 1950-51), officials at Gosplan, the republic-level
Council of Ministers, and the oblast' level were of‐
ten  openly  sympathetic  to  the  movement,  and
took great pains to soften the edges of unfriendly
initiatives (pp. 104-116). The existence of these al‐
liances, in turn, leads to a larger question which
Weiner  raises  in  the  introduction,  but  leaves
largely unanswered in the text: is it possible that
the  existence  of  an  independent  and  critical-
minded  nature-protection  movement  actually
served the interests of the regime (p. 3)? In other
words, did the movement owe its survival to offi‐
cial support more broad than the occasional pa‐
tronage relationship? If so, what, if anything, did
H-Net Reviews
3

the movement offer in return for its continued ex‐
istence? 
In the years following Stalin's death, the claim
of "scientific public opinion" on nature protection
began to falter. By the 1970s, the concept of bio‐
cenosis--the foundation upon which much of the
claim had been premised--had fallen into disuse
as  biologists  adopted  more  modern  notions  of
ecology (i.e., nature as a continuum rather than a
set  of  closed  communities)  (pp.  387-89).  Even
more  importantly,  as  the  terror  of  Stalinism
slipped into the past, the popular appeal of nature
protection grew enormously, and the movement's
rhetoric assumed civic (rather than purely scien‐
tific)  overtones.  Soviet  citizens  joined  scientists
and journalists to rally on behalf of Lake Baikal
and a host quality-of-life issues (water pollution,
air quality, etc.) closer to home. University stu‐
dents  organized  nature  protection  brigades
(druzhiny) to patrol poaching in zapovedniki (and
thus created vehicles to pass on the elite ethos
which the old-guard activists had worked so hard
to protect), while their counterparts at less presti‐
gious technical schools pursued their own agenda
of sustainable forest exploitation (pp. 313-33). By
the early 1980s, VOOP counted nearly 29 million
names  on  its  membership  rolls,  making  it  the
largest voluntary organization in the Russian Re‐
public (pp. 403-404). 
In  scale,  at  least,  these  developments  were
certainly unique, but one suspects that as mani‐
festations of an organized and independent criti‐
cal-mindedness, they were not as peculiar as they
had been prior to 1953. Evidence suggests, for in‐
stance, that VOOP's sister organization, the All-
Russian Society for the Preservation of Historical
and Cultural Monuments, was distinguished by a
similar record of popular activism during the late
60s  and  70s.[3]  Smaller  loci  of  organized  and
mostly tolerated critical-mindedness existed with‐
in the creative unions (the Moscow Sections of the
Union of Writers and Union of Architects seemed
to  be  especially  aggressive),  and  at  individual
journals.[4] After describing an especially combat‐
ive zapovednik congress in 1954, where activists
attacked the decision to dismantle the nature-pre‐
serve system two years earlier, Weiner suggests
that  the  nature-protection  movement  was  "the
only constituency that was fearless enough and
mobilized enough to compel such an appearance
at such an early date" (p. 233). Maybe so, but other
"little corners of freedom" were not far behind. 
It is difficult to do justice to a book as ambi‐
tious as A Little Corner of Freedom in a 2000-
word review. Weiner not only offers a fascinating
and eloquent history of the Soviet nature-protec‐
tion movement, but does so within a conceptual
framework that promises to make a substantial
splash  in  the  Stalin-era  historiography,  and  to
serve as a pioneering contribution to its nascent
post-Stalin counterpart. Who would have thought,
after  all,  that  it  would  one  day  be  possible  to
speak of an independent and "implicitly subver‐
sive" social movement that managed to survive
the reigns of Stalin and his successors? 
Notes 
[1]. See, for instance, Sarah Davies, Popular
Opinion  in  Stalin's  Russia:  Terror,  Propaganda,
and  Dissent,  1934-1991 (Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press, 1997); Sheila Fitzpatrick, Stalin's
Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russia
Village after Collectivization (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994); Stephen Kotkin, Magnetic
Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995); Lynne Viola,
Peasant Rebels under Stalin: Collectivization and
the Culture of Peasant Resistance (New York: Ox‐
ford  University  Press,  1996).  As  a  category  of
analysis  for  the  Soviet  period,  "resistance"  has
come under attack as of late. See Jochen Hellbeck,
"Speaking Out: Languages of Affirmation and Dis‐
sent in Stalinist Russia," Kritika: Explorations in
Russian and Eurasian History_ 1, no. 1 (Winter
2000): 71-96; Anna Krylova, "The Tenacious Liber‐
al Subject in Soviet Studies," Ibid., 119-46. 
H-Net Reviews
4

[2].  Douglas  R.  Weiner,  Models  of  Nature:
Ecology, Conservation, and Cultural Revolution in
Soviet Russia, Indiana-Michigan Series in Russian
and East European Studies (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1988). 
[3]. John B. Dunlop, The Faces of Contempo‐
rary Russian Nationalism (Princeton, N.J.: Prince‐
ton  University  Press,  1983),  63-92;  Timothy  J.
Colton, Moscow: Governing the Socialist Metropo‐
lis (Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Har‐
vard University, 1995), 406-407, 553-66. 
[4]. Like much of the post-Stalin period, many
of these phenomena await a chronicler. On "thick"
journals, the Union of Writers, and literary life in
general, see Dina Spechler, Permitted Dissent in
the USSR: Novyi Mir and the Soviet Regime (New
York: Praeger Publishers, 1982); Dirk Kretzschmar
[Krechmar], Politika i kul'tura pri Brezhneve, An‐
dropove, i Chernenko, 1970-1985 gg., trans., M. G.
Ratgauza, with an introduction by Karl Eimerma‐
cher, Seriia pervaia publikatsia v Rossii (Moscow:
Airo-XX,  1997),  11-70;  Priscilla  Johnson,
Khrushchev and the Arts: The Politics of Soviet
Culture, 1962-1964 (Cambridge, Mass.: The M.I.T.
Press, 1965), 1-89; Raisa Orlova and Lev Kopelev,
My  zhili  v  Moskve,  1956-1980 (Moscow:  Kniga,
1988). Published material on the activities of the
Union of Architects in the post-Stalin period is al‐
most  non-existent,  but  the  reviewer's  research
suggests that the Moscow Section played a sub‐
stantial role in rallying obshchestvennost' on be‐
half  of  historical-preservation  and  urban-plan‐
ning issues. See "De-Stalinization and Its Conflicts:
Social and Cultural Change in Moscow's Arbat Dis‐
trict, 1953-1968" (Ph.D. diss., University of Chica‐
go, forthcoming in 2000), chaps. 3-4. 
Copyright  (c)  2000  by  H-Net,  all  rights  re‐
served. This work may be copied for non-profit
educational use if proper credit is given to the au‐
thor and the list. For other permission, please con‐
tact H-Net@h-net.msu.edu. 
H-Net Reviews
5

If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at
https://networks.h-net.org/h-russia 
Citation: Stephen V. Bittner. Review of Weiner, Douglas R. A Little Corner of Freedom: Russian Nature
Protection from Stalin to Gorbachev. H-Russia, H-Net Reviews. March, 2000. 
URL: https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=3916 
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No
Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. 
H-Net Reviews
6
