741
revista de ciencia pOLítica/volumen 29 / Nº 3 / 2009 / 741 – 773
MEASURING DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY: 
AN INITIAL REPORT ON AN EMERGING DATA SET
Midiendo responsabilidad democrática: Reporte Inicial 
sobre una emergente base de datos
HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE,
KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
Duke University
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we report on a new dataset based on expert surveys carried out in nearly 90 countries 
around the world. This dataset helps to overcome the limited existence of cross-national data on 
democratic linkage mechanisms between citizens and politicians, especially with regard to contingent 
exchange of targeted goods for electoral support as most studies that have examined democratic 
accountability have a narrow geographic focus or are single-case studies. The report outlines the 
various methodological challenges faced in implementing the survey and in interpreting its results, 
as well as steps taken to determine the quality of the data. This preliminary analysis of results 
from the survey lends support that the various indicators developed from the survey are reliable 
and valid measures of political parties’ actual organizational practices, linkage mechanisms, and 
policy orientations. 
Key words: Democratic Accountability, Clientelism, Expert Survey, Party Competition.
RESUMEN
En este trabajo reportamos sobre una nueva base de datos de encuestas a expertos, 
cursadas en más de 90 países de todo el mundo. Esta base de datos ayuda a superar 
la ausencia de información comparable entre países en torno a los mecanismos 
democráticos de relación entre ciudadanos y políticos; los modos como éstos proveen 
bienes específicos coyunturales a cambio de apoyos electorales. Además, evita una 
limitación que caracteriza a la mayoría de los estudios anteriores sobre rendición de 
cuentas en un contexto democrático: su reducido enfoque geográfico y el hecho de ser 
estudios de casos particulares. El reporte arroja luz sobre los desafíos metodológicos 
enfrentados en el proceso de implantación de la encuesta e interpretación de sus 
resultados. Asimismo destaca los pasos tomados para determinar la calidad de 
la información. Este análisis preliminar de los resultados de la encuesta permite 
afirmar que los indicadores desarrollados son fiables y válidos para medir las 
prácticas organizacionales de los partidos políticos, sus mecanismos de relación con 
el electorado y sus orientaciones programáticas. 
Palabras Clave: “Rendición de Cuentas” clientelismo, encuesta a expertos, competición 
partidaria.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
742
This paper reports on data collected for a project on modes of democratic accountability 
in polities with a modicum of democratic electoral competition for office around the 
world, based on information collected for a total of 86 out of 89 countries for which the 
data collection process has been completed1. The purpose is to introduce the dataset and 
evaluate the quality of the data and the validity of the concepts studied prior to engaging 
in substantive comparative investigations to test theoretical propositions. In terms of the 
data quality, we think that this data project is high-risk and poses great challenges not to 
over-tax weak data and draw erroneous conclusions not borne out by the evidence. Here 
we discuss the outline of strategies to probe into the quality of the data. Our paper marks 
only the beginning and a number of the steps outlined here need to be pursued in the 
future. But our critics may come up with other techniques to probe into data quality we 
have not thought of and we will be eager to embrace in our future work.
The paper is organized in seven sections. First, we lay out the theoretical motivations 
for exploring democratic accountability and linkages between politicians and citizens in 
democratic polities. We then turn to the options we considered when it comes to conducting 
research on clientelistic linkage and the research strategy we ultimately chose. In the third 
section, we discuss the methodological challenges associated with the approach to data 
collection employed in the project. In the fourth part of the paper, we take a first systematic 
look at the data and the information we have on party policy positions across various 
dimensions. We then focus on exploring the data on party organization and action, again 
at the party level. Next we examine variation and patterns in terms of targeted exchange 
and monitoring (clientelism) and discuss how the findings we get there are consistent or 
not with other questions elsewhere in the survey. Finally, we conclude with a short section 
examining how our measures for programmatic and clientelistic competition relate to other 
variables outside the dataset, such as economic development or quality of democracy.
I.	
The Theoretical Topic: Democratic Accountability and 
Citizen-Politician Linkage in Democratic Polities
Political accountability identifies a relationship between citizens (subjects) as “principals” 
and political representatives and decision-makers as “agents”. Politicians who make 
binding decisions over the rules of conduct and the allocation of scarce resources in a 
polity are responsive to principals when they deliver benefits such constituencies value. 
Politicians’ responsiveness may be based on the ability of the subjects to hold them 
effectively accountable for their actions, i.e. replace them by competing politicians, when 
the original set of politicians fails to be responsive, provided that there is a minimal level of 
civil liberties, periodic elections, and a rule of law. If relations of democratic accountability 
succeed, we may say that a democratic polity builds effective “linkages” between citizens 
and politicians.
1	
For more information on the project, please visit http://duke.edu/web/democracy/. 

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
743
Whether or not and how such accountability relations work in practice, however, is 
associated with a big question mark. What is it that politicians –or teams of politicians 
called “parties”–need to accomplish to make themselves appear responsive to citizens 
and build a working relationship of accountability and linkage? Simply to check whether 
or not politicians and parties are popular begs the question: What are politicians’ and 
parties’ achievements that make them more or less popular? What are the grounds on 
which citizens align behind politicians and parties?
For many decades, one answer the political science literature has given to this question 
emphasizes the role of expressive, emotional mechanisms constituting accountability 
and linkage between principals and agents. One of them is party identification, or an 
affective bond between a citizen and the individual politicians as well as the organization 
of her preferred party, often handed down through socialization from generation to 
generation within families. Another expressive mechanism is descriptive representation, 
or the preference for voters to support candidates who share ascriptive traits with their 
electorates that are difficult or impossible to alter (race, ethnicity, religion, language, 
gender, region/residence). A third expressive mechanism concerns the personal conduct 
of a politician that arouses special popular loyalty or enthusiasm, or what Max Weber 
called the personal charisma of a politician, net of whatever else the politician does to 
benefit her constituency.
Critics of the expressive voting literature have always pointed out that party identification, 
descriptive representation, and leadership charisma at least in part mask more instrumental, 
calculated grounds that bind principals to agents. Thus party identification may really 
amount to a “running tally” (Fiorina 1981) of what generations of politicians working 
within a partisan label have cumulatively achieved for their constituencies in terms of 
providing material benefits. Individual parties or coalitions of parties deploy “policy” and 
“partisan programs” with catalogues of club goods that appeal to an array of supporters 
and hopefully enable them to cobble together enough groups to capture the median voter 
and govern the country. Party identification, descriptive representation, and personal 
charisma, to a certain extent, are not purely emotional expressive bonds between citizens 
and politicians, but at least in part reveal citizens’ instrumental considerations that 
politicians with certain traits will deliver policies that make their voters better off. As 
a consequence, in the political science literature on parties and party systems, as well 
as in the comparative political economy literature, a “responsible partisan model” of 
the democratic process has reigned supreme that focuses on instrumental policy-based 
principal-agent relations.
Others have pointed out that some of the goods politicians deliver in the instrumental 
model tend to have the character of valence goods all citizens want to enjoy, such as economic 
growth, rather than positional club goods advantaging some but often at the expense of 
others. More recently, research in macro-political processes in the United States has therefore 
combined a positional and a valence perspective by showing how citizens’ evaluations 
of politicians and willingness to support them interweave considerations of politicians’ 
partisan positions on divisive policies and their demonstrated or likely competence of 
conduct in office in delivering collective goods (Erikson et al. 2003). Particularly retrospective 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
744
and prospective “economic voting” on the past record or future capacity of politicians to deliver 
collective goods are in the cross-hairs of investigations focused on valence competition.
What these two instrumental perspectives, as well as the expressive-emotional 
conceptualizations of democratic principal-agent linkage, leave out, however, is the 
possibility of political accountability through a direct exchange of a citizen’s support 
of a party (through the vote, but also the contribution of money or labor) for targeted 
personal material advantages and honors tailored to specific individual supporters and 
small groups of supporters. It is not public goods or large-scale club goods that are the 
currency of instrumental principal-agent relations, but “private” goods and localized 
club goods accruing to families and small neighborhoods. Here politicians and voters 
construct a contingent and often ongoing, iterative relationship where one side delivers 
its benefit only as long as the other side reciprocates. This “clientelistic” mode of political 
accountability and competition obviously raises difficult challenges of monitoring and 
enforcement, particularly in an environment in which democratic institutions uphold the 
formal secrecy of the ballot.2
Figure 1 summarizes the typology of expressive and instrumental linkage types we 
have distinguished in the preceding paragraphs. The field of comparative politics has 
produced a sizeable literature that throws light on patterns of positional policy competition, 
accountability and resulting alignments between voters and politicians, as well as the 
change (“realignment”) or deterioration (“dealignment”) of such accountability relations. 
In a similar vein, there is a detailed literature on valence competition, at least with regard 
to its economic retrospective and prospective voting aspect where scholarship has reached 
a certain theoretical and empirical maturity impressively demonstrated by Duch and 
Stevenson’s (2008) recent comparative work. At the same time, there is no comparable 
comparative treatment of clientelistic politics, either in theoretical or in empirical terms, 
let alone a treatment of the relationship between clientelistic exchange and positional as 
well as valence variants of policy competition.
Both in the 1950s and 1960s, and then again starting in the 1990s, scholars have produced 
a torrent of country-level case studies or subnational comparative studies of clientelistic 
party competition. In both eras, the upswings of attention to clientelism coincide with the 
extension of democratic politics beyond the boundaries of Western affluent postindustrial 
democracies. But even in this “core” region clientelism was never completely absent and 
has drawn renewed attention, because its partial demise in countries where it was well 
entrenched triggered turmoil in a number of party systems in recent decades(Kitschelt 
2007a). The literature on clientelism has not remained without progress. On the one hand, 
several scholars have made useful efforts to integrate clientelistic modes of accountability 
into formal models of party competition (Stokes 2005; Magaloni, Diaz-Cayeros et al. 2007; 
Medina and Stokes 2007; Nichter 2008). On the other hand, beyond a range of highly 
instructive ethnographic case studies, scholars have produced some quantitative empirical 
2	
For a more detailed characterization and definition of clientelism, see Kitschelt and Wilkinson (2007a: 7-23).

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
745
Figure 1:	 Modes of Political Linkage in Democracies
Modes of political 
linkage building
Instrumental, deliberative, 
calculated exchange between 
principals and agents
Programmatic 
linkage: 
non-contingent 
exchange
Trait 
identification
Charismatic
leadership
Expressive, affective 
attachments of 
principals to agents
Clientelistic 
linkage: 
contingent 
exchange
Party 
identification
Policy competence:
*leadership competence;
*retrospective and prospective 
economic voting;
*issue ownership 
(“vaence competition”)
Policy position:
*spatial (Euclidean, scalar) 
distance of party and voter 
ideal points over policy 
preferences;
studies that have explored clientelism through public opinion surveys or subnational 
structural data within countries (Calvo and Murillo 2004; Stokes 2005).
Because of the absence of a concerted effort to measure clientelism by constructing a 
cross-national data set, however, there has been relatively little effort to probe into the 
systemic conditions and consequences of the profiles of political accountability relations 
(positional, valence and/or clientelistic?) that characterize party competition in different 
polities and over time. Piattoni (2001) has produced one instructive extension and test 
of Shefter’s (1977) work to a broader set of European democracies(Piattoni 2001). Where 
quantitative estimates of clientelism have been needed for cross-national comparative 
research, papers rely on presumable indirect tracers of the presence of clientelism in a 
polity, such as the size of the civil service as a proportion of total employment and/or the 
size of public investment/construction budgets (Keefer 2006).
In light of this status of the research frontier, our current project on democratic accountability 
mechanism constitutes an effort to provide a comparative party-level and polity-level 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
746
data-set on profiles of democratic linkage mechanisms around the globe. Before we 
sketch the construction of the research instrument, let us indicate a set of questions 
that we plan to address with this instrument.3 The focal theme of interest is democratic 
accountability relations or linkage mechanisms, with a particular emphasis on the 
incidence of “clientelism”. In order to account for clientelistic principal-agent relations, 
however, it will be critical to analyze politicians’ and voters’ choices of and coordination 
around “portfolios” or “profiles” of accountability relations, i.e. N-tuples with scores on 
clientelism, valence, and policy as “instrumental” aspects of accountability and scores on 
candidate personality, party identification, and descriptive representation as “expressive” 
aspects of accountability.
Of course, a research program explaining the entire range of linkage profiles will be 
too hard to manage from the very start. Our strategy will be to focus on individual 
linkage mechanisms first and treat values on others as exogenously given. We may 
then complicate the picture and examine the interactive choice of pairs or triplets of 
linkage mechanisms. A rewarding candidate in this regard is the often intuitive, tacit, 
and theoretically unquestioned implicit proposition that there is a simple one-to-one 
trade-off between pairs/triplets of accountability mechanisms: Politicians and voters 
coordinate either around policy (positional) or valence issues or around clientelism/
targeted exchange or around charismatic personalistic appeals. As a research question 
we need to leave open the possibility that politicians are able to combine different 
accountability mechanisms in identifiable and theoretically explicable profiles, depending 
on the utilities different voter groups assign to different political “services” and the 
strategies of competing politicians to satisfy such services as well. In other words, 
politicians can develop complex linkage strategies in their quest for votes, office, and 
executive power.
 Looking upstream in the causal chain, we would like to explain how politicians and voters 
coordinate around different individual principal-agent-accountability mechanisms and 
more complex profiles in which clientelism may play a more or a less prominent role. 
The most prominent and widely embraced, but never systematically tested hypothesis is 
the development hypothesis according to which progressive economic development shifts 
partisan competition from a profile with strong clientelistic elements to a profile with 
strong policy linkage, with uncertain implications for charismatic appeals. Beyond the 
development hypothesis, an institutionalist hypothesis has widely resonated in the field. 
It maintains that electoral ballot structures, formula, and district size that interact to 
highlight competition among individual politicians more so than among teams of partisan 
candidates also encourage accountability profiles strong on clientelism and charisma and 
weak on policy.
Then there are various competitiveness hypotheses according to which the profile of linkages 
as well as the effort made by politicians to build linkages depend on the “competitiveness” 
3	
For a more detailed account of theories of democratic linkage mechanisms, with a particular emphasis on 
clientelism, see Kitschelt (2000) and Kitschelt and Wilkinson (2007b).

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
747
of the inter-party configuration. A party system is generally considered more competitive 
where small changes in parties’ vote support make big differences in their respective 
bargaining leverage and control over executive office and its spoils. It is quite difficult 
to conceptualize this notion of competitiveness at a theoretical and operational level 
(Kitschelt 2007b).
A further hypothesis is the civil service hypothesis first put forth by Shefter according 
to which the preexistence of a bureaucratic-absolutist state undercuts politicians’ 
opportunities to incorporate clientelism in their linkage portfolio, once suffrage 
becomes universal and state executives democratically accountable (Shefter 1977). More 
generally, one could frame a political economy hypothesis that relates the prominence 
of policy and clientelistic concerns in democratic partisan politics to the depth of 
government regulation or ownership in manufacturing and service establishments of 
modern economies. Finally, there is the ethnic pluralism hypothesis, or better: “family” 
of hypotheses, according to which ethnic pluralization promotes clientelism, as it 
simplifies monitoring of voting behavior and channeling of benefits. All of these 
hypotheses, of course, require detailed theoretical refinement to arrive at analytically 
tractable predictions.
Looking downstream in the causal chain, individual linkage mechanisms and complex 
profiles of democratic linkage may leave causal imprints on a variety of features within 
and beyond the polity. As a most proximate effect, linkage mechanisms may shape the 
process of democratic politics, such as party system attributes themselves (fragmentation, 
polarization, volatility) or the nature and longevity of government executives. As a more 
distant causal effect, profiles of linkage mechanisms, and particularly the prominence 
of clientelistic exchange, may also affect the distribution of life chances in society, and 
especially income distribution and economic growth, as well as the protection and 
provision of collective goods (such as environmental protection). Studies of democratic 
linkage mechanisms interface here with comparative political economy. Thus much 
recent research on clientelistic linkage is situated at the intersection with comparative 
political economy and addresses the question of how different profiles of democratic 
accountability mechanisms affect (and are affected by) the market liberalization of statist 
political economies.
Finally, and partly as a result of the impact of democratic linkage mechanisms on political 
process features and political economic outputs and outcomes, profiles of democratic 
accountability may affect systemic trust in democracy and support for democracy as a political 
regime form. It is certainly a reflex among intellectuals to consider clientelism as a deficient 
form of democratic accountability that generates cynicism and disaffection about democratic 
politics for a variety of reasons, the most important may be that it undermines the fiction 
of formal equality before the law by treating citizens not as equals, but contingent upon 
their vote or campaign contributions to the electoral winners. Yet viewed through the 
lens of many electoral constituencies it may not be entirely self-evident that the presence 
of clientelistic accountability undermines support for democracy. Quite to the contrary, 
many citizens may see this mode of linkage as their primary avenue to hold elected 
politicians responsible.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
748
II.	 Researching Democratic Accountability Profiles
Having motivated the relevance of the attempt to construct a cross-national data-set on 
democratic linkage mechanisms in general and clientelistic accountability in particular, let 
us now turn to options to measure such political processes empirically and to sketch the 
research strategy chosen in this project. With regard to policy both in terms of programmatic 
appeals and valence/retrospective & prospective economic voting, at least, we have a 
variety of established methodologies delivering micro- and macro-data we will not review 
here.4 It would also take another venue to review and brainstorm about comparative data 
sets concerning expressive accountability mechanisms, particularly party identification 
and descriptive representation where some data are available on gender representation, 
but little comparatively usable data on ethnocultural representation, although Kanchan 
Chandra’s forthcoming dataset on ethnocultural representation will be helpful in this 
regard (cf. Chandra and Wilkinson 2008).
The bulk of research on clientelism is ethnographic field research in localized case studies. 
This work is essential and highly instructive, particular for any effort to determine how 
contingent exchanges can be consummated under conditions of universal suffrage and at 
least a modicum of voter privacy at the ballot station. A second avenue is survey research 
in which voters are asked to indicate the extent and nature of contacts they had with 
legislators or candidates for legislative office and to describe any benefits they have derived 
from such contacts. Both anthropological and survey research are useful, but hitherto have 
provided data only about individual countries or subnational jurisdictions.
A third avenue to pursue clientelistic exchange is through indirect macro-quantitative indicators. 
This work postulates that clientelism coincides with corruption, bad governance (rule 
of law, due process), or over-sized capital investment budgets and civil service staffing 
arrangements so that indicators of such practices can be deployed as tracers of clientelistic 
arrangements. We believe there may be some plausibility to this presumption, but it 
would be informative to explore the extent to which this is or is not true and isolate the 
incidence of transactional political practices from such broader phenomena as corruption 
and public sector patronage. These general indicators may be too coarse to assist research 
focused on illuminating politicians’ and voters’ linkage building strategies in democratic 
competitive polities where clientelism sometimes may involve very little corruption (or 
practices labeled as corruption), but constitute widely accepted, legally uncontestable ways 
of political conduct expected by substantial proportions of the electorate.
For these reasons, and in order to combine information on several principal agent linkage 
mechanisms, especially clientelistic exchange, programmatic policy appeal and emphasis 
on charismatic leadership personality, in a single investigation of democratic accountability 
under one organizational roof, the current project on which we report has settled for a 
cross-national expert survey. In each country, panels of 10-20 scholars whose research and 
4	
See especially the wonderful special issue of Electoral Studies on the validity of expert, manifesto, and survey 
data to determine the issue appeals of political parties (Volume 26, 2007, Nº 1) as well as Gabel and Huber 
(2000) and Laver, Benoit and Garry (2003).

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
749
teaching concern parties’ electoral campaigns and voter appeals and additional very small 
panels of 3-5 journalists who cover elections for national newspapers are asked to score 
relevant parties in their respective countries on a variety of traits and practices.
We realize that an expert survey of this nature is a poor second-best to a more direct field-
based, but systematically comparative approach to the study of linkage mechanisms generally and 
clientelistic exchange specifically in which researchers collect data in each country for a period 
of two months minimum, visit a number of sites characterized by theoretically important 
variance in local conditions (urbanization/development; party system competitiveness; 
urban/rural and or ethnic divisions), and score check lists of attributes in each place 
based on a sample of local informants, including scholars, journalists and the politicians 
themselves. But for 90 countries this research strategy would require a minimum financial 
input of $ 2.0 million (assuming a modest $ 15,000-18,000 per country for travel and salary, 
plus research administration), or about 8+ times the resources actually available for our 
current undertaking.5
The survey consists of five modules each of which started out as batteries of questions that 
were several times as long, but then paired back to make survey completion manageable 
within 60-90 minutes (depending on the number of parties scored) and within a horizon 
of knowledge that scholars and journalists might be moderately confident in the accuracy 
of the judgments they are passing. In almost all questions the unit of judgment (or levels 
of observation) is party j in country k, with one score requested for each party. In a few 
questions, respondents can indicate more than one response category per party. In a few 
other instances, questions ask respondents to pass aggregating judgments about partisan 
practices in general in their countries (level of observation: polity). Table 1 presents the 
breakdown of questions in the five modules, levels of observation, and the scoring metrics 
of the variables.
The first survey module concerns party organization (A) and internal decision making. We included 
it for a variety of theoretical reasons one of which is that clientelistic or programmatic 
party competition may work only if politicians have resolved problems of collective action 
sufficiently to mobilize and target resources or advertise and act on policy appeals.
The second module in our survey concerns practices of targeted exchange (B). It is worth reporting 
that this section of the survey is prefaced by a “quasi-vignette” to influence respondents 
anchor points in interpreting the scales. It gives some instructions on how to interpret the 
endpoints of scales rating the bountifulness of targeted transfers, particularly the high 
extreme of such scales. The first five items in this module then ask respondents to assess 
how much efforts parties make to provide different kinds of targeted goods and services 
to voters (B.1 - B.5).
5	
The actual figure of about $ 250,000+ includes funds from the World Bank, Kitschelt’s personal research 
account at Duke University, and research funds from the Chilean Science Foundation made available to the 
associated project that conducted the Latin American research and directed by Juan Pablo Luna and David 
Altman, Catholic University of Chile.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
750
Table 1:	
The Expert Survey Instrument
Survey Section
Question Content
Level of 
observation
Scoring range 
(measurement 
level)
Part A
organizational 
capabilities and 
power structure
A.1.	
extensiveness of party organization: local district 
offices? (1 = extensive)
party
1-4, ordinal
A.2.	
party organized social/community presence, 
ancillary groups (youth groups, women, 
cooperatives, athletic clubs…) (1 = yes)
party
0/1, ordinal
A.3.	
party reliance on local intermediaries (notables, 
religious leaders, neighborhood leaders) 
(1 = extensive) 
party
1-3, ordinal
A.4.	
reliance on party members in nomination of 
legislators: Centralization of control? 
(1 = members involved in most districts)
party
1-3, ordinal
A.5.	
legislative candidate nomination: power 
distribution? (1 = national party leaders)
party
1-4; nominal*
A.6.	
control over national party electoral strategy? 
(1 = national party leaders)
party
1-4; nominal*
A.7.	
existence of stable organized factions within 
party? (1 = yes)
party
0/1 nominal
A.8.	
1-6. party-group linkages: business/professional 
associations, etc. (1 = yes)
party
0/1 nominal
A.9.	
relevance of public subsidies for party funding? 
(1 = most revenue)
party
1-3, ordinal
A.10.	 private funding - compliance with financial 
regulation? (1 = most in compliance)
party
1-4; nominal*
A.11.	 public funding - compliance with national 
regulation? (1 = most in compliance)
party
1-4; nominal*
A.12. 	 self-assessment: How confident in one’s own 
assessment of A1-11? (1 = low)
party
1-4 ordinal
Part B
Benefits targeted 
to individual 
citizens and 
small groups
B.1.	
effort to give/promise to give consumer goods 
(1 = negligible/not)
party
1-4 ordinal
B.2.	
effort to give /promise voters preferential access 
to social policy entitlements
party
1-4 ordinal
B.3.	
effort to give/promise voters employment in 
public or regulated sector
party
1-4 ordinal
B.4.	
effort to give/promise voters preferential access to 
government contracts or procurement opportunities 
(1 = negligible/not)
party
1-4 ordinal
B.5.	
effort to give/promise voters influence over 
regulatory proceedings (1 = negl.)
party
1-4 ordinal
B.6.	
overall effort to induce voters with preferential 
benefits (1 = negligible/not)
country
1-5 ordinal
B.7.	
change in effort over last 10 years; (much less = 1; 
much more = 5)
Country
1-5 ordinal
(it continues in following page)

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
751
Survey Section
Question Content
Level of 
observation
Scoring range 
(measurement 
level)
Part B
B.8.	
group member targeting: rural, urban, ethnic
party
1/0, 3 dummies
B.9.	
group member targeting: poor-middle-wealthy 
(1 = poor)
party
1-3 ordinal
B.10.	 parties’ transmission belts to deliver targeted goods: 
unions, business associations; religious groups; 
ethnic groups; urban or rural; women;
party
0/1, 6 dummies
Part C 
Monitoring 
+ enforcing
B.11.	 effectiveness of targeted benefits for political 
parties 1=not at all
party
1-4 ordinal
B.12.	 targeting party loyalists (=1), strategic voters (=2) 
or both (=3)
party
1-3, nominal*
B.13.	 self-assessment: How confident in one’s own 
assessment of B1-12?
party
1-4 ordinal
C.1.	
monitoring of voters … successful? (all parties)
party
1-4 ordinal
C.2.	
group allies in determining the candidate’s vote? 
(multiple 0/1 dummies)
Party
0/1, 6 dummies
C.3.	
open-ended: describe practices of monitoring
party
n/a
C.4.	
Sanctions for non-delivery of the vote
party
0/1 dummy
C.5.	
change in politicians’ capacity to figure out voters 
(4 = very strong)
Country
1-4 ordinal
C.6.	
self-assessment - How confident in one’s own 
assessment of C1-5?
party
1-4 ordinal
Part D 
Policy 
Positions
D.1.	
parties’ policy positions - spending on the 
disadvantaged (against = 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
D.2.	
parties’ policy positions - state role in governing 
the economy (minimal= 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
D.3.	
parties’ policy positions - social expenditure 
(against = 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
D.4.	
parties’ policy positions - defense of national 
identity and culture (high = 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
D.5.	
parties’ policy positions - compliance with 
traditional moral authorities and values 
(high = 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
D.7.	
- D.N. parties’ policy positions - custom questions 
tailored to individual countries
(party)
1-10 ordinal
	
D.W. parties’ policy positions - left-right scale 
placements of parties (10 = right)
party
1-10 ordinal
	
D.X. self-assessment- How confident in one’s own 
assessment of D-1 - D-W 
party
1-4 ordinal
	
D.Y. sympathy/closeness to a party
	
(same views = 1; different views = 10)
party
1-10 ordinal
(continuation tabla 1)
(it continues in following page)
* some of the options are ordinally scaled, but at least one option cannot be placed in the ordinal scale.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
752
The short module C on monitoring and enforcing compliance with contingent exchange is 
probably the most difficult to frame in any rigid closed-format survey template. The 
survey preparatory group went through many iterations of draft questions and pilot 
tests of alternative formulations to get at the underlying theoretical issue. It is difficult 
to formulate because (1) monitoring and sanctioning practices tend to be highly 
localized, tacit, concealed, and even clandestine and (2) there is a great diversity of 
practices that vary with institutional settings and organizational partisan capabilities. 
Hence it is all but impossible to formulate a one-size-fits-all battery of questions. As 
a last resort, we opted for a general question that asks how successful parties are, 
provided they check at all how specific individuals or small groups of voters opted 
at the ballot station.
Module D is the most conventional one in the survey, as it requests scholars and 
journalists to score each party’s (spatial) positions on 1-10 policy issue scales. We provide 
five “generic” scales for all surveys (D.1. through D.5). Three of them tap aspects of 
economic-distributive issues and two deal with socio-cultural topics of defining insiders 
and outsiders and of collective regulatory prerogatives over individual choice. In most 
countries, we have also added country-specific policy issues (D.7 and up), typically by 
homing in on issues that are known or likely to generate inter-party divisions. These 
additional questions help prevent an underreporting of programmatic competition simply 
because the generic policy questions D.1 through D.5 may not be the correct questions 
on which to score partisan policy divides in a country. There may be idiosyncratic issues 
that are relevant only in one or several countries, but structure the spectrum of partisan 
alternatives programmatically.
Each question of the final Module E asks respondents to give one general score for 
each party in their country for five of the six linkage mechanisms depicted in figure 1, 
charisma (E.1), policy (E.2), targeted benefits (E.3), activities to invigorate emotional party 
identification (E.4) and valence/competence voting (E.5). We only left out descriptive 
Survey Section
Question Content
Level of 
observation
Scoring range 
(measurement 
level)
Part E
Summary 
judgments
E.1.	
parties’ mobilizational effort …featuring a 
leader’s charismatic personality?
party
1-4 ordinal
E.2.	
parties’ mobilizational effort …attractiveness of 
the party’s policy positions?
party
1-4 ordinal
E.3.	
parties’ mobilizational effort…capacity to deliver 
targeted material benefits
party
1-4 ordinal
E.4.	
parties’ mobilizational effort…invoke loyalty, 
party history, party ID
party
1-4 ordinal
E.5.	
parties’ mobilizational effort…parties’ claim to 
competence to govern
party
1-4 ordinal
(continuation tabla 1)

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
753
voting, as results are difficult to compare, given countries very different ethnocultural 
compositions, and as we hope to employ other objective indicators for this potential 
linkage mechanism.
Let us briefly sketch the implementation of the project with this survey instrument. 
In each country, with the exception of 15 South American countries6, we identified 
a “country anchor” who volunteered to contact prospective survey respondents and 
solicit their participation in the project, often with the help of a research assistant. 
Country anchors also decided on additional policy questions tailored to the domestic 
political discourse in part D of the survey and, where necessary, modified the language 
of the survey in part A, where questions are asked about institutional attributes of 
parties in a generic terminology that must be respecified for local respondents to be 
intelligible.
In addition, anchors also selected survey participants among local scholars with specific 
knowledge and a track record of research, as well as between three to five journalists who 
covered political parties, campaigns and elections. Table 2 contains the full list of countries 
where the survey was implemented.
6	
In Latin America, the survey was implemented by David Altman and Juan Pablo Luna from the Catholic 
University of Santiago de Chile.
Table 2:	
Countries Included in the Survey
Region
Data collection 
completed
Data collection 
planned or active
Western Europe 
+ Settler 
democracies
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States 
(20)
Post-communist 
region
Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, 
Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, 
Moldova, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine (19)
Latin america
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil , Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela (19)
Trinidad & Tobago
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Mali, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South 
Africa, Tanzania, Zambia (14)
Mauritius
Asia and middle 
east
Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, 
Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Philippines, South Korea, 
Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey (14)
Lebanon
Coverage
86
3

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
754
III.	Methodological Challenges
The data collected in this project are vulnerable primarily to four major problems we detail 
below. We expect that these methodological problems will create a fog of measurement 
error, but we hope it is going to be a fog through which relevant features of politics can 
still be glimpsed and discerned better than with other hitherto deployed instruments. 
Ultimately, only the use of multiple data strategies and cross-triangulation of descriptive 
generalizations obtained by different methods will generate robust knowledge about the 
phenomena we wish to study.
At this point, we would be satisfied if the current dataset were to enable us to (re)produce 
what one might call the ordinary “collective wisdom” of the scholarly profession–or 
maybe only the “grounded prejudices” of that profession?–about the variance of attributes 
characterizing democratic accountability in party competition across a wide range of 
countries. The advantage of our dataset would still be that it delivers this common wisdom 
or prejudice in an explicit, systematic, comprehensive, and thematically inclusive way, 
while most judgments about attributes of democratic partisan politics, particularly in 
small-N comparisons across countries, tend to be ad-hoc, incomplete, and narrow in the 
property domain covered.
a.	 Sources of Measurement Error and Bias
A first major problem in expert surveys has to do with the limited expertise of the experts. 
Many questions concerning democratic accountability mechanisms would have to draw on 
a detail of knowledge even experts can obtain only through thorough field research. Even 
the questions included in our survey may tax the knowledge of scholars who generally 
monitor parties and elections and research performed in this field in their own country. 
Lack of knowledge is thus a powerful generator of measurement error. Moreover, this 
measurement error may vary across polities, as more is known about the operation in 
some countries rather than others.
A second major problem has to do with the aggregation of data to a high level. In this survey, 
we are essentially dealing with two to three levels of aggregation, and a fourth level can 
and may well need to be constructed:
	
(L-1) party level: assessing individual attributes; (e.g., questions B.1, B.2 ….);
	
(L-2) party level: assessing a general pattern of attributes by party (e.g. questions B.8, 
B.9…. C.1, E.1,
	
E.2 …. see table 1);
	
(L-3) country level: assessing a general pattern of attributes across all parties in a 
country (e.g., questions B.6, B.7, C.5);
	
(L-4) country level general patterns of attributes, in which the party scores are weighted 
according to

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
755
(i)	 party size in the electorate (or legislature) and
(ii)	 current and/or cumulative government status over some years;
Even questions at the greatest level of disaggregation in the dataset (L-1: individual party, 
individual attribute) assume that politicians’ practices are either uniform across all locales of 
a country or that a simple aggregation process from localities and regions to the national 
level can give a summary assessment for the country as a whole, and in similar ways 
across a set of countries. All that can be hoped for is that the mean (aggregate) values 
expert survey respondents generate on an attribute for each party/country with a great 
deal of glossing over subnational variance still generates cross-nationally diverse “central 
tendencies” that track theoretically intelligible and relevant phenomena.
The third problem of cross-national data sets is that of anchor points or experts’ perception 
of the variable scales. Based on their localized experience, and a limited range of experience 
beyond, experts in country A interpret the same kind of behavior differently on the scale than 
in country B. The cardinal scores of parties/countries on an attribute are not comparable 
across countries. The same behavior that appears to experts as indicating a “high” value 
in one country appears to be a rather “lower” value to experts in another country.
Gary King and colleagues (King, Murray et al. 2004; King and Wand 2007) proposed to 
reduce anchor point heterogeneity by giving survey respondents in different settings 
identically worded hypothetical questions and fact patterns. Their responses to the actual 
questions in the domain of the survey can then be expressed in terms of a difference to 
the scores experts provide to the common hypothetical fact pattern questions. While 
this proposal has a great deal of merit in theory, in most empirical real-world situations 
resource constraints (respondents’ time, cost of survey production etc.) are so tight that 
researchers simply cannot afford a proliferation of vignettes respondents would have 
to assess in addition to the “real” questions. Piling on vignettes, therefore, would have 
made the expert survey quite unmanageable. For this reason, we opted for a single quasi-
vignette in the preface to part B of the survey.
The fourth problem with expert data is bias, particularly given the small number of responses. 
Experts may want to project a specific image of a country or a party. Bias would both impair 
within-country comparison across parties as well as cross-country comparison. Clear-
cut ideological bias may be picked up in our survey by question D-Y about respondents’ 
sympathies. Based on past experience with expert surveys, and even expert judgments 
of parties made by partisan politicians themselves, bias is rarely a problem in assessing 
parties’ policy positions. At the margin, it may come in where a policy issue is clearly a 
valence issue with a very lop-sided distribution of preferences in the electorate.
A more serious problem might occur with regards to clientelistic practices. Intellectuals 
and upper-middle class citizens, tend to be most disaffected by and opposed to clientelism. 
It may well be, then, that respondents attribute to parties they generally dislike also a 
greater propensity to engage in clientelistic practices than respondents who are more 
sympathetic to such parties. Again, we have some indirect checks of bias in our dataset, as 
we may be able to calculate the respondents’ sympathy scores with parties and compare 
the results with their assessment of the parties on indicators of clientelism. Nevertheless, 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
756
respondents’ anti-clientelistic biases might distort the scored relations among parties within 
some country and deflate or inflate differences between countries, contingent upon the 
intensity of respondents’ anti-clientelistic affect for which we cannot control.
b.	 Checking Out the Data: Strategy of Analysis
We performed a series of preliminary tests of the data. We mention three of them in passing 
and focus primarily on data and concept validation. Our first concern had to do with the 
presence (or absence) of suitable patterns of variance between parties and countries. Indeed, 
there is variance at all levels in all survey modules that calls for explanation.
We were secondly concerned with variables that exhibit very high frequencies of non-
responses. Lack of a judgment by an expert can be both “subjective” and objective, in our 
view. The former arises when the expert lacks information, while the latter might indicate 
that the parties in a particular country are unclear with regards to a particular attribute 
or practice. This comes in handy, for example, when we evaluate left-right ideology and 
find that where some experts are highly uncertain in their judgments (e.g., refuse to 
score a party) the response patterns of other experts indeed suggest highly diffuse and 
ideologically vague parties and party systems.
An initial impressionistic inspection of cross-national response patterns shows a tendency 
to elevated rates of “don’t know” (DK) and “missing value” (MV) indications (taken 
together, say > 20% of response opportunities) for a diverse field of variables in around 
10 countries, among them Brazil, Chile, Germany, Guatemala, Macedonia, Mexico, 
Norway, Switzerland, and Venezuela. Further analysis will have to reveal whether 
these DK+MV responses are concentrated on particular small parties or an across-the-
board phenomenon.
 As a third step, one may generate univariate distributions of rough highly aggregate indicators 
of attributes, say average scores of all parties in a country, and then eyeball the plausibility 
of revealed cross-national variance in light of what case study and qualitative comparative 
research tells us about our countries. Of course, data at this very high level of aggregation 
are particularly vulnerable to anchor point dependence when we engage in cross-national 
comparison. Similarities and differences between countries may simply be a consequence 
of national experts interpreting the scales differently in each country, on average.
A fourth step in probing more deeply into data validity is to try to reduce the anchor point 
problem directly by examining within-country variance, where the context of judgment, and 
presumably the anchor points of experts, are approximately similar. We accomplish this 
by avoiding a comparison of raw party scores, but instead computing the deviation of all 
parties in a country from the mean for that country on a particular question. This can also be 
addressed by evaluating the relationship between the parties’ left-right position and their 
position on questions such as economic redistributions. Coefficients of the relationship 
between the two categories are then comparable across countries. We encourage the use 
of such strategies when using any expert data set to contain the anchor point problems 
inherent in such research designs.

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
757
Finally, we follow psychometric theories to determine critical validity test of variables, or 
“construct validity” of the indicators in the dataset. This is the most complex, demanding, and 
possibly also ambiguous test of the validity of a data set. The basic idea is that we can test 
whether a variable validly measures an unobserved theoretical concept (“construct”) by 
measuring its covariance with other empirical indicators that are known to relate to that 
theoretical object. Objects that have the same score on the valid measure of a construct 
should also have a corresponding score on one’s new measure of that very same construct 
and vice versa. These are examples of “convergent validity”. At the same time, a measure 
of a different theoretical construct that should not be related to the theoretical construct one 
is trying to measure also should not be related to one’s new measure of the last construct 
(“discriminant validity”). Moreover, if a known valid measure of a theoretical construct 
predicts a certain observable effect that is causally attributed to that construct, then the 
new measure should do so likewise.
In the framework of the democratic accountability project, clientelistic and programmatic 
modes of accountability that involve particular activities on the part of politicians and 
voters to constitute “linkages” are unmeasured theoretical concepts. In the spirit of testing 
construct validity within the data set, let us see whether we have different measures of 
the same underlying construct that should be related to each other.
With regard to clientelistic competition, accountability, and linkage, the dataset gathers 
information about the activity of parties in generating targeted benefits for electoral 
constituencies and monitoring the conduct of voters or even sanctioning those who do 
not come through with their side of the deal. Some of the relations among these variables 
may count as construct validity tests, but in some instances we are looking at genuinely 
controversial causal relations that may or may not pertain, regardless of whether our 
variables tap our underlying theoretical construct correctly.
There are various measures of clientelistic goods provision at different levels of aggregation 
in our expert survey and one measure each of monitoring and sanctioning at the level of 
the party as unit of observation. Without having analyzed relationships empirically, let us 
consider whether the relationship among these different measures is conceptual, and thus 
examination of the correlation among them speaks to the question of construct validity, 
or causal, and thus a problematic matter of theorizing.
In the data sections that follow, we perform simple examinations of different variables 
taken from the dataset to examine the construct validity of these indicators for both 
programmatic and clientelistic modes of competition. In addition to these simple 
indicators examining whether related concepts taken from the survey do indeed tend 
to go together, we can also examine the validity of our new indicators with those that 
are broadly accepted in scholarly research as related to a theoretical concept. While in 
psychological measurements the tremendous proliferation of studies over the past 60+ 
years is likely to make it quite easy to generate external construct validation for almost 
any new scale produced by ongoing research, we are in a much less fortunate situation 
when it comes to the study of democratic principal-agent linkages, particularly once we 
go beyond programmatic linkages.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
758
For the latter, we can compare our empirical profiles with those obtained in other data 
sets pertaining to programmatic competition, particularly the studies by Laver and 
Hunt (1992), Benoit and Laver (2006), Rohrschneider and Whitefield (2009) and the 
several surveys undertaken by the team of Marks, Hooghe, Wilson, Ray, Edwards and 
other collaborators (for detailed references see Marks et al. 2007). Following the Electoral 
Studies 2007 special issue, we could also cross-validate our data set by examining 
the convergence of our expert studies with findings based on the Comparative Party 
Manifestoes (CMP) Data Set, although we have some serious doubts how far CMP 
can be pushed (cf. Rehm, 2008). One limitation of all these external tests of construct 
validity is that our dataset tends to be geographically much more inclusive than 
existing data sets of party competition that tend to be confined to the affluent OECD 
democracies, together with some of the postcommunist countries and maybe some 
Latin American countries.
When it comes to studies of clientelism, however, it appears to us that we are missing the 
tools of external construct validation. All the concepts that, on the surface, are plausibly 
correlated with our measures of clientelistic exchange actually may involve a more complex 
causal relationship with clientelism that needs to be theorized so as to understand both 
the coincidence and the divergence of predictions that follow when one rather than 
another empirical measure is used. What comes first to mind is a relationship between 
clientelism, corruption, and vote buying. Another “elective affinity” often mentioned in 
the literature is that between clientelism and “bad governance” or weak rule of law. In all 
these instances, such concepts may well exhibit an empirical correlation with clientelism, 
but it is probably a theoretical mechanism that drives it, not a conceptual-definitional 
identity relationship.
IV.	 A First Glimpse at Data I: Policy Positions
With these considerations in mind, let us take a first glimpse at the data. Typically we try 
to report only one number for each country in our 86 country dataset. The national level 
data we present are means of party level data weighted by average electoral support 
received by parties in the most recent two legislative elections, whether they are the means 
of the scores experts assign to parties on a particular attribute or the standard deviations 
of such scores.
For programmatic party competition, we have a set of anywhere between our five core 
policy issues (D.1 through D.5) and up to 10 additional national customized policy 
issues (particularly in Latin America) on which we are able to gauge the programmatic 
differentiation and internal cohesiveness of political parties. In this glimpse at data, 
however, we will confine ourselves to the purely formal semantics of “left” and “right” 
that in many countries taps policy differences, although it sometimes constitutes primarily 
a symbolic marker to distinguish different partisan labels. As is well known, left and 
right can be filled with different content, contingent upon historical circumstances. 
While the variation of this content is a fascinating object of explanation, we will confine 
ourselves here simply to a rough gauge of whether democratic partisan politics in a 

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
759
country appears to be more or less shaped by programmatic competition, no matter 
what is its content.
Following Downs’ (1957) theory of information misers, as further developed by Hinich 
and Munger (1994), citizens and politicians coordinate around left-right signals, because 
they are shortcuts for a large, but undefined set of possible policies. Even without having 
to make an effort to collect information about parties actual policy positions, citizens can 
essentially infer where parties might stand on an issue, if they know the party’s basic 
programmatic-ideological appeal, expressed in left-right placement terms. If that is true, 
experts should have less trouble placing political parties in the left-right space, where 
parties indeed have sharply articulated issue positions. Conversely, where parties make 
vague or diffuse appeals or no appeals at all, experts do not know how to place them 
and, if they place them, tend to disagree over where parties are located in the left-right 
space. Furthermore, it is likely that programmatic party systems are more polarized, for 
example in the sense that the variance of parties’ mean positions in a programmatically 
competitive system is greater than in a party system with vague and non-programmatic 
parties. We derive three indicators from the surveys that measure the relative programmatic 
competitiveness of party systems. Where that competitiveness is higher,
1)	 expert surveys will exhibit fewer non-responses, “no clear position” or “don’t know” 
answers to the left-right part placement question. This proportion is then weighted 
by electoral returns from the last election, so smaller parties will have a relatively 
smaller weight in the development of this measure.;
2)	 experts will be more unified in their judgment of each party’s left-right position, i.e. 
the mean standard deviations of left-right placements will be smaller;
3)	 parties will exhibit more polarization in the eyes of the experts, i.e. the standard deviation 
between the mean party left-right scores will be greater than in a programmatically more 
diffuse system. Of course, polarization is not the same as programmatic competition. 
Indeed, cases of “centripetal competition”, where parties compete for centrist positions 
in the ideological space exist (Sartori 1976). However, from a mathematical viewpoint, 
we should expect a relationship between diffuseness of expert opinions and the 
presence of centrist means for the parties (that is, as experts have more variance in 
how they score parties, the mean party score should tend toward the center).
Figure 2 shows a scattergram between the first two measures. As we can see, experts in 
West European countries, but also in Eastern Europe, opt much more rarely for missing 
responses/don’t knows and are more unified in their judgments than in Latin America 
and Sub-Saharan Africa. Asia/Middle East is a small sample so far in our survey with 
highly diverse cases. In spite of the coarse and highly aggregate nature of the data 
presented here, the data may “make sense” from the vantage point of expectations based 
on comparative political party system research. With some exceptions, it is the more 
established, institutionalized party systems in advanced capitalist democracies and 
post-communist countries in the West European zone of influence, as well as a few of 
the East Asian countries that display the sharpest patterns of programmatic competition. 
Sub-Saharan Africa is at the other extreme with high rates of non-responses, while Latin 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
760
Figure 2:	 Average Standard Deviation of Parties’ Left-Right Location and Proportion of 
Experts Refusing Parties’ Left-Right Placement
American countries are quite widely distributed across most of the range of scores, except 
very low missing response rates.
Figure 3, which roughly measures the polarization of parties in the country, also bears 
a remarkable similarity to Figure 2, albeit with the scale flipped. For the measure of 
polarization, we calculated the standard deviation for each country of the party means 
in that country. Again, the pattern is striking. Advanced capitalist countries tend to have 
the most polarized party systems, while party systems in Latin America, post-Communist 
Eastern Europe and Africa tend to have much less polarized systems. The argument relating 
polarization to the DK/non response and diffuseness of expert opinion measures utilized 
above is that more programmatic party systems will have clearer values that experts can 
attach to them. That is, they will be able to place different parties at different points in 
the ideological space.
In Section E of the survey, we invited experts to examine the extent to which politicians in 
their home countries utilized different linkage mechanisms with voters. These summary 
questions provide another programmatic measure that allows us to further investigate 
the validity of different programmatic competition indicators in our dataset. Figure 4 
examines the correlation between question E.2 in the survey (regarding the use of policy 
appeals by politicians) and the diffuseness of expert opinions on the left-right dimension. 

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
761
Figure 3:	 Left-Right Polarization
As we expect, those countries where experts show agreement on the parties’ left-right 
positions, also tend to score highly on the importance of programmatic appeals for political 
competition.
Let us emphasize that a theoretical account of these patterns would have to do a lot more 
than these simple figures, which are used primarily to establish the concept validity of 
the indicators. The visual pattern is just a plausibility probe that the data are likely to tap 
an objective pattern in the real political world rather than a contrived methodological 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
762
Figure 4:	 Average Standard Deviation of Parties’ Left-Right Location and Parties’ 
Programmatic Appeals
artifact. The various programmatic measures taken from the survey reveal clear patterns 
in the levels of cross-national programmatic competition.
Beyond a refinement of the trajectory of analysis begun in this paper, there is a great 
deal to accomplish in the comparative analysis of programmatic structuring. Even 
before examining the content of the issues and issue dimensions that structure the party 
systems across the world, it will be important to gauge the extent to which “ideological 
constraint” shapes competitive spaces with more fine-grained instruments. For example, 
we can explore the extent to which actual issue positions experts attribute to parties 
indeed predict experts’ left-right placements of the parties. We can then compare the 
extent to which these within-country statistical relations vary across countries and try 
to account for differential coefficients in a systematic fashion. We can also engage in 
factor and discriminant analyses or related statistical techniques to recover unobserved 
underlying variables that identify competitive spaces in each country and strive to 
explain the differential strength and content of such underlying factors. Ultimately, a 
comparison of 90 countries may allow us to achieve some additional insight into the 
constitution of cleavage dimensions, when compared to Lipset and Rokkan’s (1967) 
classic about Western Europe taken by itself.

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
763
V.	 A Glimpse at Data II: Party Organization and Action
A study of party organization is important for a number of reasons some of which were 
briefly touched upon earlier in this paper. We begin with a simple inspection of both the 
organizational extensiveness and centralization of parties in different countries, shown in 
figure 5. For organizational extensiveness, experts were asked to estimate how common 
it is for parties to have local district offices (question A1) and whether parties maintain 
ancillary or subsidiary organizations (question A2). Scores in figure 5 are reversed so that 
higher values indicate greater extensiveness of organization. The level of party centralization 
is taken from question A4 and A6, regarding the level at which party nominations and 
strategic decisions are made, with higher values indicating greater party centralization 
over candidate selection and/or electoral strategies. As with other indicators reported 
here, these are weighted by electoral support.
In this case, it is quite difficult to draw inferences about the plausibility of measures from a 
simple visual inspection of these highly aggregate data. At the level of individual parties, 
we probably should see some relationship between the age of parties and organizational 
extensiveness. At the systemic level, less fragmented systems should, on average have 
more extensive party organization. But a lot of other things may go on. In countries with 
Figure 5:	 Organizational Extensiveness and Centralization of Intra-party Control

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
764
long established party systems, for example, we might expect an effect of institutional 
arrangements. Party organizations may be weaker where the electoral laws provide for 
single member or small member districts in a highly decentralized setting. At the opposite 
extreme of extensive party organization are primarily stable PR-based party systems with 
large political machines. But the relationship between institutions and party organization 
is not complete. Almost perfect PR systems in Denmark and the Netherlands clock in 
with very weak party organization. This may not be a measurement error, as case studies 
of these countries indicate the collapse of erstwhile encompassing, powerful mass party 
organization in both countries in the course of “depillarization” of Dutch politics in the 
1960s and the drying up of party membership in Denmark in the 1970s and 1980s, decades 
of high volatility and new party formation.
In Latin America, it is primarily countries with more institutionalized parties and those that 
went through an ideologically based civil war (Nicaragua, El Salvador) that exhibit more 
extensive party organization. Less fragmentation also leaves an impact. This impressionistic 
hypothesis can be extended to the Asia/Middle East group and the results appear to 
be plausible. What is pretty astounding in the data set is the general tendency of post-
communist countries to be scored as having rather extensive party organization.
The only region of the world where we find at least a modicum of countries where parties 
have instituted internal decision-making, decentralized features that are approximating 
democracy with open competition is Western Europe and the Anglo-Saxon democracies. 
The Mediterranean outliers to this pattern (Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain) are known 
to have parties under the spell of strong leaders. Everywhere else in the world parties 
that offer some input to the rank-and-file are more or less the exception to the rule, a 
generalization that requires some qualifications only for Sub-Saharan Africa. The most 
uniformly centralized parties appear in post-communist polities, in Asia and the Middle 
East, whereas the centralization is somewhat less pronounced in Latin America and varies 
widely in Sub-Saharan Africa.
One of the hardest topics to research in the comparative study of parties is their political 
economy of fund raising or party finance. In the construction of this data set, it was a 
real struggle to come up with questions that would even approximate several baseline 
criteria, namely that respondents have some knowledge to provide an answer and that 
the question can be posed in a general way intelligible in different institutional and 
strategic contexts. A rough summary of two questions, the compliance of parties’ fund 
raising with campaign regulations, is shown in figure 6. This measures the proportion of 
respondents who felt that most public and private finance was collected in accordance 
with campaign finance. Of course, one would have to know how restrictive the regulations 
are and how arduous compliance is to fully assess the scores, although it is a reasonable 
presumption that more regulations typically mean more restricted access to unrestrained 
special interest funding. Our very coarse “dirty” measure, in any case, provides a clearcut 
pattern showing that restrictive finance legislation and especially compliance with such 
legislation is almost exclusively a preserve of well-established affluent OECD democracies 
in Western Europe, Eastern Europe and Asia, with a possible inclusion of some of the East 
European EU-member states.

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
765
Figure 6:	 Parties’ Private and Public Revenue Collected in Compliance with 
Regulation
The cross-national distribution of compliance with regulation yields a not implausible 
result, although there are some individual country scores that are unlikely to be correct 
in light of the existing case study literature. May we draw the reader’s attention to 
the odd outlier status of Sweden and Switzerland, where campaign compliance is 
rated as lower than in Niger and Mali? Also, at the other extreme, consider Mexico, 
according to our experts with the relatively “cleanest” partisan political economy 
in Latin America, ahead of Colombia, Chile, Brazil, and Costa Rica! Measurement 
error, in part derived from anchor point heterogeneity, may limit the cross-national 
comparison of party finance scores. Also outlier parties might drive some of these 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
766
results, an issue addressed by more disaggregate analysis. Nevertheless, the visual 
and impressionistic inspection of expert scores lets us have less confidence in the party 
finance measures than those concerning the organizational intensiveness and internal 
power centralization of parties.
VI.	A Glimpse at Data III: Targeted Exchange and Monitoring
Let us now turn to one of the core concerns of our data set collection and the analytical 
component where we are reaching out into unchartered territories, namely the assessment 
of clientelistic exchange relations of targeted goods provision for votes and services to 
a party. We have particular concerns about anchor point problems here, and therefore 
included at least one quasi-vignette in the preface to part B of the survey. We distinguish 
five different classes of targeted goods (questions B1 through B5 in the survey), which we 
then sum together to create a weighted aggregate measure of clientelistic efforts (range 
from 5 to 20). The use of targeted goods, however, may or may not effectively turn into 
votes. As a result, we use another measure indicating the degree to which experts view 
the use of targeted benefits as directly turning into electoral support. The scattergram of 
the two variables is shown below in figure 7.
Figure 7:	 Parties’ Effort to Provide Targeted Benefits and Their Effectiveness to Generate 
Electoral Support

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
767
First, to summarize the country-level distribution of targeted benefits, it is in Western 
OECD countries only that we find politics without targeted exchange. Even here, the “usual 
suspects” to violate such rules stand out (Italy, Greece, Spain, Portugal). This matches just 
about perfectly with the case study literature (Kitschelt 2007a). As revealed by figure 7, 
those countries with parties that expend a large portion of effort on target exchange are 
also generally more effective at generating votes using this method. However, this is not 
always the case. In many Latin American countries, such as Mexico, Peru and Panama, 
experts see the mobilization of targeted resources, but believe that such undertakings are 
by and large futile. For reasons to be determined, in some countries politicians choose 
clientelistic exchange strategies, even though voters do not consummate the exchange 
and decline to deliver their vote, whereas elsewhere a symmetrical relationship between 
mutual provisions does exist. Indeed, it may be a challenging subject for theoretical and 
empirical analysis to determine conditions for the effectiveness of clientelistic targeting 
strategies and for the choice of such strategies, even where they are likely to be futile for 
vote maximization.
Murkier and more puzzling are the coarse aggregate national scores on the issue of 
monitoring of clientelistic exchange where experts were asked to assess whether parties 
have the capacity and actually do try to determine how individuals and small groups of 
citizens vote (figure 8). Here we have to check first the meaning of the question. Although 
we framed the question such as to rule out that experts would consider fine-grained 
opinion polls a reason to consider parties as active and successful in a quest to identify 
voters, our open-ended question C.3 reveals that in some Western countries (e.g. Canada), 
respondents gave parties a high effectiveness score precisely because of their use of opinion 
polls. Without detailed analysis of the meaning of the answers to C.3, it will therefore be 
unclear if and how the response patterns to question C.1 can be interpreted.
Nevertheless, one robust negative finding stands out that is consistent with experts’ response 
patterns to earlier questions about targeted goods provision and its effectiveness of vote 
production. In Latin America, experts overwhelmingly score parties as unsuccessful in 
their quest to determine voters’ electoral conduct just as they saw parties as unsuccessful 
in producing votes with targeted benefits. That is, as experts judged the parties in a 
country to better monitor voting behavior of citizens, their evaluation of the effectiveness 
of targeted goods strategies by parties also increased. The strengths of the correlation vary 
across geographical areas. While the positive correlation is especially strong across Sub-
Saharan African democracies, the correlation across the Western established democracies 
and post-Communist democracies is more tenuous. How the relations is mediated through 
other institutional or economic factors may be worth further investigation.
Finally, we can also compare the aggregate targeted goods provision discussed previously 
with alternative measures of clientelistic competition taken from the survey. Question E.3 
asked experts to provide a assessment of the degree to which each party relied on targeted 
goods provision in the country, which we aggregate to the national level by weighting 
the average score by electoral support in the past election. The scattergram between this 
indicator and the summary indicator developed from question B.1 to B.5 is shown in 
Figure 9. There is a clear and robust correlation between the two variables, increasing 

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
768
Figure 8:	 Monitoring of Voters
our confidence that the measures of clientelistic competition in the survey are capturing 
an objective pattern and are not simply artifacts of the data.
VII. Construct Validation: Linkage Strategies and Theoretically 
Related Concepts
While this paper is unable to adequately detail and test theories of democratic linkage 
strategies, we may give some examples of striking and surely important statistical regularities 

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
769
that call for detailed causal explanations. The fact that these striking correlations occur 
is itself an indication of “construct validity,” in the sense that variables constructed from 
the democratic accountability survey relate to other phenomena in the world to which a 
causal relationship is plausible, albeit in need of precise specification we cannot deliver 
here. Table 3 lists seven such relationships. In case of each correlate of linkage strategies, 
we provide two measures of programmatic competition documented in figure 4 and two 
measures of clientelism presented in figure 9.
First, there is a great deal of speculation whether the wealth of polities somehow relates to 
the linkage strategies prevailing between citizens and politicians. Table 3, row 1, suggests 
that this is indeed the case, with a very robust negative association between economic 
affluence and clientelistic transactions and a somewhat less powerful positive relationship 
between affluence and programmatic competition. Second, there is a controversy about the 
relationship between the quality of democracy in terms of citizens’ participation and their 
civil and political right. There is such a relationship, but it is not very strong, reflecting the 
divided nature of the debate. Third, political-economic governance structures that protect 
Figure 9:	 Parties’ Effort to Provide Targeted Benefits and Their Reliance on Clientelistic 
Appeals

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
770
Table 3:	
Correlates of democratic linkage strategies.
	
Simple bivariate correlations
Clientelistic strategies
(see figure 9)
Programmatic policy 
strategies (see figure 4)
Summary 
index of 
clientelism efforts 
(B1~5)
Uses of 
clientelistic 
appeals 
(E3)
Uses of 
Programmatic 
Appeals 
(E2)
Mean of standard 
deviations of 
parties’ positions on 
the left-right scale
1.	Per capita GDP 
(average, most recent 
five years)
–0.86
–0.68
+0.49
–0.65
2.	Quality of Democracy 
(Polity II)
–0.44
–0.48
–0.33
–0.36
3.	Rule of Law 2006 
(World Bank Gover-
nance Indicator)
–0.87
–0.64
+0.54
–0.55
4.	Corruption (World 
Bank Governance 
Indicator)
–0.90
–0.68
+0.58
–0.55
5.	Inclusiveness of social 
policy (Bertelsmann 
Transformation Index)
–0.55
–0.45
+0.27
–0.60
6.	Interpersonal Trust 
(World Values Studies 
and Regional Values 
Studies)
–0.80a
–0.58a
+0.49a
–0.40
7.	Preference for 
democracy as best 
regime (World Values 
Studies and regional 
Values Studies)
–0.42a
–0.33
+0.35a
–0.27
a Correlations with interpersonal trust or preference for democracy that remain statistically significant 
at conventional levels (.05), even when a polity’s affluence (GDP per capita) and democratic quality 
(Polity II) are controlled for.
the security of property rights may be related to politicians’ choice of linkage strategies. 
Again, the correlations in rows 3 (rule of law) and 4 (corruption) with the World Bank 
Governance indicators bears out this hunch, albeit in a way that requires a great deal of 
probing. Fifth, there are expectations that some linkage strategies provide more social 
benefits than others, and indeed, this appears to be borne out in a negative way for the 
relationship between the comprehensiveness of social policies that protect people from the 
vagaries of the labor market and clientelism. Once again, programmatic linkage strategies 
display a less tight association.

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
771
Sixth, linkage mechanisms may also affect people’s interpersonal trust and, indeed, this 
appears to be borne out quite strongly at the level of aggregate cross-national comparison 
(row 6). Finally, people’s judgments of the desirability of democracy may be affected by 
their daily experiences with democratic accountability mechanisms and, indeed, this 
expectation appears to be borne out, yet in a rather feeble way (row 7). People’s sense of 
interpersonal trust and allegiance to democracy indeed interacts with national practices 
of democratic accountability. Nevertheless, this relationship is complicated and possibly 
mediated.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper marks the beginning, not the conclusion of a most likely lengthy trajectory of 
future research and analysis. But it is worth embarking on this undertaking only if now, 
after an effort of more than four years, we are able to determine that the data we are dealing 
with are actually worth taking seriously. For this reason, a wide variety of validity checks 
is in order. Our paper takes only the first step of even this preliminary exercise, and we 
hope to obtain feedback from readers to make that exercise more rigorous in order to 
arrive at fairly robust conclusions.
The project has been motivated by the need of quantitative estimates of modes of democratic 
accountability for cross-national comparative research. In this cross-national data set, 
party-level and polity-level data on party organization, practices of targeted exchange, 
monitoring of compliance with contingent exchange, policy position, and the general 
linkage mechanisms are collected through expert survey. Some methodological challenges 
which may impair the data quality are pointed out. These potential problems are caused 
by limited expertise of the experts, the processes of aggregation of data to higher level, 
the anchor point problem as scores might not be comparable across experts/countries, 
and the bias of the experts. Some procedures to check the data quality are also discussed 
in the paper. To conduct these procedures, we present the national average scores of 
some variables to show the patterns of variance, the patterns of non-responses, and the 
univariate distribution of these variables across geographical areas.
With all of the methodological issues, and possible sources of bias in this expert survey, 
and the overly simplistic data methods utilized, in many respects, we have put our “worst 
foot” forward in this paper. Despite this, we were able to find cross-national variance 
in many of the questions asked in the survey, and in the general direction we would 
expect given the case studies literature on the topic. Though the lack of disaggregation 
might blur the patterns in the data, the national scores we present show a semblance 
of plausibility. The correlations between them also provide some evidence of validity 
and potential theoretical relations among concepts. Of course to more adequately assess 
the quality of the data set, further steps will be needed and methodological issues 
dealt with. These steps may include examining within-party variance across variables, 
conducting external validity tests for the indicators which were also measured in other 
studies, and inspecting correlations among other measures in the data set to assess the 
construct validity.

HERBERT KITSCHELT, KENT FREEZE, KIRIL KOLEV, YI-TING WANG
772
REFERENCES
Benoit, Kenneth, and Michael Laver. 2006. Party Policy in Modern Democracies. London: Routledge.
Calvo, Ernesto, and M. Victoria Murillo. 2004. “Who Delivers? Partisan Clients in the Argentine Electoral 
Market”. American Journal of Political Science 48 (4): 742-57.
Chandra, Kanchan, and Steven Wilkinson. 2008. “Measuring the Effect of ‘Ethnicity.’” Comparative Political 
Studies 41 (4/5): 515-63.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
Duch, Raymond N., and Randoph T. Stevenson. 2008. The Economic Vote. How Political and Economic 
Institutions Condition Election Results. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Erickson, Robert S., Michael B. MacKuen, and James A. Stimson. The Macro Polity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Fiorina Morris. 1981.Retrospective voting in American elections. New Haven Yale University Press.
Gabel, Matt J., and John D. Huber. 2000. “Putting Parties in Their Place: Inferring Party Left-Right Ideological 
Positions from Party Manifestos Data”. American Journal of Political Science 44 (1): 94-103.
Hawkins, Kirk and Guillermo Rosas. 2007. “Turncoats, True Believers, and Turnout. Machine Politics in 
an Australian Ballot System”. Unpublished paper. University of Washington and Brigham Young 
University.
Hinich, Melvin J. and Michael C. Munger. 1994. Ideology and the Theory of Political Choice. Ann Arbor: 
Michigan University Press.
Keefer, Philip. 2006. Clientelism, Credibility, and the Policy Choices of Young Democracies. Mimeo World 
Bank.
King, Gary, Christopher J. L Murray, Joshua A. Salomon, and Ajay Tandon. 2004. “Enhancing the Validity 
and Cross-Cultural Comparatibility of Measurement in Survey Research”. American Political Science 
Review 98 (1): 191-207.
King, Gary, and Jonathan Wand. 2007. “Comparing Incomparable Survey Responses: Evaluating and 
Selecting Anchoring Vignettes”. Political Analysis 15 (1): 46-66.
Kitschelt, Herbert. 2000. “Linkages Between Citizens and Politicians in Democratic Polities,” Comparative 
Political Studies 33 (6-7): 845-879.
Kitschelt, Herbert. 2007a. “The Demise of Clientelism in Affluent Capitalist Democracies”. In Herbert 
Kitschelt and Steven Wilkinson, eds. Patrons, Clients, and Policies. Pp. 298-321. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kitschelt, Herbert. 2007b. “Party Systems”. in Carles Boix and Susan Stokes, eds., Handbook of Comparative 
Politics. Pp. 522-554. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kitschelt, Herbert, and Steven Wilkinson. (Eds.). 2007. Patrons, Clients, and Policies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kitschelt, Herbert, and Steven Wilkinson. 2007a. “Citizen-Politician Linkages: An Introduction”. In ibíd., 
eds. Patrons, Clients, and Policies. Pp. 1-49. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laver, Michael, Kenneth Benoit, and John Garry. 2003. “Extracting Policy Positions from Political Texts 
Using Words as Data”. American Political Science Review 97 (2): 311-31.
Laver, Michael, and V. Ben Hunt. 1992. Policy and Party Competition. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Stein Rokkan. 1967. “Cleavages Structures, Party Systems, and Voter 
Alignments. An Introduction”. In Lipset and Rokkan, eds., Party Systems and Voter Alignments. Cross-
National Perspectives, pp.1-64. New York: Free Press.
Magaloni, Beatriz, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, and Federico Estevez. 2007. “Clientelism and Portfolio Diversification: 
A Model of Electoral Investment with Applications to Mexico”. In Herbert Kitschelt and Steven 
Wilkinson, eds. Patrons, Clients, and Policies. Pp. 182-205. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Marks, Gary, Liesbet Hooghe, Marco R. Steenbergen, and Ryan Bakker. 2007. “Crossvalidating Data on 
Party Positioning on European Integration”. Electoral Studies 26 (1): 23-38.

Measuring democratic accountability: an initial report on an emerging data set
773
Medina, Luis Fernando, and Susan Stokes. 2007. “Monopoly and Monitoring. An Approach to Political 
Clientelism”. In Herbert Kitschelt and Steven Wilkinson, eds. Patrons, Clients, and Policies. Pp. 68-83. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nichter, Simeon. 2008. “Vote Buying or Turnout Buying. Machine Politics and the Secret Ballot”. American 
Political Science Review 102 (1): 19-31.
Piattoni, Simona. (Ed.). 2001. Clientelism, interests, and democratic representation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Putnam, Robert D. 1993. Making Democracy Work. Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press.
Rehm, Philipp. 2008. The Manifesto Data Set. Some Critical Remarks. Paper presented at the Workshop 
on New Methods in Comparative Politics, Duke University, April 2-3.
Rohrschneider, Robert, and Stephen Whitefield. 2009. “Understanding Cleavages in Party Systems. 
Issue Positions and Issue Salience in 13 Postcommunist Democracies”. Comparative Political Studies 
42 (2): 280-313.
Sartori, Giovanni. 1976. Parties and Party Systems. A Framework for Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Shefter, Martin. 1977. “Party and Patronage: Germany, England, and Italy”. Politics and Society 7 (3): 
403-51.
Stokes, Susan. 2005. “Perverse Accountability. A Formal Model of Machine Politics with Evidence from 
Argentina,” American Political Science Review 99 (2): 315-327.
Herbert Kitschelt (E-mail: h3738@duke.edu) is George V. Allen Professor of International Relations 
in the Political Science Department at Duke University, North Carolina, USA. Kitschelt has published 
numerous books and articles on parties and party systems in Western Europe, Eastern Europe, and 
recently Latin America (Herbert Kitschelt, Kirk Hawkins, Juan Pablo Luna, Guillermo Rosas and Elizabeth 
Zechmeister. 2010. Latin American Party Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Kent Freeze (E-mail: kent.freeze@duke.edu)
Kiril Kolev (E-mail: kiril.kolev@duke.edu)
Yi-Ting Wang (E-mail: yw48@duke.edu) are doctoral candidates in the Political Science Department 
at Duke University.

