A 
fundamental shift is taking place 
in the geography of science. Net­
works of research collaboration 
are expanding in every region of the globe. 
The established science superpowers of 
the United States and Europe have domi­
nated the research world since 1945. Yet 
this Atlantic axis is unlikely to be the main 
focus of research by 2045, or perhaps even 
by 2020. 
New regional networks are reinforcing 
the competence and capacity of emerging 
research economies, and changing the global 
balance of research activity. This may well 
reveal different ways of approaching chal­
lenges, and solutions that are different to 
those of Western institutions. If the science 
superpowers are to avoid being left behind, 
they will need to step out of their comfort 
zones to keep up with the dynamism of the 
new players in this shifting landscape. 
Collaboration is normally a good thing 
from a wider public perspective. Knowledge 
is better transferred and combined by collab­
oration, and co-authored papers tend to be 
cited more frequently1. But could increased 
global collaboration mean a blending of 
objectives that risks leaving bland priorities? 
Co-authorship is a valid proxy for col­
laboration because few scientists surrender 
credit for their papers lightly, so we can 
assume that sharing of authorship reflects a 
tangible engagement. Such publication data 
are readily available, cover many countries 
and research disciplines to a good depth, 
and have reasonable consistency across 
decades. 
Changes in the balance of research done 
by the lone scientist and that done by teams 
can be seen in co-authorship data2. Co-
authorship has been increasing inexorably3,4. 
Recently it has exploded. 
An issue of Nature today has a similar 
number of Letters to one from 60 years ago, 
but at least four times more authors5. Similar 
observations have been documented from 
clinical science to law. In the early 1980s, 
papers with more than 100 authors were rare. 
By 1990, the annual tally with that number 
exceeded 500 — and it has kept growing. The 
first paper with 1,000 authors was published 
in 2004; a paper with 3,000 authors came 
in 2008. By last year, a total of 120 physics 
papers had more than 1,000 authors and 
44 had more than 3,000 (ref. 6). Many of 
these are from collaborations at the Large 
Hadron Collider at CERN, Europe’s particle-
physics lab near Geneva, Switzerland. 
This upwards trend in multi-authorship 
will continue through shared global pri­
orities in health, energy, climate and social 
structures, propelled in part by international 
agencies such as the World Health Organi­
zation. Some of this growth will not be true 
collaboration but will come from independ­
ent contributions to joint efforts, usually in 
the form of data, that involve only weak 
intellectual interaction.
BLURRED BORDERS
Papers with hundreds of co-authors contrib­
ute to the apparent pervasiveness of collabo­
ration between countries. For example, every 
country in Europe co-authors with every 
other country in the region. For the United 
Kingdom and Germany, this collaboration 
is relatively intense and represents many 
individual links. In 2011, the two countries 
had around 10,000 joint publications in jour­
nals indexed on Thomson Reuters’ Web of 
Science — double the total in 2003 and about 
10% of each country’s total output. Malta, 
by contrast, shares only 50 papers per year 
with the United Kingdom, but that repre­
sents more than 25% of its total publication 
output. Consequently, distinguishing Malta’s 
own science performance is already impossi­
ble. This blurring of national distinctiveness 
could be a growing issue. 
According to data from Web of Science, 
the United States currently collaborates on 
3–4% of its papers with each of China (now 
its most frequent partner, with 19,141 papers 
in 2011), the United Kingdom (19,090) and 
Germany (16,753). These totals have all 
roughly doubled in the past decade and have 
increased by half as a percentage of US total 
output. No country shared more than 
1,000 papers in 1989 with any partner. US 
collaboration with Asia is rising steeply, as is 
collaboration between countries in western 
Europe. There is no reason to suppose that 
this will not continue. 
China’s rapid growth since 2000 is leading 
to closer research collaboration with Japan 
(up fourfold since 1999), Taiwan (up eight­
fold), South Korea (up tenfold), Australia 
(more than tenfold) and with every other 
research-active country in the Asia-Pacific 
region. 
The rapid growth of each nation’s 
research base and regional links, driven 
by relatively strong economies investing 
in innovation, will undoubtedly produce 
a regional research labour force to be 
The rise of 
research networks
New collaboration patterns are changing the global 
balance of science. Established superpowers need to 
keep up or be left behind, says Jonathan Adams. 
Bright lines in this map of scientific collaborations between 2005 and 2009 show many joint publications.
COMPUTED BY O. H. BEAUCHESNE, SCIENCE-METRIX. DATA: SCOPUS.
THE NEW MAP OF SCIENCE
The changing global landscape 
of research. nature.com/global
1 8  O C T O B E R  2 0 1 2  |  V O L  4 9 0  |  N A T U R E  |  3 3 5
COMMENT
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

reckoned with by 2020. Already, cutting-
edge technology can be sourced from 
research developments in South Korea as 
well as those in Germany. 
India has a growing research network with 
Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, although 
it is not as frequent a collaborator with 
China as one might expect7. In the Middle 
East, Egypt and Saudi Arabia have a strong 
research partnership that is drawing in 
neighbours including Tunisia and Algeria. 
The annual tally of joint Egyptian–Saudi 
Arabian papers has risen tenfold in the past 
decade and is accelerating. Less than 5% 
of these papers have a co-author from the 
United States, the biggest partner outside the 
region for both countries.
Latin America has an emerging research 
network focused around Brazil, which — 
despite language differences — has doubled 
its collaboration with Argentina, Chile and 
Mexico in the past five years. By contrast, 
Africa has three distinct networks: in south­
ern Africa, in French-speaking countries in 
West Africa and in English-speaking nations 
in East Africa. 
These clusters indicate that proximity 
is just one of several factors in networks. 
Nigeria, for example, collaborates not with 
its neighbours in West Africa but with 
co-linguists in East Africa. This mirrors a 
global tendency to use paths of least resist­
ance to partnership, rather than routes that 
might provide other strategic gains. Such 
language links have historically benefited 
the United Kingdom through alliances 
with Commonwealth countries that speak 
English and have adopted similar research 
structures. The United Kingdom cannot rely 
on this to continue.
This growth of regional collaboration has 
many implications. It amplifies the devel­
opment of emergent research economies. 
Researchers in Asia, for example, do not 
need recognition from European and US 
authors if their research is being cited and 
used by partners within the region. In the 
short term, students will recognize attrac­
tive opportunities closer to home, with fewer 
alienating cultural challenges than many 
European campuses have offered. 
Singapore, for example, is already reap­
ing the benefits of a 1998 policy change 
to attract foreign students. Students from 
China, India and the ten countries in the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) now comprise about 20% of 
Singapore’s university intake — around 
11,000 full-time students — with another 
20,000 part-time students in other colleges. 
Students from those countries choose 
Singapore for its proximity, its lower cost 
of living compared with Europe and the 
United States and its generous government 
scholarships. Job opportunities are excel­
lent: bursary holders sign a bond to work in 
Singapore for a fixed period after gradua­
tion and the government helps them to find 
a job that fits their skills8. 
All of this means that the significance of 
Western research economies as preferred 
partners for research could dwindle. To meet 
this challenge, these economies need to do 
much more than just take fees from immi­
grant postgraduate students. 
The United States and the United King­
dom must build new networks by actively 
exporting students to burgeoning science 
centres such as China and India. Research­
ers must stop expecting scientists from the 
new powerhouses to come to them, and 
should visit collaborators to experience dif­
ferent approaches — and be ready to learn, 
not just to teach. Travelling recently in the 
Pacific basin, I encountered many university 
leaders trying to increase collaboration with 
Europe, but finding it 
difficult to identify 
responsive contacts, 
despite having excel­
lent facilities and staff 
to offer. 
In short, countries 
in science’s old guard 
must drop their patri­
cian tendencies, open 
up clear communication channels and join 
in with new alliances as equal participants 
before they find themselves the supplicants. 
Collaboration between the public and 
private sectors has become more apparent 
because of government interest in exploit­
ing research for economic competitiveness. 
Some data show that industrial investment 
in research seems to be dropping — perhaps 
a reaction to the recession, but the trend 
seems to be long term, at least in the United 
Kingdom9. Governments need to develop 
an industrial policy that complements 
science policy. Incentives for collaborative 
innovation investment that draws directly 
on the science base would be a good start.
PATRICIAN TO PARTICIPANT
So what are the costs and benefits of col­
laboration? It provides access to resources, 
including funding, facilities and ideas. It will 
be essential for grand challenges in physics, 
environment and health to have large, inter­
national teams supported by major facilities 
and rich data, which encourage the rapid 
spread of knowledge. 
Collaborative papers tend to get cited 
more often. For example, those published 
jointly by UK and US authors are cited 
on average more often than either nation 
domestically. It also works at the institu­
tional level, so Harvard University gets 
a boost from collaborative papers with 
the University of Cambridge, and even in 
Nature the US–UK co-papers get relatively 
more citations1. And it follows through 
to industrial collaboration: when the 
University of Oxford collaborates with 
GlaxoSmithKline, for example, the papers 
are cited roughly four times as often as the 
world average for their field.
Research networks are a tool of inter­
national diplomacy. Germany exports 
excellent research equipment within its part­
nerships. China expands its cultural influence 
through the regional programmes it funds. 
As for costs, collaboration takes time and 
travel and means a shared agenda. Of wider 
concern as teams proliferate is that individu­
als could end up working only on topics that 
peer consensus defines as the most interest­
ing. The diversity of choice and opportunity 
may be diminished. The risk is that inter­
national, national and institutional agendas 
may become driven by the same bland estab­
lishment consensus. 
This global tendency for convergence 
became obvious in 1997 when Tony Blair, 
then UK prime minister, adopted the same 
technology priorities set out by Bill Clin­
ton and Al Gore in their 1992 presidential 
campaign, including biotechnology, health 
and environment. By 2000, the UK regional 
development agencies had supported the 
same missions rather than choose those 
that played to regional university strengths10. 
Leading research universities in North 
America, Europe and Asia identify strategic 
missions in similar areas. 
It is difficult to go your own way in a vil­
lage, even one that is global. But the success 
of science has been the crossing of separate 
strands of thought and practice that are 
more innovative at the edges than at the 
core. The iconoclastic, the maverick and the 
marginal may find a highly collaborative 
world a difficult place to flourish. Research-
funding agencies should maintain a bal­
ance. Collaborative grand challenges seize 
headlines, but so do Nobel prizes — and 
only three people can share one of those. ■
Jonathan Adams is director of research 
evaluation for Evidence, part of Thomson 
Reuters, in Leeds, UK. 
e-mail: jonathan.adams@thomsonreuters.
com
1.	 Adams, J. in International Partnerships of Research 
Excellence (ed. Roberts, G.) (2006); available at 
http://go.nature.com/zzwn8z. 
2.	 Whitfield, J. Nature 455, 720–723 (2008).
3.	 Leydesdorff, L. & Wagner, C. S. J. Informetr. 2, 
317–325 (2008). 
4.	 Adams, J. Nature 396, 615–618 (1998).
5.	 Greene, M. Nature 450, 1165 (2007).
6.	 King, C. ScienceWatch 23, 1–2 (2012); available 
at http://go.nature.com/w3f2jt.
7.	 Bound, K. & Thornton, I. Our Frugal Future: Lessons 
from India’s Innovation System (NESTA, 2012). 
8.	 Ministry of Education, Singapore. Education 
Statistics Digest (2012); available at http://
go.nature.com/8dz3ml.
9.	 Universities UK. The Future of Research 
(Universities UK, 2010). 
10.	 Evidence. Funding Research Diversity 
(Universities UK, 2003).
“The maverick 
and the 
marginal may 
find a highly 
collaborative 
world a 
difficult place 
to flourish.”
3 3 6  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  4 9 0  |  1 8  O C T O B E R  2 0 1 2
COMMENT
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved