 
Civilisations
Revue internationale d'anthropologie et de sciences
humaines 
51 | 2004
Religions transnationales
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious
Diasporas: Constructing a World Religion
Alejandro Frigerio
Electronic version
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/civilisations/656
DOI: 10.4000/civilisations.656
ISSN: 2032-0442
Publisher
Institut de sociologie de l'Université Libre de Bruxelles
Printed version
Date of publication: 1 January 2004
Number of pages: 39-60
ISSN: 0009-8140
 
Electronic reference
Alejandro Frigerio, « Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World
Religion », Civilisations [Online], 51 | 2004, Online since 06 January 2009, connection on 30 April 2019.
URL : http://journals.openedition.org/civilisations/656  ; DOI : 10.4000/civilisations.656 
This text was automatically generated on 30 April 2019.
© Tous droits réservés

Re-Africanization in Secondary
Religious Diasporas: Constructing a
World Religion
Alejandro Frigerio
1 
The most important recent development in the history of Afro-American religions is their
expansion across ethnic and national barriers. No more confined to the cities or areas in
which they developed, they have extended over state borders and, increasingly, national
ones. Thus, the candomblé of Bahia has moved to Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo (Prandi,
1991, 1998; Silva, 1995; Capone, 1996, 1999a) and from there to Argentina. The batuque of
Porto Alegre has spread to Montevideo (Hugarte, 1998) and Buenos Aires (Frigerio, 1998a;
Oro, 1999). Uruguayan devotees have taken the Brazilian par excellence (Concone 1987)
umbanda to Venezuela (Pollak-Eltz 1993) and Argentine practitioners are taking it to
Spain and Italy. Cuban santería, on the other hand, has spread rapidly in the U.S. through
Cuban,  Puerto  Rican  and  African-American  leaders  (Brandon,  1997;  Gleason,  1975;
Gregory, 1986; Palmié, 1995; Capone, 1999b, 1999c). It has also found a place in Venezuela,
where it threatened to overcome the native cult of Maria Lionza (Pollak-Eltz, 1985), is
flowing into Mexico, and making its way into Europe (Capone, 2001-2002; Capone and
Teisenhoffer, 2001-2002; Argyriadis, 2001-2002). 
2 
Some of the entrepreneurs who pioneered the spread of Afro-American religions through
these diverse countries are black, but many or most are white. In cities like São Paulo,
Montevideo or Buenos Aires, where they have an important number of followers, the
overwhelming majority of the new converts are white. In some cases, like Argentina and
Uruguay, Afro-Brazilian religions expanded mostly through the efforts of nationals who
were initiated in Brazil. In the U.S., to the contrary, santería was present at first mostly
within the Cuban immigrant community, and then spread into other segments of the
society, becoming popular with Puerto Ricans and African-Americans, later with other
Latino  populations  and  West  Indian  immigrants,  and  finally  incorporating  Anglo-
Americans into its files.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
1

3 
The diffusion of these religions has created networks of ritual kinship that now span
national boundaries giving rise to transnational communities of worshippers. These
transnational communities were originally mostly binational, composed by the initiates
in the new host societies and their ritual family (or families) in the mother country. Such
earlier disparate communities are now being superseded by the development of a wider,
more complex one, integrating worshippers in different countries, coming from the
practice of different national variants of Afro-American religions. These individuals have
an awareness of belonging to a religion that is not circumscribed anymore by national
variants but that has given rise to a transnational community of worshippers of the orisha
having Yorubaland as its origin, its contemporary model and Mecca.
4 
The paper shall argue that there are stages in the formation of these transnational
communities that are related to the religious careers of the practitioners, since the
different religious variants they encounter in this path have different implications for
their development. The religious communities devotees encounter are first mostly local,
then incipiently transnational and finally, for some, transnational global ones. 
5 
In this process of increasing transnationalization, the nationality of origin of the different
Afro-American religious variants remains important and must be dealt with in different
ways throughout the individual’s religious career. I will argue that the re-Africanization
processes that have been observed in practically all Afro-American variants in their new
settings (Prandi, 1991; Frigerio, 1993, 2002b; Silva, 1995; Palmié, 1995; Capone, 1999a,
1999b, 1999d) constitute the latest stage in the development of these religions and that
they are instrumental in the creation of a world religion and of a truly multifarious
transnational community of worshippers. 
6 
My interpretation intends to be valid for most new settings into which these religions
spread -locations that I have elsewhere argued comprise a secondary religious diaspora
(Frigerio, 2002c). Although, admittedly, my argument is colored by an intensive fieldwork
experience in the Southern Cone of South America (Frigerio, 1989, 1993, 1999, 2002a,
2002b), I believe that there are enough similarities in the process of expansion of most
Afro-American religions to warrant such a general rendition (Frigerio, 2002c)1. These
resemblances may be found in an examination of  the growing literature on Afro-
American religions in secondary diaspora settings -especially in the Southern Cone and in
the United States, the areas where the expansion of these religions has become more
significant, and the studies about it stronger. Correspondences include the spread, in
North and South America, of different yet functionally equivalent religious variants; a
comparable sequencing of the religious careers of the individuals and, especially, very
similar reactions to this new religious presence in the host societies regardless of the
dominant cultural context (Catholic or Protestant). This paper is an attempt to go beyond
the local character of most studies on the expansion of Afro-American religions (with the
exception of Capone, 1999c, 2000; Oro, 1999 and Frigerio, 2002c) and is based on the belief
that our current knowledge of these phenomena allows us to undertake analyses that are
more general in scope. 
 
Primary and Secondary religious diasporas
7 
I have argued that it is helpful to distinguish between primary and secondary religious
diasporas in order to understand the increasingly complex panorama produced by the
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
2

spatial displacement of Afro-American religions and their adoption by an ever more
varied  constituency  (Frigerio,  2002c)2.  Although  Afro-American  religious  variants
developed in different cities and regions, there are enough similarities in their situation
in their locales of origin that warrants that we group them together as a primary religious
diaspora. In contrast, the regions and cities towards which they migrated can be considered a
secondary religious diaspora. According to this rationale, Bahia, Recife, São Luis de
Maranhão, Porto Alegre, Havana or Port au Prince and their surrounding areas, as
birthplaces of candomblé, xangô, tambor de mina, batuque, regla de ocha and vodoun -
respectively- can be considered a primary religious diaspora. The cities, regions and
countries to which some of these variants have migrated can be considered a secondary
religious diaspora. This secondary diaspora includes cities like Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo,
Buenos Aires, Montevideo, New York, Miami, Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Juan de
Puerto  Rico  and  Caracas,  where  Afro-American  religious  variants  are  present  in
important numbers -their temples numbering, at least, in the hundreds3. 
8 
For this paper, the most sociologically relevant aspect of the spatial displacement that
warrants this distinction is that in the secondary religious diaspora the social standing
these religions had obtained in the primary one has to be regained4. In their places of
origin,  these  religions  had,  after  a  long  struggle, become  accepted  as  part  of  the
legitimate cultural (and sometimes spiritual) heritage. In secondary diaspora settings,
new narratives of national belonging need to be created, as accusations that were
successfully  refuted  in  the  primary  diaspora  where  these  religions  originated  are
reiterated or new ones are concocted (Frigerio, 1991a; Birman, 1999). 
9 
The  main  problem  that  practitioners  in  secondary  religious  diaspora  locales  face
regarding legitimation vis-a-vis the host society is that Afro-American religions have, to
this day, rarely gained the status of true « religions » (Frigerio, 2002b). Even in primary
diaspora settings their legitimation was mostly attained by having been awarded the
status of « cultural heritage » of an ethnic or racial group, and, especially, because they
were seen as fulfilling the vital function of « cultural resistance »5. Their value, as Dantas
(1988) has shown for Brazil, and Palmié (1998) and Argyriadis (1999b) for Cuba, has come
from their being visualized as the core of the culture of an ethnic group that came to be
considered as central to the conformation of national or regional identities6. Their
legitimation, therefore, is tied to certain local narratives of identity, and is lost when
these religions migrate to other areas or countries where these narratives are not
meaningful.
10 
It is because they have been legitimated as national or regional religions in primary
diaspora settings that they find great difficulties in being considered a world religion like
Christianity or Buddhism -which would make them naturally available to anyone
(regardless of social class, race and nationality) in secondary diaspora settings. Because of
their local character, they raise suspicion when practiced by people who do not share this
national or regional origin nor belong to the ethnic group that originated them. 
11 
Not all the Afro-American religious variants face this problem with the same intensity.
Some of them bind individuals primarily to religious communities in their own society
and do not emphasize their foreign national character. Others, as will be seen, bind
devotees to transnational communities of worshippers in ways that may become socially
problematic. Thus, sooner or later, the religion’s foreign national character must be de-
emphasized or re-signified. Re-Africanization, I will argue, provides an interpretive frame
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
3

that  is  particularly  suited  to  transcend  nationality  constraints  and  to  provide  the
semblance of a world religion. 
 
Religious careers in secondary diaspora settings
12 
Reviewing studies on conversion to new religious movements, James Richardson has
argued that scholars must move beyond « the assumption that most conversions are
single-event  types »  and  that  they  frequently  involve  the  passage  through  several
religions throughout an individual’s lifetime. He has proposed the notion of conversion
careers that « is tied to the idea of serial alternatives, by which is meant the sequential
trying out of new beliefs and identities in an effort to resolve felt difficulties (…) most
contemporary  conversions  are  identity  sequences  that  can  often  be  viewed  as
cumulative » (Richardson, 1980 : 49). 
13 
Based on this perspective that emphasizes process, sequentiality and the search for new
beliefs  and  identity  transformation  as  a  problem  solving  strategy,  I  have  argued
elsewhere (Frigerio, 2002c) that the analysis of the religious career of devotees of Afro-
American religions helps to understand more fully the multifaceted, complex character of
their transnationalization7. This concept underscores the fact that individuals do not
make a single option at a certain moment in time for membership into santería, batuque
or candomblé, but that they undertake a series of sequential engagements with different
variants of Afro-American religions that generally follow a fixed pattern. In their religious
career or path, individuals undergo similar or at least comparable changes in their
personal and social identities, and get to partake of different collective identities proposed
by the religious communities they become members of (Frigerio, forthcoming). This
happens in the Southern Cone as devotees traverse from umbanda to batuque to a
reafricanized variant of Afro-American religion and, likewise, in the United States, as
they proceed from espiritismo to palo to santería, to, perhaps, the « Yoruba religion » or
the « orisha religion », as the more re-africanized versions are known. As they progress
through these variants, the ritual and theological knowledge of devotees increases, they
establish relations with different spiritual beings and they undergo identity changes at
personal, social and collective levels8. Also, as shall be argued later, in this spiritual path
the religious community they are part of becomes larger and wider, as they enter into
ritual kinship networks which are, at first, local, and then increasingly transnational. 
14 
The idea of religious careers presupposes a processual, diachronic perspective that helps
to understand how individuals who do not have these religions as part of their immediate
cultural heritage are gradually and sequentially socialized into them. It also shows the
logic underlying the consecutive initiations into the different religious variants -a process
that  shows  striking  similarities  even  across  national  borders.  Some  variants  (like
umbanda or espiritismo) are especially suited for introducing individuals into the general
religious worldview of these religions (Frigerio, 1990; Carozzi and Frigerio, 1997 ; Frigerio,
1999). They act as cognitive bridges between the folk Catholicism that is practiced by
most Latin Americans and the more African variants that have some theological concepts
and rituals that are unfamiliar to it (Carozzi and Frigerio, 1992, 1997). These other
variants (like batuque or santería) are seen as more powerful and subsequent initiation
into them is regarded as mandatory in order to solve health or personal problems.
Finally, the re-africanized variants, as shall be argued later, are considered better for
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
4

legitimation purposes vis-a-vis the society and individuals adopt or develop them in the
later stages of their religious career.
15 
Three main variables shape the form the religious career takes : the fulfillment of the
religious needs of the individual (in terms of magical power and religious knowledge), his
requirements of legitimation vis-a-vis other practitioners in his religious community, and
the necessity of legitimation vis-a-vis the society in which he practices. The increasing
Africanization and  re-Africanization processes  that  several  researchers  have  noted -
especially in secondary diaspora settings- can be better understood as distinct strategies
employed by individuals to satisfy some of the aforementioned needs at different stages
of their religious careers. These two labels -sometime used interchangeably- should be
diffe-rentiated  in  order  to  more  profitably distinguish  between  different  religious
phenomena. 
16 
Africanization, is better suited to define the passage from the practice of a more syncretic
variant like umbanda or espiritismo to a more African one like candomblé, batuque or
santería. It occurs rather early in the religious career of the individual, and is a second
step that plunges him into what devotees believe is the heart of the religious experience
(Prandi, 1991). Re-Africanization is a process undergone by individuals who already
practice candomblé, batuque or santería (or other comparable ones like tambor de mina
or xangô) who, unsatisfied with the religious knowledge they have received, look to
current day Africa, especially Yorubaland, as the true source of theological and ritual
knowledge. Through this process Africa comes to be regarded not only as the remote origin
of the religious tradition but also as contemporary model for its practice. Current African
(mainly  Yoruba)  religious  beliefs  and  practices  move  center  stage.  Re-africanized
practitioners (who mostly reside in secondary diaspora settings) take courses in Yoruba
language and culture; acquire books on Ifa divination and mythology; wear clothes and
exhibit statues and ritual paraphernalia imported from Yorubaland, and sometimes
undergo initiations with religious practitioners of this origin (Prandi, 1991; Silva, 1995;
Palmié, 1995; Capone, 1999a, 1999d). Re-Africanization generally occurs in the later stages
of the religious career, after the individual has moved through umbanda or espiritismo
and undergone initiation into one or more nations of candomblé or santería or other
more African variants9.
17 
These  two  processes  (Africanization  and  re-Africanization)  have  generally  been
considered as one, as the continuous quest for a purer, more African tradition and
considered  mostly  as  a  legitimating  strategy  vis-a-vis  other  religious  practitioners
(Prandi, 1991; Silva, 1995; Capone, 1999a, 1999d). I have agreed with the gist of this
interpretation (Frigerio, 2002c), but here I want to stress that this strategy has not only
inward  legitimating  functions  -pertaining  to  the  community  of  believers-  but  also
outwards, in respect to the host societies in secondary diasporas. Also, I want to argue
that Africanization and re-Africanization may be more usefully examined as separable
processes that have different consequences at a micro (individual), meso (religious
community) and macro (host society) levels of analysis. They have different impacts on
the life of the individual, on the bonds established within the religious community, and
on the relationship that is established with the host society. 
 
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
5

a. First stage in the religious career : umbanda or espiritismo
18 
Most  temples  of  Afro-American religions  in secondary diasporas  practice  a  « more
African » variant that involves animal sacrifices (batuque, candomblé, santería) as well as
a « more syncretic » one (umbanda, espiritismo) that contains ritual and theological
elements that resonate with preexistent religious beliefs and practices10. These variants
are  considered  stages  in  the  same  religious  path.  Individuals  generally  start  their
religious career in the « more syncretic » variants and are later initiated -by the same
religious leader and in the same temple, if no conflict has ensued between them- in the
« more African » one.  This joint  practice serves a twofold purpose.  In the case of
umbanda, especially, it allows practitioners, if need be, to publicly identify with the
« more syncretic », generally also more socially respectable variant that does not perform
animal sacrifices. This is important since the practice of animal sacrifices has become
their main stigmatizing feature in all the new societies into which they have expanded
(Prandi, 1991; Frigerio, 1991a; Green, 1991; Murphy, 1995; Bartkowski, 1998; Frigerio and
Oro, 1998). Second, and most importantly, the «more syncretic» variant serves as a
cognitive bridge in the passage from preexistent belief systems (folk Catholicism in the
case of Latin America) to Afro-American religions11. 
19 
This is why, I contend, rarely, if ever, candomblé, batuque or santería exist as the sole
Afro-American religious variant present in secondary diaspora settings. In temples in
Argentina and Uruguay, batuque is practiced with umbanda (Frigerio, 1989; Carozzi and
Frigerio, 1997; Pi Hugarte, 1998) and the same is true for candomblé houses in São Paulo
(Prandi, 1991) and Rio (Capone, 1999a)12. In Venezuela, santería was mixed with the local
cult of Maria Lionza, a kind of local umbanda (Pollak-Eltz, 1985). In Puerto Rico and the
United States, santería is very frequently practiced jointly with espiritismo (Schmidt,
1995 ; Gregory, 1986 ; Matory, 2000 : 9-10).
20 
What I argue here, and have shown in detail for the Argentine case (Carozzi and Frigerio,
1997; Frigerio, 1999) is that the « more syncretic » variants function as cognitive bridges
between preexistent systems of belief and the more (ritually, theologically) alien world of
santería, batuque or candomblé. For Latin American populations, especially, umbanda,
the cult of Maria Lionza or espiritismo are very close to the world view of folk Catholicism
and prior conversion to these variants allows for later and gradual socialization into the more
African and alien worldview of the Afro-American religions. This function of cognitive bridging
is  especially  important  in  secondary  diaspora  settings,  where  people  are  totally
unfamiliar with Afro-American religions13.
21 
In secondary diaspora settings, not only is the simultaneous practice of two variants
noteworthy, but also especially important is the diachronic nature of their relationship.
This diachronic nature may be appreciated at a social and at an individual level. In São
Paulo, Buenos Aires and Montevideo, for example, umbanda was the first variant that was
introduced,  and  then,  after  several  years  of  practice,  leaders  were  initiated  into
candomblé (in the Brazilian metropolis) and batuque (in the other cities) (Prandi, 1991;
Frigerio, 1989, 1998 ; Pi Hugarte, 1998). In these cities, at an individual level, umbanda is
considered to be the first step in a religious path that leads to candomblé or batuque
which are considered the core of the religious system (Frigerio, 1989, 1990, 1999; Prandi,
1991 : 78, 87). Devotees begin their religious career in umbanda, and later undergo
initiation into candomblé or batuque.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
6

22 
Even if both variants, a more African and a more syncretic one, migrate together -as
happened  with  santería  and  espiritismo  in  the  USA- it  is  probably  the  case  that
individuals will encounter or engage in the practice of one variant first, and then the
other14. Several authors have remarked that, for santería practitioners in the USA and
Puerto Rico, espiritismo is considered the first stage in the spiritual path of la religión
which leads towards ocha (Capone, 1999b : 50, 1999c : 60; see also Gregory, 1986 : 122, 130,
165; Schmidt, 1995 : 102; Perez y Mena, 1998 : 22).
 
b. Second stage in the religious career : Africanization
23 
Africanization, I propose, occurs when an individual passes from the practice of a more syncretic
variant like umbanda or espiritismo to initiation into a more African one like candomblé, batuque
or santería. The more African variant is considered to be the core of the religious belief
system. At the same time, it is also thought to be magically stronger (Prandi, 1991 : 74,
1999 : 158, 162 ; Frigerio, 1990; Carozzi and Frigerio, 1997; Capone, 1999c : 60). For this
reason sooner or later most individuals are initiated into these variants -generally after
experiencing some kind of personal crisis, very persistent health problem, etc. It is the
use of blood in the rituals that makes the initiation and the works « stronger » than its
counterparts in umbanda or espiritismo. The use of this element to create a « seat »
(material receptacle) of the individual’s personal orisha is believed to create an intense
bond between them that cannot be broken. This is the reason why initiation into more
African  variants  of  the  religion  are  undertaken  only  after  a  certain  period  of
experimentation with introductory or bridging variants like umbanda or espiritismo15.
24 
The transition from a more syncretic variant to a more African one can be considered a
process of Africanization. It is through this passage that the individual starts participating
in religious rituals in which Catholic symbolism is minimized or disappears, songs are
sung in « African » languages and not in Portuguese or Spanish, people are possessed by
orishas and not spirits of indians, blacks or other deceased individuals. This process,
however, should be differentiated from re-Africanization -which many individuals may (or not)
undergo later- since its consequences differ at three important levels : individual, meso and macro.
25 
Africanization is a process that is often undergone because of its important consequences
at an individual level. It is mostly a quest for stronger magical power that leads to a deeper
religious commitment. In this process, the individual establishes a life-long relationship
with his orisha(s) who will help and support him in his daily life provided he reciprocates
with regular offerings and feasts. He learns new songs, dances and rituals to worship his
orishas, as well as the theological concepts that underlie these activities16. 
26 
At a meso, or group level, Africanization has important consequences since it binds the
individual to the religious community that practices the Afro-American variant -which is
generally more extended than the one that practiced umbanda or espiritismo. He may
continue to attend the weekly umbanda, caboclo or espiritismo ceremonies but now also
attends orisha feasts at his temple and, especially, starts visiting the ones that take place
in other temples. He now becomes a part of the hierarchical structure of the religious
community and has to pay homage to his ritual father or godfather -who may reside in
his country or in another one- as well as to his ritual kin (Prandi, 1990)17. 
27 
In  transnationalized  African-American  religions -or  expanding  ones- Africanization
oftentimes implies regular visits to another city or country. The individual becomes part
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
7

of a ritual kinship system that binds him to a religious community, which often spans
regional or national spaces. São Paulo candomblé priests, for example, may have ritual
parents or grandparents in Bahia. Argentine batuque practitioners may have them in
Porto Alegre (Brazil) or in Montevideo (Uruguay). North Americans may be linked
through their padrino or madrina to leaders in Havana or Matanzas, or may themselves
have been initiated there. In all these cases, they belong to a religious community that
spans regional or national borders. Another city of the Americas becomes their religious
Mecca -Bahia, Porto Alegre, Havana. They may have to visit it on at least a yearly basis for
their subsequent ritual initiations or to attend their ritual parent or grandparent’s
festivities (Oro, 1999). 
28 
Through this process the individual becomes part of an incipient transnational community.
It  is  transnational because  it  spans  national  borders,  and  creates  a  sense  that  the
individual’s religious activities have a here, in the country where he lives, and a there, the
country in which his religious « father » (or « godfather ») or even « grandfather » lives18.
I  consider  it  incipient  because  at  this  stage  this  community  is  mostly  binational
(Argentine-Brazilian; Cuban-North American). Since candomblé or batuque and santería
have explicit and recognized national origins, the recent initiate establishes a strong link
only with the nation (or city) of origin of the religion he practices19. Also, the link is
mostly with the extended ritual kinship family to which he belongs and much more
tenuous with the rest of the community. Compared to later, wider and more diversified
relationships that more seasoned veterans establish -discussed below- this transnational
community can be considered an elementary one. 
29 
At a societal or macro level Africanization processes in secondary diaspora settings
generally do not help in the legitimation of the religion. They increase and make more
widespread the use of animal sacrifices, and generally diminish the amount of individuals
who practice less controversial variants like umbanda or espiritismo. Since more African
variants have been legitimized in the primary diaspora for cultural and ethnic reasons,
not for religious ones, the practice of a racialized religion by white individuals in novel
societies  of  the secondary diaspora increases  the problematization of  the religious
community. It also furthers, as we saw, the identification of the religion with a foreign
nationality (Brazilian or Cuban mostly) and generally does not provide an interpretive
frame with a narrative of national belonging that connects the religious community or
the religion with the host society (Frigerio, 2002b). Practitioners in secondary diaspora
settings who are undergoing or have recently undergone Africanization are still too tied
to the interpretive frame of their foreign mentors. This frame developed in another
country (Brazil or Cuba) and explains the religion’s origin, its social place and worth in
terms of the cultural dynamics of the society of origin. It is totally inadequate to explain
its significance in another country20. 
30 
As individuals who have undergone Africanization mature in their religious careers,
however, they start developing interpretive frames of their own, which allow them to
gain independence from their previous foreign mentors as well as to legitimate the
religion in their own country. This interpretive frame provides a local narrative of
national belonging justifying why the religion is present in the country and why devotees
are entitled to its practice. In Latin American countries, and most notably in the Southern
Cone, the first step is to de-nationalize the religious variant, emphasizing that, as African
religions, they were found in the past in any place in the Americas where a Black
population existed. These religions, it is argued, are not the sole patrimony of the
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
8

countries where the present day variants originated, but constitute a common heritage of
Latin American countries -no matter how much a country’s dominant national narrative
downplays this heritage, as is the case in Argentina, for example (Frigerio, 2002b).
31 
Likewise, I argue that behind the «Africanizing» and «Cubanizing» discourses that Palmié
(1995) noted divide African-American and Cuban practitioners in the USA lie not only
different ideas about the role of « syncretism » within similarly divergent notions of
«tradition» (as he cogently showed) but also an attempt by the former to de-Cubanize
santería. « Africanizing » discourses not only provide a way in which African Americans
can gain a measure of autonomy from their Cuban mentors but also a way in which the
religion may lose its connotation as a migrant Cuban religion and become a part of the
African-(North) American heritage.
32 
Brandon  notices  how,  similarly,  Puerto  Rican  practitioners  appropriate  the  Cuban
orishas :
« The eruption of blackness in the form of the Seven African Powers present in
santerismo, therefore represents an affirmation of Africa as an aspect of Puerto
Rican ethnic identity. Once the Seven African Powers become encapsulated and
redefined  with  the  context  of  santerismo’s  ideology  and  embedded  in  its
symbolism, they cease to be Cuban. They have been appropriated ideologically, and
in terms of ethnicity they have become Puerto Rican » (Brandon, 1997 : 113).
33 
I have shown that similar strategies are employed by Argentines who, in order to de-
emphasize the foreign character of their religions -in a social context that stigmatizes
alien sects- stress the African roots and heritage of their country. By finding African
culture and religion in Argentina’s past, they feel entitled to its practice in the present.
This serves both as a rhetoric strategy to gain independence from their Brazilian mentors
as much as to show society that they are practicing a religion that has its own roots in the
country (Frigerio, 1991b, 1998b, 2002a, 2002b). 
34 
The growth of these discourses is very frequently accompanied by processes of re-
Africanization  which,  I  suggest,  represent  the  ultimate  development  of  this  new
interpretive frame.
 
c. Third stage in the religious career : Re-Africanization
35 
Some years after they have a temple and disciples of their own and are well established in
their religious career, it is common for practitioners to seek independence of their
mentors. No more passively learning what their teachers would pass on to them, they
start to actively influence the way the tradition is transmitted. In secondary religious
diaspora  settings,  this  way  of  intervention  seems  to  be  primarily  through  re-
Africanization processes. When several individuals in secondary diasporas are at a similar
stage, this translates, at a macro level, into a will to form a local, more autonomous
religious movement, independent from the tutelage of primary diaspora mentors.
36 
Several  studies  have  shown  remarkably  similar  processes  happening  in  secondary
diaspora settings (Prandi, 1991 ; Frigerio, 1993, 2002b; Silva, 1995; Capone, 1999a, Oro,
1999). In Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Buenos Aires, New York and other cities in the US,
certain religious leaders not only break away from their original mentors in Bahia, Porto
Alegre and Cuba -respectively- but do so in similar manner. They turn to Africa, now
viewed not only as the origin of their religion, but as a contemporary source of knowledge
with which to improve or deepen the religious understanding that their mentors have
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
9

bequeathed them. The diasporic tradition of the variant they had practiced to that
moment is considered, after several years of practice, incomplete and inadequate due to
the successive loss of knowledge that, they claim, occurred in its oral transmission. 
37 
In this return to Africa, leaders in Rio, São Paulo and Buenos Aires are generally aided by
Nigerian immigrants studying at major universities in these cities (Prandi, 1991; Silva,
1995; Capone, 1999a; Oro, 1999). These students often start by teaching classes of Yoruba
language and culture -at the university, private institutes or temples- and then move on
to lecture on Yoruba rituals and, especially, Ifa mythology.  Most of them are not
originally devotees of African religions, and so must rely heavily on the published works
of Abimbola (1976, 1977) or Bascom (1969, 1980) to teach their classes. Some of them later
undergo initiation into the Yoruba religion in Africa -or then claim to have been initiates
all along-  and eventually even initiate some of their Brazilian or Argentine disciples
(Silva, 1995, Capone, 1999a). Other secondary diaspora leaders -especially in the USA-
have direct access to the English language literature on African religions and culture. It is
also easier for them to directly visit Africa, from where they may return with honorary
titles bestowed on them by (better or lesser known) kings or priests from Nigeria (mostly)
or Benin. For these secondary diaspora leaders, the gravitational center of their religion
has moved to Africa and specifically Yorubaland (Prandi, 1991; Silva, 1995; Capone,
1999a). For most, the new Mecca is now Ilé-Ifé, the place where Oduduwa created the
world.
38 
This effort of local leaders to learn the Yoruba language, Ifa mythology, and adopt Yoruba
teachers as their main exemplars has been called « Africanization » by Prandi (1991,
1998), and « re-Africanization » by Silva (1995) and Capone (1999a) -a term that I consider
more adequate. Although it appears that only a minority of religious leaders undergo re-
Africanization, they are probably the most socially visible and outspoken. Usually among
the oldest and more formally educated of their peers in secondary diasporas, they most
outspokenly  and  cogently  provide  new  narratives  of  national  belonging  for  these
religions. They propose an interpretive frame providing a model of what the religion
should be, and what is its proper place in the society in which they reside. Taking
anthropologists, historians, artists, members of African diplomatic corps and government
officials as their allies,  they out-spokenly encounter social  prejudices against their
religions and argue for their religious rights. In their efforts to provide a narrative of
national belonging, they organize conferences, court the favor of anthropologists (Silva,
1999) -or sometimes oppose them- and take the lead in the interaction with different
social institutions of the host society. This interpretive frame, even if it not massively
accepted by their peers, generally sets the trend within which -or against which- most
practitioners must develop their practice and their conception of their religion. Leaders
who  have  not undergone  re-Africanization,  may  comprise  the  larger  group  of
practitioners in the country, but are still significantly tied to the narratives of national
belonging of their Brazilian or Cuban mentors  -narratives that are not well suited for the
justification of the presence of Afro-American religions in secondary diasporas. They are
generally less worried about social legitimation and generally develop local strategies of
adaptation that merely allow them to practice their religion in a precarious equilibrium
with the neighborhood police or other municipal institutions. Sooner or later, leaders
who wish to engage in collective action and build a collective religious identity -in order to
mobilize the religious community to struggle for its rights- must, to a greater or lesser
extent, incorporate the re-Africanized narratives (Frigerio, forthcoming).
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
10

39 
Capone (1999a : 272-284) has described re-Africanization in Rio de Janeiro, Prandi (1991)
and Silva (1995 : 244-287) in São Paulo, and Frigerio (1993, 2002b) and Oro (1999) in
Argentina. In the United States, the birth of an African-American variant, called orisha-
voodoo by practitioners and researchers has been well documented (see especially
Brandon, 1997 : 114-120; Palmié, 1995 : 77-80 ; Capone, 1999b : 62-65; Pinn, 2000 ; Hucks,
2000). I will not review these developments again here. More than the specific details of
the institutes and individuals involved, what is of interest are the general trends and
common elements that can be discerned in all or most of these situations. 
40 
Re-Africanization, as several authors have suggested (Prandi, 1991, Frigerio, 1993, 2002 ;
Palmié, 1995 ; Capone, 1999a, 2000), is always a process of independence from previous
religious mentors, especially from those of primary religious diaspora settings. However,
it is also, and especially for the analytical purposes of this paper, a process of constitution
of a world religion. Postulating a religion that has one origin, and one way to practice it,
freeing it of the local narratives that hinder specific Afro-American religious variants,
abolishing -in discourse-  the  particularities  developed in Bahia  or  Porto Alegre,  it
vindicates its status as a world religion. 
41 
In this interpretive frame not only is the local religious community taken into account,
but, especially, the transnational one, which has gained increasing relevance during the
last two decades. This is a global, more than a national, narrative for the religion. In it,
these religions lose their local characters and a conscious attempt is made to transform
the different national variants into a world religion, the « religion of the orishas »,
available to anyone regardless of nationality or race. 
 
Constructing a world religion
42 
Several authors have called attention to the fact that secondary diaspora practitioners
generally have a higher level of education than their mentors and colleagues in primary
diaspora settings (Frigerio and Carozzi, 1993 ; Silva, 1995 : 261 ; Epega, 1999 : 162 ; Capone,
1999a : 276 ; Murphy, 1995 : 294). Leaders who undergo re-Africanization are usually
among the most educated in the religious community. They are used to reading books,
taking courses, listening to lectures, participating in conferences  -or are even lecturers
or authors of books themselves. Books written by anthropologists on Afro-American
religious variants were always a valuable source of information for devotees (Bastide,
1983 : 168; Silva, 1995 : 250-261), but their use was often hidden or downplayed. Nowadays
several  priests  have  no  problem  in  publicly  discussing  their  readings,  or  even  in
recommending doctoral dissertations to colleagues and disciples21. Furthermore, the
books that now circulate among this elite do not focus, as they used to, on a primary
diaspora variant (candomblé or santería) but on Yoruba language and mythology. Many
are written by Nigerian professors lecturing in Brazil, or are translations of the classic
works on Ifa in Africa (and Cuba) written by Bascom (1969, 1980) or Abimbola (1976,
1977). 
43 
Given this more modern and formally educated constituency, re-Africanization as Prandi
(1998 : 162-163) suggests, involves an increasing intellectualization of the religion, as well
as an encouragement for bricolage. Re-Africanization implies a higher degree of bricolage
than before because each temple leader makes his own synthesis of the material he has
read  or  the  courses  he  has  attended.  Ritual  initiation  under  African  tutelage   -in
secondary diaspora cities or in Africa-  is not very frequent, so re-Africanized leaders
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
11

have only a tenuous link with their new mentors. Thus, they are able to synthesize the
new knowledge they acquire as they deem best. 
44 
Comparing re-Africanization processes with Africanization ones on the dimensions that
were discussed above, a number of important differences may be found. At an individual
level, re-Africanization does not seem to spring mostly from a desire to overcome
personal crises, as was the case in Africanization. For most individuals, it does not involve
new  initiations,  but  taking  courses,  attending  lectures,  reading  books  and then
performing  a  bricolage  with  what  they  have  learned. More  than  magical  power,  the
individual seems to be in search of an improved conceptual apparatus with which to interpret the
world. 
45 
At a meso level, if Africanization increased dependence on the leader who initiated the
individual  into  a  certain  Afro-American  religious  variant,  re-Africanization  is  a
movement of independence. The relationship the individual establishes with his new
African mentors is mostly a pay-for-service one, in which money is exchanged for courses
or lectures, not for ritual initiations that lead to prolonged dependence. Re-africanized
leaders are not linked by a complicated web of spiritual kinship, at least not to the degree
that was the case when they africanized and entered candomblé (see Prandi, 1990),
batuque or a new nation within them22. 
46 
If re-Africanization diminishes the bond that the individual had established with the
binational religious community to which he was related by ritual kinship established by
his religious mentor/s, at the same time it creates an increased awareness of belonging to
a global transnational community of orisha worshippers. This consciousness is made
possible  through  encounters  in  international  conferences  dedicated  to  the  orisha
tradition and culture, and, in these last years, increasingly through the Internet (Capone,
1999b).
47 
At a more macro level, re-Africanization in secondary diaspora settings aids in the
legitimation  of  the  religious  community.  It  provides  an  interpretive  frame  that
assertively emphasizes the global character of the religion. This frame postulates a
religion that has one origin, one model to follow, and is unencumbered by the several
local national narratives that hindered Afro-American religious variants. Abolishing in its
discourse the religious and historical particularities that developed in Bahia or Porto
Alegre, it vindicates the status of the religion as a world one. Thus, this is no longer an
Afro-Brazilian religion mostly for Brazilian devotees, or an Afro-Cuban one mostly for
Cubans, but an African one that can be vindicated by any individual who claims to
participate, to some degree, of the African genetic, or, especially, cultural heritage. This
makes it the rightful prerogative of almost everybody in the American continent, even if,
as is the case in Argentina, a counterdominant national narrative that stresses the Black
contribution to the nation’s culture must be presented (Frigerio, 2002b)23. 
48 
This interpretive frame, however, strives to make this religion rightfully available to
anyone, even beyond the American continent. The mythical origin of humanity that it
establishes at Ilé-Ifé, Nigeria, becomes blurred with its scientifically validated one in
Africa. A religion coming from the cradle of humanity is thus considered a religion open
to anyone regardless of race or nationality. Re-africanized versions of the religion have
not only one origin and one Mecca, but also, finally, one book. The strong emphasis re-
africanized priests give to Ifa (Capone, 1999b : 63) allows this corpus of mythology to
function as a sacred book providing yet another cherished element that upholds claims to
the desired new status of world religion. 
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
12

49 
This new interpretive frame has also been deftly supported -and packaged- by an
educated, powerful Nigerian elite, with strong academic ties and background, as well as
political clout. In the 1980s, this group of Nigerian religious entrepreneurs -coming
mostly from the city of Ilé-Ifé- made a strong appearance in the diaspora religious
communities (Abimbola, 1979)24. They were instrumental in the organization of the World
Conferences on the Orisha Tradition, and subsequently visited almost all the major cities
in the Americas that featured a community of orisha worshippers, becoming the main
proponents of a re-Africanization interpretive frame. This discourse was most appealing
to the religious leaders of secondary diaspora temples, who saw it as especially adequate
for establishing a religious movement that could gain independence from their primary
diaspora mentors.
50 
Nigerian embassies in many -probably all- diaspora cities backed the local efforts to teach
Yoruba language and culture, as well as the visits of the religious entrepreneurs from Ilé-
Ifé.  These Nigerian entrepreneurs have shown an especially open attitude towards
practitioners of re-africanized Afro-American religions regardless of their nationality or
race25. Primary diaspora leaders, on the other hand, continue tied to Cuban or Brazilian
narratives of regional, national and ethnic belonging, and even if they also proclaim the
universality of their religion, are always very suspicious of practitioners of different
nationality or regional origin. They often view their ex-disciples or would-be peers in
secondary diaspora settings with contempt and almost invariably, in the oblique way of
Afro-American religious etiquette, find ways to show them their inferior status and
knowledge26. Nigerian religious entrepreneurs, on the contrary, seem to have fewer
qualms in stamping their seal of African purity in any temple or practitioner that pays
enough respect -in whatever kind of species is needed27.
 
Conclusions
51 
I have argued that it is helpful to distinguish between primary and secondary religious
diasporas in order to understand the increasingly complex panorama produced by the
spatial displacement of Afro-American religions and their adoption by a nationally and
racially  varied  constituency.  The  most  sociologically  relevant  aspect  of  the  spatial
displacement  that  warrants  this  distinction is  that in secondary  religious  diaspora
settings the social legitimation these religions had obtained in the primary diaspora has
to be regained. In their places of origin these beliefs and practices were legitimated not
by reason of their religious worth but mostly because they fulfilled the function of
« cultural resistance » of a racial group that came to be considered important in the
conformation of regional or national identities. Tied to local narratives of identity,
legitimation is lost when they migrate to other countries where these are not meaningful.
Further, having been legitimated as national or regional religions in primary diaspora
settings they find great difficulties in being considered a world religion like Christianity
or Buddhism -which would make them naturally available to anyone (regardless of social
class,  race  and  nationality)  in  secondary  diaspora  settings.  Because  of  their  local
character, they raise suspicion when practiced by people who do not share their national
or regional origin nor belong to the ethnic group that originated them. There is a certain
variation in the legitimation problems that the migrating religious variants face. Some,
like umbanda or espiritismo, are less controversial because they do not advocate the
practice of animal sacrifice. Others, like santería or batuque, that perform animal
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
13

sacrifices and also entail the creation of transnational communities, suffer a larger
amount of problematization. 
52 
A processual, diachronic analysis of the religious careers of practitioners of Afro-American
religions helps to understand the underlying logic in the passage through the different
variants -a progress that shows striking similarities across national borders. Individuals
first practice variants like espiritismo or umbanda that act as cognitive bridges between
the folk Catholicism that is practiced by most Latin Americans and the more African
variants that are unfamiliar to them. Later on, they are initiated into more African ones,
like batuque, candomblé or santería, which are thought to be magically stronger and
imply a greater degree of commitment with the religion. 
53 
Throughout their religious careers individuals also gradually become part of larger
transnational  communities.  The  first  religious  communities  devotees  encounter  are
mostly local, then they become part of incipiently transnational ones, and finally some of
them feel integrated to transnational global ones. 
54 
The nationality of origin of the different Afro-American religious variants remains a
significant issue with their transnationalization and is dealt with in different manner
throughout  the  individual’s  religious  career.  At  a  certain  stage  in  their  religious
development,  religious  leaders  in  secondary  diaspora  settings  develop  interpretive
frames of their own, which allow them to gain independence from their previous foreign
mentors as well as to legitimate the religion in their own country. These interpretive
frames provide a local narrative of national belonging justifying why the religion is
present in the country and why devotees are entitled to its practice. Religious variants
are de-nationalized and it is frequently emphasized that, as African religions, they were
found in the past in any place in the Americas where a Black population existed. These
religions, it is argued, are not the sole patrimony of the countries where the present-day
variants originated, but constitute a common heritage of Latin American countries.
55 
Re-Africanization, the ultimate development of this new interpretive frame, is a process
of constitution of a world religion in pursuit of the social legitimation these religions
lack. Postulating a religion that has one origin, and one way to practice it, freeing it from
the local narratives that hinder specific Afro-American religious variants, it vindicates its
status as a world religion28. It provides a global narrative for the religion, transforming
the various local variants into the «religion of the orishas», available to anyone regardless
of nationality or race, creating the discursive conditions for the creation of a global
transnational community of orisha worshippers. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABIMBOLA, Wande
1976, Ifa. An Exposition of Ifa Literary Corpus, Ibadan and London : Oxford University Press.
1977, Ifa Divination Poetry, New York : Nok Publishers.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
14

1979, « Yoruba Religion in Brazil : Problems and Prospects », XLII International Congress of
Americanists, Paris, vol. 6, pp. 619-639.
ARGYRIADIS, Kali
1999a, La religión à La Havane. Actualité des représentations et des pratiques cultuelles havanaises, Paris :
EAC.
1999b, « Une religion vivante. Continuité et complémentarité des pratiques cultuelles
havanaises », L’Homme, 151, pp. 21-46.
2000, « Des Noirs sorciers aux babalaos : analyse du paradoxe du rapport à l’Afrique à La Havane »,
Cahiers d’études africaines, vol. XL, 160(4), pp. 649-674.
2001-2002, « Les Parisiens et la santería. De l’attraction esthétique à l’implication religieuse », 
Psychopathologie africaine, vol. XXXI, 1, pp. 17-44. 
BARTKOWSKI, John, 1998, « Claims-making and Typifications of Voodoo as a Deviant Religion : Hex,
Lies and Videotape », Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37(4), pp. 559-579.
BASCOM, William
1969, Ifa Divination. Communication Between Gods and Men in West Africa, Bloomington : Indiana
University Press.
1980, Sixteen Cowries. Yoruba Divination from Africa to the New World, Bloomington : Indiana
University Press.
BASTIDE, Roger 
1978, The African Religions of Brazil, Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press.
1983, « Contribuição ao estudo do sincretismo católico-fetichista », inEstudos Afro-Brasileiros, São
Paulo : Perspectiva.
BIRMAN, Patricia, 1999, « Entre França e Brasil : viagens antropológicas num campo (religioso)
minado », Horizontes Antropológicos, 10, pp. 35-60.
BRANDON, George, 1997, Santería from Africa to the New World. The Dead Sell Memories, Bloomington
and Indianapolis : Indiana University Press.
CANIZARES, Raul, 1999, Cuban Santería. Walking with the Night, Rochester, Vermont : Destiny Books
(2nd edition).
CAPONE, Stefania 
1996, « Le pur et le dégénéré : le candomblé de Rio de Janeiro ou les oppositions revisitées », 
Journal de la société des américanistes, 82, pp. 259-292. 
1999a, La quête de l’Afrique dans le candomblé. Pouvoir et tradition au Brésil, Paris : Karthala.
1999b, « Les dieux sur le Net : l’essor des religions d’origine africaine aux Etats-Unis », L’Homme,
151, pp. 47-74.
1999c, « Uma religião para o futuro : a rede transnacional dos cultos afro-americanos », Estudos
Afro-Asiáticos, 36, pp. 57-72. 
1999d, « L’Afrique réinventée ou la construction de la tradition dans les cultes afro-brésiliens », 
Archives européennes de sociologie, XL (1), pp. 3-27.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
15

2000, « D’une identité religieuse à une identité ‘ethnique’ : la communauté transnationale des
pratiquants de la religion des orisha », paper presented at the VIII Congreso Latinoamericano de
Religión y Etnicidad, Padova, Italia. June 30-July 5. 
2001-2002, « La diffusion des religions afro-américaines en Europe », Psychopathologie africaine,
vol. XXXI, 1, pp. 3-16.
2003, « Regards contemporaines sur les premiers candomblés à Salvador de Bahia », in Abel
Kouvouama et Dominique Cochart (éds.), Modernités transversales : citoyenneté, politique et religion,
Paris : Editions Paari, pp. 49-74. 
CAPONE, Stefania and TEISENHOFFER, Viola, 2001-2002, « Devenir médium à Paris : apprentissage et
adaptation rituels dans l’implantation d’un terreiro de candomblé en France », Psychopathologie
africaine, vol. XXXI, 1, pp. 127-156.
CAROZZI, María Julia and FRIGERIO, Alejandro 
1992, « Mamãe Oxum y la Madre Maria : Santos, Curanderos y Religiones Afro-Brasileñas en
Buenos Aires », Afro-Asia, 15, pp. 71-85. 
1997, « Não se nasce batuqueiro : A conversão às religiões afro-brasileiras em Buenos Aires », Reli-
gião e Sociedade, 30, pp. 71-94. 
CONCONE, Maria Helena, 1987, Umbanda, uma religião brasileira, São Paulo : USP/CER.
CORRÊA, Norton, 1992, O Batuque do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre : EDUFRGS.
COSENTINO, Donald, 1993, « Vodou Vatican : A prolegomenon for understanding religious
authority in a syncretic religion », Caribbean Quarterly, 39, pp. 100-107.
COSSARD-BINON, Gisèle, 1981, « A filha de santo », in Carlos M. De Moura (éd.), Oloorisa. Escritos sobre
a religião dos orixá, São Paulo : Agora. 
DANTAS, Beatriz Góis, 1988, Vovó Nagô e papai branco. Usos e abusos da Africa no Brasil, Rio de Janeiro :
Graal. 
EPEGA, Sandra Medeiros, 1999, « A volta à Africa : Na contramão do orixá », in Carlos Caroso y
Jeferson Bacelar (éds.), Faces da Tradição Afro-Brasileira, Rio de Janeiro : Pallas, pp. 159-170. 
FRIGERIO, Alejandro 
1989, With the Banner of Oxalá. Social Construction and Maintenance of Reality in Afro-Brazilian Religions
in Argentina, Ph. D. dissertation, Anthropology Dept. University of California, Los Angeles.
1990, « Umbanda e Africanismo em Buenos Aires : duas etapas de um mesmo caminho religioso »,
Comunicações do ISER, 35, pp. 52-63.
1991a, « Nuevos Movimientos Religiosos y Medios de Comunicación : La Imagen de la Umbanda
en Argentina », Sociedad y Religión, 8, pp. 69-84. 
1991b, « ‘La Umbanda no es una Religión de Ignorantes y Mediocres’ : La Estigmatización de las
Religiones Afro-Brasileñas en Buenos Aires », Revista de Antropología, 10, pp. 22-33. 
1993, « De la Umbanda al Africanismo : Identificación Etnica y Nacional en las Religiones Afro-
brasileñas en Argentina », in C. Fonseca (éd.), Fronteiras da Cultura, Porto Alegre : EDUFRGS,
pp. 92-121.
1998a, « El rol de la ‘escuela uruguaya’ en la expansión de las religiones afrobrasileñas en
Argentina », in R. P. Hugarte (éd.), Los Cultos de posesión en Uruguay. Antropología e Historia,
Montevideo : Banda Oriental, pp.75-98. 
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
16

1998b, « Les ‘sectes’ vues par les ‘religions’ : Le discours médiatique des prêtres et des pasteurs en
Argentine », Social Compass, 45(3), pp. 437-459. 
1999, « Estableciendo puentes : Articulación de significados y acomodación social en movimientos
religiosos en el Cono Sur », Alteridades, 18, pp. 5-18.
2002a, « La expansión de religiones afro-brasileñas en Argentina : Representaciones conflictivas
de cultura, raza y nación en un contexto de integración regional », Archives de Sciences Sociales des
Religions, 117, pp. 129-151.
2002b, « Outside the Nation, Outside the Diaspora : Accommodating Race and Religion in
Argentina », Sociology of Religion, 63(3), pp. 291-315. 
2002c, « Africanization, Re-Africanization and Anti-Syncretism in the Primary and Secondary
African Religious Diaspora », Paper presented at the Symposium Africas of the Americas, David
Driskell Center for the Study of the African Diaspora, University of Maryland. College Park,
Maryland, April 18-20.
Forthcoming « ‘Por nuestros derechos, ahora o nunca’! Construyendo una identidad colectiva
umbandista en Argentina », Civitas, Revista da Pontificia Universidade Católica, Rio Grande do
Sul.
FRIGERIO, Alejandro and ORO, Ari, 1998, « ‘Sectas satánicas’ en el Mercosur : Un estudio de la
construcción de la desviación religiosa en los medios de comunicación de Argentina y Brasil », 
Horizontes Antropológicos, 8, pp. 114-150.
FRIGERIO, Alejandro and CAROZZI, María Julia, 1993, « As religiões afro-brasileiras na Argentina », 
Cader-nos de Antropología, 10, pp. 39-68. 
GLAZIER, Stephen, 1996, « New World African Ritual : Genuine and Spurious », Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion, 35(4), pp. 420-431.
GLEASON, Judith, 1975, Santería, Bronx, New York : Atheneum.
GREEN, Thomas, 1991, « Accusations of Satanism and Racial Tensions in the Matamoros Cult
Murders », in J. Richardson, J. Best and D. Bromley (éds.), The Satanism Scare, New York : Aldine,
pp. 237-248. 
GREGORY, Steven, 1986, Santería in New York City. A Study in Cultural Resistance, Ph. D. dissertation,
Graduate Faculty of Political and Social Science, New School for Social Research.
HUCKS, Tracy, 2000, « African American Yorubas in Harlem and the Transition to Oyotunji
Village », in Larry Murphy (éd.), Down by the Riverside. Readings in African American Religion, New
York : New York University Press, pp. 256-259.
MATORY, J. Lorand
1999, « The English Professors of Brazil : On the Diasporic Roots of the Yoruba Nation », 
Comparative Studies in Society and History, 41(1), pp. 72-103.
2000, « The New Yoruba Imperium : Texts, Migration and the Rise of the Trans-Atlantic Lucumi
Nation », paper presented at the XXII International Congress of the Latin American Studies Association,
Miami, Florida, March 16-18.
MOTTA, Roberto
1988, « A eclesificação dos cultos afro-brasileiros », Comunicações do ISER, 30, pp. 31-43.
1994, « L’invention de l’Afrique dans le candomblé du Brésil », Storia, Antropología e Scienze del
Linguaggio, 9(2/3), pp. 65-85.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
17

1998, « The churchifying of candomblé : Priests, anthropologists, and the canonization of the
African religious memory in Brazil », in Peter Clarke (éd.), New Trends and Developments in African
Religions, Westport, CT : Greenwood Press, pp. 45-57. 
MURPHY, Joseph, 1995, « Santería and Vodou in the United States », in T. Miller (éd.), America’s
Alternative Religions, New York : SUNY Press, pp. 291-296. 
ORO, Ari Pedro
1999, Axé Mercosul. As religiões afro-brasileiras nos países do Prata, Petrópolis : Vozes. 
(éd.)1994, As religiões afro-brasileiras do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre : EDUFRGS.
PALMIÉ, Stephan 
1995, « Against Syncretism : ‘Africanizing’ and ‘Cubanizing’ Discourses in North American Orìsà
Worship », in R. Fardon (éd.), Counterworks : Managing the Diversity of Knowledge, London :
Routledge, pp. 73-104. 
1998, « Fernando Ortiz and the cooking of history », Ibero-Amerikanisches Archiv, 24(3/4),
pp. 353-373.
2001, « Of pharisees and snark-hunters : Afro-Cuban religion as an object of knowledge », Culture
and Religion, 2(1), pp. 3-20.
PEREZ Y MENA, Andres, 1998, « Cuban Santería, Haitian Vodun, Puerto Rican Spiritualism : a
Multiculturalist Inquiry into Syncretism », Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37 (1) , pp.
15-27.
PI HUGARTE, Renzo, 1998, Los cultos de posesión en Uruguay. Antropología e Historia, Montevideo :
Ediciones de la Banda Oriental. 
PINN, Anthony, 2000, « Orisha Worship in the United States », in Larry Murphy (éd.), Down by the
Riverside. Readings in African American Religion, New York : New York University Press, pp. 243-255.
POLLAK-ELTZ, Angelina 
1985, Maria Lionza. y culto venezolano, Caracas : Universidad Católica Andres Bello. 
1993, Umbanda en Venezuela, Caracas : Acta Científica Venezolana.
PRANDI, Reginaldo
1990, « Linhagem e legitimidade no candomblé paulista », Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais, 14,
pp. 18-31.
1991, Os Candomblés de São Paulo, São Paulo : HUCYTEC-EDUSP.
1998, « Referências sociais das religiões afro-brasileiras : sincretismo, branqueamento,
africanização », Horizontes Antropológicos, 8, pp. 151-167. 
SCHMIDT, Bettina, 1995, « Towards a New Merging : Spiritism and the Afro-Puerto Rican Religious
Culture », Horizontes Antropológicos, 3, pp. 98-104.
SILVa, Vagner Gonçalves da 
1995, Orixás da metrópole, Petrópolis : Vozes.
1999, « Reafricanização e sincretismo : Interpretações acadêmicas e experiências religiosas », in
Carlos Caroso y Jeferson Bacelar (éds.), Faces da Tradição Afro-Brasileira, Rio de Janeiro : Pallas, pp.
149-158.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
18

NOTES
1. Apart from my own fieldwork on the transnationalization of these religions in the Southern
Cone (complemented by the works of Oro, 1999 and Pi Hugarte, 1998), I also draw on some field
experience in Los Angeles, where I lived and pursued graduate studies, as well as on my
participation in privileged sites of study of the forging of a transnational community : the World
Conferences on the Orisha Tradition and Culture. These conferences were the first events that
brought together practitioners from many countries in the Americas, and were instrumental in
creating an awareness of the existence of a transnational community of worshippers. I took part
in three of these meetings : in Salvador, Bahia (1983), New York (1986) and São Paulo (1990). 
2. I thank Stephan Palmié for his suggestion to use these terms to distinguish between both types
of diaspora -when I was thinking of other, more complicated, ones.
3. I have not added cities in Europe to the list because the number of temples present seems to be
small (Capone and Teisenhoffer, 2001-2002; Argyriadis, 2001-2002).
4. In a previous work, I argued that there are three important legitimation problems that
practitioners of Afro-American religious variants face in secondary diaspora settings. First, they
have to be accepted by the new host society. Second, they must, at a certain stage in the
development of their religion, gain a measure of independence from their religious mentors in
the primary diaspora. Third, they have to establish a hierarchical structure in the new religious
community that is being formed. In brief, they need to be legitimized vis-à-vis the new host
society; the religious practitioners in the primary diaspora and their peers in the secondary
diaspora setting. I will not, in this article, deal with the last two legitimation problems (they are
treated in Frigerio, 2002c).
5. Anthropologists were instrumental in their obtaining this kind of legitimation -having always
insisted that these religions performed this academically cherished role (Dantas, 1988; Motta,
1994, 1998; Capone, 1999a).
6. This is no mean feat, since for many years they were considered alien to the societies in which
they developed.
7. I prefer to use the term « religious career » rather than « conversion careers » because,
differently from the cases studied by Richardson and other scholars of new religious movements,
the incorporation of new beliefs and the identity transformations occur through subsequent
initiations into different variants of Afro-American religions, that are considered to be within the
same religious path, « la religión » (as devotees in Cuba and in the Southern Cone call it).
8. See the religious trajectories described by Carozzi and Frigerio (1997) and Argyriadis (1999a),
as well as Frigerio (forthcoming) on the need to distinguish between these different levels of
identity.
9. Re-Africanization, I have argued, is more frequent in secondary diaspora settings (Frigerio,
2002c). Practitioners in primary religious diasporas more commonly adopt «churchifying» or
«orthodoxization» and « de-synchretization » strategies (Capone, 1999a, 1999b, 1999c, 1999d ;
Motta,  1988,  1994,  1998 ;  Cosentino,  1993  and  Palmié,  1995).  They  eliminate  or  downplay
syncretism and take as a model of religious practice and belief not contemporary Africa but the
most prestigious temples of the African diaspora in the Americas. Thus, for practitioners in
Havana, Salvador or Porto Alegre the « pure » roots of the religious tradition are to be found not
in present-day Africa, but in the Afro-American past (Capone, 1999a, 1999c; Palmié, 1995 ; Oro,
1999 ; Frigerio, 2002c).
10. Espiritismo is not strictly an Afro-American religion, but -especially in Cuba and in the USA-
is frequently practiced in a joint and complementary manner with variants of Afro-American
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
19

religion like ocha and palo monte, comprising a religious continuum emically labeled « la religión
 » (Argyriadis, 1999a ; Capone, 1999b : 51).
11. It may be argued that espiritismo, in its original, distinct form, is not strictly comparable
with umbanda. However, when it is jointly practiced with santería (either as the separate but
closely connected mode that Argyriadis (1999a, 1999b) describes for Cuba, or the mixed form that
Brandon (1997) calls santerismo in the USA), it can be considered a « bridge » variant. In this
sense espiritismo and umbanda are functionally equivalent in secondary religious diaspora
settings. They are closer to preexistent belief systems and individuals generally start their
socialization into trance experiences in these variants.
12. In several cases, however, the leader who passes from umbanda to candomblé may stop the
practice of the first variant (but see Epega, 1999 : 166). Even then, umbanda has certainly served
as a bridge to the practice of a more African variant.
13. The function of cognitive bridging may be more important than what it is thought also in
primary diaspora settings -as is suggested by the fact that the joint practice of two or three
variants seem to be the rule almost everywhere. However, because these religions are racialized,
it is assumed that « black » individuals are born into them (Frigerio, 2002b). Probably because of
this assumption, we have little data on the religious careers of individuals in primary diaspora
settings. Argyriadis’ revealing ethnography of « la religión » in Cuba (1999a, 1999b) shows that
even in Havana individuals are more likely to start their religious career in espiritismo (1999a :
125).  Lydia  Cabrera  pointed  out  several  decades  ago  that  « Spiritism  has  thousands  upon
thousands of adherents and thousands upon thousands of mediums » in Cuba (1975 : 30) and one
of her informants stated: «el muerto en todas las reglas pare al santo» [the dead gives birth to the
orisha] (1975 : 62). My own experience in Salvador, Bahia shows that candomblé de caboclos -or
giras de caboclos- is usually concurrent with candomblé ketu and individuals frequently start
their religious careers working with caboclos and are only later initiated into candomblé. Corrêia
(1992) and Oro (1994) ascertain that batuque in Porto Alegre is also mostly practiced jointly with
umbanda. All these data suggest that, even in primary diasporas, these variants probably serve
the same function of cognitive bridging.
14. The order in which the variants arrived in the USA depends on the group of migrants
considered.  In  the  case  of  Puerto  Ricans,  they  brought  espiritismo  with  them  from  their
homeland and after some years in the USA, adopted santería. Brandon (1997) argues that within
this community it is more adequate to talk of « santerismo » than santería proper, since they
practice a mixture of both variants. Perez y Mena states that « Most Puerto Rican believers
evolve from French Kardecian Spiritism toward incorporating aspects of Yorubaland religious
practices » (1998 : 22). According to the argument here developed, it makes sense that it is the
Puerto Ricans (the population to which santería is more culturally alien) who most need to
develop  cognitive  bridges  between  their  more  traditional  practices  (espiritismo)  and  Afro-
American religions.
15. There are two variants that further complicate this scheme : kimbanda (for the expansion of
Afro-Brazilian religions) and palo monte (for Afro-Cuban ones). Initiation into kimbanda, in the
Southern Cone usually comes after the practice of umbanda and precedes initiation into batuque.
During the 1990s, this variant has gained prevalence in the region -oftentimes at the cost of
Umbanda. Argyriadis (1999a : 124-125) ascertains that in Havana initiation into palo monte
similarly comes after the practice of espiritismo and usually precedes initiation into regla de
ocha.
16. Africanization is a dynamic process, with further stages of its own. The passage from
umbanda or espiritismo to candomblé, batuque or santería is generally only the first of a series of
perhaps less dramatic but equally important initiations. Practically the same mechanics that
drives umbanda leaders to become candomblé pais de santo, leads them to undergo successive
initiations into candomblé « nations » considered « purer ». This process has been documented
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
20

for São Paulo by Prandi (1991, 1998) and for Rio de Janeiro by Capone (1996, 1999a). Both scholars
stress that this passage generally enhances the reputation of the pai de santo, since it is always
performed in the direction of a « purer », more prestigious nation. Although I agree with this
interpretation,  I  believe  that  successive  initiations  are  not  only a  quest  for  prestige  and
legitimacy, but are also sought as a problem-solving strategy. Adding another dimension to their
explanation, I contend that « purer » nations are emically prestigious not only because they are
more legitimate but also because they are considered to be magically stronger.
17. Also, at an individual level, and contrary to re-Africanization, which is generally always a
movement of independence, Africanization is a move towards increased dependence. After
initiation, the individual becomes subordinated to his pai/mãe de santo or padrino/madrina and to
all his related ritual elders. Brandon (1997 : 111) and Schmidt (1995 : 100) ascertain that the
bonds linking santería devotees (ahijada/o) with their initiators (madrinas/padrinos) is stronger
than those present in espiritismo communities. 
18. Even if an individual’s padrino or pai de santo live in the same city, in all likelihood the ritual
family  of  his  mentor  lives  abroad  -because  these  religions  have  only recently  become
transnational. Thus, almost any initiate in batuque, candomblé or santería knows that he has an
important ritual family in another city, which he will visit periodically.
19. The  community  may  be  trinational  (Argentinian-Brazilian-Uruguayan;
Cuban-North
American-Puerto Rican) but its members have a strong relationship only with the nationality of
origin of their religion.
20. These are local, national religions that expand through the individual efforts of particular
priests who enjoy having international disciples (Oro, 1999) but have made little efforts to de-
nationalize or universalize their beliefs. Other local religions that have gone global, crossing
ethnic and national boundaries, had a centralized organization, sent missionaries abroad with a
clearer and more definite recruiting rationale and with greater amount of financial resources -as
is the case of Japanese new religions, for instance.
21. See the revealing testimony of Sandra Medeiros Epega, an Africanized mãe de santo from São
Paulo, herself a lecturer and author, to Silva (1995 : 259) where she states that she must have
made some 300 copies of a doctoral dissertation in Portuguese about the use of leaves in
candomblé.
22. There are a few exceptions : the aforementioned yalorisha Sandra Medeiros became the
spiritual  daughter  of a famous  African  babalawo,  and  adopted  his  name,  becoming  Sandra
Medeiros Epega. Such cases, though, are rare. 
23. It must be remembered that race barriers were already transcended with the expansion of
these variants to the secondary diasporas. In cities like São Paulo, Montevideo, Buenos Aires and
Mexico most of the practitioners are white, and in others like Rio de Janeiro or New York a very
significant percentage of them are not Black.
24. We still lack a good study of this group and its strategies. Certainly the key figures involved
are the Ooni of Ilé-Ifé, and two scholar-priests who held high positions in the Obafemi Owolowo
University of the same city. The first is Oomotoso Eluyemi, a noted archaeologist and also the
Apena of Ifé (the right hand of the King). The second is Wande Abimbola, who was head of the
university and has published extensively on Ifa (1976, 1977). Nigerians who have taught Yoruba
language and mythology in secondary religious diaspora settings are either related to this group
or have later seeked their support -or to the very least, have heavily used their books. The
Epegas, father and son, coming from a lineage of babalawos, must also be included in this group.
The influence of this group in the spread of a re-Africanized interpretive frame can be likened to
that of previous « Black ethnicity entrepreneurs » in the establishment and the extraordinary
success of the « Yoruba traditional religion » in the New World (Matory, 1999).
25. The wording of the presentation for the VII World Congress of Orisa Tradition and Culture
that was to take place in Nigeria, in 2001, is very representative of the global -not national-
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
21

character assigned to the religion in this interpretive frame. It shows clearly how the Nigerian
entrepreneurs who are one of the main driving force behind it are able to transcend local
narratives with a global one. A statement that this is the third time that the conference will be
held in Nigeria is the only oblique claim to this country’s importance in the religious tradition.
Early on the universal character of the tradition is emphasized as attention is called to the
significant fact that « the Conference takes place at the Cradle of the Human Race, Ilé-Ifé » (their
emphasis). The planetary relevance of the meeting is again immediately ratified by the remark
that « Equally important is the fact that holding of this conference at the material time is
apposite as the world is vigorously pursuing the ultimate aim of World Peace and Harmony. And
since the time of Creation, Orisa Tradition has been the equilibrium that adjusts world forces! »
(my emphasis). Twice in this short introduction the African -and not solely Nigerian- character of
the event and of the religion are emphasized. First, by thanking all involved « in the making of
the decision to hold the 2001 Congress in Africa and specifically in Ilé-Ifé », and then again, by
explaining how the theme of the conference was determined « after spiritual validation and
propitiatory  rites  by  the  priests,  priestesses,  and  eminent  scholars  in  the  area  of  African
Traditional Religion and Spirituality » (my emphasis). A final welcome « to the Source » (their
emphasis) and the fact that the conference languages will be « Yoruba, English, Portuguese,
Spanish  and  French »  show,  once  more,  the  cosmopolitan  character  of  the  event.  (The
introduction can be found at http://www.geocities.com/orisaworldcongress/2001the-me.html)
26. See, for example, the opinions of Brazilian batuque leaders on their Argentine counterparts
in Oro (1999).
27. For example, when the Ooni of Ifé visited a temple in Buenos Aires in 1991, he complimented
its members telling them that they had kept the dances « just as they were done in Africa », a
remark which was quite visibly an overstatement, for dancing was not among the many virtues
that the members of the temple could boast of. 
28. However, the heavy racialization of Black culture still conspires against Afro-American
religions attaining this status, in spite of their rapid expansion. African derived theological
concepts and practices -especially animal sacrifices- are still, to a large extent, considered
« primitive » and are not recognized as a legitimate spiritual quest in the Western world.
Therefore,  they  are  especially  suspect  when  practiced  by  white  people  (Frigerio,  2002b).
Judgments may be more condescending when they are practiced by Blacks, since then the ethnic
cultural resistance functions of these religions take precedence over their alleged religious value.
It is only when African religious beliefs and practices come to be recognized as a legitimate
spiritual quest, one of the sacred legacies of mankind such as Buddhism or Hinduism, that they
will be able to effectively achieve the status of a world religion.
ABSTRACTS
The most important recent development in the history of Afro-American religions is their
expansion across ethnic and national barriers. The diffusion of these religions has created
networks of ritual kinship that now span national boundaries giving rise to transnational
communities of worshippers. The paper argues that there are stages in the formation of these
transnational communities that are related to the religious careers of the practitioners, since the
different religious variants they encounter in this path have different implications for their
development. In this process of increasing transnationalization, the nationality of origin of the
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
22

different Afro-American religious variants remains important and must be dealt with in different
ways  throughout  the  individual’s  religious  career.  It  is  argued  that  the  re-Africanization
processes that have been observed in practically all Afro-American variants in their new settings
constitute the latest stage in the development of these religions and that they are instrumental
in the creation of a world religion and of a truly multifarious transnational community of
worshippers.
La principale évolution récente des religions afro-américaines est leur expansion par delà les
barrières ethniques et nationales. La diffusion de ces religions a créé des réseaux de parenté
rituelle  qui  maintenant  dépassent  les  frontières  nationales  donnant  naissance  à  des
communautés transnationales de fidèles. Cet article met en évidence le fait qu’il y a des étapes
dans la formation de ces communautés transnationales qui sont liées à la « carrière » religieuse
des pratiquants. Les modalités des pratiques religieuses suivies par leur membres influencent le
développement de la communauté. Dans ce processus de transnationalisation croissante, la
nationalité d’origine des différentes religions afro-américaines reste importante et doit être prise
en  compte  dans  les  differents  mode  d’évolution  religieuse  individuelle.  Le  processus  de
réafricanisation s’observe dans pratiquement toutes les variantes des cultes afro-américain, où
qu’ils soient implantés : il constitue la dernière étape de développement de ces religions et
contribue à la création d’une religion universelle et d’une communauté de fidèles transnationale
et multiforme.
INDEX
Mots-clés: religions afro-américaines, diaspora, transnationalisation, réafricanisation
Keywords: Afro-American religions, diaspora, transnationalization, re-Africanization
AUTHOR
ALEJANDRO FRIGERIO
Alejandro Frigerio est chercheur du CONICET (Conseil national pour la recherche scientifique et
technologique) et professeur de l’Université Catholique Argentine. Il est l’auteur de plusieurs
ouvrages, parmi lesquels Cultura Negra en el Cono Sur : Representaciones en conflicto (Ed. de la
Universidad Católica Argentina, 2000) et Argentinos e Brasileiros : Encontros Imagens e Estereótipos
(Ed. Vozes, 2002, avec Gustavo Lins Ribeiro). Il poursuit actuellement ses recherches sur la
transnationalisation des religions afro-brésiliennes en Argentine.
Re-Africanization in Secondary Religious Diasporas: Constructing a World Reli...
Civilisations, 51 | 2004
23
