Copyright © 2013 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Luttrell, C., L. Loft, M. F. Gebara, D. Kweka, M. Brockhaus, A. Angelsen, and W. D. Sunderlin. 2013.
Who should benefit from REDD+? Rationales and realities. Ecology and Society 18(4): 52. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5751/ES-05834-180452
Research, part of a Special Feature on Beyond Carbon: Enabling Justice and Equity in REDD+ Across Levels of Governance
Who Should Benefit from REDD+? Rationales and Realities
Cecilia Luttrell 1, Lasse Loft 2,3, Maria Fernanda Gebara 4, Demetrius Kweka 1, Maria Brockhaus 1, Arild Angelsen 5 
and William D. Sunderlin 1
ABSTRACT. Benefit-sharing mechanisms are a central design aspect of REDD+ because they help to create the necessary
incentives to reduce carbon emissions. However, if stakeholders do not perceive the benefit sharing as fair, the legitimacy of
REDD+, and support for the mechanism, will be weakened. In this paper, drawing on data from CIFOR’s Global Comparative
Study on REDD+, we analyze national policy processes in 6 countries and incipient benefit-sharing arrangements in 21 REDD+
project sites. Through our analysis of current practices and debates, we identify six rationales that have been put forward to
justify how benefits should be distributed and to whom. These rationales encompass a range of perspectives. Some hold that
benefit sharing should be related to actual carbon emission reductions or to costs incurred in achieving the reduction of emissions;
others emphasize the importance of a legal right to benefit, the need to consider aspects such as poverty reduction or the
appropriateness of rewarding those with a history of protecting the forest. Each rationale has implications for the design of
benefit-sharing mechanisms and the equity of their outcomes. We point out that, given the wide range of rationales and interests
at play, the objectives of REDD+ and benefit sharing must be clearly established and the term “benefit” defined before effective
benefit-sharing mechanisms can be designed. For stakeholders to support REDD+, the legitimacy of decision-making institutions,
consideration of context, and attention to process are critical. Building legitimacy requires attention not only to fair distributional
outcomes but also to consensus on relevant institutions’ authority to make decisions and to procedural equity.
Key Words: benefit sharing; carbon rights; equity; REDD+; REDD+ costs
INTRODUCTION
The distribution of benefits has been identified as “one of the
most challenging hurdles” facing REDD+ (Costenbader
2010:3). Benefit sharing is important for the creation of the
necessary incentives and measures to reduce carbon
emissions, but it must be perceived as fair by stakeholders or
it will threaten the legitimacy of, and support for, REDD+.
We focus on the main rationales in the benefit-sharing debate,
which encompasses the questions of how to create effective
incentives for emission reductions and what is “fair” in the
distribution of benefits of REDD+. 
We define “rationale” as a “justification for a course of action”
and we examine the implications of a number of rationales for
the design of a benefit-sharing mechanism. First, we set the
scene by defining key concepts and offering clarifications that
tend to be overlooked in the benefit-sharing debate. One of
these is the recognition that benefit-sharing mechanisms are
the sum of a large set of mechanisms of REDD+ design and
implementation, and thus are an integral part of REDD+.
Another is the importance of recognizing costs when designing
benefit-sharing mechanisms because it is the net gains that
matter, that is, “benefits” should be interpreted as “net
benefits.” We lay out the main rationales that have been put
forward for how benefits should be distributed, describe how
they influence the design of benefit-sharing mechanisms, and
discuss their implications for equity outcomes. The review of
these rationales enables a critical perspective on current
debates and the objectives of the various REDD+ mechanisms.
We also discuss the importance of legitimacy in decision-
making processes and describe ways to navigate the trade-offs
between the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity objectives
underlying these rationales. The paper concludes by
highlighting the need to explicitly communicate the relative
importance assigned to each rationale and the trade-offs
between them.
Data sources and methods
Our analysis examines the debates, discourses, and actions in
six countries surrounding the question of who should receive
REDD+ benefits. We drew primarily on data from CIFOR’s
Global Comparative Study on REDD+ (GCS), a four-year
project between 2009 and 2013, designed to provide early
insights on the performance of REDD+. These data were
supplemented by analysis of national policy documents,
secondary literature, and media reports, active observations,
and semistructured informant interviews carried out in
Tanzania, Indonesia, and Brazil in 2011 and 2012. Information
was also drawn from “country profiles” (literature reviews on
the context of REDD+) produced as part of the GCS (see for
example those for Brazil [May et al. 2011] and for Indonesia
[Indrarto et al. 2012]). Based on these data, we developed an
analytical framework to identify the main rationales put
forward by actors to justify how benefits should be shared. 
In addition, we drew on the results for Brazil and Indonesia
of the social organizational survey carried out as part of the
GCS between 2010 and 2012, in which respondents were
1Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), 
2Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre, 
3Senckenberg Gesellschaft für Naturforschung, 
4Getulio
Vargas Foundation, 
5Norwegian University of Life Sciences

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
asked to indicate their agreement with various statements,
including some on benefit sharing (Figs. 1–3). Respondent
organizations were selected by members of an expert panel,
who were asked to identify organizations that are involved and
influential in the REDD+ national domain. For the purposes
of this analysis, the organizations were categorized into four
groups: government, NGOs and research organizations, the
private sector, and donors and international organizations (see
Fig. 1 for details of these groups). 
The project-level data are based on GCS field research at 21
project sites in 6 countries, Brazil, Cameroon, Indonesia, Peru,
Tanzania, and Vietnam. Data were collected at project, village,
and household levels in each project site through a variety of
surveys, including interviews with the project proponents.
Descriptions of the GCS methods and surveys are provided in
Sunderlin et al. (2010), Brockhaus et al. (2012), Brockhaus
and Di Gregorio (2012), and Verchot et al. (2012).
DEFINING REDD+ BENEFITS, COSTS, AND
OBJECTIVES
While analyzing the debate about benefit sharing for REDD+,
we noticed considerable variation in the use of terms. In
particular, we noted that the term “benefits” is used in current
debates to refer to both gross and net benefits. Here, we define
benefits as net benefits, i.e., gross benefits minus costs. Costs
are understood as either direct financial outlays or opportunity
costs in the sense of income foregone because of a REDD+
action. 
We distinguish between three main types of (net) benefits, as
follows. The first type comprises the (net) benefits from
implementation of a REDD+ project, program, or policy.
Those implementing REDD+ may derive gains from
international and national transfers related to REDD+, such
as the sale of REDD+ credits in a carbon market, or from donor
or government funds linked to REDD+ readiness and/or
payments based on results. The direct costs consist of
transaction and implementation costs, such as for guarding
forests to prevent illegal logging and forest clearing. The
second type consists of (net) benefits from changes in forest
use. The REDD+ debate tends to focus primarily on the
foregone agricultural and timber rent (profit), or the
opportunity costs of forest conservation, that is, lost
opportunities because some uses are stopped or downscaled
(e.g., Börner et al. 2010). However, there might also be gains
in the form of better access to and higher income from forest
products that do not reduce forest carbon. REDD+
implementation also aims to enhance indirect ecosystem
benefits, such as the protection of soil and water quality,
biodiversity protection, and local climate stabilization. The
third type of benefits consists of indirect (net) benefits from
REDD+ implementation. These include improved governance,
e.g., strengthening of tenure rights and law enforcement,
technology transfer, enhanced participation in decision
Fig. 1. Percentage of respondents in the social organization
survey in Brazil and Indonesia that agreed with the
statement “Benefits should reward large-scale industries/
companies for reducing forest emissions.”
This note provides an explanation of the composition of the
four categories:
“Government”: Brazil - 6 bodies under the Ministry of
Environment, 6 other ministries, 2 presidential bodies, Civil
House of the Presidency, Cabinet of National Congress,
state governments of Amazonas and Acre, the Legal
Amazon Governors’ Forum, and the Amazon Fund.
Indonesia - 10 ministries, 5 coordinating agencies, and 3
local government agencies, NGOs, and research institutes;
Brazil - 5 international environmental NGOs, 9 domestic
environmental NGOs, 4 social movements/indigenous
peoples groups, 2 research institutes under the Ministry of
Science and Technology, Institute of Applied Economic
Research, Getúlio Vargas Foundation, Brazilian Enterprise
for Agricultural Research, Federal University of Minas
Gerais - Indonesia - 13 national NGOs, 6 international
NGOs, 3 national research institutes, and 3 international
research institutes.
“Private sector”: Brazil - Business Council for Sustainable
Development, National Confederation of Agriculture,
Brazilian Petroleum, and 2 professional associations;
Indonesia - Renewable Energy Society, Chamber of
Commerce, PT Sumalindo, April Group, Sinar Mas Group,
PT Rimba Makmur, Starling Resources, Sustainable
Conservation, 3 professional associations.
“Donors and international organizations”: Brazil - 3
bilateral donors, Governors’ Climate and Forests Task
Force, World Bank; Indonesia - 11 bilateral donors, two
multilateral donors, International Tropical Timber
Organization (ITTO), and Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPF).

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Fig. 2. Percentage of respondents in the social organization
survey in Brazil and Indonesia that agreed with the
statement “REDD should mainly reward local people for
emission reduction activities.” Note: For the composition of
the four categories, see Fig. 1.
Fig. 3. Percentage of respondents in the social organization
survey in Brazil and Indonesia that agreed with the
statement “Without involvement of local people in their
implementation, REDD projects are unlikely to be
effective.” Note: For the composition of the categories, see
Fig. 1.
making, and infrastructure provision. Infusion of REDD+
funds may also stimulate the local economy (multiplier
effects) and generate new income-earning opportunities.
However, reduced agricultural income can have similar, but
negative, indirect effects, and these need to be factored in.
Examples of these types of benefits that are anticipated from
activities that are planned or underway in some of the REDD+
project sites that we studied are listed in Table 1. 
The three types of benefits laid out above include both
monetary and nonmonetary benefits. The degree to which they
can be readily quantified, and, as a next step, monetized, varies
greatly, both conceptually and practically. Despite the wide
range of possible direct and indirect benefits, the REDD+
literature tends to focus on monetary, and hence relatively
easily quantifiable, benefits in the form of direct financial
transfers, and the implementation costs, transaction costs, and
opportunity costs of forest conservation (Streck 2009,
Lindhjem et al. 2010, Peskett 2011a). Omitting the value of
indirect benefits in the second and third categories can make
local costs appear higher than they are (Pagiola and Bosquet
2009). The inclusion of noncarbon cobenefits might suggest
that local communities do not necessarily need large amounts
of monetary compensation to be better off under REDD+. 
In talking about net benefits, we make a critical distinction
between cost recovery or compensation on the one hand, and
the distribution of any surplus once all relevant costs have
been recovered, i.e., net gains or “REDD+ rent”, on the other.
This distinction between cost compensation and net gains
(REDD+ rent) is rarely made explicit in the national or project
debates around REDD+ (as also noted by Karsenty et al.
2012a), but we believe it is highly relevant. Others argue that
a REDD+ system in which the full costs are accurately
compensated should not, in theory, generate surplus rent, and
that pursuing efficiency in a REDD+ mechanism would
require minimizing the REDD+ rents to be distributed
(Meridian Institute 2009).  
We define “benefit sharing” under REDD+ as the distribution
of benefits from the implementation of REDD+ projects and
policies among individuals and groups (stakeholders). A
distinction here can be made between vertical benefit sharing
between national- and local-level stakeholders, and horizontal
benefit sharing, between and within communities, households,
and other local stakeholders (Lindhjem et al. 2010). We use
the term “benefit-sharing mechanism” to refer to the full set
of institutional means, governance structures, and instruments
that distribute finance and other net benefits from REDD+
implementation (following Vhugen et al. 2012). 
An important consideration for benefit sharing is the
appropriate balance between, on the one hand, mechanisms
that act as transfers to forest users to create direct incentives
for reducing deforestation and forest degradation, and, on the
other, expenditures to enhance the governance and policy
context needed to enable successful REDD+ implementation,
such as the clarification of tenure and the strengthening of law
enforcement (Gregersen et al. 2010, Karsenty and Ongolo
2012). In practice, all countries and many projects are
considering both these types of mechanism (see Table 2), in
recognition that the success of compensation schemes requires

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 1. Types of benefits from 12 of the REDD+ projects studied and the level of the distribution. Projects were selected for
this table to capture a range of the anticipated outcomes classified by projects as “benefits”† (adapted from Luttrell et al. 2012).
 
Project
Level
Type of upfront benefit
TFCG – Making REDD Work for Communities and Forest
Conservation in Tanzania (Kilosa and Lindi, Tanzania)
Household
Alternative livelihoods
‡; capacity building
‡; improved agriculture
‡;
cash
Mpingo Conservation Project (Tanzania)
Community
Tenure security
‡; certification of timber production
‡; cash
CARE-HIMA – Piloting REDD in Zanzibar through Community
Forest Management (Tanzania)
Community
Alternative cooking energy
‡; alternative livelihoods
‡; capacity
building
‡; cash
Transamazon – Sustainable Settlements in the Amazon:
§ The
challenge of transition from family production on the frontier to a
low carbon economy (Brazil)
Household
Cash; sustainable agriculture
‡; land tenure regularization
‡
Community
Organizational strengthening
Central Xingu REDD+ Pilot Program (Brazil)
Household
Land tenure regularization
‡; livelihood alternatives
‡; capacity
building; agricultural intensification
Acre – Acre State System of Incentives for Environmental
Services (Brazil)
Household
Cash
‡; alternative agriculture strategies
‡; sustainable forest
management; land tenure regularization
‡; certification; capacity
building
Community
Public services
Bolsa Floresta Program (Brazil)
Household
Capacity building
‡; cash
‡; sustainable income generation
‡; income
diversification
‡; support to associations
‡; healthcare
‡; education
‡
Cotriguaçu – Northwest Mato Grosso Pilot REDD+ Project
(Brazil)
Household
Sustainable forest management
‡; cattle and dairy production
‡;
alternative agriculture strategies; land tenure regularization
‡;
capacity building
SNV Site, Cat Tien Lam Dong District (Vietnam)
Household
Improved land management
‡; livelihood alternatives
‡
Community
Public services
KFCP – Kalimantan Forest and Climate Partnership (Indonesia)
Household
Employment
‡; alternative livelihoods such as rubber planting and
fish cultivation
‡; income from reforestation and rehabilitation trials
‡;
training
‡; cash compensation for blocking small canals
‡
Community
Governance training; institutional capacity building technical
support for development planning, participatory natural resource
mapping
KCCP – REDD Pilot Project Development, Community Carbon
Pools (Indonesia)
Household
Capacity building
‡; tenure strengthening by establishing hutan desa 
(village forests)
‡; alternative livelihoods
RRC – Rimba Raya Biodiversity Reserve Project (Indonesia)
Household
Employment
‡; capacity building; alternative livelihoods
‡; credit;
infrastructure; ecotourism
Community
Public services
† Data were compiled from “site narratives,” “project checklists,” and unpublished reports prepared by the GCS component 2 country teams for Tanzania,
Brazil, Vietnam, and Indonesia, as well as direct interaction and additional inputs from the C2 country research teams. Additional information on projects
in Brazil was taken from Duchelle et al. (2010, 2013).
‡ Indicate benefits from mechanisms that are already being implemented.
§This project is now part of a larger project titled “Sustainable settlements in the Amazon: the challenge of transition from family production on the frontier
to a low carbon economy.”
a conducive and enabling policy environment. The relative
emphasis given to each type of benefit-sharing mechanism
depends on the specific country and project context and the
drivers of deforestation. For example, Brazil’s draft National
REDD+ Strategy concentrates on strengthening policy and
enforcement and on recognizing tenure and property rights,
whereas Vietnam is more interested in the approach used in
payments for environmental services (PES) schemes and the
compensation of costs. Although many of the projects are
considering providing conditional financial benefits, Table 1
shows that most currently define benefits as activities such as
capacity building, creation of alternative livelihoods,
livelihood enhancement, and the strengthening of tenure
rights, which can be viewed as prerequisites for the successful
introduction of PES systems (Sunderlin and Sills 2012). This
implies that the type of benefit-sharing mechanism in place is
likely to change with the type of finance as the projects move
from REDD+ readiness toward payments for realized
emission reductions. 
Future finance for REDD+ is likely to come from a variety of
sources. To date, international funding has come mainly from
development aid budgets (Streck and Parker 2012). The initial
idea of REDD+ being funded by the carbon market through a
global “cap and trade” mechanism hinges on agreement on a
new global and comprehensive climate protocol (Karsenty et
al. 2012b). In the meantime, market funding will come from
the voluntary market and possibly also from emerging national
or regional carbon markets. National funding will also play a
major role, particularly for middle-income countries such as
Brazil. The source of funding will have an impact on the
distribution of benefits: market finance is more likely to reward
those that reduce emissions directly, whereas fund-based

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 2. Examples of rationales shaping REDD+ benefit-sharing policy and practice in four key REDD+ countries (adapted
from Luttrell et al. 2012).
 Country
REDD+ benefit-sharing policy and practice
Benefit-sharing rationale
(s)
Brazil
The draft National REDD+ Strategy focuses on the recognition of property rights and decentralization. A
number of state and substate projects (see Table 1) are defining their own benefit-sharing arrangements. The
definition of property rights is an important focus.
Legal rights
No national carbon rights legislation has been enacted but Amazonas, Acre, Tocantins, and Mato Grosso have
moved ahead to pass state legislation.
Legal rights
The “safeguard” function of benefit sharing is being emphasized (Gebara 2011, MMA 2012). The Ministry of
Environment is leading an initiative to create a safeguards system that includes equitable benefit sharing as one
possible safeguard (Vértice Associados 2011).
Pro-poor
Two influential models for subnational funding allocation (Moutinho et al. 2011, MMA 2012) suggest that
funding could be allocated (i) according to the contribution to reducing emission reductions and the maintenance
of forest stock or (ii) depending on the contribution of specific land use categories (e.g., indigenous lands,
extractive reserves) to the reduction of deforestation and conservation of forest stock.
Emission reductions and
stewardship
Lobbying for recognition of the role of forest stewards is widespread (e.g., Nepstad et al. 2007, Moutinho et al.
2011)
Stewardship
Some states, among them Mato Grosso, are targeting the highest emitters (Moutinho et al. 2011)
Emission reductions
Some NGOs, such as the Amazon Environmental Research Institute (IPAM) and the Socio-Environmental
Institute (ISA), and REDD+ projects are emphasizing the importance of giving compensation for
implementation and opportunity costs (Nepstad et al. 2007, May et al. 2011, Moutinho et al. 2011).
Cost compensation
Indonesia
A common view in the policy debate is that incentive structures should encourage project developers to engage
in REDD+. This is reflected in Ministry of Forestry Regulation No. 36/Menhut-II/2009, which specifies the
proportions of REDD+ revenue that will accrue to each group and suggests that higher proportions of revenue
will accrue to project developers or communities than to the state.
Facilitation
A Ministry of Forestry regulation states that benefits should be distributed to communities adjacent to the
REDD+ project site. However, a concern is that customary/local communities may have less involvement in
REDD+ benefit sharing than other actors because customary communities find it harder to define themselves
legally (Indrarto et al. 2012).
Legal rights and pro-poor
The 2012 National REDD+ Strategy emphasizes the importance of all groups benefiting equally.
Stewardship
Tanzania
An important concern in the policy debate is whether REDD+ benefit sharing should follow tenure regimes for
land and forest (national- and project-level interviews, 2011-2012).
Legal rights
Tanzania’s National REDD+ Framework (United Republic of Tanzania 2009) and TFWG (2010) focus on
options for (i) rewards for emission reductions and (ii) compensation for implementation and opportunity costs.
The Framework calls for payments to be based on performance.
Emission reductions and
cost compensation
A concern at the project level is ensuring that upfront payments can serve to encourage early commitments
(project-level interviews, 2011-2012).
Cost compensation
Vietnam
The policy debate has favored a performance-based approach, as seen in the country’s PES schemes and the
compensation of costs incurred (To et al. 2012).
Emission reductions and
cost compensation
The importance of cobenefits is receiving attention in the policy debate; for example, the UN-REDD Programme
and the NGO SNV are exploring the use of an R coefficient for calculating payments based on both emission
reductions and socio-environmental impacts (UN-REDD Programme 2010).
Cost compensation and
pro-poor
finance such as development aid can allow a more flexible
approach to benefit sharing.  
With the possible exception of Brazil, there is little clarity in
any of the countries about the institutional governance
arrangements for the transfer of REDD+ finance. Project-
based REDD+ involves a contract between the provider and
the buyer, but can be more removed from state structures,
whereas national systems designed to reward national
performance have a wider range of players and more layers of
subnational systems to accommodate (UN-REDD Programme
2010). Many countries have several alternative proposals on
the table. For example, Tanzania’s National REDD+ Strategy
proposes a centralized national REDD+ system with payment
into a National Trust Fund, whereas Tanzanian projects, and
the Readiness Preparation Proposal, are proposing a nested
approach that allows for direct international payments to
projects. In Indonesia and some other countries, multiple
processes of defining benefit-sharing mechanisms are
underway, although the legality of the arrangements being
proposed is not clear. The fact that many REDD+ projects are
operating in insecure legal and policy frameworks means that
existing benefit-sharing arrangements could be subject to
upheaval once the national-level policy is formalized.
WHO SHOULD BENEFIT FROM REDD+?
Theoretical principles of distributive equity
The objectives of REDD+ are often characterized in terms of
the “3E” criteria of effectiveness, efficiency, and equity
outcomes. In the REDD+ context, effectiveness is a measure
of “the amount of emissions reduced or removals increased

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 3. Relationship between selected principles of distributive equity (following McDermott et al. 2012 and Pascual et al.
2010) and the benefit-sharing rationales.
 Theory
Principle for the distribution of benefits (and costs)
Benefit-sharing rationale
Merit-based
Distribution should be proportional to the contribution or inputs of the stakeholders (Pascual et
al. 2010). Konow (1996) uses the term “accountability principle” to suggest that distribution
should be relative to work effort and Miller (1999) refers to “desert”: that superior performance
should attract superior recognition. Pascual et al. (2010) distinguish between the criteria of
“compensation” for foregone benefits related to the provision of the service and the “actual
provision” of the service.
Emission reductions
Facilitation
Cost compensation
Needs-based
Distribution should be according to needs and those with the greatest needs should receive a
higher reward (Rawls 1979, Dobson 1998, Konow 2001) in order to ensure that the position of
the least advantaged individuals is as high as possible (Pascual et al. 2010).
Pro-poor
Stewardship
Egalitarian
Distribution should be equal among all providers of a service independent of the cost and level
of service provision (Pascual et al. 2010).
Stewardship
Libertarian
Distribution should be according to property rights and the moral of liberty of action. Right-
libertarianism supports private rights and argues that natural resources should be appropriated
by those who discover them, claim them, or provide labor inputs. Left-libertarianism advocates
for common ownership and that those who claim rights should pay others for the value of those
rights (Vallentyne 2010).
Legal rights
by REDD+ actions” and efficiency a measure of “the costs of
these emissions reductions or removal increases” (Angelsen
2009:5). A far more complex debate has emerged in the
literature about the definition of “equity,” which Konow
(2001) describes as an idea that resists simple formulations.
In this paper, we refer to Corbera et al.’s (2007:589, following
Dobson 1998) definition that “equity relates to the distribution
of socio-economic factors and goods in a society according to
an agreed set of principles or criteria, which often include
principles such as desert and need.” Common to many of the
discussions around equity are notions of fairness, justice, and
distributional consequences (Konow 2001, Adger et al. 2003).
Several authors have proposed frameworks to distinguish
between different dimensions of equity, for example between
distributive and procedural equity. Distributive equity refers
to the allocation of outcomes and their impacts on different
stakeholders in terms of costs, risks, and benefits (Corbera et
al. 2007, Proctor et al. 2008, Pascual et al. 2010, McDermott
et al. 2012). Within the dimension of distributive equity are a
number of principles that can be traced back to different rules-
based theories related to distributive justice (Table 3). These
include the “merit-based” principle that distribution should be
proportional to contribution, the “needs-based” principle that
distribution should be according to need, the “egalitarian”
principle of equal distribution, and the “libertarian” principle
that distribution should be according to property rights. 
Another element of equity, namely procedural equity, refers
to participation in decision making and inclusion and
negotiation of competing views (Brown and Corbera 2003).
Central to the emphasis on procedural equity is the notion that
it strengthens legitimacy. To be legitimate, a system must be
justifiable, according to given moral principles and social
norms (Johnson 1997, Jentoft 2000), with evidence of consent
(Beetham 1991) and acknowledgment by the governed to
validate the ruler’s claim to authority (Weber 1978).  
A third dimension of equity has also been proposed, one that
McDermott et al. (2012) term “contextual equity” and that
Brown and Corbera (2003) refer to as “equity of access” to
resources and markets. This dimension reflects a broader
argument (see, for example, Miller 1999) that what is
perceived as equitable is not universal but rather depends on
the specific context in which decisions about the distribution
of resources are made (Konow 2003, Schokkaert and
Devooght 2003, Muradian et al. 2010). For example,
contextual factors such as capacity, power, cultural values,
social capital, and the level of dependence on forest have
important effects on the equity of distribution (Konow 2001).
In this sense, some “indirect benefits” such as tenure reform,
capacity building, or improved governance could also be
categorized as “contextual” features, in that they constitute the
necessary preconditions for benefiting from the implementation
of REDD+.
A typology of benefit-sharing rationales
Through our analysis of current practices and debates on
sharing benefits from REDD+, we identified a typology of six
rationales for the distribution and targeting of benefits that cut
across all three objectives of effectiveness, efficiency, and
equity. These six rationales represent different justifications
for the allocation of benefits, namely that: 
G benefits should go to actors with legal rights (“legal
rights” rationale); 
G benefits should go to those actors achieving emission
reductions (“emission reductions” rationale); 

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
G benefits should go to low-emitting forest stewards
(“stewardship” rationale); 
G those actors incurring costs should be compensated (“cost
compensation” rationale); 
G benefits should go to effective facilitators of REDD+
implementation (“facilitation” rationale); 
G benefits should go to the poorest (“pro-poor” rationale). 
Hajer (1993) highlights that, in the case of environmental
politics, complex policy problems are often mirrored by
complex political arguments that draw on more than one
discourse. Benefit sharing is no exception. We show how each
rationale can be related to one or more principle of distributive
equity principles (see Table 3), although in practice the choice
of rationale may reflect other factors as well.  
The rationales were identified through the analysis of policy
documents, secondary literature and media reports,
semistructured interviews, and quantitative surveys carried
out at national and project levels. In particular, we examined
the discourses expressing each rationale as they emerged in
the benefit-sharing debate as well as the specific planned and
actual REDD+ actions related to benefit sharing. Examples of
how we ascribed design features of benefit-sharing
mechanisms, proposed and actual, to each rationale are shown
in Tables 2 and 4. As seen in the tables, multiple rationales
may be in play in a single country or project, which reflects
the diversity of underlying discourses about benefit sharing.
Again, it is important to note differences in the use of the term
“benefits”: in some rationales, “benefits” are defined as
including compensation for implementation and opportunity
costs, whereas others refer only to net gains or rent.
Benefit-sharing rationale I: benefits should go to actors
with legal rights related to carbon emission reductions
(“legal rights” rationale)
One rationale that is prevalent in the benefit-sharing debate in
all countries is that benefits should be distributed to those with
a legal claim or right, whether statutory or customary, to any
benefits associated with carbon emission reductions. This
rationale is related to theories on libertarian justice (see Table
3). This rationale is particularly strong in Tanzania and Brazil
(see Table 2), which is perhaps a reflection that land and forest
resource rights are more clearly defined in these countries; in
most countries, rights to carbon sequestration and storage
(carbon rights) have not been clarified. None of the countries
studied has national legislation on carbon rights, and as a result
most REDD+ projects are operating in a vacuum of uncertainty
over the legal right to benefit from payments for carbon
emission reductions. 
In the absence of that clarity, existing land and forest tenure
rules and current policies for rights to forest resources can be
assumed to serve as the basis for allocating payments for
carbon emission reductions (Cotula and Mayers 2009).
However, in those countries, e.g., New Zealand until 2008,
and states, e.g., Amazonas and Acre in Brazil, where carbon
rights are clarified legally, the rights do not reflect existing
land and forest tenure because the carbon rights were vested
in the state regardless of land and forest tenure (Peskett and
Harkin 2007, Karsenty et al. 2012a). 
Legal rights vary within a “bundle” of property rights, ranging
from usufruct rights, or the right to earn income from a
resource, to the right to transfer the resource to others (McKean
2000, Segal and Whinston 2013). Ownership of land or trees
does not necessarily give the owner a legal right to benefit
from carbon sequestration or reductions in carbon emissions.
Peskett and Brodnig (2011) argue (following Streck and
Sullivan 2007; see also Takacs 2009) that the term “carbon
rights” has two different aspects: 
1. The property right to the sequestered carbon itself, which
is physically contained in land, trees, and soil, does not
necessarily have to coincide with the property right to the
physical resources. 
2. The right to benefit from selling carbon credits is distinct
from the property right to sequestered carbon. Where
there is no explicit law on the right to sequestered carbon,
legal rights to sell carbon credits can be associated with
the right to the underlying asset, activity, or resource. If
the legal status is not clear, contracts become important
for clarifying rights and responsibilities (Norton Rose
2010). 
Therefore, a central consideration is whether the state will
claim separate rights to benefit from trading carbon credits
even in contexts where land or forest is privately or
communally owned. In Tanzania, most REDD+ projects are
taking place on land registered as Village Forest Reserves.
Because communities that own Village Forest Reserves have
the right to the revenue and benefits arising from them (United
Republic of Tanzania 1998), there is no legal requirement for
the income from these projects to go to the central government.
However, despite the relative clarity of the laws in Tanzania,
national-level actors have exhibited some resistance to the
decentralization and devolution of decision-making power
and rights to communities, based on the view that the entire
nation should benefit from forest resources and not only those
living in forest areas (interviews with national stakeholders,
2012).  
If the national government claims rights to the benefits from
carbon emission reductions, a national benefit-sharing
mechanism needs to address not only how to distribute the
revenue from any carbon credits but also the creation of
incentives at lower scales to encourage those responsible for
deforestation and forest degradation to reduce these activities.
If rights are assigned to households or communities, further

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 4. Plans for sharing of benefits and the associated rationales [in brackets] in 10 REDD+ projects. Projects were selected
for this table to reflect a range of benefit-sharing rationales.†
 
Project
Timing of benefit and for what
To whom
TFCG (Tanzania)
Upfront funds, conditional on full participation in conservation activities. The
amount of funds paid is a little below what would be paid should emissions be
reduced to the expected level. The amount allocated to each village is based on
the area of forest reserved minus leakage [emission reductions].
REDD+ dividends will be paid to every
qualifying individual (including up to three
children per household, received by their
mothers) [pro-poor].
Payments will be allocated to those who have
land/forest ownership [legal rights].
Mpingo Conservation
Development Initiative
(Tanzania)
Performance-based [emission reductions]. No upfront funding is provided but the
communities are benefitting from upfront support in the form of free facilitation
for Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)-certified timber through participatory
forest management opening up a potential revenue stream.
Payments will be allocated to those who have
land/forest ownership [legal rights].
5% of revenue from certified timber is paid
to the District Council [facilitation].
The project proponent and community are
negotiating the percentage arrangement to be
paid to the project to cover administration
costs [facilitation].
CARE-HIMA
(Tanzania)
Upfront benefits in the form of conservation grants [cost compensation]; the
share of funds is determined according to pro-poor [pro-poor] and environmental
criteria. Future benefits will be linked to performance [emission reductions].
Payments will be allocated to those who have
land/forest ownership [legal rights].
TaTEDO – Community
Based REDD
Mechanisms for
Sustainable Forest
Management in Semi-
Arid Areas (Tanzania)
Upfront payments based on efforts in the implementation of management plan,
the area of forest, and carbon baseline data; later payments will be performance-
based [emission reductions]. Every member in the group has to adhere to certain
management requirements such as the minimization of use and harvest and
maintenance of land use. The 5% going to the project will be used for managing
the ngitili (traditional forest management) groups and the 3% to the militias will
be used for law enforcement and patrolling [cost compensation].
Payments will be made to Ngiliti (traditional
forest management) owners (83%) [legal
rights]), village government (7%), village
level Ngitili group (5%), Sungu-Sungu group
(village militia) that patrols Ngitilis (3%)],
and district level Ngitili Association (2%)
[cost compensation].
Transamazon (Brazil)
Upfront benefits [cost compensation], performance-based benefits based on the
amount of forest protected [stewardship], zero deforestation [emission
reductions], compliance with community agreements, and membership in rural
workers union).
Cash and in-kind benefits will be delivered to
small-scale farmers, but not to large
landowners or timber extractors [pro-poor].
Central Xingu REDD+
Pilot Program (Brazil)
Upfront benefits in the form of a rural environmental registry (CAR) and
restoration plan (PRAD); conditional benefits in the form of technical assistance
and technology transfer. The development of the CAR and the PRADs is one of
the conditions for receiving further benefits.
In-kind benefits will be delivered to private
landholders [legal rights], indigenous groups,
and protected areas managers [stewardship].
Acre (Brazil)
Upfront benefits and conditional benefits in the form of technical support for
sustainable production and cash. Benefits allocated for increasing production in
deforested areas and carbon stocks in deforested areas [emission reductions].
Benefits will go to private and rural
settlement properties [legal rights].
Bolsa Floresta Program
(Brazil)
Conditional benefits; monthly payment of BRL 50 reals (US$30) per household
directed to the women. Families commit to zero deforestation [emission
reduction], good agricultural practices, and to enrolling their children in school
[pro-poor]. Annual investments in village associations, sustainable production,
and social benefits such as education and health infrastructure.
Recipients of benefits are participating
households, communities, and associations.
Benefits are offered to all residents in
protected areas selected for the program.
KFCP (Indonesia)
Upfront benefits in the form of payments to individuals and alternative
livelihoods programs [pro-poor]; performance-based payments are planned based
on mutually agreed targets and indicators linked to emission reductions [emission
reductions]; upfront payments to individuals for work and materials provided to
achieve those targets [cost compensation].
Payments and in-kind benefits go to villages,
households, and individuals
CED – Payment for
Ecosystem Services
project in Cameroon
South and East Region
(Cameroon)
Performance-based payments [emission reductions]. Forest areas have been
divided into “sectors,” with a maximum payment amount designated for each
sector. Percentages of that amount will be allocated in areas with no clear-felling
according to the following criteria: (i) 100% of the maximum amount if the land
area opened for farming is less than 3 ha; (ii) 50% if the area opened is 3–4 ha;
(iii) zero if the area opened is more than 4 ha [emission reductions].
Payments will be made to Community
Activity Groups created by the project.
†Data were compiled from “site narratives,” “project checklists,” and unpublished reports prepared by the GCS component 2 country teams for Tanzania,
Indonesia, Brazil, and Cameroon, as well as direct interaction and additional inputs from these teams. Additional information on projects in Brazil was
taken from Duchelle et al. (2010).
attention may be required to tackle the drivers of carbon
emissions, because those given the legal rights may not be
responsible for high-emitting behavior. 
Basing a benefit-sharing mechanism on a legal rights rationale
may have the effect of further disadvantaging the poor. Poor
forest users seldom possess legally recognized rights to land

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 5. Legal status of land uses associated with carbon emissions in eight REDD+ projects, indicating potential equity problems
arising from basing benefit sharing on a “legal rights” rationale. Projects were selected for this table to reflect a range of land
use activities.†
 
Main potential drivers of carbon emissions
Legal
Legally ambiguous
Illegal
Katingan Conservation Area
(Indonesia)
Timber harvesting, oil palm and
mining concessions (avoided),
swidden
 
Seasonal hunting and fishing,
collection of nontimber forest
products
Small-scale logging
 
KCCP (Indonesia)
Large-scale oil palm
Swidden, small- and large-scale
logging
 
Small-scale mining
 
Central Xingu REDD+ Pilot Program
(Brazil)
Large-scale logging
‡ and small-scale
cattle ranching
Swidden, extraction of nontimber
forest products, mining, agriculture
 
Small- and large-scale logging,
small- and large-scale cattle
ranching, commercial fishing
 
Transamazon (Brazil)
Small- and large-scale ranching,
small- and large-scale logging,
swidden, subsistence hunting, small-
scale agriculture
 
Commercial hunting, swidden, small-
scale agriculture, small- and large-
scale ranching, small- and large-scale
logging
 
Mpingo Conservation Development
Initiative (Tanzania)
Pastoralism, large-scale land
acquisition for agriculture (including
biofuels), agricultural burning,
charcoal production, burning for
hunting, honey collection, safety,
visibility, and shifting agriculture
 
Timber harvesting
CARE-HIMA (Tanzania)
Logging, settlements, tourism
 
Agriculture, firewood collection,
charcoal making
 
Logging
 
TaTEDO (Tanzania)
Grazing, charcoal making, firewood
 
Swidden
JGI – Building REDD Readiness in
the Masito Ugalla Ecosystem Pilot
Area (Tanzania)
 
Swidden
 
Logging
 
† Data were compiled from “project checklists” (created based on expert interviews, secondary data, and field observation) collected by CIFOR GCS
REDD+ Component 2 country teams for Brazil, Indonesia, and Tanzania.
‡ The same land use can occur under multiple types of legality. In Central Xingu REDD+ Pilot Program, for example, some logging is legal and some
illegal depending on the location and whether or not a permit has been obtained.
and/or forest products, often because of the high costs of
getting legal recognition; they therefore use the forest illegally
(Colchester et al. 2006). In some REDD+ projects, the large-
scale land uses, e.g., large-scale timber and oil palm
concessions, targeted by the project would be classified as
“legal,” whereas many of the smaller-scale activities that
would also be reduced as a result of the project either have no
legal recognition or would be deemed “illegal” (see Table 5).
In these cases, directing benefits only to those entities with
legal rights would favor large-scale land users and not
compensate the poor for the loss of their livelihood activities.
Benefit-sharing rationale II: benefits should go to those
who reduce emissions (“emission reductions” rationale)
The effectiveness and efficiency objectives of REDD+ focus
on the goal of reduced carbon emissions and the notion that
benefits should be used as an incentive to bring about a
reduction in emissions. In a performance-based payment
system, actors are paid for their actual performance in terms
of improved forest conditions and reduced degradation in ways
that can be empirically verified through higher forest carbon
stocks compared with reference emission levels. This system
provides a direct link between REDD+ payments and effective
forest conservation activities. This rationale is related to the
“merit-based” theory of “actual provision” discussed by
Pascual et al. (2010), which states that the distribution of a
reward should correspond to the actual level of ecosystem
service provision.  
One implication of this rationale is that REDD+ finance may
end up being used to reward large-scale actors, the dominant
emitters in many contexts, for reducing carbon emissions. This

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
can be controversial, partly because of the magnitude of the
opportunity costs that these large-scale actors will incur and
partly because of the concern that they will be rewarded for
their poor environmental performance in the past. In Brazil, a
large 
proportion 
of 
government 
and 
NGO/research
respondents in the social organization survey disagreed with
the statement that “REDD benefits should reward large-scale
industries/companies for reducing forest emissions” (Fig. 1).
In particular, many of the respondents from indigenous and
traditional groups raised concerns that “criminals” would be
rewarded, given that much of the deforestation is carried out
by large private landowners that do not comply with the
National Forest Code or do not have proper land titles. In
Indonesia, on the other hand, this statement received strong
support among government and private sector respondents,
although only around half of the NGO/research respondents
agreed with it.
Benefit-sharing rationale III: benefits should go to forest
stewards (“stewardship” rationale)
A rationale that emerges frequently in policy debates,
particularly in Brazil (e.g., Nepstad et al. 2007), is that REDD+
benefits should go not only to the actors reducing emissions
but also to indigenous groups or other forest users that have a
record of responsible forest management (see Table 2). This
rationale is partly based on the “merit” principle of equity: that
benefit distribution should reward a virtuous pattern of
behavior. It also owes something both to the egalitarian view
that benefits should be distributed equally among all providers
of a service regardless of the level of service provision, and
to the needs-based theory, as it advocates for the use of REDD+
benefit-sharing mechanisms to support marginalized forest
dwellers. 
Under a benefit-sharing mechanism based on this rationale, a
community or users that have been protecting the forests for
a long time would have a strong claim to benefits from
REDD+. In this view, benefits from REDD+ serve to
recognize both past and current efforts and to encourage the
continued protection of forests. The dilemma for REDD+ is
that in many of these low-emission situations, additionality
cannot be proven because there are no emissions to reduce in
the first place. However, it can be argued that emissions are
likely to increase in the future, because a realistic baseline is
higher than a historical one, and therefore continued
conservation could be considered as additional. 
Recognition of good forest stewardship is evident in some of
the projects studied in Peru and Brazil, where benefits are
being distributed to actors that are not directly involved in
deforestation as a means of encouraging collaboration and
creating incentives for protecting the area. This can be seen,
for example, in the BAM (Brazil Nuts Concession REDD)
project in Madre de Dios, Peru, where the owners of Brazil
nut concessions are given incentives to protect the forest, even
though the main activities causing deforestation, agricultural
clearance and illegal logging, are carried out by different actors
altogether. Another example is the Bolsa Floresta Program in
Brazil, whose site has undergone relatively little land use
change to date, although deforestation is a long-term threat.
The benefits that the program offers to families are therefore
perceived not as compensation for “additional measures” to
alleviate deforestation pressures but rather as a reward for
those who have sustained forest permanence over the years.
It is interesting to note, however, that outside of Brazil and
Peru, the stewardship rationale has little presence in the design
of the benefit-sharing systems at the project level (see Table 4).
Benefit-sharing rationale IV: actors incurring costs
should be compensated (“cost-compensation” rationale)
One view that emerges frequently in the benefit-sharing debate
is that the actors that shoulder implementation, transaction,
and opportunity costs should be compensated regardless of
the carbon emission reductions for which they are directly
responsible. However, we found that the distinction between
compensation for incurred costs and rent is made explicit in
only a few of the situations where this rationale has been
proposed as a basis for benefit sharing.  
This rationale is related to “merit-based” theories, which
suggest that distribution should be proportional to inputs
(Dobson 1998). Within the merit-based theories is a tension
between the view that reward should be based on performance,
i.e., the “actual provision” of emission reductions, and the
view that any effort or inputs made toward REDD+
implementation should be rewarded. This tension is reflected
in the design of many emerging benefit-sharing arrangements.
It arises not only because inputs are easier to define and
measure than are emission reductions and their associated
opportunity costs, but also because most REDD+ projects are
in the early stages of implementation and recognize the need
to give actors incentives for getting involved. Although
projects are striving to move toward results-based crediting,
many proponents argue that it is essential to look at the
potential costs arising from REDD+ and whether the actors
bearing the costs are the same ones receiving compensation
or rent. 
Most of the REDD+ projects studied in Tanzania (see Table
4) are combining upfront funding as compensation for early
inputs with plans to shift to payments based on performance.
In projects such as the Tanzania Forest Conservation Group
(TFCG) and Hifadhi ya Misitu ya Asili (HIMA), communities
receive benefits as long as they implement activities that
improve carbon stock, such as the development of land use
plans, participatory forest management, law enforcement, or
the implementation of forest management plans. This option
has low transaction costs because these activities can easily
be verified.  

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Table 6. The “most significant” potential opportunity costs of six REDD+ projects, showing the variation in actors depending
on the indicators used to define “significant.” Projects were selected for this table to reflect a range of land use activities.†
 Project
The carbon-emitting activity that, if reduced through REDD+, would ...
... incur the greatest financial losses
[cost compensation rationale]
... affect the greatest
number of people [pro-poor
rationale]
... create the most significant
change in land or forest use
over the largest area [emission
reductions rationale]
Katingan
Conservation
Area (Indonesia)
Large-scale oil palm
Swidden, fishing, collection
of nontimber forest
products
Large-scale logging
concessions, large-scale oil
palm plantations, mining,
swidden
Ulu Masen
(Indonesia)
Large- and small-scale logging, large
oil palm plantations, small-scale
mining and timber plantations
Agricultural expansion,
small-scale plantations,
grazing, large- and small-
scale mining
Large-scale logging, oil palm
Transamazon
(Brazil)
Small-scale cattle ranching
Swidden
Small-scale cattle ranching
Acre (Brazil)
Large-scale cattle ranching
Swidden
Large-scale cattle ranching
Central Xingu
REDD+ Pilot
Program (Brazil)
Large-scale cattle ranching
Swidden, small-scale
logging
Large-scale cattle ranching
CED –
Nkolenyeng
(Cameroon)
Small-scale logging
Swidden
Swidden
† Data were compiled from “opportunity cost stakeholder checklists” (created based on expert interviews, secondary data, and field observation) collected
by CIFOR GCS REDD+ Component 2 country teams for Brazil, Indonesia, and Cameroon.
The rationale does have several drawbacks. For example, it
does not necessarily allow for a direct link between payments
and reductions in deforestation and forest degradation.
Furthermore, it does not account for variability in the
performance of forest managers, and their incentives are weak
if paid regardless of forest outcomes (TFWG 2010). An effort-
based payment system also ignores the differences in
opportunity costs among communities; for example,
communities that succeed in halting charcoal production or
shifting cultivation will incur higher opportunity costs than
those that fail (TFWG 2010). In addition, because there tend
to be more valuable economic opportunities in areas where
forests have higher carbon content (TFWG 2010),
communities in such highland areas will incur greater
opportunity costs than communities in low-carbon forests, for
example, miombo in southern Tanzania and coral-rag in
Zanzibar (United Republic of Tanzania 2009). This is a rare
example in the cases we studied, in that attention has been
given to contextual equity in the debate around benefit sharing.
If such cost differences are not factored in, effort-based
systems could arguably be inequitable. 
Designing mechanisms for compensation of opportunity costs
is at an early stage in most of the projects studied. A review
of projects’ own assessments of their opportunity costs reveals
considerable disparity between (i) the stakeholder groups that
are predicted to incur the most significant opportunity costs
depending on whether “significant cost” is defined in terms
of the greatest financial loss, (ii) the loss of livelihood for the
greatest number of people, and (iii) the most significant change
in area of land or forest use (Table 6). In the examples of
REDD+ projects shown in Table 6, the highest levels of
potential financial loss correspond to activities with the highest
forest area change and carbon emission reductions. This
highlights potential trade-offs between an opportunity costs
approach based on profit foregone and consideration of other
equity concerns associated with the number of people whose
basic livelihoods may be affected.
Benefit-sharing rationale V: benefits should go to
effective facilitators of implementation (“facilitation”
rationale)
Also related to the “merit-based” principle of “compensation”
is the rationale, running through much of the REDD+ benefit-
sharing debate, that a proportion of REDD+ benefits should
be shared with the actors that are not necessarily forest-based
but that are essential for the implementation of REDD+. These
actors may include private sector proponents, NGO project
proponents, or central or local government. This rationale is
more explicitly about the level of “rent” that will accrue to
actors rather than compensation, although making a distinction
between the two presupposes that each actor is clear about the
exact costs of implementation.  
The proportion of the benefits that should accrue to facilitators
of implementation is subject to debate in many countries. The

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
debate largely concerns who should benefit from REDD+ and
the legal and constitutional considerations concerning the
state’s right to retain revenue from privately and nationally
owned goods. The challenge is to ensure that those facilitating
the implementation of REDD+ receive sufficient incentives
to achieve effective implementation, while at the same time
guarding against them getting windfall profits, an issue
discussed in the Ministry of Finance of Indonesia’s Green
Paper (2009). Private sector project developers in Indonesia
are lobbying to influence national policy on setting benefit-
sharing rules, arguing that project developers require adequate
compensation to cover the implementation and transaction
costs they are incurring as a result of REDD+ readiness
activities. In the Tanzanian projects in particular, the level of
administration fees that should accrue to the facilitating
organization is a key issue in negotiations with communities.
A complicating factor is that, in most of the cases, project
proponents are NGOs operating at a small scale and the level
of “rent” that could, or should, accrue to them has not been
clarified in national policy. 
This question also arises in relation to the rights of
governments to retain some revenue to cover their own
implementation and transaction costs. As with revenue
collected from forest products, central and local governments
might retain revenue for admissible costs, such as setting up
systems for monitoring, reporting, and verification and for
enforcement (Irawan and Tacconi 2009). The UN-REDD
Programme (2010) recommends that the amount retained by
government should be based on performance and directly
related to the costs incurred, although we recognize that the
principles of “cost recovery” and “performance-based” can
conflict with each other in the actual design of the rules.  
A related question in the vertical benefit-sharing debate is how
to distribute REDD+ rent or taxes between levels of
government, including the degree to which local governments
should keep locally derived revenues. The principle of
subsidiarity suggests that greater efficiency is achieved by
locating powers and tasks at the lowest possible administrative
level (Føllesdal 1998). In the case of REDD+, however, some
activities may be best handled at the central level, e.g., to
contain leakage (Irawan and Tacconi 2009).
Benefit-sharing rationale VI: benefits should go to the
poor (“pro-poor” rationale)
The view that REDD+ benefits should flow to the poorest
constitutes another influential rationale in the debate on
REDD+ benefit sharing. This rationale is based on the concern
that an exclusive focus on carbon emissions and compensation
of costs could result in unfair distribution of REDD+ funds,
e.g., by rewarding wealthy actors for reducing their illegal
behavior, and thus serve to increase inequality and undermine
the moral and political legitimacy of REDD+ (Kaimowitz
2008, Karsenty and Ongolo 2012). The Cancun Agreements
consolidated the “pro-poor” rationale as a safeguard by
establishing that REDD+ should be implemented in the
context of sustainable development and poverty reduction to
enhance other social and environmental benefits (UNFCCC
2010). This rationale is related to “needs-based” equity
theories (Table 3). Needs-based theories have a moral basis,
drawing on the principles that benefits should be distributed
according to need, with those with the greatest need receiving
a greater reward, and that the needs of marginalized groups,
such as women, indigenous people, and vulnerable
communities, should be catered for. This rationale stems from
a concern that benefits will not flow to poor people and that
REDD+ systems could create new risks for the poor (Peskett
2011a). 
The statement “REDD should mainly reward local people for
emission reduction activities” elicited very strong agreement
from respondents to the social organization survey across all
groups in both Brazil and Indonesia (Fig. 2), even among those
groups that had previously said that large-scale emitters should
be rewarded for reductions. Although this opinion is likely to
be rooted in support for pro-poor outcomes, it may also reflect
to some extent a pragmatic concern for effectiveness, given
that respondents in all groups except the private sector also
strongly agreed that “without involvement of local people in
their implementation, REDD projects are unlikely to be
effective” (Fig. 3). A significant pragmatic element to the
debate lies in the idea that if REDD+ is not equitable it will
not be perceived as fair (Börner and Wunder 2008), which can
undermine its effectiveness, legitimacy (Peskett 2011a,
Lindhjem et al. 2010, Costenbader 2010), and sustainability,
thus leading to increased conflict (Mohammed 2011) and a
higher risk of nonpermanence (IIED 2009). 
Pro-poor rationales are a clear concern at the project level. As
Table 1 shows, many of the projects have invested in upfront,
in-kind benefits in the form of livelihood alternatives, capacity
building, and tenure strengthening. However, Table 4 shows
that cash payments tend not to be targeted according to the
pro-poor rationale but rather tend to be shared according to
the cost compensation or emission reductions rationales.
DISCUSSION
The prevalence of each rationale and relative weight given to
each at the national or project level vary according to several
factors: the objective of REDD+ in a specific context, the
nature of the REDD+ funding envisaged, the form of REDD+
activity planned, and the stakeholders involved in the design
of the mechanism. In Vietnam, for example, with its extensive
experience with PES schemes, the focus is on performance-
based payments that can accommodate cobenefits, and hence
the emission reductions and pro-poor rationales receive the
most attention (see Table 2). In Tanzania, upfront payments
are of interest at the project level as a means of encouraging
early commitment; thus, the cost compensation rationale is

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
prevalent (see Table 4). The emphasis in Brazil is largely on
strengthening property rights (legal rights rationale) and
catering to the needs of indigenous people (stewardship
rationale), whereas in Indonesia the focus is simultaneously
on ensuring benefits for local people (pro-poor rationale) and
on creating adequate incentive structures to keep project
developers involved (facilitation rationale).  
It should be recognized, however, that the prevalence of a
particular rationale in a context may not necessarily indicate
support for the related principle of distributive equity (Table
3). For example, even though a pro-poor approach may reflect
a needs-based principle, the reason for adopting a pro-poor
approach may not stem from support for this principle. Rather,
certain groups may be employing that principle as part of a
strategy to legitimize a particular action that supports their
interests while neglecting others (Brockhaus and Angelsen
2012). It is also interesting to note that the expression of views
in policy debates or organizational statements in favor of a
certain rationale may not always result in actions that follow
the same rationale. For example, the professed support for the
pro-poor rationale for benefit sharing in Brazil (see Table 2)
is in contrast to practices that have favored the reward of large-
scale deforesting actors. Such practices include the amnesty
in the Forest Code given to large landholders that operated
illegally in the past (Schwartzman et al. 2012) and credit
schemes that are available to large deforesting landholders
(Assunção et al. 2013).
NEGOTIATING OBJECTIVES AND LEGITIMACY
OF PROCESS
A common feature in the countries and projects studied is a
lack of clarity about which is the competent agency or group
of actors to make decisions on benefit-sharing mechanisms.
In some cases, this lack of clarity is stalling the development
of mechanisms and therefore of REDD+ implementation. In
Indonesia, the REDD+ benefit-sharing regulation developed
by the Ministry of Forestry has been challenged by the
Ministry of Finance, which contends that the Ministry of
Forestry does not have the legal authority to make fiscal
decisions (Peskett 2011b). At the same time, the REDD+ Task
Force is developing parallel proposals for benefit sharing in
connection with the Norwegian funding for REDD+. In
Tanzania, there are similar debates over which ministries have
the authority to make decisions about REDD+. The
Department of Environment in the Vice President’s Office
holds the authority to make decisions on REDD+
implementation, the implementation of REDD+ projects falls
under the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (United
Republic of Tanzania 2010), the Ministry of Finance is
responsible for monitoring and ensuring revenue collection,
the Ministry of Land makes decisions about land ownership,
titling, and boundaries for village forestland, where most
REDD+ projects are located, while the local government
authority at the district level has the mandate to approve land
use plans, which are required for establishing Village Forest
Reserves. 
An important first step in the design of benefit-sharing
mechanisms, therefore, would be to attain legal clarity on
which institutions have the authority to make decisions.
However, the uncertainty of what constitutes that legitimate
authority is a major obstacle at the national and subnational
levels. In the theoretical debate, some stress that legal authority
enhances legitimacy (e.g., Beetham 1991). Others maintain
that legal authority alone does not bring legitimacy (Jentoft
2000), because legal rights are not necessarily related to wider
moral or ethical rights. A system that cannot be justified on
grounds of social justice will be challenged, however solid its
legal foundations (Rothstein 1998). Thus the clarification of
carbon rights and of institutional authority over related
decisions is a necessary but not sufficient step toward
achieving legitimacy.  
Legitimacy is a function not only of the distributional
outcomes (who gets how much) but also of the procedure of
designing and implementing the benefit-sharing system.
“Procedural equity” is about more than the fair implementation
of a fair set of rules; rather, it extends to how those rules are
set up and who is present when they are made. For example,
in Bolsa Floresta, carbon rights legally belong to the state but
the providers of ecosystem services can gain access to benefits
(Gebara 2011). However, civil society has criticized the
decision-making process surrounding the creation of the
program and the clarification of carbon rights for failing to
involve those affected by the decisions made, including
decisions made over the design of the benefit-sharing
mechanisms (Pereira 2010, May et al. 2011). Without a
process that is procedurally equitable, even a fair distribution
based on consensus is unlikely to be able to be implemented
(Pascual et al. 2010).  
Attention to procedural equity remains a challenge when
multiple interest groups are involved in the REDD+ arena.
Each rationale is supported by distinct interest groups, each
of which has its own material interests and ideology.
Procedural equity in decision making can help to overcome
these power imbalances. However, social and moral norms do
not necessarily have a common meaning for all (Falk Moore
1983, Knight 1992, Johnson 1997). As Giddens (1981) argues,
shared norms are more relevant for dominant groups, and
legitimacy is less likely to be challenged by the less powerful
(Scott 2001). In addition, notions of what is legitimate can also
change over time (Boulding 1990).
CONCLUSION
REDD+ is heavily loaded with a wide range of expectations
on outcomes beyond carbon emission reductions, expectations
that lie behind the diversity of rationales concerning who
should benefit from REDD+. As seen, these rationales draw
on different principles about what REDD+ should pay for and

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
employ different definitions of the term “benefits.” Managing
these expectations on outcomes and the differences in
rationales requires common understanding, at both national
and project levels, of (i) the primary objectives of REDD+
benefit sharing and (ii) the degree to which REDD+ should
address and/or generate cobenefits. However, our analysis
suggests that, in most situations, these issues have yet to be
clarified. 
It is unlikely that countries will be able to formulate clear
distributive principles, such as a needs-based principle or a
merit-based one, for benefit sharing because doing so can be
contentious, given the ethical and political judgments
involved. These judgments would also need to factor in legal
and constitutional aspects concerning the right of the state to
retain revenue from privately and nationally owned goods,
aspects that remain at issue in many countries and/or
subnational contexts. Nevertheless, the goal of clearly
establishing the relative importance of each rationale for
distributing benefits in a certain context is a realistic one. Once
the priorities assigned to the different approaches have been
made explicit, for example, clearly communicating that a cost
compensation rationale is of higher priority than an emission
reductions rationale, complementary strategies to address any
inequities associated with the preferred rationale could be
developed.  
The multiplicity of objectives and interest groups involved
makes the legitimacy of the process of designing mechanisms
critical. Ensuring legitimacy of the process can guard against
small and unrepresentative interest groups exerting
disproportionately strong influence over the design of REDD+
benefit sharing. Building legitimacy requires attention not
only to fair distributional outcomes but also to a consensus on
relevant institutions’ authority to make decisions and to
procedural equity. This requires both legal clarity and
consensus about which institution or group of actors has the
authority to make such decisions. It also demands attention to
procedural rights such as transparency, participation, and free
prior and informed consent. For stakeholders to support
REDD+, they must perceive benefit sharing as fair; hence, the
legitimacy of decision-making institutions, consideration of
context, and attention to process are critical. We suggest,
therefore, that effective benefit-sharing mechanisms are not
only about having clear principles and guidelines for design,
because these alone cannot hope to satisfy the interests of all
stakeholders; benefit sharing must also entail a legitimate
process for making decisions, in which priorities can be
unambiguously assigned to the rationales influencing the
debate.
Responses to this article can be read online at: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/issues/responses.
php/5834
Acknowledgments:
This research is part of CIFOR’s Global Comparative Study
on REDD+ (GCS) (http://www.forestsclimatechange.org/
global-comparative-study-on-redd.html) and CIFOR’s project
on Benefit Sharing for REDD+. The authors of this paper are
grateful for the research efforts of the many other people
involved in the development of the GCS research methods and
the collection of the particular data on which we have drawn.
These include Monica Di Gregorio (methods); Amy Duchelle
(Brazil and Peru), Marina Cromberg, Raissa Guerra, Peter
May, and Shaozeng Zhang (Brazil); Abdon Awono and Akombi
Andrea Tambe (Cameroon); Cut Augusta Mindry Anandi,
Stibniati Atmadja, Yayan Indriatmoko, Dian Intarini, Moira
Moeliono, Ida Aju Pradnja Resosudarmo, and Levania
Santoso (Indonesia); Galia Selaya and Valerie Garrish
(Peru); Huynh Thu Ba (Vietnam); and Desita Andini, Riza
Aryani, Sofi Mardiah, and Efrian Muharrom (global database
management), among others. In addition, we would like to
thank the special feature editors and two anonymous reviewers
for valuable comments on this article and Charlotte Streck
and five anonymous reviewers for their comments on early
drafts. We are also grateful to Imogen Badgery-Parker and
Ruth Raymond for their help with editing. Funding was
provided by the Norwegian Agency for Development
Cooperation, the European Union, the Australian Agency for
International Development, and the UK Department for
International Development.
LITERATURE CITED
Adger, W. N., K. Brown, J. Fairbrass, A. Jordan, J. Paavola,
S. Rosendo, and G. Seyfang. 2003. Governance for
sustainability: towards a ‘thick’ analysis of environmental
decision making. Environment and Planning A 35
(6):1095-1110.  
Angelsen, A. 2009. Introduction. Pages 1-9 in A. Angelsen,
editor. Realising REDD+: national strategy and policy
options. Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor,
Indonesia. 
Assunção, J., C. Gandour, R. Rocha, and R. Rocha. 2013. Does
credit affect deforestation? Evidence from a rural credit policy
in the Brazilian Amazon. Climate Policy Initiative, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. 
Beetham, D. 1991. The legitimation of power. Macmillan
Education, London, UK. 
Börner, J., and S. Wunder. 2008. Paying for avoided
deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon: from cost assessment
to scheme design. International Forestry Review 10
(3):496-511. http://dx.doi.org/10.1505/ifor.10.3.496 
Börner, J., S. Wunder, S. Wertz-Kanounnikoff, M. Rügnitz
Tito, L. Pereira, and N. Nascimento. 2010. Direct conservation

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
payments in the Brazilian Amazon: scope and equity
implications. Ecological Economics 69:1272-1282. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.11.003 
Boulding, K. E. 1990. Three faces of power. Sage, Newbury
Park, California, USA. 
Brockhaus, M., and A. Angelsen. 2012. Seeing REDD+
through 4Is: a political economy framework. Pages 15-30 in 
A. Angelsen, M. Brockhaus, W. D. Sunderlin, and L. V.
Verchot, editors. Analysing REDD+: challenges and choices.
Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia.
 
Brockhaus, M., and M. Di Gregorio. 2012. A brief overview:
component 1 on national REDD+ policies and processes.
CIFOR Infobrief 13. Center for International Forestry
Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Brockhaus, M., M. Di Gregorio, and S. Wertz-Kanounnikoff.
2012. Guide for country profiles. Center for International
Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Brown, K., and E. Corbera. 2003. Exploring equity and
sustainable development in the new carbon economy. Climate
Policy 3(S1):41-56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clipol.2003.10.004 
Colchester, M., with M. Boscolo, A. Contreras-Hermosilla, F.
Del Gatto, J. Dempsey, G. Lescuyer, K. Obidzinski, D.
Pommier, M. Richards, S. N. Sembiring, L. Tacconi, M.
Vargas Rios, and A. Wells. 2006. Justice in the forest: rural
livelihoods and forest law. Center for International Forestry
Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Corbera, E., K. Brown, and W. N. Adger. 2007. The equity
and legitimacy of markets for ecosystem services.
Development 
and 
Change 
38:587-613. 
http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-7660.2007.00425.x 
Costenbader, J. 2010. REDD+ benefit sharing: a comparative
assessment of three national policy approaches. International
Union for Conservation of Nature, Gland, Switzerland. 
Cotula, L., and J. Mayers. 2009. Tenure in REDD+ – start-
point or afterthought? Natural Resource Issues No. 15.
International Institute for Environment and Development,
London, UK. 
Dobson, A. 1998. Justice and the environment: conceptions
of environmental sustainability and dimensions of social
justice. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 
Duchelle, A., J. Börner, S. Wunder, E. Araújo, R. Farias, J.
Tezza, A. Toniolo, R. G. Cortez, M. de los Ríos, M. F. Gebara,
R. Guerra, T. Megid, L. Micol, G. Ribemboim, and V. Viana.
2010. Grounding the REDD+ debate: preliminary evidence
from pilot initiatives in the Brazilian Amazon. Amazon
Initiative Policy Brief 02. Center for International Forestry
Research, Brazil. [online] URL: http://www.mtnforum.org/
sites/default/files/publication/files/250111020753.pdf 
Duchelle, A. E., M. Cromberg, M. F. Gebara, R. Guerra, T.
Melo, A. M. Larson, P. Cronkleton, J. Börner, E. Sills, S.
Wunder, S. Bauch, P. May, G. Selaya, and W. D. Sunderlin.
2013. 
Linking 
forest 
tenure 
reform, 
environmental
compliance, and incentives: lessons from REDD+ initiatives
in the Brazilian Amazon. World Development. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.01.014 
Falk Moore, S. 1983. Law as process: an anthropological
approach. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, UK. 
Føllesdal, A. 1998. Survey article: subsidiarity. Journal of
Political Philosophy 6:190-218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1-
467-9760.00052 
Gebara, M. F. 2011. REDD+ institutions: a preliminary
analysis. Pages 161-176 in C. C. Oliveira and R. S. Rocha
Sampaio, editors. A economia verde no contexto do
desenvolvimento sustentável: a governança dos atores
públicos e privados. Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) Direito
Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. [online] URL: http://direitorio.fgv.
br/livropdma-riomais20 
Giddens, A. 1981. A contemporary critique of historical
materialism. University of California Press, Berkeley,
California, USA. 
Gregersen, H., H. El Lakany, A. Karsenty, and A. White. 2010.
Does the opportunity cost approach indicate the real cost of
REDD+? Rights and realities of paying for REDD+. Rights
and Resources Initiative, Washington, D.C., USA, and
CIRAD, Paris, France. 
Hajer, M. 1993. Discourse coalitions and the institutionalization
of practice: the case of acid rain in Great Britain. Pages 43-76
in F. Fischer and J. Forester, editors. The argumentative turn
in policy analysis and planning. Duke University Press,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. 
Indrarto, B. G., P. Murharjanti, J. Khatarina, I. Pulungan, F.
Ivalerina, J. Rahman, N. M. Prana, P. A. I. Resosudarmo, and
E. Muharrom. 2012. The context of REDD+ in Indonesia:
drivers, agents and institutions. CIFOR Working Paper 92.
Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
International Institute for Environment and Development
(IIED). 2009. Sharing the benefits of large dams in West Africa. 
IIED, London, UK.  
Irawan, S., and L. Tacconi. 2009. Reducing emissions from
deforestation 
and 
forest 
degradation 
(REDD) 
and
decentralized forest management. International Forestry
Review 11:427-438. http://dx.doi.org/10.1505/ifor.11.4.427 

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
Jentoft, S. 2000. Legitimacy and disappointment in fisheries
management. Marine Policy 24:141-148. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0308-597X(99)00025-1 
Johnson, C. 1997. Rules, norms and the pursuit of sustainable
livelihoods. Institute of Development Studies Working Paper
52. Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, UK. 
Kaimowitz, D. 2008. The prospects for reduced emissions
from deforestation and degradation (REDD) in Mesoamerica.
International Forestry Review 10:485-495. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1505/ifor.10.3.485 
Karsenty, A., and S. Ongolo. 2012. Can “fragile states” decide
to reduce their deforestation? The inappropriate use of the
theory of incentives with respect to the REDD mechanism.
Forest Policy and Economics 18:38-45. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.forpol.2011.05.006 
Karsenty, A., N. Tulyasuwan, and E. D. de Blas. 2012b.
Financing options to support REDD+ activities. CIRAD,
Paris, France. 
Karsenty, A., A. Vogel, and F. Castell. 2012a. “Carbon rights”,
REDD+ 
and 
payments 
for 
environmental 
services.
Environmental Science and Policy http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsci.2012.08.013 
Knight, J. 1992. Institutions and social conflict. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511528170 
Konow, J. 1996. A positive theory of economic fairness.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 31:13-35.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2681(96)00862-1 
Konow, J. 2001. Fair and square: the four sides of distributive
justice. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 
46:137-164. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2681(01)00194-9 
Konow, J. 2003. Which is the fairest one of all? A positive
analysis of justice theories. Journal of Economic Literature
41:1188-1239. http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/002205103771800013 
Lindhjem, H., I. Aronsen K. G. Bråten, and A. Gleinsvik. 2010.
Experiences with benefit sharing: issues and options for
REDD-plus. Econ Pöyry and Vista report R-2010-018. Econ
Pöyry, Oslo, Norway. [online] URL: http://www.unredd.net/
index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=-
7599&Itemid=53 
Luttrell, C., L. Loft, M. F. Gebara, and D. Kweka. 2012. Who
should benefit and why? Discourses on REDD+ benefit
sharing. Pages 129-152 in A. Angelsen, M. Brockhaus, W. D.
Sunderlin, and L. V. Verchot, editors. Analysing REDD+:
challenges and choices. Center for International Forestry
Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
May, P. H., B. Millikan, and M. F. Gebara. 2011. The context
of REDD+ in Brazil: drivers, agents and institutions.
Occasional Paper 55. Second edition. Center for International
Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
McDermott, M., S. Mahanty, and K. Schreckenberg. 2012.
Examining equity: a multidimensional framework for
assessing equity in payments for ecosystem services.
Environmental Science and Policy http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsci.2012.10.006 
McKean, M. A. 2000. Common property: what is it, what is
it good for, and what makes it work? Pages 27-56 in C. C.
Gibson, M. A. McKean, and E. Ostrom, editors. People and
forests: communities, institutions, governance. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Meridian 
Institute. 
2009. 
Reducing 
emissions 
from
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD): an options
assessment report. Meridian Institute, Washington, D.C.,
USA. 
Miller, D. 1999. Principles of social justice. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Ministério do Meio Ambiente (MMA). 2012. REDD +
Relatório de painel técnico do MMA sobre financiamento,
benefícios e cobeneficios. M. F. Gebara, editor. Secretaria de
Mudanças Climáticas, Brasília, Brazil. [online] URL: http://
www.conservation.org.br/arquivos/redd+_relatorio_de_pain-
el_tecnico_do_mma_sobre_financiamento_beneficios_e_cobeneficios.
pdf 
Ministry of Finance, Indonesia. 2009. Ministry of Finance
green paper: economic and fiscal policy strategies for climate
change mitigation in Indonesia. Ministry of Finance and
Australia–Indonesia Partnership, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
Mohammed, E. Y. 2011. Pro-poor benefit distribution in
REDD+: who gets what and why does it matter? REDD
Working Paper. International Institute for Environment and
Development, London, UK. [online] URL: http://pubs.iied.
org/16508IIED.html 
Moutinho, P., O. Stella, A. Lima, M. Christovam, I. Castro,
and D. Nepstad. 2011. REDD no Brasil: um enfoque
amazônico: fundamentos, critérios e estruturas institucionais
para um regime nacional de redução de emissões por
desmatamento e degradação florestal – REDD. Centro de
Gestão e Estudos Estratégicos, Brasilia, Brazil. 
Muradian, R., E. Corbera, U. Pascual, N. Kosoy, and P. H.
May. 2010. Reconciling theory and practice: an alternative
conceptual framework for understanding payments for
environmental services. Ecological Economics 69:1202-1208.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.11.006 
Nepstad, D., B. Soares-Filho, F. Merry, P. Moutinho, H.
Oliveira-Rodriguez, M. Bowman, S. Schwartzman, O.
Almeida, and S. Rivero. 2007. The costs and benefits of
reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
degradation in the Brazilian Amazon. The Woods Hole
Research Center, Falmouth, Massachusetts, USA. 
Norton Rose. 2010. Forest carbon rights in REDD+ countries:
a snapshot of Africa. Norton Rose Group, London, UK. 
Pagiola, S., and B. Bosquet. 2009. Estimating the costs of
REDD at the country level. Forest Carbon Partnership Facility,
Washington, D.C., USA. [online] URL: http://www.
forestcarbonpartnership.org/fcp/sites/forestcarbonpartnership.
org/files/The%20Costs%20of%20REDD%2004-09-09.pdf 
Pascual, U., R. Muradian, L. Rodriguez, and A. Duraiappah.
2010. Exploring the links between equity and efficiency in
payments for environmental services: a conceptual approach.
Ecological Economics 69:1237-1244. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.ecolecon.2009.11.004 
Pereira, S. 2010. Payment for environmental services in the
Amazon Forest: how can conservation and development be
reconciled? Journal of Environment Development 19:171-190.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1070496510368047 
Peskett, L. 2011a. Benefit sharing in REDD+: exploring the
implications for poor and vulnerable people. World Bank and
REDD-net, Washington, D.C., USA. [online] URL: http://
redd-net.org/files/BenefitSharingReport.pdf 
Peskett, L. 2011b. REDD+ benefit sharing in Indonesia. 
World Bank and REDD-net, Washington, D.C., USA. [online]
URL: http://redd-net.org/files/WB_CSBEnefitIndonesia.pdf 
Peskett, L., and G. Brodnig. 2011. Carbon rights in REDD+:
exploring the implications for poor and vulnerable people. 
World Bank and REDD-net, Washington, D.C., USA. [online]
URL: http://redd-net.org/files/CarbonRightsReport.pdf 
Peskett, L., and Z. Harkin. 2007. Risk and responsibility in
reduced emissions from deforestation and degradation.
Forestry Briefing 15. Overseas Development Institute,
London, UK. 
Proctor, W., T. Köllner, and A. Lukasiewicz. 2008. Equity
considerations and payments for ecosystem services.
Environmental Economy and Policy Research Working
Papers 31. Department of Land Economy, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
Rawls, J. 1979. A theory of justice. Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Rothstein, B. 1998. Just institutions matter: the moral and
political logic of the universal welfare state. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511598449 
Schokkaert, E., and K. Devooght. 2003. Responsibility-
sensitive fair compensation in different cultures. Social Choice
and Welfare 21:207-242. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00355-003-0257-3 
Schwartzman, S., P. Moutinho, and S. Hamburg. 2012.
Amazon deforestation and Brazil’s forest code: a crossroads
for climate change. Carbon Management 3(4):341-343. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4155/cmt.12.34 
Scott, W. R. 2001. Institutions and organizations. Second
edition. Sage, Thousand Oaks, California, USA. 
Segal, I., and M. D. Whinston. 2013. Property rights. Pages
100-158 in R. Gibbons and J. Roberts, editors. The handbook
of organizational economics. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA.  
Streck, C. 2009. Rights and REDD+: legal and regulatory
considerations. Pages 151-162 in A. Angelsen, editor.
Realising REDD+: national strategy and policy options.
Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Streck, C., and R. O’Sullivan. 2007. Legal tools for the
ENCOFOR Programme. Joanneum Research, Graz, Austria. 
Streck, C., and C. Parker. 2012. Financing REDD+. Pages
111-128 in A. Angelsen, M. Brockhaus, W. D. Sunderlin, and
L. V. Verchot, editors. Analysing REDD+: challenges and
choices. Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor,
Indonesia.  
Sunderlin, W. D., A. M. Larson, A. Duchelle, E. O. Sills, C.
Luttrell, P. Jagger, S. Pattanayak, P. Cronkleton, and A. D.
Ekaputri. 2010. Technical guidelines for research on REDD+
project sites with survey instruments and code book. Center
for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Sunderlin, W. D., and E. O. Sills. 2012. REDD+ projects as a
hybrid of old and new forest conservation approaches. Pages
177-191 in A. Angelsen, M. Brockhaus, W. D. Sunderlin, and
L. V. Verchot, editors. Analysing REDD+: challenges and
choices. Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor,
Indonesia. 
Takacs, D. 2009. Forest carbon – law and property rights.
Conservation International, Arlington, Virginia, USA.  
Tanzania Forestry Working Group (TFWG). 2010. Options
for REDD in Tanzania: key design issues for the National
REDD Strategy. Information Brief No. 2. TFWG, Arusha,
Tanzania. [online] URL: http://www.tfcg.org/pdf/Brief%
202%20Key%20Design%20Issues%20for%20REDD%20Strategy.
pdf 
To, P. X., R. O’Sullivan, J. Olander, S. Hawkins, P. Q. Hung,
and N. Kitamura. 2012. REDD+ in Vietnam: integrating
national and subnational approaches. Forest Trends, Climate
Focus, 
Vietnam 
Administration 
of 
Forestry, 
Japan
International Cooperation Agency, Hanoi, Vietnam. [online]
URL: http://www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_3227.
pdf 

Ecology and Society 18(4): 52
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss4/art52/
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). 2010. Decision 1/CP.16: Outcome of the work of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action
under the Convention. UNFCCC, Cancun, Mexico. [online]
URL: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2010/cop16/eng/07a01.
pdf#page=2 
United Republic of Tanzania. 1998. National forest policy.
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. 
United Republic of Tanzania. 2009. National framework for
REDD. United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. 
United Republic of Tanzania. 2010. Draft national strategy
for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation (REDD+). Department of Environment, Vice
President’s Office, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 
UN-REDD Programme. 2010. Design of a REDD-compliant
benefit distribution system for Viet Nam. UN-REDD, Hanoi,
Vietnam. 
Vallentyne, P. 2010. Libertarianism. In E. N. Zalta, editor. The
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Fall 2010 edition.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, USA. [online]
URL: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/
libertarianism/ 
Verchot, L. V., M. Brockhaus, W. D. Sunderlin, and A.
Angelsen. 2012. CIFOR’s global comparative Study on
REDD+ (GCS). Pages 335-364 in A. Angelsen, M. Brockhaus,
W. D. Sunderlin, and L. V. Verchot, editors. Analysing
REDD+: challenges and choices. Center for International
Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia. 
Vértice Associados. 2011. Relatório de Consultoria ao
projeto: "Apoio a Estratégia Nacional de REDD+" - PPY BRA
1002. Produto 02: Memórias e sínteses processo de
Construção da Estratégia Nacional de REDD+. Ministério do
Meio Ambiente, Brasília, Brazil. [online] URL: http://www.
mma.gov.br/redd/images/Publicacoes/memoria-oficina-
salvaguardas-2011.pdf 
Vhugen, D., S. Aguilar, L. Peskett, and J. Miner. 2012. REDD
and carbon rights: lessons from the field. Property Rights and
Resource Government Project. Report prepared for the United
States Agency for International Development, Washington,
D.C., USA. [online] URL: http://usaidlandtenure.net/sites/
default/files/USAID_Land_Tenure_REDD%2B_and_Carbo-
n_Rights_Lessons_from_the_Field.pdf  
Weber, M. 1978. Economy and society. University of
California Press, Berkeley, California, USA.
