 
 
 
 
 
 
Preschool Education and Its Lasting Effects: 
Research and Policy Implications 
 
W. Steven Barnett, Ph.D. 
 
National Institute for Early Education Research 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
 
September 2008 
 
 
Education Policy Research Unit 
Division of Educational Leadership and Policy Studies 
College of Education, Arizona State University 
P.O. Box 872411, Tempe, AZ 85287-2411 
Telephone: (480) 965-1886 
Fax: (480) 965-0303 
E-mail: epsl@asu.edu 
http://edpolicylab.org 
 
 
Education and the Public Interest Center 
School of Education, 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0249 
Telephone: (303) 447-EPIC 
Fax: (303) 492-7090 
Email: epic@colorado.edu 
http://epicpolicy.org 
 
● Suggested Citation:  
    Barnett, W. S. (2008). Preschool education and its lasting effects: Research and policy 
implications. Boulder and Tempe: Education and the Public Interest Center & Education 
Policy Research Unit. Retrieved [date] from http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-
education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUCATION POLICY RESEARCH UNIT 
    
 
EPRU |

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of a series of Policy Briefs made possible by funding from 
the Great Lakes Center for Education Research and Practice. 
 
EPIC/EPRU policy briefs are peer reviewed by members of the 
Editorial Review Board. For information on the board and its 
members, visit:  http://epicpolicy.org/editorial-board

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
1 of 35 
Preschool Education and Its Lasting Effects: 
Research and Policy Implications 
 
W. Steven Barnett, National Institute for Early Education Research 
 
Executive Summary 
Over the last several decades, participation in center-based preschool 
programs has become much more common, and public support for these 
programs has grown dramatically. Nevertheless, participation remains far 
from universal, and policies vary across states, as well as across options 
such as private child care, preschools, Head Start, and state pre-K. Since 
policy makers typically have more alternatives than money, they face key 
questions about the value of preschool education, whom it should serve or 
subsidize, and which program designs are best. This brief reviews the 
research regarding the short- and long-term effects of preschool education 
on young children’s learning and development. A detailed and 
comprehensive assessment of evidence yields the following conclusions 
and recommendations: 
 
Conclusions 
 
• Many different preschool programs have been shown to produce 
positive effects on children’s learning and development, but those 
effects vary in size and persistence by type of program. 
• Well-designed preschool education programs produce long-term 
improvements in school success, including higher achievement test 
scores, lower rates of grade repetition and special education, and higher 
educational attainment. Some preschool programs are also associated 
with reduced delinquency and crime in childhood and adulthood. 
• The strongest evidence suggests that economically disadvantaged 
children reap long-term benefits from preschool. However, children 
from all other socioeconomic backgrounds have been found to benefit 
as well. 
• Current public policies for child care, Head Start, and state pre-K do 
not ensure that most American children will attend highly effective 
preschool programs. Some attend no program at all, and others attend 
educationally weak programs. Children from middle-income families 
have least access, but many children in poverty also lack preschool 
experiences. 
• Increasing child care subsidies under current federal and state policies 
is particularly unlikely to produce any meaningful improvements in 
children’s learning and development. Given the poor quality of much 
child care, it might instead produce mild negative consequences. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
2 of 35 
• Increasing public investment in effective preschool education programs 
for all children can produce substantial educational, social, and 
economic benefits. State and local pre-K programs with high standards 
have been the most effective, and such programs need not be provided 
by public schools. Public schools, Head Start, and private child care 
programs have produced similar results when operating with the same 
resources and standards as part of the same state pre-K program. 
• Publicly funded pre-K for all might produce a paradoxical but 
worthwhile effect in terms of educational gains. Disadvantaged 
children benefit (in comparison to their gains with targeted programs), 
but so do more advantaged children. Accordingly, while such universal 
programs may result in higher levels of achievement for the 
disadvantaged, they might leave a larger achievement gap. If a 
universal preschool program substantially increased the enrollment of 
disadvantaged children, however, the achievement gap might also be 
reduced. .  
 
Recommendations 
• Policy makers should not depart from preschool education models that 
have proven highly effective. These models typically have reasonably 
small class sizes and well-educated teachers with adequate pay.  
• Teachers in preschool programs should receive intensive supervision 
and coaching, and they should be involved in a continuous 
improvement process for teaching and learning. 
• Preschool programs should regularly assess children’s learning and 
development to monitor how well they are accomplishing their goals. 
• Preschool programs, in order to produce positive effects on children’s 
behavior and later reductions in crime and delinquency, should be 
designed to develop the whole child, including social and emotional 
development and self-regulation. 
• Because an earlier start and longer duration does appear to produce 
better results, policies expanding access to children under 4 should 
prioritize disadvantaged children who are likely to benefit most. More 
broadly, preschool education policy should be developed in the context 
of comprehensive public policies and programs to effectively support 
child development from birth to age 5 and beyond. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
3 of 35 
 
Preschool Education and Its Lasting Effects: 
Research and Policy Implications 
 
W. Steven Barnett, National Institute for Early Education Research 
 
Introduction 
Rapidly evolving preschool education poses challenges for local, 
state, and federal education policy. In 1960, just 10% of the nation’s 3- 
and 4-year-olds were enrolled in any type of classroom. Less than a half 
century later, nearly three-quarters of children enroll in a preschool 
classroom at age 4 and about half do so at age 3.1 These trends have been 
accompanied by growth in private preschool education and child care, 
state-funded pre-K, preschool special education, and the federal Head 
Start program.2 Public programs currently enroll about half of those in 
programs at ages 3 and 4. Children are therefore served by programs that 
vary widely in enrollment, program design and operation, and this is true 
across and even within states. Issues of quality also arise out of this 
miscellany. A recent study in California, for example, revealed that state 
pre-K offered the highest educational quality, but that educational quality 
averaged across all programs, public and private, was relatively low.3 
This policy brief summarizes research regarding the short- and 
long-term effects of preschool education, with particular attention given to 
what is known about influences on program effectiveness. This 
information is relevant to public policy makers who must decide whether 
and how much to support various types of preschool programs, what 
standards to set for public programs, and how much funding to allocate. 
 
A Brief Survey of the Preschool Landscape 
Nationally, the largest public investments in early education are for 
child care subsidies, state pre-K, Head Start, and preschool special 
education. About 75% of the nation’s 4-year olds attend a preschool 
center, as do 50% of 3-year-olds.4 About half of all 4-year-olds, but fewer 
than 20% of all 3-year-olds, are in public programs, while about 35% of 
both age groups enroll in private preschool options. 
The federal Head Start program serves comparatively few children:  
11% of 4-year-olds and 8% of 3-year-olds. In 2006-2007, the federal 
government spent about $6.2 billion on Head Start (and nearly $700 
million on Early Head Start, which serves children younger than 3). State 
pre-K programs enroll 22% of 4-year-olds and 11% of 3-year-olds. As 
these figures suggest, far fewer 3-year-olds overall enroll in public 
programs—8% in Head Start, as noted above, and an additional 3% in 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
4 of 35 
state pre-K. Nationwide in 2006-2007, 38 states and the District of 
Columbia funded pre-K programs, spending more than $3.7 billion on 
them. Generally, the federal government is not a major funder of state pre-
K, although local education agencies have supplemented state funding. 
Head Start and most state pre-K programs have eligibility 
requirements based on family income. Head Start limits eligibility to 
children in families whose income is below the Federal Poverty Level 
(FPL), or who are eligible for public assistance, with exceptions for 
homeless children and some others.5 Some states use the FPL or some 
multiple of it, while others use a percentage of the state median income 
(SMI).6 Several states have committed to provide access for all 4-year-
olds: Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, New York, Oklahoma, and West 
Virginia. However, only Oklahoma is currently approaching universal 
enrollment.7 Generally, preschool enrollment rates are lowest for children 
in families whose income is above the poverty line but in the lower half of 
income distribution. 
Children who attend preschool programs have widely varying 
experiences.8 Public programs vary considerably in operating schedules, 
teacher qualifications, class size and ratio, auxiliary services (such as 
health and social services, or parenting education), monitoring and 
accountability, actual teaching practices, and effects on children’s learning 
and development. Teacher qualifications in state pre-K programs range 
from little more than a high school diploma to a four-year college degree 
with specialized training in early childhood education. Head Start has 
national standards for program structure and operation. Private programs 
vary greatly as well. State child care regulations are weak everywhere, but 
many centers exceed standards, even as others violate them.9 With 
programs varying so greatly, widely varied effects on children are to be 
expected. 
 
Effects across All Types of Programs: An Overview 
A substantial body of research establishes that preschool education 
can improve the learning and development of young children. Many 
studies have investigated the immediate effects of preschool education for 
children during their first five years of life. Some have compared the 
outcomes for preschool education against other options: outcomes for a 
true control group having no preschool education; outcomes for typical 
experience (which includes child care outside the home); and outcomes for 
more or less well-defined alternatives (for example, outcomes for 
preschool education programs using different curricula). With such a large 
number of studies, meta-analysis is a useful tool to summarize findings. 
As a statistical procedure, meta-analysis can provide a transparent, 
quantitative summary of findings that is easy to interpret. However, since 
meta-analysis offers little nuance concerning the details, strengths and 
weaknesses of each included study, it is also useful to consider a detailed 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
5 of 35 
review of the most rigorous and relevant individual studies. The following 
discussion includes both approaches. 
Multiple meta-analyses conducted over the past 25 years have 
found preschool education to produce an average immediate effect of 
about half (0.50) a standard deviation on cognitive development.10 This is 
the equivalent of 7 or 8 points on an IQ test, or a move from the 30th to the 
50th percentile for achievement test scores. For the social and emotional 
domains, estimated effects have been somewhat smaller but still 
practically meaningful, averaging about 0.33 standard deviations.11 To put 
these gains in perspective, it’s important to realize that on many measures, 
a half standard deviation is enough to reduce by half the school readiness 
gap between children in poverty and the national average. 
Dozens of studies have examined preschool education’s long-term 
effects, providing information on effects into elementary school and 
beyond.12 Recent meta-analyses of these find that preschool education has 
significant lasting effects on cognitive abilities, school progress (grade 
repetition, special education placement, and high school graduation), and 
social behavior.13 Estimated effects decline as students move from 
immediate experience to elementary school, to adolescence, and to 
adulthood follow-up. Thus, long-term effect sizes (reported as standard 
deviation units for each measure) are smaller, and are roughly 0.10 to 0.20  
for cognitive abilities, 0.15 for school progress, and 0.15 to 0.20 on social 
behavior including delinquency and crime.14 
These effect size estimates are averages across studies that vary 
widely in rigor and program types included. There is also some variation 
in populations served, although most studies have focused on 
economically disadvantaged populations. The strongest studies, which are 
randomized trials, have examined programs ranging from intensive 
“model” programs for children from birth to age 5 to typical Head Start 
centers.15 The largest estimated effects have been reported by these more 
rigorous studies. Also, programs focused directly on educating the child 
had greater effect than multi-purpose programs delivering a mix of 
services to children and families.16 Thus, the average effect sizes across all 
studies summarized by meta-analysis are significantly smaller than the 
average effect sizes found for well-implemented, intensive educational 
programs. For a more finely grained picture, then, this review turns now to 
the results of specific studies. 
 
Child Care Effects 
Ordinary child care is found to have the smallest initial effects on 
children’s learning and development. Typically, family day care homes 
show no effect on cognitive development, while child care centers produce 
small short-term effects (0.10 to 0.15) on cognitive and language 
development.17 Several non-experimental studies in the United States and 
Canada have found center-based child care to produce small negative 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
6 of 35 
effects on social-emotional development and behavior—in particular, 
increased aggression.18 There is some evidence that negative effects 
increase with number of years in care, but lessen when children attend 
higher quality programs.19 Higher program quality (defined in terms of 
standards and observed practices) is also associated with larger gains in 
cognitive and language abilities.20 In addition, some studies, but not all, 
find larger benefits for children from economically disadvantaged 
families.21 These findings are from non-experimental studies, however; 
effects may be influenced by unobserved differences between children and 
families who do and do not use child care.22 Finally, evidence suggests 
that child care subsidies increase employment for mothers of young 
children.23 
Given the small initial effects of child care, it is not surprising that 
the estimated long-term effects are small as well. Some children might 
benefit from long-term increases in family income due to increases in 
maternal employment, though work could lead mothers to reduce time 
with their young children, perhaps partially offsetting income benefits. 
The methodologically strongest long-term study of child care’s effects in 
the United States finds that both positive and negative effects tend to 
decline over time. Persistent effects are few. Greater child care quality is 
associated with higher vocabulary scores through grade 5 (an effect size of 
0.06), and more time in center-based care increases teacher-reported 
behavior problems through grade 6 (an effect size of 0.08).24 The weaker 
Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Cohort of 1998 (ECLS-
K) studies find that center-based programs have small residual effects on 
reading and math test scores until the end of third grade (about 0.05 
standard deviations).25 
 
Head Start Effects 
Two recent randomized trials and a regression-discontinuity study 
(a rigorous alternative) have assessed the short-term effects of one year of 
Head Start.26 The strongest study to date is the Head Start Impact Study 
(HSIS) of a large sample of children across the country randomly assigned 
to attend Head Start or not at ages 3 and 4.27 The estimated cognitive 
effects of nine months of Head Start range from 0.05 to 0.25 standard 
deviations. Effects tend to be smaller for cognitive measures of broad 
domains and larger for measures of limited sets of literacy skills and 
knowledge more easily taught and mastered in a brief time.28 No evidence 
was found of any negative effects on socio-emotional development, and 
behavior problems and hyperactivity were significantly reduced (0.13 to 
0.18 standard deviations) for 3-year-olds. Access to dental care was 
improved and child health, as reported by parents, was modestly improved 
(0.12 standard deviations) for 3-year-olds. An earlier, smaller, randomized 
trial of Head Start for 4-year-olds in one region of the country found larger 
effects on cognitive development. For example, on the Peabody Picture 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
7 of 35 
Vocabulary Test (PPVT), gains were 0.32 standard deviations (compared 
to HSIS’s 0.05 to 0.12). The study also found a very large effect on dental 
care as well as positive effects on health care.29 
Another recent rigorous study of Head Start’s initial effects 
employed a quasi-experimental, regression-discontinuity design in Tulsa, 
Oklahoma. For one year of Head Start at age 4, this study found effects of 
0.33 to 0.55 standard deviations on literacy and math assessments. Of 
note, the Tulsa Head Start programs are not typical. All lead teachers in 
Tulsa Head Start had four-year college degrees and early childhood 
teacher certification, and they received public school salaries and benefits. 
While it would therefore be inappropriate to generalize these results to 
Head Start overall, these findings increase concerns that the Head Start 
Impact Study (HSIS) might underestimate potential effects. 
One reason for these concerns about HSIS is the influence of 
“crossovers” – children whose experience didn’t actually correlate with 
study design. At age 4, only 86% of the treatment group actually attended 
Head Start, and conversely, 18% of the control group found their way into 
a Head Start program elsewhere.30 Adjustments for crossovers in the study 
yield estimates of 0.08 to 0.36 on cognitive outcomes for children who 
actually attended Head Start.31 Even this finding is open to some question, 
however, since much of the “no treatment” control group attended 
programs other than Head Start: at least 22% of 3-year-olds and 30% of 4-
year-olds in the control group attended other center-based programs.32 A 
similar concern exists about the earlier, smaller randomized trial discussed 
above, in which over a third of the control group similarly attended 
another child care program. Overall, it seems reasonable to conclude that 
one year of Head Start has initial effects on cognitive abilities that are at 
least in the range of 0.10 to 0.30 standard deviations. 
Several researchers have used data from the Early Childhood 
Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Cohort of 1998 (ECLS-K) to estimate 
the effects of Head Start.33 Although the ECLS-K provides a large and 
diverse sample and several family background measures for use as 
statistical controls, the data set has significant limitations including 
reliance on parent reports to identify Head Start participation, and the lack 
of pre-tests for behavior and academic skills, to control for pre-existing 
differences between children in the control and Head Start cohorts. These 
studies find that for children entering kindergarten, Head Start has no 
significant effects on cognition and negative effects on socio-emotional 
development and behavior as children enter kindergarten. It is important to 
note that the findings from these studies are precisely the opposite of the 
findings of the national randomized trial. A reasonable conclusion is that 
the ECLS-K findings differ because of the biases introduced by their 
weaker research designs, casting doubt on their longer-term findings as 
well.34 
Some studies using survey data have employed approaches 
specifically designed to address problems in selection bias. These have 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
8 of 35 
found positive Head Start effects on achievement, producing estimates of 
initial impacts approximating those from randomized trials.35 Several have 
also looked at longer-term effects. A series of studies comparing children 
within the same family who did and did not attend Head Start (as reported 
by parents) found effects on achievement at kindergarten entry that were 
similar for all ethnic groups.  Nevertheless, later effects appear to vary by 
ethnicity. They found lasting effects on achievement test scores and grade 
retention for white and Hispanic children, but not for African-American 
children. Grade repetition for Hispanic children age 10 and older was 
found to be substantially reduced.36 In addition, they found that Head Start 
increased high school graduation rates by 22 percentage points for white 
children and decreased arrest rates by 12 percentage points for African-
American children.37 However, other researchers suggest that the methods 
and data employed in these ESCL-K studies may introduce biases that 
could account for some of the variations in outcomes by ethnicity.38  
One study, which approximates a randomized trial, relies on an 
historical discontinuity in Head Start funding across counties to estimate 
Head Start’s effects on children’s health and on their educational 
attainment.39 It finds that Head Start decreased mortality among children 
ages 5 to 9 from causes plausibly affected by Head Start health services; in 
addition, it increased high school graduation and college attendance.40 
Based on the health effects found in this study, an increase in Head Start 
enrollment from 12,000 to 30,000 per 100,000 children can be expected to 
result in one or two fewer deaths. Although no effects were found on 
eighth grade test scores, the significance intervals are so wide that the 
modest positive effects found in other studies can not be ruled out. The 
significant long-term effects are found for boys and girls and for blacks as 
well as whites. However, the estimates apply to children who attended 
Head Start in the 1960s and 1970s, and it is possible that today’s Head 
Start has smaller or larger effects.41 
 
State and Local Pre-Kindergarten Effects 
Two studies of preschool education that began in the 1960s stand 
out. They were well-implemented, randomized trials of public school 
programs.42 The two programs studied, which are discussed briefly below, 
differ from typical state and local pre-K programs in scale and in the 
extent of oversight, supervision, and teacher support. Both employed 
public school teachers who received intensive coaching and supervision, 
regular in-depth discussion, and feedback regarding teaching practices. 
Other preschool programs with strong evidence of effectiveness have also 
had such teacher support, and it has been suggested that strong teacher 
support is likely to be important to replicating positive results.43 Teachers 
in both programs also conducted home visits. Among numerous other 
studies of preschool interventions, only the two discussed below employed 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
9 of 35 
a true experimental design to investigate the persistent effects of preschool 
education provided by public schools.44 
The High/Scope Perry Preschool program randomly assigned 128 
disadvantaged minority children to either a half-day preschool program 
with home visits by the teachers or a control group.45 Children attended 
the preschool program for two school years beginning at age 3 (except for 
a few who entered at age 4). Classes and ratios were much better than is 
typical of most public programs: 12 or 13 children with two teachers. This 
staffing made the Perry program considerably more expensive than the 
typical public education pre-K program. However, initial effects on 
language and general cognitive abilities after two years were impressive: 
about 0.90 standard deviations, which is about the size of the typical 
black/white test score gap. 
The Perry study followed 123 children from preschool well into 
adulthood. Researchers’ ability to study nearly the entire original group 
over time allows confidence in long-term findings. The initial cognitive 
advantage from the preschool program was seen to decline over time, 
partly because the public school experience appeared to help the control 
group catch up once they entered kindergarten.46 While there was no 
persistent effect on IQ, the study found a persistent effect on achievement 
tests through middle school, a finding consistent with results from the 
meta-analysis of all relevant research literature. In addition, the preschool 
group had better classroom and personal behavior as reported by teachers, 
less involvement in delinquency and crime, fewer special education 
placements, and a higher high school graduation rate.47 Through age 40, 
the program was associated with increased employment and earnings, 
decreased welfare dependency, and reduced arrests. Long-term effect sizes 
are in the range from 0.30 to 0.50 standard deviations. High school 
graduation increased from half to two-thirds, the number of arrests by age 
27 fell by half, and employment at age 40 showed an increase of 14 
percentage points.48 
Another study of public school preschool education was conducted 
by the Institute for Developmental Studies (IDS). It included a larger 
sample of 402 children who were randomly assigned to the public 
program or to a control group.49 Children entered the preschool program at 
age 4 and attended for one year, and afterward entered an IDS 
kindergarten program. A teacher and an aide staffed each preschool 
classroom of 17 children. Estimated effects at the end of pre-K were just 
over 0.40 standard deviations on measures of cognitive and language 
abilities; an estimated effect of about 0.20 on these abilities persisted 
through at least third grade. The IDS study also provides follow-up 
analyses that indicate persistent effects to adulthood on achievement, 
educational attainment, and employment. However, the study suffers from 
severe attrition, which limits the confidence that can be placed in those 
very long-term findings.50 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
10 of 35 
A third randomized trial deserving mention examined the effects of 
one-year of a half-day university preschool program on 291 children from 
advantaged backgrounds. This study experienced higher attrition than the 
others, with only 196 (67%) of the original group remaining in the study at 
second and third grade follow-up. Moreover, this study had no tests of 
children’s abilities prior to program entry. Attrition rates in treatment and 
control groups were apparently not affected by children’s gender, IQ, or 
social competence. The average IQ of children in the study was 130, 
which indicates very high abilities—the 97th percentile. No significant 
program effects were found on IQ (although the estimated effect is 3 
points, or 0.20 standard deviations), but significant effects were found on 
measures of social competence and school readiness.51 For second and 
third grade, the study found statistically significant gains on achievement 
tests for boys, but not girls. The estimated effect size for boys on the total 
achievement battery was 0.82 standard deviations.52 
There are no randomized trials of large scale, state-funded pre-K 
programs. However, recent studies have employed a regression-
discontinuity design (RDD) that emulates the results of a randomized trial 
under reasonable assumptions.53 These RDD studies make use of the birth 
date cut-off for school entry to compare two groups of children who both 
enter the program (thereby avoiding the selection bias problem) a year 
apart, but who differ in age by only one day.54 Such studies of the 
universal pre-K program in Tulsa, Oklahoma, provide credible estimates 
of short-term effects on subgroups, as well as for children generally. These 
studies find effects on literacy and math achievement of 0.36 to 0.99 
standard deviations.55 These positive effects are found for boys and girls, 
for white, black, Hispanic, and Native American children, and for children 
who do and do not qualify for free and reduced-price lunches.56 Effect 
sizes are, however, somewhat larger for minority children (ranging from 
0.40 to 1.3).57 
The RDD approach also has been used to estimate the initial 
effects of one year of state pre-K on children’s cognitive abilities in 
Arkansas, California, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
South Carolina, and West Virginia.58 The average effect sizes across these 
eight states were 0.23 for general cognitive and language ability, 0.31 for 
math, and 0.79 for print awareness.59 Effects on a test of general cognitive 
and language abilities can be directly compared to those in the Perry and 
IDS studies. The average initial effect size for one year of these state pre-
K programs is about half that of IDS and one-quarter that of Perry, with 
the top-performing state pre-K programs approaching IDS effectiveness. 
These eight state programs are not necessarily representative, but they do 
provide a broad sample what state pre-K can produce on a large scale. 
Unfortunately, this particular RDD approach cannot be used to 
estimate long-term effects, so some studies have supplemented it with 
other research designs in order to compare children who attended state 
pre-K with similar children from the same localities who did not. There is 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
11 of 35 
some evidence that this less rigorous study design underestimates the 
initial effects of pre-K, sometimes by as much as half.60 Even so, they 
have found statistically significant effects persisting through kindergarten 
and first grade, although those effects may decline a bit over time.61 Also, 
these persistent gains are larger on broader domains of learning that are 
not quickly mastered.62 Children with two years of New Jersey’s relatively 
intensive Abbott pre-K program starting at age 3 sustained cognitive gains 
through the end of kindergarten (0.42 effect size on the PPVT) that are 
comparable to end of kindergarten gains from the Perry Preschool 
program.63 
Other studies of state and local school pre-K programs provide 
additional evidence, including longer-term results, but unfortunately most 
used non-experimental research designs that offer less protection from 
selection bias.64 Two of the methodologically stronger state evaluations 
used waiting lists to construct comparison groups (thereby creating a 
“control” group that is also characterized by parental interest in preschool 
education). A South Carolina study using a pre-test of children’s abilities 
found a positive effect (0.33 standard deviations) on cognitive abilities at 
kindergarten entry, particularly for children whose classrooms had higher 
quality as measured by direct observation (0.44 standard deviations).65 A 
New York study found initial positive effects on general reasoning, verbal 
concepts, and school-related knowledge and skills.66 Both studies found 
some persistence of effects into the elementary school years; the New 
York study additionally found evidence of less retention in grade. 
Several literature reviews have summarized long-term findings 
from the large body of research literature evaluating state and local pre-K 
programs using quasi-experimental methods. Such summaries find a 
mixed pattern of positive and null findings on achievement tests, but a 
more uniform pattern of significant reductions in special education and 
grade retention.67 The substantially lower rates of grade retention and 
special education for children attending pre-K reported by several studies 
actually explains some of the null findings on achievement test scores. 
Most studies compare children in the control group with children receiving 
pre-K education within each grade level; such comparisons, however, do 
not take into account the absence of low-performing children from the 
control group who were retained in an earlier grade or moved into special 
education.68 
The most rigorous long-term, large-scale study of pre-K is the 
Child Parent Center (CPC) study.69 Chicago’s public schools operated the 
CPC program beginning in the late 1960s. CPC provides low-income 
children with a half-day preschool, kindergarten, and a follow-on 
elementary school component. Some 55% of CPC students attended CPC 
preschool for two-years beginning at age 3 (the remaining students 
attended the preschool for one year beginning at age 4). The preschool 
program had a certified teacher and an assistant in each classroom of 18 
children, and a relatively strong parent outreach and support component. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
12 of 35 
This program design is similar to “better” state programs in terms of basic 
design and cost. Multiple evaluations have been conducted on the CPC 
program, all finding positive effects on children’s learning. The most 
recent study constructed a comparison group at kindergarten entry drawn 
from children in similar neighborhoods, some attending the same 
elementary schools as the CPC children. Estimated effects on test scores at 
kindergarten vary from 0.35 to 0.77 standard deviations depending on the 
measure and analysis procedures (estimated effects of just one year of 
preschool attendance are about 0.20 to 0.65 standard deviations).70 
The CPC study has a relatively large sample and has maintained its 
sample integrity into adulthood; it estimates program effects on a broad 
range of outcomes through age 21. Because the half-day CPC program is 
broadly similar to the Perry Preschool program (albeit less intensive), it 
can be considered a replication of the Perry study, and the extent to which 
the CPC study’s findings confirm the long-term findings of the Perry 
Preschool study is important. The CPC study finds positive effects on the 
following outcomes: test scores through at least middle school, arrests for 
delinquency and crime, special education, and high school graduation. The 
estimated effects are remarkably similar to those in the Perry Preschool 
study, though sometimes smaller. In addition, it finds a significant 
reduction in grade retention.71 This pattern is what one would expect from 
a somewhat less intense dose of the same “treatment” in a different 
location. As in the Perry Preschool study, effects on cognitive abilities 
decline over time, but as late as eighth grade they are still nearly 0.20 
standard deviations. The effects on schooling outcomes are substantial 
(effect sizes of 0.23 to 0.34) with a 15 percentage point reduction in grade 
retention, a 10 percentage point reduction in special education placements, 
and an 11 percentage point increase in high school graduation by age 20. 
Additional estimates of the effects of state and local pre-K have 
been produced by other studies using the large national ECLS-K data set.72 
Although the size and diversity of their samples are appealing, such 
studies have serious methodological limitations. As noted earlier, studies 
employing large national data sets have generally been found to produce 
more biased estimates than studies using smaller samples with local 
comparison groups.73 Moreover, ECLS-K uses only parental reporting to 
identify the type of program, and parents were not asked if the program 
was a state or local education program. This is a serious problem for 
studies trying to look closely at state pre-K, which can encompass private 
centers, Head Start programs, and public school programs.74 These studies 
find positive effects on cognitive development of just under 0.20 standard 
deviations and negative effects on social skills and behavior of 0.12-0.29 
standard deviations. Longer-term, these studies find pre-K to reduce grade 
retention and to increase test scores in third grade by about 0.05 standard 
deviations.75 When estimates are limited to preschool programs housed in 
the same elementary school a child attended for kindergarten, negative 
effects on social skills and behavior disappear.76 As with Head Start, 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
13 of 35 
comparison to the results of randomized trials suggests that the ECLS-K 
estimates are biased downward and assign an inaccurate negative in the 
social-emotional domain. Thus, the ECLS-K studies add to the evidence of 
persistent positive effects despite their short-comings, but their specific 
estimates should carry little weight in policy debates. 
Perhaps because many preschool education programs have been 
half-day, few studies have estimated their effects on maternal 
employment. One study finds that public preschool programs and cheaper 
private programs increased employment of single and married mothers of 
3- and 4-year olds and that public kindergarten increased employment of 
single and married mothers of 5-year-olds.77 These estimated increases are 
large: from 6 to 15% for employment, hours, and earnings for mothers of 
5-year-olds, and over 20% for mothers of younger children. Another study 
of the effects of public kindergarten on maternal employment finds 
smaller effects for single mothers and no effects for married mothers.78 
Neither study accounts for whether public kindergarten was part-day or 
full-day, a potential problem as half-day kindergarten might be expected 
have little or no effect on employment. A study of single mothers who had 
received public assistance in Massachusetts found that both the 
availability of Head Start and state funding for preschool education for 
low-income children increased maternal employment.79 Studies of the 
effects of preschool education on maternal employment in other nations 
have also found positive effects.80 
 
International Evidence 
Research in other countries confirms many of the U.S. findings 
regarding short- and long-term outcomes of pre-K. A randomized trial 
with long-term follow-up of high-quality half-day pre-K in Mauritius finds 
short-term improvements in children’s learning and behavior, and reduced 
crime rates into adulthood.81 Rigorous quasi-experimental studies in Latin 
America find increased test scores through third grade, as well as 
decreased school failure, increased educational attainment, and positive 
effects on attention, class participation, and discipline,.82 Several studies in 
the United Kingdom that are similar to the National Institute for Child 
Health and Human Development (NICHD) and ECLS-K studies in the 
United States find modest positive effects on cognitive development that 
persist for at least several years into school and mixed (but weak) effects 
on social development and behavior.83 In the UK, entering school prior to 
age 5 has been linked with cognitive gains through age 16 and increased 
employment at age 33.84 Both early schooling and preschool attendance 
were associated with increased wage rates (about 3%) at age 33.85 Effects 
in these studies are similar for children from all economic strata.86 A New 
Zealand study finds positive long-term effects on cognitive abilities and 
some protection from getting into trouble through age 16 for children from 
all backgrounds.87 UK and New Zealand studies found larger gains when 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
14 of 35 
programs contained more middle class families.88 Finally, international 
comparisons find that increased duration of preschool education is 
associated with higher achievement test scores through age 15 and that 
very high participation rates are associated with less within-country 
inequality in test scores.89 
 
Effects of Very Early Educational Intervention 
Researchers also have studied the effects of early education and 
child care beginning before age 3, sometimes during the first year of life. 
The Abecedarian study employed a randomized trial to evaluate the effects 
of a full-day (six to eight hours) year-round educational program from 
about four months of age to kindergarten entry. This study followed 111 
children from program entry through age 21 with a largely intact sample.90 
The Abecedarian program produced large initial gains in IQ that have 
declined over time, with effect sizes of about 0.75 at age 4, 0.50 at age 5, 
and 0.33 at ages 15 and 21. Effects on reading and math achievement 
averaged about 0.40 standard deviations from ages 8 to 21, with only a 
very slight decrease in magnitude over time. The program had large 
effects on grade retention and special education, reducing each by 23 
percentage points. The study reports no statistically significant effect on 
high school graduation, but high school graduations (excluding GED) 
through age 19 were 67% for the treatment group and 51% for the control 
group, a 16 percentage point difference. Attendance at a four-year college 
was significantly different, 36% for the program group versus 14% for the 
control group.91 
There were broader effects, as well. At the young adult follow-up, 
the program group was more likely to have a skilled job, less likely to 
have become teen parents, and less likely to smoke marijuana. Effects 
were not found on social development or behavior during the program or 
in later delinquency and crime. However, control group involvement in 
crime and delinquency was low, making it difficult to improve on an 
already good outcome.92 A 16 percentage point difference in adult 
smoking is not statistically significant, but is similar to the observed 
difference in the Perry Preschool study. The program group also reported 
fewer depressive symptoms at age 21 (effect size of 0.42). Finally, the free 
child care appeared to have improved mothers’ long-term employment 
opportunities and earnings. 
Other randomized trials replicate or partially replicate the 
Abecedarian findings. The Project CARE study compared essentially the 
same program as Abecedarian to a home visiting model and a no-
treatment control group.93 This study is limited by a smaller sample size 
(only 16 children in the center-based program, with 14 included at long-
term follow-up), and thus it has sometimes been combined with the 
Abecedarian data for analysis. The CARE study finds essentially the same 
pattern and magnitude of preschool effects on IQ over time. The home 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
15 of 35 
visitation program had no significant effects. Program effects on 
achievement and school progress have not been reported. However, young 
adult outcomes are quite similar for four-year college enrollment and 
highly skilled employment. When the data from the two studies are 
pooled, there is a statistically significant effect on years of education 
(effect size 0.43). CARE did not replicate findings regarding smoking or 
teen parenting. 
Another small-scale replication is a Milwaukee study of a program 
providing full-day educational child care to highly disadvantaged children 
from before age 1 through kindergarten. This study had only 53 children at 
start and 40 for longer-term follow-up, but it approximated a randomized 
trial. The study found large initial gains in IQ that declined when the 
control group entered school, but remained at about 10 points (0.67 
standard deviations) through age 14. Effects on achievement test scores 
appeared to decline rapidly during the early school years. Though not 
statistically significant, the effect on reading achievement was an 
estimated 0.68 grade equivalent, or 10 percentiles. Math scores were 
essentially equal for the two groups by grade 4. However, there were half 
as many grade retentions (10 v. 5) and substantially fewer special 
education placements for the program group by grade 4. The subsequent 
absence of the additional retained and special education students from the 
control population may have adversely affected the achievement test 
comparisons.94 
A much larger, but less exact replication is the Infant Health and 
Development Program (IHDP), a multi-site randomized trial of home 
visitation for the first year followed by educational child care modeled on 
the Abecedarian program from ages 1 to 3. Children and families received 
no services after age 3.95 All 985 children in the IHDP study were low 
birth weight (LBW), but the sample was divided into low and high LBW 
groups. The heavier low birth weight group is more socio-economically 
diverse and less educationally disadvantaged than samples in most other 
randomized trials.96 At age 3, the treatment group had a higher IQ (10 
points, effect size 2/3), fewer behavior problems, and a higher rate of 
maternal employment. The IQ gain was larger (14 points, 0.93) for the 
heavier LBW program group.97 
Although no effects persist beyond age 3 for the sample as a 
whole, long-term gains are found for the heavier LBW IHDP participants. 
They have cognitive advantages of about 0.30 to 0.45 standard deviations 
at ages 5 and 8, and higher math (but not reading) achievement at age 8.98 
At age 18, the heavier LBW program participants also had higher scores 
on one measure of cognitive ability and language (0.25), but not on IQ, as 
well as higher math achievement test scores (0.34) and less self-reported 
risky behavior.99 No significant effects were found on grade retention, 
special education, high school graduation, or arrest rates. However, 
estimated effects for the heavier children were similar in size to estimated 
effects for the children in the Chicago Child Parent Center study for 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
16 of 35 
special education (reduced from 24% to 17%) and for arrests (reduced 
from 26% to 21%).100 In contrast to child effects, the maternal 
employment gain persisted only for the lighter LBW group.101 
Multiple randomized trials have been conducted on early 
childhood interventions that seek to comprehensively intervene with 
parents and children beginning in the first years of life. These do not 
typically provide an intensive educational program to children. Overall, 
they have not produced the same magnitude of effects as programs 
focused on educating the child, and studies do not find substantive 
cognitive effects persisting to kindergarten entry. Examples include the 
Comprehensive Child Development Program (CCDP), Avance family 
support program, Child and Family Resource Program, New Chance, and 
Even Start.102 The recent large-scale multi-site randomized trial of Early 
Head Start (birth to age 3 programs delivering center-based and home 
visitation services) is perhaps the most positive. It found small effects on 
development (0.10 for cognitive and language abilities) for children age 3 
and for parent outcomes.103 At age 5, no effects persisted on cognition, 
language, or achievement; however, small improvements (0.10 standard 
deviations) were found for children’s behavior problems, parenting, and 
maternal depression.104 
 
Implications for Policy Implementation 
As described above, early care and education programs have 
positive effects on young children’s cognitive and social development, and 
these effects can be substantial. Rigorous studies find not only immediate 
gains, but lasting benefits for learning and educational achievement, 
school progress and educational attainment, and social behavior, including 
delinquency and crime. The methodologically strongest studies find the 
largest effects, and the earliest and smallest studies have been replicated 
repeatedly and on a large scale. Research from other countries indicates 
that findings of long-term educational and social benefits generalize across 
a tremendous range of social, political, and educational environments. 
This evidence indicates that policies supporting the provision of effective 
preschool education can produce important improvements in children’s 
learning and development. However, two policy questions immediately 
arise. Who should receive the programs? And, what characteristics should 
programs have in order to be effective? 
In the United States, the question about who should receive 
programs translates to the question of whether programs should be 
targeted. One way to address the question is to ask what groups preschool 
is known to help. Positive effects have been found for boys and girls, 
children from all socio-economic strata, and children from all major ethnic 
backgrounds.105 While the size of some effects varies with children’s 
characteristics (including their family background), the largest and most 
rigorous studies do not consistently find that effects are limited to one 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
17 of 35 
gender or only to children from low-income families. Larger effects do 
seem likely for children from disadvantaged backgrounds on threshold 
measures like grade repetition, special education placement, high school 
graduation, and criminal arrests. However, about 1 in 10 children from the 
middle 60% of the family income distribution repeats a grade and a similar 
fraction drops out of high school; due to their sheer numbers it is these 
middle-income children who account for most of the school failure 
problem.106  
Multiple benefit-cost analyses have been conducted on three of the 
intensive educational programs that have been studied long-term—
Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and CPC.107 All three find that benefits 
substantially exceed costs. Thus, these programs not only achieve 
important educational goals, but are sound public investments even if they 
are far from optimal, or even if they serve populations with relatively less 
to gain than the cohorts studied in these three programs. The value of the 
benefits is so high that even if more advantaged children gained as little as 
one half—or even one tenth—of the benefits disadvantaged children gain, 
a one- or two-year preschool program for them would be a worthwhile 
public investment.  
There are, of course, other reasons for preferring either a targeted 
or a universal program.108 Some derive from political principles, like 
assertions that smaller government is preferable to a larger one, or that 
public education in a democracy should be equally available to all. Such 
philosophical issues are beyond the scope of this review. In addition, 
practical issues complicate the choice. Most targeted programs use family 
income to determine eligibility. However, family income presents a 
moving target due to the transience of poverty for many families. Many 
families move from one side of the cut-off to the other during the school 
year; some families manage to enroll their children despite having 
incomes above the cut-off; and others who qualify are not even identified 
as eligible. By the end of a program year, half of those enrolled may 
exceed the income cut-off. 109 Moreover, family income is far from a 
perfect indicator of who will benefit from preschool education. Others 
have suggested developing measures of “poor parenting” for use in 
targeting, but this seems even more intrusive and impractical than means-
testing. In addition, the evidence reviewed here suggests that program 
effects on disadvantaged children may be larger when programs serve 
children from diverse backgrounds. If the primary concern about 
implementing a universal program is the cost of subsidies to higher-
income families, the use of a sliding fee scale can reduce public cost while 
accommodating all children. 
Regarding how children should be served, it is clear that all 
programs do not produce the same gains. Current child care policies and 
programs do not provide services of the educational intensity needed to 
produce substantial short-term gains, much less long-term gains. 
Moreover, there is reason for some concern that under current policies 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
18 of 35 
child care has small negative effects on social and emotional development. 
These undesirable outcomes are an important concern because most young 
children who are in child care attend private programs with little or no 
quality assurance: at best, they are regulated and subsidized as child 
care—not education. Head Start and other public programs produce larger 
positive effects, and no negative effects. Although Head Start’s effects on 
learning may be smaller than those of many state and local pre-K 
programs, rudimentary calculations for Head Start based on research 
reviewed here suggest that it passes a cost-benefit test.110 The better state 
pre-K programs should pass as well. Private child care is not necessarily 
inferior: private child care centers operating under state pre-K standards 
with state pre-K funding can produce the same large positive effects as 
programs in public schools.111 
In general, research finds that the programs with the largest and 
longest lasting effects are the most educationally intensive and expensive. 
Additional guidance from research regarding program design is limited. 
Others things equal, programs that begin earlier appear to have greater 
long-term effects. Only programs that begin at age 1 or earlier have had 
persistent effects on IQ, but this does not necessarily translate into greater 
long-term benefits across the board. Programs starting in the first year of 
life and continuing to kindergarten may or may not have higher rates of 
return than programs starting at ages 3 or 4. Programs for infants and 
toddlers are much more expensive, and some quite expensive very early 
interventions largely failed, apparently because they did not deliver 
enough education. 
Both half-day and full-day programs have produced strong results, 
but only full-day programs produce economic benefits from increases in 
parental employment. Employment and earnings benefits suggest the 
value of jointly developing child care and preschool education policies. 
Examples include extending the length of preschool education day to six 
or more hours, offering wrap-around child care in public pre-K, funding 
private child care centers to offer pre-K that meets high education 
standards, coordinating child care subsidies and public preschool funding, 
and connecting family home day care providers and public pre-K in ways 
that facilitate children’s participation in pre-K without disrupting (or even 
improving) their family home day care arrangements. As a bonus, one 
small randomized trial found that an extended day and extended year 
produced greater learning gains.112 
Strong guidance regarding other issues of preschool program 
design is difficult to glean from existing research. Many studies have 
measured the associations between children’s learning and development 
and such program characteristics as teacher qualifications and training, 
teacher salaries, class size, and adult-child ratio.113 A number have failed 
to find relationships between any of the structural characteristics of 
programs and children’s learning.114 However, none have been 
randomized trials. The scant evidence from randomized trials that we do 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
19 of 35 
have contradicts the results from weaker designs. The Tennessee class size 
experiment, for instance, found that smaller classes (around 15) led to 
greater learning gains in kindergarten.115 A randomized trial within the 
National Day Care Study found that smaller classes and better adult-child 
ratios produced more learning.116 As this review shows, weaker quasi-
experimental designs often produce misleading results and can even get 
the direction of an effect wrong (e.g., finding a negative effect when the 
true effect is positive). Recent analyses call into question the validity of 
even sophisticated value-added studies as a means to address these 
questions.117 
Until we have more randomized trials, policy makers would be 
well advised to use caution when departing from models demonstrated to 
be effective. The research literature does establish that programs with 
well-educated, adequately paid teachers, small classes (no more than 20 
children), and reasonable staff-child ratios (less than 1:10) have repeatedly 
produced strong short- and long-term educational gains. Programs putting 
fewer resources into the classroom often have failed to achieve similar 
results. 
 Of course, structure and resources alone are not sufficient for high 
levels of educational effectiveness. Careful attention must be paid to the 
how teachers actually teach, what children experience and learn in the 
classroom, the provision of supervision and coaching, and the engagement 
of teachers and those who support them in a continuous improvement 
process.118 A program’s goals and implementation matter a great deal, 
though these are complex and not necessarily well-specified by the formal 
curriculum. Recent randomized trials comparing curricula produced few 
strong findings, with the most frequent result by far no significant 
difference. Nevertheless, several of these studies add to the evidence 
reviewed above that intentional focus on specific learning goals does 
matter.119 One of the most important matters in this respect is to pay 
attention to all of children’s needs for learning and development. Healthy 
social and emotional development is as important in life as academic 
success. An intentional focus on enhancing social and emotional 
development is required for success in this domain, and curricula have 
been found to differ in their effectiveness in this domain.120 Physical 
health and nutrition deserve attention, as well.121 
 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
A substantial body of research is available regarding the effects of 
preschool education on young children’s learning and development, 
including long-term outcomes. Much of the evidence is from rigorous 
studies, and findings have been replicated with considerable variations in 
program design, populations served, and social context. These studies 
provide a sound basis for conclusions about the benefits of publicly 
funded preschool education, and they can help inform key decisions about 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
20 of 35 
who to serve and how programs should be designed. Based on a detailed 
and comprehensive review of the evidence the following conclusions and 
recommendations are offered: 
 
Conclusions 
• Many different preschool programs have been shown to produce 
positive effects on children’s learning and development, but those 
effects vary in size and persistence by type of program. 
• Well-designed preschool education programs produce long-term 
improvements in school success, including higher achievement test 
scores, lower rates of grade repetition and special education, and higher 
educational attainment. Some preschool programs are also associated 
with reduced delinquency and crime in childhood and adulthood.  
• The strongest evidence suggests that economically disadvantaged 
children reap long-term benefits from preschool. However, children 
from all other socioeconomic backgrounds have been found to benefit 
as well.  
• Current public policies for child care, Head Start, and state pre-K, do 
not ensure that most American children will attend highly effective 
preschool programs. Some attend no program at all, and others attend 
educationally weak programs. Children from middle-income families 
have least access, but many children in poverty also lack preschool 
experiences. 
• Increasing child care subsidies under current federal and state policies 
is particularly unlikely to produce any meaningful improvements in 
children’s learning and development. Given the poor quality of much 
child care, it might instead produce mild negative consequences. 
• Increasing public investment in effective preschool education programs 
for all children can produce substantial educational, social, and 
economic benefits. State and local pre-K programs with high standards 
have been the most effective, and such programs need not be provided 
by public schools. Public schools, Head Start, and private child care 
programs have produced similar results when operating with the same 
resources and standards as part of the same state pre-K program..  
• Publicly funded pre-K for all might produce a paradoxical but 
worthwhile effect in terms of educational gains. Disadvantaged 
children benefit (in comparison to their gains with targeted programs), 
but so do more advantaged children. Accordingly, while such universal 
programs may result in higher levels of achievement for the 
disadvantaged, they might leave a larger achievement gap. If a 
universal preschool program substantially increased the enrollment of 
disadvantaged children, however, the achievement gap might also be 
reduced.  
 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
21 of 35 
Recommendations 
 
• Policy makers should not depart from preschool education models that 
have proven highly effective. These models typically have reasonably 
small class sizes and well-educated teachers with adequate pay.  
• Teachers in preschool programs should receive intensive supervision 
and coaching, and they should be involved in a continuous 
improvement process for teaching and learning. 
• Preschool programs should regularly assess children’s learning and 
development to monitor how well they are accomplishing their goals.  
• Preschool programs, in order to produce positive effects on children’s 
behavior and later reductions in crime and delinquency, should be 
designed to develop the whole child, including social and emotional 
development and self-regulation. 
• Because an earlier start and longer duration does appear to produce 
better results, policies expanding access to children under 4 should 
prioritize disadvantaged children who are likely to benefit most. More 
broadly, preschool education policy should be developed in the context 
of comprehensive public policies and programs to effectively support 
child development from birth to age 5 and beyond.  
 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
22 of 35 
Notes and References 
 
1 Belfield, C. (2008). Unpublished analyses of enrollment in any type of center-based program for children 
who turned 4 (or 3) prior to September of the current school year using data from the National 
Household Survey of Education, 2005. 
2 Barnett, W.S., Hustedt, J.T., Friedman, A.H., Boyd, J.S., & Ainsworth, P. (2007). The state of preschool 
2007: State preschool yearbook. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, National Institute for Early Education Research. 
3 Karoly, L.A., Ghosh-Dastidar, B., Zellman, G., Perlman, M., & Fernyhough, L. (2008). Nature and 
quality of early care and education for California’s preschool-age children: Results from the 
California Preschool Study. Santa Monica, CA: Rand. 
4 Belfield, C. (2008). Unpublished analyses of enrollment in any type of center-based program for children 
who turned 4 (or 3) prior to September of the current school year using data from the National 
Household Survey of Education, 2005. Some other analyses of NHES data report slightly lower 
rates of participation, but those lower rates are based on age in the spring of the year when the 
survey was conducted rather than whether children belong to the age 4 or age 3 birth cohort for 
school entry purposes. 
5 Sec. 645. PARTICIPATION IN HEAD START PROGRAMS [42 U.S.C. 9840]. Retrieved July 18, 2008 
from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ohs/legislation/HS_act.html#645 
6 Barnett, W.S., Hustedt, J.T., Friedman, A.H., Boyd, J.S., & Ainsworth, P. (2007). The state of preschool 
2007: State preschool yearbook. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, National Institute for Early Education Research. 
7 Barnett, W.S., Hustedt, J.T., Friedman, A.H., Boyd, J.S., & Ainsworth, P. (2007). The state of preschool 
2007: State preschool yearbook. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, National Institute for Early Education Research. 
8  Karoly, L.A., Ghosh-Dastidar, B., Zellman, G., Perlman, M., & Fernyhough, L. (2008). Nature and 
quality of early care and education for California’s preschool-age children: Results from the 
California Preschool Study. Santa Monica, CA: Rand. 
 Early, D.M., Barbarin, O., Bryant, D., Burchinal, M., Chang, F., Clifford, R., Crawford, G., Weaver, W., 
Howes, C., Ritchie, S., Kraft-Sayre, M., Pianta, R., & Barnett, W.S. (2005). Pre-Kindergarten in 
Eleven States: NCEDL’s Multi-State Study of Pre-Kindergarten & Study of State-Wide Early 
Education Programs (SWEEP). Chapel Hill, N.C.: NCEDL. 
9 Blau, D. (2007). Unintended consequences of child care regulation. Labour Economics, 14, 513-538. 
10 Camilli, G., Vargas, S., Ryan, S., & Barnett, W.S. (in press). Meta-analysis of the effects of early 
education interventions on cognitive and social development. Teachers College Record.  
Gorey, K. M. (2001). Early childhood education: A meta-analytic affirmation of the short- and long-term 
benefits of educational opportunity. School Psychology Quarterly, 16 (1), 9-30. 
Guralnick, M.J., & Bennett, F.C. (Eds.),(1987). The effectiveness of early intervention for at-risk and 
handicapped children. New York, NY: Academy Press.  
McKey, R.H., Condelli, L., Ganson, H., Barrett, B.J., McConkey, C., & Planz, M.C. (1985). The impact of 
Head Start on children, families, and communities. Washington, DC: Head Start Evaluation 
Synthesis and Utilization Project.  
Nelson , G., Westhues, A., & MacLeod, J. (2003). A meta-analysis of longitudinal research on preschool 
prevention programs for children. Prevention and Treatment, 6, 1-34. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
23 of 35 
 
Ramey, C.T., Bryant, D.M., & Suarez, T. M. (1985). Preschool compensatory education and the 
modifiability of intelligence: A critical review. In D. Detterman (Ed.) Current topics in human 
intelligence (pp.247-296). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
White, K., & Casto, G. (1985). An integrative review of early intervention efficacy studies with at-risk 
children: Implications for the handicapped. Analysis and Intervention in Developmental 
Disabilities, 5, 7-31. 
11 Camilli, G., Vargas, S., Ryan, S., & Barnett, W.S. (in press). Meta-analysis of the effects of early 
education interventions on cognitive and social development. Teachers College Record.. 
McKey, R.H., Condelli, L., Ganson, H., Barrett, B.J., McConkey, C., & Planz, M.C. (1985). The impact of 
Head Start on children, families, and communities. Washington, DC: Head Start Evaluation 
Synthesis and Utilization Project.  
White, K., & Casto, G.(1985). An integrative review of early intervention efficacy studies with at-risk 
children: Implications for the handicapped. Analysis and Intervention in Developmental 
Disabilities, 5, 7-31. 
12 Aos, S. , Lieb, R., Mayfield, J., Miller, M., & Pennucci, A. (2004). Benefits and costs of prevention and 
early intervention programs for youth. Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public 
Policy. 
Barnett, W. S. (1998). Long-term effects on cognitive development and school success. In W. S. Barnett & 
S. S. Boocock (Eds.), Early care and education for children in poverty: Promises, programs, and 
long-term results (pp. 11–44). Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
Karoly, L.A., Kilburn, M.R., & Cannon, J.S. (2005). Early childhood interventions: Proven results, future 
promise, MG-341. Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation. 
13Aos, S. , Lieb, R., Mayfield, J., Miller, M., & Pennucci, A. (2004). Benefits and costs of prevention and 
early intervention programs for youth. Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public 
Policy. 
Camilli, G., Vargas, S., Ryan, S., & Barnett, W.S. (in press). Meta-analysis of the effects of early education 
interventions on cognitive and social development. Teachers College Record. 
14 Effect sizes are one way of facilitating comparisons across measures in which the size of the effect is 
portrayed relative to the amount of variation in the outcome in the population. There are multiple 
ways to calculate effect sizes, and these can produce potentially misleading differences across 
studies.  When possible, this study reports effect sizes based on the population standard deviation 
for a measure rather than using standard deviations from particular study samples.  
15 Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Eds.), (1983). As the twig is bent…lasting effects of preschool 
programs. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Love, J. M., Kisker, E. E., Ross, C. M., Schochet, P. Z., Brooks-Gunn, J., Paulsell, D., et al. (2002). Making 
a difference in the lives of infants and toddlers and their families:  The impacts of Early Head 
Start. Volume I:  Final technical report. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research Inc. 
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Lopez, M., Zill, N.,et al. (2005). Head Start impact study:  First 
year findings. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration 
for Children and Families.  
Schweinhart, L.J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W.S., Belfield, C.R., & Nores, M. (2005). Lifetime 
effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press. 
Wasik, B.H., Ramey, C.T., Bryant, D.M., & Sparling, J.J. (1990). A longitudinal study of two early 
intervention strategies: Project CARE. Child Development, 61(6), 1682-1696. 
16 Barnett, W.S. (2002). Early childhood education. In A. Molnar (Ed.), School reform proposals: The 
research evidence, (pp. 1-26). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.  

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
24 of 35 
 
Camilli, G., Vargas, S., & Ryan, S., & Barnett, W.S. (in press). Meta-analysis of the effects of early 
education interventions on cognitive and social development. Teachers College Record. 
17 Bernal, R., & Keane, M.P. (2006). Child care choices and children’s cognitive achievement: The case of 
single mothers. (Working paper 06-09). Evanston, IL: Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern 
University. Bernal and Keane find negative effects of informal care in contrast to positive effects 
of center based care for children of poorly educated mothers, in particular. 
NICHD Early Care Research Network (2002). Early child care and children’s development prior to school 
entry: Results from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. American Educational Research 
Journal, 39(1), 133-164.  
18 Baker, M., Gruber, J. & Milligan, K. (2005). Universal childcare, maternal labor supply, and family well-
being (NBER Working Paper No. W11832). Retrieved July 20, 2008 from 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=875708 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance?  Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51. 
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2003). Does amount of time spent in child care predict 
socioemotional adjustment during the transition to kindergarten? Child Development, 74(4), 976-
1005. 
19 NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2003). Does amount of time spent in child care predict 
socioemotional adjustment during the transition to kindergarten? Child Development, 74(4), 976-
1005. 
Love, J.M., Harrison, L., Sagi-Schwartz, van Ijzendoorn, M.H., Ross, C., Ungerer, J.A.,et al. (2003). Child 
care quality matters: How conclusions may vary with context. Child Development, 74(4), 1021-
1033. 
20 Burchinal, M.R., & Cryer, D. (2003). Diversity, child care quality, and developmental outcomes. Early 
Childhood Research Quarterly, 18, 401-426. 
McCartney, K., Dearing, E., Taylor, B.A., & Bub, K.L. (2007). Quality child care supports the achievement 
of low-income children: Direct and indirect pathways through caregiving and the home 
environment. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 28, 411-426. 
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network & Duncan, G.J. (2003). Modeling the impacts of child care 
quality on children’s preschool cognitive development. Child Development, 74, 1454-75.  
Peisner-Feinberg, E.S., & Burchinal, M.R. (1997). Relations between preschool children’s child-care 
experiences and concurrent development: The Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study. Merrill-Palmer 
Quarterly, 43(3). 451-477. 
Ruopp, R., Travers, R.J., Glantz, F., & Coelen, C. (1979) Children at the center: Final report of the 
National Day Care Study, Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates. 
Vandell, D.L. (2004). Early child care: The known and unknown. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 50(3), 387-
414. 
21 Caughy, M.O., DiPietro, J.A., & Strobino, D.M. (1994). Day-care participation as a protective factor in 
the cognitive development of low-income children. Child Development, 65, 457-471. 
NICHD Early Child CareResearch Network &Duncan, G.J. (2003). Modeling the impacts of child care 
quality on children’s preschool cognitive development. Child Development, 74, 1454-75. 
22 Larzelere, R.E., Kuhn, B.R., & Johnson, B. (2004). The intervention selection bias: An under-recognized 
confound in intervention research. Psychological Bulletin, 130(2), 289-303. 
Shadish, W.R., Cook, T.D., & Campbell, D.T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for 
generalized causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
25 of 35 
 
23 Blau, D., & Currie, J. (2006). Pre-school, day care, and after-school care:  Who’s minding the kids?  In 
E. Hanushek & F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the economics of education, Volume 2 (1163-1277). 
New York, NY: North- Holland Publishing Co. 
Blau, D., & Tekin, E. (2007). The determinants and consequences of child care subsidies for single mothers 
in the USA. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 719-741. 
Lefebver, P., & Merrigan, P. (2008). Child-care policy and the labor supply of mothers with young 
children: A natural experiment from Canada. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3), 519-548. 
Tekin, E. (2007). Child care subsidies, wages, and employment of single mothers. Journal of Human 
Resources, 42(2), 453-487. 
24 Belsky, J., Vandell, D.L., Burchinal, M., Clarke-Stewart, K.A, McCartney, K., Owen, M.T., et al. (2007). 
Are there long-term effects of early child care?  Child Development, 78(2), 681-701. 
25 Limitations of the ECLS-K data include reliance on parental report rather than observed program 
participation and lack of a pre-test to adjust for differences in child abilities prior to the program. 
The types of programs are inferred from parental word choice as parents were not asked to 
distinguish child care from other types of programs except Head Start. Thus, child care is less 
accurately distinguished from other programs in the ECLS-K studies, which might account for 
differences from the NICHD results. 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance? Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51. 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C. & Waldfogel, J. (2007). The persistence of preschool effects: Do subsequent 
classroom experiences matter? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22, 18-38. 
Magnuson, K.A., Meyers, M.K., Ruhm, C.J., & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Inequality in preschool education and 
school readiness. American Educational Research Journal, 41(1), 115-157. 
26 The regression-discontinuity design is a set of approaches to creating equivalent groups using a known 
assignment rule so as to permit unbiased estimates of program effects under reasonable 
assumptions. Cook, T. (2008). Waiting for life to arrive: A history of the regression-discontinuity 
design in Psychology, Statistics and Economics. Journal of Econometrics, 14, 636–654. 
27Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Lopez, M., Zill, N., et al. (2005). Head Start impact study:  First 
year findings. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration 
for Children and Families. 
28 The demographic composition of the samples is somewhat different at age 3 than at 4. Thus, any 
difference in outcomes could be due to factors other than age.  
29 Abbott-Shim, M., Lambert, R., & McCarty, F. (2003). A comparison of school readiness outcomes for 
children randomly assigned to a Head Start program and program’s waiting list. Journal of 
Education for Students Placed at Risk 8(2), 191-214. This study employed random assignment to 
treatment and wait-list groups, so that a small number of children migrated from the wait-list into 
Head Start. 
30 Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D. (2007). The benefits and costs of Head Start. Social Policy Report, 21(3), 3-13.  
31 Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D. (2007). The benefits and costs of Head Start. Social Policy Report, 21(3), 3-13. 
32At age 4 in particular some of the control group children may have attended a state pre-K program and 
that might be expected to result in even greater underestimation of Head Start’s effects given the 
greater effectiveness of state pre-K compared to ordinary child care.   
Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D.A. (2007). The benefits and costs of Head Start. (NBER Working Paper 12973). 
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
26 of 35 
 
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Lopez, M., Zill, N.,et al. (2005). Head Start impact study:  First 
year findings. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration 
for Children and Families. 
33Magnuson, K., Meyers, M., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Inequality in preschool education and 
school readiness. American Education Research Journal, 41, 115-157. 
Magnuson, K., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance? Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51. 
Loeb, S., Bridges, M., Bassok, D., Fuller, B., & Rumberger, R.W. (2007). How much is too much? The 
influence of preschool centers on children’s social and cognitive development. Economics of 
Education Review, 26, 52-66. 
34 Larzelere, R.E., Kuhn, B.R., & Johnson, B. (2004). The intervention selection bias: An under-recognized 
confound in intervention research. Psychological Bulletin, 130(2), 289-303. 
35 Currie, J., & Thomas, D. (1995). Does Head Start make a difference?  American Economic Review, 85, 
341-364. 
Currie, J. & Thomas, D. (1999). Does Head Start help Hispanic children? Journal of Public Economics, 74, 
235-262. 
Such studies have their own limitations relating to measurement error and untenable assumptions that may 
be more damaging for estimating long-term than short-term effects. For example, parents may 
equalize investments in children over time so that if one attends Head Start while another does not 
parents may compensate the child who did not attend Head Start in other ways as opportunities 
arise later.  
36 Currie, J., & Thomas, D. (1995). Does Head Start make a difference?  American Economic Review, 85, 
341-364. 
Currie, J. & Thomas, D. (1999). Does Head Start help Hispanic children? Journal of Public Economics, 74, 
235-262. 
37 Garces, E., Thomas, D., & Currie, J. (2002). Longer term effects of Head Start. American Economic 
Review, 92(4), 999-1012. 
38 Barnett, W.S., & Camilli, G. (2002). Compensatory preschool education, cognitive development, and 
"race." In J. M. Fish (Ed.), Race and intelligence: Separating science from myth (pp. 369-406). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D.A. (2008). Long term effects o f Head Start on low-income children. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 40, 1-12. 
39 Ludwig, J., & Miller, D.L (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from a 
regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 159-208. Essentially, the 
regression discontinuity design constructs groups for comparison that differ in their degree of 
Head Start funding based on a historical artifact that is unrelated to characteristics of the children 
and communities in which they live that might affect child outcomes. 
40 The study does not find effects on mortality related to causes that are unlikely to have been affected by 
Head Start health services, nor does it find effects on cohorts not likely have benefited from the 
temporary differential in Head Start spending for some counties that is used to estimate effects. 
This increases confidence that the regression-discontinuity design is producing valid estimates. 
41 Inescapably, long-term effect estimates always apply to a program as it existed many years ago. This 
need not mean that the estimates cannot be validly applied to current programs. Consistency of 
findings across several decades strengthens the basis for generalization. Head Start today is a 
better funded program with more highly qualified staff and stronger performance standards than in 
the 1960s  and 1970s .  

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
27 of 35 
 
42 Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Eds.), (1983). As the twig is bent…lasting effects of preschool 
programs. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
43 Frede, E.C. (1998). Preschool program quality in programs for children in poverty. In: W.S. Barnett & 
S.S. Boocock (Eds.), Early care and education for children in poverty (pp. 77-98). Albany, NY: 
SUNY Press. 
44 Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Eds.), (1983). As the twig is bent…lasting effects of preschool 
programs. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
45 Schweinhart, L.J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W.S., Belfield, C.R., & Nores, M. (2005). Lifetime 
effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40 (Monographs of the High/Scope 
Educational Research Foundation, 14). Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press. Post-test data are 
available on 123 or 96% of the original sample. In a departure from random assignment, a small 
number of children whose mothers worked and had difficulty transporting children to the program 
were switched to from the preschool to the control group. Nevertheless, treatment and control 
children were comparable in other respects at entry. Statistical analyses indicate that this shift has 
no meaningful impact, but analyses adjusted for this in any case. Maternal employment is 
associated with better child outcomes in this sample. 
46 Berrueta-Clement, J.R., Scwheinhart, L.L., Barnett, W.S., Epstein, A.S., & Weikart, D.P. (1984). 
Changed lives:  The effects of the Perry Preschool program on youths through age 19. Ypsilanti, 
MI: High/Scope Press. 
47 Berrueta-Clement, J.R., Scwheinhart, L.L., Barnett, W.S., Epstein, A.S., & Weikart, D.P. (1984). 
Changed lives:  The effects of the Perry Preschool program on youths through age 19. Ypsilanti, 
MI: High/Scope Press. 
Schweinhart, L.J, Barnes, H.V., Weikart, D.P. (1993). Significant benefits:  The High/Scope Perry 
Preschool study through age 27. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press. 
48 Schweinhart, L.J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W.S., Belfield, C.R., & Nores, M. (2005). Lifetime 
effects:  The High/Scope Perry Preschool study through age 40 (Monographs of the High/Scope 
Educational Research Foundation, 14). Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press. 
Karoly, L.A., Kilburn, M.R., & Cannon, J.S. (2005). Early childhood interventions: Proven results, future 
promise. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation. 
49 Deutsch, M., Taleporos, E., & Victor, J. (1974). A brief synopsis of an initial enrichment program in 
early childhood. In S. Ryan (Ed.), A report on longitudinal evaluations of preschool programs 
Volume 1: Longitudinal evaluations (pp. 49-60). Washington, DC: Office of Child Development, 
US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 
Deutsch, M., Deutsch, C.P., Jordan, T.J., & Grallow, R. (1983). The IDS program: An experiment in early 
and sustained enrichment. In Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Ed.). As the Twig is Bent: 
Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs (pp. 377-410). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. The 
original sample included 503 children and 80% of these were tested after pre-K. 
50 Deutsch, M., Deutsch, C.P., Jordan, T.J., & Grallow, R. (1983). The IDS program: An experiment in 
early and sustained enrichment. In Consortium for Longitudinal Studies (Ed.). As the Twig is Bent: 
Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs (pp. 377-410). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
The sample for the latest follow-up was only 154 children, and lasting effects were found for boys, but not 
girls. 
Jordan, T.J., Grallo, R., Deutsch, M., & Deutsch, C.P. (1985). Long-term effects of early enrichment: A 20-
year perspective on persistence and change. American Journal of Community Psychology, 13(4), 
393-415. 
51 Larsen, J.M., Hite, S.J., & Hart, C.H. (1983). The effects of preschool on educationally advantaged 
children: First phases of a longitudinal study. Intelligence, 7, 345-352. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
28 of 35 
 
52 Larsen, J.M., & Robinson, C.C. (1989). Later effects of preschool on low-risk children. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly, 4, 133-144. Although not statistically significant, estimated effect sizes for 
girls appear to be in the 0.10 to 0.20 range for total achievement and even larger for language. 
53 Cook, T. (2008). Waiting for life to arrive: A history of the regression-discontinuity design in 
Psychology, Statistics and Economics. Journal of Econometrics, 14, 636–654. 
Cook, T.D., Wong, V.C., (In press). Empirical tests of the validation of the regression discontinuity design. 
Annales d’Economie et de Statistique. 
Hahn, H., Todd P., & van der Klaauw, W. (2001). Identification and estimation of treatment effects with a 
regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica, 69(3), 201-209. 
54 For a more detailed description of the application of this particular version of the RDD see: Wong, V.C., 
Cook, T.D. Barnett, W. S., & Jung, K. (2008). An effectiveness-based evaluation of five state pre-
kindergarten programs. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(1), 122-154. 
55 Gormley, W.T., Gayer, T., Phillips, D., & Dawson, B. (2005). The effects of universal pre-k on cognitive 
development. Developmental Psychology, 41(6), 872-884. 
Gormley, W.T., Phillips, D., & Gayer, T. (2008). Preschool programs can boost school readiness, Science, 
320, 1723-24. 
56 Gormley, W.T., Gayer, T., Phillips, D., & Dawson, B. (2005). The effects of universal pre-k on cognitive 
development. Developmental Psychology, 41(6), 872-884. 
Gormley, W.T., Phillips, D., & Gayer, T. (2008). Preschool programs can boost school readiness, Science, 
320, 1723-24. 
57 Gormley, W.T., Gayer, T., Phillips, D., & Dawson, B. (2005). The effects of universal pre-k on cognitive 
development. Developmental Psychology, 41(6), 872-884. 
Gormley, W.T., Phillips, D., & Gayer, T. (2008). Preschool programs can boost school readiness, Science, 
320, 1723-24. 
58 Barnett, W.S., Howes, C., & Jung, K. (2008). California’s state preschool program: Quality and effects 
on children’s cognitive abilities at kindergarten entry. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for 
Early Education Research, Rutgers University. 
Hustedt, J.T., Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., & Figueras, A. (2008). Impacts of New Mexico PreK on children’s 
school readiness at kindergarten entry: Results from the second year of a growing initiative. New 
Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers University. 
Hustedt, J.T., Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., & Thomas, J. (2007). The effects of the Arkansas Better Chance 
Program on young children’s school readiness. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early 
Education Research, Rutgers University.  
Wong, V.C., Cook, T.D. Barnett, W. S., & Jung, K. (2008). An effectiveness-based evaluation of five state 
pre-kindergarten programs. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(1), 122-154. 
The New Jersey study sampled programs only in the 31 school districts providing the Abbott Pre-K 
program. For logistical reasons, the California study sampled programs in a three diverse regions: 
Los Angeles, Fresno, and Sacramento.  
59 The average across eight states was calculated using the more conservative estimates from Wong et al. 
(2008) plus estimates from the Arkansas, California, and New Mexico (averaged of two years) 
studies with each state weighted equally. 
60 Barnett, W.S., Howes, C., & Jung, K. (2008). California’s state preschool program: Quality and effects 
on children’s cognitive abilities at kindergarten entry. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for 
Early Education Research, Rutgers University. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
29 of 35 
 
Frede, E.C., Jung, K., Barnett, W.S., Lamy, C.E., & Figueras, A. (2007). The Abbott Preschool Program 
Longitudinal Effects Study. Report to the New Jersey Department of Education. New Brunswick, 
NJ: NIEER.  
Hustedt, J.T., Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., & Thomas, J. (2007). The effects of the Arkansas Better Chance 
Program on young children’s school readiness. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early 
Education Research, Rutgers University. 
61 Frede, E.C., Jung, K., Barnett, W.S., Lamy, C.E., & Figueras, A. (2007). The Abbott Preschool Program 
Longitudinal Effects Study. Report to the New Jersey Department of Education. New Brunswick, 
NJ: NIEER.  
Hustedt, J.T., Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., & Thomas, J. (2007). The effects of the Arkansas Better Chance 
Program on young children’s school readiness. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early 
Education Research, Rutgers University. 
62 Frede, E.C., Jung, K., Barnett, W.S., Lamy, C.E., & Figueras, A. (2007). The Abbott Preschool Program 
Longitudinal Effects Study. Report to the New Jersey Department of Education. New Brunswick, 
NJ: NIEER. 
Hustedt, J.T., Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., & Thomas, J. (2007). The effects of the Arkansas Better Chance 
Program on young children’s school readiness. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for Early 
Education Research, Rutgers University. 
63 Frede, E.C., Jung, K., Barnett, W.S., Lamy, C.E., & Figueras, A. (2007). The Abbott Preschool Program 
Longitudinal Effects Study. Report to the New Jersey Department of Education. New Brunswick, 
NJ: NIEER. 
64 Gilliam, W.S., & Zigler, E.F. (2001). A critical meta-analysis of all impact evaluations of state-funded 
preschool from 1977 to 1998: Implications for policy, service delivery and program evaluation. 
Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15, 441-473. 
Gilliam, W., & Zigler, E. (2004). State efforts to evaluate the effects of prekindergarten: 1977 to 2003. 
Unpublished manuscript. NewHaven: Yale University Child Study Center. 
65 Barnett, W.S., Frede, E.C., Mobasher, H., & Mohr, P. (1987). The efficacy of public preschool programs 
and the relationship of program quality to efficacy. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 
10(1), 37-49. 
66 Irvine, D.J., Horan, M.D., Flint, D.L., Kukuk, S.E. & Hick, T.L. (1982). Evidence supporting 
comprehensive early childhood education for disadvantaged children. Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science, 461, 74-80. 
67 Aos, S., Lieb, R., Mayfield, J., Miller, M., & Pennucci, A. (2004). Benefits and costs of prevention and 
early intervention programs for youth. Olympia: Washington State Institute for Public Policy. 
Gilliam, W.S., & Zigler, E.F. (2001). A critical meta-analysis of all impact evaluations of state-funded 
preschool from 1977 to 1998: Implications for policy, service delivery, and program evaluation. 
Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15, 441-473. 
Barnett, W.S. (1998). Long term effects on cognitive development and school success. In W.S. Barnett and 
S.S. Boocock (Eds.) Early care and education for children in poverty:  Promises, programs, and 
long-term results. (pp. 11-44) Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
68 Barnett, W.S. (2004). Does Head Start have lasting cognitive effects? The myth of fadeout. In E. Zigler 
& S. Styfco (Eds.), The Head Start debates (pp. 221-249). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing 
Co. 
Barnett, W.S. (1998). Long-term effects on cognitive development and school success. In W.S. Barnett & 
S.S. Boocock (Eds.), Early care and education for children in poverty: Promises, programs, and 
long-term results (pp. 11-44). Albany, NY: SUNY Press 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
30 of 35 
 
69 Reynolds, A.J. (2000). Success in early intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
70 Reynolds, A.J. (2000). Success in early intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
71 The CPC study is one of the few quasi-experimental studies of public pre-K and Head Start to ensure that 
children who have been retained in grade are properly reintegrated with their age cohort in the 
statistical analyses of test scores at each grade level, which may explain why it finds persistent 
effects on achievement tests when other, less careful studies do not. 
72 Magnuson, K.A., Meyers, M., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Inequality in preschool education and 
school readiness. American Educational Research Journal 41(1), 115-157. 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance? Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51.  
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). The persistence of effects: Do subsequent classroom 
experiences matter? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22, 18-38. 
Similar findings emerge from research using Canadian national survey data where participation in 
“educational programs,” but not child care generally, is positively related to child development at 
ages 3 and 4. Lefebvre, P., & Merrigan, P. (2000). The effect of childcare and early education 
arrangements on developmental outcomes of young children. Working Paper No. 119. Center for 
Research on Economic Fluctuations and Employment, Universite du Quebec a Montreal.  
73 Glazerman, S., Levy, D.M., & Myers, D. (2003). Nonexperimental versus experimental estimates of 
earnings impacts. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 589, 63-93. 
74 Researchers have essentially guessed that when parents call a program pre-K or preschool then it is 
public pre-K, and this seems likely to have a very high error rate. An alternative is to consider only 
programs reported to be in a public school to be state and local pre-K. This omits many public pre-
K programs, but those that are included are likely to be correctly identified.  
75 Magnuson, K.A., Meyers, M., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2004). Inequality in preschool education and 
school readiness. American Educational Research Journal 41(1), 115-157. 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance?  Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51. 
76 Parents reporting that the program was in a public school, but not the one attended for kindergarten may 
simply have been wrong about the pre-K program being in a public school. Alternatively, there 
may be some kind of selection effect when children who change schools between pre-K and 
kindergarten are excluded from the pre-K group.  
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Does prekindergarten improve school preparation and 
performance? Economics of Education Review, 26, 33-51. 
Magnuson, K.A., Ruhm, C., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). The persistence of effects: Do subsequent classroom 
experiences matter? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22, 18-38. 
77 Gelbach, J. (2002). Public schooling for young children and maternal labor supply. American Economic 
Review, 92(1), 307-322.  
78 Cascio, E. (2006). Public preschool and maternal labor supply: evidence from the introduction of 
kindergartens into American public schools, (NBER Working Paper 12179). Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research. 
79 Lemke, R.J., Witt, R., & Witte, A.D. (2007). The transition from welfare to work. Eastern Economic 
Journal, 33(3), 359-373. 
80 Berlinski, S. & Galiani, S. (2007). The effect of a large expansion of pre-primary school facilities on 
preschool attendance and maternal employment. Labour Economics, 14, 665-680. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
31 of 35 
 
Schlosser, A. (2006). Public preschool and the labor supply of Arab mothers: Evidence from a natural 
experiment. Working Paper. Jerusalem:  Economics Department, Hebrew University. 
81 Raine, A., Mellingen, K., Liu, J., Venables, P., Mednick, S.A. (2003). Effects of environmental 
enrichment at ages 3-5 years on schizotypal personality and antisocial behavior at ages 17 and 23 
years. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(9), 1627-1635. 
82 Berlinski, S., Galiani, S., & Gertler, P. (2006). The effect of pre-primary on primary school performance. 
Institute for Fiscal Studies, (Working Paper W06/04). London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, 
University of London. 
Berlinski, S. Galiani, S., & Manacorda, M. (2008). Giving children a better start: preschool attendance and 
schoolage profiles. Journal of Public Economics, 92, 1416-1440. 
83 Goodman, A., & Sianesi, B. (2005). Early education and children’s outcomes: How long do the impacts 
last? London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of London.  
Melhuish, E.C., Phan, M.B., Sylva, K., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., & Taggart, B. (2008). Effects of 
home learning environment and preschool center experience upon literacy and numeracy 
development in early primary school. Journal of Social Issues, 64(1), 95-114. 
Osborne, A.F., & Milbank, J.E. (1987). The effects of early education: A report from the Child Health and 
Education Study. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Taggart, B., & Elliot, K. (2005). Investigating 
the effects of pre-school provision: Using mixed methods in the EPPE research. International 
Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8, 207-224.  
Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., & Taggart, B. (2004). The final report:  
Effective pre-school education. Technical paper 12. London: Institute of Education, University of 
London. 
84 Goodman, A., & Sianesi, B. (2005). Early education and children’s outcomes: How long do the impacts 
last? London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of London. 
85 Goodman, A., & Sianesi, B. (2005). Early education and children’s outcomes: How long do the impacts 
last? London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of London. 
86 Goodman, A., & Sianesi, B. (2005). Early education and children’s outcomes: How long do the impacts 
last? London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of London. 
Melhuish, E.C., Sylva, K., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., Taggart, B. Phan, M.B., & Malin, A. (2008). 
Preschool influences on mathematics achievement. Science, 321,  1161-1162. 
Melhuish, E.C., Phan, M.B., Sylva, K., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., & Taggart, B. (2008). Effects of 
home learning environment and preschool center experience upon literacy and numeracy 
development in early primary school. Journal of Social Issues, 64(1), 95-114. 
Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., & Taggart, B. (2004). The final report:  
Effective pre-school education. Technical paper 12. London: Institute of Education, University of 
London. 
87 Hogden, E. (2007). Early childhood education and young adult competencies at age 16. New Zealand: 
Ministry of Education and New Zealand Council for Educational Research. 
88 Goodman, A.G, & Sianesi, B. (2005). Early education and children’s outcomes: How long do the 
impacts last? London: Institute for Fiscal Studies, University of London.  
Hogden, E. (2007). Early childhood education and young adult competencies at age 16. New Zealand: 
Ministry of Education and New Zealand Council for Educational Research. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
32 of 35 
 
Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., & Taggart, B. (2004). The final report:  
Effective pre-school education. Technical paper 12. London: Institute of Education, University of 
London. 
89Fuchs, T., & Wossmann, L. (2006). Governance and primary school performance:  International 
evidence. Munich: Ifo Institute for Economic Research, University of Munich. 
Rindermann, H. & Ceci, S.J. (2008). Education policy and country outcomes in international cognitive 
competence studies. Graz, Austria: Institute of Psychology, Karl-Franzens-University Graz. 
Schutz, G., Ursprung, H.W., & Wossmann, L. (2008). Education policy and equality of opportunity. 
Kyklos, 61, 279-308. 
Wossmann, L., Ludemann, E., Schutz, G., & West, M.R. (2007). School accountability, autonomy, choice, 
and the level of student achievement: International evidence from PISA 2003. (Education Working 
Paper No. 13). Paris: OECD Directorate for Education. 
90 The study randomly assigned 123 families. Only 111 children in 109 families participated in the study as 
12 dropped after assignment, primarily because 8 decided not to send their children to the child 
care program. This differential attrition may have produced differences between the groups, 
though these appear to have been very slight, about one maternal IQ point and a half year of 
maternal education (no statistically significant differences were found in family background). As 
will be seen, these slight differences could not account for either the pattern or magnitude of 
estimated program effects.  
Campbell, F.A., & Ramey, C.T. (2007, December). Carolina Abecedarian Project. Paper presented at the 
Conference on Critical Issues in Cost Effectiveness in Children’s First Decade, Minneapolis, MN.  
91 Barnett, W.S., & Masse, L.N. (2007). Comparative benefit-cost analysis of the Abecedarian program and 
its policy implications. Economics of Education Review, 26, 113–125. 
Campbell, F.A., & Ramey, C.T. (1995). Cognitive and school outcomes for high-risk African-American 
students at middle adolescence: Positive effects of early intervention. American Educational 
Research Journal, 34(4), 743-772. 
Campbell, F.A., Ramey, C.T., Pungello, E.P., Sparling, J.J., & Miller-Johnson, S. (2002). Early childhood 
education: Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. Applied Developmental Science, 
6, 42-57. 
McLaughlin, A.E., Campbell, F.A., Pungello, E.P., & Skinner, M. (2007). Depressive symptoms in young 
adults: The influences of the early home environment and early educational child care. Child 
Development, 78(3), 746-756. 
Ramey, C.T., Campbell, F.A., Burchinal, M., Skinner, M.L., Gardner, D.M., & Ramey, S.L. (2000). 
Persistent effects of early childhood education on high-risk children and their mothers. Applied 
Developmental Science, 4(1), 2-14. 
92 After entry to school, teachers reported that children in the earliest cohorts were somewhat more 
aggressive. As a result, changes were made to the curriculum, and children from later cohorts were 
not reported to be more aggressive, nor were any later negative effects found for the entire 
program group.  
93 Campbell, F.A., Wasik, B.H., Pungello, E.P., Burchinal, M., Barbarin, O., Kainz, K. et al. (In press). 
Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian and CARE early childhood educational 
interventions. Early Childhood Research Quarterly. 
94 Unfortunately, the study does not clearly report whether achievement testing was conducted by the 
schools or the study researchers, the sample size at each year, or whether analyses are by grade 
level or age. 
Garber, H.L. (1988). The Milwaukee Project: Preventing mental retardation in children at risk. 
Washington, DC: American Association on Mental Retardation. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
33 of 35 
 
95 Infant Health and Development Program. (1990). Enhancing the outcomes of low-birth-weight, 
premature infants: A multisite, randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
263, 3035 -3042. 
96 Average IQ in the control group is 92 compared to a norm of 100 for the population as a whole. 
97 McCarton, C., Brooks-Gunn, J., Wallace, I., Bauer, C., Bennett, F., Bernbaum, J. et al. (1997). Results at 
8 Years of Intervention for Low Birthweight Premature Infants: The Infant Health and 
Development Program. Journal of the American Medical Association, 227, 126-32.  
98 McCarton, C., Brooks-Gunn, J., Wallace, I., Bauer, C., Bennett, F., Bernbaum, J. et al. (1997). Results at 
8 Years of Intervention for Low Birthweight Premature Infants: The Infant Health and 
Development Program. Journal of the American Medical Association, 227, 126-32.  
99 McCormick, M.C., Brooks-Gunn, J., Buka, S.L., Goldman, J., Yu, J., Salganik, M., Scott, D.T., et al. 
(2008). Early intervention in low birth weight premature infants: Results at 18 years of age for the 
Infant Health and Development Program. Pediatrics, 117(3), 771-780. 
100 The IDHP study relies on mother’s reports for school outcomes rather than official records, a potential 
source of additional error. Reported dropout rates differ by only one percentage point, and no 
results are reported for grade repetition.  
101 Martin, A., Brooks-Gunn, J., Klebanov, P., Buka, S.L., & McCormick, M.C. (2008). Long-term effects 
of early childhood intervention: Findings from the Infant Health and Development Program 
(IHDP). Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 29, 101-107. 
102 St. Pierre, R.G., &. Layzer, J.I. (1999). Using home visits for multiple purposes: The Comprehensive 
Child Development Program. Future of Children, 9(1), 134-151. 
St. Pierre, R.G., Layzer, J.I., & Barnes, H.V. (1995). Regenerating Two-Generation Programs (99-121). In 
W.S. Barnett and S.S. Boocock (Eds.) Early care and education for children in poverty: Promises, 
programs, and long-term results. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.  
St. Pierre, R.G., Layzer, J.I., Goodson, B.D., & Bernstein, L.S. (1997). National impact evaluation of the 
Comprehensive Child Development Program. Cambridge, MA: Abt. Associates, Inc. 
103 Love, J.M., Kisker, E.E., Ross, C.M., Schochet, P.Z., Brooks-Gunn, J., Boller, K. et al. (2001). Early 
Head Start research-building their futures: How Early Head Start programs are enhancing the 
lives of infants and toddlers in low-income families. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, 
Inc. 
104Love, J.M., Vogel, C., Raikes, H.H., Chazan-Cohen, R., Kisker, E.E., Constantine, J., et al. (2007, 
March). Impacts of Early Head Start at the end of the program (Age 3) and two years later when 
children were in prekindergarten. Presentation at the SRCD Biennial Meeting, Boston, MA. 
Retrieved July 20, 2008 from http://www.mathematica-
mpr.com/about%20us/srcd07abstracts.asp#impacts 
Chazan-Cohen, R., Ayoub, C., Pan, B.A., Roggman, L., Raikes, H., McKelvey, L. et al. (2007). It takes 
time: Impacts of Early Head Start that lead to reductions in maternal depression two years later. 
Infant Mental Health Journal, 28(2), 151-170. 
105 Some smaller studies report effects for girls, but not boys. The interaction between treatment and gender 
typically is not statistically significant, however, and other studies find the opposite trend. No 
large scale study reports finding significant differences by gender. Some studies find somewhat 
larger effects for disadvantaged children, while others do not. 
106 Barnett, W. S. (2007). Benefits and costs of quality early childhood education. The Children's Legal 
Rights Journal (CLRJ), 27(1), 7-23.  
107 Barnett, W.S., & Masse L.N. (2007). Comparative benefit-cost analysis of the Abecedarian program and 
its policy implications. Economics of Education Review, 26 (1), 113-125.  

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
34 of 35 
 
Temple, J., & Reynolds, A. (2007). Benefits and costs of investments in preschool education: Evidence 
from the Child-Parent Centers and related programs. Economics of Education Review, 26, 126-
144.  
108 For a more detailed consideration of these issues see Barnett, W. S., Brown, K., & Shore, R. (2004). The 
universal vs. targeted debate: Should the United States have preschool for all? Preschool Policy 
Matters, Issue 6. New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER. 
109 Barnett, W. S. (2007). Benefits and costs of quality early childhood education. The Children's Legal 
Rights Journal (CLRJ), 27(1), 7-23. 
110 Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D. (2007). The benefits and costs of Head Start. Social Policy Report, 21(3), 3-
13 
111 New Jersey’s highly effective model is primarily composed of former private child care programs that 
were upgraded, if need be, to public school standards for pay and teacher qualifications with a 
maximum of 15 children per teacher and assistant. Frede, E.C., Jung, K., Barnett, W.S., Lamy, 
C.E., & Figueras, A. (2007). The Abbott Preschool Program Longitudinal Effects Study. Report to 
the New Jersey Department of Education. New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER.  
112 Robin, K. B., Frede, E. C., & Barnett, W. S. (2006). Is more better? The effects of full-day vs. half-day 
preschool on early school achievement. New Brunswick, NJ:  NIEER. 
113 Barnett, W. S. (2003). Better teachers, better preschools: Student achievement linked to teacher 
qualifications. Preschool Policy Matters, Issue 2. New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER. 
Barnett, W. S., Schulman, K., & Shore, R. (2004). Class size: What’s the best fit? Preschool Policy Matters, Issue 9. 
New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER.  
Kelly, P., & Camilli, G. (2004). Effects of teacher qualifications in preschool education: A meta-analysis 
(Working paper). New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER.  
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (2002). Child care structure→ process→ outcome: Direct and 
indirect effects of child-care quality on young children’s development. Psychological Science, 13, 
199–206. 
Vandell, D. L., & Wolfe, B. (2000). Child care quality: Does it matter and does it need to be improved? 
Madison: Institute for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin. 
Yoshikawa, H., Rosman, E. A., & Hsueh, J. (2002). Resolving paradoxical criteria for the expansion and 
replication of early childhood care and education programs. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 
17: 3-27. 
114 Early, D., Maxwell, K., Burchinal, M., Alva, S., Bender, R., Bryant, D., et al., (2007). Teacher 
education, classroom quality, and young children’s academic skills: Results from seven studies of 
preschool programs. Child Development, 78(2), 558-580. 
Kelly, P., & Camilli, G. (2004). Effects of teacher qualifications in preschool education: A meta-analysis 
(Working paper). New Brunswick, NJ: NIEER.  
Pianta, R., Howes, C., Burchinal, M., Bryant, D., Clifford, R., Early, D., & Barbarin, O. (2005). Features of 
pre-kindergarten programs, classrooms, and teachers: Do they predict observed classroom quality 
and child-teacher interactions? Applied Developmental Science, 9(3), 144-159. 
Mashburn, A.J., Pianta, R.C., Hamre, B.K., Downer, J.T., Barbarin, O.A., Bryant, D., Burchinal, M., Early, 
D.M., & Howes, C. (2008) Measures of classroom quality in pre-kindergarten and children's 
development of academic, language and social skills. Child Development, 79(3), 732-749. 
115 Nye, B. A., Hedges, L. V., & Konstantopoulos, S. (2000). The effects of small classes on academic 
achievement: The results of the Tennessee Class Size Experiment. American Educational 
ResearchJournal, 37, 123–151. 

Preschool education and its lasting effects 
 
 
 
 
 
http://epicpolicy.org/publication/preschool-education 
35 of 35 
 
116 Travers, J., Goodson, B.D., Singer, J.D., & Connell, D.B. (1980). Research results of the National Day 
Care Study. Final Report, Volume II. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates. 
117 Rothstein, J. (2008). Teacher quality in educational production: Tracking, decay, and student 
achievement. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University. 
118 Frede, E.C. (1998). Preschool program quality in programs for children in poverty. In: W.S. Barnett & 
S.S. Boocock (Eds.), Early care and education for children in poverty (pp. 77-98). Albany, NY: 
SUNY Press.  
Mashburn, A.J., Pianta, R.C., Hamre, B.K., Downer, J.T., Barbarin, O.A., Bryant, D., Burchinal, M., Early, 
D.M., & Howes, C. (2008) Measures of classroom quality in pre-kindergarten and children's 
development of academic, language and social skills. Child Development, 79(3), 732-749. 
119 Preschool Curriculum Evaluation Research Consortium (2008). Effects of preschool curriculum on 
school readiness. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Research, Institute of 
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. 
120Although cross study comparison of the research reviewed here is instructive, two particularly relevant 
randomized trials that compare curricula directly add significantly to our knowledge in this respect 
(cited below).  
Barnett, W.S., Jung, K., Yarosz, D.J., Thomas, J., Hornbeck, A., Stechuk, R., & Burns, S. (2008). 
Educational effectiveness of the Tools of the Mind curriculum: a randomized trial. Early 
Childhood Research Quarterly, 23, 299-313. 
Diamond, A., Barnett,W. S., Thomas, J., & Munro, S. (2007). Preschool program improves cognitive 
control. Science, 318, 1387–1388. 
Schweinhart, L.J. & Weikart, D.P. (1997). The High/Scope preschool curriculum comparison study through 
age 23. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 12(2), 117-143. 
121 In addition to their intrinsic importance, poor nutrition and health have been implicated in childhood-
onset of persistent patterns of anti-social behavior. Head Start and state pre-k programs (to varying 
degrees) address children’s health and nutrition needs. 
Raine, A., Mellingen, K., Liu, J., Venables, P., & Mednick, S. A. (2003). Effects of environmental 
enrichment at ages 3-5 years on schizotypal personality and antisocial behavior at ages 17 and 23 
years. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(9), 1627-1635. 
van Goozen, S.H.M., Farichild, G., & Harold, G.T. (2008). The role of neurobiological deficits in 
childhood antisocial behavior. Current Directions in Pyschological Science, 17(3), 224-228. 
 
