Two Regimes of Global Health
Andrew Lakoff
Humanity: An International Journal of Human Rights,
Humanitarianism, and Development, Volume 1, Number 1, Fall 2010,
pp. 59-79 (Article)
Published by University of Pennsylvania Press
DOI:
For additional information about this article
https://doi.org/10.1353/hum.2010.0001
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/394856
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

Andrew Lakoff
Two Regimes of Global Health
The movement for global health is an increasingly prominent rationale for action
across a range of organizations, including philanthropic foundations, development
agencies, and biomedical research institutes. Despite the appearance of a shared moral
and technical project, however, global health is not a uniﬁed ﬁeld. Even for many of
the actors centrally involved in the movement, it is not clear precisely what the term
entails and how global health projects should be distinguished from already established
national and international public health efforts.1 Indeed, different projects of global
health imply starkly different understandings of the most salient threats facing global
populations, of the relevant groups whose health should be protected, and of the
appropriate justiﬁcation for health interventions that transgress national sovereignty.
In what follows I describe two contemporary regimes for envisioning and inter-
vening in the ﬁeld of global health: global health security and humanitarian biomedicine.
Each of these regimes combines normative and technical elements to provide a
rationale for managing infectious disease on a global scale. They each envision a form
of social life that requires the fulﬁllment of an innovative technological project.
However, the two regimes rest on very different visions of both the social order that
is at stake in global health and the most appropriate technical means of achieving it.
While these two regimes by no means exhaust the expansive ﬁeld of global health,
their juxtaposition usefully highlights some of the tensions inherent in many contem-
porary global health initiatives.
Global health security focuses on ‘‘emerging infectious diseases’’—whether natu-
rally occurring or man-made—which are seen to threaten wealthy countries, and
which typically (though not always) emanate from Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, or Latin
America. Its exemplary pathogens include weaponized smallpox, SARS, and highly
virulent inﬂuenza; but what is crucial is that this regime is oriented toward outbreaks
that have not yet occurred—and may never occur. For this reason, it seeks to implement
systems of preparedness for events whose likelihood is incalculable but whose political,
economic, and health consequences could be catastrophic. Its ambitious sociotechnical
agenda is to create a real-time, global disease surveillance system that can provide
‘‘early warning’’ of potential outbreaks in developing countries and link such early
warning to immediate systems of response that will protect against their spread to the
rest of the world. To achieve this, global health security initiatives draw together
various organizations including multilateral health agencies, national disease control
institutes, and collaborative reference laboratories and assemble diverse technical
elements such as disease surveillance methods, emergency operations centers, and
vaccine distribution systems.
59
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

60
Humanity
Fall 2010
Humanitarian biomedicine, in contrast, targets diseases that currently afﬂict the
poorer nations of the world, such as malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS. Its prob-
lematic is one of alleviating the suffering of individuals, regardless of national bound-
aries or social groupings. Such intervention is seen as necessary where public health
infrastructure at the nation-state level is in poor condition or nonexistent. Humani-
tarian biomedicine tends to develop ‘‘apolitical’’ linkages—between nongovernmental
organizations, activists, scientiﬁc researchers, and local health workers. Its target of
intervention is not a collectivity conceived as a national population but rather indi-
vidual human lives. As a sociotechnical project, this regime seeks to bring advanced
diagnostic and pharmaceutical interventions to those in need; this involves both
providing access to existing medical technologies and spurring the development of
new medications addressed to ‘‘neglected diseases’’—that is, diseases not currently
targeted by the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. Whereas global health
security develops prophylaxis against potential threats at home, humanitarian biomed-
icine invests resources to mitigate present suffering in other places.
Each regime is ‘‘global’’ in the sense that it strives to transcend certain limitations
posed by the national governance of public health. Within each regime actors work
to craft a space of the global that will be a site of knowledge and intervention.2
However, the type of ethical relationship implied by a project of global health depends
upon the regime in which the question is posed: the connection between health advo-
cates and the afﬂicted (or potentially afﬂicted) can be one of either moral obligation
to the other or protection against risk to the self. Global health is, in this sense, a
contested ethical, political, and technical zone whose contours are still under construc-
tion.
Governing Pathogens
A recent case illustrates some of the tensions that can arise at the intersection of these
two regimes. In an opinion piece published in the Washington Post in August ,
the diplomat Richard Holbrooke and the science journalist Laurie Garrett mounted a
sharp attack on what they called ‘‘viral sovereignty.’’ By this term, the authors referred
to the ‘‘extremely dangerous’’ idea that sovereign states could exercise ownership rights
over samples of viruses found in their territory. Speciﬁcally, Holbrooke and Garrett
were incensed by the Indonesian government’s refusal to share samples of HNavian
inﬂuenza with the World Health Organization’s Global Inﬂuenza Surveillance
Network (GISN). For over ﬁfty years, this network had collected samples of ﬂu viruses
from around the world and used these samples to determine the composition of yearly
ﬂu vaccines. More recently, the network had tracked the transformations of avian
inﬂuenza viruses as a means of assessing the risk of a deadly global pandemic.3 Interna-
tional health experts feared that the new strain of HN, which had already proven
highly virulent, would mutate to become easily transmissible among humans—in
which case a worldwide calamity could be at hand. GISN thus served as a global early
warning system enabling experts to track genetic changes in the virus that could lead
to a catastrophic disease event.
As the country where the most human cases of avian inﬂuenza had been reported,
Indonesia was a potential epicenter of such an outbreak. For this reason, the country’s

decision to withhold samples of the virus undermined GISN’s function as a global
early warning system. From Holbrooke and Garrett’s vantage, Indonesia’s action
posed a signiﬁcant threat to global health. ‘‘In this age of globalization,’’ they wrote,
‘‘failure to make viral samples open-source risks allowing the emergence of a new
strain of inﬂuenza that could go unnoticed until it is capable of exacting the sort of
toll taken by the pandemic that killed tens of millions in .’’ According to Garrett
and Holbrooke, Indonesia had not only a moral but also a legal obligation to share its
viruses with the World Health Organization. They argued that the country’s action
was a violation of the newly revised International Health Regulations (IHR), which
held the status of an international treaty for WHO member states.
The opinion piece suggested that the rational and beneﬁcent technocracy of the
WHO was faced with antiscientiﬁc demagoguery that threatened the world’s health.
Holbrooke and Garrett painted a picture of the Indonesian health minister, Siti
Fadilah Supari, as an irrational populist who sought to make domestic political gains
through unfounded attacks on the United States and the international health
community. Indonesia was apparently withholding these virus samples based on the
‘‘dangerous folly’’ that these materials should be protected through the same legal
mechanism that the UN Food and Agriculture Organization used to guarantee poor
countries’ rights of ownership to indigenous agricultural resources—the Convention
on Biological Diversity. Further, Holbrooke and Garrett rebuked Supari’s ‘‘outlandish
claims’’ that the U.S. government was planning to use Indonesia’s HNsamples to
design biological warfare agents—echoing U.S. secretary of defense Robert Gates’s
reaction upon hearing this accusation during a visit to Jakarta: ‘‘the nuttiest idea I’ve
ever heard.’’4
The controversy over inﬂuenza virus-sharing was, it turned out, somewhat more
complicated than Holbrooke and Garrett allowed. Beginning in late , at Supari’s
behest, the Indonesian Health Ministry had stopped sharing isolates of HNfound
in patients who had died of avian inﬂuenza with the Global Inﬂuenza Surveillance
Network. The source of Supari’s ire was the discovery that an Australian pharmaceu-
tical company had developed a patented vaccine for avian ﬂu using an Indonesian
strain of the virus—a vaccine that would not be affordable for most Indonesians in
the event of a deadly pandemic. More generally, given the limited number of vaccine
doses that could be produced in time to manage such a pandemic—estimates were in
the million range—experts acknowledged that developing countries would have
little access to such a vaccine. In other words, while Indonesia had been delivering
virus samples to WHO as part of a collective early warning mechanism (i.e., GISN),
its population would not be the beneﬁciary of the biomedical response apparatus that
had been constructed to prepare for a deadly global outbreak. For the Indonesian
health minister, this situation indicated a dark ‘‘conspiracy between superpower
nations and global organizations.’’
While less suspicious of U.S. and WHO intentions than Supari, a number of
Western journalists and scientists were sympathetic to the Indonesian position—on
the grounds of equity in the global distribution of necessary medicines. A Time
magazine article noted that ‘‘they had a point; poor developing nations are often
priced out of needed medicines, and they’re likely to be last in line for vaccine during
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
61

62
Humanity
Fall 2010
a pandemic.’’5 An editorial in the Lancet argued that ‘‘to ensure global health security,
countries have to protect the wellbeing not only of their own patients but also those
of fellow nations.’’6 Anxious to ensure the functioning of its surveillance apparatus,
WHO was willing to strike a bargain: at a World Health Assembly meeting in ,
members agreed to explore ways of helping poorer countries to build vaccine
production capacity. But the ﬁnancial and technical details of how such a system
would function were opaque, and the issue remained unresolved. In October , as
Indonesia continued to withhold the vast majority of its virus samples from GISN,
Agence France-Presse reported that ‘‘Supari does appear to be vindicated by a ﬂood
of patents being lodged on the samples of HNthat have made it out of Indonesia,
with companies in developed countries claiming ownership over viral DNA taken
from sick Indonesians.’’7 The Australian drug company CSL acknowledged that it had
used Indonesian bird ﬂu strains to develop a trial vaccine but insisted that it had no
obligation to compensate Indonesia or guarantee access to the vaccine.
A good deal more could be said about the controversy over Indonesia’s refusal to
share its HNsamples, but I want to focus here on just one aspect of Holbrooke and
Garrett’s attack: their accusation that Indonesia was in violation of the revised Interna-
tional Health Regulations (IHR). The IHR system, dating from the International
Sanitary Law, deﬁnes states’ mutual obligations in the event of an outbreak of a
dangerous communicable disease. Historically, its function has been to guarantee the
continued ﬂow of global commodities in the event of such outbreaks, ensuring that
countries do not take overly restrictive measures in response to the threat of infection.
The HNvirus-sharing controversy unfolded just after a major revision of these regu-
lations. According to the legal scholar David Fidler, the IHR revision was ‘‘one
of the most radical and far-reaching changes in international law on public health
since the beginning of international health co-operation in the mid-nineteenth
century.’’8
For my purposes here, the revised IHR are best understood as a signiﬁcant element
in an emerging apparatus of global disease surveillance and response—what the World
Health Organization called ‘‘global public health security.’’ The IHR instituted a new
set of legal obligations for nation-states to accept global intervention in a world seen
as under threat from ominous pathogens circulating ever more rapidly. A key
provision expanded the list of the diseases that would be subject to international
regulation and potential intervention beyond the classic infections of the nineteenth
century—cholera, yellow fever, and plague. Now any disease outbreak that could be
classiﬁed as a ‘‘public health emergency of international concern’’ (PHEIC)—such as
SARS, or an easily transmissible form of HN—would be covered by the IHR regula-
tions. International law experts saw the virus-sharing controversy as an early test of
how well the revised IHR would function.
According to the new regulations, IHR signatories were required to provide WHO
with ‘‘public health information about events that may constitute a PHEIC.’’9 In the
case of the virus-sharing controversy, the central legal question was whether biological
materials constituted such ‘‘public health information.’’ Plausible arguments could be
made on both sides. At the May meeting of the World Health Assembly, WHO
director Margaret Chan claimed that ‘‘countries that did not share avian inﬂuenza
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

virus would fail the IHR.’’10 The U.S. delegation agreed: ‘‘All nations have a responsi-
bility under the revised IHRs to share data and virus samples on a timely basis and
without preconditions.’’11 Thus, the United States argued, ‘‘Our view is that with-
holding inﬂuenza viruses from GISN greatly threatens global public health and will
violate the legal obligations we have all agreed to undertake through our adherence to
IHRs.’’ However, the relevance of the revised IHR to the speciﬁc issue of virus sharing
was ambiguous: the new regulations explicitly referred only to a requirement to share
public health information, such as case reports and fatality rates, and the case could be
made that biological materials such as virus samples were distinct from such informa-
tion.12
In any case, the Indonesian Health Ministry’s response came from outside the
legal framework of IHR. Rather, Supari argued that the global virus sharing system
was ethically compromised, and in need of reform. ‘‘We want to change the global
virus-sharing mechanism to be fair, transparent and equitable,’’ Supari said in an
interview defending the government’s decision to withhold the virus.13 ‘‘What we
mean by fair is that any virus sharing should be accompanied by beneﬁts derived from
the shared virus, and these beneﬁts should be coming from the vaccine-producing
countries.’’ Supari was speaking from within a different technical and political prob-
lematic than that of the WHO’s framework of ‘‘global public health security,’’ the
strategy that the revised IHR was designed to serve. In speaking of beneﬁts sharing,
Supari was invoking a mechanism intended to encourage development—the
Convention on Biological Diversity—in order to ground a rhetoric of national sover-
eignty that ran counter to the transnational authority of the WHO. But her attack on
the high price of patented vaccines also resonated with demands for equal access to
life-saving medicines coming out of the humanitarian global health movement.
A technical and political system designed to prepare for potentially catastrophic
disease outbreaks was facing a very different demand: a call for access to essential
medicines based on a vision of global equity (see table ). The potential for a deadly
outbreak of avian inﬂuenza had led to an encounter between two different ways of
conceptualizing the problem of global health—one that was taking place in the
absence of an actual HNpandemic. At stake was not only the issue of how best to
respond to a global outbreak of HNbut, more broadly, how to deﬁne the political
obligation to care for the population’s health in a globalizing world in which the
capacity of national public health authorities to protect citizens’ well-being was
increasingly in question.
Assembling Global Health
Each of these regimes can be seen as a response to a crisis of existing, nation-state–
based systems of public health. From the vantage of global health security, this crisis
comes from the recognition that existing national public health systems are inadequate
to prepare for the potentially catastrophic threat of emerging and reemerging infec-
tious diseases. Such diseases outstrip the capabilities of modern public health systems
that were designed to manage known diseases that occur with regularity in a national
population. For humanitarian biomedicine, in contrast, the crisis comes from the
failure of development efforts to provide adequate health infrastructure to lessen the
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
63

64
Humanity
Fall 2010
Table : Regimes of Global Health
Global Health Security
Humanitarian Biomedicine
Type of threat
Emerging infectious diseases that
Neglected diseases that afﬂict poor
threaten wealthy countries
countries
Source of
Social and ecological
Failure of development; lack of
pathogenicity
transformations linked to
access to health care
globalization
Organizations and
National and international health
NGOs, philanthropies, activists
actors
agencies; technocrats
Techno-political
Global disease surveillance;
Provide access to essential
interventions
building response capacity; rapidly
medicines; drug and vaccine
develop biomedical interventions
research and development for
to manage novel pathogens
diseases of the poor
Target of
National public health
Suffering individuals
Intervention
infrastructures
Ethical stance
Self-protection
Common humanity
burden of treatable but still deadly maladies in poor countries: it is a political and
technical failure rather than the result of disease emergence per se. For humanitarian
biomedicine, especially in the context of ‘‘low capacity’’ states in which public health
infrastructure has collapsed, human suffering demands urgent and immediate response
outside the framework of state sovereignty. Despite their differences, each of these
regimes of global health has borrowed certain aspects of earlier public health forma-
tions, adapting them for new uses in the post–Cold War era.
Public health systems in Europe and North America were initially built in the
mid-to-late nineteenth century in response to pathologies linked to industrialization
in urban centers.14 For these systems, the object of knowledge and intervention was
the population: its rates of death and disease, cycles of scarcity, and endemic levels of
mortality. Public health advocates uncovered patterns of disease incidence linked to
living conditions that could be reduced through technical interventions.15 Statistical
knowledge, generated in ﬁelds such as epidemiology and demography, made these
collective regularities visible. This form of public health sought to know and to
manage such regularities, to decrease mortality and increase longevity—to ‘‘optimize
a state of life,’’ as Michel Foucault put it.16
For this early form of public health, the design of interventions required the
analysis of historical patterns of disease in a given population. For example, as the
historian George Rosen has shown, nineteenth-century British public health reformers
carefully tracked the incidence of disease according to differential social locations to
make the argument that ‘‘health was affected for better or worse by the state of the
physical or social environment.’’17 Such knowledge was cumulative and calculative.
Reformers gathered and analyzed vital statistics—rates of birth, death, and illness
among various classes—in order to demonstrate the economic rationality of disease-
prevention measures such as the provision of clean water or the removal of waste from

streets.18 If this initial mode of public health intervention emphasized social condi-
tions—sanitation, nutrition, the safety of factories—a next iteration of public health
narrowed its focus to the level of the pathogen. The rise of bacteriology in the late
nineteenth century led to the systematic practice of mass vaccination against infectious
disease. But again, for these early forms of public health, making rational interventions
required knowledge about the historical pattern of disease incidence in a speciﬁc popu-
lation.19
Cold War–era international health efforts, as exempliﬁed by the World Health
Organization after its founding in , sought to forge collaborations between
existing national public health agencies.20 International health in this period had two
main currents: disease eradication and primary health care. The major international
disease eradication efforts were the WHO-led malaria campaign beginning in 
(and abandoned by the early s) and the more successful smallpox eradication
campaign, again led by WHO and completed in . Such initiatives were interna-
tional—rather than ‘‘global’’—in that they required coordination between WHO and
national public health services. The other main current of Cold War–era international
health, ‘‘primary health care,’’ articulated health as a basic human right linked to social
and economic development. Again, this vision was international rather than global: a
functioning nation-state apparatus was seen as central to the delivery of basic primary
care and so development efforts were critical to the improvement of population health.
By the early s the primary health care model linked to the developmental state
was in crisis. Funding dried out for primary health schemes in the context of the
inﬂuence of World Bank–led reforms of national health systems. The WHO shifted
its energies toward vertically integrated public-private partnerships that focused on
managing speciﬁc diseases—such as HIV/AIDS and TB—rather than on developing
local health infrastructures. The emphasis was on targeting the ‘‘burden’’ of a given
disease. As a group of public health historians has recently suggested, competition
between the World Health Organization and the World Bank over the ﬁeld of primary
care was one motivation for WHO’s move toward such public-private global health
initiatives.21 The Gates Foundation also played a key early role in this shift, funding
$.billion worth of projects from to . Gates was then joined in this type
of disease-focused initiative by other donor-funded institutions, such as the UN
Global Fund and the Clinton Global Initiative.
Contemporary regimes of global health take up aspects of earlier public health
programs but adapt them to a different set of circumstances. Global health security
seeks to direct certain elements of existing national health systems toward its goal of
early detection of emerging infections. Since the focus of this regime is on potential
disease events, whose likelihood cannot be calculated using statistical methods, it
develops techniques of imaginative enactment that model the impact of an outbreak.
Global health security demands compliance from national governments in developing
preparedness measures against potential outbreaks that threaten global catastrophe.
Like classical public health, humanitarian biomedicine is concerned with actually
existing diseases, but it functions outside of a state apparatus; its object of concern is
not the national population but rather suffering individuals irrespective of national
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
65
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

66
Humanity
Fall 2010
borders. If a major ethical imperative for classical public health efforts was one of
social solidarity, that of humanitarian biomedicine is one of common humanity.
Humanitarian Biomedicine
By the term ‘‘humanitarian biomedicine,’’ I do not refer to a single, clearly articulated
framework or tightly linked set of institutions; rather I mean to indicate a congeries
of actors and organizations with diverse histories, missions, and technical approaches.
They share what Peter Redﬁeld calls ‘‘a secular commitment to the value of human
life’’—one that is practiced through medical intervention.22 This ethical commitment
underlies a sense of urgency to provide care to suffering victims of violence, disease,
and political instability. The structure of intervention is one in which medical organi-
zations and philanthropies from advanced industrial countries engage in focused
projects of saving lives in the developing world—and these efforts explicitly seek to
avoid political involvement.23
My goal here will not be to provide a thorough history of the ﬁeld of humanitarian
biomedicine but rather to point brieﬂy to some of the salient points of juxtaposition
with global health security.24 We can take as exemplary instances of humanitarian
biomedicine two prominent—though quite distinctive—organizations: Me´decins sans
frontie`res (MSF) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). In her 
analysis of MSF, Rene´e Fox writes that the organization’s efforts are premised on the
‘‘conviction that the provision of medical care, service, and relief is a humane form of
moral action’’—that medical practice has the capacity to heal the body politic as well
as the human body.25 MSF has an actively ‘‘global’’ sense of its mission, challenging
the ‘‘sacred principle’’ of the sovereignty of the state and claiming a new world order
based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Melinda Gates has articulated
a similar ethical stance based on the equivalence of all lives in her recent call for a new
initiative to eradicate malaria: ‘‘The ﬁrst reason to work to eradicate malaria is an
ethical reason—the simple cost. Every life has equal worth. Sickness and death in
Africa are just as awful as sickness and death in America.’’26 It is worth contrasting
this ethical rationale for malaria eradication—one grounded in common humanity,
ostensibly outside politics—with the developmentalist agenda at the heart of Cold
War international health efforts, in which improving the health of a given population
was inextricably tied to economic and political modernization.27
In a sense, the primary health movement’s stance of a ‘‘right to health for all’’ was
carried into humanitarian biomedicine. But this right was no longer to be concretized
by national governments, which were now seen as beset with corruption, incapable of
reliably enacting programs. Thus global health initiatives to combat speciﬁc diseases
such as AIDS in the developing world expressly detach aid from existing national
health agencies, seeking to ‘‘govern through the nongovernmental.’’ As Manjari
Mahajan puts it in her analysis of AIDS programs in India funded by Western donors,
‘‘That which was explicitly ‘nongovernmental’ was recruited to provide public health
services that had traditionally been in the ambit of the government.’’28 In turn, in
order to govern global health from outside the state, the knowledge practices that
guide intervention—such as epidemiological modeling—must be transposable from

local contexts—a characteristic that, as we will see, also structures the governance of
global health security.
Given the need to avoid political entanglement and to operate across multiple
settings, humanitarian biomedicine tends to emphasize technical interventions such as
drugs, vaccines, or bed nets. A prominent example is work by activist organizations as
well as philanthropies and multilateral agencies to increase access to antiretroviral
therapies,29 as well as coordinated work to develop new treatments and protocols for
treating ‘‘neglected’’ diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis in resource-poor
settings.30 In some cases, humanitarian biomedicine has moved toward ambitious
biotechnical projects, as in the Gates Foundation’s funding of basic research in the
genomics of drug resistant TB and malaria. Meanwhile, critics have argued that such
an emphasis on technical approaches ignores the more fundamental sources of
suffering in developing countries—the living conditions of the world’s poor. Thus
Anne-Emanuelle Birn writes, ‘‘In calling on the world’s researchers to develop inno-
vative solutions targeted to ‘the most critical scientiﬁc challenges in global health,’ the
Gates Foundation has turned to a narrowly conceived understanding of health as a
product of technical interventions divorced from economic, social, and political
contexts.’’31 In a similar vein, Redﬁeld describes the limits of MSF’s campaign to
provide chronic care for AIDS patients in Uganda: ‘‘In identifying structural deﬁcits
in the global supply of pharmaceuticals, MSF has recognized poverty as a condition
for which it offers no cure.’’32
Global Health Security
A report from the World Health Organization articulated the objects and aims
of global health security.33 The report, titled ‘‘A Safer Future: Global Public Health
Security in the st Century,’’ began by noting the success of traditional public health
measures during the twentieth century in dealing with devastating infectious diseases
such as cholera and smallpox. But in recent decades, it continued, there had been an
alarming shift in the ‘‘delicate balance between humans and microbes.’’34 A series of
factors—including demographic changes, economic development, global travel and
commerce, and conﬂict—had ‘‘heightened the risk of disease outbreaks,’’ ranging
from new infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS and drug-resistant tuberculosis to
food-borne pathogens and bioterrorist attacks.35
The WHO report proposed a strategic framework for responding to this new
landscape of threats, which it called ‘‘global public health security.’’ The framework
emphasized a space of global health that was distinct from the predominantly national
organization of traditional public health. ‘‘In the globalized world of the st century,’’
the report began, simply stopping disease at national borders was not adequate. Nor
was it sufﬁcient to respond to diseases after they had become established in a popu-
lation. Rather, it was necessary to prepare for unknown outbreaks in advance, some-
thing that could be achieved only ‘‘if there is immediate alert and response to disease
outbreaks and other incidents that could spark epidemics or spread globally and if
there are national systems in place for detection and response should such events occur
across international borders.’’36
The strategic framework of global health security was a culmination of two decades
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
67

68
Humanity
Fall 2010
of increasing concern over the problematic of ‘‘emerging infectious disease’’—a
category with an impressive capacity for expansion. This problematic was initially
raised by a group of U.S.-based infectious disease experts in the late s and early
s.37 In , the virologist Stephen Morse and the molecular biologist Joshua
Lederberg hosted a conference on the topic, which led to the landmark volume
Emerging Viruses.38 Morse and Lederberg shared an ecological vision of disease emer-
gence as the result of environmental transformation combined with increased global
migration.39 Participants in the conference warned of a dangerous intersection. On
the one hand, there were a number of new disease threats, including novel viruses
such as AIDS and Ebola as well as drug-resistant strains of diseases such as tuberculosis
and malaria. On the other hand, public health systems worldwide had begun to decay,
beginning in the late s with the assumption that infectious disease had been
conquered. Moreover, the emergence of new infectious diseases could be expected to
continue, due to a number of global processes, such as increased travel, urbanization,
civil wars and refugee crises, and environmental destruction. For these experts, the
AIDS crisis heralded a dangerous future in which more deadly diseases were likely to
emerge.
Over the ensuing years, alarm about emerging disease threats came from various
quarters, including scientiﬁc reports by prominent organizations such as the Institute
of Medicine, the reporting of journalists such as Laurie Garrett, and the dire scenarios
of writers such as Richard Preston.40 For many health experts, the emerging disease
threat—particularly when combined with weakening national public health systems—
marked a troublesome reversal in the history of public health. At just the moment
when it seemed that infectious disease seemed about to be conquered, and that the
critical health problems of the industrialized world now involved chronic disease, these
experts warned, we were witnessing a ‘‘return of the microbe.’’
It is worth emphasizing the generative character of the category of ‘‘emerging
infectious disease.’’ The category made it possible to bring AIDS into relation with a
range of other diseases, including viral hemorrhagic fevers, West Nile virus, dengue,
and drug-resistant strains of malaria and tuberculosis. It also pointed toward the
imperative to develop means of anticipatory response that could deal with a disparate
set of disease threats. Initiatives that would later come to be associated with global
health security were ﬁrst proposed in response to this perceived need.
Practices of disease eradication that had been honed as part of Cold War interna-
tional health were incorporated into proposed solutions to the problem of emerging
disease. One contributor to Emerging Viruses was the epidemiologist D. A. Henderson,
who had implemented techniques of disease surveillance in the s and s as
director of the WHO Smallpox Eradication Program. For Henderson, the task was
not one of prevention but of vigilant monitoring. He argued that novel pathogen
emergence was inevitable—that ‘‘mutation and change are facts of nature, that the
world is increasingly interdependent, and that human health and survival will be chal-
lenged, ad inﬁnitum, by new and mutant microbes, with unpredictable pathophysio-
logical manifestations.’’41 As a result, ‘‘we are uncertain as to what we should keep
under surveillance, or even what we should look for.’’ What we need, he continued,
is a system that can detect novelty: in the case of AIDS, such a detection system could
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

have provided early warning of the new virus and made it possible to put in place
measures to limit its spread. Henderson proposed a system of global disease surveil-
lance units to be run by CDC and located in peri-urban areas in major cities in the
tropics, which could provide a ‘‘window on events in surrounding areas.’’ Thus, tools
of disease eradication that had been developed as part of Cold War international
health—surveillance, outbreak investigation, and containment—were brought to bear
to address the newly articulated problem of emerging infectious disease.
Over the following decade, the emerging disease problematic became a part of
U.S. national security discussions. Security ofﬁcials began to focus on bioterrorism as
one of a number of ‘‘asymmetric threats’’ the nation faced in the wake of the Cold
War. They hypothesized an association between rogue states, global terrorist organiza-
tions, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.42 Reports during the s
about Soviet and Iraqi bioweapons programs, along with the Aum Shinrikyo subway
attack in , lent credibility to calls for biodefense measures focused on the threat
of bioterrorism. Early advocates of such efforts, including infectious disease experts
such as Henderson and national security ofﬁcials such as Richard Clarke, argued that
adequate preparation for a biological attack would require a massive infusion of
resources into both biomedical research and public health response capacity.43 More
broadly, they maintained, it would be necessary to incorporate the agencies and insti-
tutions of the life sciences and public health into the national security establishment.
In the s, Henderson and others connected the interest in emerging diseases among
international health specialists with national security ofﬁcials’ concern about the rise
of bioterrorism, suggesting that a global disease surveillance network could serve to
address both problems.
Epidemic Intelligence
Henderson’s model of disease surveillance came out of his background at the Epidemic
Intelligence Service (EIS) based at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).44 The EIS
approach, developed in the s, was one of ‘‘continued watchfulness over the distri-
bution and trends of incidence through systematic consolidation and evaluation of
morbidity and mortality data and other relevant data,’’ as his mentor Alexander
Langmuir put it.45 Henderson used this method in tracking the global incidence of
smallpox as director of the WHO eradication program. His proposed global network
of surveillance centers and reference laboratories extended this approach to as yet
unknown diseases, providing early warning for response to outbreaks of any kind—
whether natural or man-made. Stephen Morse summarized the justiﬁcation for devel-
oping such a network: ‘‘A global capability for recognizing and responding to
unexpected outbreaks of disease, by allowing the early identiﬁcation and control of
disease outbreaks, would simultaneously buttress defenses against both disease and
CBTW [chemical, biological, and toxin warfare]. This argues for expanding
permanent surveillance programs to detect outbreaks of disease.’’46
The ‘‘epidemic intelligence’’ approach to emerging infections was institutionalized
at a global scale over the course of the s as experts from CDC brought the
methods of EIS into the World Health Organization. The career of the epidemiologist
David Heymann is instructive. Heymann began his career in EIS and in the s
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
69

70
Humanity
Fall 2010
worked with CDC on disease outbreak containment in Africa and with WHO on the
smallpox eradication program.47 In the early years of the AIDS pandemic, he helped
establish a WHO ofﬁce to track the epidemiology of the disease in developing coun-
tries. He then returned to Africa in to lead the response to a widely publicized
Ebola outbreak in Congo. After this he was asked by the Director of WHO to set up
a program in emerging diseases. ‘‘At this time there was an imbalance in participation
internationally in the control of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases,’’ he
later recalled, ‘‘the burden was falling mainly on the USA.’’48 At WHO, Heymann set
up a global funding mechanism that increased the agency’s emerging disease surveil-
lance and response capacities along the CDC model.
In the wake of the Ebola outbreak, as well as catastrophic outbreaks of cholera in
Latin America and plague in India in the early s, Heymann later reﬂected, a ‘‘need
was identiﬁed’’ for stronger international coordination of response.49 A major problem
for outbreak investigators was that national governments often did not want to report
the incidence of a disease that could harm tourism and international trade. The case
of the plague outbreak in Surat in , in which Indian ofﬁcials suppressed interna-
tional reporting of the event, was exemplary of the difﬁculty of forcing countries to
publicly report epidemics.50 Advocates of the emerging disease problematic suggested
revision of the existing International Health Regulations as one potential solution to
the problem of compliance. In the context of emerging diseases, the existing IHR had
proven ineffectual in forcing disease notiﬁcation for at least two reasons. For one, the
limited list of reportable conditions—cholera, plague, and yellow fever—was of little
relevance for the expansive category of emerging infections; second, there was no way
to require countries to comply with IHR reporting requirements. Although, as
Heymann put it, ‘‘in our emerging diseases program our idea was to change the
culture so that countries could see the advantage of reporting,’’ a practical means of
enforcing compliance was needed.
The revision of IHR became a vehicle for outbreak investigators to ﬁnally
construct the functioning global disease surveillance system that had been proposed
by Henderson and others. Health authorities proposed three key innovations to IHR
that would make it possible for WHO to manage a range of potential disease emer-
gencies. The ﬁrst innovation (mentioned above in the context of the Indonesian virus-
sharing controversy) responded to the problem of the narrow range of conditions to
which the existing IHR could be applied. Through the invention of the concept of
the ‘‘public health emergency of international concern’’ (PHEIC), the revised regula-
tions vastly expanded the kinds of events to which the regulations might apply. Natu-
rally occurring infectious diseases such as inﬂuenza and Ebola, intentional releases of
deadly pathogens such as smallpox, or environmental catastrophes such as those that
occurred at Bhopal in and Chernobyl in could, according to the new regula-
tions, provoke the declaration of a PHEIC. The IHR ‘‘decision instrument’’ was an
important tool for guiding states in determining what would constitute a public health
emergency that required the notiﬁcation of WHO (see ﬁgure ). However, as we saw
in the Indonesian HNcase, the pathway in the decision instrument deﬁned as ‘‘any
event of international public health concern’’ left considerable room for interpretation
of the scope of the regulations.

OR 
OR 
Events detected by national surveillance system (see Annex 1) 
An event involving the following 
diseases shall always lead to 
utilization of the algorithm, 
because they have demonstrated 
the ability to cause serious 
public health impact and to 
spread rapidly internationally :
-
Cholera 
-
Pneumonic plague 
-
Yellow fever 
-
Viral haemorrhagic fevers 
(Ebola, Lassa, Marburg) 
-
West Nile fever 
-
Other diseases that are of 
special national or regional 
concern, e.g. dengue fever, 
Rift Valley fever, and
meningococcal disease.
Any event of potential 
international public 
health concern, 
including those of 
unknown causes or 
sources and those 
involving other events 
or diseases than those 
listed in the box on the 
left and the box on the 
right shall lead to 
utilization of the 
algorithm.
A case of the following 
diseases is unusual or 
unexpected and may 
have serious public 
health impact, and thus 
shall be notified1, 2:
-
Smallpox
-
Poliomyelitis due to 
wild-type 
poliovirus
-
Human influenza 
caused by a new 
subtype 
-
Severe acute 
respiratory 
syndrome (SARS).
EVENT SHALL BE NOTIFIED TO WHO UNDER THE INTERNATIONAL HEALTH 
REGULATIONS
Yes
No
Not notified at this 
stage. Reassess when
more information 
becomes available. 
No
Is there a significant risk of inter-
national travel or trade restrictions? 
No
Yes
Yes
Is the public health impact 
of the event serious? 
No
Yes
Is the event unusual or 
unexpected? 
Is the event unusual or unexpected? 
No
Yes
Is there a significant risk of 
international spread? 
Is there a significant risk of 
international spread? 
No
Yes
ANNEX 2 
DECISION INSTRUMENT FOR THE ASSESSMENT AND NOTIFICATION 
OF EVENTS THAT MAY CONSTITUTE A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY 
OF INTERNATIONAL CONCERN
1 As per WHO case definitions. 
2 The disease list shall be used only for the purposes of these Regulations. 
2
OR 
OR
Figure 1: IHR Decision Instrument
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
71
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

72
Humanity
Fall 2010
The second major innovation in the revised IHR responded to the problem of the
concentration of epidemiological knowledge in national public health agencies. The
new regulations expanded the potential sources of reports of outbreaks: whereas the
prior IHR had restricted ofﬁcial reporting to national governments, the revised IHR
allowed WHO to recognize reports from nonstate sources such as digital and print
media. In this way, state parties’ unwillingness to report outbreaks would not impede
the functioning of the system. The premise was that, given WHO’s ofﬁcial recognition
of nonstate monitors, reports of outbreaks could no longer be contained and so it
would be in states’ interest to allow international investigators into the country as
soon as possible in order to undertake disease mitigation measures and to assure the
public that responsible intervention was under way. Critical to making this possible
was the creation during the s of Internet-based reporting systems such as
ProMED in the United States and GPHIN in Canada that scoured international
media for stories about possible outbreaks. The development of these information
networks meant that global public health surveillance no longer relied exclusively on
state-based epidemiological methods such as the ofﬁcial case report.51 In , WHO
established GOARN (Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network), a system
linking individual surveillance and response networks, which eventually had 
partners. The potential for the rapid circulation of infectious disease information
undermined national governments’ traditional control of public health knowledge,
making a global form of disease surveillance possible.
The third major innovation of the revised IHR addressed the problem of coun-
tries’ ability to monitor outbreaks. It required that states build national capacity for
infectious disease surveillance and response. The construction of these ‘‘national
public health institutes’’ on the model of CDC would make possible a distributed
global network that relied on the functioning of nodes in each country. Here again,
it is worth noting the contrast with the developmentalist model of health infra-
structure. IHR’s reliance on national health systems did not necessarily imply
strengthening governmental capacity to manage existing disease; rather, it sought to
direct the development of outbreak detection systems according to the needs of global
disease surveillance. As one document suggested: ‘‘It is proposed that the revised IHR
deﬁne the capacities that a national disease surveillance system will require in order
for such emergencies to be detected, evaluated and responded to in a timely
manner.’’52 WHO gave countries until to fulﬁll this obligation. However, it was
unclear where the resources would come from to make it possible to implement
systems for detecting rare diseases in poor countries that already had trouble managing
the most common ones.
Rolling Out the System: SARS
While the revised IHR were not ofﬁcially approved by the World Health Assembly
until and did not go into effect until June , the SARS outbreak of early
gave Heymann and his colleagues in WHO’s Emerging Infections branch an
early opportunity to roll out elements of the agency’s new global surveillance and
response system. As an outbreak of an unknown and unexpected but potentially cata-
strophic viral disease, SARS ﬁt well into the existing category of ‘‘emerging infec-

tions.’’53 The Chinese government’s initial reluctance to fully report the outbreak led
WHO to rely on its new capacity to use nonstate sources of information: SARS was
the ﬁrst time the GOARN network identiﬁed and publicized a rapidly spreading
epidemic. As opposed to recalcitrant governments, Heymann noted, international
scientists ‘‘are really willing to share information for the better public good.’’54
GOARN made it possible to electronically link leading laboratory scientists, clinicians,
and epidemiologists around the world in a virtual network that rapidly generated and
circulated knowledge about SARS. WHO tracked the spread of the illness closely and
issued a series of recommendations on international travel restrictions. According to
Heymann, who led the WHO response, this rapid reaction was key to the
containment of the epidemic by July —though he also acknowledged the good
fortune that SARS had turned out not to be easily transmissible.
The lesson Heymann drew from SARS was that, in a closely interconnected and
interdependent world, ‘‘inadequate surveillance and response capacity in a single
country can endanger the public health security of national populations and in the
rest of the world.’’55 This was the broad premise underlying the regime of global
health security. Processes of globalization—including migration, ecological transfor-
mations, and massive international travel—had led to new biological, social, and
political risks—risks that transcended national borders and therefore could not be
ignored by wealthy countries. Only a global system of rapidly shared epidemiological
information could provide adequate warning in order to mitigate such risks. National
sovereignty must accede to the demands of global health security. This lesson was
then applied to the next potential disease emergency, avian inﬂuenza. As Holbrooke
and Garrett argued, in calling for Indonesia to comply with WHO’s inﬂuenza virus-
sharing network, SARS had proven that ‘‘globally shared health risk demands absolute
global transparency.’’
Applying the New Regulations: XDR-TB
The ﬁrst-ever application of the revised International Health Regulations came in an
unexpected context: not the outbreak of a deadly new pathogen in a country of the
developing world but rather the diagnosis of an American air traveler with a dangerous
strain of tuberculosis.56 In the spring of an Atlanta lawyer named Andrew
Speaker was diagnosed with multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis just before leaving on
his honeymoon to Europe. Speaker ignored a recommendation not to travel and ﬂew
to Europe with his wife. The CDC then informed him by phone that a follow-up test
had indicated that he had extremely drug resistant TB (XDR-TB), a rare form of the
disease that is very difﬁcult to treat. The CDC told Speaker that he would either have
to stay in Europe, quarantined in an Italian hospital, or pay his own way back to the
United States on a private, medically secured jet—a prohibitively expensive alter-
native. Instead, Speaker bought a plane ticket to Montreal on the Internet and drove
back into the United States via the Canadian border, even though he had been placed
on a Department of Homeland Security watch list. The event brieﬂy caused an inter-
national panic, as health ofﬁcials worried that Speaker had exposed fellow passengers
to the pathogen during the long transatlantic ﬂight.
From the vantage of global health security, the Speaker case was a test of the new
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
73

74
Humanity
Fall 2010
health preparedness system. As a New York Times reporter wrote, ‘‘The bizarre case
calls into question preparations to deal with medical crises like inﬂuenza pandemics
and even bioterror attacks.’’57 Similarly, a Los Angeles Times editorial warned: ‘‘One
day, a plane landing at LAX could carry a passenger infected with XXDR, a bioterror
agent, Ebola or an emerging virus. Will we be ready?’’58 The Congressional
Committee on Homeland Security Issued a report on the Speaker incident that linked
XDR-TB to the broad problematic of emerging infectious disease, whose solution
would require the integration of public health and security:
The twin specters of diseases that are increasingly resistant or completely without
current treatments and antimicrobials, and the ability of diseases to spread more
quickly than ever before due to rapid transit and other enablers, place public health
concerns squarely on the homeland, national, and transnational security agendas.
How we address these gaps now will serve as a direct predictor of how well we will
handle future events, especially those involving emerging, reemerging, and
pandemic infectious disease.59
But the Speaker case was far from exemplary of the global problem of drug
resistant TB. In fact, the disease is one of the central objects of attention for humani-
tarian biomedicine.60 For advocates of humanitarian biomedicine, the case was useful
in bringing attention to an underreported issue: the increasing incidence of multi- and
extremely drug-resistant TB in parts of the world with poorly functioning public
health systems, such as South Africa and the former Soviet bloc. As one humanitarian
activist urged: ‘‘We need to wake up and pay attention to what’s happening with TB
in other parts of the world. We need to start treating XDR-TB where it is, not just
respond to one case of one American who will get the ﬁnest treatment.’’61 For
biomedical humanitarianism, the growing epidemic of drug-resistant TB pointed to
structural inequality and to the failures of public health systems to adequately manage
a treatable, existing condition among the world’s poor.62
Thus, if the specter of an airplane passenger with XDR-TB was seen a practice
run for a future bioterrorist attack, the questions—and answers—generated by the
incident were quite different than if the passenger were seen as a sign of an already
existing health emergency, but one taking place outside the networks and nodes of
our own health and communications systems. The same disease could look quite
different, and provoke quite different responses, depending on whether it was taken
up within a regime of global health security or one of humanitarian biomedicine.
Conclusion
Whether the revised IHR would live up to its billing as a radical transformation of
international public health in the direction of providing security against novel
pathogens would depend at least in part on its capacity to force sovereign states to
comply with the requirements of global health surveillance. The issue of intellectual
property rights in the case of Indonesian ﬂu viruses indicated that an alternative
regime of global health—one focused on the problem of access to essential medicines
in treating existing diseases—could well complicate such efforts. Global health security
did not address the major existing infectious disease problems of the developing
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

world—which were linked to poverty and the lack of resources to devote to basic
health infrastructure. As Fidler put it, ‘‘The strategy of global health security is essen-
tially a defensive, reactive strategy because it seeks to ensure that States are prepared
to detect and respond to public health threats and emergencies of international
concern . . . The new IHR are rules for global triage rather than global disease preven-
tion.’’63
The program of global health security was limited; it did not have any means to
address, for example, the HIV/AIDS pandemic—and so did not attract the interest of
global health advocates focused on existing health crises. It contained no provisions
regarding medication access, prevention programs, or vaccine research and devel-
opment for neglected diseases.64 As the critic Philip Calain wrote, describing WHO-
led projects such as GOARN, ‘‘There is no escaping from the conclusion that the
harvest of outbreak intelligence overseas is essentially geared to beneﬁt wealthy
nations.’’65 Humanitarian biomedicine thus offered potential resources for the critique
of what was left out of global health security. Nonetheless, each regime functioned
relatively coherently on its own—leading to the question of whether, in fact, the two
regimes might best be understood as complementary rather than inherently contra-
dictory facets of contemporary global health governance. If so, humanitarian biomed-
icine could be seen as offering a philanthropic palliative to nation-states lacking public
health infrastructure in exchange for the right of international health organizations to
monitor their populations for outbreaks that might threaten wealthy nations.
N O T E S
I would like to thank Carlo Caduff, Stephen Collier, Nils Gilman, Sam Moyn, Peter Redﬁeld,
and Miriam Ticktin for their helpful suggestions on earlier drafts of this essay.
. A recent article notes: ‘‘Although frequently referenced, global health is rarely deﬁned.
When it is, the deﬁnition varies greatly and is often little more than a rephrasing of a common
deﬁnition of public health or a politically correct updating of international health.’’ Jeffrey Koplan
et al., ‘‘Toward a Common Deﬁnition of Global Health,’’ The Lancet (June , ): –.
. Stephen J. Collier and Aihwa Ong, ‘‘Global Assemblages, Anthropological Problems,’’ in
Global Assemblages: Ethics, Technology and Politics as Anthropological Problems, ed. Aihwa Ong and
Stephen J. Collier (New York: Blackwell, ).
. The director of WHO’s Communicable Diseases Cluster, David Heymann, described the
network as follows: GISN ‘‘identiﬁes and tracks antigenic drift and shifts of inﬂuenza viruses to
guide the annual composition of vaccines, and provides an early alert to variants that might signal
the start of a pandemic.’’ Heymann, ‘‘The International Response to the Outbreak of SARS in
,’’ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B (): –. For an
anthropological critique, see Carlo Caduff, ‘‘Anticipations of Biosecurity,’’ in Biosecurity Interven-
tions: Global Health and Security in Question, ed. Andrew Lakoff and Stephen J. Collier (New York:
Columbia University Press, ).
. ‘‘Indonesia’s Bird Flu Warrior Takes on the World,’’ Agence France-Presse, October ,
.
. Bryan Walsh, ‘‘Indonesia’s Bird Flu Showdown,’’ Time, May , .
. Editorial: ‘‘International Health Regulations: The Challenges Ahead,’’ The Lancet 
(May , ): .
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
75

76
Humanity
Fall 2010
. ‘‘Indonesia’s Bird Flu Warrior Takes on the World.’’
. David Fidler, ‘‘From International Sanitary Conventions to Global Health Security: The
New International Health Regulations,’’ Chinese Journal of International Law , no. (): .
. Citation in David P. Fidler, ‘‘Inﬂuenza Virus Samples, International Law, and
Global Health Diplomacy,’’ Emerging Infectious Diseases , no. (January ): –.
. Ibid.
. Ibid.
. Ibid.
. ‘‘Indonesia’s Bird Flu Warrior Takes on the World.’’
. Elizabeth Fee and Dorothy Porter, ‘‘Public Health, Preventive Medicine and Professional-
ization: England and America in the Nineteenth Century,’’ in Medicine in Society: Historical Essays,
ed. Andrew Wear (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
. As Foucault noted, public health experts found ‘‘phenomena that are aleatory and unpre-
dictable when taken in themselves or individually, but which, at the collective level, display
constants that are easy, or at least possible, to establish.’’ Michel Foucault, ‘‘Society Must Be
Defended’’: Lectures at the College de France, –(New York: Pantheon, ), .
. Ibid.
. George Rosen, A History of Public Health (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
), . For the French case, see William Coleman, Death Is a Social Disease: Public Health and
Political Economy in Early Industrial France (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, ).
. Thus, as Chadwick’s famous Inquiry into living conditions among the working classes
argued, ‘‘The expenditures necessary to the adoption and maintenance of measures of prevention
would ultimately amount to less than the cost of disease now constantly expanded.’’ Cited in
Rosen, A History of Public Health, . Ian Hacking looks to this period to ﬁnd the moment when
the ‘‘laws of sickness’’ were discovered, in part through the use of beneﬁt societies’ actuarial tables.
Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
. For example, as Rosen notes, in designing New York City’s vaccination campaign against
diphtheria among schoolchildren in the s, it was ‘‘necessary to know the natural history of
diphtheria within the community: How many children of different ages had already acquired
immunity, how many were well carriers, and what children were highly susceptible?’’ Rosen, A
History of Public Health, . Such data were gathered in order to make decisions based on the
balance between the expected costs and beneﬁts of a given intervention.
. While I am focusing here on two major strands of Cold War international health, there
is a complex history of pre–World War II international health efforts ranging from the Rockefeller
Foundation to the League of Nations that historians of public health have recently begun to
unravel. See, for example, Alison Bashford, ‘‘Global Biopolitics and the History of World Health,’’
History of the Human Sciences , no. (): –.
. Theodore M. Brown, Marcos Cueto, and Elizabeth Fee, ‘‘The World Health Organization
and the Transition from ‘International’ to ‘Global’ Health,’’ American Journal of Public Health ,
no. (January ): –.
. Peter Redﬁeld, ‘‘Doctors Without Borders and the Moral Economy of Pharmaceuticals,’’
in Human Rights in Crisis, ed. Alice Bullard (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Press, ), .
. Didier Fassin emphasizes the paradoxes involved in the effort by Me´decins sans frontie`res
to stage what he calls a ‘‘politics of life’’ that deals with passive victims rather than active citizens:
‘‘humanitarian testimony establishes two forms of humanity and two sorts of life in the public

space: there are those who can tell stories and those whose stories can be told only by others.’’
Fassin, ‘‘Humanitarianism as a Politics of Life,’’ Public Culture , no. (): .
. A number of illuminating anthropological critiques of the ﬁeld of humanitarian biomed-
icine have recently appeared. See Fassin, ‘‘Humanitarianism as a Politics of Life’’; Miriam Ticktin,
‘‘Where Ethics and Politics Meet: The Violence of Humanitarianism in France,’’ American Ethnol-
ogist , no. (February ): –; and Peter Redﬁeld, ‘‘A Less Modest Witness: Collective
Advocacy and Motivated Truth in a Medical Humanitarian Movement,’’ American Ethnologist ,
no. (February ): –.
. Rene´e Fox, ‘‘Medical Humanitarianism and Human Rights: Reﬂections on Doctors
Without Borders and Doctors of the World,’’ Social Science and Medicine , no. : –.
. Melinda Gates, ‘‘Malaria Forum Keynote Address,’’ October , . Text available at:
http://www.gatesfoundation.org/speeches-commentary/Pages/melinda-french-gates--malaria-
forum.aspx (accessed //).
. For the history of modernization theory and its political context, see Nils Gilman,
Mandarins of the Future: Modernization Theory in Cold War America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, ).
. Manjari Mahajan, ‘‘Designing Epidemics: Models, Policy-making, and Global Fore-
knowledge in India’s AIDS Epidemic,’’ Science and Public Policy , no. (October ): .
. Vinh-Kim Nguyen, ‘‘Antiretroviral Globalism, Biopolitics, and Therapeutic Citizenship,’’
in Global Assemblages: Ethics, Technology and Politics as Anthropological Problems, ed. Aihwa Ong
and Stephen J. Collier (New York: Blackwell, ). Brazil’s efforts to increase ARV access serve
as a model for many biomedical humanitarians. For a critique, see Joao Biehl, ‘‘Pharmaceutical
Governance,’’ in Global Pharmaceuticals: Ethics, Markets, Practices, ed. Adriana Petryna, Andrew
Lakoff, and Arthur Kleinman (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, ).
. Erin Koch, ‘‘Disease as a Security Threat: Critical Reﬂections on the Global TB Emer-
gency,’’ in Biosecurity Interventions: Global Health and Security in Question, ed. Andrew Lakoff and
Stephen Collier (New York: Columbia University Press, ).
. Anne-Emanuelle Birn, ‘‘Gates’ Grandest Challenge: Transcending Technology as Public
Health Ideology,’’ The Lancet , no. (): –.
. Redﬁeld, ‘‘Doctors Without Borders and the Moral Economy of Pharmaceuticals,’’ .
. This section draws on portions of Stephen J. Collier and Andrew Lakoff, ‘‘The Problem
of Securing Health,’’ in Biosecurity Interventions, ed. Lakoff and Collier.
. World Health Organization, The World Health Report : A Safer Future: Global Public
Health Security in the st Century (Geneva: WHO, ).
. Charles Rosenberg has contrasted this new form of ‘‘civilizational risk’’ with those that
sparked early public health efforts, noting that anxieties about the risk of modern ways of life are
here explained not in terms of the city as a pathogenic environment but in terms of evolutionary
and global ecological realities. Rosenberg, ‘‘Pathologies of Progress: The Idea of Civilization as
Risk,’’ Bulletin of the History of Medicine , no. (): –.
. World Health Organization, The World Health Report .
. Nicholas King has analyzed the rise of the emerging disease framework in detail. See King,
‘‘Security, Disease, Commerce: Ideologies of Post-Colonial Global Health,’’ Social Studies of
Science , no. /(): –.
. Stephen S. Morse, ed., Emerging Viruses (New York: Oxford University Press, ).
. Warwick Anderson describes this vision as follows: ‘‘Evolutionary processes operating on
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
77
[66.254.228.3]   Project MUSE (2026-01-05 17:16 GMT)  University of Notre Dame

78
Humanity
Fall 2010
a global scale were responsible for the emergence of ‘new’ diseases. As environments changed, as
urbanization, deforestation, and human mobility increased, so, too, did disease patterns alter, with
natural selection promoting the proliferation of microbes in new niches.’’ Warwick Anderson,
‘‘Natural Histories of Infectious Disease: Ecological Vision in Twentieth Century Bioscience,’’
Osiris (): –.
. Institute of Medicine, Emerging Infections: Microbial Threats to Health in the United States
(Washington, D.C., National Academy Press, ); Laurie Garrett, The Coming Plague: Newly
Emerging Diseases in a World out of Balance (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, ); Richard
Preston, The Cobra Event (New York: Ballantine, ).
. D. H. Henderson, ‘‘Surveillance Systems and Intergovernmental Cooperation,’’ in
Emerging Viruses, ed. Stephen S. Morse (New York: Oxford University Press, ).
. Susan Wright, ‘‘Terrorists and Biological Weapons,’’ Politics and the Life Sciences , no. 
(): –.
. As Susan Wright (ibid.) argues, the very use of the term ‘‘weapons of mass destruction’’
to link nuclear weapons to biological weapons was a strategic act on the part of biodefense advo-
cates.
. The EIS was founded in by Alexander Langmuir. For Henderson’s recollections, see
D. A. Henderson, Smallpox: The Death of a Disease (New York: Prometheus, ).
. Alexander Langmuir, ‘‘The Surveillance of Communicable Diseases of National Impor-
tance,’’ New England Journal of Medicine , no. (January ): –. As Lyle Fearnley
has described, Langmuir pioneered a method of epidemiological surveillance designed to track
each instance of a disease within a given territory—one that would serve the needs of both public
health and biodefense. Lyle Fearnley, ‘‘‘From Chaos to Controlled Disorder:’ Syndromic Surveil-
lance, Bioweapons, and the Pathological Future,’’ ARC Working Paper (), http://
anthropos-lab.net/wp/publications///workin gpaperno.pdf (accessed //).
. Stephen S. Morse, ‘‘Epidemiologic Surveillance for Investigating Chemical or Biological
Warfare and for Improving Human Health,’’ Politics and the Life Sciences , no. (February
): .
. Haroon Ashraf, ‘‘David Heymann—WHO’s Public Health Guru,’’ The Lancet Infectious
Diseases , no. (December ): –.
. Ibid., 
. Heymann, ‘‘The International Response to the Outbreak of SARS in ,’’.
. See Garrett, The Coming Plague.
. Lorna Weir and Eric Mykhalovskiy, ‘‘The Geopolitics of Global Public Health Surveil-
lance in the st Century,’’ in Medicine at the Border: Disease, Globalization, and Security, —
Present, ed. Alison Bashford (Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, ): –.
. Fidler, ‘‘From International Sanitary Conventions,’’ .
. Claire Hooker, ‘‘Drawing the Lines: Danger and Risk in the Age of SARS,’’ in Medicine
at the Border, ed. Bashford.
. Ashraf, ‘‘David Heymann,’’ .
. Heymann, ‘‘International Response,’’ .
. Howard Markel, Lawrence O. Gostin, and David P. Fidler, ‘‘Extensively Drug-Resistant
Tuberculosis: An Isolation Order, Public Health Powers, and Global Crisis,’’ JAMA , no. 
(July , ): –.

. John Schwartz, ‘‘Tangle of Conﬂicting Accounts in TB Patient’s Odyssey,’’ New York
Times, June , .
. ‘‘Editorial: TB Terror,’’ Los Angeles Times, June , .
. Committee on Homeland Security, The XDR-TB Incident: A Breakdown at the Inter-
section of Homeland Security and Public Health, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. House of Representatives,
), .
. As an example we can take the recent $million initiative by the Gates Foundation, in
collaboration with the Chinese Ministry of Health, to develop a quick diagnostic test for drug
resistant TB. Sandi Doughton, ‘‘Gates Foundation Launches rd Initiative in China,’’ Seattle
Times, March , .
. John Donnelly, ‘‘Specialists say TB Case a Sign of Things to Come,’’ Boston Globe, June
, .
. See, for example, Paul Farmer, Infections and Inequalities: The Modern Plagues (Berkeley:
University of California Press, ).
. Fidler, ‘‘From International Sanitary Conventions,’’ .
. Ibid., .
. Philippe Calain, ‘‘From the Field Side of the Binoculars: A Different View on Global
Public Health Surveillance,’’ Health Policy and Planning , no. (): .
Lakoff: Two Regimes of Global Health
79
