are numerous and diverse but so are the problems. Different
regulatory systems, academic calendars, credit systems, tuition
and scholarship schemes, teaching languages and approaches,
and examination requirements create only some of the techni-
cal requirements to be met by the participating institutions.
National and university regulations and customs differ
among countries and present challenges for the design and
implementation of international collaborative programs—reg-
ulations preventing students from enrolling in more than one
university at a time, laws requiring students to spend their last
year or semester at the home university, or practices mandat-
ing the recruitment and selection of students. Nonrecognition
and limitations on the number of courses or credits taken at a
partner university raise additional barriers. Dissimilar academ-
ic years can create problems for student mobility but may pro-
vide more opportunities for faculty exchange. Ev a l u a t i o n
requirements and procedures often present obstacles to dou-
ble-degree programs. 
Quality assurance and accreditation constitute fundamental
factors, but national accreditation systems do not exist in all
countries or may differ enormously. Some bodies focus on the
program and others on the institutional level; many concen-
trate on inputs, and others look at process or outputs.
Currently, the best-case scenario involves the completion of
accreditation by each partner institution in the double-, joint-,
or combined-degree program. Certain professional programs
are evaluated by international accreditation agencies like ABET
or EQUIS, but currently institutions are more likely to have
their home programs accredited than the double- or joint-
degree programs. A relevant issue concerns whether national,
regional, or international accreditation is the best route for
international collaborative programs. 
Recognition of the qualifications from the various collabora-
tive programs forms the most vexing issue. Only a few coun-
tries, although the numbers are rising, allow a domestic uni-
versity legally to confer a joint qualification in partnership with
a foreign institution. The student would get a formal diploma
from one university and an unofficial certificate from the other,
or others, indicating that it was a joint collaborative program.
For some students, the international nature, rather than the
qualification, of the academic program composed the most sig-
nificant aspect. For many though, this is not the case as creden-
tialism is increasingly relevant for students and their careers.
Employers, academic institutions, and credential evaluation
agencies must be aware of the granting and recognition of dou-
ble or multiple qualifications. Some double, multiple and com-
bined degrees are perceived as more “legitimate” than others,
but this impression is difficult to prove. Much of the concern
rests with the double counting of the same course credits and
workload for two or more qualifications. This has led to the
“two for the cost of one” label for double degrees. Cost in this
case is not only measured in monetary terms but also student
workload. 
The diversity of models used to determine the completion
requirements for double- and multiple-degree programs is
problematic. No clarity exists on whether requirements are
based on (1) the number of completed courses and credits, (2)
the student workload, or (3) required outcome and competen-
cy. These three approaches lead to different explanations and
arguments to support the legitimacy of the double and multi-
ple degrees awarded. Many would argue that attributing the
same course workload toward two or more degrees from two or
more institutions in different countries devalues the validity of
a qualification. Others believe that if students meet the stated
learning outcomes and competencies required for a qualifica-
tion the credential is legitimate. This logic infers that double
and multiple degrees, based on a set of core courses or compe-
tencies, are academically legitimate; and it is the process for
recognizing these qualifications that requires more attention
not the completion requirements per se. Both arguments have
validity, but the variety of program models prevents a clear res-
olution to the question of perceived and actual legitimacy.
The higher education sector must work out a common
understanding of joint, double, and combined programs and
iron out the academic issues concerning working in different
national regulatory frameworks, cultures, and practices. A rig-
orous debate on the vexing questions of accreditation, recogni-
tion, and legitimacy of the qualifications needs to take place to
ensure that international collaborative programs and their
awards are respected and recognized by students, higher edu-
cation institutions, and employers around the world.
International Students in the
United States: Open Doors
Survey
Patricia Chow and Rachel Marcus
Patricia Chow is senior program officer and Rachel Marcus is research offi-
cer at the Institute of International Education. E-mail: iieresearch@iie.org.
Open Doors Web site: http://opendoors.iietnetwork.org.
D
uring the 2007/08 academic year, the number of interna-
tional students in the United States reached a record high
of 623,805, a 7 percent increase over the prior year and the first
significant increase since 2001/02. Students enrolling for the
13
international higher education
patterns and problems of internationalization
Much of the concern rests with the double counting
of the same course credits and workload for two or
more qualifications

first time at a US campus often represents a more sensitive
measure of growth than total enrollment, and these new
enrollments increased 10 percent this year, to 173,121 students.
The Institute of International Education annually surveys
approximately 3,000 accredited US higher education institu-
tions on various aspects of international educational exchange
and has collected data on international students in US higher
education in the form of the Open Doors project since 1954.
International Student Origins—2007/08
For the eighth consecutive year, India was the leading place of
origin of international students in the United States, with
94,563 Indian students in 2007/08. The People's Republic of
China remained in second place this year, with 81,127 students,
and the Republic of (South) Korea remained in third place,
with 69,124 students. All three countries experienced large
increases this year, as did two other top-sending countries in
Asia: Vietnam and Nepal. The number of international stu-
dents from Asia increased by 10 percent overall this year and
accounted for 61 percent of all international students. The
number of students from the Middle East also increased this
year (11 percent), driven by a large increase (25 percent) from
Saudi Arabia, the result of a Saudi Arabian government schol-
arship program launched in 2005. Enrollments from Latin
America saw a slight decline (less than 1 percent), despite a 7
percent increase from Mexico. Africa also saw a slight decline
of less than 1 percent. Both Europe and Oceania saw small
increases this year, following declines the previous year. This
year marks the first increase from Europe since 9/11, although
the current total still remains far below the peak of 95,697 stu-
dents in 2001/02.
Student Profile—2007/08
As has been the case since 2001/02, international graduate
students outnumbered international undergraduate students
in 2007/08. Forty-nine percent of enrolled international stu-
dents were graduate-degree students, 43 percent were under-
graduate-degree students, and 8 percent were nondegree stu-
dents. The number of nondegree students grew 12 percent
over the past year, driven by large increases from China, India,
and Vietnam.
Almost two-thirds (62 percent) of all international students
are self-funded, with 82.5 percent of undergraduates and 77
percent of nondegree students paying for their education with
personal and family funds. At the graduate level, about half (46
percent) are self-funded.
One-fifth of all enrolled international students in the United
States are studying business and management, the most pop-
ular field of study for international students. The science, tech-
nology, engineering, and mathematics fields are also very pop-
ular, and together account for 40 percent of all enrolled inter-
national students.
Changes since 2001/02
After 9/11, the number of enrolled international students in
US higher education experienced its first decline after nearly
50 years of increases. While the overall enrollment numbers
have now rebounded, substantial shifts have appeared in the
composition of the international student body. With some
exceptions, the general trend has been extended largely toward
the top countries of origin (now exceeding pre-9/11 levels),
accompanied by declines from many predominantly Muslim
countries and places outside of Asia.
While the total number of international students in the
United States has advanced 7 percent since 2001/02, the num-
ber of students from Asia rose 17 percent during the same peri-
od. This movement is attributable to large increases from
India, China, South Korea, Nepal, and Vietnam, and these
increases have completely overshadowed substantial declines
from other major Asian countries of origin—including Japan,
Indonesia, Thailand, Pakistan, and Malaysia.
The picture from the Islamic world is similarly nuanced.
There was an average decline of 15.5 percent in the number of
students from predominantly Muslim countries studying in
the United States in 2007/08 compared to 2001/02. However,
this drop raises the number of students coming to the United
States from several countries in the Muslim world, most
notably Saudi Arabia, which saw a 77 percent increase during
this period, despite seeing a loss of 46 percent between
2001/02 and 2004/05. A similar trend was seen for North
Africa: although there was a 31 percent loss between 2001/02
and 2007/08, this past year the number of students from
North Africa grew by 4 percent, the first increase since
2001/02.
Other world regions saw mostly moderate declines of stu-
dents in the United States between 2001/02 and 2007/08:
from Africa a 5.5 percent decline; from Europe 12 percent
(despite an increase of 1.5 percent this year); and from Latin
America 6 percent. North America (comprised of Canada and
Bermuda) and Oceania saw increases during this period of 9
percent and 3 percent, respectively.
international higher education
patterns and problems of internationalization
14
For the eighth consecutive year, India was the lead-
ing place of origin of international students in the
United States, with 94,563 Indian students in
2007/08. 
While undergraduate enrollments increased 25 per-
cent, graduate enrollments rose 160.5 percent

Changes since 1981/82
The number of international students in the United States
nearly doubled between 1981/82 and 2007/08 (from 326,299
to 623,805). But while undergraduate enrollments increased
25 percent, graduate enrollments rose 160.5 percent during the
same period, and as a consequence, the proportion of under-
graduate students has declined.
Among the top places of origin, students from Iran in
1981/82 comprised the largest cohort of international students
in the United States, followed by students from Taiwan and
Nigeria. These top three places of origin accounted for 23 per-
cent of all international students in the United States in
1981/82. Since then, not only have the top places of origin
shifted, a clear trend has appeared of greater concentration
from the top places of origin, with the current top three places
accounting for 39 percent of all international students in
2007/08.
Conclusion
While there has been enormous growth in the number of
international students in the United States since 1981/82, it is
also clear that the students come from different countries and
are enrolled at different academic programs than their peers
from the past, as changing economies and political situations
at home, as well as the changing landscape of higher education
around the world, have created both new opportunities and
barriers for internationally mobile students.
___________
Authors' Note: Open Doors has received support from the Bureau of
Educational and Cultural Affairs of the US Department of State since
1972. The opinions expressed in this article are entirely those of the
authors.
It's the Faculty, Stupid!
The Centrality of the Academic
Profession
Philip G. Altbach 
Philip G. Altbach is Monan University Professor and director of the Center
for International Higher Education at Boston College.
I
n 1992, Bill Clinton was elected president of the United
States in considerable part by emphasizing the importance
of the economy. His mantra—“It's the economy, stupid!”—
focused this point. For higher education, the mantra should be
“it's the faculty, stupid.” In fact, no university can achieve suc-
cess without a well-qualified, committed academic profession.
Neither an impressive campus nor an innovative curriculum
will produce good results without great professors. Higher
education worldwide focuses on the “hardware”—buildings,
laboratories, and the like—at the expense of “software”—the
people who make any academic institutions successful. Look at
the often-criticized rankings. What do they measure? Numbers
of Nobel prizewinners, the research productivity of professors,
grants obtained by faculty, and the quality of the students are
central. Budgets and facilities are less important in the rank-
ings. 
Almost everywhere, the faculty is forgotten in the rush to
cope with ever increasing enrollments and in the midst of
deepening financial problems. If higher education is to suc-
ceed, “It's the faculty, stupid!” must be a central rallying cry for
universities worldwide. 
It is depressing, but quite essential, to examine the status of
the academic profession worldwide. A few examples will illus-
trate global realities. One issue involves the fact that the aca-
demic profession is aging in many countries. In much of the
world, half or more of the professoriate is getting close to
retirement. In many countries, too few new PhDs are being
produced to replace those leaving the profession, and many
new doctorates prefer to work outside of academe. Too few
incentives for advanced doctoral study and an uncertain
employment market for new PhDs, along with inadequate
financial support in many fields, deter enrollment and ensure
that many students drop out of doctoral programs. Countries
with rapidly growing higher education systems are especially
hard hit. Vietnam, for example, requires 12,000 more academ-
ics each year to meet expansion goals, and only 10 percent of
the academic profession currently hold doctoral degrees. 
Global examples of the current state of the academic profes-
sion will illustrate contemporary deteriorating. These exam-
ples are chosen to highlight widespread realities.
The Rise of the Part-Time Profession
To be most effective, professors need to be truly engaged in
teaching and research. They must have full-time academic
appointments and devote attention exclusively to academic
responsibilities and to the universities and colleges that
employ them. The full-time professoriate is a dying breed.
Latin America is the homeland of the part time “taxicab” pro-
fessor, rushing between teaching jobs or between class and
another profession. Except for Brazil, in almost all Latin
American countries up to 80 percent of the professoriate is
employed part time. Paid a pittance, they have little commit-
ment to the university or to students. It is not surprising that
there are almost no Latin American universities among the top
500 and little research productivity. In the United States, only
half of newly hired academics are full time on the “tenure
15
international higher education
the academic profession
