111
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate
Islam in Indonesia
Syamsun Ni’am
Faculty of Islamic Education, State Institute for Islamic Studies (IAIN), Jember
E-mail: niamstainjbr@gmail.com; ni_amstainjbr@yahoo.co.id
Abstract
Since reformation movement was trundled by students and people in Indone-
sia in 1998, all most thought and social movement domain are influenced by
the reformation, primarily those relate to the religious understanding and its
practice. At the time before reformation the people were in the quo status
detention, who used to agree with all the uniformity of thought and move-
ment—including in religious practice. However, in line with the reformation
movement, the uniformity have been dissolved, so it encourages the emer-
gence of various new religious thoughts. These have brought the consequences
of emerging issues of islamic liberalism, funadamentalism, moderatism, ect.
in Indonesia. The study of moderate Islam Indonesia have found the momen-
tum to be seeked the roots of the devolopment in Pesantren.
Sejak gerakan reformasi digulirkan oleh para mahasiswa dan masyarakat Indo-
nesia pada tahun 1998, seluruh pemikiran dan gerakan sosial telah terpengaruh
olehnya, khususnya terkait dengan pemahaman dan praktek keberagamaan.
Pada saat sebelum reformasi digulirkan, masyarakat Indonesia berada dalam
tekanan status quo, di mana mereka sudah terbiasa hidup dalam keseragaman
dalam pemikiran dan gerakan —termasuk di dalamnya adalah praktek
keberagamaan. Akan tetapi, dengan digulirkannya gerakan reformasi tersebut,

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
112
keseragaman (uniformitas) telah menjadi pudar, dan hal ini telah
memunnculkan berbagai model pemikiran keagamaan yang baru. Hal ini telah
membawa konsekuensi terhadap munculnya isu-isu tentang liberalisme,
fundamentalisme, moderatisme, dan sebagainya di Indonesia. Kajian tentang
Islam moderat di Indonesia ini telah menemukan momentumnya, untuk
dicarikan dasar-dasar pengembangannya di pesantren.
Keywords:
Learning Moderatism; Pesantren in Indonesia; Muhammadiyah; NU
(Nahdlatul ‘Ulama).
Introduction
Since the reform era in 1998, Indonesia seemed to be exposed to a myriad
of problems which until now has not finished. Even it tends to develop
from one problem to another. According to the author, the major prob-
lem comes from three main problems, which are interrelated and inter-
connected. First, the nationality problem concerned about the lack of
sense of nationalism. This is evidenced by the national political process
that runs for is no longer heed religious values and national-cultural prin-
ciples that have crystallized and rooted in Indonesia since the state was
founded. As a result, there is disharmony between pragmatic and practi-
cal demands of conscience itself. Pragmatic-practical demands are more
dominant than the individual conscience demands that should promote
fairness, justice, and welfare for the people (al-mas}lah}at al-’a>mmah).
Second, humanitarian problems are related with the lack of brother-
hood as fellow children of the nation, identity loss as human beings should
be respected and honored, loss of sense of community, sense of mutual
cooperation, mutual help among others, recognition loss of the exist-
ence of the other, etc. The third problem is a religious problem related
with religious understanding which is not comprehensive (ka>ffah);1, which
1 Comprehensive is often synonymous with the term “ka>ffah” in terms of the Qur’an. For
example, in a piece of verse 208 in Sura al-Baqarah: 
 (O you who believe,

113
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
then has implications for the practice of exclusive religious and human-
ist, resulting in the emergence of what is understood justification by him
alone, to deny even consider others who have different understanding
do not deserve to live in this country.
Referring to the Report of the Wahid Institute (WI) 2008 and the
Moderate Muslim Society (MMS) 2009, that religious conflicts tend to
not be better. In the 2008-2009 annual report on religious pluralism,
there are eight categories recorded by WI and MMS from 2008-2009:
The deception of the group/individual, whether it is done by the com-
munity, the state, or a combination of both, Violence based on religion,
Religious regulation, Places of worship conflicts, such as vandalism, li-
censing problems, land disputes and other matters related, Freedom of
thought and expression, Inter-religious relations as the issue of the spread
of hatred against other religions, Religious fatwa and Morality and por-
nography which, although not directly related to religion, but the issues
of morality and pornography-in-praxis reality cannot be separated from
religious understanding.2
This shows that Indonesia’s long history of nationality has experienced
ups and downs in building religious harmony and diversity. Therefore,
the solution that would deserve serious attention is by controlling those
aspects of cultural Islam moderates in Indonesia. Because cultural Islam
in Indonesia grows and evolves with contextualization, accommodation
enter ye into the whole Muslim [comprehensive]). Comprehensive understanding of Islam in
the group in part defined in accordance with the messages in the al-Quran and al-Hadith.
But in the context of subsequent, comprehensive (ka>ffah) by some people have been elabo-
rated in accordance with the understanding of the understanding itself. As a consequence,
if it is found to be different from the understanding of the understanding, Islam is under-
stood others considered comprehensive (ka>ffah) as mentioned in the Qur’an.
2 Detailed reports can be viewed on MMS, Laporan Akhir Tahun 2009 Toleransi dan
Intoleransi di Indonesia, 6.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
114
and acculturation time and place. Thus, the characteristic of Indonesian
Islam and those in Arab, Middle East, Afghanistan, etc are different.
Moderate Islam3 in Indonesian history
In the history of religion in Indonesia, Islam has developed quite unique.
In terms of religion, such as the Javanese before accepting the influence
of Hindu religion and culture, in its early stages was dynamistic and ani-
mistic. They worshiped the ancestor spirits, and believed in the power of
magic or magical power contained in objects, plants, animals, and were
considered to have magic power. Belief and worship as mentioned above,
by itself not manifest itself as a real and conscious religion.4
3 In 2008 Japan Institute of International Affairs (JIIA) held a symposium in Tokyo.
The theme “Islam and Asia: Revisiting the Socio-Political Dimension of Islam”, which is
about the future of political Islam. Participants majority of Islamic countries such as Egypt,
Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Tunis, Indonesia and Malaysia, plus one from the U.S. and several
of Japan itself. It seems that this symposium aims to measure the future of Muslim political
power after the events of 11 September, will be in the hands of radical or moderate. Thus,
among the issues raised about the meaning there is a moderate Muslim. This term seems to
serve as a tamer of terrorism. Similar to the function of secularism in the 70’s as a tamer
fundamentalism. At first the participants responded with flat course. “Moderate” means
no excessive ghuluw (extreme) in his religion. For Professor bedowi Abdelmajid from Tunis,
the moderates in Islam is reflected in the faith, worship, social of affairs, and in the tradition
of thought as well as in real life. But the problem becomes crucial when Angel Rabasa,
representative of the Rand Corporation defines America, moderate Muslims are willing to
accept pluralism, feminism and gender equality, democracy, humanism and civil society. Dr.
Sohail Mahmud of Pakistan considers the definition Rabasa was loaded with Western
interests. Azzam Tamimi, director of al-Hiwar TV London, rejected the definition and
confirmed that the majority of Muslims according to Islamic criteria is moderate though
not agree with pluralism, feminism, humanism, etc. See “Moderate” in http://insistnet.com/
index.php?option=com_content & view = article & catid = moderate 2% 3
Ahamidfahmyzarkasyi=17. There is also a moderate who interpret Islam as a violent anti-
Islam and anti-terrorism. Moderate Islam is identical with a friendly Islam, not extreme right
and the extreme left. View Ahmad Najib Burhani, “Moderate Islam is a paradox,” in http:
//blog.uad.ac.id/latif_ilkom/ 2010/06/09/ islam-moderat-adalah-sebuah-paradoks.
4 Simuh, Mistik Islam Kejawen Raden Ngabehi Ranggawarsita: Suatu Studi Terhadap Serat
Wirid Hidayat Jati,  Jakarta: UI-Press, 1988, 1.

115
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
In such a religious level, the influence of original religion to Indone-
sia against new religions is real that can not be avoided. According to
Seno Harbangan Siagian, every Indonesian however is advance, remain
unaffected by the native religion more or less attached to his faith, whether
he is a follower of Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, and Christianity.5
Indonesian Native Religions, according Rachmat Subagya, were spiri-
tual concepts in tribal communities that internally grow, develop, and
reach perfection without imitation or external influences, resulting in
the further development of religion-Islam-especially in Indonesia, has
experienced ups and downs, as a sociological-psychological, the carriers
and spreaders of Islam itself is required to understand the culture of the
people of Indonesia are covered sincretisism.6
Among the historians, either from the West (orientalist) and East (Is-
lam) there are many diverse views about the coming of Islam to Indone-
sia. It is a fact that Islam came to Indonesia in a peaceful manner (civil
penetration), with no support from the government or the military cam-
paign, the early determination of the arrival of Islam seem less signifi-
cant because of the people involved in the first mission does not tend
whatsoever, other than sense of responsibility to fulfill obligations un-
conditionally, so that their names go by swallowing history. Although it
was discovered there are diverse views about the coming of Islam to Indo-
nesia, the initial determination of the advent of Islam can be categorized
into two perspectives. First, the view that assumes early arrival of Islam in
5 Alwi Shihab, Islam Sufistik: Islam Pertama dan Implikasinya hingga Sekarang di Indonesia,
Bandung: Mizan, 2001, ed. I, 1.
6 Syncretism: The mingling together of different philosophies or religions, resulting in
hybridforms of philosophy or religion. See Alan Richardson, Dictionary of Christian Theo-
logy, London: 1969, 331. Syncretism can also mean: A movement to bring about a har-
mony of positions in philosophy or theology which are somewhat opposed or different.
Lihat edisi D.D. Runes, Dictionary of Philosophy, USA, tth., 308. See Simuh, Mistik Islam...,
2.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
116
the 7th century AD H/13. Second, the view that embraces the first cen-
tury AH.7
In terms of the Islamization process in Indonesia, there are several
theories as M. Solihin wrote. First, the theory that the history of Islam in
Indonesia through economics-business (trading).8 The theory is quite rea-
sonable, because Indonesia has long been established trade with the Arab
nations, Gujarat and China. Second, the theory of marriage approaches,
migrants and Muslim traders from the Middle East established kinship
with the locals. From this marriage, it produced to a new generation of
Muslims in Indonesia.
Third is the theory through political (power). The approach is political
propaganda efforts undertaken by the merchants and Muslim immigrants,
who managed to Islamize palaces of kings and princes, who had previ-
ously embraced Hinduism or Buddhism. This theory seems to hold true
after the formation of Islamic kingdoms in the archipelago, which man-
aged to Islamize neighbor kingdoms.
Fourth is the theory Sufi approach. This theory is also quite argumen-
tative because the founding fathers were Islamic scholars who had the
knowledge and experience of Sufi. They appear as a scholar who prac-
ticed sufis morals, even they often carry and practice specific congrega-
tion. The scholars appeared as charismatic Sufi figures, authoritative and
wise, and being accommodating to the local culture, in addition to mod-
erate, pluralist and inclusive, and always uphold the values of the noble
ideals.
7 In this regard, the argument is different from the arguments of each. More details can
be seen on Shihab, Islam Sufistik..., 4-8.
8 This can be evidenced by the reports of Marco Polo who visited the north shore of
Sumatra who first embraced Islam in the Malay, the Chinese imperial envoy and affirm
Islamic Sultanate of Samudra Pasai. Found here that traders from Kromendul and Arab
traders from Baghdad after the fall of the Mongol attacks which spread Islam in Perlak,
which later became part of the Kingdom of Aceh city. View Shihab, Islam Sufistik..., 4-5.

117
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
Therefore, without denying the other three approaches, this last ap-
proach seems to be considered more acceptable because it is by looking at
figure-bearers of Islam as mentioned above. Thus, it has been recognized
by the orientalists, A.H. Johns admits that it is less possible when Islam
came to Indonesia through trade approach. He put forward the theory
that the Sufis travelers look more successfully spreading Islam in Indone-
sia.
Azyumardi Azra, in line with A.H. John above, that the success of the
Sufi scholars are very visible when there are many Muslims including
clerics and Sunni-Sufi-from Persia who migrated to new areas islamized
due to the emergence of the uncertain political situation in the region. It
can speed up the conversion to Islam, which is in the Indian subconti-
nent, Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia, and Indonesia in the period be-
tween the second half of the 10th century and, the end of the 13th cen-
tury. The whole process has contributed to resurgence by Hodgson called
the “internationalization” Sunni Islam.9
The process of the spread of Islam in the countries of Southeast Asia,
especially in Indonesia, are growing spectacularly is a fact that can not be
denied either by historians and researchers. This is because of the atti-
tude shown by the Sufis was full of compassion, compromise, and more
moderate-minded, pluralistic, and inclusive. Alwi Shihab added that it
does have a tendency Sufism human-oriented open and cosmopolitan.10
The statement is no exaggeration; we have witnessed many Sufi lead-
ers with their attitudes and behavior which are helpful, compassion, sense
of togetherness and true brotherhood among the people, so it is not
9 See Azyumardi Azra, Jaringan Ulama Timur Tengah dan Kepulauan Nusantara Abad
XVII dan XVIII: Melacak Akar-akar Pembaruan Pemikiran Islam di Indonesia, Bandung: Mizan,
1998, Ed. IV, 36; M.G.S. Hodgson, The Venture of Islam II, Chicago: Universty of Chicago
Press, 1974, 1-368.
10 Shihab, Islam Sufistik..., 13.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
118
surprising that the Sufis were very close to people. This is why Islam spread
rapidly in the country peacefully, without violence.
Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad says the same thing that “perhaps the Indo-
nesian archipelago is the most appropriate place to prove the fact that
Islam is accepted and thrive in the midst of people who adhere to other
religions. In every corner of the country there is evidence of how good
exemplary role in spreading non-violent means”. It is proved that the
carrier and disseminator of Islam has been aware of the prevailing socio-
cultural and socio-psychological Indonesian society, so the approach and
methods used were very suitable and preferred people of Indonesia.
The most influential Sufi figure in the history of Islamization in Indo-
nesia is “Wali Songo”. Activities and positive efforts, accommodating and
moderate they do, look at all the expression author Madkhal ila> al-Ta>ri>kh
al-Isla>m bi al-Sharq al-Aqs}a> with the following illustration:
“Islam came to the islands was carried away by the noble morality,
virtuous, wise men, and the spirit of hard work. Meanwhile, nations that
receive their arrival have clear conscience, so that the joy of receiving the
invitation and expressed their faith. They are the descendants of ‘Ali and
Fatima bint Muhammad set foot in areas that have not been touched by
the hands of the West. They do it not with the army, but the spirit of
faith, nor power, but an attitude of confidence and faith. They were armed
with nothing but resignation; no motor boats, no army anyway; that they
carry only the faith and the Koran. They managed to achieve that goal
can not be achieved with all the thousands of troops and supplies com-
plete facilities though, but they are only a few people”. Hadramaut re-
gion their home, the former moved the goal ashraf first generation.11
From among those born Imam Ahmad al-Muhajir, the pioneer ances-
tor propagation of Islam in Indonesia, religious ideas, schools, and con-
11 See Abdullah ibn Nuh, al-Ima>m al-Muha>jir, Jakarta: n.p., 1960, 93.

119
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
ceptions of theology and the congregation is very influential in the lunge
and struggle their descendants spread of Islam in Indonesia and surround-
ing islands.12 This is what later becomes the embryo of Sufi leaders-espe-
cially, in spreading the “Wali Songo”-known Sufi Islam accommodating
and moderate in the archipelago. In further developments have inspired
Islamic leaders archipelago in developing moderate Islam in Indonesia.
Thus, by the “Wali Songo” Islam has been spread by peaceful means, not
force others to convert followers of Islam, ongoing cultural respect, and
even accommodate it into the local culture without losing its identity.
Apparently tolerance is a lot of interesting people sympathetic to Indone-
sia at the time to follow the teachings of Islam.
Therefore, “Wali Songo” is a reliable architect in the grounding of
Islam in Indonesia. According to records Abdurrahman Mas’ud, “Wali
Songo” is a unique Java agents on the XV-XVI centuries were able to
integrate the spiritual aspects of Islam and the secular in broadcasting.
Their position in the socio-cultural and religious life in Java so compell-
ing that it can be said Islam never be the religion of Java if Sufism deve-
loped by the “Wali Songo” is not rooted in society. Reference characteris-
tics shows that Islam was introduced “Wali Songo” in Java comes with a
peaceful, although seemed to slow but assured. Based on historical fact,
that by tolerating the local traditions and modify it to the teachings of
Islam and still rests on the principles of Islam, the new religion embraced
by the aristocrats, and the majority of the people on the north coast of
Java.13
Transmission Islam pioneered “Wali Songo” is a brilliant struggle that
is implemented in a simple way, that show the way and new alternatives
12 Shihab, Islam Sufistik..., 20-21.
13 Miftahudin, “Islam Moderat Konteks Indonesia dalam Perspektif Historis”, in http:/
/ eprints.uny.ac.id/2407/9/ Akar_Islam_Moderat, p. 4-5. Accessed on March 11, 2012.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
120
that do not disturb the local traditions and customs, and easily captured
by a layman because concrete approaches and realistic, meticulous, and
united with social life. This model shows the uniqueness of Javanese mys-
tics that are capable of absorbing elements of local and foreign culture,
but at the same time, it still stands strong on the principles of Islam.14
Apparently “Wali Songo” were aware of how it should be grounded in
Indonesian Islam. They understood that Islam should be contextualized,
without losing the essence of the principles and teachings, in accordance
with the conditions of the region or the world in which Islam spread.
This is what became known as the concept of “indigenization of Islam”.
The idea is meant to melt the pattern and character of Islam as norma-
tive and religious practices into something contextual. In the
“indigenization of Islam” illustrated how the normative teachings of Is-
lam as derived from God accommodated to the culture derived from
human without losing their identity. More concrete, contextualize Islamic
teachings understood as related to the context of time and place. Change
of time zone differences and a key to the work of interpretation and
ijtiha>d. Thus, Islam will be able to continue to renew themselves and
dynamically in response to changing times. Moreover, Islam is capable to
dialogue with social conditions varying from one view to another angle.
Adaptability is critical that in fact made Islam can truly adjust with time
and place (suitable for every time and place).
This opinion is in accordance with the opinion of Quraish Shihab,
stating that:
“Diversity is a necessity in life that is desired by God Almighty. This
includes differences and diversity of opinion in the scientific field, even
14 Abdurrahman Mas’ud, Dari Haramain ke Nusantara: Jejak Intelektual Arsitek Pesantren,
Jakarta: Kencana, 2006, 67.

121
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
the diversity of human responses concerning the truth of scriptures,
interpretation of its contents, as well as the form of its practice.”15
Fazlur Rahman asserted it, historically the main source of Islam is a
divine revelation which then included in the book called the Koran.
However, this book does not go down as well as the concurrent period,
but down bit by bit and only collected after a few decades. Therefore, the
revelation of this type is the reaction of the historical social conditions
that took place at that time. The relationship between believers and re-
vealed text made possible by the revelation that the normative aspect,
while the pattern of the last run through the way of interpretation. The
texts never speak for themselves, and it would be meaningless if associ-
ated with humans. What it was done, it was approved, and what is was
said by the Apostle of Allah. It was the result of effort (ijtiha>d) of the
Messenger of Allah in understanding the normative dimensions of re-
velation. Meanwhile, the Apostle efforts to interprete the text were af-
fected by the particular historical situation at the time. In fact, it was
apostle of Allah Himself often changed its interpretation of the Koran if
needed.16
The cultural plurality of the same religion can not be avoided when
the religion has spread to vast areas with diverse cultural background. In
the interaction and dialogue between religious teachings to local culture,
the strength or weakness of the cultural roots of pre-existing by itself will
determine how deep and strong the religious teachings of the universal
reach of local socio-cultural realities. The plurality of religions face can
also be caused by the different response of the followers of the same
religion on social, cultural, and economic challenges they face. From the
15 M. Quraish Shihab, Secercah Cahaya Ilahi: Hidup Bersama al-Qur’an, Bandung: Mizan,
2007, 52.
16 Hendro Prasetyo, “Mengislamkan Orang Jawa: Antropologi Baru Islam Indonesia”,
in Islamika 3, (January-March 1994): 80.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
122
perspective of this is to be explained why, for example, the Islamist move-
ment which is known as the “modernist” Muhammadiyah which tend to
gain strong support in urban areas, while the NU (Nahdlatul ‘Ulama)
group often referred to as “traditional” gained widespread influence in
the rural areas.17
So, the bottom line is that although the religion taught by the same
prophet and holy book, but the religion is growing number of believers
in the area of influence, the more difficult it will also face the unity of
the faith can be maintained. Because, when the teachings and religions
that come from heaven is about to land to plain empirical, then inevita-
bly be faced with a series of socio-cultural realities that are often not ap-
propriate or even contrary to religious teachings to be developed.
Pesantren:18 Islamic miniature, Indonesian moderate
Indonesian Moslems are Islam moderates as mentioned above, it is not
difficult to find a reference in the history of Islam, both in itself and the
origin of Islam in Indonesia. More precisely, Islam moderate can refer, if
the area in which the coming of Islam, the practice of Islam of the Prophet
Muhammad and his companions, in particular al-Khulafa ar-Rasyidun.
17 Pranowo, Islam Faktual..., 19.
18 The word comes from the boarding students, which the prefix and suffix “pe” in front
means the abode of the students. Professor Johns argued that the term comes from the
Tamil students, which means a home tutor. Medium C.C. Berg argued that the term is
derived from the term “shastri” which in India means a person who knows the sacred books
of Hinduism, or an expert scholar of Hindu religious scriptures. The word comes from the
word “shastri, shastra” which means holy books, religious books or books about science. See
Zamakhsyari Dhofier, Tradisi Pesantren: Studi tentang Pandangan Hidup Kyai. Jakarta: LP3ES,
1994, 18. In this regard, Karel A. Steenbrink, argues that the traditional Islamic boarding
schools are boarding schools in Indonesia. Teaching institution focused on religious instruc-
tion using traditional teaching methods and has the rules, administration, and curriculum
teaching specialties. “Pesantren” usually led by a religious teacher or a scholar as well as
teaching the students. For a more complete review, see Karel A. Steenbrink, Pesantren,
Madrasah, dan Sekolah: Pendidikan Islam pada Periode Modern, Jakarta: LP3ES, 1994.

123
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
Where the Prophet Muhammad had built cultural and social interac-
tions are egalitarian with various groups at the time. After the Holy
Prophet, the mission of prophetic la> ila>ha illa>lla>h in Mecca, he went on
his mission to move to the city of Medina, formerly known as Yathrib.
Yathrib name used since the first came and built the city called Yathrib
bin Amliq ibn Laudz ibn Nuh ibn Sham. Community Yathrib was quite
diverse and familiar with pluralism. There were dominant tribes that
inhabit the city, the tribe Aus, Khazraj, Qainuqa, Quraidlah, and Bani
Nadzir. There were also very diverse religions, Muslims, Jews and Chris-
tians of Najran bit. In Islamic society itself, there are two kinds of groups,
namely the migrants called immigrants (from some tribes of Mecca and
its surroundings origin) and locals, which is called the Ansharin (which is
dominated by the Aus and the Khazraj tribe). While more Jews came
from the tribe Nadzir, Qainuqa, and Quraidlah.
Here the Holy Prophet had built civilization by the interactions and
communication with various parties. The Prophet himself never applied
discriminatory against any religions and groups there, including against
Islam itself. He also built the foundations of the importance of ethical
and moral foundation in establishing civilized people, who uphold the
values of justice, liberty, equality of rights and obligations, as well as equal
treatment under the law. To realize this then formed a “State of Medina”.
The concept is then laid out in “S{ah}i>fah Madi>nah (Medina Charter)”19
which contains the basis of ethics and morality. The Holy Prophet (clear
and unequivocal) had instilled the values of humanity, egalitarianism,
mutual respect-inter-religious, inter-ethnic and tribal, as well as existing
groups.20 Thus, the reasons and excuses whatsoever, any violence in the
name was not found at its ethical foundation.
19 Medina Charter consists of 47 Articles. See Ibn Hisham, Wustenfeld, 341-3; Watt,
Medina, 22-5.
20 Said Agil Siradj, Sufisme sebagai Kritik Sosial, Bandung: Mizan, 2006.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
124
Meanwhile, moderate understanding of Islam in the Indonesian con-
text, can refer to the spreading of Islam known as “Wali Songo”—as pre-
viously described. Generation bearers of moderate Islam in Indonesia,
just miniaturized, presumably to refer to the practice of Islam is done
through organizations such as Muhammadiyah “a social and educational
institution”, and NU (Nahdatul ‘Ulama) through education in their
Pesantren. Islam in the Indonesian context of this kind more suited dis-
closed, to borrow the concept of Syafi’i Ma’arif, “Islam in Indonesian
Frame”. Azyumardi Azra also often mentions that moderate Islam is the
original character of religious Muslims in Indonesia.21
Pesantren as a miniature of the Indonesian Muslim community has shown
their works in articulating moderate Islam in Indonesia.22 Moderate Islam
style is then used as the basis in a friendly Islam spread to the universe. In
this regard, there are some traditions that have long been demonstrated
by Pesantren, where Pesantren is the oldest educational institution in the
dynamic development of the history of Indonesia. Based on the results of
a study conducted by observers, have shown that since the beginning of its
development (early 16th century), Islamic mosque or the like kind, board-
ing, and other appropriate name preach Islam to the region-friendly and
easy temperament with cultural heritage. As the oldest Islamic educational
institutions, Pesantren have a major role in the process of Islamization (in-
cluding cultural Islamization) in Indonesia, and even Southeast Asia.23
21 See Ahmad Syafi’i Ma’arif, Islam dalam Bingkai Keindonesiaan dan Kemanusiaan; Sebuah
Refleksi Sejarah, Bandung: Mizan, 2009.
22 It cannot be denied it, that was allegedly found any schools that is far from moderatisme
aspects. This then led to the emergence of irrelevant comments on the existence of pesantren.
For example, Al-Mukmin Ngruki boarding Solo cared for by Ustadz Abu Bakar Bashir;
Pesantren Al-Islam, in Tenggulun, Solokuro, Lamongan, East Java; Boarding School Umar
bin Khattab, Bima, West Nusa Tenggara, and others. Even Yusuf Kalla as Vice President,
had proposed to close the Islamic schools allegedly teach values   violence.
23 Basha, “Menelusuri Artikulasi...”, 3.

125
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
The ability of Pesantren with diverse cultural heritage characters is easy,
and not oppressed with the progress of time, becomes sufficient evidence
that the early history of Pesantren have stepped up and proceed openly to
differences and diversity. Dissertation research field is quite interesting
by Prof. Lukens-Bull (1997) from Arizona State University (ASU), USA
Has supported this evidence, which Pesantren have managed to carve out
a new identity. They rejected two forms of imitation such Kamal at-Taturk,
and the rejection of Khomeini, against everything Western and modern
versatile; Pesantren community are aware of and sensitive to globalization
and Mc-Donalization, but remains actively respond to the globalization
with jiha>d of peace education through Pesantren.24
According to historical records, the privilege has been achieved by
Pesantren because it is supported by the presence of many Pesantren cur-
riculum includes moderates and multiculturalism ideologies. It is often
called the yellow book (classic referrences/kitab kuning),25 which until now
is still a basic element of the curriculum of Pesantren.
24 Masdar Farid Mas’udi, “Mengenal Pemikiran Kitab Kuning”, dalam Pergulatan
Pesantren: Membangun dari Bawah, M. Dawam Rahardjo (ed). Jakarta: Perhimpunan
Pengembangan Pesantren dan Masyarakat [P3M], 1985, 218.
25 Yellow Book (Kitab Kuning)  or commonly referred to as the classics are written works
(Arabic) arranged medieval Islamic scholars (between 12-15 century AD), and is therefore
often called the ancient book. The book though in terms of comprehensive abortion is said
to be weighing academic, but in terms of the systematic presentation seems simple. For
example, unknown reading signs as dots, commas, question marks, and so on. The shift
from one sub-topic to other sub-topic, not to use or Alenia new paragraph, but with
chapters or such similar code, tatimmah, muhimmah, tanbi>h, far’, and so on. The content is
presented in a yellow book is almost always made   up of two components, namely the
observations and other components are sharh}. Matan is the core content will be removed
by sharh}. In its layout, matan placed outside the line of the rectangle that surrounds sharh}.
The other hand, is usually yellow book binding system with korasan (kara>sah), in which the
sheet-sheet can be split so it allows the reader to explore it while relaxing or tetiduran,
without having to carry all the books of the body, sometimes reaching hundreds of pages. In
the meantime, why it was given the title of yellow, because the paper commonly used yellow,
or white due to age, the color changed to yellow rose. See Masdar F. Mas’udi, “Mengenal
Pemikiran”…, 55-56; See also Martin Van Bruinessen, Kitab Kuning, Pesantren dan Tarekat,

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
126
Among the concrete example is the book of al-Mila>l wa al-Nih}a>l, writ-
ten by al-Shahrastani (479-485 H). The book review about firqah-firqah
(factions) both within Islam and outside of Islam are presented objec-
tively without any purpose insult or praise; book al-Fiqh al-Maz|a>hib al-Arba’ah
(book four schools), written by al-Jazairi, to review the opinion of com-
parative fiqh scholars in the four schools. Of the two books, quite clearly
the attitude of tolerance, respect for differences, and instilled the spirit
of multiculturalism.26
Likewise indicated tafseer learned and studied at Pesantren. Anwa>r al-
Tanzi>l wa Asra>r al-Ta’wi>l by Abu Sai>d al-Baidla>wi> (d. 691 H/1191 M) and
the book of Tafsi>r al-Jala>lain –work of Jala>l al-Di>n al-Mah}alli> (d. 864 H/
1459 M) and Jala>l al-Di>n al-Suyu>t}i> (d. 911 H/1505 M), in interpreting Qs.
Yu>nus verse 99. Jala>lain said, “Do not (force you) to what Allah swt. do
not want to do it for them! “. Al-Baidlawi also interpret, “Surely the dif-
ference desire/volition impossible equated to the force”.
When interpreting the same verse, Ibn Kathi>r (d. 774 H/1373 M) in
the Tafsi>r al-Qur’a>n al-’Az}i>m stated, “(Hida>yah) what is that, but the affair
of Allah.” Shaykh al-Nawa>wi> al-Banta>ni> in Tafsi>r al-Muni>r said, “You do
not have the power to change (belief) one. Faith can not be present in a
person’s life, unless the will of god (the will) and qudrah (power) of God”.
Another example of the Qs. al-Nah{l verse 125. Al-Baidlawi interpret
this verse by saying, “Your duty is only to convey (the al-Bala>gh) and preach
(al-da’wah). Medium guidance (al-Hida>yah) and apostasy (al-d{ala>l) it does
not concern you. Allah Swt. better know who lost and who receive guid-
Bandung: Mizan, 1999, 142. however, in reality today, many books that are not yellow but
white original, although the type and style of the book resembles the yellow book. However,
most people still regarded as the yellow book without losing the characteristics, style and
content.
26 Syafiq Hashim, “Belajar Multikulturalisme dari Pesantren”, Al-Wasathiyyah Journal,
Vol. 1, Number. 1 (February 2006), 66.

127
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
ance. Allah swt who (right) they reply “. So that was shown by the books
of classical commentators commonly studied in Pesantren.
According to K.H. Afifuddin Muhajir, the director of Ma’had Aly
Sukorejo Situbondo in East Java, the teaching of fiqh is also full of mod-
eration and tolerance. “Based on my reading, teaching tolerance is often
found in the books of fiqh”, he explained. Kyai Afif gave examples, such
as a description of individual duty kifayah in the book Fath} al-Mu’i>n –the
work of Zain al-Di>n al-Mali>ba>ri> (d. 975 H/1567 M) of Madzab Sha>fi’i>. Al-
Mali>ba>ri> explains, among social duty is kiswatu ‘a>ri>n (giving clothes to the
naked), including the dhimmi> infidels. So, if a non-Muslim “dhimmi>s” is
naked, social obligation duty for Muslims to give them clothes.”27
Kyai Afif gave another example; if Muslims and dhimmi> infidels are
together in a boat that is heavy load, so threatened to sink, then there
must be stuffs on a boat that was sacrificed. This is for the sake of human
safety, including safety infidel dhimmi>’s. Fiqh talk a lot of that way. There
are many examples of the teachings of the tolerant and moderate in
these classic books. There is also in the book of Tanbi>h al-Gha>fili>n by Abu
Layth al-Samarkandi (373 H/983 M). For example; it explained, “Mus-
lims must be polite, kind to fellow Muslims, Jews, Christians, and the
other believers.”28
The messages are displayed in classic Pesantren books in moderate frame
in Indonesia –in fact— has been expressed by their sheikh. There are sto-
ries shown by K.H. Abdul Hamid Pasuruan, is known as a cleric who
always accept and respect every guest that comes, even though other reli-
gions. Even just asking for prayer, Kyai Hamid was never refused.29
27 See Ferdhi Gamal, Ragam Ekspresi Islam Nusantara, Jakarta: The Wahid Institute, Ed.
I, 2008, 73-74.
28 Ferdhi, Ragam Ekspresi..., 75.
29 Details can be seen on Hamid Ahmad, Uswatun Hasanah: Biografi Keteladanan Kiai
Hamid, Pasuruan: Yayasan Ma’had Salafiyah, 2001.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
128
Another example as shown by Kyai Achmad Siddiq; he quoted the
Sufi perspective. According to Kyai Achmad, sufism can be embraced by
all human beings without notice and differentiate ethnic origin, race,
color, class, or religion. In Sufism, all being are considered equal. “We are
all servants of God”. Similarly, Kyai Achmad quoted the words of a Sufi.
Kyai Achmad -in the discourse of Sufism —is well- regarded human be-
ings, without any prejudices that are ideological, theological or discrimi-
natory views, because humans are viewed equally. The differences of reli-
gion, tribe, race, skin color, only artificial distinction that should not hinder
brotherhood among humans (ukhuwwah insa>niyyah).30
Hence, the classic books are taught in Pesantren without a doubt largely
dominated by the teachings of the tolerant and moderate in the order of
human life. It seemed to be a refutation of the National Survey Findings:
Attitudes Behaviour Religious Violence in Indonesia, conducted Centre
of Islam and Society (PPIM) UIN Jakarta, July 2006. Among the findings
is that the yellow book has the potential to encourage the teaching of
violence between religions. However, Jajang Jahroni hastily dismissed on
research findings, that the majority of the yellow book encourages vio-
lence. “Actually we are not researching the yellow book, but violence in
the name of religion”. Jajang commented.
According to Kyai Afif, “Ignorance is the main cause of the Muslims
spreading violence against people of different faiths. That’s because their
learning is not complete. The deeper knowledge of one’s religion, the
more tolerant”. The same phrase as stated by David Dakeke, Islamic re-
searcher at George Washington University, USA, in the book of Islam,
Fundamentalism and the Betrayal of Tradition (2004). Dakeke wrote,
30 Munawar Fuad Noeh and Mastuki HS., Menghidupkan Ruh Pemikiran K.H. Achmad
Siddiq, Jakarta: Logos, 1999, 83; Syamsun Ni’am, The Wisdom of K.H. Achmad Siddiq:
Membumikan Tasawuf, Jakarta: Erlangga Press, 2009, 150-151.

129
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
growing violence and Islamic fundamentalism are born from Islamic
modernism by ignoring the intellectual treasures of classic and tradition.31
In this context, the discussion of the moderate Islamic discourse in
Indonesia, particularly in Pesantren, has found the momentum. Because,
as long as Islam is often interpreted as a single reality-not plural or
multicultural. In fact, in Indonesia moderate Islam and the multicultural
reality are very strong, both socio-historical and global (global-local). Lo-
cally, for example, Islam in Indonesia is divided by Clifford Geertz in
trichotomy: santri, secular and the noble (abangan), or the dichotomy
perspective Deliar Noer, namely traditional and modern Islam, and there
are many other views as liberal, fundamental, moderate, radical and so
on. In the socio-historical, the presence of Islam in Indonesia can not be
separated from a multicultural context as can be read in the history of
Islam in Indonesia carried by “Wali Songo”.32
Thus, learning about Islam moderates is not new. It has been shown
by at least Pesantren with systems and patterns of teaching that are full of
moderate and multiculturalism values. Such conditions can be viewed
not only through the process of teaching and learning, but also the mate-
rials or curriculum they teach. Pesantren –long observation and experi-
ence of the author— is always taught the value of morality to respect one
another and respect among diverse, style and diversity that exist in hu-
man beings, both religious differences, customs, culture, and so on. This
is then referred to “Pesantren tradition”, which is the length of the dia-
logue and the struggle between Islamic doctrine and local traditions. In
Pesantren, through the teachings of morality and mysticism (akhla>q) are
delivered, has developed the teachings of the need for upholding the
31 Ferdhi, Ragam Ekspresi..., 76.
32 Choirul Fuad, “Mengkaji Ulang Islam Multikultural” http://islamlib.com, accessed on
March 13, 2012.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
130
attitudes of tolerance (tasa>muh), moderate (tawa>sut}) and being consistent
and optimistic (ta’a>dul and istiqa>mah).
In the historical development of independence until the establishment
of the Republic of Indonesia, Pesantren has instituted Pioneers and “Fa-
ther of the Nation (Founding Fathers)”. We can mention them such,
K.H. Hashim Ash’ari and his son K.H.A. Wahid Hashim, K.H. Ahmad
Dahlan, K.H. Mas Mansur, Prof. Kahar Muzakkar, Ki Bagus Hadikusumo,
H. Agus Salim, Sutan Syahrir, HAMKA, and others. All of them were
educated in Pesantren, which are not only competent in the religion field,
as well as its commitment to defend the universal values of humanity,
but also because of their strong leadership and the spirit of nationalism
and nationality.33
Therefore, at the present time, people should be willing to live be-
yond the bulkhead ethnicity, culture, and religion. To organize a harmo-
nious life, they are required to face the reality of pluralism.34 The con-
cept of pluralism is already a constitutional philosophy of the world to-
day. Although each state has different political idiom, ranging from com-
posite society, culture of pluralism, the melting pot community, through
unity in diversity. All those refer to the meaning, which is “the recogni-
tion of the existence of pluralism”.35
33 M. Syafii Anwar, “Islam dalam Bingkai Keindonesiaan dan Kemanusiaan; Sebuah Refleksi
Sejarah”, Al-Wasathiyyah Journal, Vol. 01, Number 1 (February 1, 2006), 4.
34 The word “pluralism” is derived from the Latin, “Plures” which means a few (several)
with the implications of diversity and difference, of in some (many), homogeneous. See
Nurcholish Madjid, “Pluralisme Agama di Indonesia”, Ulumul Qur’an IV, Vol. 3 (1995), 62-
68.
35 Different terms are essentially supports the same meaning, “pluralism”, and the differ-
ence is occurred due to differences in countries applying earlier. United States typically use
the term “melting pot society”, Canada using “multi-culturalism community”, India using “a
composite society”, and Indonesia using “Unity in Diversity”. See Thoha Hamim, “Islam
dan Hubungan Antar Umat Beragama” FORMA, Volume XXVI, Surabaya: Faculty Stu-
dent Magazine. Ushuluddin IAIN Sunan Ampel, 2001, 2.

131
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
Thus the plural values are necessity, the rule of God (Sunnatulla>h) that
can not be changed, altered, resisted and denied. Anyone who tries to
deny the law of cultural diversity, it will give rise to the phenomenon of
turbulence that is everlasting. Perhaps because of this denial, so that con-
flicts always arise, not only locally, regionally, and nationally, but also
globally (international).
Conclusions
From the above, it is important to record together as recommendation
and solutions: Peter L. Berger (2003) offers two strategies to respond to
the emergence of intolerance as a result of the currents of modernity
and secularization, which was “religious revolution” and “subculture of
religion”. The first is how the clergy can transform society as a whole and
present a model of modern religion, and the second is how our efforts to
prevent outside influences that do not easily fit into the religion. Radical
Islamic movements emerged as an understanding of religion that tend
literally, narrow, black-and-white. This uunderstanding will easily lead the
reader on a rigid religious attitude. Reading of religion can not be sepa-
rated from its historical context. Understanding religion is dynamic. For
this reason, the open reading will keep us from hostile attitudes.
There are several solutions that can be offered in response to the
phenomenon of radicalism: First, presenting Islam as a universal teach-
ing that provides direction for peace on earth. Second, there needs to be
an effort to raise the action to reject violence and terrorism stance. This
action involves all groups within religions who do not want such things.
Terrorism is a form of harassment and violence in the name of religion
and humanity. Third, it’s time to grow a moderate religious character.
Understanding the dynamics of life openly with receiving the plurality of
the other which is outside the group. Moderate diversity will fade the

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
132
polarization between fundamentalism and secularism in dealing with
modernity and change. Islam which is in the middle (ummatan wasat}an)
will shape the Islamic character which is democratic, open, and rational.
Islam is also present to meet the call of humanity and peace. It is our
duty to give a positive image of Islam that is humanist and anti-violence.
Only a history will prove whether the religion is able to present their
goals as how the way should be.
Bibliography
Ahmad, Hamid. Uswatun Hasanah: Biografi Keteladanan Kiai Hamid. Pasuruan:
Yayasan Ma’had Salafiyah, 2001.
Anwar, M. Syafii. “Menggali Kearifan Pesantren untuk Multikulturalisme”, Al-
Wasathiyyah, Vol. 01, Number. 01 (Februari 2006).
Al-Aqqad, Abbas Mahmud. al-Isla>m fi> al-Qarn al-‘Isyri>n: H{a>d}irihi> wa Mustaqbalihi>.
Kairo: Da>r al-Kutub al-H}adi>thah, 1954.
Arnold, T.W. The Preacing of Islam. London: 1935.
‘Aun, Faisal Badr. al-Tashawuf al-Isla>mi> al-T}a>riq wa al-Rija>l. Kairo: Maktab Sa’i>d
Ra’fat, 1983.
Azra, Azyumardi. Jaringan Ulama Timur Tengah dan Kepulauan Nusantara Abad
XVII dan XVIII: Melacak Akar-akar Pembaruan Pemikiran Islam di Indonesia.
Bandung: Mizan, 1998, Cet. IV.
Basya, M. Hilaly. “Menelusuri Artikulasi Islam Moderat di Indonesia”, http:/
/www.madina-sk.com/index.php?option=com, diakses tanggal 15 Maret 2012.
Bruinessen, Martin Van. Kitab Kuning, Pesantren dan Tarekat. Bandung: Mizan,
1999.
Dhofier, Zamakhsyari. Tradisi Pesantren: Studi tentang Pandangan Hidup Kyai.
Jakarta: LP3ES, 1994.
Ferdhi, Gamal. Ragam Ekspresi Islam Nusantara. Jakarta: The Wahid Institute,
Cet. I, 2008.
Fuad, Choirul. “Mengkaji Ulang Islam Multikultural”, http://islamlib.com,
diakses pada 13 Maret 2012.
Gibb, H. A. R. Modern Trends in Islam. Chicago: 1945.
Hamim, Thoha. “Islam dan Hubungan Antar Umat Beragama”, FORMA,
Surabaya: Majalah Mahasiswa Fak. Ushuluddin IAIN Sunan Ampel,
2001, Volume XXVI.

133
Pesantren: the miniature of moderate Islam in Indonesia  (Syamsun Ni’am)
Hasyim, Syafiq. “Belajar Multikulturalisme dari Pesantren”, Jurnal Al-
Wasathiyyah, Vol. 1, No. 1, Februari 2006.
Hisyam, Ibnu, Wustenfeld, 341-3; Watt, Medina, 22-5.
Hodgson, M.G.S. The Venture of Islam II. Chicago: Universty of Chicago Press,
1974.
Ma’arif, Ahmad Syafi’i. Islam dalam Bingkai Keindonesiaan dan Kemanusiaan;
Sebuah Refleksi Sejarah. Bandung: Mizan, 2009.
Madjid, Nurcholish. “Pluralisme Agama di Indonesia”, ‘Ulumul Qur’an, IV
(3), 1995.
Mas’ud, Abdurrahman. Dari Haramain ke Nusantara: Jejak Intelektual Arsitek
Pesantren. Jakarta: Kencana, 2006.
Mas’udi, Masdar Farid. “Mengenal Pemikiran Kitab Kuning”, dalam Pergulatan
Pesantren: Membangun dari Bawah. M. Dawam Rahardjo (ed), Jakarta:
Perhimpunan Pengembangan Pesantren dan Masyarakat (P3M), 1985.
Miftahudin. “Islam Moderat Konteks Indonesia dalam Perspektif Historis”,
http://eprints.uny.ac.id/2407/9/Akar_Islam_Moderat, diakses pada tanggal
11 Maret 2012.
Moderat Muslim Society (MMS). Laporan Akhir Tahun 2009 Toleransi dan
Intoleransi di Indonesia.
Ni’am, Syamsun. The Wisdom of K.H. Achmad Siddiq: Membumikan Tasawuf.
Jakarta: Erlangga Press, 2009.
Noeh, Munawar Fuad dan Mastuki HS. Menghidupkan Ruh Pemikiran K.H.
Achmad Siddiq. Jakarta: Logos, 1999.
Nuh, Abdullah ibn. al-Ima>m al-Muha>jir. Jakarta: 1960.
Pranowo, Bambang. Islam Faktual: Antara Tradisi dan Relasi Kuasa. Yogyakarta:
Adicita, 1999.
Prasetyo, Hendro. “Mengislamkan Orang Jawa: Antropologi Baru Islam Indo-
nesia”, Islamika Number.3, (Januari-Maret 1994).
Richardson, Alan. Dictionary of Christian Theology. London: 1969.
Runes, D.D. Dictionary of Philosophy. U.S.A: n.a.
Shihab, Alwi. Islam Inklusif: Menuju Sikap Terbuka dalam Beragama. Bandung:
Mizan, 1997.
Shihab, Alwi. Islam Sufistik: “Islam Pertama” dan Pengaruhnya hingga Kini di
Indonesia. Bandung: Mizan, 2001, Cet. I.
Shihab, M. Quraish. Secercah Cahaya Ilahi: Hidup Bersama Al-Qur’an. Bandung:
Mizan, 2007.
Simuh. Mistik Islam Kejawen Raden Ngabehi Ranggawarsita: Suatu Studi Terhadap
Serat Wirid Hidayat Jati. Jakarta: UI-Press, 1988.

IJIMS, Indonesian Journal of Islam and Muslim Societies, Volume 5, Number 1, June  2015: 111-134
134
Siradj, Said Agiel. “Tradisi dan Reformasi Keagamaan”, Republika, 2 Juni 2007.
Siradj, Said Agil. Tasawuf sebagai Kritik Sosial. Bandung: Mizan, 2006.
Solihin, M. Sejarah dan Pemikiran Tasawuf di Indonesia. Bandung: Pustaka Setia,
2001, Cet. I.
Steenbrink, Karel A. Pesantren, Madrasah, dan Sekolah: Pendidikan Islam dalam
Kurun Moderen. Jakarta: LP3ES, 1994.
Subagya, Rachmat. Kepercayaan Kebatinan, Kerohanian, dan Agama. Jakarta:
Yayasan Kanisius, 1970.
Tjandrasasmita, Uka. “Proses Kedatangan Islam dan Munculnya Kerajaan-
kerajaan Islam di Aceh”, A. Hasymi (Ed.). Sejarah Masuk dan Berkembangnya
Islam di Indonesia. Bandung: Alma’arif, 1993.
