Beware the creeping 
cracks of bias 
Evidence is mounting that research is riddled with systematic errors. Left 
unchecked, this could erode public trust, warns Daniel Sarewitz. 
A
larming cracks are starting to penetrate deep into the scientific 
edifice. They threaten the status of science and its value to soci­
ety. And they cannot be blamed on the usual suspects — inad­
equate funding, misconduct, political interference, an illiterate public. 
Their cause is bias, and the threat they pose goes to the heart of research. 
Bias is an inescapable element of research, especially in fields such 
as biomedicine that strive to isolate cause–effect relations in com­
plex systems in which relevant variables and phenomena can never 
be fully identified or characterized. Yet if biases were random, then 
multiple studies ought to converge on truth. Evidence is mounting that 
biases are not random. A Comment in Nature in March reported that 
researchers at Amgen were able to confirm the results of only six of 53 
‘landmark studies’ in preclinical cancer research (C. G. Begley & L. M. 
Ellis Nature 483, 531–533; 2012). For more than a decade, and with 
increasing frequency, scientists and journalists 
have pointed out similar problems. 
Early signs of trouble were appearing by the 
mid-1990s, when researchers began to document 
systematic positive bias in clinical trials funded 
by the pharmaceutical industry. Initially these 
biases seemed easy to address, and in some ways 
they offered psychological comfort. The prob­
lem, after all, was not with science, but with the 
poison of the profit motive. It could be countered 
with strict requirements to disclose conflicts of 
interest and to report all clinical trials. 
Yet closer examination showed that the trouble 
ran deeper. Science’s internal controls on bias 
were failing, and bias and error were trending 
in the same direction — towards the pervasive over-selection and 
over-reporting of false positive results. The problem was most provoca­
tively asserted in a now-famous 2005 paper by John Ioannidis, currently 
at Stanford University in California: ‘Why Most Published Research 
Findings Are False’ (J. P. A. Ioannidis PLoS Med. 2, e124; 2005). Evidence 
of systematic positive bias was turning up in research ranging from basic 
to clinical, and on subjects ranging from genetic disease markers to test­
ing of traditional Chinese medical practices. 
How can we explain such pervasive bias? Like a magnetic field that 
pulls iron filings into alignment, a powerful cultural belief is aligning 
multiple sources of scientific bias in the same direction. The belief is that 
progress in science means the continual production of positive findings. 
All involved benefit from positive results, and from the appearance of 
progress. Scientists are rewarded both intellectually and professionally, 
science administrators are empowered and the public desire for a bet­
ter world is answered. The lack of incentives to 
report negative results, replicate experiments or 
recognize inconsistencies, ambiguities and uncer­
tainties is widely appreciated — but the necessary 
cultural change is incredibly difficult to achieve. 
Researchers seek to reduce bias through tightly controlled experi­
mental investigations. In doing so, however, they are also moving far­
ther away from the real-world complexity in which scientific results 
must be applied to solve problems. The consequences of this strategy 
have become acutely apparent in mouse-model research. The tech­
nology to produce unlimited numbers of identical transgenic mice 
attracts legions of researchers and abundant funding because it allows 
for controlled, replicable experiments and rigorous hypothesis-testing 
— the canonical tenets of ‘scientific excellence’. But the findings of such 
research often turn out to be invalid when applied to humans. 
A biased scientific result is no different from a useless one. Neither 
can be turned into a real-world application. So it is not surprising 
that the cracks in the edifice are showing up first in the biomedical 
realm, because research results are constantly put to the practical test 
of improving human health. Nor is it surpris­
ing, even if it is painfully ironic, that some of 
the most troubling research to document these 
problems has come from industry, precisely 
because industry’s profits depend on the results 
of basic biomedical science to help guide drug-
development choices. 
Scientists rightly extol the capacity of research 
to self-correct. But the lesson coming from bio­
medicine is that this self-correction depends not 
just on competition between researchers, but also 
on the close ties between science and its appli­
cation that allow society to push back against 
biased and useless results. 
It would therefore be naive to believe that 
systematic error is a problem for biomedicine alone. It is likely to be 
prevalent in any field that seeks to predict the behaviour of complex 
systems — economics, ecology, environmental science, epidemiol­
ogy and so on. The cracks will be there, they are just harder to spot 
because it is harder to test research results through direct technological 
applications (such as drugs) and straightforward indicators of desired 
outcomes (such as reduced morbidity and mortality). 
Nothing will corrode public trust more than a creeping awareness 
that scientists are unable to live up to the standards that they have set for 
themselves. Useful steps to deal with this threat may range from reduc­
ing the hype from universities and journals about specific projects, to 
strengthening collaborations between those involved in fundamental 
research and those who will put the results to use in the real world. There 
are no easy solutions. The first step is to face up to the problem — before 
the cracks undermine the very foundations of science. ■ 
Daniel Sarewitz is co-director of the Consortium for Science, 
Policy and Outcomes at Arizona State University, and is based in 
Washington DC. 
e-mail: dsarewitz@gmail.com
 NATURE.COM
Discuss this article 
online at:
go.nature.com/bo2srq
A
BIASED
SCIENTIFIC RESULT 
IS NO DIFFERENT
FROM A  
USELESS ONE.
1 0  M A Y  2 0 1 2  |  V O L  4 8 5  |  N A T U R E  |  1 4 9
WORLD VIEW A personal take on events
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved