The Anarchical Society

The Anarchical Society
A Study of Order in World Politics
Second Edition
Hedley Bull
Foreword by Stanley Hoffmann

© Hedley Bull 1977
Foreword © Stanley Hoffmann 1995
Index © Mary Bull 1995
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of
this publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with
the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court
Road, London WIP 9HE.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this
publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil
claims for damages.
First edition 1977
Reprinted 15 times
Second edition 1995
Published by
MACMILLAN PRESS LTD
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 2XS
and London
Companies and representatives
throughout the world
ISBN 978-0-333-63822-4
ISBN 978-1-349-24028-9 (eBook)
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library.
10
9
8
7
04
03
02
01
6
5
00
99
98
Copy-edited and typeset by Povey-Edmondson
Okehampton and Rochdale, England
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-24028-9

Contents
Foreword to the Second Edition by Stanley Hoffmann
Preface
Introduction
Part 1
The Nature of Order in World Politics
I
The Concept of Order in World Politics
2
Does Order Exist in World Politics?
3
How is Order Maintained in World Politics?
4
Order versus Justice in World Politics
vii
Xlll
xv
1
3
22
51
74
Part 2
Order in the Contemporary International System
95
5
The Balance of Power and International Order
6
International Law and International Order
7
Diplomacy and International Order
8
War and International Order
9
The Great Powers and International Order
Part 3
Alternative Paths to World Order
97
122
156
178
194
223
10
Alternatives to the Contemporary States System
225
II
The Decline of the States System?
248
12
The Obsolescence of the States System?
272
13
The Reform of the States System?
286
14
Conclusion
307
Notes and References
Index
v
309
321

For Emily, Martha and Jeremy

Foreword: Revisiting 'The
Anarchical Society'
Stanley Hoffmann
The Anarchical Society is widely recognised today as a classic of the
literature on international relations on account not only of its
content but also its lucid and crisp prose. It is also seen as the
most masterful work in what is called the British school of
international relations, or the British approach to international
relations (with his dislike of pomposity, BuH would have shied
away from the word 'school'). This approach derives its originality
from its view of international relations as a complex set of relations
among states that form an international society, and not simply a
'system of states'.
We may ask ourselves why so important a book did not receive
the recognition it deserved on initial publication in 1977 particularly
in the United States - the country where the attempt to develop a
discipline of international relations distinct from diplomatic history
and international law has gone farthest. The answer is that its
'Britishness' did not fit with the prevailing American approaches.
The emphasis on society (however anarchical) seemed strange to
realists who, around Hans Morgenthau, studied international
relations from the perspective of power-seeking and competing
states, or to neo-realists who, following Kenneth Waltz, focused on
the effects of the distribution of power in the international system
on the inevitable contests of states. For realists and neo-realists,
whatever order exists in this endless 'state of war' results from the
states' attempts to organise ever-shifting balances of power. Bull
devotes a chapter to these, but does not assume that they constitute
the alpha and omega of interstate order. However, his book did not
satisfy the champions of the other (and older) American approach
to intern ational relations - the idealism which, in the spirit of
Woodrow Wilson, wishes to reform and to moralise, and sometimes
VII

Vlll
Foreword: Revisiting 'The Anarchical Society'
even to transcend, the system of states; looks at war and balances of
power with dismay, and at diplomacy with distrust; and invests
hope in effective and authoritative international institutions. Bull's
work , for all its emphasis on common rules, institutions and
interests, is too firmly anti-utopian, too closely tied to the system
of sovereign states -
to what it is now a cliche to call the
Westphalian system - to please those for whom states are the
problem, not the solution, in so far as order is concerned. Bull's
work was too 'Grotian' for the Machiavellians and the Hobbesians,
too statist for the Kantians and the cosmopolitans.
Some two-and-a-half decades after its publication, we can judge
more serenely the significance of a book which does not constitute
the author's last word, and from which BuB may have departed
even more if he had not died so prematurely. I will discuss here its
importance in two respects: first, as a general approach to
international relations, and second, as a way of understanding the
present international system.
As a general approach, The Anarchical Society draws our
attention to 'the element of co-operation and regulated intercourse
among states'. Bull tells us, on the one hand, that every interna-
tional system can be analysed in such terms (even the Cold War's
bipolar system, about which his cool reasonableness proved entirely
right); but on the other hand he carefully reminds us that in the
international system there is also 'the element of war and struggle
for power among states', as well as 'the element of transnational
solidarity and conflict, cutting across the divisions among states'.
How important the 'interstate society' aspect is, he does not
prejudge: it is a matter for empirical investigation. A comparison
with Waltz is instructive. Both accept the 'anarchy framework':
international relations is the politics of autonomous states, without
a common superior. It is the domain of self-help. Both therefore
stress the importance of the distribution of power, and particularly
of the distinction between the great powers and the lesser ones.
(Bull goes on to a distinction of the types of great power behaviour
in their spheres of influence.) But Bull's approach is richer.
Concerned almost exclusively with the 'state of war' , Waltz, in
discussing the international system, does not go beyond a binary
classification - bipolar versus multipolar systems. Bull's approach
would lead itself to a typology based on how much 'society' there is
in each system: the distinction between bipolar and multipolar ones

Stanley Hoffmann
IX
would thus lose some of the importance that Waltz, or Raymond
Aron, gave to it; and the nature of the relations between the strong
and the weak would be seen as largely dependent on how much of a
society the system is, on the character of its rules and on the content
of the states' common interests.
Indeed, when he examines the interaction among states, Bull is
interested in things other than the relations of power: common
concerns, rules and institutions. This allows him to examine wars
not only as the frequent outcomes of power clashes, but also as
possible instruments of order, aimed at curbing the ambitions and
excesses of trouble-makers: after all, limited wars were a tool for the
balancing of power. It also allows him to examine patterns of order
that are neither the balance of power nor war: diplomacy and
international law.
This approach has two great merits. It reintroduces into the study
of the international system three factors left out by Waltz's own
reductionism: transnational ideas, which can generate common
norms and interests, international institutions, and interdepen-
dence (how states 'perform' self-help: co-operatively, unilaterally,
or conflictually, depends to a considerable extent on their degree of
interdependence). Also, it draws our attention to the relationship
between the interactions among states on the one hand, and their
nature and their own institutions on the other. In other words, it
looks not merely at the distribution of power among the units, but
also at the units themselves . The scope of international society (as
compared with transnational society) depends on the ratio of free
enterprise versus government regulation within the units' political
systems. The intensity or depth of international society depends on
how much the units have in common. The substance or content of
international society depends on the dominant ideas, ideologies or
cultures.
This does not mean that Bull's broad and sweeping outline is
without ambiguities or problems. Bull, in his discussion of order,
states that it assumes 'a sense of common interests in the elementary
goals of social life': order thus seems to belong in, and to emerge
from , his 'element of society'. But a pattern such as the balance of
power can - when it is a product of mechanical, self-interested
moves - be part of the 'state of war', just as it can be part of
'society' when it corresponds to a sense of common concerns, and is
deliberately 'contrived'; it can be a Hobbesian or a Grotian

x
Foreword: Revisiting 'The Anarchical Society'
phenomenon. The two aspects of interstate relations - state of war
and international society - are hard to distinguish, both because the
'anarchy problematique' does not mean a constant war of all
against all - a convergence on co-operation may result from the
calculations of self-help, a point made, also in the 1970s, by the so-
called neo-liberal institutionalists - and because, conversely, many
features of international society are fragile, and can be undermined
when those calculations change.
Bull is not explicit enough in analysing the relations between
power and the common rules and institutions of international
society (although his rather merciless discussion of order versus
justice, and particularly of human rights, contains tentative
answers). Nor does he go behind the fuzzy notion of common
interests: where do they come from (external imperatives? domestic
pressures?) and how do they become binding? Above all, in this
book, he did not tell us enough about the formation of interna-
tional society. We need to know more about its origins. These can
be both the patterns of interdependence, and the state of war, which
often led to the coercive inclusion into the network of rules and
institutions of entities previously left out. We need to know more
about the mechanisms of international society: since the diffusion of
ideas, technology and goods operates through the units, one must
study particularly the effects (and different styles) of hegemonic
power. We need to know more about the material underpinnings of
international society, or about the respective roles of common
values or cultures, and of material factors. Bull puts a strong
emphasis on cultural cohesion, but historically it often turned out
to be brittle and easily destroyed by the 'state of war'. The
variations in the ratio of society to state of war, depending on
the period, the region of the world, and the issues, are another
element that the book, given its generality, does not cover
adequately. Bull's approach leads one to asking such questions,
and he himself was beginning to answer some of them at the end of
his life.
The Anarchical Society can also be seen as an approach to
understanding the contemporary international system - a system in
which economic interdependence is compelling, where the network
of common rules and institutions is dense, where the utility of force
has decreased both because of the nuclear danger and because of
the irrelevance of war to many of the conflicts economic inter-

Stanley Hoffmann
Xl
dependence breeds. It is also a world in which the states remain the
central actors, and where the diversity of cultures (even if it is not
seen as leading to a 'war of civilisations') puts into question the
solidity of international society and often challenges its rules. The
co-operation of self-interested actors that the theorists of 'interna-
tional regimes' have explored is a reality for which Bull's work
provides a framework.
Nevertheless, here too, question marks abound. First, we find,
today, factors Bull did not foresee or integrate into his analysis.
There is little in his book about the economic dimensions of
international relations (here, he is closer to the realists than to
many of the eighteenth-, nineteenth- and twentieth-century liberals);
and yet we have witnessed the formation not only of an interstate
economic society but also of a transnational world economy, in
which private groups and individuals are the actors, and where,
thanks to the revolution in communications, decisions are taken -
under no central political and few national political controls -
which can overwhelm the resources available to states, and
constrain their theoretical sovereignty. It is impossible now to
separate as rigorously as Bull did the 'transnational' from the
'international' elements of world politics and of order. Moreover,
the problem today is not the hypothetical and elusive world state,
or even the deliberate reform of the state system; it is the weakness
of so many states, racked and wrecked by ethnic or religious
conflicts, inadequate institutions and resources, lack of legitimacy,
etc. In a sense, all theorists of international relations have taken for
granted the notion of a 'system of states' - in conflict or in co-
operation. The dichotomy in their minds has been: systems of
several states versus imperial systems. But what happens when the
number of failed or disintegrating states increases faster, by far,
than the capacity of international society to deal with the resulting
chaos? Its rules and institutions are inadequate, and the states'
common interest tends to be defined as short-term prudence and
avoidance of involvement.
The questions to which the study of the present, post-Cold War,
system leads one inevitably are questions Bull left unanswered. How
much can society actually flourish in an anarchic milieu? Can the
factors of sociability prevail over the antagonisms that exist both in
the system of states and in the transnational sphere - or under what
conditions? Will the importance of economic interdependence in

XII
Foreword: Revisiting 'The Anarchical Society'
both these realms 'spill over' into, and reduce, the domain of
conflict, or will they simply coexist - or else will the conflicts erode
society? Can a global international system without a common
culture be a genuine and strong society, even if there are dense
networks of rules and institutions? What happens to world order
when the states challenge it through internal violence and weakness
as well as through their customary external violence and aggres-
siveness, and when transnational society's own rules and institu-
tions create more turbulence than order? Again, these are questions
that come straight out of Bull's approach. They could provide
students of international relations with a research agenda whose
very richness shows the usefulness of the paradigm put forward in
this remarkable book - not only for further empirical scrutiny of
world politics, but also for normative reflections on the possibility
of introducing more ethical concerns into the practices of actors on
the world stage, a vast and difficult subject that Bull refused to
confront in this 'purely intellectual' inquiry. Next to this agenda,
and however sketchy Bull's account of international society may
appear, all the competing paradigms look like dead-ends, or like
short and narrow paths.

Preface
In this book I have sought to expound systematically a view of
international society and international order that I have stated only
in piecemeal fashion elsewhere.
It owes a lot to my former colleagues in the International
Relations Department of the London School of Economics, and
especially to C.A. W. Manning. It has benefited greatly from the
discussions of the British Committee on the Theory of International
Politics, in which I have taken part for some years. lowe a
profound debt to Martin Wight, who first demonstrated to me
that International Relations could be made a subject, and whose
work in this field, to use one of his own metaphors, stands out like
Roman masonry in a London suburb. His writings, still inade-
quately published and recognised, are a constant inspiration.
At some points in the argument I draw on the ideas of my Oxford
teacher, H. L. A. Hart. In several chapters I dispute the views of my
friend Richard A. Falk of Princeton. I believe, however, that his is
one of the most significant points of departure in the stud y of world
politics today, and the attention I devote to refuting him should be
taken as a compliment. I am particularly grateful to my friend and
colleague, Professor J. D. B. Miller, for his criticism and encourage-
ment.
This book is the product neither of refined theoretical techniques
nor of any particularly recondite historical research. When still an
undergraduate I was very impressed (I now think too impressed) by
the dictum of Samuel Alexander, the author of Space, Time and
Deity (London: Macmillan, 1920) that 'thinking is also research'.
My book reflects the limitations of an attempt to deal with a large
and complex subject simply by thinking it through.
An earlier version of Chapter 4 appeared as 'Order vs Justice in
International Society' in Political Studies, vol. xix, no. 3 (September
1971). An earlier version of Chapter 8 appeared as 'War and
International Order', in The Bases of International Order: Essays in
Honour of C. A. W. Manning, ed. Alan James (Oxford University
xiii

XIV
Preface
Press, 1973). I am grateful to the publishers for permission to
reproduce passages from these essays.
My greatest intellectual debt is to John Anderson, Professor of
Philosophy in the University of Sydney from 1927 to 1958, a greater
man than many who are more famous. He had little to say directly
about the matters discussed in this book, but the impact of his mind
and his example has been the deepest factor in shaping the outlook
of many of us whom he taught.
HEDLEY BULL

Introduction
This book is an inquiry into the nature of order in world politics,
and in particular into the society of sovereign states, through which
such order as exists in world politics is now maintained. I have
sought answers to three basic questions:
(i) What is order in world politics?
(ii) How is order maintained within the present system of
sovereign states?
(iii) Does the system of sovereign states still provide a viable path
to world order?
The three parts of the book explore, in succession, these three
questions.
It will be helpful if, at the outset, I indicate the basic elements in
my approach to this subject. First, I am concerned in this book not
with the whole of world politics but with one element in it: order.
Sometimes when we speak of world order (or of the world order)
what we have in mind is the totality of relationships among states,
the international political system as a whole. Here, by contrast, I
am thinking of order as a quality that mayor may not obtain in
international politics at anyone time or place, or that may be
present to a greater or lesser degree: order as opposed to disorder.
Ofcourse, the element ofdisorder looms as large or larger in world
politics than the element of order. Indeed, it is sometimes held
(mistakenly, as I shall argue) that there is no such thing as order in
world politics at all, and that we can speak of international order or
of world order only as some future , desirable state ofaffairs which we
should strive to bring about but which does not exist at present and
has not existed in the past. But while it is important to remember that
order is at best only one element in world politics, it is upon this
element that I wish to focus attention. Thus when, in Part 2, I
consider such institutions of the society of states as the balance of
power, international law, diplomacy, war and the great powers, it is
their functions in relation to order that I seek to explore , not the
place they occupy in the international political system as a whole.
xv

XVI
Introduction
Second, order in this study is defined (in Chapter I) as an actual
or possible situation or state of affairs, not as a value, goal or
objective. Thus it is not to be assumed that order, as it is discussed
in this study, is a desirable goal, still less that it is an overriding one.
To say that such and such an institution or course of action helps to
sustain order in world politics is not to recommend that that
institution should be preserved or that course of action followed.
Of course, in common with most men I do attach value to order.
If I did not think of order in world politics as a desirable objective, I
should not have thought it worthwhile to attempt this study of it.
Indeed , it is doubtful whether any serious theory of political ends or
values fails to attach some value to order in human relationships.
But, as I argue in Chapter 4, order is not the only value in relation
to which international conduct may be shaped, and is not necessarily
an overriding value. One of the themes of the present time, for
example, is the clash between the preoccupation of the rich industrial
states with order (or rather with a form of order that embodies their
preferred values) and the preoccupation of poor and non-industrial
states with just change. Similarly, we often hear that order in
international politics should be subordinated to freedom or liberty
- the coalition against Napoleon, for example, saw itself as fighting
for the liberties of European nations against a system that provided
order but extinguished these liberties, and today it is often said that
within the American and Soviet spheres ofinfluence order is imposed
at the expense of the freedom or independence of small states .
To speak of order as if it were an overriding value, therefore,
would be to beg the question of the relationship between order and
other goals, and this I do not wish to do. A study ofjustice in world
politics, which may be envisaged as a companion volume to the
present one, might yield some very different perspectives from those
that are expressed here. I am not unaware of these perspectives or
unsympathetic to them. But this is a study of order in world
politics, and not ofjustice. I do, in the course of this work, consider
how order in world politics is related to demands for justice, and I
discuss the extent to which demands for just change have to be
satisfied if order in world politics is to obtain. But these excursions
into the theory of justice are undertaken only because they are
essential to the treatment of order.
Third, I have sought to confine my inquiry into order in world
politics to enduring issues of human political structure or institu-

Introdu ction
XVII
tions, and to avoid consideration of the substantive issues of world
politics at the present time. It is often said, sometimes correctly,
that the prospects for international order depend on the outcome of
some substantive question of the day - as, at present, the control of
strategic nuclear weapons, or the development of detente between
the United States and the Soviet Union, or the containment of the
Arab-Israeli dispute, or the avoidance of a world depression, or the
reform of the international monetary system, or the limitation of
population growth, or the redistribution of the world's food supply.
But whatever the substantive issues of the day may be, they have to
be dealt with in the context of the existing political structure of the
world, and it is in relation to this political structure, and
alternatives to it, that I have sought answers to the three basic
questions I have posed about order.
Fourth, the approach to order in world politics that is developed
here is one that does not place primary emphasis upon international
law or international organisation, and which, indeed, treats order as
something that can exist and has existed independently of both.
Order, it is contended here, does depend for its maintenance upon
rules, and in the modern international system (by contrast with
some other international systems) a major role in the maintenance
of order has been played by those rules which have the status of
international law. But to account for the existence of international
order we have to acknowledge the place of rules that do not have
the status of law. We have also to recognise that forms of
international order might exist in the future, and have existed in
the past, without rules of international law. It is, I believe, one of
the defects of our present understanding of world politics that it
does not bring together into common focus those rules of order or
coexistence that can be derived from international law and those
rules that cannot, but belong rather to the sphere of international
politics.
Similarly, the approach followed here does not place major
emphasis upon international organisations such as the United
Nations and its specialised agencies, and the various regional
international organisations. Of course, the part played by these
organisations in the maintenance of order in contemporary world
politics is an important one, and this is acknowledged at various
points in the argument. But to find the basic causes of such order as
exists in world politics, one must look not to the League of Nations,

xviii
Introduction
the
United Nations and such bodies, but to institutions of
international society that arose before these international organisa-
tions were established, and that would continue to operate (albeit in
a different mode) even if these organisations did not exist.
Even the part that is in fact played by the United Nations and
other international organisations is best understood not in terms of
the official objectives and aspirations of these organisations
themselves, or of the hopes commonly placed in them, but in
terms of the contribution they make to the working of more basic
institutions. It is for this reason that such references as are made to
the United Nations and such bodies appear in the chapters dealing
with the balance of power, international law, diplomacy, the role of
the great powers, and war. It is these latter that are the effective
institutions of international society; the League and the United
Nations, as Martin Wight once argued, are best seen as pseudo-
institutions. I have also been influenced by the feeling that the
United Nations, because of the great mass of documentation it
engenders, has been overstudied, and that this tends to deflect
scholarly attention away from sources of international order that
are more fundamental.
Finally, my purpose in writing this book is not to prescribe
solutions or to canvass the merits of any particular vision of world
order or any particular path that might lead to it. My purpose, or at
least my conscious purpose, is the purely intellectual one of
inquiring into the subject and following the argument wherever it
might lead.
Of course, I do not wish to imply anything so absurd as that this
study is 'value-free'. A study of this kind that did not derive from
moral and political premises of some kind would be impossible,
and, if it were possible, it would be sterile. What is important in an
academic inquiry into politics is not to exclude value-laden
premises, but to subject these premises to investigation and
criticism, to treat the raising of moral and political issues as part
of the inquiry. I am no more capable than anyone else of being
detached about a subject such as this. But I believe in the value of
attempting to be detached or disinterested, and it is clear to me that
some approaches to the study of world politics are more detached
or disinterested than others. I also believe that inquiry has its own
morality, and is necessarily subversive of political institutions and
movements of all kinds, good as well as bad.