POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
113
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group 
and European Integration
ANDREA SCHMIDT
Abstract: The Visegrad Group celebrated its 25th anniversary in February 2016. Es‑
tablished as an initiative of three statesmen from the Central and Eastern European 
(CEE) region, this cooperation has experienced booms and crises. The aim of this paper 
is to analyse the function of this regional integration in the years following the end 
of bipolar system as Visegrad Group members headed down the road to Euro­‑Atlantic 
integration. To this end, I apply different theoretical approaches and attempt to ex‑
plain the influence of key former politicians as well as new scenarios for the Visegrad 
Group’s position in the European Union. This analysis also covers the latest foreign 
policy changes and challenges facing CEE due to the involvement of a wider region 
that creates a counter­‑balance to the core EU. Statistical data and official documents 
from the Visegrad Group’s website strengthen these findings.
Key words: regional cooperation, European Union, foreign policy
The Visegrad cooperation celebrated its 25th anniversary in February 2016. 
This special type of regional cooperation was established by the three partici‑
pating states from the ruins of a collapsing bipolar system. Since 1993, when 
Czechoslovakia was dissolved and the Czech Republic and Slovakia became in‑
dependent, Visegrad has functioned as an entity with four member states. Over 
the last quarter century, this regional cooperation has seen booms and crises, 
and at times its legacy has come into question. The birth of the Visegrad Group 
was treated (and is sometimes still seen) as a miracle and the ultimate proof 
of the success of strong contributions based on common interests without any 
outside aid. The Group is still active, and from time to time, it causes surprises 
and obstacles in the European context.
Politics in Central Europe (ISSN: 1801-3422)
Vol. 12, No. 3
DOI: 10.1515/pce-2016-0019

114
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
For all these positive appraisals, Visegrad has had its share of controversies. 
On several occasions, the necessity of this cooperation and its effectiveness 
have been questioned; leading politicians have put the success of the Group 
at risk by subordinating it to their personal ambitions. Nevertheless, these oc‑
casional common threats – along with shared goals, international events and 
the obstacles of everyday operations – have also deepened the cooperation. 
This article deals with the prospects of survival of the Visegrad cooperation. 
Mindful of the role of regional integration generally and in CEE in particular, 
I analyse various scenarios and standpoints in order to find adequate answers 
to the question of whether the Visegrad cooperation can still be treated as effec‑
tive integration and whether, from a broader perspective, Central and Eastern 
Europe represents a collapsing region. My position is reinforced by statistical 
data regarding the position of the Visegrad cooperation; other documents 
related to annual presidencies also support this analysis. Lastly, in comparing 
the prospects of the Visegrad cooperation, I note that the survival of the Group 
can be explained in various ways.1 
Borders in Central and Eastern Europe
Examining the past and present state of CEE cooperation – that is, the way it 
came to take on the form and function of Visegrad Group – confirms the histori‑
cal lesson that the European continent cannot be considered a homogeneous 
entity; it contains cleavages which are either cultural or economic. Unsurpris‑
ingly, these two kinds of divisions are located at more or less at the same places.2 
Like many others, Hungarian historians have accepted Wallerstein’s (1983) 
model of a triply divided structure. Observing common roots and differences in 
the development of the CEE region, Jenő Szűcs (1981) developed an extended 
model to reflect internal cleavages within the European continent. According to 
this common view, the gap between the more developed West and the (eastern) 
periphery can be explained by several historical and economic factors. Both 
these commentators also identified a so­‑called semi­‑periphery, which can be 
understood as the Central and Eastern European region.
Assessing borders and cleavages raises complicated issues. The situation may 
become even more complex if we wish to examine the reasons and methods for 
border creation. The region can be seen as a special case given the fact that the 
1	 In a lecture in September 2016, Géza Jeszeszky, the former foreign minister of Hungary in Antall József’s 
government of the early ’90s and one of the Visegrad negotiators, confessed that a lack of strict rules 
had perhaps been crucial for the cooperation’s survival.
2	 The division of Europe is a popular theme among scholars. Wallerstein’s (1983) theory of the core and 
the periphery is based on an ideology also described by the Hungarian historian Jenő Szűcs (1981) in 
his work Vázlat Európa három történeti régiójáról[Aside from its aspiration to provide a summary com-
parison of the different regions of Europe, the importance of this essay lies in its delicate timing. First 
published in the early 1980s, it claimed that there was no such thing as a homogenous Eastern Europe.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
115
final borders of the CEE states were settled in the 19th and 20th centuries while 
in Western Europe during the Cold War, the placement of borders remained 
a symbolic issue that could link people together. The problem of borders is also 
closely connected with how Europe is identified. According to Jacobs (2012), for 
example, it is obvious that “Europe” represents a concept as well as a continent. 
On this interpretation, Europe became virtually synonymous with Christendom 
during the Middle Ages. Another relatively recent if generally unaccepted theory 
maintains that Europe spanned half the globe, extending from Iceland to the 
Bering Strait and nearly touching Alaska. Religious issues remained at the core 
of Europe’s division into smaller units, and concerns about ethnic and religious 
identity often surfaced in debates about the structure of the European regions.
The post­‑World War II period saw the creation of new concepts. The entire 
Central and Eastern European region belonged to the Soviet Union’s sphere of 
interest, and it was hardly possible to discuss any kind of cultural, ethnic or 
even religious cleavages (Schmidt 2011). Later, in the second half of the 1980s 
especially, new discussions opened up about the structure of Europe. Following 
Huntington’s (1996) theory as well as the 1930s scholarly debate between Oscar 
Halecki and Jaroslav Bidlo over East–West borders,3 Poland, the Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Slovenia, Slovakia and Croatia were deemed to be the western half of 
the CEE region, while Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Rumania, FYROM 
and parts of Bosnia composed the eastern half (Gorzelak 2002).
During the Cold War, however, the opposite tendency prevailed: all of the 
Soviet Union, including Vilnius, Riga and other cities that today lie within the 
European Union, was excluded from Europe entirely. At times, even the Soviet 
satellite states under the Warsaw Pact were left out, and thus, “Europe” became 
synonymous with the “West” and its associated political values (Schmidt 2013). 
The Cold War period saw widespread understanding and agreement about where 
the borders of a divided Europe were to be found and which ones were most 
important (Bialasiewicz 2009). The borders that divided Europe also divided 
the world. They created the geopolitical division between East and West. The 
Iron Curtain both divided Europe and – because this division was exported to 
other parts of the world – also worked as a global border.
Among the consequences of the revolutions of 1989 was a profound reor‑
dering of the spatial imaginary of Europe. The collapse of both the Berlin Wall 
and the Soviet bloc called for the creation of new geographical stories and new 
spatial representations that could capture and codify the cartographic chaos of 
the former Eastern European space (Bialasiewicz 2003). Although the Cold War 
was over, its borders did not disappear at once. The European East–West ones 
3	 In the interwar years, the famous Polish historian Halecki and Czech Byzantinist Bidlo had quarrelled 
over the place of Poland in Europe. While Halecki located the country in the east based on a simple 
bipartite division of the continent, Bidlo claimed it was wholly western (Okey 1992).

116
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
were inevitably strengthened, and while in Western Europe, the role of borders 
declined and there was some kind of recognisable integration, to the east of 
the continent, the isolation of borders became even more critical. As we have 
seen, while the entire Central and Eastern European region fell in the sphere 
of interest of the Soviet Union, it was scarcely possible to reflect on any kind 
of cultural, ethnic or even religious cleavages or indeed any other differences 
among the group of socialist countries. Nevertheless, these discussions began 
from the second half of the 1980s especially.
Some final points about borders should be noted here. The act of border 
creation can be understood to happen in one of two ways: on the first approach, 
the border is created from above by way of state participation and efforts in 
a process that usually seems rather peaceful. The peacefulness of this method 
is particularly clear when we compare it with the second approach whereby 
borders are established from outside, usually as a consequence of cataclysmic 
events such as a painful loss or victory on the battlefield and peace talks. It 
remains a crucial question whether aside from their shared acknowledgement 
of borders, inhabitants enclosed by state boundaries experience any kind of 
common identity related to the region they come from. Today, people from 
the Visegrad region are supposed to feel connected to several identities: these 
are local, regional, national, European and – last but not least – some sort of 
“Visegrad” or Central European identity.
Cleavages in Europe and the position of Visegrad
As we have seen, the internal cleavages or borders of Europe were a forgotten 
issue in the age of the Cold War. The Central and Eastern European region was 
treated as a homogenous entity matching Russia’s so­‑called zone of influence. 
As perceived by the West, Europe ended at the Iron Curtain and everything 
located beyond this border was part of the group of satellite states within the 
Soviet Union’s sphere of interest.
The question of CEE regionalism, in fact, remained complex throughout the 
20th century. The notion of a common territorial identity among citizens with 
different mother tongues was suppressed in state propaganda, which presented 
the historical regions as “actually” ancient Polish, Czech, Hungarian and Roma‑
nian lands. Moreover, the depiction of the relationship between territory and 
ethnicity was one dimensional, and because of socialist states’ hierarchical cen‑
tralism, the historical regions did not evolve into collective actors (Tägil 1999).
Turning to the progressive increase in European integration after the end of 
World War II, the European experience provided different models for regional 
integration. On the one hand, Western European integration focused on trade 
agreements and helped remove customs duties among member countries. By the 
end of 1990s, these changes had produced a deeper level of integration leading 

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
117
to the formation of a common currency area (Lee – Kim 2013). On the other, 
the Central and Eastern European countries saw political changes requiring the 
radical revamping of their trade policy and political institutions. Along with the 
inevitable political reforms, one noteworthy development was the considerable 
opening up of local markets to foreign suppliers of goods and services.
As the late 1980s became the age of debates about the division of the CEE region, 
new questions and problems arose. Given the political transformation and col‑
lapse of the Soviet Union, historical forces demanded the reorganisation of the 
spatial structure of the region. As we have noted, the 1989 revolutions brought 
a radical reordering of Europe’s spatial imaginary (Bialasiewicz 2003). Early in 
the next decade, the new democracies of Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, 
thus, set out to pursue a new mode of Central European cooperation symbolised 
by their formation of Visegrad Group (Ash 1999). Attempting to move past old 
debates and misunderstandings related to the history of this region, the political 
leaders of the three (later four) Central and Eastern European countries began 
to focus on this totally new form of cooperation. This mode of regional integra‑
tion was a natural consequence of historical forces. Regional integration was 
useful since there was no external actor who could assist with the transforma‑
tion and orientation of these countries, let alone other issues. Accepting Haas 
(1970) review of regional integration, the Visegrad cooperation might be seen as 
a good example of a process whereby nation states “voluntarily mingle, merge 
and mix with their neighbors so as to lose the factual attributes of sovereignty 
while acquiring new techniques for resolving conflicts among themselves.”
Generally speaking, we can examine integration efforts in terms of eight im‑
portant functions
1.
Strengthening of trade integration in the region
2.
Creation of an appropriate enabling environment for private sector actors
3.
Development of infrastructure programmes to support economic growth and regional integration
4.
Development of strong public sector institutions and good governance
5.
Reduction of social exclusion and development of an inclusive civil society
6. Contributions to peace and security in the region
7.
Development of environment programmes at regional level
8. Strengthening of the region’s interaction with other world regions
The processes of regional integration that emerged after World War were origi‑
nally most concerned with trade and economics. In contrast, the “new regional‑
ism” wave after the 1980s was a multi­‑dimensional process entailing aspects of 
politics, diplomacy, security and culture alongside economic cooperation. (íde 

118
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
ílombarde­‑Van Langenhove 2006) The end of the bipolar system and subsequent 
transformation years unleashed a sequence of unresolved questions in the 
post­‑socialist world. For independent states in the region, the new challenges 
concerned how to balance integration with a state of total or partial isolation. 
In creating Visegrad Group, the founding states, thus, had to focus on a very 
special form of integration that would reduce the meaning of internal borders 
while suggesting the potential for new external boundaries. The natural course 
of this cooperation would have been some kind of permanent institutional 
structure, however the founding partners concentrated on a looser approach 
entailing limited norms and a less institutional structure. Referring to academic 
analyses of regional integration (Dobson 1991), this process recalled the most 
intensive form of inter­‑state interaction with common inter­‑state policies. The 
aims of this Visegrad integration may be understood in various ways. While 
the Group was established partly for practical reasons, as Ash (1999) remarks, 
there was another explanation for this alliance:
they believed in the idea of Central Europe, which Havel and the new Hun‑
garian president, Árpád Göncz, had preached in the 1980s, and wished to pre‑
clude any return to the petty nationalisms of [the] interwar years. But it was 
also because th[is] tight little regional cooperation would win their countries’ 
favor in the West (Ash 1999; see also Schmidt 2011)
The role of the Visegrad cooperation can also be analysed by applying some 
of the factors set out in the general scholarship. Most crucial here is the issue 
of whether the regional agreements of the Group met any or all of the follow‑
ing criteria:
1.	 Consistency with domestic policy objectives4 
2.	 Creation of incentives to reduce, minimise or eliminate trade diversion
3.	 Production of a deeper level of integration than what could have been 
achieved through the “multilateral option”
4.	 Enabling of a faster rate of integration with outside countries than what 
would have been possible under multilateral agreements (Drabek 1997)
The great challenge for CEE countries initially was moving away from tradi‑
tional isolationism. The next step entailed joining or activating membership in 
multilateral economic institutions and encouraging various regional initiatives. 
Sometimes these efforts all took place at the same time.
At the outset, there was common agreement across Europe that the political 
objective for the CEE countries was the introduction of democracy based on 
a multi­‑party political system, respect for human rights and the principles of 
4	 The consistency of the Group’s multilateral agreements with domestic objectives should also be con-
sidered.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
119
a market economy. A second common interest was security. While the collapse 
of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA)5 and the Warsaw Pact 
were generally welcomed, many in Central Europe believe Russia’s retreat from 
Central Europe was only temporary. Building closer security ties to the West 
was, therefore, an important goal of the CEE states. A third shared interest was 
environmental issues. The EU had a strong interest in cooperating more closely 
with Eastern Europe in order to resolve a variety of environmental problems 
that had plagued the CEE countries for decades (Drabek 1997).
Despite the integration process, the issue of independence continued to occupy 
a central position. When it came to planning future cooperation, historical expe‑
rience also proved very helpful. Focusing on historical roots, Vaclav Havel, the 
former president of Czechoslovakia put together a cooperation initiative that 
referred to the success of a historic meeting of Bohemian, Polish and Hungar‑
ian kings in 1335. In a message to the Polish and Hungarian prime ministers 
and presidents, he put it:
We should not compete with each other to gain admission into the various 
European organizations. On the contrary, we should assist each other in the 
same spirit of solidarity in which, in darker days, you protested [against] […] 
our persecution as we did against yours (quoted in Lengyel – Suranyi 2013)
In initiating the cooperation, Havel aimed to break free of the isolation in 
which the Central and Eastern European countries found themselves after the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union. No longer part of the Soviet zone, these states 
had only just begun to confront the challenges of independence and were reluc‑
tant to give up this position and take on an Euro­‑Atlantic orientation (Lengyel 
2006). The CEE countries were also waiting to be invited and received into the 
European Economic Community but in the early 1990s, there was no sign of 
the acceptance of their efforts. The Visegrad cooperation focused on economic, 
cultural and security issues but its chief task was helping member states on the 
transformation path. The inauguruation meeting organised by Havel took place 
in Bratislava in 1990; its main task was the development of a security policy 
since the end of the bipolar system and collapse of the Soviet Union called for 
a new orientation within foreign policy.6 
There can be no doubt that by 2004, the ultimate goal of European and trans­
‑Atlantic integration had been accomplished, and in economic terms, these 
5	 CMEA had been a Soviet Union­‑led system of regional integration. The dominance of the Soviet Union 
inevitably hampered the extension of common trade agreements among the satellite states.
6	 The idea of restoring a sense of Central Europe was very popular in the late 1980s. Several conferences, 
meetings and publications dealt with the changing role of CEE. The Central European University was 
the practical result of annual conferences along these lines in Dubrovnik. The university even had its 
faculties in Prague (Czechoslovakia), Warsaw (Poland) and Budapest (Hungary), that is, in the countries 
which were the “closest to each other,” creating a “geopolitically important [,] blessed and damned 
region where the future of Europe could be decided and solved” (Kiss Gy. 2000)

120
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
countries also took on a Western orientation. Nevertheless, the framework for 
economic independence remained a key problem. In the beginning, it was obvi‑
ous that the Visegrad region needed financial resources from abroad in order 
to help these states’ ruined economies while Western European countries re‑
quired extended markets in which to sell their goods. It was merely a side effect 
that in adapting to the principles of a market economy, this region gradually 
integrated market economics. Seeking new perspectives, the Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Poland and Slovakia agreed to establish their own sub­‑regional trade 
initiative – the Central European Free Trade Arrangement (CEFTA) – in March 
1993 and they invited Bulgaria, Romania and Slovenia to join.
With the collapse of CMEA and the disappearance of the Soviet Union as 
the main trade partner of the majority of the CEE states, CEFTA had to guar‑
antee economic cooperation in order to support the region, and it did this by 
eliminating taxes and tariffs on international commercial activity. Later, with 
European integration, CEFTA would lose its original members, who enjoyed 
tax­‑free trade within the European Union. The CEFTA arrangement then took 
on a new orientation, gradually expanding its area of interest to include other 
satellite and even post­‑Soviet states.
The Visegrad cooperation had its own special integration mission to ac‑
complish. This was not the reconstruction of a petite entente as there was no 
great power working behind the scenes to control the member states or even 
coordinate their cooperation. Similarly, there was no push to revive the Yalta 
system, which was the structure that the new independent states most wished 
to avoid. The integration sought not to pit the states against one another but to 
provide a proactive tool for their cooperation. As there was no existing model 
for such habitual use, only limited rules were adopted. In fact, this system of 
cooperation remains special since it continues to lack of the following elements:
1.	 An organised structure.
2.	 Fixed and written rules of cooperation. (The system is flexible.)
3.	 Official headquarters. (Through a special annual rotation system, each 
member state takes on the tasks of the presidency every fourth year. The 
Czech presidency, for example, extended from July 2015 until June 2016.)
4.	 A strict agenda. (Annual meetings take place among different experts and 
sectoral policy representatives at ministerial level.)
5.	 More than one functioning organisation. (The Group’s organisation, In‑
ternational Visegrad Fund (IVF), is based in Bratislava and has an annual 
budget of 8 billion Euro that is paid by the four member states. This is 
also the basis for the scholarships offered by IVF.)
This system of cooperation lacking written and fixed rules was strongly influ‑
enced by the representatives of the member states for whom the Group had 

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
121
different meanings. The general aim set out a series of action plans concern‑
ing the consequences of political and economic transformation and the new 
international political environment. The founding partners expressed their 
intention to rebuild based on the democratic framework of a new civil society 
and transformation into a market economy.
The success of the Visegrad Four (V4) has, thus, been based on the effective‑
ness of their cooperation, and this is also what may guarantee the Group’s sur‑
vival. The size and influence that these countries may achieve if they are united 
by common aims cannot be ignored. According to the data, if the V4 were 
a single country, then its total population of 64,301,710 would make it the 
22nd largest state in the world and the fourth largest in Europe.7 From the 
standpoint of economic potential, the Visegrad Group is the world’s 16th –17th 
largest economy.
Table 1: Estimated GDP in 2016
Ranking 
Country
GDP in USD million
Total world 
73,993,835
1.
USA
18,558,130
EU
16,477,211
2.
China
11,383,030
3.
Japan
4,412,600
4.
Germany
3,467,780
5.
United Kingdom
2,760,960
6.
France
 2,464,790
7.
India
2,288,720
8.
Italy
1,848,690
9.
Brazil
1,534,780
10.
Canada
1,462,330
11.
South Korea
1,321,200
12.
Spain
1,242,360
13.
Australia
1,200,780
14.
Russia
1,132,740
15.
Mexico
1,082,430
16.
Indonesia
936,955
Visegrad group
866,296
17.
Netherlands
762,521
Source: Author according to http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/01/weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.
x=51 & pr.y=10 & sy=2015 & ey=2016 & scsm=1 & ssd=1 & sort=country & ds=.&br=1 & c
7	 This transformation of the V4 into an independent state was never on the agenda of the Visegrad Group 
member states.

122
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
Table 2: Largest European Union countries by population in 2016
Ranking
Country
Number of inhabitants
1.
Germany
80,682,351
2.
UK
65,111,143
3.
France
64,668,129
Visegrad Group
64,392,055
4
Italy
59,801,004
Source: http://www.worldometers.info/world­‑population/population­‑by­‑country/
Extension scenarios: Visegrad Group on the road to Euro­‑Altantic 
Integration
In the first decade of its existence, the V4 cooperation experienced several 
conflicts and downturns. The very first obstacle came in 1993 when the number 
of original founders increased with the dissolution of Czechoslovakia. Imme‑
diately after the territorial changes in 1993, the Czech prime minister, Vaclav 
Klaus announced that his country’s aims would supersede the common inter‑
est. Klaus went so far as to suggest that the Czech Republic would no longer 
be interested in the Visegrad cooperation since the focus should instead be 
on cooperating with Western Europe (Jovanovic 1998). Klaus’s view can be 
explained by the fact that even in the mid-1990s, he was convinced that the 
Czech Republic belonged to the West more than to any other formation, and 
he dismissed Central Europe as a geopolitical category.8 Klaus claimed that the 
Visegrad Group was an artificial product of the West (Lázár 2014). This position 
harmed cooperation with the Czech Republic’s neighbours and a competition 
began to see who would join the EU soonest. These comments from the Czech 
PM also disregarded the practical reality: it would be foolish to believe that the 
industrial Czech Republic belongs anywhere besides Central Europe, which 
also includes Poland and Hungary.9
The V4 countries were not satisfied with mere association with the European 
Communities, and as such, in the mid-1990s, they submitted their official EU 
membership applications. Hungary was the first V4 country to apply for full 
membership, lodging its official application on 1 April, 1994. Poland officially 
8	 In several respects, Klaus was correct. The Czech Republic’s geographical position is different from that 
of the other three member states. The country is located to the west of Poland, Slovakia and Hungary. 
While there are several models of Europe’s inner borders, the location of the Czech state is generally 
treated as “Central” while the other three countries represent “East Central” or “Central East” Europe. 
At the same time, the locations given to the Visegrad Group member states are highly dependent on 
the expert making the pronouncement.
9	 For more information, see Dostál (n.d.)

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
123
applied for EU membership on 8 April, 1994 and Slovakia did so in June 1995. 
The Czech Republic made its formal application in Brussels at the beginning 
of 1996. At the European Council’s Luxembourg summit in December 1997, 
a decision was reached that the Polish, Hungarian and Czech applications were 
ready for negotiation. As such, these three Visegrad Group states began their EU 
membership pre­‑accession negotiations together with the other Luxembourg 
group states (i.e. Slovenia, Estonia and Cyprus) in March 1998. During the 
EC’s Helsinki summit in December 1999, it was agreed that Slovakia, Bulgaria, 
Romania, Lithuania, Latvia and Malta would also start their EU membership 
negotiations. Pre­‑accession negotiations with Helsinki Group states (including 
Slovakia), thus, began in March 2000 (Pawlas 2015).
Before joining the EU, the Visegrad Group members had emphasised that 
their strength was based on cooperation. Nevertheless, in 2002, the Polish and 
the Czech members took part in secret negotiations in Denmark. After European 
integration, the Visegrad Group contained representatives from three different 
groups of states: with a potential Warsaw­‑Berlin­‑Paris triangle in the pipeline, 
Poland found itself among the most prestigous member states while Hungary 
and the Czech Republic each belonged to the group of medium­‑sized EU mem‑
ber states and Slovakia represented the Visegrad Group’s interests among the 
smallest EU members. Having been quite efficient in its negotiation process, 
Slovakia managed to finish its accession negotiations together with other Viseg‑
rad Group states on 13 December, 2002 in Copenhagen. The Accession Treaty 
between these V4 states and the EU was signed on 16 April, 2003 in Athens 
and they all acceded to European Union structures on 1 May, 2004. (They were 
joined by six other new member states, i.e. Slovenia, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, 
Malta and Cyprus, who also finished the negotiation process in Copenhagen 
in December 2002.) Since that time, all these states have been treated as full 
European Union members and have, thus, had the right to participate in creat‑
ing the EU’s future (Pelkmans 2006).
The first few years of the Visegrad Group’s cooperation resulted in various 
doubts about the prospects of mutual understanding. As the V4 states checked 
off their final goals of transforming into market economies and achieving Euro­
‑Atlantic integration through the acceptance of invitations to join NATO and 
later the European Union, new questions and cleavages emerged regarding the 
cooperation itself. Breakdowns and setbacks, usually attributed to ideas of soli‑
darity and coordination being overriden by competitive attitudes and national 
ambitions during the EU accession negotiations, prompted many to seriously 
doubt the chances of the Group’s survival (Lázár, 2014). Pessimistic views were 
shared about this highly painful if illuminating failure of Central European 
cooperation. In the face of these doubts, the V4 members concluded the 2004 
Kroměříž Declaration, which set out a framework and goals for future coopera‑
tion, taking account of the fact that the original V4 objectives of some 15 years 

124
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
earlier – a trans­‑Atlantic orientation and European integration – had now been 
fulfilled.10 The V4 representatives, thus, expressed their commitment to becom‑
ing ambassadors of countries awaiting integration with the European Union.
Though European integration was the ultimate proof of the legitimacy of the 
V4 cooperation, it also raised new concerns about the cohesion of these four 
countries. A key issue was the asymmetrical size and influence of the member 
states. In this regard, Poland emphasised its own distinct aims and interests 
in seeking out a position in the European Union and NATO as a strong partner 
to the US in the war in Iraq. This difference in Poland’s position recalled an 
old quandary for the V4 states: Was it necessary to concentrate on political al‑
liances, or were they better off emphasising the importance of civil platforms? 
Fałkowski­‑Bukalska­‑Gromadzki 2003). Here some Czech commentators main‑
tained that instead of strengthening ties with Poland, it would be reasonable for 
the Czech Republic to focus on Central Europe and the historic connection with 
Austria and Slovenia instead (Pehe 2004).11 Czech President Milos Zeman and 
his Slovak counterpart, Ivan Gasparovic also discussed the prospect of enlarging 
the Visegrad cooperation by inviting new member states to join. While Zeman 
supported enlargement through the entry of Slovenia, Gasparovic opposed this 
move, maintaining that no conclusion had ever been reached on the expansion 
of the V4, a reputable and important “brand” in Europe, which should continue 
to cooperate according to its traditional alignment (Lázár 2014). Earlier, in 2007, 
Slovak Prime Minister Robert Fico had expressed the same opinion, arguing 
that the Visegrad Group enjoyed a high level of political “added value” and so 
there was no reason to enlarge it (Lázár 2014).
The view in Hungary was similar to the one in the Czech Republic, however 
Poland insisted that the Group take no new members. Instead of focusing on 
the “restoration of the Habsburg monarchy,” as Polish experts usually accused 
10	 This declaration included the following wording: “The Visegrad Group countries regard their accession to 
the European Union and NATO as a significant step towards the reunification of Europe and as a historic 
milestone on the path of their democratic transformation, integration efforts and mutual cooperation. 
The integration of the Visegrad Group countries into the European and Euro­‑Atlantic structures opens 
up new opportunities and poses new challenges for their further cooperation on the issues of common 
interest.
	
The cooperation of the Visegrad Group countries will continue to focus on regional activities and 
initiatives aimed at strengthening the identity of the Central European region. In this context, their 
cooperation will be based on concrete projects and will maintain its flexible and open character.”
11	 This remains a live issue. In future years, the situation may become even more complex since some Czech, 
Hungarian and Slovak politicians would like to join in hardcore European integration in the event that 
European states create a two­‑speed Europe following the failure of the [YEAR?] Brussels summit. If 
some Visegrad countries commit to hardcore European integration, while others, in particular, Poland, 
opt out, there will be a new dividing line between these groups, which will definitely bury the Visegrad 
cooperation.
	
Whatever happens, it is time to start thinking seriously about a new way of organising Central Europe. 
For the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia, close cooperation with Poland may not be the best 
route to self­‑protection and self­‑advancement in the EU since the interests of those small countries 
and a large and self­‑confident Poland may not coincide.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
125
their Hungarian colleagues of doing, Visegrad Group members have, thus, 
gradually turned east, involving the Eastern Partnership member states in the 
cooperation and beginning to orientate themselves towards the Balkan pen‑
insula.12 Cooperation with the Eastern Partnership is an obvious choice since 
three of the four Visegrad member states share borders with Ukraine, and the 
“Orange Revolution” and resulting Ukrainian political instability have created 
new threats at eastern borders. These are also the eastern borders of the Euro‑
pean Union, which has led to more interest in the security question.
After ten years of EU membership, the outbreak of the war in Ukraine and 
resulting security policy issues, including the defence of Visegrad and European 
Union borders, are among the most challenging concerns that the V4 and EU 
have had to face. This war has practically moved into the neighbourhood, call‑
ing on the states to adopt an active security policy.13
Strong statesmen, weak cooperation?
The success of the Visegrad Group has also been the result of its active politicians. 
In the absence of institutionalisation or any automatically binding cooperation 
mechanisms, the place of the Visegrad cooperation in the minds of the political 
leaders of the Visegrad states provides an important lead when it comes to as‑
sessing the prospects of the cooperation as well as any signs of how successful 
or significant the V4 actually is or might become (Lázár 2014). Personal connec‑
tions and relations among prime ministers and presidents could easily affect the 
success or failure of the cooperation. As we have seen, the first obstacles to the 
Visegrad Group’s cooperation emerged as a result of Vaclav Klaus’s standpoint 
on the Czech Republic’s position and orientation. Klaus formed the opinion that 
there was a need for CEFTA cooperation instead of dealing with a “tenth rate 
initiative at best” from a Polish and Czech perspective (Lázár, 2014). At a meet‑
12	 As we have seen, over the years, several scenarios have been put forward for extending cooperation by 
accepting new members. The Hungarians have made frequent reference to the “good old traditions” 
between Hungary and Austria and also cited Slovenia /and Croatia as potential new partners. In contrast, 
the Poles opposed re­‑establishing the Austro­‑Hungarian monarchy at the turn of the 21st century. This 
Polish preference for working with Eastern Partnership members may be explained by Polish foreign 
policy’s Ukraine–Lithuania–Belarus (ULB) orientation. Historically, there have been special ties among 
these states, and Poland has felt a special responsibility towards them. Notably, these ties were disre-
spected by Russia
13	 Based on discussions of a preliminary plan, the V4 battle group was to be placed on standby by 2016 
under the Defence Austerity in the Visegrad Region (DAV4) programme. This was combined with plans 
to set up a long­‑term cyber security cooperation mechanism, a V4 + Ukraine EU battle group, common 
V4 air surveillance, a common air force pilot training centre and stronger cooperation among V4 defence 
academies. As a result of the V4’s specific geographical position and opposition to illegal immigration 
as well as dilemmas concerning the relaxation of its visa policy for citizens of Eastern Partnership states, 
the Group needed to adopt a special joint refugee policy in 2015 to deal with the growing number of 
immigrants. This issue formed the basis for a common platform among cooperating politicians and 
governments.

126
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
ing of CEFTA member prime ministers in Poznan, Poland, on 25 November, 
1994, he reaffirmed his opposition to the political interdependence of Visegrad 
countries, claiming that Czechs were only willing to cooperate on trade matters 
within a CEFTA framework. At the meeting’s final press conference, he went so 
far as to say that the Czech Republic now translated “Visegrad” as “CEFTA” in 
its internal dictionary. Klaus denied that there was a lack of cooperation in this 
region; instead, he contended that the Czech Republic was the “driving force” 
behind the economic cooperation embodied in CEFTA. In response, the Polish 
president, Lech Walesa accused him of elevating Czech interests above those of 
Visegrad Group (Fawn 2005). By 2011, Klaus’s view had changed considerably 
and he remarked that the Visegrad cooperation had contributed to strengthen‑
ing the friendship among the four countries. Concerning his previous position, 
he claimed that he had only rejected the idea of the V4 replacing fully­‑fledged 
national membership of Western institutions when Western partners had hesi‑
tated to promise EU and NATO membership to the four countries. After EU 
accession, however, the V4 had acquired a new foreign political dimension and 
this permitted the formulation of joint interests and priorities as well as their 
promotion at international level (Lázár 2014).
The former Slovak Prime Minister Vladimír Mečiar was not a Visegrad fan 
either. The Slovak challenge to Visegrad was also ideological but had different 
content. The nationalistic Mečiar antagonised the Hungarian minority in Slova‑
kia, damaging relations with Budapest. His regime’s foreign policy also moved 
away from Euro­‑Atlanticism and even made surprising overtures to Russia 
(Harris 2010). Mečiar’s attitude hampered Slovak participation in the Visegrad 
cooperation between 1994 and 1998. Eventually, he also concluded that “in the 
end, sooner or later we will have to cooperate together”(Harris 2010). Despite 
these tensions, internal communication in Visegrad continued to function, dem‑
onstrating the Group’s basic viability. As we have seen, Visegrad Group members 
entered the European Union together, a development that might be understood 
as the ultimate sign of their Western orientation. Nevertheless, this achieve‑
ment also called into question the very grounds for the cooperation’s existence. 
The Visegrad cooperation has frequently been compared with the situation of 
the Benelux states. While the Group admittedly lacks the internal unity of the 
Benelux Union, it has repeatedly succeeded in presenting a more or less united 
position within the European Union, which is a far better outcome than if its 
members were competing with each other.14 Even so, the late 1990s saw the erup‑
tion of a crisis in the Group. Along with Vladimir Mečiar’s views, Hungary’s Or‑
bán government of the late 1990s had the effect of weakening the cooperation. 
Slovak–Hungarian relations had always been seen as a weak point in the Group. 
14	 This opinion was also expressed by former Hungarian foreign affairs minister Geza Jeszenszky on the 
25th anniversary of the establishment of the Visegrad cooperation.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
127
From the perspective of FIDESZ, Hungary’s governing party, it was vital that 
the country’s foreign policy focus on advancing Hungarian interests. In 1998, 
when Orbán was invited to Washington, it had already been announced that 
Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic would join NATO in the near future 
while Slovakia might be invited later on. In 1999, the European Union added 
that Estonia, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Cyprus and Slovenia were 
the first six states chosen to begin European integration negotiations. It was 
also noted that these negotiations might be protracted for as long as a decade.15 
This decision gave Orbán’s government a new impetus to focus on strengthen‑
ing regional diplomacy, including the renewal of the Visegrad cooperation and 
reinforcement of ties with Austria in April 2000.16 Orbán declared his aims in 
a speech to the Hungarian national assembly in November of that year:
With all our efforts, we have to try to take part in the cultural, political and 
economic re­‑structuring of Central and Eastern Europe. We have to treat the 
neighbouring countries as our partners in the creation of a common Central 
European future. This was our intention when we concentrated on the renewal 
of the Visegrad cooperation beginning with the negotiations with Poland and 
Czech Republic, then with Slovakia after the elections (quoted in Gavra 2003)
The first obstacles to this renewed cooperation came with a statement by 
Orbán on the incompatibility of the existing Benes decrees with European 
integration and the need to adapt to the EU legal system. This issue was seen 
as unacceptably sensitive and, as a result of Orbán’s comment, a meeting of 
Visegrad Group prime ministers scheduled for Budapest in 2002 was suspended 
when Czech and Slovak partners refused to participate. The frozen relations 
between Slovakia and Hungary gradually thawed, and in 2013, Slovak Prime 
Minister Robert Fico and Orbán spoke of “opening a new chapter in the shared 
history of the two countries,” claiming that the relationship between the two 
states was based on “political and personal trust” (Lázár 2014).17 In the same 
year, Slovak Foreign Affairs Minister Miroslav Lajcak added that “Visegrad is 
going strategic, we are more mature. Visegrad makes each of us individually 
and as a group stronger.”18 
Analysing the role of Visegrad Group member representatives more closely, 
it is clear that these politicians have generally hesitated about whether to refer 
15	 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/hel1_en.htm
16	 For more information, see Gábor Gavra (2003): A kormányzó FIDESZ és az EU csatlakozás: igenek és 
nemek, Magyar Narancs, http://magyarnarancs.hu/belpol/a_kormanyzo_fidesz_es_az_eu­‑csatlakozas_
igenek_es_nemek-62225
17	 As Lázár (2014) remarks, Fico’s personal position appeared to change after 2006 when he first partici-
pated in a meeting of relevant parties. This seems to have been a formal meeting without substantive 
content. By 2013, the relations had progressed to pragmatic rational cooperation with the participating 
countries making informed and important decisions.
18	 http://www.globsec.org/globsec2013/highlights­‑news/globsec­‑visegrad­‑makes­‑us­‑stronger­‑said­‑lajcak/

128
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
to national sovereignty or express anti­‑EU sentiments. Orbán and his Slovak 
counterpart Robert Fico have long drawn on sovereigntist narratives while the 
Czech Deputy Prime Minister Andrej Babiš has often also resorted to anti­‑EU 
rhetoric. The famous statement of former Polish foreign minister Radek Sikorski 
“I fear German power less than…German inactivity” might, thus, be adapted to 
reflect the positions of some Visegrad leaders: “We fear German power and do 
not care about EU inactivity.”19 There are various reasons for this standpoint. 
Leaving aside the political culture of these states, we can see from the traditions 
of Visegrad Group that this region’s convergence with the core European Union 
can also affect public opinion. Politicians have always sought to understand the 
demands of their citizens, attempting to identify with their feelings and make 
sense of their fears. These demands and fears appear to have been widespread, 
and although prime ministers and presidents have represented different politi‑
cal parties with different priorities, they have easily managed to find common 
ground on certain issues.
Table 3: Party divisions among Visegrad Group political leaders
State
Politician
Party
Prime Minister
President
Hungary
Orbán, Viktor 
Áder, János 
FIDESZ (Hungarian Civic Alliance) 
– conservative, nationalist
Poland
Szydlo, Beata 
Duda, Andrzej 
Law and Justice (PiS) – 
right-wing, nationalist-conservative
Czech Republic
Sobotka, Bohuslav 
Zeman, Milos 
Czech Social Democratic Party 
– left-wing, social democratic
Slovakia
Fico, Robert
Kiska, Andrej 
Direction – Social Democratic (Smer) – 
left-wing, populist / independent
Source: Edited by the author
This varieties of self­‑representation of the Visegrad states and their frequent 
attempts at self­‑determination may have added to their differences. Never‑
theless, there have also been common threats which have eliminated these 
conflicts and forced V4 states to focus on practical solutions. The 2009 energy 
crisis demonstrated the gas dependency of the Visegrad member states. These 
countries’ home production falls far short of the volume needed for sufficient 
consumer supplies and their gas and other energy imports rely primarily on 
one country: Russia.20
19	 http://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/?fa=62423 http://pl2011.eu/en/content/minister­‑radoslaw­
‑sikorski­‑visit­‑berlin
20	http://www.visegrad.info/energy­‑security­‑infrastrucutre/factsheet/energy­‑security­‑of­‑visegrad­‑region.
html

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
129
The priorities of each presidency have, thus, included collaboration on energy, 
the Eastern Partnership project, defence cooperation and the development of 
a digital economy. Other important topics are transport infrastructure develop‑
ment, the social dimension of European integration and the fight against tax 
evasion. The crisis in Ukraine in 2014 and the acceptance of the embargo against 
Russia have shown that member states’ interests may vary. While Polish foreign 
policy has tried to ensure Poland avoids all cooperation with Russia, Hungary 
has made moves to strengthen ties through economic cooperation. At a meet‑
ing of prime ministers in Bratislava in May 2014, the Polish prime minister 
expressed his negative standpoint to the Hungarian partner, claiming that the 
V4 cooperation is more than a symbolic representation of a common past and 
future and the threats from Russia cannot be ignored. Hungary’s position on 
the question facing the new Ukrainian government about whether to give “full 
collective rights” and dual citizenship to Hungarians living in the Zakarpattia 
Oblast has also impeded the chances of agreement among the Visegrad Group 
member states and Ukraine. Orbán has himself expressed his support for 
maintaining the territorial integrity of Ukraine; in the context of the Ukrain‑
ian–Russian conflict, this aligns with Russian rhetoric since it suggests that 
the government in Kiev is undemocratic and guilty of discriminating against 
ethnic minorities in Ukraine (Sadecki 2014). Orbán has also been blamed for 
the pending Hungarian position on the Ukrainian–Russian conflict. Although 
Hungarian diplomats co­‑authored both the Visegrad Group and EU declara‑
tions which condemned the annexation of Crimea by Russia and supported 
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as Sadecki (2014) points out, 
the Hungarian prime minister has emphasised Hungary’s neutrality as regards 
the Ukrainian–Russian conflicts and tried to avoid any friction in relations with 
Russia since Hungary is in the process of building closer cooperation with the 
energy sector.
Notwithstanding this situation, the year 2015 saw important changes in 
the bilateral relations between Poland and Hungary when after eight years of 
governance, Poland’s Civic Platform party (Platform Obywatelski, PO) lost the 
country’s presidential and the parliamentary elections; these were both claimed 
by the Law and Justice party (Prawo i Sprawedliwość, PiS) in October 2015. After 
an extended period of controversial relations between Poland and Hungary, the 
new governing party and Hungary’s FIDESZ have, thus, revived their friendship. 
While the issue is critical, the Hungarian attitude to Russia remains almost the 
only point of conflict between the two party leaders. The landslide victory of 
Poland’s conservative PiS has allowed the new political elite in Warsaw to make 
changes at an unprecedented pace. Though Polish–Hungarian relations have 
reached a new peak after the change of Polish government, both states have 
become and remain targets for the European Union. Criticism of government 
policies from Brussels only adds fuel to the fire and may strengthen the posi‑

130
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
tions of Eurosceptic hardliners within PiS, who believe that Central Europe has 
to find its own path to prosperity, and this should not be based on catching up 
with Western Europe.
The ultimate proof: European integration
As we have noted, the V4 member states all joined the European Union in 2004. 
By taking this step, they were able to actively shape the future of European 
integration. Visegrad Group representatives work in all EU institutions – the 
Council of the European Union, the European Council, the European Commis‑
sion and European Parliament as well as in the Committee of the Regions, the 
Economic and Social Committee, the Court of Justice of the EU, the General 
Court and the Court of Auditors. Moreover, this European integration has 
played an important role in their economic development. The V4 states joined 
the European Union as relatively poor countries, characterised by their low 
level of per capita GDP when compared to the rest of the EU (especially the 
EU15 countries). EU transfers today provide an important injection into the 
economies of the Visegrad Group countries, however the reality is far from the 
expected convergence. While the financial support of the new member states 
has been critical, the data suggests that there has been no narrowing of the gap 
between Visegrad Group and the most developed EU member states.
Table 4.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
131
Responsibility for the Council of the European Union presidency is seen as 
an important aspect of EU membership. According to the official presidential 
calendar, the Czech Republic was the first V4 member state to play this role, 
which it occupied between January and June 2009. The country also co­‑operated 
closely with France and Sweden in a presidency trio. The three priorities of the 
Czech presidency were the economy, energy and external relations. Here, a com‑
petitive and open Europe was treated as a crucial goal, with the Czechs empha‑
sising the need to deepen the internal market by enhancing the four freedoms 
and improving innovation policy management. Regarding energy and climate 
change, the Czech presidency focused on energy security, including improving 
the reliability of supplies and the creation of an external energy policy. Finally, 
in the area of external action to the EU, the areas promoted were Euro­‑Atlantic 
relations, the Eastern Partnership, openness and further enlargement of the 
European Union (Drulak 2008).
Hungary was the second V4 state to take on the EU Council presidency. The 
Hungarian presidency occurred between January and June 2011, constituting 
a presidency trio together with Spain and Belgium. The Hungarian presiden‑
tial agenda focused on four main topics: growth and employment through the 
preservation of the European social model (small and medium enterprises, 
demographics and family policy and the fight against poverty); a stronger 
Europe (food, energy, water initiatives); a citizen­‑friendly European Union 
(implementation of the Stockholm Programme; promotion of cultural diversity 
in the EU); and finally, enlargement and neighbourhood policy (Croatia and 
the Western Balkans, the Eastern Partnership).21
In late June 2011, Hungary handed over the presidency to Poland, which, pre‑
sided over the EU Council from July to December 2011 and formed a presidency 
trio with Denmark and Cyprus. Among the priorities of the Polish presidency 
were the EU’s exit from crisis; the EU and its external partners/neighbourhood 
(construed as the reinforcement of the Eastern Partnership and EU expansion) 
and finally, the safety of Europe (to be implemented through the EU’s common 
security and defence policy and external energy policy) (Pawlas 2012).
In line with the presidential timetable, Slovakia has led the EU during the 
second half of 2016, comprising a presidential trio with the Netherlands and 
Malta.
It would seem that the priorities of the V4 states have been closely deter‑
mined by the internal and external challenges facing the European Union. It 
must, however, be pointed out that these priorities have been partly derived 
from the specific internal problems and geopolitical location of each V4 state. 
Among other things, the war in Crimea has called into question attitudes to 
Russia, and the region’s economic policy has been affected by the embargo on 
21	 http://www.eu2011.hu/priorities­‑hungarian­‑presidency

132
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
Russian products since August 2014. Visegrad Group members have accepted 
this restriction ambivalently given the effects on energy security: after all, all 
these states were dependent on gas supplies from Russia and a huge share of 
their export activity focused on the Russian market.22 
The refugee crisis has led to a renaissance of the Visegrad Group as the 
threat of an increasing number of migrants from the south­‑east has required 
a coordinated reaction. The Hungarian prime minister was the first to argue 
for prioritising national interests, and this standpoint was soon taken up by 
the three member states. In February 2016, the states made a joint declara‑
tion concerning a common security policy, closer cooperation with Romania, 
Bulgaria and Macedonia and the plan to stop the refugees at Greece’s borders. 
A so­‑called line of defence was to be set up under this agreement. Andrzej Duda, 
the Polish president has also drawn attention to the increasing power of the 
Visegrad Group based largely on the migration crisis. Moreover, Zeman and 
Duda have agreed on the importance of strengthening ties with northern and 
southern states in the CEE region.
Under the new Polish government, the country’s foreign policy has taken on 
a new approach. Instead of the old Ukraine–Lithuania–Belarus (ULB) orienta‑
tion, Duda has addressed these states from a new direction based on the Adriatic 
Sea, Baltic and Black Sea (Czarne morze) triangle. This idea, known as the ABC 
policy, has received support from the Baltic states.23 The strengthening of ties 
among these target regions was confirmed by the visits of the Polish president 
to relevant areas in the first half of 2016. This development has special impor‑
tance since it was greatly influenced by the migration crisis.24
Faced with the Ukrainian crisis and growing fears of Russia’s actions as 
well as the knowledge that certain core EU members might not resist Russian 
aggression firmly in the Black Sea and Baltic regions, Poland has gone looking 
for a regional counterweight. The country has, thus, returned to the geopolitical 
concept of the “Intermarium,” a plan for a military alliance across the Baltic, 
Black and Adriatic seas that was intended to counter Bolshevik and Stalinist 
expansion in the 1920s and 1930s.25 For President Andrzej Duda, who came 
to office in May 2015, this Intermarium­‑resembling project is a foreign policy 
goal. This situation has opened up a new path for cooperation, and the result‑
22	As EU members, the Visegrad states have also struggled with the supply of agricultural products. In 
one example, tonnes of unsold apples have remained in Poland while Russian zoos suffer a shortage 
of apple supplies. While this may seem like a marginal concern, the Polish government has had to deal 
with the difficulties of both farmers and traders.
23	http://www.president.pl/en/news/art,122,president­‑starts­‑official­‑visit­‑to­‑hungary.html
24	When considering future scenarios for the Central and Eastern European region, Poland’s geopolitical 
ambitions are critical. As Kraev(2016), notes, the Intermarium, a forgotten idea introduced in inter­‑war 
Poland, has been reborn in the new foreign policy of the Law and Justice Party that provides scope for 
wider cooperation beyond the framework of Visegrad Group.
25	http://neweasterneurope.eu/articles­‑and­‑commentary/1976-warsaw­‑pivots­‑to­‑the­‑black­‑sea

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
133
ing response of Visegrad states to EU initiatives has worried many actors. As 
a consequence, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi has warned V4 members 
that their EU funds will be suspended if they are not willing to accept EU rules 
and regulations. Back in the autumn of 1991, there was a general view within 
the EU that “ideas in the [Visegrad] proposal fully corresponded to their ideas 
for further development of cooperation between the Alliance and Czechoslova‑
kia, Poland and Hungary.”26 Nowadays, this has changed to a perception that 
“Visegrad is like a bad word.”27
From time to time, a question has also arisen about whether there is a real 
threat that Visegrad Group may obstruct the European Union’s decision­‑making. 
In this regard, it is highly relevant whether the Group remains an entity with 
four member states or it opens up to absorb more states. The role of this co‑
operation also often comes into question. V4 supports usually agree that the 
Group will remain a cohesive bloc at EU level on some key issues such as energy 
and migration.
On the question of their position within the European Union, it is clear 
that V4 countries are now being taken more seriously than they were previ‑
ously. This is partly because of these states’ opposition to EU migration policy, 
an area where common EU policies have failed to deliver results. In part, this 
failure reflects the reluctance of member states, who are the main parties re‑
sponsible for implementation. The old methods by which strong member states 
pushed through policies have also created a backlash.28 After the EU summit 
in June 2016, Viktor Orbán echoed these sentiments, telling reporters that the 
EU’s democratic legitimacy could only come from member states:
We have to return to the notion that the basis of the EU is not its institutions, 
but its members. The democratic feature[s] of the EU can only be reinforced 
through the member states, and the relationship between the institutions and 
member states must be improved.29
There is a feeling within Brussels institutions that a stronger V4 might also mean 
greater nationalism, populism and even xenophobia in Europe. In a media re‑
port published in September 2016, one senior EU official put it, “If you let the 
26	Former German politician Hans­‑Dietrich Genscher made this remark about the Visegrad cooperation at 
a meeting of foreign ministers in Krakow, Poland in November 1991. See Spero 2004: 267.
27	See the comments of Central European Policy Institute expert Milan Nic in January 2016: http://www.
economist.com/news/europe/21689629-migration­‑crisis­‑has­‑given­‑unsettling­‑new­‑direction­‑old­‑alliance­
‑big­‑bad­‑visegrad
28	Exemplifying these methods, French President Francois Hollande scheduled a visit to Central Europe in 
2016 to promote European policies as part of a symbolic reaching out to the “East.” This trip was later 
cancelled after the terrorist attack in Nice in July 2016.
29	http://www.visegradgroup.eu/brexit­‑could­‑amplify­‑the

134
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
Poles gang up with Orbán and lead the contributions at the Bratislava summit, 
then we are doomed.”30 This comment partly referred to the current Warsaw gov‑
ernment, which has come under heavy criticism from the EU Commission and 
European Parliament.31 The same official also argued that EU institutions and 
Western member states had to take Central Europe more seriously than in past 
years while also working more closely with Slovak Prime Minister Robert Fico 
and his Czech counterpart Bohuslav Sobotka, who are the “more reasonable” V4 
members: “They [Fico and Sobotka] need our gestures. It is that moment. Think‑
ing you can go to Bratislava, having made your call to Berlin, is not enough.”32
Regarding the potential of V4 members to obstruct voting at the Council 
of the European Union session, current rules dictate that a blocking minority 
must include at least four Council members who together represent more than 
35% of the EU population.33 The extended cooperation among Visegrad Group, 
the Baltic states and countries in the Black Sea region represents a combined 
102 million citizens, however to block the member states’ actions effectively, 
a population of 178 million citizens is required. The Visegrad Group and mem‑
bers of the ABC countries are, thus, still too weak to paralyse the European 
Union’s decision­‑making process though they may cause problems. Assuming 
that these states had a common cause with at least one bigger and one smaller 
member state, they could hamper the work of the Council of the European Union.
Concerning the future of EU integration, the expectations of V4 are quite 
diverse and fragmented. While the Poles and Czechs foresee expect more dif‑
ferentiated (multi­‑speed) integration, the Hungarians believe that the larger 
member states will dominate increasingly and the Slovaks – the only Eurozone 
country in the group – anticipate a reinforcement of the Euro area.
30	Ibid
31	 Ibid
32	Ibid
33	 http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council­‑eu/voting­‑system/qualified­‑majority/

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
135
The ABC states
Source: http://www.tvn24.pl/magazyn­‑tvn24/abc­‑sen­‑o-potedze­‑krajow­‑trzech­‑morz,25,571

136
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
Table 5: Share of ABC states within the European Union
State 
Population in thousands (2015)
1
Bulgaria
7.202
2
Croatia
4.225
3
Czech Republic
10.538
4
Estonia
1.313
5
Hungary
9.855
6
Latvia
1.986
7
Lithuania
2.921
8
Poland
38.005
9
Romania
19.870
10
Slovakia
5.421
11
Slovenia
2.062
Total
103.498
EU 28 total
508.293
Share of ABC countries related to EU28
20.36%
Source: https://europa.eu/european­‑union/about­‑eu/countries_en
The refugee crisis opened up new chapter in the Visegrad cooperation. If the 
response to the embargo against Russia divided the member states, then the fear 
of the growing number of immigrants helped them to strengthen and deepen 
their cooperation. Public opinion and politicians’ standpoints were quite closely 
aligned within the Visegrad member states. The Czech public was roundly op‑
posed to taking in asylum seekers, while Milos Zeman, the country’s populist 
president, claimed that the integration of Muslim refugees was “practically 
impossible.”34 Anti­‑migrant sentiment, thus, unified the Visegrad Group of 
Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. Hungary’s Viktor Orbán 
had already demonstrated the position of himself and his government in the 
late summer of 2015, and in an October 2016 referendum, he hoped to win the 
support of Hungarian voters as well.35 A similar standpoint may be expected 
from Polish politicians such as Jarosław Kaczyński, the leader of the Law and 
Justice Party and a great supporter of Orbán’s policy.
Regarding the future of the Visegrad cooperation and its relations with the 
European Union, the increasing support for nation states and the fragility of 
the Union itself may still lead to unpleasant incidents. As the Hungarian ambas‑
sador to Italy, Péter Paczolay explained in February 2016 at the conference in 
34	In the past year, the country has accepted just 520 of these refugees. http://www.economist.com/news/
europe/21689629-migration­‑crisis­‑has­‑given­‑unsettling­‑new­‑direction­‑old­‑alliance­‑big­‑bad­‑visegrad
35	 The results of this referendum are beyond the scope of this study, and thus, we need only note that 
participation in this referendum did not reach the expected threshold. Only 43% of the population took 
part. Nevertheless, the results showed that the majority (98%) of participants wished to stop these 
migrants at Hungary’s borders.

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
137
Forli organized for students, the Visegrad cooperation can be treated as a form 
of “practical solidarity,” but this may be counterbalanced by the culturally and 
historically determined need to preserve the regional self­‑perceptions and 
identities of these four states.36
Conclusion
The Visegrad cooperation has a unique position in the Central and Eastern 
European region. The basis of the group is an almost six century­‑old history of 
cooperation. The cooperation has survived its years of greatest uncertainty and 
it has managed to overcome obstacles and threats. The founding states stood 
on different sides at the peace summits following the two world wars, however 
after 1945, they were forced to remain in the Soviet bloc. During the Cold War, 
they faced the challenges of belonging to a non­‑existent Central Europe and 
being isolated from Western civilisation, and there may be a common sense of 
recovery of a sunken history that the cohesion of these states helps to address.
Looking back over the centuries, we can see that this part of Europe was 
always the playground of the great powers, and the survival of these states was 
strongly influenced by their ability to co­‑operate. European integration and 
NATO membership were the ultimate proof of the Western orientation of the 
Visegrad states, and the Visegrad Group has also served as a kind of litmus 
paper or testing ground for the European Union. Remaining alone after the 
collapse of the bipolar system, the three (later four) countries had to focus on 
self­‑determination. The Visegrad cooperation framework that has survived for 
the last 25 years was developed, then, based on the methods current when the 
Central European region states were already dealing with the problem of being 
satellite states of the Soviet Union, but they had not yet accepted the norms 
and rules of an integrated Europe. The euphoria of sovereignty and independ‑
ence has sometimes hampered and continues to obstruct acceptance of the 
EU’s operating institutional framework; instead of conforming, these states 
have shown a tendency to propose new norms that may inevitably shock the 
older member states and their diplomats. Even so, given their geopolitical posi‑
tion and the potential advantages they can demonstrate over the other former 
socialist states, these V4 members have managed to preserve their importance 
and position in the European context. Concluding our investigation, we may, 
thus, note that this special type of regional integration has survived a great deal 
and may now serve as a model for other partnerships. As Martonyi Janos, the 
former Hungarian foreign minister puts it:
36	http://www.pecob.eu/flex/cm/pages/ServeBLOB.php/L/EN/IDPagina/4943/UT/systemPrint

138
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
V4 is an ad hoc reaction to a very concrete situation and for preparations 
for NATO. We had to ask who we were. We are all Central Europe, and V4… is 
not only [a] regional operation, it is based on specific historical and spiritual 
identity that we now call Central Europe.37
References
Ash, T.G.: The Puzzle of Central Europe http://www.visegradgroup.eu/the­‑visegrad­‑book/ash­
‑timothy­‑garton­‑the
Bialasiewicz, Luiza (2003): Another Europe: Remembering Habsburg Galicia. Cultural Geogra-
phies, vol. 10 pp. 21–44
Bialasiewicz, Luiza (2009): Europe as/at the border: Trieste and the meaning of Europe. Social 
and Cultural Geography, vol 10(3). pp. 319–333
Big, Bad Visegrad (2016, Jan 30): The Economist: http://www.economist.com/news/
europe/21689629-migration­‑crisis­‑has­‑given­‑unsettling­‑new­‑direction­‑old­‑alliance­‑big­‑bad­
‑visegrad
De Lombaerde –Van Langenhove Indicators of regional integration, conceptual and methodo-
logical aspects, In: ed. De Lombaerde: Assesment and Measurement of Regional Integration, 
Routledge, Lomdonand New York, 9–42 Dobson, W. (1991): Economic Policy Coordination: 
Requiem or Prologue? Policy Analyses in International Economics, vol 30.
Dostal, Vit (n.d.): Debating V4: A Czech Perspective http://www.cepolicy.org/publications/
debating­‑v4-vit­‑dostal
Drabek, Z. (1997) Regional and Sub­‑Regional Orbán in Central and Eastern Europe: an Overview, 
in Regionalism and the Global Economy: The Case of Central and Eastern Europe. Fondad: 
the Hague, www.fondad.org
Energy Security of Visegrad region (n.d.) Visegrad.info.com, http://www.visegrad.info/energy­
‑security­‑infrastrucutre/factsheet/energy­‑security­‑of­‑visegrad­‑region.html
Fałkowski, Mateusz – Bukalska, Patrycja – Gromadzki, Grzegorz (2003): Yes to Visegrad, In: 
Analyses & Opinions, No. 16, Instytut Spraw Publicznych, Warszawa,
Fawn, Rick (2005): The Czech Republic: A Nation of Velvet, Routledge
Gavra, Gábor (2003): A kormányzó FIDESZ és az EU csatlakozás: igenek és nemek. Magyar Narancs, 
2003/4 http://magyarnarancs.hu/belpol/a_kormanyzo_fidesz_es_az_eu­‑csatlakozas_ig-
enek_es_nemek-62225
Gorzelak, Grzegorz (2002): New Models of Polish Regional Policy in a Decentralized State, 
EUROREG, Warsaw University.
Gyarfasova – Meseznikov (2016): Twenty­‑five years of the V4 as seen by the public. Institute for 
Public Affairs, Bratislava 15–29
37	 http://www.globsec.org/globsec2013/highlights­‑news/globsec­‑visegrad­‑makes­‑us­‑stronger­‑said­‑lajcak/

POLITICS IN CENTRAL EUROPE 12 (2016) 3
139
Haas, E.B.: The Study of Regional Integration: Reflections on the Joy and Anguish of Pretheoriz-
ing, In: International Organization, Vol. 24, No. 4. 609–610
Hans­‑Ake Persson (1999): Viadrina to the Odera­‑Neisse Line: Historical evolution and regional 
cooperation, in Tagil, Sven, ed.,Regions in Central Europe, Hurst & Company, London.
Harris, Erika (2010): Slovakia since 1989, in Ramet, S, ed., Central and Southeast European Politics 
since 1989, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 182–203
Helsinki European Council (1993, 10 and 11 December): Presidency Conclusions. European Parlia-
ment, http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/hel1_en.htm
Horel, Catherine (2011): A középnek mondott Európa, Akadémiai Kiadó pp. 354–365
http://www.globsec.org/globsec2013/highlights­‑news/globsec­‑visegrad­‑makes­‑us­‑stronger­
‑said­‑lajcak/
http://www.wordometers.info/world­‑population/population­‑by­‑country
IMF World Economic Outlook Database, http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/01/
weodata/index.aspx
Jacobs (2012): Where is Europe? http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/where­‑is­
‑europe/
Jovanovic, Miroslav (1998): International Economic Integration, Taylor & Francis
Kazimierczak, Rafal (n.d.): Magazyn TVN24, http://www.tvn24.pl/magazyn­‑tvn24/abc­‑sen­‑o-
potedze­‑krajow­‑trzech­‑morz,25,571
Kiss Gy. Csaba (2000): Közép­‑Európa, nemzetek, kisebbségek, Pesti Szalon Kiadó
Kraev, Kamen (2016, 28 April): Warsaw Pivots to the Black Sea. New Eastern Europe: http://
neweasterneurope.eu/articles­‑and­‑commentary/1976-warsaw­‑pivots­‑to­‑the­‑black­‑sea
Lázár, Andras (2014): Post­‑EU­‑Accession Visegrad Cooperation – Results, Rhetoric, Prospects. 
Biztpol Affairs, 22–44.
Lee, Jeong Yeon – Kim, Doyeon (2013): Different Models for Regional Integration: Lessons 
from Total Factor Productivity in Europe, ABDI Working Papers, No. 452, https://think­‑asia.
org/bitstream/handle/11540/1212/2013. 12. 13.wp452.different.models.regional.integration.
pdf?sequence=1
Lengyel, László – Suranyi, György (2013): Határátkelés, Kalligram, Budapest­‑Pozsony
Lengyel, László (2006): Illeszkedés vagy kiválás?, Osiris, Budapest. 159–161
Nic, Milan – Dostal, Vit (2016, 8 Jan): Central Europe’s Outlook on the EU and Foreign Policy. 
Carnegie Europe, http://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/?fa=62423
Nicolo, Fasolo – Pilloni, Manuela (n.d.): The Visegrad Group between Identity and Post­‑Socialist 
Transition – Relations with the EU and contemporary crisis: Portal on Central Eastern and 
Balkan Europe: http://www.pecob.eu/flex/cm/pages/ServeBLOB.php/L/EN/IDPagina/4943/
UT/systemPrint
Okey, Robin (1992): Central Europe/ Eastern Europe: Behind the Definitions. Past and Present, 
the Cultural and Political Construction of Europe No. 137: 102–133

140
Friends forever? The Role of the Visegrad Group and European Integration  Andrea Schmidt
Pawlas, Iwona (2015): The Visegrad Countries and European Union Membership, Selected Is-
sues, https://www.google.hu/webhp?sourceid=chrome­‑instant & ion=1 & espv=2 & ie=UTF-
8#q=Pawlas%2C+Iwona+(2015)%3 A+The+Visegrad+Countries+and+European+Union+Me
mbership
Pelkmans, Jacques (2006): European Integration, Methods and Economic Analysis. Financial 
Times Management
President of Republic of Poland (2016, 17 March): President starts official visit to Hungary, http://
www.president.pl/en/news/art,122,president­‑starts­‑official­‑visit­‑to­‑hungary.html
Sadecki, Andrzej (2014): Hungary’s stance on the Ukrainian­‑Russian conflict. Osrodek Studiow 
Wschodnich im Marka Karpia, www.osw.waw.pl
Schmidt, Andrea (2011): The Eastern Borders of Europe – Symbolic, Historical and Cultural 
Aspects, in Tuka –Tarrosy, eds., Borderless Europe – Changes, Opportunities, Publikon:Pecs, 
39–54
Schmidt, Andrea (2012) : Piast vagy Jagello? Lengyelország és Európa, in Bretter - Glied – Vörös, 
eds., Az elkötelezett tanító, IDResearch/Publikon: Pécs, 119–127
Schmidt, Andrea (2013): The consequence of the EU enlargement, the new borders of the 
European Union in Milford, Susan – Tarrósy, István, eds. Challenges for the European Union 
in the next decade, 61–76
Publikon: Pecs
Spero, Joshua (2004): Bridging the European Divide (Middle Power Politics and Regional Security 
Dilemmas), Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Szűcs, Jenő (1981): Vázlat Európa három történeti régiójáról, Történelmi Szemle, vol.3. 313-359
Tagil, Sven, ed., Regions in Central Europe, Hurst & Company, London
Andrea Schmidt (PhD in Political Science) is a graduate of the University of Pecs, 
Central European University, State University of New York (Albany, USA) and Bu‑
dapest Business School. She is an assistant professor in the Department of Political 
Science and International Studies at University of Pecs and current visiting lecturer 
at Ivan Franko National University (Lviv, Ukraine). She is also a former visiting 
lecturer at Josai International University (Tokyo, Japan) and the Polish University 
Abroad (London, UK). Andrea’s work focuses on international political economy 
and comparative political studies in the Central and Eastern European region. She 
is the author of several articles and book chapters related to CEE and the post­‑Soviet 
region.E­‑mail: schmidt.andrea@pte.hu.
