101
The New Global Agenda and the Future 
of the Multilateral Development Bank System
A. Bhattacharya, H. Kharas, M. Plant, A. Prizzon
Amar Bhattacharya – Senior fellow, Global Economy and Development program, The Brookings Institution; 
USA, Washington, DC 20036, 1775 Massachusetts Ave., NW; E-mail: communications@brookings.edu
Homi Kharas  – The interim vice president and director of Global Economy and Development program, 
The Brookings Institution; USA, Washington, DC 20036, 1775 Massachusetts Ave., NW; E-mail: hkharas@
brookings.edu
Mark Plant – The director of development finance and senior policy fellow, Center for Global Development; 
USA, Washington DC 20036, 2055 L Street NW; E-mail: mplant@cgdev.org
Annalisa Prizzon  – Senior research fellow, Overseas Development Institute; UK, London SE1 8NJ, 203 
Blackfriars Road; E-mail: a.prizzon@odi.org.uk
“The New Global Agenda and the Future of the Multilateral Development Bank System” by Bhattacharya A., 
Kharas H., Plant M., Prizzon A., English text. The Brookings Institution (Brookings), Overseas Development 
Institute (ODI), the Center for Global Development (CGD)1
© Brookings, ODI & CGD. Translated and reproduced with permission. Brookings, ODI & CGD are not 
responsible for the accuracy of this translation.
1 Bhattacharya A., Kharas H., Plant M., Prizzon A. (2018) The New Global Agenda and the Future 
of the Multilateral Development Bank System. The Brookings Institution, Overseas Development Institute 
(ODI), the Center for Global Development (CGD), February 2018. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/
wp-content/uploads/2018/02/epg_paper_on_future_of_mdb_system_jan301.pdf.
The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to independent research and policy solu-
tions. Its mission is to conduct high-quality, independent research and, based on that research, to provide in-
novative, practical recommendations for policymakers and the public. 
The Overseas Development Institute (ODI) is a leading independent think tank on international de-
velopment and humanitarian issues. Its mission is to inspire and inform policy and practice which lead to the 
reduction of poverty and the achievement of sustainable livelihoods in developing countries by locking together 
high quality applied research, practical policy advice, and policy-focused dissemination and debate. The Center 
for Global Development works to reduce global poverty and inequality through rigorous research and active 
engagement with the policy community to make the world a more prosperous, just, and safe place for us all. 
The conclusions and recommendations of this publication are solely those of its authors, and do not 
reflect the views of the Institutions, their management, or their other scholars.
Support for this publication was generously provided by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and The 
Rockefeller Foundation. Brookings, CGD, and ODI recognize that the value they provide is in the absolute 
commitment to quality, independence, and impact. Activities supported by their donors reflect this commit-
ment.
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the G-20 Eminent Persons Group Symposium on Global 
Financial Governance in Frankfurt, Germany, on December 4, 2017. This version of the paper has greatly 
benefited from the discussion.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
102
Abstract
The new global agenda, with Agenda 2030 at its core, is ambitious, comprehensive, and universal. The three central 
goals now are to reignite growth, deliver on the sustainable development goals (SDGs), and meet the ambitions of 
the Paris climate agreement aimed at mitigating climate change and adapting to its effects. Achieving these goals will 
require a significant scaling up and reorientation of investments, especially for sustainable infrastructure and human 
development. Implementing this agenda is urgent, as the world is witnessing the largest wave of urban expansion in 
history and more infrastructure will come on stream over the next 15 years than the world’s existing stock. This is also 
the last opportunity to manage remaining significant demographic transitions.
The capital investments and technological choices made in the coming two decades will lock-in carbonization, 
urbanization, and demographic trends that will determine the future of humanity and our planet for the rest of the 
century and beyond.
The backdrop for achieving these ambitions is challenging. In many countries, investment and productivity 
growth have decelerated, there is growing inequality and persistent unemployment, fragility and tensions are rising, 
and the incidence and vulnerability to shocks has grown. At the same time, major opportunities exist to tap the 
potential of new technologies and the growing capacity of the private sector. Today’s hyper-connected world requires 
a mix of activities spanning private goods, national public goods, and regional/global public goods to meet the 
challenges of sustainable development.
The agenda requires government intervention to reach adequate scale, to take social and environmental 
sustainability seriously, and to manage spillovers across sectors and borders. It also requires stepped up international 
cooperation to drive transformative change and mobilize financing on an unprecedented scale.
With their highly effective capacity to help countries strengthen policy and institutional foundations and to 
leverage finance, multilateral development banks (MDBs) have a central role to play. They are trying to respond, 
but human and financial constraints and unclear and expanded mandates from shareholders are holding them back. 
Clarifying their mandates and addressing the constraints are essential to enable them to scale up and make more 
effective their support for the new global agenda.
The unique financial structure of the MDBs allows them to leverage contributions from MDB shareholders 
and multiply them into financing at low cost. This financial capacity can in turn further crowd-in other sources of 
finance, especially from the private sector. With better system-wide coordination, MDBs can scale up their impact to 
deliver for increasingly differentiated clients, but this requires shareholder consensus on, and financial support for, 
expanded efforts.
Independent evaluations suggest that each MDB is individually performing well, but the system as a whole is 
not delivering enough.
This paper suggests ways to improve policy and operational coherence among MDBs and outlines how better 
shareholder governance could bring this about. It focuses on the need for stepped-up financing of investments in 
developing countries, but should be viewed in the broader context of managing globalization, especially with regard 
to trade and financial stability.
Key words: multilateral development banks; sustainable development goals; investments; human development; 
global governance 
For citation: Bhattacharya A., Kharas H., Plant M., Prizzon A. (2018) The New Global Agenda and the Future 
of the Multilateral Development Bank System. International Organisations Research Journal, vol. 13, no 2, 
pp. 101–124 (in Russian and English). DOI: 10.17323/1996-7845-2018-02-06.
MDB Coordination to Act as a System
Subject matter specialization among MDBs has evolved in ways that can be applied not just 
regionally, but also globally. More robust mechanisms to share best practice and allow sister in-
stitutions to share expertise will permit economies of scale and scope in providing services. The 
opportunities for enhanced collaboration extend to all sectors and to areas of global collective 

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
103
action where the MDBs have comparative advantage. Infrastructure, because of its size, offers 
particular opportunities for collaboration.
Areas for stepped-up collaboration include: (a) joint efforts on diagnostic work and im-
proving data; (b) platforms for project preparation and application of common standards and 
benchmarks including for sustainable infrastructure; (c) knowledge platforms and tools for 
strengthening policy and institutional foundations and provision of technical assistance; and 
(d) cooperation on establishment of financing structures that can unlock investments at scale.
MDBs should also review how competition between them in policy conditionality, pric-
ing, and financing modalities affects the impact of system-wide support to each country. Com-
petition can be healthy and offer recipient countries with a broader range of options, but it 
needs to take place in the context of a healthy eco-system and a level playing field.
Support to All Clients and Global Cooperation 
in an Interconnected World
For MDB engagement to add value across all income groups and drive the frontiers of growth 
and development where financial markets are imperfect and where knowledge and capac-
ity gaps exist, the concept of “graduation” based on per capita income needs to be adjusted. 
A more adaptive framework would determine MDB engagement based not just on income level, 
but on the development impact in the particular country and sector, and on the value the en-
gagement brings to the system as a whole. From a development finance perspective, the role of 
direct financial support will diminish as client countries gain better access to financial markets, 
and the mobilization of other sources of finance, especially from the private sector, will become 
more important. Yet the progression away from needing direct MDB support happens in fits 
and starts and both policy and capital market failures suggest that MDB finance can play an 
important role in the social sectors, infrastructure and in the response to shocks across all in-
come groups.
While the MDBs can enhance their support everywhere, the system is falling short with 
respect to three types of clients: fragile and conflict affected states, highly indebted countries, 
and upper middle-income countries (UMICs).
Fragile and conflict/violence affected states (FCVs): MDBs should deepen their support for 
institutional development in FCV affected countries, rigorously evaluating pilot approaches 
and scaling up what works. Areas such as public administration reform, public utility manage-
ment, and oversight of the security sector are ripe for new, innovative approaches by the MDBs 
and their partners. Greater flexibility in approaches and longer timeframes are needed in FCV 
countries, and MDBs shareholders need to adjust oversight to these conditions.
High-debt countries: We would recommend MDBs jointly prioritize and strengthen debt 
management capacity in borrowing countries. They should also review how the quality of pub-
lic investment, the track records of policy reforms, and availability and use of policy space 
affect debt sustainability assessments. They should develop principles and procedures for debt 
restructuring that reflect the increasingly complex nature of the creditor community.
Upper middle-income countries: We believe that there is a powerful argument for the MDB 
system to engage in all developing countries, including UMICs. The real discussion for share-
holders should be on the criteria for engagement, and the need to demonstrate a clear deve-
lopmental purpose for any intervention (often sub-national or public good for UMICs). The 
“cascade” principles provide a useful frame: test whether there is a real need for public financ-
ing (including as a contribution to a global externality); identify whether such needs could be 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
104
obviated in future through policy and institutional strengthening, but engage where a compel-
ling development case can be made.
The Provision of Global Public Goods
In addition to their financial role, the MDBs are well positioned to contribute to global chal-
lenges and spillovers too – from climate to pandemics to migration to digitization and the future 
of work to coping with shocks to peace and security. The primary comparative advantage of 
MDBs when engaging around these global public goods (GPGs) and bads comes from their 
country engagement, but they can also contribute to platforms for global agreement and action 
with other partners, especially the U.N. At present, the assignment of responsibilities is ad hoc 
across the multilateral system, with clear objectives and accountabilities often lacking.
Using Balance Sheets to Leverage Resources
There have been many recommendations on MDB capital adequacy, the impact of callable 
capital, balance sheet optimization, credit risk concentration and pooling, and the like. We sug-
gest that the deeper issue is to agree on, and signal, the scale of activity of MDBs (both financial 
and non-financial service delivery) and to work backward to develop scenarios for capital and 
risk tolerance.
In our view, scaling the system to deliver trillions more in project and program finance 
through direct and catalytic finance over the next decade or so is an appropriate starting point 
for shareholder discussions. Our calculations suggest this is quite feasible, given considerable 
leverage and mobilization opportunities, but needs political will (and perhaps changes in credit 
rating methodologies). Such scaling will also require a pivot in emphasis from direct financing 
to mobilization, with attendant implications for internal incentives, instruments, and the busi-
ness model.
MDBs could also develop financing “exit mechanisms” to turn over their capital more 
rapidly for greater development impact. In such schemes, private sector investors with an ap-
petite for developing country investments could purchase mature financial assets from MDBs, 
freeing their capital. While MDBs already have asset sales programs, getting such mechanisms 
to function at scale would require a significant change in pricing and business models.
Systemic Governance Issues
Shareholder misalignment and outdated governance are at the heart of many of the MDBs’ 
limitations. The effectiveness and legitimacy of the MDB system requires a  shared vision and 
purpose across stakeholders. Having an MDB system that is fit for purpose requires new go-
vernance arrangements that preserve the multilateral character of the institutions in a changing 
world. This applies to the processes of leadership selection and to the rules by which sharehold-
ers make decisions. Reforms to corporate governance structures to ensure alignment of incen-
tives and accountabilities would allow MDB staff and management to be more cost-effective 
and responsive to the technocratic needs of clients.
Shareholders need to set expectations for what the multilateral development system should 
deliver as contributions toward Agenda 2030, including how they help mitigate shocks and pro-
vide global public goods. Given the urgency for action in the upcoming two decades, sharehold-
ers also urgently need to assess whether progress on outcomes is rapid enough. Performance 

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
105
of the system can in turn be assessed against these expectations, with periodic adjustments to 
ambitions and mandates as new challenges emerge.
A governance framework that periodically takes stock of system-wide results, say every 
five years, would facilitate follow-up and course corrections in individual institutions. A careful 
system-wide review of the costs and benefits of current Board structures and staffing is needed.
Strategy setting for the long-term and accountability for results are urgently needed for the 
MDB system as a whole. The MDBs have made a start in thinking through collective commit-
ments (see the Joint MDB Statement of Ambitions for Crowding in Private Finance).
Examining the distribution of specializations across the multilateral system requires re-
ckoning with the significant presence of U.N. agencies in many domains. Indeed, MDB share-
holders need to be wary of the propagation of competing mandates that could undercut or 
duplicate other international efforts to achieve the SDGs.
The New Global Agenda and the Future of the MDB System
Section 1. The Changed Global Context
A New Global Agenda and the Criticality of the Coming Decades
Agenda 2030, agreed to by 193 countries in 2015, is more comprehensive in scope, univer-
sal in its relevance to countries across the income spectrum, and more ambitious in its targets 
than the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) agenda of 2000-2015. The central goals now 
are to reignite growth, to deliver on the SDGs, to ramp up actions in line with the ambitions of 
the Paris climate agreement; to mitigate vulnerabilities and shocks; and to facilitate collective 
action to tackle cross-border issues such as pandemics and financial and debt crises.
The backdrop for achieving these ambitious objectives is challenging, as investment and 
productivity have decelerated in advanced and developing economies, and the world economy 
is facing major structural changes – including growing multipolarity, climate change, urbaniza-
tion, demographic transitions and the uncertain labor market effects of technological change.
On the one hand, if protracted crises in fragile situations are resolved, over the next few 
decades, policymakers could help eliminate extreme poverty and advance sustainable develop-
ment. On the other, populations everywhere face structural forces that could affect develop-
ment for decades to come.
The largest wave of urban expansion in history is happening now – urban populations will 
double in a generation and the shape of urban expansion will dictate our patterns of production 
and consumption for generations.
During the next 15 years, we will be adding more infrastructure than the existing stock. 
The quality of this infrastructure will determine the path of carbon emissions and climate 
change. We can make the new infrastructure and urban areas sustainable and attractive or lock 
cities into a future where we cannot move or breathe. Under such a dystopian outlook, global 
temperatures would rise by more than 2 degrees Celsius, and bring with it a slew of consequen-
tial impacts and risks.
The next two decades are also the last opportunity to address the demographic transitions 
occurring in the developing world, especially in Africa, where a demographic youth bulge could 
either contribute to more jobs and prosperity, or fuel frustration and anger and a scramble to 
migrate. Related to this, girls’ secondary education over the next 15 years will drive fertility and 
be the difference between a global population of 9 billion or 11 billion by the end of the century.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
106
Value Proposition of the MDBs
The value proposition for the multilateral development system rests on the MDBs’ ability 
to be trusted partners who can provide scaled-up and least-cost services, using a strong country 
presence, which allows them to tailor solutions to client needs.2 It is built on an understanding 
among shareholders that multilateral solutions can complement bilateral approaches by pool-
ing resources, avoiding waste and duplication, and building a critical mass of specialized skills.
From the clients’ perspective, the value proposition of the multilateral development insti-
tutions comes from the experiences and practices gained from 70 years of development coop-
eration.3 MDBs provide:
 
A sustainable development lens that supports policy and institutional reforms and ca-
pacity building, enhances the quality of projects and programs, and lays the basis for scal-
ing up or transformative change, or helps build resilience and capacity to rapidly respond 
to, or avoid, shocks.
 
A stable transfer of long-term resources at low cost (relative to alternative market access 
for the borrower), the mobilization of financing from other sources, especially from the 
private sector, and an ability to address impediments and de- risk programs and projects. 
Financial transfers can be particularly helpful during episodes of external crisis.4
 
A global/regional approach to help tackle spillovers, most importantly in the areas of 
climate action, disease surveillance and treatment, conflict prevention, migration, and 
economic stabilization, where “bads” from one country can seriously affect others or 
where there are opportunities for positive spillovers such as regional connectivity and 
growth poles.5
In sum, multilaterals offer a unique combination of benefits. They provide large-volume 
finance at the most attractive terms combined with knowledge, policy advice, institutional 
strengthening, and technical assistance for projects, with a regional or global outlook.
The global development challenges of the world today – where issues are interconnected, 
externalities are prevalent, non-market social concerns must be factored in, and scale and speed 
of implementation are urgent – require far more than private sector investment. They require 
public involvement, and governments in all developing countries look to MDBs for support.
Most commonly, such support comes from individual MDBs through project-based ac-
tivities. Each multilateral agency has tended to operate individually, and each has developed 
specialized skills and knowledge that are partly geographic and partly thematic. Too often, such 
approaches are inimical to system-wide approaches.
There are good reasons for the MDBs to work together as a system to increase the value 
added for their clients. These include getting to scale, reducing transaction costs and duplica-
tions, reinforcing impact through greater coherence, and optimizing use of the financial and 
human capital assets of each institution. System approaches that establish goals and targets, 
platforms for financing, common standards, and strong feedback loops can be useful to deal 
with the range of uncertainties in the world today and to spread successful innovations more 
2 In this submission, we primarily consider the experiences of the World Bank Group, AfDB, AsDB, 
EBRD and IADB, but the MDB system also includes the IsDB, NDB, AIIB, EIB and IFC.
3 Of course, some countries have also raised concerns about low disbursement speeds, intrusive policy 
conditionality, and parallel operations that do not avail of country systems.
4 The core MDB financial model is extremely powerful in channeling private investment into develop-
ment projects. For example, with a total share capital investment of only $15.8 billion since 1944, the IBRD has 
supplied nearly $700 billion in development financing [Humphrey, 2017].
5 See for example [Ahluwalia et al., 2016], where the authors recommend creation of global public goods 
“windows” at the MDBs with funds that could be used to reduce the cost to borrowers of projects with positive 
regional or global spillovers.

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
107
rapidly across countries. A systems approach would take into account the shifting requirements 
for development finance and the growing differentiation of clients. It would require greater 
policy and operational coherence among MDBs and stronger shareholder alignment.
Toward a More Effective Development Finance System
Although the original mission of MDBs was to transfer financial resources to develop-
ing economies, in most countries, this is no longer their principal function. Instead, MDBs 
are providers of development solutions. This often requires financing, as part of an effort to 
overcome imperfect capital markets, but with funding limited to what is necessary to ensure 
that solutions are adequately resourced. In the case of most middle-income countries (MICs), 
financial transfers from MDBs are small as a percent of total investments or total cross-border 
capital inflows.
If transferring financial resources to developing countries is the goal, MDBs must not 
crowd out private finance. However, when ambitious development outcomes are the goal, it 
becomes necessary to ensure that MDBs crowd-in private finance. Increasingly, mobilizing de-
velopment finance also means developing and tapping into long-term local currency financial 
markets.
Capital markets in developing countries remain incomplete and unable to properly tackle 
the risks and high transaction costs associated with large-scale infrastructure, small- scale agri-
culture, social and environmental services with non-market spillovers, sub – national finance, 
or emergency finance. MDBs can often add value in these areas.
Since the 1980s, developing countries have become richer (and their own resources more 
plentiful), and private external finance has expanded in all countries. MDB concessional fi-
nancing has risen, while the number of low-income countries (LICs) has shrunk to just 31 
today. However, MDBs have become less important as a source of finance in most MIC coun-
tries (0.3 percent of GDP in lower middle-income countries (LMICs) and negligible in upper-
middle income countries (UMICs)).
Since 2000, LMICs have gotten most (two-thirds to four-fifths) of their foreign financing 
from foreign direct investment (FDI) and non-guaranteed private flows. Even LICs get one-
third of their financing from these sources. The multilateral system is declining in relative size, 
although MDB flows are far less volatile than are private flows.
The World Bank Group (WBG) used to be the largest financial institution in all regions, 
but now, except in Africa, net disbursements from the Bank Group are lower than the net dis-
bursements of the regional MDBs in their respective geographic focal areas.
Compositionally, the RDBs have grown to be commensurate in size and skills in relation 
to the regional departments of the WBG. With growing overlap in membership, a restrictive 
geographic-based architecture is giving way to a system where expertise can be deployed across 
the world.
Understanding Changing Client Needs
Clients have traditionally turned to international financial institutions (IFIs) for assis-
tance on growth, investment climate, human capital, institutions/governance, and conflict 
and violence prevention. As the global economy evolves, they are asking for more attention to 
sustainable infrastructure, technology, trade/connectivity (both broad-based and in clusters 
and growth corridors) and inclusion (gender/small and medium sized-enterprises/urban and 
rural), and for help in the face of global shocks and global public “bads” such as communicable 
disease and climate change mitigation.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
108
For the most part, MDBs share similar approaches in the way they respond to client 
requests for assistance. However, there are three categories of clients where MDBs and their 
shareholders are divided on diagnosis and implementation – fragile contexts, highly indebted 
countries, and UMICs. As we discuss below, bridging these divides is essential for the system 
to operate effectively.
Section 2. Enhancing MDB Coherence and Collaboration
Changing How MDBs Work Together
The Rome Declaration of 2003 on harmonizing donor practices for aid delivery recognized 
that effective and efficient development support required increased coordination of the policies 
and procedures of donors “for preparing, delivering, and monitoring development assistance.” 
Coupled with a “country-based approach that emphasizes country ownership and government 
leadership,” the new approach to development envisaged a more coherent approach by the 
entire international community, unifying donor interventions with country strategies [OECD, 
2003]. Over the past 14 years, through a series of conferences and declarations, the quest for 
operational coherence evolved to include civil society, parliamentarians, and the private sector.6 
Repeatedly the world has pledged to “strengthen and use country systems, [and] improve har-
monization by providers of development cooperation…” [OECD, 2012].
The rhetoric, however, has exceeded the reality of implementation. Sceptics have decried 
the results as mostly superficial bureaucracy with few tangible results and certainly not on the 
scale or depth hoped for in 2003.7 One casualty has been budget support. Once heeded by do-
nors, budget support has fallen over time in absolute and relative terms, partly because of the 
difficulty of reconciling it with results and accountability metrics.8
Despite these difficulties, client developing countries and bilateral donors alike continue 
to look to the MDBs to lead on the use of country systems in prioritization, allocation, and 
evaluation. They view MDBs as providing a needed antidote to the realization that bilateral 
donors’ agendas are becoming increasing domestically driven.
MDBs have also sought to improve coherence and strengthen collaboration across their 
own activities. One particularly important but difficult area has been safeguards on projects. 
The perception has been that the World Bank has had the most rigorous specification of safe-
guards. Yet clients often see these as too burdensome and costly. After multiple attempts at 
simplification and emphasis on country systems, the right balance remains elusive.9 In setting 
up its safeguard policies, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank has tried to take on board 
lessons from the experience of other MDBs to ensure clear objectives to maintain standards, but 
without being overly rigid. The experience across the MDBs suggests that coherence requires 
striking the right balance between conformity and contestability.
Over the years, the areas of collaboration among MDBs have expanded greatly to cover 
evaluation, procurement systems, sectoral policies, financial policies, and knowledge platforms 
such as public private partnership (PPP) frameworks. More recently, there has been stepped up 
6 The Paris Agenda for Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), the Busan 
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (2011) and the subsequent establishment of the Global 
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (2012), which sponsored high-level meetings in 2014 and 
2016, the latter producing the Nairobi Document.
7 See for example: [Brown, 2016].
8 See for example: [Koch, Molenaers, 2015].
9 See for example the discussion on pp. 19–21 and the dissent on pp. 27–28 in [Ahluwalia et al., 2016].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
109
collaboration on climate, infrastructure, balance sheet optimization, and principles for provi-
sion of finance, all with the involvement of the G-20.
However, competition persists among MDBs on policy advice, pricing and financing mo-
dalities; it is sometimes healthy in expanding choices for clients, but sometimes creates prob-
lems for the overall functioning of the system. For example, some MDBs worry that access to 
policy-based funding from one MDB can reduce client demand for project loans from another 
MDB. As another example, some MDBs provide free technical assistance, while others strug-
gle to create market-based fee-for-service programs. There are few guardrails for resolving these 
kinds of differences.
At the country level, technical assistance/cooperation is already a core activity for the 
MDBs, and it is likely to become even more valuable as countries grapple with new partners, 
particularly from the private sector. Government clients are increasingly demanding that MDBs 
provide skills in finance, project preparation, and evaluation that have been undeveloped until 
very recently. With country systems as the common denominator, closer collaboration of the 
MDBs in delivering technical assistance will reduce system-wide costs and help countries build 
capacity.
The SDGs call for a major ramping up in the scale and quality of investments, especially 
in sustainable infrastructure and human development at the country level. This in turn will re-
quire policy and institutional strengthening across all groups of countries, platforms for project 
preparation and delivery that can help both scale up and enhance the quality of projects and 
programs, and financing structures that can mobilize financing from all sources.
The largest and most complex need pertains to infrastructure. The absolute scale of in-
vestments required in the coming two decades, and the inherent complexities of infrastructure 
investment (the long-term nature, interconnectedness, social impacts, and externalities, posi-
tive and negative) make progress in the sector especially challenging. Infrastructure investments 
require robust policy and institutional settings as well as strong governance. In addition, pro-
ject preparation requirements and the need for financing structures that can mobilize different 
pools of finance over the different phases of the project cycle add further layers of complexity. 
All of these tasks must be undertaken to manage and reduce risks and bring down the cost of 
capital.
MDBs are uniquely positioned to help tackle these constraints but need to step up their 
collaborative efforts in the following areas:
(a) joint efforts on diagnostic work and improving data; (b) platforms for project prepa-
ration and application of common standards and benchmarks for sustainable infrastructure; 
(c) knowledge platforms and tools for strengthening policy and institutional foundations and 
provision of technical assistance; and (d) cooperation on establishment of financing structures 
that can unlock investments at scale.
Joint efforts are underway to improve coordination on sustainable infrastructure across 
MDBs and with other stakeholders. One concrete outcome of this collaboration is SOURCE, 
a new platform to develop sustainable infrastructure across MDBs. Jointly developed by the 
MDBs and the private sector, SOURCE comprises a set of tools that “provides support to na-
tional and subnational governments and public agencies in improving infrastructure project 
bankability, quality and delivery, in increasing investment and crowding-in private finance, 
in strengthening their technical capacities and abilities to manage risks.”10 When coupled with 
country-oriented platforms, like Colombia’s Financiera de Desarrollo Nacional, scaled up re-
sults are possible. This represents best practice in MDB collaboration and coherence, and could 
10 “About Source” Sustainable Infrastructure Foundation. Available at: https://public.sif-source.org/
about/about- source/ (accessed 25.05.2018).

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
110
be extended to other sectors and become a model for large investment programming with pri-
vate participation.
There is also tremendous scope for tapping the skills and institutional capacities across 
the MDBs. MDBs have developed key areas of specialization and experience that are of rel-
evance to, and can be shared with, others. Examples include the pioneering work of the Inter-
American Development Bank Group on migration and remittances, violence prevention, and 
conditional cash transfers; the work of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment Bank (EBRD) on capital market development and private sector energy efficiency; Asian 
Development Bank (AsDB) support to sub-regional projects, such as the Greater Mekong Sub-
regional project, and; the World Bank’s work on countries in fragile situations.
Yet, there are only a few examples where MDBs have worked together and taken advan-
tage of the capabilities in sister institutions. More commonly, they operate independently. For 
example, each MDB has its own research department and independent evaluation office. They 
each develop individual country strategies. They have their own assessment frameworks for 
development effectiveness.
We recommend that MDBs define a common program of research, knowledge genera-
tion and good practices. They should undertake joint country and sector strategies, and apply 
common frameworks for effectiveness and impact, including goals and metrics. In particular, 
we advocate for joint knowledge work wherever there is a sectoral platform of the client country 
that needs support.
This is not to say that policy and operational coordination and coherence are always wel-
comed. Client countries search for policy options, not policy prescriptions, and have concerns 
that international financial institution (IFI) coordination could become monopolistic – a sig-
nificant danger, given that history has shown that IFI policy prescriptions are not infallible. 
What clients do desire is policy coherence, meaning consistency of approaches across different 
levels of government and across sectors. Policy coherence points to a desire to manage, rather 
than ignore, trade-offs (for example, public investment strategies and debt sustainability) and 
exploit synergies across sectors (for example, sanitation and nutrition).
MDBs are increasingly looking for ways to bring private sources of finance into develop-
ment financing. This is perhaps best exemplified by the cascade approach of the WBG, which 
seeks to link “reform, investment, mobilization, and catalyzation” by evaluating first whether 
a project can be financed by the private sector. If not, the cascade template then asks whether 
reforms be made to address market failures or whether risk mitigation measures can be used 
to induce private participation. Only in the latter instance would public and/or concessional 
finance be offered.11 While most other MDBs have similar objectives for mobilizing private 
finance, what is lacking are system-wide procedures that channel financing through national 
platforms. These common protocols could prevent “shopping” by the private sector for the best 
deal and limit counter-productive inter-MDB competition.
While MDBs have an array of instruments, including guarantees that should permit con-
siderable mobilization of private capital, results to date have been disappointing. The OECD, 
in its survey of all aid agencies, bilateral and multilateral, found only $80 billion over four years, 
mostly using guarantees and mostly in MICs [OECD, 2017].
A platform approach allows the pooling of all sources of long-term development finance, 
with concessional funds applied where appropriate to fill key gaps. For example, the approach 
could work for project preparation, technical assistance, or to compensate for environmen-
tal or social externalities. Significant potential for developing and tapping into local currency 
long-term financing now exists in selected countries. This line of thinking also links to policy 
11 See pages 5–6 of [World Bank, 2017].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
111
coherence: local capital market development may be just as important as a specific project in 
supporting sustainable infrastructure.
The impediment appears to be the business and financing model for MDBs. Guaran-
tees require the same amount of capital set-asides as loans, but are more complex to originate. 
[Humphrey, Prizzon, 2014]. In addition, loans are the main source of income for MDBs; loan 
margins fund the administrative staff costs needed to work on reforms to improve the enabling 
environment for private sector investments. As such, staff incentives are often based on loan 
mobilization.
In a platform approach, the business model of MDBs could change. Their comparative 
advantage in a world awash in liquidity is to provide initial funds and expertise for origination 
and upstream policy and institutional work; patient capital to take on construction and other 
risks from early-gestation activities; and affordable capital to help clients internalize social and 
environmental externalities.
Embracing a platform approach, unbundling these different services to the platform, and de-
veloping appropriate business models for each could permit MDBs to use their capital more effec-
tively, including through asset sales programs that could allow for more rapid turnover of loans.
To free up more capital for development purposes, MDBs could also develop financing 
“exit mechanisms” to turn over their capital more rapidly for greater development impact. In 
such schemes, private sector investors with an appetite for developing country investments 
could purchase mature financial assets from MDBs, freeing their capital. While MDBs already 
have asset sales programs, getting such mechanisms to function at scale would require a signifi-
cant change in pricing and business models.
Developing a Shared Understanding of Approaches Among Different Clients
MDBs face sharp challenges with respect to three types of clients. “Fragile” and conflict/
violence (FCV) affected states that are lagging behind and not converging with advanced econo-
mies (the International Monetary Fund (IMF) identifies 43 such countries in the latest World 
Economic Outlook database) [IMF, 2017]. These countries and states are the locus of the great-
est concentration of poverty, yet also places where development efforts have been least effec-
tive [World Bank, 2014]. Heavily indebted countries, as classified by debt sustainability analyses, 
strive to balance the need for debt financing to accelerate growth with the desire to avoid debt 
crises. UMICs, with access to private capital markets, still ask for support in selected areas (often 
institutional and governance strengthening, sub-national development, or sustainable infrastruc-
ture with global spillovers), but are being graduated to conserve MDB capital in the short run.
Fragile Contexts
The New Deal for engagement in fragile states signed in 2011 and the World Development 
Report 2011 on Conflict, Security and Development reflect long-standing efforts to broaden sup-
port for post-conflict recovery by moving away from traditional aid efforts and financing of 
social services and infrastructure toward a focus on political settlement, security, justice and 
jobs. This agenda has increased urgency: The locus of global poverty will overwhelmingly be in 
fragile, mainly LIC and African states by 2025 [Kharas, Rogerson, 2017].
MDBs are well placed to support FCV affected countries, where these have legitimate 
governments. The reasons for this are fourfold:12
 
First, MDBs have the finance, depth of expertise and scope that can support full- scale 
comprehensive approaches.
12 This section draws on [McKechnie, 2016]. 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
112
 
Second, by pooling funds, MDBs can avoid providing the fragmented assistance that 
overloads countries with weak institutions.
 
Third, MDBs can pool and manage risks for bilateral donors and private capital, miti-
gating them through policy reform and sharing them through deployment of guarantees. 
FCV countries are some of the riskiest places to do any kind of business.
 
Fourth, MDBs can take the long-term perspective that is necessary in fragile situations; 
building effective institutions can take 20–40 years [World Bank, 2011].
MDBs have an institutional legacy in financing infrastructure, where projects can take a 
decade from concept to results, and where governance arrangements can be structured to insu-
late their management from short-term political pressures.
To support reconstruction and institution building in FCV, we would recommend MDB share-
holders and management tolerate variation in constitutional arrangements and economic policies 
and avoid influence over electoral processes. MDBs should do this while enabling greater multi-
lateral engagement in strengthening accountable police and judiciary with a mind to safeguarding 
human rights, encouraging disarmament of irregular forces, advancing security sector reforms, and 
enhancing oversight by legislatures” [IEG, 2014].
Rules governing MDBs forbid interference in the political affairs of member countries; their 
articles also require impartial decisions based only on economic or social development consid-
erations. Some interpretations of these articles impede MDBs in assisting countries to overcome 
some dimensions of fragility, leaving clients vulnerable to reversals in development progress.
A second recommendation would be to revise approaches to the country-based lending model in 
the case of FCV countries to allow a more creative use of MDBs’ grant instruments. For example, grants 
would make it easier to fund both national and regional projects that reduce FCV. While country-
based lending has served central governments well, it is ill suited to financing sub-national go-
vernments, civil society or businesses. Nor does the country-based model lend itself to activities 
that span two or more countries, nor to settings where the government lacks legitimacy.
Third, we recommend MDB shareholders adjust their oversight of MDB operations in FCV 
countries. The two MDBs most active in fragile context – the World Bank and AfDB – have 
been criticised for their cumbersome fiduciary systems, which can be alien to a borrowing 
country’s financial management, audit and procurement systems. Inflexible administrative 
procedures are another Achilles heel. Oversight by the boards should give greater attention to 
implementation and speed of results, rather than loan approvals. They could also ensure that 
MDBs are fit for the challenge of fragility, especially through adjusting their policies and pro-
cedures for greater agility in FCV contexts, decentralising highly qualified, empowered staff to 
country offices, using country systems wherever possible, and providing hands-on support to 
counterparts in low-capacity countries [McKechnie, 2016].
High Debt Countries
In the wake of the 2008 economic downturn and financial crisis, public debt sustainability 
in advanced economies was at the top of the international agenda. Meanwhile, external debt in 
developing countries was on the verge of falling off development practitioners and analysts’ radar 
screens. This made sense, because debt ratios plummeted as the result of the debt relief initiatives 
in the 1990s and 2000s and the sustained economic growth in most of beneficiary countries.13
13 From an average of 131 percent of gross national income (GNI) in 2000 across HIPCs to 35 percent in 
2015 [Mustapha, Prizzon, forthcoming].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
113
This positive picture is rapidly changing though.14 The risk is still high or moderate for 
30 post-completion point heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs) who benefited from mul-
tilateral debt relief (out of 36); two other HIPC post-completion point countries are in debt 
distress. The share of concessional financing declined in the majority of HIPC countries from 
2005–2007 up to 2013–2015.15 Some countries are about to exceed debt limits set in their public 
financial management laws.
Scaling up resources from “billions to trillions” will largely entail resources that generate 
liabilities, rather than being grant financed. Most of the new, envisaged liabilities associated 
with blended finance projects are from the private sector at far less favorable terms and condi-
tions than MDB lending. The mechanism for managing debt workouts in the future, including 
for multilateral debts, should be debated and clarified.
The increasing complexity of financing options requires a new skill set for debt sustain-
ability assessments by the IFIs. They must understand rollover risk, contingent risks, and set-
asides for explicit and implicit guarantees, link debt management and fiscal policies, and better 
appreciate the quality and effectiveness of public investments.16
At the same time, no debt workout mechanisms exist when liabilities need restructuring. 
Multilateral debt mechanisms such HIPC or the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) 
or the Paris Club may not suffice if another debt crisis occurs, as most debt comes now from 
private sources.
We recommend MDBs jointly prioritize and strengthen debt management capacity in borrow-
ing countries. They should also review how the quality of public investment, policy reform track 
record, and availability and use of policy space affect debt sustainability assessments. Finally, they 
should develop principles and procedures for debt restructuring that reflect the increasingly complex 
nature of the creditor community.
Graduation and the UMIC Support Issue
Shareholders disagree on the role of the MDB system in UMICs. Some argue that any 
financial support to these countries should be sharply circumscribed (or even cut to zero except 
in exceptional circumstances), regardless of the level of concessionality from the point of view 
of the lender. These shareholders view engagement in UMICs as a zero- sum game, and prefer 
to reallocate resources to other countries. Others argue the opposite – that engagement with 
UMICs is valuable for all other countries. They have put forward four reasons:
1. Profitability from UMIC clients can add to capital and reserves, raise the portfolio 
quality of MDB assets, and thereby improve their credit rating and support greater lending to 
others.17
2. Engagement permits direct learning from development implementation innovations 
introduced by UMICs.
3. UMICs are often important partners in implementing global and regional public goods 
(for example, climate and water), and in managing regional spillovers and crises. They also 
14 UNCTAD [2016] and Jubilee Debt Campaign (2016)’s analyses and media articles (Financial Times, 
2017, see https://www.ft.com/content/de5fab92-0f27-11e7-a88c-50ba212dce4d)  find that servicing debt obli-
gations has become more expensive in several SSA countries.
15 [Mustapha, Prizzon, forthcoming].
16 For example, staff at the IMF recently advocated for a “big push” on development expenditures in low- 
income countries on the grounds that debt sustainability concerns could skew public investment choices toward 
projects with short-term returns (roads) rather than projects with far higher, longer-term returns (education). 
Available at: https://blogs.imf.org/2017/11/09/roads-or-schools-a-critical-tradeoff/ (accessed 25.05.2018).
17 In the longer-term, UMICs can be stewarded to become large donors or capital contributors to mul-
tilaterals.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
114
serve as growth poles for neighboring countries that need to be encouraged to adopt global 
standards and improve regional connectivity and networks.
4. National governments in UMICs often cannot engage directly with sub-national enti-
ties without weakening frameworks of fiscal decentralization, so turn to international support 
for lagging areas.
The typical case for UMIC graduation assumes that private capital markets can replace 
lending from publicly supported international institutions when countries reach  a certain in-
come threshold and enjoy reasonable capital market access. Whether this assumption holds 
today, however, is far from obvious. Current discussions on PPPs, especially in big-ticket areas 
such as sustainable infrastructure, suggest that public and private finance is often complemen-
tary, with each having its own role in the value chain and its own comparative advantage in 
bearing risks. In fact, given the different stages of policy, institutional and financial constraints 
facing different sectors within a given developing country, graduation may be better considered 
as a country-sector issue rather than a country-national income issue.
We believe that, in the medium to long term, there is a powerful argument for the MDB system 
to engage in all developing countries. The real discussion for shareholders should be on the criteria 
for engagement, and the need to demonstrate a clear developmental purpose for any intervention. 
The “cascade” principles provide a useful frame: test whether there is a real need for public financ-
ing (including as a contribution to a global externality), identify whether such needs could be obvi-
ated in future through policy and institutional strengthening, but engage where the development case 
is compelling.
MDBs and the Provision of GPGs
The role of MDBs in providing selected GPGs is also important, especially where imple-
mentation is country-focused. In this respect, MDBs serve as idea generators, as coordinators, 
and as financiers. Their governance structure and their lending to sovereign governments are 
not a natural fit with GPG provision: their principal comparative advantage is in supporting na-
tional actions that overlap with the development agenda. However, over the years, their role has 
evolved organically rather than through a deliberate move on the part of shareholders to enter 
into the GPG business. As a result, no coherent GPG engagement model exists for the MDB 
system. A system-wide approach that integrates national, regional and global actions based on 
comparative strengths and deploys cooperative platforms of action is needed. In addition, it 
would be worth considering grant resources to attract, guide, and nudge national governments 
and the private sector to invest in ways that help the global community resolve a host of un-
met global challenges. In instances where broader projects have GPG components, modified 
support in the form of grants may be appropriate. MDBs could also explore restructuring the 
governance of GPG “funds” to reflect an appropriate governance structure, as opposed to a 
shareholder/donor driven decision model.18
Section 3. Shareholder Alignment
Shareholder alignment and outdated governance are at the heart of many of the limita-
tions that the MDBs face, both individually and collectively. To be effective and legitimate, of 
the MDB system requires a shared vision and purpose across stakeholders; changes in gover-
nance arrangements that preserve the multilateralism (including the processes of leadership se-
18 See for example the discussion in [Ahluwalia et al., 2016].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
115
lection); determination of shareholding and decision rules; and reform in corporate governance 
structures to enable MDBs to be more cost-effective and responsive to clients’ needs.
Shareholders need to provide a vision for what they expect MDBs to deliver. They have 
encouraged older MDBs to refresh their mandates and they have established new MDBs to fill 
perceived gaps in the system over time, but shareholders have not systematically reviewed the 
MDB system since 1944.
In carrying out the new mandates dictated by the current context, shareholders agree that 
the MDB system should be lean and green, nimble and flexible. The system should innovate 
in the use of technology, safeguards, and in learning the language of partnerships and of the 
private sector. It should achieve results at scale. Nevertheless, beyond these generalities, there 
are sharp differences among shareholders that remain unaddressed under current governance 
arrangements. These concern: (i) setting specific goals for the system, outlining the degree of 
ambition, and ensuring coherence in the mandates of individual institutions; (ii) setting a vision 
for the mobilization and deployment of public finance through the MDB system; (iii) enabling 
MDBs to cooperate more effectively by guiding the division of labor and contestability of the 
system; and (iv) ensuring that governance evolves to provide legitimacy and trust of the system.
Setting Goals, Agreeing on Degree of Ambition, 
and Ensuring Cohesion in Mandates
Shareholders diverge on their long-term vision for the multilateral system. Some view the 
system as one that should systematically work itself out of a job, permitting countries to take on 
greater responsibility for their own development with full reliance on private global capital mar-
kets. Others view the multilateral system as a permanent expression of international solidarity 
and an important instrument for addressing those left behind in all countries. These are distinct 
but opposing visions for the long-term goals of the system that urgently need to be reconciled.
Related to this is mandate creep. Ad hoc mandates to address emerging problems, funded 
on a case-by-case basis, pose a different set of problems for the MDB system. While such a task-
ing by certain shareholders or interested parties may be appropriately responsive to short-term 
emergency challenges, over time it can dilute an institution’s core mandate, erode managerial 
oversight, and lead to confusion as to where responsibility lies, if anywhere.
Shareholders need to set expectations for what the MDB system should deliver as contri-
butions toward Agenda 2030, the mitigation of shocks, and the provision of global public goods. 
System-wide performance can then be regularly assessed against these expectations.
(These expectations need to be sufficiently granular to be effective – SMART targets. For 
example, the MDB joint report on climate finance sets out monitorable targets for climate-
related lending volumes, by institution;19 another example is the nascent MDB commitment to 
measure and report on the net carbon emissions of their operations).20
There should be a periodic inventory of ambition and mandates across the MDB system with 
decisions as to when “emerging challenges” merit a permanent effort, with corresponding increases 
in permanent resources untied to a particular shareholder or funding entity. Given the urgency for 
action in the upcoming two decades, shareholders also urgently need to assess whether progress on 
outcomes is rapid enough.
19 See, for example, http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/266191504817671617/2016-joint-report-on-mdbs- 
climate-finance.pdf.
20 See https://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21730448-environmentalists-allege- 
their-lending-has-been-less-green.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
116
Setting a Vision for the Mobilization and Deployment of Public Finance
Shareholder resources, both for concessional and non-concessional on-lending, are not 
being deployed in the most effective way. The model of allocation according to country income 
levels no longer seems optimal. Consider this: shareholders argue for deploying concessional 
funds to the poorest countries, yet in many special situations, the actual association between 
recipient country per capita income and aid allocations is negligible, both for multilaterals and 
for bilateral funding. As another example: low-income countries have availed of private finance 
for revenue-generating infrastructure investments, when access to non-concessional multilate-
ral resources could have been effective, with better development results because concessional 
funding could then be redeployed. Conversely, MICs sometimes need concessional funds, but 
current procedures make this cumbersome, as in the case of Lebanon and Jordan’s efforts to 
help Syrian refugees.
Nevertheless, shareholders should take comfort in the fact that the existing MDB financ-
ing model is the most efficiently structured form of international public finance. Shareholders 
typically only pay-in 6 percent of total subscribed capital, so even with extremely conservative 
debt/equity ratios of 1:1, lending can be a 16-times multiple of contributions.21 If private sector 
and client government funds match or exceed multilateral lending, total investment projects of 
more than 32-times are possible. Over time, as MDBs reap profits from equity investments, leve -
rage increases still further, making a 50-fold multiplier feasible over a decade. This arithmetic 
suggests that $40 billion injected into the MDB system could generate $2 trillion in project and 
program finance for sustainable development.
It is this potential for leverage and mobilization of development finance that makes the 
MDB system so attractive as an instrument for achieving the global community’s goals.
Related to the question of capital adequacy is the issue of risk tolerance of shareholders 
and the likelihood of a call on unpaid, subscribed capital. Multilateral institutions are unique 
bodies, and methodologies for their credit rating are imperfect and evolving, with little hard 
empirical data points (no IFI has actually defaulted on its debt and preferred creditor status is 
hard to assess). Hence, some claim that IFIs are operating at a AAA+++ level and could take 
on substantially more risk without jeopardizing their rating, while others are concerned about 
maintaining the AAA rating at all costs, particularly for any individual IFI.
There have been many recommendations on MDB capital adequacy, the impact of callable 
capital,22 balance sheet optimization, credit risk concentration and pooling, and the like. We suggest 
that the deeper issue is to agree on and signal the scale of activity of MDBs (both financial and non-
financial service delivery) and to work backward to develop scenarios for capital and risk tolerance. 
In our view, scaling the system to deliver trillions more in project and program finance over the next 
decade or so is an appropriate starting point for shareholder discussions and this would probably 
require allowing the institutions to operate with less restrictive financial ratios, while still maintain-
ing their AAA rating.
21 Total World Bank paid-in capital of $16.1 billion supports subscribed capital of $268.9 billion as of 
June 30, 2016. Available at: http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/htm/financial_shareholder.html (accessed 
25.05.2018).
22 Callable capital totals more than $650 billion for the World Bank and the four major regional MDBs, 
but the vast majority is from countries with less than AAA ratings and of little use to MDBs, according to rat-
ing agency methodologies. To make better use of callable capital, MDB shareholders and their legislatures 
should more clearly define the circumstances and process by which callable capital can be called, which might 
convince rating agencies to give it more credit in their capital adequacy calculations [Humphrey, 2017, op. cit.].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
117
Enabling MDBs to Cooperate More Effectively Among Themselves
Major shareholders have long taken different views of individual institutions within the 
MDB system. The report of the Meltzer Commission, established by the U.S. Congress in 1998, 
was blunt in its assessment of why the U.S. Treasury seemed to favor the expansion of the World 
Bank over that of regional development banks: “The U.S. Treasury does not wish to see power 
and responsibility shift to the countries in the region. I [Meltzer] believe a shift of this kind is 
likely in coming years, and it is best to make the transfer in an orderly way. Indeed, in Europe 
and Asia the movement toward greater regional control is well underway” [Meltzer, 2004].
If MDBs are to cooperate more effectively as a system, shareholders must provide each 
institution with additional flexibility to move beyond its geographic mandate if such a move can 
add value to the system as a whole.
Given different client bases and charters, subject matter expertise among MDBs has 
evolved organically rather than through top-down mandates. At times, such expertise emerged 
from research and operational engagements with repeat clients. As examples, EBRD has well-
developed skills and experience on the complexities of private sector financing, evaluation and 
managing risk, especially in the energy sector; IDB is collaborating with universities; AsDB has 
done extensive research and operations on regional spatial data and infrastructure; AfDB on 
rural water; IBRD on climate.
Yet there are few cases of system-wide efforts to tap such expertise, either in formal part-
nerships or through inter-MDB memoranda of understanding. Best practice, such as EBRD/
AfDB collaboration on private sector development in North Africa, could be better shared and 
practiced, and geography should not become a barrier to the use of specialized skills across the 
MDB system [African Development Bank, 2011].
We believe that, with modern communications technology, subject matter specialization should 
be used across the globe. Formal mechanisms to share best practice should be strengthened and al-
lowing sister institutions to take the lead in particular areas would permit the system to realize econo-
mies of scale and scope in providing services. Helping countries craft coherent technical assistance 
strategies is one area in which specialized MDBs could be of considerable use.
In examining the distribution of specializations in a systemic manner, the significant presence 
of U.N. agencies in many domains must be reckoned with; MDB shareholders need to be wary of 
undercutting or duplicating other international efforts to achieve the SDGs through the propagation 
of competing mandates.
Ensuring Governance Evolves to Support Legitimacy and Effectiveness
Client trust is central to the MDB value proposition and is based on client confidence with 
current and future governance. The Zedillo Commission views on the World Bank are worth 
repeating:
“Current mechanisms for strategy formulation are not adequate for setting priorities and guiding 
operations. As a result, they undermine members’ ownership of the Group’s strategy, foster mis-
sion creep, and increase the risk of misallocating resources or stretching them too thin. In addition, 
the institution’s decision‐making process is widely seen as allowing many member countries insuf-
ficient voice and opportunities for participation. Finally, there is insufficient institutional account-
ability for results – a problem that ultimately weakens the effectiveness and legitimacy of the World 
Bank” [Zedillo, 2009].
These observations are as relevant to the MDB system as to individual institutions. A vi-
sion of a system serving all developing countries requires a governance structure that permits 
adequate voice.

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
118
Governance in multilateral institutions does matter. Research suggests that among MDBs, 
those where borrowing countries have more voice have: less reliance on a compliance rules-
based culture, and more cost-effective linkage between safeguards and development benefits; 
less conservative financial policies; more flexibility in allocation procedures; and less internal 
oversight and cost [Kharas, 2015].
The corporate governance of the MDBs should guide management choices on strategy, 
flexibility and responsiveness, while holding them accountable for development results. In 
some MDBs, however, the number of staff in shareholder offices has swelled to levels (several 
hundred in the case of IBRD) that are inconsistent with simple provision of strategic oversight. 
Today’s Board members are like parliamentarians who impose substantial costs on the system 
with few benefits in terms of transparency and accountability of management.
If the MDBs are to behave as a global system, the governance of each part should permit 
a global representation. What is at stake is the preservation of the cooperative nature of the in-
stitutions as representing the collective response of nations to the pressing global development 
issues of the day.
To realize a holistically functioning MDB system, strategy setting for the long-term, and ac-
countability for results, are urgently needed. The MDBs have made a start in thinking through col-
lective commitments, as evinced in the “Joint MDB Statement of Ambitions for Crowding in Private 
Finance.” Taking a page from that joint effort, the MDBs could use the same kind of methodology to 
identify their contributions to Agenda 2030 results. A governance framework that periodically takes 
stock of system – wide results, say every four or five years, would facilitate follow-up and course 
corrections in individual institutions.23 Likewise, the time is ripe for a careful system-wide review of 
the costs and benefits of current Board structures and staffing.
No formal structure that would facilitate an exchange of views and the forging among 
shareholders of a consensus on the mandate and operational modalities for the MDB system 
exists. Rather than construct a new layer, we recommend making use of existing fora.
Any dialogue on the MDB system must be legitimate and effective and enjoy the trust of 
all MDB stakeholders. It is likely that multiple fora might be needed. For example, a special 
session of the Development Committee could be organized; but representation there is the 25 
members represented on the boards of executive directors of the World Bank and the IMF. 
Pursuing the discussion at the U.N., perhaps in conjunction with the quadrennial High Level 
Political Forum Summit, would add legitimacy and broaden representation. Bringing recom-
mendations to the G-20 offers the chance to engage more directly with ministers of finance. 
Each forum has its own added value; together they could show a way forward for the system as 
a whole.
Section 4. Summary and Conclusions
Government and market failures are rife in developing countries, and addressing them in 
a way that advances sustainable development and achieves the goals of Agenda 2030 remains 
key to the fundamental mandate of MDBs. In a world with new opportunities provided by data, 
technology, innovation and a new willingness of private capital to invest in developing coun-
tries, the scope for MDBs to scale up their development impact is considerable. There is also 
an urgency to do so now, as today’s choices regarding the scale and technology of investments 
in infrastructure and human capital will lock-in development pathways for decades to come.
While MDBs’ considerable financial, human and cultural assets can help clients, team-
work among the multilaterals is rarely encouraged. The geographic boundaries that have shaped 
23 See for example the discussion on pp. 26–26 in [Ahluwalia et al., op. cit].

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
119
the development finance architecture are blurring. While geography will remain an important 
element of comparative advantage for regional banks, they each have expertise that can be more 
widely used by the system.
The greatest risk today is of “active inertia.” Independent evaluations suggest the MDBs 
are each successful in their own activities, but are not collectively delivering at the scale and 
scope demanded of them, nor investing enough in systems, such as those for common environ-
mental, social and governance standards, which would facilitate inter- operability. In such an 
environment, incremental governance reviews within each institution will not generate the big 
and bold changes to the system that are needed.
Such changes include potentially fundamental shifts in business models to focus more on 
upstream activities – from project and program design through construction and implementa-
tion.
Another way to correct inertia is for the MDBs to focus on institutional support to develop 
national platforms that serve as tools for planning and originating projects and that can pool 
different sources of finance, including long-term local currency capital.
Other business model changes should revolve around engagements in contexts of fragility, 
high debt, and UMIC – levels of prosperity.
Changes in financial models are needed as well. Discipline in optimizing the use of capital 
could require greater levels of asset sales and the recycling of funds. This in turn raises questions 
of loan pricing. It could also imply greater use of risk-sharing and risk- mitigation instruments 
that need appropriate pricing.
Internal staff incentives also need review to align with new metrics of knowledge, de-ris-
king, mobilization of private finance and institutional collaboration.
The responsibility for introducing these changes falls to the governance of each MDB. 
Currently, board involvement in each transaction in most MDBs distracts attention from efforts 
to improve efficiency, effectiveness and legitimacy in each institution. Change in each of these 
areas could yield substantial benefits.
We are concerned that an incremental shareholder review process among MDBs will not 
generate the kind of governance improvements the entire system needs. Accordingly, we pro-
pose more structured discussions on the MDBs in three fora: the Development Committee, the 
U.N.’s quadrennial High Level Political Forum Summit on the SDGs, and the G-20. These 
discussions could take stock of whether the impact of the MDB system is delivering sufficiently, 
in scope and breadth, on the major challenges faced in implementing the world’s global goals.
References
Ahluwalia M.S., Summers L., Velasco A., Birdsall N., Morris S. (2016) Multilateral Development Banking 
for This Century’s Development Challenges. Five Recommendations to Shareholders of the Old and New 
Multilateral Development Banks Project Directors. Available at: https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/
multilateral-development-banking-report-five-recommendations.pdf (accessed 25.05.2018).
African Development Bank (2011) Memorandum of Understanding between European Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development and the African Development Bank and the African Development Fund. 10 Septem-
ber. Available at: https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Legal-Documents/signed%20
memorandum%20of%20understanding%20between%20ebrd%20and%20adb%20and%20adf.pdf  (accessed 
25.05.2018).
Bhattacharya et al. (2016) Delivering on Sustainable Infrastructure for Better Development and Better Cli-
mate. Brookings/LSE/NCE. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/research/delivering-on-sustainable-
infrastructure-for-better-development-and-better-climate/ (accessed 25.05.2018).

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS RESEARCH JOURNAL. Vol. 13. No 2 (2018)
120
Brown S. (2016) Putting Paris into Practice: Foreign Aid, National Ownership, and Donor Alignment in Mali 
and Ghana. WIDER Working Paper 2016/145, December 2016.
Gurria J.A., Volker P. (2001) The Role of the Multilateral Development Banks in Emerging Economies. The 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Humphrey C., Prizzon A. (2014). Guarantees for Development. A Review of Multilateral Development Bank 
Operations. Available at: https://www.odi.org/publications/9130-guarantees-development-review-multilater-
al-development-bank-operations (accessed 25.05.2018).
Humphrey C. (2017) Six Proposals to Strengthen the Finances of Multilateral Development Banks. ODI 
Working and Discussion Paper, April. Available at: https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-docu-
ments/11451.pdf (accessed 25.05.2018).
IEG (2014) World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: An Inde-
pendent Evaluation, p. xiii. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16999 (ac-
cessed 25.05.2018).
IMF (2017) World Economic Outlook Database, October. Available at: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
weo/2017/02/weodata/index.aspx (accessed 25.05.2018).
Kharas H. (2015) The Post-2015 Agenda and the Evolution of the World Bank Group. The Brookings In-
stitution, GED Working Paper 92, September. Available at:  https://www.brookings.edu/wp- content/up-
loads/2016/07/Kharas-WBG-evolution-and-post2015-agenda-2.pdf (accessed 25.05.2018).
Kharas H., Rogerson A. (2017) Global Development Trends and Challenges: Horizon 2025 Revisited, ODI 
Research Reports and Studies, October. Available at: https://www.odi.org/publications/10940-global-devel-
opment-trends-and-challenges-horizon-2025-revisited (accessed 25.05.2018).
Koch S., Molenaers N. (2015) The Europeanisation of Budget Support: Do Government Capacity and Au-
tonomy Matter? European Politics and Society, vol. 17, no 1, pp. 90–104.
OECD (2017) Amounts Mobilized from the Private Sector by Official Development Finance Interventions. 
Available at: https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-data/Pre-
liminary- results-mobilisation.pdf (accessed 25.05.2017).
OECD (2012) The Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation. Available at: http://www.oecd.
org/development/effectiveness/busanpartnership.htm (accessed 25.05.2018).
OECD (2003) The Rome Declaration. Available at:  https://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/31451637.pdf 
(accessed 25.05.2018).
McKechnie A. (2016) Fragility, Conflict and Violence as Global Public Goods: Strengthening Engagement by 
Multilateral Development Banks. ODI Research Report, October. 
Meltzer A.H. (2004) The Report of the International Financial Institution Advisory Commission: Comments 
on the Critics. The IMF and its Critics: Reform of Global Financial Architecture (D. Vines, L. Christopher 
(eds)).  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 106–123.
Mustapha S., Prizzon A. (forthcoming) Taking Stock of Debt Relief Initiatives 20 Years on and What the New 
Development Finance Landscape Means for External Public Debt Sustainability. ODI.
UNCTAD (2016) The Economic Development in Africa Report 2016: Debt Dynamics and Development Fi-
nance in Africa. Available at unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/aldcafrica2016_en.pdf  (accessed 25.05.2018).
World Bank (2011) World Development Report 2011: Conflict, security and development. Washington DC: 
World Bank. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/4389 (accessed 25.05.2018). 
World Bank. Group (2014) World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected 
States: An Independent Evaluation. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16999 
(accessed 25.05.2018).
World Bank (2017) Forward Look, A Vision for the World Bank Group in 2030 – Progress and Challeng-
es, March. Available at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEVCOMMINT/Documentation/23745169/
DC2017-0002.pdf (accessed 25.05.2018).
Zedillo E. (2009) Repowering the World Bank for the 21st Century. Available at:  http://siteresources.world-
bank.org/news/Resources/wbgovernancecommissionreport.pdf (accessed 25.05.2018).

NEW AGENDA FOR GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
121
Новая глобальная повестка и будущее 
многосторонних банков развития124
А. Бхаттачария, Х. Харас, М. Плант, А. Приццон
Бхаттачария Амар  – старший сотрудник программы по мировой экономике и глобальному развитию 
Института Брукингса; USA, Washington, DC 20036, 1775 Massachusetts Ave., NW; E-mail: communications@
brookings.edu
Харас Хоми – исполняющий обязанности вице-президента и директор программы по мировой экономике 
и глобальному развитию Института Брукингса; USA, Washington, DC 20036, 1775 Massachusetts Ave.; E-mail: 
hkharas@brookings.edu
Плант Марк – директор направления финансирования развития и старший сотрудник Центра глобального 
развития; USA, Washington DC 20036, 2055 L Street NW; E-mail: mplant@cgdev.org
Приццон Аннализа – старший научный сотрудник Института зарубежного развития; UK, London SE1 8NJ, 
203 Blackfriars Road; E-mail: a.prizzon@odi.org.uk
Новая глобальная повестка дня, ядром которой является Повестка дня в области устойчивого развития на пе-
риод до 2030 г., всеобъемлюща и универсальна. В настоящее время определены три главные цели: возобновление 
роста, обеспечение реализации Целей устойчивого развития (ЦУР) и выполнение задач Парижского соглашения 
по климату, связанных с борьбой с изменением климата и адаптацией к его последствиям. Достижение этих це-
лей потребует значительного расширения и переориентации инвестиций, особенно в области устойчивой инфра-
структуры и человеческого развития. Их реализация является неотложной задачей, поскольку мир столкнулся 
с самой большой волной экспансии городов в истории, а в течение следующих 15 лет начнет функционировать 
больше инфраструктурных объектов, чем существует в мире сегодня. Также это последняя возможность вы-
работки эффективных подходов к управлению масштабными демографическими переходами.
Капитальные вложения и технологический выбор в ближайшие два десятилетия закрепят тенденции кар-
бонизации, урбанизации и демографии. Они будут определять будущее человечества и нашей планеты до конца 
нынешнего столетия и далее.
1 Институт Брукингса – некоммерческая организация, проводящая исследования и осущест-
вляющая выработку независимых политических решений. Миссия института – проводить высоко-
качественные независимые исследования и на основе этих исследований предоставлять инновацион-
ные практические рекомендации для разработчиков политики и общественности. 
Институт зарубежного развития является ведущим независимым аналитическим центром по 
вопросам международного развития и гуманитарной деятельности. Его миссия состоит в стимулиро-
вании и информировании политики и практики, направленных на сокращение масштабов нищеты 
и обеспечение устойчивых средств к существованию в развивающихся странах за счет сочетания вы-
сококачественных прикладных исследований, практических консультаций по вопросам политики и 
ориентированного на эту политику обсуждения и распространения знаний. 
Центр глобального развития работает над сокращением глобальной нищеты и неравенства по-
средством скрупулезных исследований и активного взаимодействия с политическим сообществом, 
чтобы сделать мир более процветающим, справедливым и безопасным для всех. 
Выводы и рекомендации данной статьи принадлежат исключительно ее авторам и не отражают 
взглядов упомянутых учреждений, их руководства или других сотрудников. 
Поддержка данной публикации была великодушно предоставлена Фондом Билла и Мелинды 
Гейтс и Фондом Рокфеллера. Институт Брукингса, Центр глобального развития и ODI считают, что 
основная ценность их работы заключается в абсолютной приверженности качеству, независимости и 
воздействию. Деятельность, поддерживаемая их спонсорами, отражает эту приверженность.
Более ранняя версия настоящей статьи была представлена на симпозиуме Группы видных дея-
телей «Группы двадцати» по глобальному финансовому управлению во Франкфурте, Германия, 4 де-
кабря 2017 г. Данная версия статьи значительно улучшена по результатам обсуждения.

122
ВЕСТНИК МЕЖДУНАРОДНЫХ ОРГАНИЗАЦИЙ. Т. 13. № 2 (2018)
Условия, в которых предстоит решать эти задачи, весьма сложны. Во многих странах рост инвестиций 
и производительности замедлился, усиливается неравенство и сохраняется безработица, растут напряжен-
ность, уязвимость к шокам и их частота. В то же время существуют масштабные возможности для использо-
вания новых технологий и растущего потенциала частного сектора. Сегодняшний сверхсвязанный мир требует 
сочетания мероприятий, охватывающих частные блага, национальные общественные блага и региональные / 
глобальные общественные блага для решения задач устойчивого развития.
Повестка дня требует достижения адекватных масштабов государственного вмешательства, серьез-
ного отношения к социальной и экологической устойчивости, а также управления побочными эффектами, рас-
пространяемыми между секторами и через границы. Также требуется активизация международного сотруд-
ничества для реализации трансформационных изменений и мобилизации финансирования в беспрецедентных 
масштабах.
Многосторонние банки развития (МБР), обладающие высокоэффективным потенциалом помощи стра-
нам в укреплении политических и институциональных основ реализации данных задач, а также привлечения 
финансирования, должны сыграть в этом процессе центральную роль. Они пытаются реагировать на существу-
ющий запрос, но людские и финансовые ограничения, а также неясные и чрезмерно широкие мандаты, определя-
емые акционерами, сдерживают их. Уточнение мандатов и устранение указанных ограничений имеют важное 
значение для расширения и повышения эффективности поддержки ими новой глобальной повестки дня.
Уникальная финансовая структура МБР позволяет им использовать ресурсы акционеров, мультиплицируя 
их и предоставляя финансирование по низкой стоимости. Это, в свою очередь, позволяет привлекать финан-
сирование из других источников, особенно со стороны частного сектора. При лучшей системной координации 
МБР смогут повысить качество удовлетворения потребностей все более разнообразных клиентов, но для этого 
требуются консенсус среди акционеров и финансовая поддержка с их стороны соответствующих усилий МБР.
Независимые оценки показывают, что каждый отдельно взятый МБР демонстрирует хорошие результа-
ты работы, но в рамках системы эффективность недостаточна.
В данной статье предлагаются пути улучшения согласованности политики и операционной деятельности 
между МБР и описывается, как совершенствование управления со стороны акционеров может способствовать 
достижению этой цели. Основное внимание уделяется необходимости увеличения финансирования инвестиций 
в развивающихся странах, но статья должна рассматриваться в более широком контексте управления процес-
сами глобализации, особенно в отношении торговли и финансовой стабильности.
Ключевые слова: многосторонние банки развития; цели устойчивого развития; инвестиции; развитие 
человеческого потенциала; глобальное управление
Для цитирования: Бхаттачария А., Харас Х., Плант М., Приццон А. (2018) Новая глобальная повестка и 
будущее многосторонних банков развития // Вестник международных организаций. Т. 13. № 2. С. 101–124. 
DOI: 10.17323/1996-7845-2018-02-06.
Текст «Новая глобальная повестка и будущее многосторонних банков развития» А. Бхаттачарии, 
Х. Хараса, М. Планта, А. Приццон переведен и опубликован с разрешения Института Брукингса (The 
Brookings Institution), Института зарубежного развития (ODI) и Центра глобального развития (CGD)2.25
© Brookings, ODI & CGD. Институт Брукингса (The Brookings Institution), Институт зарубежного 
развития (ODI) и Центр глобального развития (CGD) не несут ответственности за качество пере-
вода. 
Источники
Ahluwalia M.S., Summers L., Velasco A., Birdsall N., Morris S. (2016) Multilateral Development Banking for 
This Century’s Development Challenges. Five Recommendations to Shareholders of the Old and New Mul-
tilateral Development Banks Project Directors. Режим доступа: https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/
multilateral-development-banking-report-five-recommendations.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
2 Bhattacharya A., Kharas H., Plant M., Prizzon A. (2018) The New Global Agenda and the Future 
of the Multilateral Development Bank System. The Brookings Institution, Overseas Development Institute 
(ODI), the Center for Global Development (CGD). February 2018. Режим доступа: https://www.brookings.
edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/epg_paper_on_future_of_mdb_system_jan301.pdf.

123
НОВАЯ ПОВЕСТКА ДЛЯ ГЛОБАЛЬНОГО УПРАВЛЕНИЯ
African Development Bank (2011) Memorandum of Understanding between European Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development and the African Development Bank and the African Development Fund. 10 September. 
Режим доступа: https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Legal-Documents/signed%20
memorandum%20of%20understanding%20between%20ebrd%20and%20adb%20and%20adf.pdf  (дата об-
ращения: 25.05.2018).
Bhattacharya et al. (2016) Delivering on Sustainable Infrastructure for Better Development and Better Climate. 
Brookings/LSE/NCE. Режим доступа: https://www.brookings.edu/research/delivering-on-sustainable-in-
frastructure-for-better-development-and-better-climate/ (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Brown S. (2016) Putting Paris into Practice: Foreign Aid, National Ownership, and Donor Alignment in Mali 
and Ghana. WIDER Working Paper 2016/145. December.
Gurria J.A., Volker P. (2001) The Role of the Multilateral Development Banks in Emerging Economies. The 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Humphrey C., Prizzon A. (2014) Guarantees for Development. A Review of Multilateral Development Bank 
Operations. Режим доступа: https://www.odi.org/publications/9130-guarantees-development-review-multi-
lateral-development-bank-operations (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Humphrey C. (2017) Six Proposals to Strengthen the Finances of Multilateral Development Banks. ODI Work-
ing and Discussion Paper. April. Режим доступа: https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-docu-
ments/11451.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
IEG (2014) World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: An Inde-
pendent Evaluation. P. xiii. Режим доступа: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16999 
(дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
IMF (2017) World Economic Outlook Database. October 2017. Режим доступа: https://www.imf.org/exter-
nal/pubs/ft/weo/2017/02/weodata/index.aspx (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Kharas H. (2015) The Post-2015 Agenda and the Evolution of the World Bank Group. The Brookings Institu-
tion, GED Working Paper 92, September 2015. Режим доступа: https://www.brookings.edu/wp- content/
uploads/2016/07/Kharas-WBG-evolution-and-post2015-agenda-2.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Kharas H., Rogerson A. (2017) Global Development Trends and Challenges: Horizon 2025 revisited, ODI 
Research Reports and Studies, October. Режим доступа: https://www.odi.org/publications/10940-global-
development-trends-and-challenges-horizon-2025-revisited (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Koch S., Molenaers N. (2015) The Europeanisation of Budget Support: Do Government Capacity and Au-
tonomy Matter? // European Politics and Society. Vol. 17. No. 1. P. 90–104.
OECD (2017) Amounts Mobilized from the Private Sector by Official Development Finance Interventions. 
Режим доступа: https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-data/
Preliminary- results-mobilisation.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2017).
OECD (2012) The Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation. Режим доступа: http://www.
oecd.org/development/effectiveness/busanpartnership.htm (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
OECD (2003) The Rome Declaration. Режим доступа: https://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/31451637.
pdf (дата обращения:  25.05.2018).
McKechnie A. (2016) Fragility, Conflict and Violence as Global Public Goods: Strengthening Engagement by 
Multilateral Development Banks. ODI Research Report. October. 
Meltzer A.H. (2004) The Report of the International Financial Institution Advisory Commission: Comments 
on the Critics // The IMF and its Critics: Reform of Global Financial Architecture / D. Vines, L. Christopher 
(eds). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. P. 106–123.
Mustapha S., Prizzon A. (forthcoming) Taking Stock of Debt Relief Initiatives 20 Years on and What the New 
Development Finance Landscape Means for External Public Debt Sustainability. ODI.
UNCTAD (2016) The Economic Development in Africa Report 2016: Debt Dynamics and Development Fi-
nance in Africa. Режим доступа: unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/aldcafrica2016_en.pdf  (дата обраще-
ния: 25.05.2018).

124
ВЕСТНИК МЕЖДУНАРОДНЫХ ОРГАНИЗАЦИЙ. Т. 13. № 2 (2018)
World Bank (2011) World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington DC: 
World Bank. Режим доступа: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/4389 (дата обращения: 
25.05.2018). 
World Bank. Group (2014) World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: 
An Independent Evaluation. Режим доступа: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16999 
(дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
World Bank (2017) Forward Look, A Vision for the World Bank Group in 2030 – Progress and Challeng-
es. March. Режим доступа: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/devcommint/Documentation/23745169/
DC2017-0002.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
Zedillo E. (2009) Repowering the World Bank for the 21st Century. Режим доступа: http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/NEWS/Resources/WBGovernancecommissionreport.pdf (дата обращения: 25.05.2018).
