UCLA
Ufahamu: A Journal of African Studies
Title
Black Study, Black Struggle
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cj8q196
Journal
Ufahamu: A Journal of African Studies, 40(2)
ISSN
0041-5715
Author
Kelley, Robin D. G.
Publication Date
2018
DOI
10.5070/F7402040947
Copyright Information
Copyright 2018 by the author(s). All rights reserved unless otherwise 
indicated. Contact the author(s) for any necessary permissions. Learn 
more at https://escholarship.org/terms
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ufahamu 40:2  Summer 2018
Black Study, Black Struggle1
Robin D. G. Kelley
In the fall of 2015, college campuses were engulfed by fires ignited 
in the streets of Ferguson, Missouri. This is not to say that college 
students had until then been quiet in the face of police violence 
against black Americans. Throughout the previous year, it had 
often been college students who hit the streets, blocked traffic, 
occupied the halls of justice and malls of America, disrupted 
political campaign rallies, and risked arrest to protest the torture 
and suffocation of Eric Garner, the abuse and death of Sandra 
Bland, the executions of Tamir Rice, Ezell Ford, Tanisha Ander­
son, Walter Scott, Tony Robinson, Freddie Gray, ad infinitum.
That the fire this time spread from the town to the campus 
is consistent with historical patterns. The campus revolts of the 
1960s, for example, followed the Harlem and Watts rebellions, 
the freedom movement in the South, and the rise of militant 
organizations in the cities. But the size, speed, intensity, and char­
acter of recent student uprisings caught much of the country off 
guard. Protests against campus racism and the ethics of universi­
ties’ financial entanglements erupted on nearly ninety campuses, 
including Brandeis, Yale, Princeton, Brown, Harvard, Claremont 
McKenna, Smith, Amherst, UCLA, Oberlin, Tufts, and the Univer­
sity of North Carolina, both Chapel Hill and Greensboro. These 
demonstrations were led largely by black students, as well as coali­
tions made up of students of color, queer folks, undocumented 
immigrants, and allied whites.
What I offer here are a few observations and speculations 
about the movement, its self-conception, and its demands, many 
of which focus on making the university more hospitable for 
black students. I am not opposed to this. Nor am I questioning 
the courageous students who have done more to disrupt univer­
sity business-as-usual than any movement in the last half-century. 
Instead I want to draw attention to the contradictory impulses 
within the movement: the tension between reform and revolution, 
between desiring to belong and rejecting the university as a cog 
in the neoliberal order. I want to think about what it means for 
© 2018 Robin D. G. Kelley

154
UFAHAMU
black students to seek love from an institution incapable of loving 
them—of loving anyone, perhaps—and to manifest this yearn­
ing by framing their lives largely through a lens of trauma. And I 
want to think about what it means for black students to choose to 
follow Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s call to become subver­
sives in the academy, exposing and resisting its labor exploitation, 
its gentrifying practices, its endowments built on misery, its class 
privilege often camouflaged in multicultural garb, and its commit­
ments to war and security.
It is fair to say that most black students have minimal interest 
in joining the current wave of activism. Many are not politically 
radical, while others feel that they do not yet have the discern­
ment to know if they are. Others fear that an activist past may 
haunt them in the future, while the majority is simply trying to 
get through school and join the ranks of professionals. This essay 
does not attempt to offer such students an invitation to activism, 
although that would be a worthy project. Rather, I am interested 
in speaking to those who are already activists, specifically about 
the ideological fissures in their movement and what these might 
tell us about the character of contemporary black movements, the 
future of the university, and what I believe is a crisis of political 
education. And while crises reveal contradictions, they also signal 
opportunities.
In particular, I challenge student activists to not cleave their 
activism from their intellectual lives or mistakenly believe that 
because the university does not offer them the education they 
crave, it is beyond their reach. There is a long history of black 
activists repurposing university resources to instruct themselves 
and one another—to self-radicalize, in effect. This is not to say 
that today’s student activists should do exactly as was done in the 
past, but historical models may provide valuable insights for those 
seeking novel solutions. Moreover, I encourage student activists to 
carefully consider the language they use to frame their grievances. 
In particular, I argue that while trauma can be an entrance into 
activism, it is not in itself a destination and may even trick activists 
into adopting the language of the neoliberal institutions they are 
at pains to reject.
The epicenter of recent student activism, the University 
of Missouri, Columbia, is a two-hour drive from the spot where 
former Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson ended Michael 

155
Kelley
Brown’s life. In November the activism of a coalition called Con­
cerned Student 1950 (the year “Mizzou” admitted its first black 
student)—coupled with a hunger-striking graduate student and 
a threatened strike by the varsity football team—forced the 
president and chancellor to resign and the university’s Board of 
Curators to acknowledge a long history of campus racism. It was 
a victory for students of color at Mizzou and elsewhere, who have 
been fighting deeply entrenched racism for years. Since President 
Obama took office in 2009, the U.S. Department of Education’s 
Office for Civil Rights has received more than a thousand formal 
complaints of racial harassment at colleges and universities.
While students on various campuses have done everything 
from addressing racial incidents to criticizing university invest­
ments, the national trend is to push for measures that would make 
campuses more hospitable to students of color: greater diversity, 
inclusion, safety, and affordability. That means more students, fac­
ulty, staff, and administrators of color; “safe spaces” and mental 
health support; reduced or free tuition; curricular changes; and the 
renaming of campus buildings and monuments after significant 
nonwhite figures. Similarly the Obama administration convened 
a meeting of administrators, faculty, students, and lawyers to pro­
mote ways to “foster supportive educational environments.” As 
former Secretary of Education Arne Duncan put it, college should 
be about “finding a home and a community” and ensuring that 
campuses are “welcoming places for learning for every student.”
Indeed, to some extent campus protests articulated the sense 
of betrayal and disappointment that many black students felt upon 
finding that their campuses failed to live up to their PR. Many stu­
dents had come to the university expecting to find a welcoming 
place, a nurturing faculty, and protective administration. If they 
believed this, it was in no small part because university recruiters 
wanted them to: tours for prospective students, orientations, and 
slickly produced brochures often rely on metaphors of family and 
community, highlight campus diversity, and emphasize the sense of 
belonging that young scholars enjoy.
But while the rebellions succeeded in getting the attention of 
administrators and trustees, as well as the national media, students 
endured an awful backlash—including credible death threats—
that tested the limits of the family metaphor, which to many 
now seems both misguided and disingenuous. Conservatives and 

156
UFAHAMU
liberals alike trivialized their activism, dismissing the protesters 
as oversensitive whiners whose demands for speech codes, dress 
codes, and mandatory anti-racist courses threaten the university’s 
integrity and impede critical thought.
The rancor, however, has obscured fundamental differences 
within the movement. Student’s core demands for greater diver­
sity, inclusion, and cultural-competency training converge with 
their critics’ fundamental belief that the university possesses a 
unique teleology: it is supposed to be an enlightened space free 
of bias and prejudice, but the pursuit of this promise is hindered 
by structural racism and patriarchy. Though adherents of this 
perspective differ in their assessments of the extent to which the 
university falls short of this ideal, they agree that it is perfectible.
I do not. The fully racialized social and epistemological 
architecture upon which the modern university is built cannot 
be radically transformed by “simply” adding darker faces, safer 
spaces, better training, and a curriculum that acknowledges his­
torical and contemporary oppressions. This is a bit like asking for 
more black police officers as a strategy to curb state violence. We 
need more faculty of color, but integration alone is not enough. 
Likewise, what is the point of providing resources to recruit more 
students of color without changing admissions criteria and pro­
cedures? Why do we stay wedded to standard “achievement” 
measures instead of, say, open admissions?
A smaller, more radical contingent of protesters is less san­
guine about the university’s capacity to change. Rejecting the 
family metaphor, these students understand that universities are 
not walled off from the “real world” but instead are corporate 
entities in their own right. These students are not fighting for a 
“supportive” educational environment, but a liberated one that 
not only promotes but also models social and economic justice. 
One such student coalition is the Black Liberation Collective, 
which has three demands:
1) that the numbers of black students and faculty reflect the 
national percentage of black folks in the country;
2) that tuition be free for black and indigenous students;
3) that universities divest from prisons and invest in 
communities.
Likewise the demands from protesters at UNC, Chapel Hill 
are a model for radical global politics. They include ending ties to 

157
Kelley
prisons and sweated labor; retraining and disarming campus police; 
offering free childcare for students, staff, and faculty; and paying a 
minimum wage of $25 per hour for workers, with the addendum 
“that all administrators be compensated at the same rate as work­
ers.” Many will say these are not winnable demands, but winning is 
not always the point. Unveiling the university’s exploitative prac­
tices and its deeply embedded structures of racism, sexism, and class 
inequality can be profound acts of demystification on their own.
But still, a common thread runs through both the more 
modest and more radical critics of universities. Both demand that 
universities change in ways that we cannot expect them to change. 
The first group asks universities to deliver on their promise to be 
post-racial havens, but that will not happen in a surrounding sea 
of white supremacy. The second sees universities as the leading 
edge in a socially revolutionary fight. While I share the transfor­
mative aims of the latter, I think that universities are not up the 
task. Certainly universities can and will become more diverse and 
marginally more welcoming for black students, but as institutions 
they will never be engines of social transformation. Such a task is 
ultimately the work of political education and activism. By defini­
tion it takes place outside the university.
Fugitive Study
Black studies was conceived not just outside the university but 
in opposition to a Eurocentric university culture with ties to cor­
porate and military power. Having emerged from mass revolt, 
insurgent black studies scholars developed institutional models 
based in, but largely independent of, the academy. In later decades, 
these institutions were—with varying degrees of eagerness—
incorporated into the university proper in response to pressure to 
embrace multiculturalism.
In 1969 Vincent Harding, Stephen Henderson, Abdul Alkali­
mat, A. B. Spellman, Larry Rushing, and Council Taylor founded 
the Institute of the Black World (IBW) at Atlanta University in 
order to mobilize the “collective scholarship” of black intellectu­
als to confront racism and colonialism, here and abroad. Black 
students, artists, and activists at the University of Chicago founded 
the Communiversity, offering courses in African history and Marx­
ist political economy to community members on Chicago’s South 

158
UFAHAMU
Side. Less than two decades later, the United Coalition Against 
Racism, a student organization at the University of Michigan, 
established the Ella Baker – Nelson Mandela Center for Anti-
Racist Education (BMC). The center was never conceived as a 
safe space for students of color but rather as a resource for anti-
racist struggles “dedicated to the principle of thinking in order to 
act.” The BMC offered leadership training, sponsored cultural and 
educational events, provided rare anti-racist literature, and served 
as a radical place for study and critical engagement open to every­
one, especially nonuniversity working-class residents.
In fact, it was during a talk held at IBW that the Guyanese 
historian Walter Rodney, some six years before he was martyred, 
urged radical black scholars to become “guerrilla intellectuals.” By 
this he meant freeing ourselves from the “Babylonian captivity” 
of bourgeois society, moving beyond disciplinary imperatives, and 
“grounding” with the people so as to engage, act, and think col­
lectively in terms of social movements. Recently, Rodney’s notion 
of the guerrilla intellectual has been resuscitated and transformed 
in Stefano Harney and Fred Moten’s The Undercommons: Fugitive 
Planning and Black Study.
Harney and Moten disavow the very idea that the university 
is, or can ever be, an enlightened place, by which I mean a place 
that would actively seek to disrupt the reproduction of our cul­
ture’s classed, racialized, nationalized, gendered, moneyed, and 
militarized stratifications. Instead they argue that the university 
is dedicated to professionalization, order, scientific efficiency, 
counterinsurgency, and war—wars on terror, sovereign nations, 
communism, drugs, and gangs. The authors advocate refuge in and 
sabotage from the undercommons, a subaltern, subversive way of 
being in but not of the university. The undercommons is a fugi­
tive network where a commitment to abolition and collectivity 
prevails over a university culture bent on creating socially isolated 
individuals whose academic skepticism and claims of objectivity 
leave the world-as-it-is intact.
Unlike Rodney’s guerrilla intellectuals, Harney and Moten’s 
guerrillas are not preparing to strike, planning to seize power, 
contesting the university (or the state; the difference isn’t always 
clear)—at least not on the terms they have set. To do so would be 
to recognize the university and its legitimacy and to be invested 
in its regimes of professionalization. Instead Harney and Moten 

159
Kelley
argue that the university’s power over our lives is illusory. It lulls 
us into believing that politics—to lobby for access to, or control 
over, such institutions—is our only salvation. The book is a clarion 
call to think together, to plan together in undisciplined assembly. 
When The Undercommons hit the Internet—first as a 2008 essay 
and then as a 2013 collection of essays—it spread like wildfire 
among the PhD precariat and radical-thinking graduate students. 
For many young scholars cobbling together a life adjuncting, 
Harney and Moten’s critique of the university spoke an essential 
truth: “It cannot be denied that the university is a place of refuge, 
and it cannot be accepted that the university is a place of enlight­
enment. In the face of these conditions one can only sneak into 
the university and steal what one can.”
Contrast this with black student protesters who appeal to the 
university to “repair a broken community,” to make students “feel 
safe, accepted, supported and like they belong,” and to remedy 
their sense of alienation through “intense ‘inclusion and belonging’ 
training for all levels of students, staff, faculty, and administration.” 
Why black students might seek belonging and inclusion over refuge 
is understandable, given their expressed sense of alienation and 
isolation, combined with the university’s liberal use of the family 
metaphor. It also explains why students are asking the university to 
implement curriculum changes—namely, the creation of cultural-
competency courses, more diverse course reading lists, and classes 
dedicated to the study of race, gender, sexuality, and social justice. 
They not only acknowledge the university’s magisterium in all things 
academic, but they also desperately wish to change the campus cul­
ture, to make this bounded world less hostile and less racist.
But granting the university so much authority over our 
reading choices, and emphasizing a respect for difference over 
a critique of power, comes at a cost. Students not only come to 
see the curriculum as an oppressor that delimits their interro­
gation of the world, but they also come to see racism largely in 
personal terms.
The Personal Is Not Always Political
Second only to a desire for increased diversity, better mental 
health services were a chief priority for student protesters. Activ­
ists framed their concerns and grievances in the language of 

160
UFAHAMU
personal trauma. We shouldn’t be surprised. While every genera­
tion of black Americans has experienced unrelenting violence, this 
is the first one compelled to witness virtually all of it, to endure the 
snuffing out of black lives in real time, looped over and over again, 
until the next murder knocks it off the news. We are also talk­
ing about a generation that has lived through two of the longest 
wars in U.S. history, raised on a culture of spectacle where horrific 
acts of violence are readily available on their smartphones. What 
Henry Giroux insightfully identifies as an addiction does nothing 
to inure or desensitize young people to violence. On the contrary, 
it anchors violence in their collective consciousness, produces 
fear and paranoia—wrapped elegantly in thrill—and shrouds the 
many ways capitalism, militarism, and racism are killing black and 
brown people.
So one can easily see why the language of trauma might 
appeal to black students. Trauma is real; it is no joke. Mental 
health services and counseling are urgently needed. But read­
ing black experience through trauma can easily slip into 
thinking of ourselves as victims and objects rather than agents, 
subjected to centuries of gratuitous violence that have struc­
tured and overdetermined our very being. In the argot of our day, 
“bodies”—vulnerable and threatening bodies—increasingly stand 
in for actual people with names, experiences, dreams, and desires. 
I suspect that the popularity of Ta-Nehisi Coates’s Between the 
World and Me (2015), especially among black college students, 
rests on his singular emphasis on fear, trauma, and the black 
body. He writes:
In America, it is traditional to destroy the black body—it 
is heritage. Enslavement was not merely the antiseptic bor­
rowing of labor—it is not so easy to get a human being to 
commit their body against its own elemental interest. And 
so enslavement must be casual wrath and random manglings, 
the gashing of heads and brains blown out over the river as 
the body seeks to escape. It must be rape so regular as to 
be industrial. . . . The spirit and soul are the body and brain, 
which are destructible—that is precisely why they are so pre­
cious. And the soul did not escape. The spirit did not steal 
away on gospel wings.

161
Kelley
Coates implies that the person is the brain, and the brain just 
another organ to be crushed with the rest of the body’s parts. Ear­
lier in the book, he makes the startling declaration that enslaved 
people “knew nothing but chains.” I do not deny the violence 
Coates so eloquently describes here, and I am sympathetic to his 
atheistic skepticism. But what sustained enslaved African people 
was a memory of freedom, dreams of seizing it, and conspiracies to 
enact it—fugitive planning, if you will. If we reduce the enslaved 
to mere fungible bodies, we cannot possibly understand how they 
created families, communities, sociality; how they fled and loved 
and worshiped and defended themselves; how they created the 
world’s first social democracy.
Moreover, to identify anti-black violence as heritage may 
be true in a general sense, but it obscures the dialectic that pro­
duced and reproduced the violence of a regime dependent on 
black life for its profitability. It was, after all, the resisting black 
body that needed “correction.” Violence was used not only to 
break bodies but to discipline people who refused enslavement. 
And the impulse to resist is neither involuntary nor solitary. It 
is a choice made in community, made possible by community, 
and informed by memory, tradition, and witness. If Africans were 
entirely compliant and docile, there would have been no need for 
vast expenditures on corrections, security, and violence. Resistance 
is our heritage.
And resistance is our healing. Through collective struggle, 
we alter our circumstances; contain, escape, or possibly eviscerate 
the source of trauma; recover our bodies; reclaim and redeem our 
dead; and make ourselves whole. It is difficult to see this in a world 
where words such as trauma, PTSD, micro-aggression, and triggers 
have virtually replaced oppression, repression, and subjugation. 
Naomi Wallace, a brilliant playwright whose work explores trauma 
in the context of race, sexuality, class, war, and empire, muses:
Mainstream America is less threatened by the ‘trauma’ theory 
because it doesn’t place economic justice at its core and takes 
the focus out of the realm of justice and into psychology; out 
of the streets, communities, into the singular experience (even 
if experienced in common) of the individual.
Similarly, George Lipsitz observes that emphasizing “inte­
riority,” personal pain, and feeling elevates “the cultivation of 

162
UFAHAMU
sympathy over the creation of social justice.” This is partly why 
demands for reparations to address historical and ongoing racism 
are so antithetical to modern liberalism.
Managing trauma does not require dismantling structural 
racism, which is why university administrators focus on avoid­
ing triggers rather than implementing zero-tolerance policies for 
racism or sexual assault. Buildings will be renamed and safe spaces 
for people of color will be created out of a sliver of university real 
estate, but proposals to eliminate tuition and forgive student debt 
for the descendants of the dispossessed and the enslaved will be 
derided as absurd. This is also why diversity and cultural-com­
petency training are the most popular strategies for addressing 
campus racism. As if racism were a manifestation of our “incom­
petent” handling of “difference.” If we cannot love the other, we 
can at least learn to hear, respect, understand, and “tolerate” her. 
Cultural competency also means reckoning with white privilege, 
coming to terms with unconscious bias and the myriad ways white 
folks benefit from current racial arrangements. Powerful as this 
might be, the solution to racism still is shifted to the realm of self-
help and human resources, resting on self-improvement or the 
hiring of a consultant or trainer to help us reach our goal.
Cultural-competency training, greater diversity, and demands 
for multicultural curricula represent both a resistance to and 
manifestation of our current “postracial” moment. In Are We All 
Postracial Yet? (2015), David Theo Goldberg correctly sees post­
racialism as a neoliberal revision of multicultural discourse, whose 
proposed remedies to address racism would in fact resuscitate 
late-century multiculturalism. But why hold on to the policies 
and promises of multiculturalism and diversity, especially since 
they have done nothing to dislodge white supremacy? Indeed 
I want to suggest that the triumph of multiculturalism marked 
a defeat for a radical anti-racist vision. True, multiculturalism 
emerged in response to struggles waged by the Black Freedom 
movement and other oppressed groups in the 1960s and ’70s. 
But the programmatic adoption of diversity, inclusion, and mul­
ticulturalism vampirized the energy of a radical movement that 
began by demanding the complete transformation of the social 
order and the eradication of all forms of racial, gender, sexual, and 
class hierarchy.

163
Kelley
The point of liberal multiculturalism was not to address the 
historical legacies of racism, dispossession, and injustice but rather 
to bring some people into the fold of a “society no longer seen as 
racially unjust.” What did it bring us? Black elected officials and 
black CEOs who helped manage the greatest transfer of wealth 
to the rich and oversee the continued erosion of the welfare 
state; the displacement, deportation, and deterioration of black 
and brown communities; mass incarceration; and planetary war. 
We talk about breaking glass ceilings in corporate America while 
building more jail cells for the rest. The triumph of liberal multi­
culturalism also meant a shift from a radical anti-capitalist critique 
to a politics of recognition. This means, for example, that we now 
embrace the right of same-sex couples to marry so long as they 
do not challenge the institution itself, which is still modeled upon 
the exchanging of property; likewise we accept the right of people 
of color, women, and queer people to serve in the military, killing 
and torturing around the world.
At the same time, contemporary calls for cultural competence 
and tolerance reflect neoliberal logic by emphasizing individual 
responsibility and suffering, shifting race from the public sphere 
to the psyche. The postracial, Goldberg writes, “renders individu­
als solely accountable for their own actions and expressions, not 
for their group’s.” Tolerance in its multicultural guise, as Wendy 
Brown taught us, is the liberal answer to managing difference but 
with no corresponding transformation in the conditions that, in 
the first place, marked certain bodies as suspicious, deviant, abject, 
or illegible. Tolerance, therefore, depoliticizes genuine struggles 
for justice and power:
Depoliticization involves construing inequality, subordina­
tion, marginalization, and social conflict, which all require 
political analysis and political solutions, as personal and indi­
vidual, on the one hand, or as natural, religious, or cultural on 
the other. Tolerance works along both vectors of depoliticiza­
tion—it personalizes and it naturalizes or culturalizes—and 
sometimes it intertwines them.
But how can we embrace our students and acknowledge 
their pain while remaining wary of a culture that reduces struc­
tural oppression to misunderstanding and psychology?

164
UFAHAMU
Love, Study, Struggle
Taped inside the top drawer of my desk is a small scrap of paper 
with three words scrawled across it: “Love, Study, Struggle.” It 
serves as a daily reminder of what I am supposed to be doing. 
Black study and resistance must begin with love. James Bald­
win understood love-as-agency probably better than anyone. For 
him it meant to love ourselves as black people; it meant making 
love the motivation for making revolution; it meant envisioning 
a society where everyone is embraced, where there is no oppres­
sion, where every life is valued—even those who may once have 
been our oppressors. It did not mean seeking white people’s love 
and acceptance or seeking belonging in the world created by our 
oppressor. In The Fire Next Time (1963), he is unequivocal: “I do 
not know many Negroes who are eager to be ‘accepted’ by white 
people, still less to be loved by them; they, the blacks, simply don’t 
wish to be beaten over the head by the whites every instant of 
our brief passage on this planet.” But here is the catch: if we are 
committed to genuine freedom, we have no choice but to love all. 
To love all is to fight relentlessly to end exploitation and oppres­
sion everywhere, even on behalf of those who think they hate us. 
This was Baldwin’s point—perhaps his most misunderstood and 
reviled point.
To love this way requires relentless struggle, deep study, and 
critique. Limiting our ambit to suffering, resistance, and achieve­
ment is not enough. We must go to the root—the historical, 
political, social, cultural, ideological, material, economic root—
of oppression in order to understand its negation, the prospect 
of our liberation. Going to the root illuminates what is hidden 
from us, largely because most structures of oppression and all of 
their various entanglements are simply not visible and not felt. 
For example, if we argue that state violence is merely a manifesta­
tion of anti-blackness because that is what we see and feel, we are 
left with no theory of the state and have no way of understanding 
racialized police violence in places such as Atlanta and Detroit, 
where most cops are black, unless we turn to some metaphysical 
explanation.
For my generation, the formal classroom was never the 
space for deep critique precisely because it was not a place of 
love. The classroom was—and still is—a performative space, 

165
Kelley
where faculty and students compete with each other. Through 
study groups, we created our own intellectual communities held 
together by principle and love, though the specters of sectari­
anism, ego, and just-plain childishness blurred our vision and 
threatened our camaraderie. Still, the political study group was 
our lifeblood—both on and off campus. We lived by Karl Marx’s 
pithy 1844 statement:
But if the designing of the future and the proclamation of 
ready-made solutions for all time is not our affair, then we 
realize all the more clearly what we have to accomplish in the 
present—I am speaking of a ruthless criticism of everything 
existing, ruthless in two senses: The criticism must not be 
afraid of its own conclusions, nor of conflict with the powers 
that be.
Study groups introduced me to C. L. R. James, Frantz Fanon, 
Walter Rodney, Barbara Smith, Angela Davis, Karl Marx, Fried­
rich Engels, Vladimir Lenin, Chancellor Williams, George E. 
M. James, Shulamith Firestone, Kwame Nkrumah, Kwame Turé, 
Rosa Luxemburg, Antonio Gramsci, Chinweizu Ibekwe, Amílcar 
Cabral, and others. These texts were our sources of social critique 
and weapons in our class war on the bourgeois canon. As self-
styled activist-intellectuals, it never occurred to us to refuse to 
read a text simply because it validated the racism, sexism, free-
market ideology, and bourgeois liberalism against which we railed. 
Nothing was off limits. On the contrary, delving into these works 
only sharpened our critical faculties.
Love and study cannot exist without struggle, and strug­
gle cannot occur solely inside the refuge we call the university. 
Being grounded in the world we wish to make is fundamental. 
As I argued in Freedom Dreams nearly fifteen years ago, “Social 
movements generate new knowledge, new theories, new questions. 
The most radical ideas often grow out of a concrete intellectual 
engagement with the problems of aggrieved populations confront­
ing systems of oppression.” Ironically I wrote these words with 
my students in mind, many of whom were involved in campus 
struggles, feeling a bit rudderless but believing that the only way 
to make themselves into authentic activists was to leave the books 
and radical theories at home or in their dorms. The undercom­
mons offers students a valuable model of study that takes for 

166
UFAHAMU
granted the indivisibility of thought and struggle, not unlike its 
antecedent, the Mississippi Freedom Schools.
The Mississippi Freedom Schools, initially launched by the 
Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee as part of the 
1964 Freedom Summer, were intended to create “an educational 
experience for students which will make it possible for them to 
challenge the myths of our society, to perceive more clearly its 
realities and to find alternatives, and ultimately, new directions for 
action.” The curriculum included traditional subjects that publicly 
funded black schools did not offer, but they were never designed 
to be simply better versions of the traditional liberal education 
model. Rather, students examined power along the axes of race 
and class. Students and teachers worked together to reveal how 
ruling whites profited from Jim Crow, and they included in their 
analysis the precarious position of poor whites. Rural black kids 
of all ages learned to distinguish between “Material Things and 
Soul Things,” developing a trenchant critique of materialism. The 
freedom schools challenged the myth that the civil rights move­
ment was just about claiming a place in mainstream society. They 
didn’t want equal opportunity in a burning house; they wanted to 
build a new house.
Perhaps one of the best historical models of radical, collec­
tive, grounded intellectual work was launched by black feminists 
Patricia Robinson, Patricia Haden, and Donna Middleton, work­
ing with community residents of Mt. Vernon, New York, many 
of whom were unemployed, low-wage workers, welfare mothers, 
and children. Together, they organized and read as a commu­
nity—from elders to children. They saw education as a vehicle for 
collective transformation and an incubator of knowledge, not a 
path to upward mobility and material wealth. Influenced by Frantz 
Fanon, they interrogated and critiqued racism, sexism, slavery, 
and capitalism, emphasizing the ways in which racism produced a 
kind of psychosis among poor black people. Their study and activ­
ism culminated in a collectively written, independently published 
book called Lessons from the Damned (1973). It is a remarkable 
book, with essays by adults as well as children—some as young as 
twelve, who developed trenchant criticisms of public school teach­
ers and the education system.
Although they acknowledged the unavoidability of address­
ing trauma, they understood that one’s activism could not stop 

167
Kelley
there. In a section titled “The Revolt of Poor Black Women,” the 
authors insisted that a genuine revolution requires the overthrow 
of capitalism, the elimination of male supremacy, and the transfor­
mation of self. Revolution, they argued, is supposed to usher in a 
brand new beginning; it is driven by the power of freed imagina­
tion, not the dead weight of the past. As Robinson, Haden, and 
Middleton wrote, “All revolutionaries, regardless of sex, are the 
smashers of myths and the destroyers of illusion. They have always 
died and lived again to build new myths. They dare to dream of a 
utopia, a new kind of synthesis and equilibrium.”
At UCLA, where I teach, these same insights are taking a 
new form. A group of graduate students launched their version of 
the undercommons in January 2016. Based on the Freedom School 
model, UCLA’s undercommons holds weekly outdoor meetings 
featuring activists from groups such as Black Lives Matter, Criti­
cal Resistance, and the L.A. Poverty Department. Faculty and 
students lead discussions. These events have drawn as many as 150 
students, and the community continues to grow. The primary orga­
nizers—Thabisile Griffin, Marques Vestal, Olufemi O. Taiwo, Sa 
Whitley, and Shamell Bell—are all doctoral students who see the 
university as a site of contestation, a place of refuge, and a space 
for collective work. Their vision is radical and radically ambitious: 
they are abolitionists committed to dismantling prisons and redi­
recting their funding to education and the repair of inequality. 
Their ultimate goal is to create in the present a future that over­
throws the logic of neoliberalism.
These students are demonstrating how we might remake the 
world. They are ruthless in their criticism and fearless in the face 
of the powers that be. They model what it means to think through 
crisis, to fight for the eradication of oppression in all its forms, 
whether it directly affects us or not. They are in the university but 
not of the university. They work to understand and advance the 
movements in the streets, seeking to eliminate racism and state 
violence, preserve black life, defend the rights of the marginalized 
(from undocumented immigrants to transfolk), and challenge the 
current order that has brought us so much misery. And they do 
this work not without criticism and self-criticism, not by pandering 
to popular trends or powerful people, a cult of celebrity or Twitter, 
and not by telling lies, claiming easy answers, or avoiding the ideas 
that challenge us all.

168
UFAHAMU
Notes
1	 This essay was first published in the Boston Review, on March 07, 2016. We 
reprint it here with the author’s permission.