 
 
Special Issue 
Constitutional Identity in the Age of Global Migration 
The Rise of an Ethnocultural Constitutional Identity in the 
Jurisprudence of the East Central European Courts 
 
 
By Kriszta Kovács* 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The recent trend in East Central European jurisprudence is that courts apply an ethnocultural 
understanding of identity, thereby putting European integration in peril.  Although the EU is 
clearly committed to shared values and principles, Article 4(2) of the Treaty on European 
Union emphasizes that “the Union shall respect the national identities of the Member 
States.” Due to the recent migration flow in Europe, the Member States are currently 
attempting to (re)define themselves and offer a legal definition of identity. East Central 
European Member States, by labelling ethnocultural national identity as constitutional 
identity, apply Article 4(2) as a means of derogating from some of their obligations under EU 
law.  Despite the vast literature available on national identity and its role in EU law, little 
attention has been paid to the recently emerging trend of judicial reinvention of identity in 
East Central Europe. This is what this Article offers. It focuses on the Visegrád Group, which 
consists of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia. The Visegrád countries (V4) 
are united in their views on rejecting migrant relocation quotas in the EU and define their 
exclusionary constitutional identities accordingly. The main subject of the Article is the 
relevant case law of the V4 constitutional courts. These courts have the authoritative role in 
enforcing nation-state policies based upon ethnocultural considerations.  The Article 
provides a comparative-analytical description of the judicial interpretations of constitutional 
identity in these countries based on which we can better understand the recent East Central 
European trend of disintegration. 
 
 
                                            
* Kriszta Kovács is Associate Professor of Comparative Constitutional Law at the UNESCO Chair on Human Rights 
and Peace at Eötvös Loránd University (ELTE) Faculty of Social Sciences, Budapest. The author is responsible for the 
choice and presentation of information contained in this article as well as for the opinions expressed therein, which 
are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. (kriszta.kovacs@tatk.elte.hu). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1704 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
A. Introduction 
 
The concept of sovereignty has long framed the discourse on the allocation of competencies 
within the EU and on the structure and function of the EU. After the entering into force of 
the Lisbon Treaty, the relevance of the concept of sovereignty weakened and the concept 
of national identity became more relevant, because Article 4(2) of the Treaty on European 
Union (TEU) obliges the EU to respect the national identity of Member States. The EU 
Member States use this concept to offer a legal definition of their identity. And although the 
TEU explicitly uses the notion of national identity, Article 4(2) by focusing on state structures, 
suggests that national identity has a constitutional bearing.1 Thereby national identity taken 
in a socio-constitutional sense became a legal concept of EU law.2 
 
Recently in East Central Europe, forceful political claims have been made in the name of 
national identity, and such claims have induced various kinds of constitutional 
transformation in East Central Europe.3 It is worth examining and analyzing how V44 apply 
the concept of identity. The reason for choosing them is that they all voted against the quota 
scheme introduced by EU Council Decision 2015/1601.5 Hungary and Slovakia filed two 
separate actions for annulment against the Decision to the Court of Justice of the European 
Union (CJEU).6 V4 declared that setting quotas with negative consequences is not a policy 
that the V4 supports7 and they (re)define their constitutional identities along these lines. 
 
                                            
1 Roberto Toniatti, Sovereignty Lost: Constitutional Identity Regained, in NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL IDENTITY AND 
EUROPEAN INTEGRATION 64 (Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz & Carina Alcoberro LLivina eds., 2013). 
2 Leonard Besselink, National and Constitutional Identity Before and after Lisbon, 6 UTRECHT L. REV. 37 (2010).  
3 See the papers included in the 2016 Symposium of the Journal of Common Market Studies coedited by Dimitry 
Kochenov, Amichai Magen, and Laurent Pech. See Jan-Werner Müller, Should the EU Protect Democracy and the 
Rule of Law in Its Member States?, 21 EUR. L.J. (2015). 
4 V4 consists of countries with different historical/cultural/linguistic background, it is “not an all round alliance, 
but a practical ad hoc cooperation platform.” Daniel Hegedűs, From Front-runners’ “EU”phoria to  Backmarkers’ 
“Pragmatic Adhocism”, DGAPanalyse, No. 7 (May 2014), at 13. 
5 Joint Declaration by the Prime Ministers of V4 Countries on Migration, VISEGRAD (July 19, 2017), 
http://www.visegradgroup.eu/documents/official-statements. 
6 ECJ, C-643/15, Slovak Republic and Hungary v. Council of the European Union, ECLI:EU:C:2017:631, Judgment of 
6 September 2017. 
7 As of 18 August 2017, the Czech Republic launched 50 pledges and relocated 12 people, Slovakia pledged 60 places 
and 
relocated 
16, 
Poland 
pledged 
100 
but 
did 
not 
relocate 
anyone. 
http://europeanstudies.macmillan.yale.edu/news/visegrad-group-factor-stability-central-and-eastern-europe. 
Hungary refused to pledge any number. See Member States' Support to Emergency Relocation Mechanism, 
European 
Union 
(Oct. 
19, 
2017), 
https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-
do/policies/european-agenda-migration/press-material/docs/state_of_play_-_relocation_en.pdf. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1705 
The Article focuses on the judicial interpretation, since law is an interpretive concept8 
influencing the everyday life of members of a society. Hence, constitutional law is a practice 
of that society. Constitutional courts are the authoritative interpreters of constitutions in 
that practice. During the democratic transition V4 constitutional courts played a vital role in 
the revision of the legal system inherited from the Soviet era to meet new constitutional-
democratic standards.9 The part played by these courts during the recent anti-democratic 
changes has remained integral and crucial. What is of great significance for the article is to 
establish the nature of that role, and how homogenous is it across the countries of the 
region.  
 
Seemingly, the German Federal Constitutional Court (FCC) served as a role model for V4 
courts to empower themselves to exercise identity review. In reality, the identity reviews 
exercised by those courts are not identical; the essence, the scope and the aim of the identity 
control are different. The article takes the 2016 decision of the Hungarian constitutional 
court on constitutional identity as a reference point for developing a critique of the 
corresponding interpretation of identity among the V4 apex courts. 
 
B.  National and Constitutional Identities 
 
Identity is the characteristics determining what a given thing is. But how can a community’s 
political identity, which extends across generations, be defined? In a political community, 
political agents usually exercise the identity-constituting power. Their aim is to make the 
identity of the community distinguishable and worthy of protection. It can be conceived as 
a belonging to a collective self.10 Belonging is the condition of being understood, and “to be 
understood is to share a common past, common feelings and language, common 
assumptions, possibility of intimate communications—in short, to share common forms of 
life.”11 
 
One way to define this belonging is to apply the concept of national identity. National 
identity can be connected to the “state-nation” concept, where the membership is based 
upon political criteria, for example, citizenship. Or, alternatively, to the “ethnocultural-
nation” concept, where the members should have “their roots in the generations that have 
lived in the nation’s territory and share its customs and culture (e.g., language, religion) since 
                                            
8 RONALD DWORKIN, LAW’S EMPIRE 410–13 (Hart, 1998). 
9 See Gábor Attila Tóth, From Uneasy Compromises to Democratic Partnership: The Prospects of Central European 
Constitutionalism, 13 EUR. J. L. REFORM 1 (2011). 
10 See Michel Rosenfeld, Constitutional Identity, in The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Constitutional Law, Oxford 
UP, 2012, 757. 
11 ISAIAH BERLIN, PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS 258 (Pimlico, 1998). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1706 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
childhood.”12 Applying the metaphorical concept of Ceruti, a mirror-identity can be formed 
which creates a “we” but does not create an “other,” in other cases a wall-identity may 
emerge, which separates the group from other groups.13 While there is always a comparison 
with other groups, this comparison with “the Others” can be relatively benign, whereby the 
national identity can remain open to everyone who shares the same constitutional values. 
When a comparison with “the incomprehensible Alien”14 is present, exclusionary identity 
may emerge. Today in the V4 countries the concept of national identity is taken in a 
linguistic, ethnic, religious sense and depends upon the distinctive ethnocultural traditions 
of a given society. The imagined15 common ethnicity of the people of a given society serves 
as the core of the collective identity. It is imagined because “ethnic identity is not natural 
and inborn, nor the product of ancient tradition: instead, it is socially constructed.”16 Hence, 
it is more a wall-identity than a mirror-identity. The origins of such projects where ethnicity 
arises as a category of identity based upon the idea of distinctiveness can be found in 
romantic nationalism.17 
 
Constitutional identity is also a contested and inarticulate concept, and there are different 
views on the exact meaning of the phrase. The identitarian or communitarian approach sees 
constitutions as reflections of national identity or the identity of the people. This Article 
builds on the thought which emphasizes that constitutional identity is located within the 
constitution.18 But how this identity can be identified? First, the whole set of constitutional 
values, principles and rules should be recollected in order to receive information on the 
constitutional identity.19 Second, the constitutional amendment procedures could be used 
as sources from which we are able to determine a given state’s constitutional identity.20 
 
                                            
12 Max Haller & Regina Ressler, National and European Identity: A Study of Their Meanings and Interrelationships, 
47 REVUE FRANCAISE DE SOCIOLOGIE 822 (2006). 
13 FURIO CERRUTI, POLITICAL IDENTITY AND CONFLICT: A COMPARISON OF DEFINITIONS (Palgrave, 2001).  
14 European Commission, The Development of European Identity/Identities: Unfinished Business (2012), at 22. 
15  See generally BENEDICT ANDERSON, IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: REFLECTIONS ON THE ORIGIN AND SPREAD OF NATIONALISM 
(Verso, 1991). 
16 Lawrence M. Friedman, Introduction: Nationalism, Identity, and Law, 28 IND. L. REV. 503 (1995). 
17 Isaiah Berlin, European Unity and its Vicissitudes, in CROOKED TIMBER  191–92 (1990). 
18 See Michel Troper, Behind the Constitution?, in CONSTITUTIONAL TOPOGRAPHY: VALUES AND CONSTITUTIONS 201–03 
(András Sajó & Renáta Uitz eds., 2010). 
19 See José Luis Martí, Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity: Identity of the Constitution v. Identity of the 
People, in NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL IDENTITY AND EUROPEAN INTEGRATION 24 (Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz & Carina Alcoberro 
LLivina eds., 2013). 
20 See Constance Grewe, Methods of Identification of National Constitutional Identity, in NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL 
IDENTITY AND EUROPEAN INTEGRATION 40 (Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz & Carina Alcoberro LLivina eds., 2013).  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1707 
The notion of constitutional identity may be connected to the “state-nation” concept, the 
roots of which go back to Aristotle’s Politics.21 In this case constitutional identity refers to 
the fact that it is not the physical characteristics of the community, or the ethnocultural form 
of life of the given community that matter, but the constitution22 itself.23 Therefore, the 
identity of the people and the identity of the constitution are two different things, and the 
identity of the political community may be different from the identity of the constitution 
which gives rules to the given community.24 
 
In other words, constitutional identity may refer to the “constitutional essentials”25 of a 
given constitutional order,26 which can be identified by the sets of norms—including the 
underlying principles, the system of constitutional organs and the basic liberties—providing 
information on the fundamental structure of the given state, that, when touched by 
constitutional change, would result in a modified constitutional identity. 
 
Constitutional texts themselves have only limited potential for giving information on 
constitutional identity. Therefore, the words of the constitution need to be interpreted, and 
socially embedded institutions, by interpreting and applying these words, could actually 
foster the constitutional identity. Hence, constitutional identity depends upon the 
constitutional principles embedded in the political culture.27 Some empirical demonstration 
that the text of the constitution is mainly consistent with constitutional experience is thus 
required.28 Constitutions acquire identity by experience, and constitutional courts are the 
institutions which have the authority to give erga omnes interpretation of the constitutional 
provisions. 
                                            
21 THE POLITICS OF ARISTOTLE 98 (Ernst Baker ed. & trans., Oxford University Press, 1962). 
22 Since the Age of Enlightenment, we have been differentiating between constitutions and constitutionalism. When 
not otherwise indicated, this article applies the concept of a normative constitution which complies with the 
requirement of constitutionalism. See Wil Waluchow, Constitutionalism, in STANFORD ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY 
(Edward N. Zalta ed., 2014), http://plato.stanford.eedu/archives/spr2014/entries/constitutionalism/. 
23 See Gary Jeffrey Jacobsohn, Constitutional Identity, 68 R. POL. 361, 364 (2006). 
24 See Martí, supra note 19, at 19. 
25 John Rawls’ well-known expression refers to the principles that structure the government and the basic rights 
and liberties, not including political issues that are the matters of ordinary legislation. See JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL 
LIBERALISM 214, 227–29 (1993). 
26 Martí, supra note 19, at 20.  
27 See Jürgen Habermas: Citizenship and National Identity, in GLOBALIZATION: GLOBAL MEMBERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION 
172 (2003). Constitutional patriotism means an attachment not only to abstract constitutional values. It is also 
crucial how they were discussed and established in the given democratic context. 
28 Gary J. Jacobsohn, The Formation of Constitutional Identities, in COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 131 (Tom 
Ginsburg & Rosalind Dixon eds., 2011).  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1708 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
 
 
 
 
C. Regional Dynamics: The Emerging Ethnocultural Understanding of Identity 
 
I.  Convergence Toward a Common European Constitutional Identity 
 
The year 1989 is frequently taken as a marker of qualitative change regarding the 
constitutional identities of the V4. It is a turning point in a sense that in the early 1990s these 
states, by departing from the Socialist values and aspiring to the constitutional values of the 
European Convention on Human Rights as well as the EU, were converging towards a 
common European constitutional identity that everybody aspired to.29 Breaking with the 
Socialist past, and openness towards European integration played an important role in their 
identity formation, and it looked as if unique national events were not that decisive in the 
constitution-making process. Hence, the Visegrád countries ended up with more or less 
similar constitutional narratives at the level of constitutional principles30—democracy, rule 
of law, equality, and respect of human rights—regardless what political events brought them 
to the point of constructing a democratic constitution.  
 
The newly adopted domestic constitutions of the region contained the principles of rule of 
law, democracy and the most basic human rights, including, for instance, the right to human 
dignity and a free speech clause. Certainly, the domestic judicial interpretations of these 
constitutional principles differed strikingly. For instance, the Polish Constitutional Tribunal 
recognized the constitutional right to life of an unborn vis-à-vis the mother’s claim to self-
determination.31 While the Hungarian Constitutional Court, after the legislature did not 
deem the embryo a legal subject, weighed the mother's right to control her body against the 
state's duty to protect human life—instead of the right to life of an unborn.32 Other 
differences in judicial interpretation of the principles might also be detected. V4 courts 
interpreted the constitutional free speech clauses differently. For example, the Czech 
Constitutional Court33 and the Polish Tribunal34 argued that the constitutional right to free 
                                            
29 See Jirí Pribán, Reconstituting Paradise Lost: Temporality, Civility, and Ethnicity in Post-Communist Constitution-
Making, 48 L. & SOC. REV. 408 (2004). 
30 The article uses this term in the Dworkinian sense. See Ronald Dworkin, The Model of Rules, 35 UNIV. CHI. L. REV. 
14 (1967). 
31 See Constitutional Tribunal [CT], 16 November 2011, K 45/09 (Pol.). 
32 See Alkotmánybíróság (AB) 48/1998. (XI. 23.) AB határozat (Hung.). 
33 See Czech Constitutional Court Pl. ÚS 5/92, Decision 2943/08 of January 2009 (Cz.). 
34 See Constitutional Tribunal [CT], 7 June 1994, K 17/93 (Pol.). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1709 
speech did not encompass the right to hate speech. Contrary to this, under the early 
Hungarian constitutional jurisprudence the political right to free speech included hate 
speech so long as the speech does not incite others to criminal acts.35 Hence, the early 
Hungarian free speech jurisprudence was more in line with the US tradition, while the other 
V4 courts were ready to restrict speech in the interests of social peace.36 
  
These are only a few examples of how these constitutional courts were to play a central role 
in forming the identity of the newly adopted constitutional-democratic constitutions. The 
judicial interpretations of the constitutional principles formed the constitutional identity of 
the respective country and the constitutional identities were to be guarded by constitutional 
courts as authoritative interpreters of the constitutions.37 The courts tended to interpret the 
identity of the political community by emphasizing its connection to the values of the 
domestic constitutional setting, and to European constitutionalism. For instance, in 2010 the 
Polish Constitutional Tribunal connected the constitutional identity to the values of the 
political system of the state, such as the protection of human dignity and constitutional 
rights, the principles of democracy, the rule of law, social justice, and subsidiarity.38 
 
II.  Divergence of the Interpretations of Constitutional Identity  
 
The convergence toward a common European constitutional identity based upon the rule of 
law, democracy and human rights, however, seems now to have been only temporary, and 
to be drifting into divergence. What we are witnessing in the V4 region is a far-reaching 
questioning of these core principles and an increase in national constitutional projects 
aiming at making national identity as locally valid and unique as possible. One of the reasons 
for this new trend might be that constitutions adopted after the 1989 democratic transitions 
are perceived by many political actors and their supporters not as something “organically 
grown,” but something imposed by external forces, such as the international community.39 
For these political agents the concept of national identity represents the view that nation-
states are faithful to their own system of political and ethnocultural priorities, and their aim 
                                            
35 See Alkotmánybíróság (AB) 30/1992. (V. 26.) AB határozat (Hung.). 
36 But see WOJCIECH SADURSKI, RIGHTS BEFORE COURTS: A STUDY OF CONSTITUTIONAL COURTS IN POSTCOMMUNIST STATES OF 
CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE 233 (2d ed. 2014). 
37 For an account on how constitutional identity are guarded by constitutional courts by means of reviewing 
constitutional amendments, see Kriszta Kovács, Changing Constitutional Identity via Amendment, in CONSTITUTIONAL 
ACCELERATION WITHIN THE EUROPEAN UNION AND BEYOND 199–216 (Paul Blokker ed., 2017). 
38 Constitutional Tribunal [CT], 24 November 2010, K 32/09, 2.1 (Pol.) [hereinafter the Lisbon decision of the CT]. 
39 The phrase “fight for independence” against external influence is often used by Viktor Orbán 
https://visegradpost.com/en/2017/07/24/full-speech-of-v-orban-will-europe-belong-to-europeans/, and Jaroslaw 
Kaczynski 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-11/poland-ready-to-fight-its-allies-for-
sovereignty-kaczynski-says. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1710 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
first and foremost is to protect particular interests. National identity is understood as the 
sum of the distinctive ethnocultural traditions and culture of a given society. It is the physical 
characteristics of the given community that matter, which should be in accord with the 
constitution. These contemporary identity-maker political agents stress the need for a 
religious and ethnocultural background for the concept of national identity by referring to 
the culturally, religiously and linguistically homogeneous community.40 
 
In Hungary and Poland these political actors, after becoming leading forces, are playing a 
crucial role in the process of creating new, exclusionary national identities. For instance, the 
current Hungarian constitutional transformation was substantiated by the argument that 
the identity expressed by the 1989 constitutional revision failed to comply with the 
Hungarian national identity, and for this reason Hungary needed a new constitution which 
was able to provide a “foundation for the spiritual and intellectual renewal of Hungary.”41 
Similarly, the President of Poland called for constitutional referendum saying that “it is time 
for a serious debate on the constitution among the Polish people,” because “Poles and 
Poland have earned a new constitution.”42  
 
The new systems of government43 in these countries have affected the independence and 
the competences of the constitutional courts.44 Today both the Tribunal and the Hungarian 
Constitutional Court are dominated by justices elected by the ruling majority, hence the 
“constitutional captures”45 neutralized the courts as checks on government. 
 
Consequently, these courts are more often than not deferential to the government’s 
understanding of national identity. They reflect the ruling majority’s conception of what a 
“nation” is. Moreover, the existing case law in East Central Europe lends them a helping 
hand. In the early 2010s the Slovak and Czech Constitutional Courts already proclaimed their 
                                            
40 In the case of national identity the Slovak political discussion is dominated by Robert Fico’s Smer party, the 
Hungarian discussion by Viktor Orbán’s Fidesz party, the Polish discussion by Jaroslaw Kaczisky’s PiS party, the Czech 
discussion by Pavel Belobrádek’s KDU and Petr Fiala’s ODS parties. National Identities in CEE — country case studies, 
available at http://www.ceeidentity.eu/news/national-0 and http://www.ceeidentity.eu/blog/ten-years-after-0 
41 Tibor Navracsics, ‘A New Constitution for Hungary: Locking in the Values of 1989–1990 Transition, At Last’ (2011) 
The Wall Street Journal April 19.  
42 http://www.dw.com/en/polands-president-calls-for-constitutional-referendum/a-38725200 
43 The second (2010-2014) and third (2014-) Orbán-government and the (2015-) Szydło-government. 
44 See Venice Commission Opinion on the Act CLI of 2011 on the Constitutional Court of Hungary, CDL-AD(2012)009-
e, 19 June 2012; Venice Commission Opinion on the Act on the Constitutional Tribunal, CDL-AD(2016)026-e, 14 
October 2016. 
45 Jan-Werner Müller, Rising to the Challenge of Constitutional Capture, EUROZINE (Mar. 21, 2014), 
http://www.eurozine.com/rising-to-the-challenge-of-constitutional-capture/ (last visited Oct. 25, 2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1711 
capacity to conduct identity review, that is, to decide whether the EU respects the national 
identity of the Member States and the limits of their conferred competences.46 
 
In 2010, the Slovak Constitutional Court held, without giving lengthy justifications, that the 
constitutional court has the power to review EU law if this is indispensable to protect the 
constitutional identity of the country.47 Likewise, the Czech Constitutional Court in a Slovak 
pension case referred to the concept of identity. The so-called Landtová case was about the 
financial situation of retired employees who worked in the Czech part of Czechoslovakia 
while their employer’s residence was in the Slovak part of the country. Their pensions were 
to be covered by the Slovak state. According to the calculation based on a bilateral Treaty 
concluded by the Czech and Slovak Republic, however, the pensions of these workers were 
significantly lower than pensions in the Czech Republic. The Czech Constitutional Court 
concluded that this violated the principle of equality and the right to social security, and 
therefore some benefits to compensate the difference should be paid. This interpretation 
was contested by the Czech Supreme Administrative Court, which posed a preliminary 
question to the CJEU. The CJEU considered that payment of a supplement to old age benefit 
solely to individuals of Czech nationality, residing in the territory of the Czech Republic, 
constituted discrimination and was in contradiction to the principle of free movement of 
workers.48 The Czech Supreme Administrative Court decided the case by holding it illegal 
and rejecting the discriminatory pension supplement.49 
 
The Czech Constitutional Court, on the next opportunity given to it, did not follow the 
argumentation of the CJEU and did not accept the argument that the pension supplement 
was discriminatory.50 Instead, it held that the CJEU in the case of Landtová had acted ultra 
vires, because in the given case the foreign element was lacking; the employment happened 
in the formerly united Czechoslovakia, hence EU law could not have been applicable. The 
court argued that the CJEU had not respected Czech constitutional identity. According to the 
Czech Constitutional Court, Czech constitutional identity draws on a common constitutional 
tradition with the Slovak Republic that stems from the over seventy years of the common 
                                            
46 This article uses the notions identity review and identity control interchangeably.  
47 See Decision II. ÚS 501/2010 of the Slovak Constitutional Court. 
48 See ECJ, C-399/09, Marie Landtová v. Česká správa socialního zabezpečení, ECLI:EU:C:2011:415, Judgment of 22 
June 2011.  
49 See Decision 3 Ads 130/2008-204 of the Czech Supreme Administrative Court. The CJEU decision did not require 
such an outcome. For more on the legal background, see Georgios Anagnostaras, Activation of the Ultra Vires 
Review: The Slovak Pensions Judgment of the Czech Constitutional Court, 14 GERMAN L.J. 959 (2013). 
50 
See 
Decision 
Pl. 
ÚS 
5/12 
31 
January 
2012 
of 
the 
Czech 
Constitutional 
Court 
http://www.usoud.cz/en/decisions/20120131-pl-us-512-slovak-pensions/ [hereinafter Slovak pension decision]. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1712 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
state and its peaceful dissolution. It is a “completely idiosyncratic and historically created 
situation that has no parallel in Europe.”51 
 
D.  The Hungarian Decision on Constitutional Identity 
 
I. 
 The Precursors and the Context 
 
The recent decision of the Hungarian Constitutional Court (HCC) on constitutional identity52 
fits into a general trend in the East Central European jurisprudence. Following the relevant 
Slovak, Czech, and the already mentioned Polish decisions, the Hungarian judges introduced 
the notion of “constitutional identity” to the Hungarian legal system.53 What is particular to 
Hungary is that the 2011 Fundamental Law (FL) has already declared a change in the identity 
of the political community by characterizing the nation as an ethnic and Christian 
community, which opposes the republican ethos.54 Since the adoption of the FL, the concept 
of identity has been further clarified under the pretext of “the danger caused by mass 
migration.” In 2015 the biggest wave of migrants ever reached the country. The number of 
asylum claims submitted in Hungary multiplied a hundredfold;55 however, these claims were 
largely abandoned, as the applicants left the country within a few days. Nonetheless, in 2015 
Hungarian state officials began labelling asylum seekers as “illegal migrants;”56 and the 
government used “mass migration” as a justification for introducing “emergency 
measures”57 to protect the sovereignty and cultural identity of the Hungarian nation. 
 
The EU refugee relocation system was believed by the Hungarian government to impose the 
model of multicultural society the government opposes; hence, the parliamentary majority 
                                            
51 Id. 
52 
Alkotmánybíróság 
(AB) 
22/2016. 
(XII. 
5.) 
AB 
határozat 
(Hung.), 
http://hunconcourt.hu/letoltesek/en_22_2016.pdf [hereinafter Identity decision]. 
53 The court decision is embedded in a wider national political context, but this article does not go into the details, 
since the contributions of Balázs Majtényi and Zsolt Körtvélyesi present and analyze the relevant Hungarian political 
events. 
54 See the legally binding National Avowal of the Fundamental Law. See Opinion on the Fundamental Law of 
Hungary, in CONSTITUTION FOR A DISUNITED NATION 460–62 (Andrew Arato, Gábor Halmai, János Kis & Tóth GA eds., 
2012). 
55 Boldizsár Nagy, Hungarian Asylum Law and Policy in 2015–2016: Securitization Instead of Loyal Cooperation, 
GERMAN L.J. 1035 (2016). 
56 Id. at 1045. 
57 Act CXLII of 2015 on the amendment of the Act LXXX of 2007 on Asylum was adopted to enact the “state of crisis 
caused by mass migration” and to make it possible to renew the state of crisis indefinitely at six-month intervals. 
The government declared and prolonged the state of crisis in the following decrees 269/2015, 270/2015, 41/2016, 
272/2016, 36/2017, and 247/2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1713 
adopted an Act58 calling on the government to initiate an action for annulment against the 
Council Decision before the CJEU. Accordingly, Hungary challenged the Council Decision. 
Soon afterwards the European Commission opened an infringement procedure against 
Hungary59 concerning its recently-adopted legislation. 
 
In response to this, the Hungarian ombudsman turned to the HCC, asking the Court to 
interpret two constitutional provisions of the FL over the issue of the EU relocation scheme. 
One of these articles prohibits collective expulsion, stating that foreigners staying in the 
territory of Hungary may only be expelled on the basis of a lawful decision, Article XIV(1). 
The second is the so-called “EU clause,” which makes a limited transfer of the constitutional 
competences to the EU possible by virtue of the constitution and on the basis of 
international treaties, Article E(2). The ombudsman explained this move by saying that he 
sought to clear up legal concerns around the issue of the mandatory transfer of asylum 
seekers to Hungarian territory. Although the ombudsman did not explicitly challenge the 
constitutionality of the Council Decision, the petition questions its lawfulness. Seemingly the 
ombudsman protected the rights of the asylum-seekers by arguing that the FL secures the 
fundamental rights of the asylum seekers more than the EU law. But in fact, the ombudsman 
questioned the constitutionality of the EU Council Decision by saying that the HCC should be 
competent to declare secondary EU legislation inapplicable in the Hungarian legal order, if 
and to the extent that it conflicts with national identity. 
 
Simultaneously, the government called for a referendum allowing the electorate to vote on 
the following question: “Do you want the European Union, without the consent of 
Parliament, to order the compulsory settlement of non-Hungarian citizens in Hungary?” The 
political aim of the referendum was to gain the approval of the people to protect “Hungary's 
and Europe's ethnic, cultural and religious identity.”60 Although the Prime Minister claimed 
a victory, and nearly 98 per cent of those who took part supported the government’s call, 
the referendum was invalid because of the low turnout.61 
 
Shortly afterwards, the Prime Minister proposed a constitutional amendment to put the 
wished-for results of the referendum into the FL, to define the “core element of the 
                                            
58 See Act CLXXV of 2015 on Acting Against the Compulsory Settlement Quota System in Defense of Hungary and 
Europe. 
59 European Commission Press Release, Commission Opens Infringement Procedure Against Hungary Concerning 
Its Asylum Law (Dec. 10, 2015), http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6228_en.htm. The Commission has 
found the Hungarian legislation to be partly incompatible with EU law. 
60 Orbán: Népszavazás lesz a betelepítési kvótáról, MAGYAR NEMZET (Feb. 24, 2016), https://mno.hu/belfold/orban-
nepszavazas-lesz-a-betelepitesi-kvotarol-1330246 (last visited Oct. 25, 2017) (author translation). 
61 41,32 % of the Hungarian electorate participated in the referendum, less than the 50% threshold needed to 
validate the referendum. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1714 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
constitution, which is also a kind of check and limit to EU law.”62 The Seventh Amendment 
leaned on “constitutional self-identity63” to gain exemption from EU law in the area of 
immigration. The Seventh Amendment would add to the FL the following sentence: “We 
hold that the defense our constitutional self-identity, which is rooted in our historical 
constitution, is the fundamental responsibility of the state.” Furthermore, the EU clause 
would have been amended to emphasize that the exercise of the powers granted by the EU 
founding treaties “must be in harmony with the fundamental rights and freedoms 
established in the Fundamental Law and must not curtail Hungary’s inalienable right to 
determine its territory, population, or form of government.” The Seventh Amendment 
would declare that it is the responsibility of every state institution to defend 
Hungary’s constitutional identity. And, last but not least, the refurbished Article XIV would 
prohibit the settlement of foreign population in Hungary and regulated how foreign citizens, 
not including EEA citizens, might live in the territory of Hungary in accordance with the 
procedures 
established 
by 
the 
national 
Parliament, 
based 
upon 
their 
documentation individually evaluated by Hungarian authorities. 
 
The governing majority no longer has its two-thirds majority in Parliament to amend the FL, 
and political attempts to obtain extra votes have been proved unsuccessful, including the 
attempt to pass the constitutional amendment. The decision of the HCC, however, achieved 
the required result. 
 
II.  Ethnocultural Constitutional Identity Approved 
 
The decision64 expressed that the common identity of the Hungarian people is equivalent to 
the constitutional identity of Hungary that has not been created but only recognized by the 
FL and, therefore, cannot be renounced by an international treaty.65 The content of 
constitutional identity is to be determined on a case-by-case basis by the HCC. When the 
Court decides so, it should base its decision on the FL. The FL requires the judges to interpret 
the constitutional provisions in the light of the Preamble called the “National Avowal”, and 
the “achievements of the historical constitution,” Article R(3).66 
                                            
62 Ministry of Justice, Non-Hungarians Cannot Be Relocated to Hungary’s Territory, HUNGARIAN GOVERNMENT (Oct. 11, 
2016, 12:58PM), http://www.kormany.hu/en/ministry-of-justice/news/non-hungarians-cannot-be-relocated-to-
hungary-s-territory (last visited Oct. 25, 2017). 
63 The Seventh Amendment and the HCC’s decision use the phrase “constitutional self-identity,” but this paper 
continues to apply the notion of constitutional identity. 
64 Although the ombudsman’s petition contained several points, the Court dealt only with the issue of interpreting 
the EU clause and left the EU refugee relocation issue to another decision. See Identity decision, supra note 52, 
para. 29. 
65 See id. para. 67. 
66 See id. para. 64. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1715 
 
The concept of the historical constitution dates back to 1896, when Hungary—at that time 
part of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire—celebrated the millennial anniversary of the 
conquest of the territory of Hungary. At that time a claim appeared that Hungary was the 
only nation in Central Europe to possess a thousand-year-old statehood built upon the 
“Millennial historical constitution.”67 The concept of the historical constitution is coupled 
with the Holy Crown doctrine, according to which the Holy Crown—allegedly the crown of 
St Stephen, the first Hungarian king—is seen as an ancient source of authority, a literal 
marker of collective Hungarian identity. In the last century this concept has been used for 
various purposes. Its core prefers “a ‘mystic membership’ to constitutional patriotism, the 
ancient territory of the Hungarian Kingdom to the current borders of the State, and noble 
privileges to the republican traditions of 1946 and 1989.”68 Today the historical constitution 
and the Holy Crown features prominently in the National Avowal. The HCC is deferential to 
the claim of the ruling majority engraved into the FL, that the constitutional identity of 
Hungary is distinctively rooted in the historical constitution. 
 
Even though the Court held that the constitutional identity of Hungary does not mean a list 
of exhaustively enumerated values, it nevertheless mentioned some of them without further 
clarifying their meanings: “freedoms, the division of powers, republic as the form of 
government, respect of autonomies under public law, the freedom of religion, exercising 
lawful authority, parliamentarism, equality of rights, acknowledging judicial power, the 
protection of nationalities that are living with us.”69 In addition, the decision declared 
without further explanation that the protection of constitutional identity may also emerge 
in connection with areas that shape citizens’ living conditions, in particular the private 
sphere of their responsibility, personal and social security, protected by fundamental rights, 
as well as in cases where the linguistic, historical and cultural traditions of Hungary are 
affected.70 The sentence has been taken word for word from the Lisbon decision of the FCC, 
in which the FCC held that when achieving European unification, sufficient space should be 
left for the Member States to outline economic, cultural and social living conditions.71 This 
applies especially to areas which “shape the citizens’ living conditions, in particular the 
private sphere of their own responsibility and of political and social security, protected by 
fundamental rights, as well as to political decisions that rely especially on cultural, historical 
                                            
67 János M. Bak & Anna Gara-Bak, The Ideology of a “Millennial Constitution” of Hungary, 15 E. EUR. Q. 307 (1981). 
68 Gábor Attila Tóth, Hungary, in CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE EU MEMBERS 791 (Besselink et. al. eds., 2014). 
69 Identity decision, supra note 52, para. 65. 
70 See id. para. 66. 
71 See Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], 30 June 2009, [2 BvE 2/08]. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1716 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
and linguistic perceptions.”72 This sentence became part of the decision without any 
argument justifying its presence in the text. 
 
The decision emphasized that since the principal organ for protection of the FL is the HCC, it 
is the task of the Court to defend Hungary’s constitutional identity.73 For this purpose the 
HCC developed the fundamental rights-reservation review and the ultra vires review—
composed of a sovereignty review and an identity review—to decide whether the EU 
respects the national identity of Hungary and the limits of their conferred competences. The 
Court based the fundamental rights-reservation review on the EU clause and Article I(1) of 
the FL on the state duty to protect fundamental rights. It argued that as the state is bound 
by fundamental rights, this binding force of the rights is applicable also to cases where public 
power is exercised together with EU institutions or other Member States. 
 
Concerning the ultra vires review, the Court stressed without going into detail that there are 
two main limits for conferred or jointly exercised competencies: they cannot infringe either 
the sovereignty of Hungary—sovereignty review—or Hungarian constitutional identity—
identity review.74 According to the judicial reasoning, there are many overlaps between 
sovereignty and constitutional identity; the two reviews need to be employed considering 
one another. In the Court’s view, the concept of “state sovereignty”—supreme power, 
territory, and population—follows from Article B of the FL, and the EU clause should not 
empty Article B, nor the exercise of powers (within the EU) result in the loss of the ultimate 
oversight possibility of the people over the public power. Therefore, the Court empowered 
itself to examine whether the joint exercise of competences with the EU infringes human 
dignity, other fundamental rights, the sovereignty of Hungary, or Hungary’s identity based 
on its historical constitution. 
 
Consequently, the political claim to an ethnocultural understanding of identity was 
transformed as the judicial understanding of constitutional identity by this decision. The HCC 
took upon itself the responsibility to determine the constitutional identity of Hungary and 
authorized itself to exercise identity control. 
 
E.  The V4 approach: Deviation from the German Role Model 
 
By now all V4 constitutional courts have considered themselves competent to define 
constitutional identity and exercise identity review. Several commonalities in their approach 
can be identified. First, V4 courts tend to interpret the concept of constitutional identity as 
a national identity based upon ethnocultural attributes: the relevant case-law very often 
                                            
72 Id. para. 4. 
73 See Identity decision, supra note 52, para. 55. 
74 See id. para. 54. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1717 
refers to the assumed common and homogenous ethnocultural tradition of a given 
community rooted in distinctive historical events. For instance, both the Czech and the 
Hungarian decisions mention the “unique historical events” as the basis upon which the 
constitutional identity rests.75 Up until the recent constitutional capture, the Polish Tribunal 
was the only court in the V4 which applied the concept of constitutional identity in a politico-
constitutional sense instead of basing it on historical events and ethnocultural traditions. 
Moreover, the Lisbon decision differentiated between constitutional and national identity, 
arguing that the latter includes the tradition and culture of the state.76 Later the decision on 
the contempt of the Polish nation77 stressed that the notion of nation covers both the 
political and the cultural community. It is far from clear what the relationship between this 
national identity and the concept of constitutional identity is.78 
 
Second, when V4 courts decide on the content of constitutional identity, they very often lack 
the exact criteria to select constitutional essentials. The Czech, the Hungarian and the Polish 
decisions list various principles as constitutional essentials. The selection of values for which 
there can be identity review, however, raises the following questions: Why these values and 
not others? Why the exercising lawful authority and freedom of religion in the Hungarian 
case, but not the rule of law and equal human dignity? Why prohibition of retroactivity and 
generality of law79 in the Czech case, and the principles of social justice and subsidiarity in 
the Polish case?80 In understanding the motivation behind the haphazard selection, there is 
little point in searching for principled reasons. It seems that courts decide on the content of 
constitutional identity on a case by case basis, and by using the notion of constitutional 
identity they express their understanding of the sovereignty of the respective state. 
 
Third, V4 courts do not connect the list of values protected by the identity review to a non-
amendable constitutional provision. The main reason is that most of the V4 constitutions, 
including the Hungarian, the Polish, and the Slovak constitutions do not render any 
constitutional provision or principle explicitly unamendable, and the constitutional courts 
do not interpret any constitutional provision as non-amendable. Even the Czech court 
defines the content of constitutional identity much more broadly than the values—
democratic state governed by the rule of law—protected by the constitution’s non-
                                            
75 See Slovak pension decision, supra note 50; Identity decision, supra note 52, para. 65. 
76 See Lisbon decision of the CT, supra note 38, § 2.1. 
77 Constitutional Tribunal [CT], 21 September 2015, K 28/13. 
78 See Anna Śledzińska-Simon & Michał Ziółkowski, Constitutional Identity of Poland: Is the Emperor Putting On the 
Old Clothes of Sovereignty? 4 (Jul. 11, 2017) (unpublished manuscript) (on file with author). 
79 See Constitutional Court 10 September 2009, Pl OS 27/09, N 199/54 SbNU 445 (Meledk) (Cz.). 
80 See Lisbon decision of the CT, supra note 38, § 2.1. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1718 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
amendable clause, Article 9(2).81 Thereby in the V4 jurisprudence the “constitutional 
essentials” seem to be much broader than the constitutional core. 
 
Fourth, V4 court decisions interpreting constitutional identity are mainly those dealing with 
EU integration issues. It seems therefore that in these countries the national identity is 
formed as limit to European integration. V4 courts assume the supremacy of domestic 
constitutions and tend to hold that if EU legislation takes precedence over domestic 
constitutions, it is only because a constitutional provision allows this rule to apply. Hence, 
these courts believe that they are competent to declare EU law inapplicable in their 
domestic legal order to the extent that it conflicts with national identity. For instance, the 
Czech and the Hungarian interpretations of identity were used as a means to fend off 
European Union authority over these countries. And although V4 courts usually emphasize 
the importance of cooperation with the CJEU,82 they do not base their identity review of an 
EU act on the interpretation provided by the CJEU. 
 
Last but not least, when deciding on the essence and scope of this control, the V4 courts 
refer frequently, although usually ornamentally,83 to the case law of the FCC. They argue 
that the identity review they perform is basically the same as the identity review performed 
by the FCC. The last part of the article will briefly explore this claim. A detailed analysis of 
the German jurisprudence falls outside of the scope of this article. Here it will only focus on 
the issues in which the V4 courts deviate from their German counterpart. 
 
Today the concept of constitutional identity is understood as one of the main attributes of 
the German constitutional case law. Although the Solange II84 decision of the FCC already 
used the notion of identity to “demarcate what is acceptable and not acceptable as concerns 
the constitutional impact”85 of the EU law on the German constitutional order, it was the 
Lisbon judgment that introduced the language of identity.86 The FCC, when examining 
transfer of powers to the EU or international institutions that amounts to a constitutional 
amendment, links the concept of identity to the values enshrined by the 1949 Basic Law’s 
                                            
81 See Ladislav Vyhnánek, The Eternity Clause in the Czech Constitution as Limit to European Integration, 9 ICL J. 243 
(2015).  
82 See Slovak pension decision, supra note 50; Identity decision, supra note 52, para. 65. 
83 See Jan Komárek, Playing with Matches: The Czech Constitutional Court’s Ultra Vires Revolution, VERFBLOG (Feb. 
22, 2012), http://verfassungsblog.de/playing-matches-czech-constitutional-courts-ultra-vires-revolution/ (last 
visited Oct. 25, 2017). 
84 Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], Nov. 22, 1986, BVerfGE 73, 339, 2 BvR 
197/83. 
85 Besselink, supra note 3, at 47. 
86 See Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], June 30, 2009, 2 BvE 2/08. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2017 
Ethnocultural Identity in East Central European Courts 
1719 
non-amendable clause, Article 79(3), which protects the basic principles of Germany’s 
constitutional order, such as the inviolability of human dignity, the principle of democracy, 
separation of powers, essential elements of the rule of law, federalism, and the social state. 
In the Court’s view, the non-amendable elements of the constitution constitute the 
constitutional identity, which is neither open to constitutional amendments, nor to 
European integration. Thus, the concept of constitutional identity in Germany is based on 
an attachment to the values of the democratic constitution. In the Court’s view it is the task 
of the Court to safeguard the constitutional values by identity review.87 The logic is that the 
underlying principles of the German constitutional state cannot be altered by the super-
majority via constitutional amendment or via international treaty confirmed by the same 
super-majority. Changing constitutional identity would amount to an illegitimate usurpation 
of the constituent power of the people.88 
 
The FCC expressly stated several times that it exercises identity review cautiously and in a 
way that is open to European integration (europarechtsfreundlich).89 It also emphasized that 
the identity review cannot entail substantial risks for the uniform application of EU law, thus 
the FCC bases its review of the European act in question on the interpretation of that act 
provided by the CJEU also in the context of the identity review.90 Despite this, the identity 
review mandated by the FCC is not obviously European-friendly, because the FCC bases its 
decisions on an idiosyncratic “German” understanding of democracy which is limited to a 
state with a people and its territory.91  This understanding provides a reference point to the 
interpretation of the V4 courts. 
 
Ostensibly the jurisprudence of the FCC served as a role model for the V4 courts, but the 
identity review of these courts does not correspond to their German counterpart. The 
identity review of V4 courts differs from that of the FCC in three important ways. First, there 
is a difference with regard to the substance of the elements identified as defining part of the 
respective constitutional identity. The FCC has developed a universal integrative mirror-
identity in which members of German society may recognize themselves. It is connected to 
the text of the Basic Law as well as the principles and values of the domestic constitution. 
By contrast, V4 courts tend to launch exclusionary wall-identities which efficiently shut out 
                                            
87 Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], Dec. 15, 2015, [2 BvR 2735/14], para. 41. 
88 This may remind us of the view of Carl Schmitt in the early years on the possibilities of changing the identity of 
the constitution. 
89 See, e.g., Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], June 21, 2016, BVerfGE 142, 121, 2 
BvR 2728/13. 
90 See Bundesverfassungsgericht [BVERFGE] [Federal Constitutional Court], Dec. 15, 2015, 2 BvR 2735/14, para. 46. 
91 See Daniel Halberstam & Christoph Möllers, The German Constitutional Court Says Ja Zu Deutschland, 10 GERMAN 
L.J. 1241, 1258 (2009). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1720 
German Law  Journal   
Vol. 18 No. 07 
“the other” by referring to specific historical events or traditions instead of the established 
constitutional values in the given democratic context.  
 
Second, V4 courts assume the supremacy of domestic constitutions and hold that if EU law 
takes precedence over domestic constitutional law, it is only because a constitutional 
provision allows this rule to apply. By contrast, the FCC does accept the claim of EU law to 
primacy over “ordinary” German constitutional law. The FCC challenges the CJEU’s 
unqualified claim only with regard to the non-amendable parts of the Basic Law. 
 
And last, but not least, the identity review of V4 courts appears to be following the identity 
review of the FCC from the point of view of the national apex courts’ relationship with the 
CJEU. But in reality, the particular adaptation of the German identity review amounted to a 
claim that in some cases the Czech, the Hungarian, the Polish or the Slovak tradition, laws 
and interests are so special that they cannot follow a particular EU law. As a result, the V4 
interpretations weaken the authority of the CJEU, and therefore, ultimately, the rule of law 
in the EU. 
 
F.  Conclusion 
 
There is an emerging trend in the V4 constitutional courts’ case law which assumes a 
common ethnocultural tradition of the respective country. The apex courts of the V4 
countries seem to accept the reasoning of their governments on the need to protect the 
country’s exclusionary national identity in an era of global migration. This Article took the 
2016 Hungarian decision on constitutional identity as a reference point for developing a 
critique of the corresponding interpretation of identity among the V4 apex courts.  
 
Ostensibly, the FCC served as a role model for these courts to empower themselves to 
exercise identity review. In fact, however, the identity reviews exercised by those courts are 
not identical. The essence, the scope and the aim of the identity control are different. 
Although the deliberate switch of language to the concept of identity by the FCC’s Lisbon 
decision lent a helping hand to the V4 courts, the constitutional identity concept led to very 
different results in this region. The concept of constitutional identity as developed by the 
FCC is understood in a politico-constitutional sense. By contrast, V4 courts tend to provide 
an ethnocultural background for the concept of identity. V4 courts rely on the concept of 
national identity under Article 4(2) of the TEU when derogating from some of their 
obligations under EU law. The CJEU, the ultimate interpreter of the TEU, has never endorsed 
even the FCC’s argument on constitutional identity,92 and it seems improbable that the V4 
courts’ interpretation qualify as legitimate cultural defenses93 under the EU law. 
                                            
92 ECJ, C-62/14, Gauweiler et al. v. Deutscher Bundestag, ECLI:EU:C:2015:400, Judgment of 16 June 2015, paras. 5–
31. 
93 See LIAV ORGAD, THE CULTURAL DEFENSE OF NATIONS, A LIBERAL THEORY OF MAJORITY RIGHTS (2015).  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022501 Published online by Cambridge University Press
