By 2019, it was clear
that the liberal international order was in deep trouble. The tectonic plates that
underpin it are shifting, and little can be done to repair and rescue it. Indeed,
that order was destined to fail from the start, as it contained the seeds of its
own destruction.
The fall of the liberal international order horriªes the Western elites who
built it and who have beneªted from it in many ways.1 These elites fervently
believe that this order was and remains an important force for promoting
peace and prosperity around the globe. Many of them blame President Donald
Trump for its demise. After all, he expressed contempt for the liberal order
when campaigning for president in 2016; and since taking ofªce, he has pur-
sued policies that seem designed to tear it down.
It would be a mistake, however, to think that the liberal international order
is in trouble solely because of Trump’s rhetoric or policies. In fact, more funda-
mental problems are at play, which account for why Trump has been able to
successfully challenge an order that enjoys almost universal support among
the foreign policy elites in the West. The aim of this article is to determine
why the liberal world order is in big trouble and to identify the kind of inter-
national order that will replace it.
I offer three main sets of arguments. First, because states in the modern
world are deeply interconnected in a variety of ways, orders are essential for
facilitating efªcient and timely interactions. There are different kinds of inter-
national orders, and which type emerges depends primarily on the global dis-
tribution of power. But when the system is unipolar, the political ideology of
the sole pole also matters. Liberal international orders can arise only in unipo-
lar systems where the leading state is a liberal democracy.
John J. Mearsheimer is the R. Wendell Harrison Distinguished Service Professor of Political Science at the
University of Chicago.
The author is grateful to Olafur Bjornsson, Joshua Byun, Michael Desch, Charles Glaser, Nicolas
Guilhot, Jack Jacobsen, Robert Keohane, Do Young Lee, Jennifer A. Lind, Nuno Monteiro, Paul
Poast, Barry Posen, Burak Tan, an anonymous reviewer, and especially Eliza Gheorghe, Mariya
Grinberg, Sebastian Rosato, and Stephen Walt for their incisive comments. He also thanks the
many individuals who offered insightful comments when he presented earlier versions of this arti-
cle at the European Council on Foreign Relations in Berlin, the Notre Dame International Security
Center, and the Program on International Security Policy at the University of Chicago.
1. Ivo H. Daalder and James M. Lindsay, The Empty Throne: America’s Abdication of Global Leadership
(New York: PublicAffairs, 2018).
International Security, Vol. 43, No. 4 (Spring 2019), pp. 7–50, https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00342
© 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bound to Fail
Bound to Fail
John J. Mearsheimer
The Rise and Fall of the Liberal
International Order
7
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Second, the United States has led two different orders since World War II.
The Cold War order, which is sometimes mistakenly referred to as a “liberal
international order,” was neither liberal nor international. It was a bounded or-
der that was limited mainly to the West and was realist in all its key dimen-
sions. It had certain features that were also consistent with a liberal order, but
those attributes were based on realist logic. The U.S.-led post–Cold War order,
on the other hand, is liberal and international, and thus differs in fundamental
ways from the bounded order the United States dominated during the
Cold War.
Third, the post–Cold War liberal international order was doomed to col-
lapse, because the key policies on which it rested are deeply ºawed. Spreading
liberal democracy around the globe, which is of paramount importance for
building such an order, not only is extremely difªcult, but often poisons rela-
tions with other countries and sometimes leads to disastrous wars. National-
ism within the target state is the main obstacle to the promotion of democracy,
but balance of power politics also function as an important blocking force.
Furthermore, the liberal order’s tendency to privilege international in-
stitutions over domestic considerations, as well as its deep commitment to po-
rous, if not open borders, has had toxic political effects inside the leading
liberal states themselves, including the U.S. unipole. Those policies clash with
nationalism over key issues such as sovereignty and national identity. Be-
cause nationalism is the most powerful political ideology on the planet, it in-
variably trumps liberalism whenever the two clash, thus undermining the
order at its core.
In addition, hyperglobalization, which sought to minimize barriers to global
trade and investment, resulted in lost jobs, declining wages, and rising income
inequality throughout the liberal world. It also made the international ªnan-
cial system less stable, leading to recurring ªnancial crises. Those troubles then
morphed into political problems, further eroding support for the liberal order.
A hyperglobalized economy undermines the order in yet another way: it
helps countries other than the unipole grow more powerful, which can under-
mine unipolarity and bring the liberal order to an end. This is what is happen-
ing with the rise of China, which, along with the revival of Russian power,
has brought the unipolar era to a close. The emerging multipolar world will
consist of a realist-based international order, which will play an important role
in managing the world economy, dealing with arms control, and handling
problems of the global commons such as climate change. In addition to this
new international order, the United States and China will lead bounded orders
that will compete with each other in both the economic and military realms.2
International Security 43:4
8
2. This article assumes that the world became multipolar in or close to 2016, and that the shift
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The remainder of this article is organized as follows. First, I explain
what the term “order” means and why orders are an important feature of in-
ternational politics. Second, I describe the different kinds of orders and the cir-
cumstances under which a liberal international order will emerge. Relatedly,
I examine in the third section what accounts for the rise and decline of interna-
tional orders. In the fourth section, I describe the different Cold War orders.
In the next three sections, I recount the history of the liberal international or-
der. Then, in the subsequent four sections, I explain why it failed. In the
penultimate section, I discuss what the new order will look like under multi-
polarity. The conclusion provides a brief summary of my argument and
some policy recommendations.
What Is an Order and Why Do Orders Matter?
An “order” is an organized group of international institutions that help govern
the interactions among the member states.3 Orders can also help member
states deal with nonmembers, because an order does not necessarily include
every country in the world. Furthermore, orders can comprise institutions that
have a regional or a global scope. Great powers create and manage orders.
International institutions, which are the building blocks of orders, are effec-
tively rules that the great powers devise and agree to follow, because they be-
lieve that obeying those rules is in their interest. The rules prescribe acceptable
kinds of behavior and proscribe unacceptable forms of behavior.4 Unsurpris-
ingly, the great powers write those rules to suit their own interests. But when
the rules do not accord with the vital interests of the dominant states, those
same states either ignore them or rewrite them. For example, President George
W. Bush emphasized on numerous occasions before the 2003 Iraq War that
even if a U.S. invasion violated international law, “America will do what is
Bound to Fail
9
away from unipolarity is a death sentence for the liberal international order, which is in the pro-
cess of collapsing and will be replaced by realist orders.
3. My deªnition of an international order is consistent with how other scholars deªne the term.
See Hal Brands, American Grand Strategy and the Liberal Order: Continuity, Change, and Options for the
Future (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2016), p. 2; G. John Ikenberry, After Victory: Insti-
tutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order after Major Wars (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2001), pp. 23, 45; and Michael J. Mazarr, Summary of the Building a Sustainable In-
ternational Order Project (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2018), pp. 3–5. Order does not
mean peace or stability. In other words, it is not the opposite of disorder, a term that can convey
chaos and conºict. Nevertheless, many in the West believe that a well-established liberal world or-
der facilitates peace. Nor is order a concept that describes the balance of power in a particular re-
gion or among the great powers. The international order and the global balance of power are
distinct entities, although they are related, as discussed below.
4. For my views on international institutions, see John J. Mearsheimer, “The False Promise of In-
ternational Institutions,” International Security, Vol. 19, No. 3 (Winter 1994/95), pp. 5–49, doi.org/
10.2307/2539078.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

necessary to ensure our nation’s security . . . I will not wait on events, while
dangers gather.”5
An order can contain different kinds of institutions, including security insti-
tutions such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), or the Warsaw Pact, as well as economic insti-
tutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the North American
Free Trade Agreement, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development, and the World Bank. It can also include institutions that deal
with the environment, such as the Paris Agreement to tackle climate change,
and more multifaceted institutions such as the European Union (EU), the
League of Nations, and the United Nations (UN).
Orders are indispensable in the modern international system for two rea-
sons. First, they manage interstate relations in a highly interdependent world.6
States engage in enormous amounts of economic activity, which leads them to
establish institutions and rules that can regulate those interactions and make
them more efªcient. But that interdependence is not restricted to economic af-
fairs; it also includes environmental and health issues. Pollution in one coun-
try, for example, invariably affects the environment in neighboring countries,
while the effects of global warming are universal and can be dealt with only
through multilateral measures. Moreover, deadly diseases do not need pass-
ports to cross international boundaries, as the lethal inºuenza pandemic of
1918–20 made clear.
States are also interconnected in the military realm, which leads them to
form alliances. To present an adversary with a formidable deterrent or to ªght
effectively should deterrence break down, allies beneªt from having rules that
stipulate how each member’s military will operate and how they will coordi-
nate with each other. The need for coordination is magniªed because modern
militaries possess a vast array of weapons, not all of which are compatible
with their allies’ weaponry. Consider the wide variety of weapons in the mili-
taries that made up NATO and the Warsaw Pact, not to mention the difªculty
of coordinating the movements of the various ªghting forces inside those alli-
ances. It is unsurprising that both superpowers maintained heavily institution-
alized alliances—and indeed heavily institutionalized orders—during the
Cold War.
Second, orders are indispensable in the modern international system be-
International Security 43:4
10
5. President George W. Bush, “State of the Union Address” (Washington, D.C.: White House, Jan-
uary 29, 2002), https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/01/20020129-
11.html.
6. Robert O. Keohane, After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1984); and Stephen D. Krasner, ed., “International Re-
gimes,” special issue, International Organization, Vol. 36, No. 2 (Spring 1982).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

cause they help the great powers manage the behavior of the weaker states in
ways that suit the great powers’ interests.7 Speciªcally, the most powerful
states design institutions to constrain the actions of less powerful states and
then put signiªcant pressure on them to join those institutions and obey the
rules no matter what. Nevertheless, those rules often work to the beneªt
of the weaker states in the system.
A good example of this phenomenon is the superpowers’ efforts during
the Cold War to build a nonproliferation regime. Toward that end, in 1968 the
Soviet Union and the United States devised the NPT, which effectively made it
illegal for any member state that did not have nuclear weapons to acquire
them. Naturally, the leadership in Moscow and Washington went to great
lengths to get as many states as possible to join the NPT. The superpowers
were also the main driving force behind the formation of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group in 1974, which aims to place signiªcant limits on the sale of
nuclear materials and technologies to countries that do not possess nuclear
weapons, but might attempt to acquire them in the market.
The institutions that make up an order, however, cannot compel powerful
states to obey the rules if those states believe that doing so is not in their inter-
est. International institutions, in other words, do not take on a life of their own,
and thus do not have the power to tell the leading states what to do. They are
simply tools of the great powers. Still, rules, which are the essence of any insti-
tution, help manage the behavior of states, and great powers obey the rules
most of the time.
The bottom line is that in a world of multifaceted interdependence, a system
of rules is necessary to lower transaction costs and help carry out the multi-
tude of interactions that take place among states. Adm. Harry Harris, a former
commander of U.S. military forces in the Paciªc, captures this point when he
referred to the liberal international order as the “Global Operating System.”8
Types of Orders
There are three important distinctions among the orders that populate the in-
ternational system. The ªrst difference is between international orders and
bounded orders. For an order to be international, it must include all of the
world’s great powers. Ideally, it would contain every country in the system. In
contrast, bounded orders consist of a set of institutions that have limited mem-
Bound to Fail
11
7. Jack Knight, Institutions and Social Conºict (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
8. Statement of Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., U.S. Navy Commander, U.S. Paciªc Command before
the House Armed Services Committee on U.S. Paciªc Command Posture, 115th Cong., 1st sess.,
April 26, 2017, p. 1, https://docs.house.gov/meetings/AS/AS00/20170426/105870/HHRG-115-
AS00-Wstate-HarrisH-20170426.PDF.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

bership. They do not include all of the great powers, and they are usually re-
gional in scope. In most cases, they are dominated by a single great power,
although it is possible for two or more great powers to form a bounded order,
provided at least one great power remains outside of it. In short, international
and bounded orders are created and run by great powers.
International orders are concerned mainly with facilitating cooperation be-
tween states. Speciªcally, they help foster cooperation either among the great
powers in the system or among virtually all the countries in the world.
Bounded orders, on the other hand, are designed mainly to allow rival great
powers to wage security competition with each other, not to advance coopera-
tion between them. Nevertheless, great powers that lead bounded orders work
hard to foster cooperation among the member states, coercing them if neces-
sary. High levels of cooperation within the bounded order are essential for
waging security competition with opposing great powers. Lastly, international
orders are a constant feature of contemporary international politics, whereas
bounded orders are not. Only realist international orders are accompanied
by bounded orders.
The second major distinction concerns the different kinds of international
orders that great powers can organize: realist, agnostic, or ideological (to in-
clude liberal). Which order takes hold depends primarily on the distribution of
power among the great powers. The key issue is whether the system is bipolar,
multipolar, or unipolar. If it is unipolar, the political ideology of the dominant
state also matters for determining the kind of international order that forms. In
bipolarity and multipolarity, however, the political ideology of the great pow-
ers is largely irrelevant.
realist orders
The international order—and the institutions that make it up—will be realist
if the system is either bipolar or multipolar. The reason is simple: if there are
two or more great powers in the world, they have little choice but to act ac-
cording to realist dictates and engage in security competition with each other.
Their aim is to gain power at the expense of their adversaries, but if that is not
possible, to make sure that the balance of power does not shift against them.
Ideological considerations are subordinated to security considerations in these
circumstances. That would be true even if all the great powers were liberal
states.9 Nevertheless, rival great powers sometimes have an incentive to coop-
International Security 43:4
12
9. Consider, for example, the hard-nosed security competition between Britain and the United
States in the latter part of the nineteenth century and the intense rivalry among Britain, France,
and Germany in the twenty-ªve years before World War I. All of those countries were liberal de-
mocracies. See Christopher Layne, “Kant or Cant: The Myth of the Democratic Peace,” Interna-
tional Security, Vol. 19, No. 2 (Fall 1994), pp. 5–49, doi.org/10.2307/2539195; and Ido Oren, “The
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

erate. After all, they operate in a highly interdependent world, where they are
sure to have some common interests.
Bounded and international orders, which operate side by side in a realist
world, help opposing great powers compete and cooperate among themselves.
Speciªcally, the great powers establish their own bounded orders to help wage
security competition with each other. In contrast, they organize international
orders to facilitate cooperation between themselves and often with other coun-
tries as well. The institutions that make up an international order are well
suited for helping great powers reach agreements when those states have
common interests. This concern with cooperation notwithstanding, the great
powers are still rivals whose relationship is competitive at its core. Balance
of power considerations are always at play, even when great powers work
through international institutions to cooperate with each other. In particular,
no great power is going to sign an agreement that diminishes its power.
The institutions that make up these realist orders—be they international or
bounded—might sometimes have features that are consistent with liberal val-
ues, but this is not evidence that the order is liberal. Those features just happen
to also make sense from a balance of power perspective. For example, the key
economic institutions inside a bounded order might be oriented to facilitate
free trade among the member states, not because of liberal calculations, but be-
cause economic openness is considered the best way to generate economic and
military power inside that order. Indeed, if abandoning free trade and moving
toward a more closed economic system made good strategic sense, that would
happen in a realist order.
agnostic and ideological orders
If the world is unipolar, the international order cannot be realist. Unipolarity
has only one great power, and thus by deªnition there can be no security com-
petition between great powers, which is a sine qua non of any realist world or-
der. Consequently, the sole pole has little reason to create a bounded order.
After all, bounded orders are mainly designed for waging security competi-
tion with other great powers, which is irrelevant in unipolarity. Nevertheless,
some of the institutions in that nonrealist international order might be regional
in scope, whereas others will be truly global in terms of their membership.
None of those regional institutions, however, would be bundled together to
form a bounded order; they would instead be either loosely or tightly linked
with the other institutions in the prevailing international order.
In unipolarity, an international order can take one of two forms—agnostic or
Bound to Fail
13
Subjectivity of the ‘Democratic’ Peace: Changing U.S. Perceptions of Imperial Germany,” Interna-
tional Security, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Fall 1995), pp. 147–184, doi.org/10.2307/2539232.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

ideological—depending on the political ideology of the leading state. The key
issue is whether the unipole has a universalistic ideology, one that assumes
that its core values and its political system should be exported to other coun-
tries. If the unipole makes this assumption, the world order will be ideologi-
cal. The sole pole, in other words, will try to spread its ideology far and
wide and remake the world in its own image. It would be well positioned to
pursue that mission, because there are no rival great powers with which it
must compete.
Liberalism, of course, contains within it a powerful universalistic strand,
which stems from its emphasis on the importance of individual rights. The lib-
eral story, which is individualistic at its core, maintains that every person has a
set of inalienable or natural rights. As such, liberals tend to be deeply con-
cerned about the rights of people all around the world, regardless of which
country they live in. Thus, if the unipole is a liberal democracy, it is almost cer-
tain to try to create an international order that aims to reshape the world in its
own image.10
What does a liberal international order look like? The dominant state in the
system obviously must be a liberal democracy and must have enormous inºu-
ence within the key institutions that populate the order. Furthermore, there
must be a substantial number of other liberal democracies in the system and a
largely open world economy. The ultimate goal of these liberal democracies,
especially the leading one, is to spread democracy across the globe, while pro-
moting greater economic intercourse and building increasingly powerful and
effective international institutions. In essence, the aim is to create a world or-
der consisting exclusively of liberal democracies that are economically en-
gaged with each other and bound together by sets of common rules. The
underlying assumption is that such an order will be largely free of war and
will generate prosperity for all of its member states.
Communism is another universalistic ideology that could serve as the basis
for building an ideological international order. Indeed, Marxism shares some
important similarities with liberalism. As John Gray puts it, “Both were en-
lightened ideologies that look forward to universal civilization.”11 Both liberal-
ism and communism, in other words, are bent on transforming the world.
Communism’s universalistic dimension is based on the concept of class, not
rights. Marx and his followers maintain that social classes transcend national
groups and state borders. Most importantly, they argue that capitalist exploita-
International Security 43:4
14
10. See John J. Mearsheimer, The Great Delusion: Liberal Dreams and International Realities (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2018).
11. John Gray, Black Mass: Apocalyptic Religion and the Death of Utopia (New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2007), p. 30.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

tion has helped foster a powerful bond among the working classes in different
countries. Hence, if the Soviet Union had won the Cold War and had felt the
kind of enthusiasm for Marxism in 1989 that the United States felt for liberal
democracy, Soviet leaders surely would have tried to build a communist inter-
national order.
If the unipole does not have a universalistic ideology, and therefore is not
committed to imposing its political values and governing system on other
countries, the international order would be agnostic.12 The dominant power
would still target regimes that challenged its authority and would still be
deeply involved in both managing the institutions that make up the interna-
tional order and molding the world economy to ªt with its own interests. It
would not, however, be committed to shaping local politics on a global scale.
The sole pole would instead be more tolerant and pragmatic in its dealings
with other countries. If Russia, with its present political system, were ever to
become a unipole, the international system would be agnostic, as Russia is not
driven by a universalistic ideology. The same is true of China, where the re-
gime’s principal source of legitimacy is nationalism, not communism.13 This is
not to deny that some aspects of communism still have political importance for
China’s rulers, but the leadership in Beijing displays little of the missionary
zeal that usually comes with communism.14
thick and thin orders
So far, I have distinguished between international and bounded orders, and I
have divided international orders into realist, agnostic, and ideological kinds.
A third way to categorize orders—be they international or bounded—is to fo-
cus on the breadth and depth of their coverage of the most important areas of
state activity. Regarding breadth, the central question is whether an order has
some effect on the key economic and military activities of its member states.
Concerning depth, the main question is whether the institutions in the order
exert signiªcant inºuence on the actions of its member states. In other words,
does the order have strong and effective institutions?
With these two dimensions in mind, one can distinguish between thick or-
Bound to Fail
15
12. In using the word “agnostic” to describe this kind of order, I am not saying that the unipole
cares little about its own ideology or does not have one. In fact, it may be seriously committed to a
particular ideology at home, but it will be largely noncommittal—agnostic—about the ideology
that other states adopt.
13. See Zheng Wang, Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese Politics and
Foreign Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012); and Suisheng Zhao, “Foreign
Policy Implications of Chinese Nationalism Revisited: The Strident Turn,” Journal of Contemporary
China, Vol. 22, No. 82 (July 2013), pp. 535–553, doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2013.766379.
14. Timothy R. Heath, China’s New Governing Party Paradigm (New York: Ashgate, 2014); and
David Shambaugh, China’s Communist Party: Atrophy and Adaptation (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 2008).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

ders and thin orders. A thick or robust order comprises institutions that have a
substantial effect on state behavior in both the economic and military realms.
Such an order is broad and deep. A thin order, on the other hand, can take
three basic forms. First, it might deal with only the economic or military do-
main, but not both. Even if that realm contained strong institutions, it would
still be categorized as a thin order. Second, an order might deal with one or
even both realms, but contain weak institutions. Third, it is possible, but un-
likely, that an order will be involved with economic and military matters, but
will have strong institutions in only one of those areas. In short, a thin order is
either not broad, not deep at all, or deep in only one of the two crucial realms.
Figure 1 summarizes the different categories of orders employed in this article.
The Rise and Decline of International Orders
No international order lasts forever, which raises the question: What ex-
plains the demise of an existing order and the rise of a new one? The same two
factors that account for the prevailing order, the distribution of power and the
leading state’s political ideology, explain the fall of realist and agnostic orders
as well as the kind of order that replaces them. While those same factors also
help explain the dissolution of ideological orders, two other factors, national-
ism and balance of power politics, usually play the central role in causing
their collapse.
Realist orders, which are based on either bipolarity or multipolarity, collapse
when the underlying distribution of power changes in fundamental ways. If
International Security 43:4
16
Figure 1. A Typology of Orders
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

the international system shifts from bipolarity to multipolarity or vice versa,
or if the number of great powers in a multipolar system decreases or in-
creases, the resulting order remains realist, although different in its conªgura-
tion. Regardless of the number of great powers in the system, they still must
compete with each other for power and inºuence. But if bipolarity or multi-
polarity gives way to unipolarity, the new order will be either agnostic or
ideological, depending on whether or not the sole pole is committed to a uni-
versalistic ideology.
Realist orders tend to have signiªcant staying power, because major shifts in
the balance of power are usually the result of differential economic growth
among the great powers over a long period of time. Great power wars, how-
ever, can sometimes lead to a swift change in the global distribution of power,
although such events are rare.15 After World War II, for example, the system
shifted from multipolar to bipolar, largely because of the total defeat of
Germany and Japan and the terrible price the war exacted on Britain and
France. The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as the two poles.
Moreover, when realist orders change, they usually give way to newly con-
ªgured realist orders—as happened after World War II—simply because
unipolarity is rare.
Agnostic orders also tend to have substantial staying power, because the
unipole accepts the heterogeneity that is inherent in political and social
life and does not try to micromanage the politics of nearly every country on
the planet. That kind of pragmatic behavior helps preserve, if not augment, the
hegemon’s power. An agnostic order is likely to meet its end when unipolarity
gives way to either bipolarity or multipolarity, making the order realist; or if
the sole pole experiences a revolution at home and adopts a universalistic ide-
ology, which would surely lead it to forge an ideological order.
By contrast, any ideological international order based on a universalistic
ideology, such as liberalism or communism, is destined to have a short life
span, mainly because of the domestic and global difªculties that arise when
the unipole seeks to remake the world in its own image. Nationalism and bal-
ance of power politics work to undermine the requisite social engineering in
countries targeted for regime change, while nationalism also creates signiªcant
problems on the home front for the sole pole and its ideological allies. When
such problems emerge, the unipole is likely to give up trying to remake the
world in its own image, in effect abandoning its efforts to export its ideology
abroad. It might even forsake that ideology altogether. When that happens, the
order stops being ideological and becomes agnostic.
Bound to Fail
17
15. Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983);
and Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conºict from
1500 to 2000 (New York: Random House, 1987).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

An ideological order can also come to an end in a second way. New great
powers could emerge, which would undermine unipolarity and lead to either
a bipolar or a multipolar system. In that event, the ideological order would be
replaced by bounded and international realist orders.
The Cold War Orders, 1945–89
The global distribution of power from 1945 to 1989 was bipolar, which
led to the formation of three principal political orders. There was an over-
arching international order that was largely created and maintained by the
Soviet Union and the United States for purposes of facilitating cooperation be-
tween them when they had common interests. This emphasis on cooperation
notwithstanding, it was not a liberal order, as the superpowers were engaged
in intense rivalry throughout the Cold War, and the order they created was
fully consistent with the security interests of both sides. Moreover, the Soviet
Union was not a liberal democracy, and indeed Moscow and Washington were
ideological adversaries. There were also two bounded orders, one largely
conªned to the West and dominated by the United States, the other consisting
mainly of the world’s communist countries and dominated by the Soviet
Union. They were created by the superpowers for purposes of waging security
competition with each other.
The international order that existed during the Cold War was a thin one, as
it did not have a pronounced inºuence on the behavior of states—especially
the great powers—in either the economic or military realm. Because the West
and the communist world engaged in only minimal economic intercourse dur-
ing the Cold War, there was little need to build institutions to help manage
their economic dealings.16 Militarily, however, the story was more compli-
cated. Given that the United States and the Soviet Union were bitter foes that
competed for power, they concentrated on building thick bounded orders to
help wage that struggle. Thus, the main military institutions that each super-
power created—NATO and the Warsaw Pact—were not international in
scope. They were instead the key elements in the U.S.-led and Soviet-led
bounded orders.
Nevertheless, the United States and the Soviet Union sometimes had good
reasons to cooperate and negotiate arms control agreements that served their
mutual interests. Most importantly, they worked together to craft institutions
designed to prevent nuclear proliferation. They also reached agreements
International Security 43:4
18
16. In fact, the United States established the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Con-
trols (CoCom) in the early Cold War to limit East-West trade. Michael Mastanduno, Economic Con-
tainment: CoCom and the Politics of East-West Trade (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1992).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

aimed at limiting the arms race so as to save money, ban destabilizing
weapons, and avoid competition in areas such as Antarctica. Finally, they con-
cluded agreements aimed at establishing “rules of the road” and conªdence-
building measures. In the process, Moscow and Washington helped strengthen
the Cold War international order, although it remained a thin order.
Both superpowers opposed further proliferation as soon as they ac-
quired the bomb. Although the United States tested the ªrst atomic weapon in
1945 and the Soviet Union followed suit in 1949, they did not put in place a set
of institutions that could seriously limit the spread of nuclear weapons until
the mid-1970s. The ªrst step forward was the creation of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in 1957. Its primary mission is to promote the civilian
use of nuclear energy, but with safeguards that ensure that states receiving nu-
clear materials and technologies for peaceful purposes do not use them to
build a bomb. The key institutions that the superpowers devised to curb
proliferation are the NPT and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, which, along with
the International Atomic Energy Agency, markedly slowed the spread of nu-
clear weapons after 1975.
The United States and the Soviet Union also began pursuing an arms control
agreement in the late 1960s that would put limits on their strategic nuclear ar-
senals. The result was the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT I),
which capped the number of strategic nuclear weapons each side could deploy
(although at very high levels) and severely restricted the development of anti-
ballistic missile systems. Moscow and Washington signed the SALT II Treaty in
1979, which put further limits on each side’s strategic nuclear arsenal, al-
though neither side ratiªed it. The superpowers worked on a follow-on agree-
ment, the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, during the 1980s, but it was not put
into effect until after the Cold War ended. The other signiªcant arms control
agreement was the 1988 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which
eliminated all short-range and intermediate-range missiles from the Soviet and
U.S. arsenals.
The superpowers negotiated a host of other less signiªcant security
agreements and treaties that were also part of the Cold War international or-
der. They include the Antarctic Treaty System (1959), the Partial Test Ban
Treaty (1963), the Moscow-Washington Hot Line (1963), the Outer Space Treaty
(1967), the Seabed Arms Control Treaty (1971), the U.S.-Soviet Incidents at Sea
Agreement (1972), the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(1973), the Biological Weapons Convention (1975), and the Helsinki Accords
(1975). There were some agreements that were reached during the Cold War,
such as the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which was signed in
1982, but not ratiªed and put into effect until 1994, ªve years after the Cold
War ended.
Bound to Fail
19
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The UN was probably the most visible institution in the Cold War interna-
tional order, but it had little inºuence on the behavior of countries around the
world, mainly because the rivalry between the superpowers made it almost
impossible for that institution to adopt and enforce consequential policies.
In addition to this thin international order, the superpowers each built a
thick bounded order to help wage the Cold War. The Soviet-led order included
institutions that dealt with economic, military, and ideological matters.17 The
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon), for example, was estab-
lished in 1949 to facilitate trade between the Soviet Union and the communist
states in Eastern Europe. The Warsaw Pact was a military alliance founded
in 1955 to counter NATO after NATO’s member states decided to invite
West Germany to join the alliance. The Pact also helped Moscow keep its
Eastern European allies in line. Finally, the Soviets created the Communist
Information Bureau in 1947 as a successor to the Communist International.
Both were designed to coordinate the efforts of communist parties around the
world, mainly for the purpose of allowing the Soviets to purvey their policy
views to their ideological brethren. The Communist Information Bureau was
dissolved in 1956.
The bounded Western order was dominated by the United States, which
shaped it to suit its own interests. It encompassed a host of economic institu-
tions such as the IMF (1945), the World Bank (1945), the General Agreement on
Trade and Tariffs (GATT, 1947), the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral
Export Controls (CoCom, 1950), and the European Community (EC, 1950), as
well as NATO on the security front. Although the liberal United States domi-
nated this bounded order, which also included a number of other liberal de-
mocracies, it was a realist order from top to bottom. Its primary mission was to
create a powerful West that could contain and ultimately defeat the Soviet
Union and its allies.
This emphasis on security notwithstanding, generating prosperity was an
important end in itself for the countries in this bounded order. Moreover, there
were some aspects of this realist order that are compatible with liberal princi-
ples. For instance, there is little doubt that ceteris paribus U.S. policymakers
preferred dealing with democracies to authoritarian states. But promoting de-
mocracy always yielded when it conºicted with the dictates of balance of
power politics. The United States did not preclude non-democracies from join-
ing NATO or throw out countries that abandoned democracy once they joined,
as the cases of Greece, Portugal, and Turkey illustrate.
International Security 43:4
20
17. Laurien Crump and Simon Godard, “Reassessing Communist International Organizations: A
Comparative Analysis of COMECON and the Warsaw Pact in Relation to Their Cold War Compet-
itors,” Contemporary European History, Vol. 27, No. 1 (February 2018), pp. 85–109, doi.org/10.1017/
S0960777317000455.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Moreover, although Washington tended to favor economic policies that en-
couraged free trade and investment among the order’s members, those poli-
cies were guided foremost by strategic considerations. As Joanne Gowa notes,
“That the East-West conºict drove the United States to merge the high politics
of security and the low politics of trade is a theme that emerges repeatedly in
the work of those scholars who both deªned and developed the subªeld of
international political economy.”18 In fact, the Dwight Eisenhower administra-
tion, which generally believed that free trade is the best way to create eco-
nomic and military might, was prepared in the mid-1950s to allow the EC to
become a closed economic bloc—that is, to undermine free trade—because it
thought that an illiberal arrangement of this kind would make Western Europe
a more powerful partner in the Cold War.19 Furthermore, the Marshall Plan
was motivated mainly by strategic considerations. And as Sebastian Rosato
shows, power politics underpinned the making of the EC, the forerunner of
the EU.20
The Liberal International Order, 1990–2019
After the Cold War ended and the Soviet Union collapsed, the United States
was by far the most powerful country in the world. The “unipolar moment”
had arrived, which meant that most of the constraints that arise from security
competition between great powers were gone.21 Moreover, the thick Western
order that the United States had created to deal with the Soviet Union re-
mained ªrmly intact, while the Soviet order quickly fell apart. Comecon and
the Warsaw Pact dissolved in the summer of 1991, and the Soviet Union col-
lapsed in December 1991. Unsurprisingly, President George H.W. Bush de-
cided to take the realist Western order and spread it across the globe,
transforming it into a liberal international order. The institutions that had
made up the thin Cold War–era international order—the UN and the various
Bound to Fail
21
18. Joanne Gowa, Allies, Adversaries, and International Trade (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1994), p. 3.
19. Pascaline Winand, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and the United States of Europe (New York: St. Martin’s,
1993), pp. 109–137. The United States cared greatly about relative gains in its dealings with the
Soviet Union, as relative gains and losses are largely synonymous with shifts in the balance of
power. But Washington paid little attention to relative gains when dealing with its West European
allies and focused instead on maximizing their absolute gains, not because U.S. policymakers were
motivated by liberal thinking, but because the more powerful U.S. allies were, the better suited
they were to help contain the Soviet Union.
20. Melvyn P. Lefºer, “The United States and the Strategic Dimensions of the Marshall Plan,” Dip-
lomatic History, Vol. 12, No. 3 (Summer 1988), pp. 277–306, doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7709.1988
.tb00477.x; and Sebastian Rosato, Europe United: Power Politics and the Making of the European Com-
munity (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2011).
21. Charles Krauthammer, “The Unipolar Moment,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 70, No. 1 (1990/91),
pp. 23–33, doi.org/10.2307/20044692.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

arms control agreements—would be incorporated into what Bush called the
“new world order.”22
This remarkably ambitious endeavor enjoyed the enthusiastic support
of the liberal democracies in East Asia and especially Western Europe, al-
though there was never any doubt that the United States was in charge. As
Bush put it in 1990, “There is no substitute for American leadership.”23 Or
as Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and President Barack Obama liked
to say, the United States is “the indispensable nation.”24 In essence, Bush and
his successors in the White House were bent on creating a new international
order that was fundamentally different from the Western order that had ex-
isted during the Cold War. Speciªcally, they were committed to transforming a
bounded realist order into an international liberal order.25 Indeed, Bill Clinton
made it clear when he ran for president in 1992 that his predecessor’s concept
of a new world order was not ambitious enough.26
Creating a liberal international order involved three main tasks. First, it was
essential to expand the membership in the institutions that made up the
Western order, as well as erect new institutions where necessary. In other
words, it was important to build a web of international institutions with
universal membership that wielded great inºuence over the behavior of the
member states. Second, it was imperative to create an open and inclusive inter-
national economy that maximized free trade and fostered unfettered capital
markets. This hyperglobalized world economy was intended to be much more
ambitious in scope than the economic order that prevailed in the West during
the Cold War. Third, it was crucial to vigorously spread liberal democracy
around the world, a mission that was frequently shortchanged when the
United States was competing for power with the Soviet Union. This goal was
not the United States’ alone; its European allies generally embraced this under-
taking as well.27
International Security 43:4
22
22. Bush ªrst laid out his vision before a joint session of Congress on September 11, 1990. Presi-
dent George H.W. Bush, “Address before a Joint Session of the Congress on the Persian Gulf Crisis
and the Federal Budget Deªcit,” September 11, 1990, https://bush41library.tamu.edu/archives/
public-papers/2217.
23. Ibid.
24. Albright made this statement on NBC’s The Today Show. Madeleine K. Albright, interview by
Matt Lauer, Today Show, February 19, 1998. For Obama’s use, see Barack Obama, “Remarks by the
President at the United States Military Academy Commencement Ceremony” (Washington, D.C.:
White House, May 28, 2014).
25. The one important similarity between the new liberal international order and the bounded re-
alist Western order is that both represent thick orders.
26. See David C. Hendrickson, “The Recovery of Internationalism,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 73, No. 5
(September/October 1994), pp. 26–27, doi.org/10.2307/20046829.
27. Europe’s enthusiasm for this mission is reºected in the policies of the Organization for Secu-
rity and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). See Pamela Jawad, “Conºict Resolution through Democ-
racy Promotion? The Role of the OSCE in Georgia,” Democratization, Vol. 15, No. 3 (June 2008),
pp. 611–629, doi.org/10.1080/13510340801972288.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

These three tasks, of course, are directly tied to the principal liberal theories
of peace: liberal institutionalism, economic interdependence theory, and dem-
ocratic peace theory. Thus, in the minds of its architects, constructing a robust,
sustainable liberal international order was synonymous with creating a peace-
ful world. This deep-seated belief gave the United States and its allies a pow-
erful incentive to work assiduously to create that new order. Integrating China
and Russia into it was especially important for its success, because they were
the most powerful states in the system after the United States. The goal was to
embed them in as many institutions as possible, fully integrate them into the
open international economy, and help turn them into liberal democracies.
NATO expansion into Eastern Europe is a good example of the United States
and its allies working to turn the bounded Western order into a liberal interna-
tional order.28 One might think that moving NATO eastward was part of a
classic deterrence strategy aimed at containing a potentially aggressive
Russia.29 But it was not, as the West’s strategy was geared toward liberal ends.
The objective was to integrate the countries of Eastern Europe—and maybe,
one day, Russia as well—into the “security community” that had developed in
Western Europe during the Cold War. There is no evidence that its chief
architects—Presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama—thought that Russia might
invade its neighbors and thus needed to be contained, or that they thought
Russian leaders had legitimate reasons for fearing NATO enlargement.30
This liberal approach to NATO expansion is reºected in how the Clinton ad-
ministration sold that policy to the U.S. and West European publics. For exam-
ple, Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott argued in 1995 that embedding
the countries of Eastern Europe in NATO—as well as the European Union—
was the key to producing stability in that potentially volatile region. “Enlarge-
Bound to Fail
23
28. Enlarging NATO was actually the core element in a broader strategy that also included ex-
panding the European Union and promoting the so-called color revolutions in Eastern Europe to
spread democracy. See John J. Mearsheimer, “Why the Ukraine Crisis Is the West’s Fault: The Lib-
eral Delusions That Provoked Putin,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 93, No. 5 (September/October 2014),
pp. 77–89, https://www.jstor.org/stable/24483306.
29. Some analysts made this argument after the Ukraine crisis broke out in February 2014. For ex-
ample, Stephen Sestanovich claims that “today’s aggressive Russian policy was in place” in the
early 1990s and that “power calculations undergirded” U.S. policy toward Russia—to include
NATO expansion—from that point forward. See Sestanovich’s response, “How the West Has
Won,” in Michael McFaul, Stephen Sestanovich, and John J. Mearsheimer, “Faulty Powers: Who
Started the Ukraine Crisis?” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 93, No. 6 (November/December 2014), pp. 171,
173, https://www.jstor.org/stable/24483933. NATO enlargement, from this perspective, is a realist
policy. The available evidence, however, contradicts this interpretation of events. Russia was in no
position to take the offensive in the 1990s, and although its economy and military improved some-
what after 2000, hardly anyone in the West saw it as a serious threat to invade its neighbors—
including Ukraine—before the February 2014 crisis. In fact, Russia had few large-scale combat
units on or near its western border, and no serious Russian policymaker or pundit talked about
conquering territory in Eastern Europe. Thus, it is unsurprising that U.S. leaders rarely invoked
the threat of Russian aggression to justify NATO expansion.
30. Ikenberry, After Victory, pp. 235–239, 245–246, 270–273.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

ment of NATO,” Talbott argued, “would be a force for the rule of law both
within Europe’s new democracies and among them.” Moreover, it would “pro-
mote and consolidate democratic and free market values,” which would
further contribute to peace.31
The United States based its policy toward China in the post–Cold War pe-
riod on the same liberal logic. For example, Secretary of State Albright main-
tained that the key to sustaining peaceful relations with a rising China is to
engage with it, not try to contain it the way the United States had sought to do
with the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Engagement, Albright claimed,
would lead to China’s active membership in some of the world’s major institu-
tions and help integrate it into the U.S.-led economic order, which would inev-
itably help turn China into a liberal democracy. China would then be a
“responsible stakeholder” in the international system, highly motivated to
maintain peaceful relations with other countries.32
The Bush Doctrine, which was developed over the course of 2002 and used
to justify the March 2003 invasion of Iraq, is a third example of a major U.S.
policy aimed at building a liberal international order. In the wake of the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Bush administration concluded that
winning the so-called global war on terror required not only defeating al-
Qaida, but also confronting countries such as Iran, Iraq, and Syria. The admin-
istration’s key operating assumption was that the regimes in these purported
rogue states were closely tied to terrorist organizations such as al-Qaida, were
bent on acquiring nuclear weapons, and might even give them to terrorists.33
International Security 43:4
24
31. Strobe Talbott, “Why NATO Should Grow,” New York Review of Books, August 10, 1995, pp. 27–
28. Talbott’s views on NATO expansion were widely shared in the upper echelons of the Clinton
administration. See Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher, “Reinforcing NATO’s Strength in
the West and Deepening Cooperation with the East,” opening statement at the North Atlantic
Council Ministerial Meeting, Noordwijk, the Netherlands, May 30, 1995; Secretary of State Mad-
eleine K. Albright, “A Presidential Tribute to Gerald Ford,” Ford Museum Auditorium, Grand
Rapids, Michigan, April 17, 1997; and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, “Commencement
Address,” Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 5, 1997.
32. Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, “American Principle and Purpose in East Asia,” 1997
Forrestal Lecture, U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, April 15, 1997. See also Secretary of
State Warren M. Christopher, “America and the Asia-Paciªc Future,” address to the Asia Society,
New York City, May 27, 1994; White House, “A National Security Strategy of Engagement and En-
largement” (Washington, D.C.: White House, February 1995), pp. 28–29, http://nssarchive.us/
NSSR/1995.pdf; and White House, “A National Security Strategy for a New Century” (Washing-
ton, D.C.: White House, October 1998), pp. 41–47, http://nssarchive.us/NSSR/1998.pdf. Deputy
Secretary of State Robert B. Zoellick ªrst introduced the term “responsible stakeholder” in 2005.
Zoellick, “Whither China? From Membership to Responsibility,” remarks to the National Commit-
tee on U.S.-China Relations, New York City, September 21, 2005.
33. President Bush said shortly before the invasion of Iraq in March 2003 that “the greatest danger
in the war on terror [is] outlaw regimes arming with weapons of mass destruction.” American
Enterprise Institute (AEI), “President George W. Bush Speaks at AEI’s Annual Dinner,” Feb-
ruary 28, 2003, http://www.aei.org/publication/president-george-w-bush-speaks-at-aeis-annual-
dinner. On the Bush Doctrine, see White House, The National Security Strategy of the United States
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The best way to deal with proliferation and terrorism, the administration rea-
soned, was to turn all the countries in the Greater Middle East into liberal
democracies, which would transform that region into a giant zone of peace,
thereby eliminating the twin problems of proliferation and terrorism.34 “The
world has a clear interest in the spread of democratic values,” President Bush
declared, “because stable and free nations do not breed the ideologies of mur-
der. They encourage the peaceful pursuit of a better life.”35
It appeared to many observers in the early 1990s that the United States was
well situated to construct a liberal international order. It had abundant experi-
ence building and running the Western order during the Cold War, and it was
remarkably powerful compared to its potential rivals. China was in the early
stages of its rise, and Russia was in a state of complete disarray, which re-
mained the case throughout the 1990s. This huge power advantage meant that
the unipole could largely ignore realist dictates and act according to liberal
principles, which was impossible during the Cold War. It also meant that the
United States could coax or coerce other states into following its edicts. And of
course, there was always the possibility that Washington would use force to
get its way.
Finally, the United States and its allies had abundant legitimacy in the years
immediately after the Cold War ended. Not only did they win that protracted
conºict, but there seemed to be no viable alternative to liberal democracy,
which looked like the optimal political order for the foreseeable future. It was
widely believed in the West at the time that eventually almost every country in
the world would become a liberal democracy—a belief that led Francis
Fukuyama to conclude that this might be “the end of history.”36 Moreover, the
wide array of international institutions that had helped produce abundant
prosperity in the West during the Cold War appeared to be ideally suited to
Bound to Fail
25
(Washington, D.C.: White House, September 17, 2002), https://www.state.gov/documents/
organization/63562.pdf.
34. One might think that NATO expansion, U.S. efforts to turn China into a liberal democracy, and
the Bush Doctrine are all evidence of untethered realism that unipolarity made possible. This con-
clusion would be wrong, however. It is clear from the discourse in policymaking circles and within
the foreign policy establishment that these policies were motivated by liberal theories and that the
United States and its allies in the West were ªrmly committed to building a liberal international or-
der that would transcend balance of power politics. Almost all realists, it is worth noting, opposed
NATO expansion, the Iraq War, and the Bush Doctrine. Moreover, they favored emphasizing con-
tainment over engagement in dealing with China. If the United States had been guided by realist
logic in the aftermath of the Cold War, it would have sought to create an agnostic international or-
der and pursued the policies advocated by realist thinkers. See Stephen M. Walt, The Hell of Good
Intentions: America’s Foreign Policy Elite and the Decline of U.S. Primacy (New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2018), pp. 266–269.
35. AEI, “President George W. Bush Speaks at AEI’s Annual Dinner.”
36. Francis Fukuyama, “The End of History?” National Interest, No. 16 (Summer 1989), pp. 3–18,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24027184.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

take globalization to the next step. In essence, it looked like the United States
was well positioned to pursue liberal hegemony, a foreign policy that called
for building a world order based on liberal principles.37
During the 1990s and the early 2000s, the United States and its close allies
appeared to be well on their way to fashioning a full-scale liberal international
order. There were certainly problems, but generally speaking the emerging or-
der was working nicely. Few people expected that it would begin to unravel a
few years into the new millennium, but that is what happened.
The Golden Years, 1990–2004
Efforts by the United States and its allies to integrate China and Russia into the
order’s key economic institutions after the Cold War ended were generally
successful. Russia joined the IMF and the World Bank in 1992, although it did
not join the World Trade Organization (WTO) until 2012. China had been a
member of the IMF and the World Bank since 1980, when it took Taiwan’s
place in those institutions. China joined the WTO in 2001. Despite a minor cri-
sis over Taiwan in 1997, Beijing and Washington were otherwise on good
terms throughout the 1990s and early 2000s. Engagement appeared to be
working. Relations between Moscow and Washington also fared well during
this period.
The story in Europe was also positive. The 1992 Maastricht Treaty was a ma-
jor step in promoting European integration, and in 1999 the euro made its
debut, which was widely seen as evidence that the EU had a bright future.
Furthermore, the early waves of EU and NATO expansion into Eastern Europe
occurred with few problems, although Russian policymakers made their oppo-
sition clear. Finally, both Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union broke apart
peacefully. Yugoslavia did not, however, resulting in wars over Bosnia and
Kosovo, which the United States and its NATO allies were slow to respond to
and bring to an end. But a cold peace was eventually imposed on the Balkans
by 1999.
Developments in the Greater Middle East were more mixed, but even there
it appeared that the region was slowly but steadily being incorporated into the
liberal international order. Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
signed the Oslo Accords in September 1993, giving hope that the two sides
might ªnd a peaceful solution to their conºict by the end of the decade. The
United States, operating with a UN Security Council mandate, led a broad
coalition of allies to a stunning military victory over Iraq in early 1991—
liberating Kuwait, signiªcantly weakening Iraq’s military, and exposing
International Security 43:4
26
37. Mearsheimer, The Great Delusion, pp. 120–151; and Walt, The Hell of Good Intentions, pp. 21–52.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Saddam Hussein’s secret nuclear weapons program, which was then shut
down. Nevertheless, the Baathist regime maintained power. Afghanistan also
remained a trouble spot, mainly because the Taliban allowed al-Qaida to plan
its operations there, including the September 11 terrorist attacks, without inter-
ference. The events of that day, however, prompted the United States to invade
Afghanistan in October 2001 and topple the Taliban, putting in its place a pro-
Western regime. Then, in March 2003, the U.S. military conquered Iraq and re-
moved Saddam from power. It appeared by the summer of 2003 that the Bush
Doctrine, which aimed to spread democracy across the Greater Middle East,
was going to work as intended.
Democracy was clearly on the march in the wake of the Cold War, seemingly
conªrming Fukuyama’s claim that there was no viable alternative to it. Ac-
cording to Freedom House, 34 percent of the countries in the world were
democracies in 1986. That ªgure jumped to 41 percent by 1996 and then 47 per-
cent by 2006.38 On the economic front, hyperglobalization was generating
abundant wealth around the globe, although there was a major ªnancial crisis
in Asia in 1997–98. In addition, interest was growing in prosecuting human
rights violators, leading a prominent scholar to write a book titled The Justice
Cascade: How Human Rights Prosecutions Are Changing World Politics.39 On the
proliferation front, South Africa abandoned its nuclear weapons program in
1989, while in the mid-1990s, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine gave up the
nuclear arsenals they had inherited from the Soviet Union and joined the NPT.
North Korea, which was on its way to developing nuclear weapons in the
early 1990s, agreed in 1994 to terminate its program.
The United States and its allies did face some setbacks during the 1990s.
India and Pakistan tested nuclear weapons in 1998; the Clinton administration
suffered policy failures in Somalia (1993) and Haiti (1994–95); and it reacted
too slowly to the Rwandan genocide in 1994. The United States also failed to
end deadly wars in Congo and Sudan, while al-Qaida grew more dangerous
within the conªnes of Afghanistan. Still, one could make a strong case that
enormous progress had been made in a short time in spreading the liberal
international order across the globe and that the United States and its
allies would eventually be able to integrate troubled countries in Africa
and elsewhere into the new order and make further strides in rolling
back proliferation.
Bound to Fail
27
38. Arch Puddington and Tyler Roylance, “Populists and Autocrats: The Dual Threat to Global
Democracy,” in Freedom House, “Freedom in the World, 2017” (Washington, D.C.: Freedom
House, 2017), p. 4.
39. Kathryn Sikkink, The Justice Cascade: How Human Rights Prosecutions Are Changing World Poli-
tics (New York: W.W. Norton, 2011). See also Sarah B. Snyder, From Selma to Moscow: How Human
Rights Activists Transformed U.S. Foreign Policy (New York: Columbia University Press, 2018).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The Liberal Order Goes Downhill, 2005–19
Midway through the ªrst decade of the 2000s, serious cracks began to appear
in the liberal international order, which have since steadily widened. Consider
what has happened in the Greater Middle East. By 2005, it was evident that
the Iraq War was becoming a disaster, and the United States had no strategy
for stopping the ªghting, much less turning Iraq into a liberal democracy.
At the same time, the situation in Afghanistan began to deteriorate, as the
Taliban came back from the dead and took aim at the U.S.-installed govern-
ment in Kabul. The Taliban has grown stronger with time, and the war
in Afghanistan is now the longest war in U.S. history, lasting longer than the
American Civil War, World War I, World War II, and the Korean War com-
bined. Moreover, there is no apparent path to victory for the United States. In
addition, Washington and its allies pursued regime change in Libya and Syria,
which ended up helping precipitate deadly civil wars in both countries. Fur-
thermore, in the process of helping wreck Iraq and Syria, the Bush and Obama
administrations played a crucial role in creating the Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria, which the United States went to war against in 2014.
The Oslo Peace Process, which once seemed so promising, has failed,
and the Palestinians have virtually no hope of acquiring their own state. With
Washington’s help, Israeli leaders are instead creating a Greater Israel, which,
as two former Israeli prime ministers have said, will be an apartheid state.40
The United States is also contributing to the death and destruction in the civil
war in Yemen, and gave its consent when the Egyptian military overthrew a
democratically elected government in Egypt in 2013. Far from incorporating
the Greater Middle East into the liberal international order, the United States
and its allies inadvertently have played a central role in spreading illiberal dis-
order in that region.
Europe, which appeared to be the brightest star in the liberal galaxy during
the 1990s, was in serious trouble by the late 2010s. The EU suffered a major set-
back in 2005 when French and Dutch voters rejected the proposed Treaty
for Establishing a Constitution for Europe. Even more damaging was the
Eurozone crisis, which began in late 2009 and lingers on. Not only has the cri-
sis exposed the fragility of the euro, but it also created intense animosity be-
tween Germany and Greece, among other political problems.41 To make
International Security 43:4
28
40. Rory McCarthy, “Barak: Make Peace with Palestinians or Face Apartheid,” Guardian, Feb-
ruary 2, 2010, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/03/barak-apartheid-palestine-
peace; and Rory McCarthy, “Israel Risks Apartheid-Like Struggle If Two-State Solution Fails, Says
Olmert,” Guardian, November 30, 2007, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/nov/30/
israel.
41. Claudia Sternberg, Kira Gartzou-Katsouyanni, and Kalypso Nicolaidis, The Greco-German Af-
fair in the Euro Crisis: Mutual Recognition Lost? (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

matters worse, Britain voted in June 2016 to exit the EU, and xenophobic right-
wing parties are growing more powerful across Europe. Indeed, fundamen-
tally illiberal views are commonplace among leaders in Eastern Europe. As a
January 2018 article in the New York Times put it: “The Czech president has
called Muslim immigrants criminals. The head of Poland’s governing party
has said refugees are riddled with disease. The leader of Hungary has de-
scribed migrants as poison . . . [and] Austria’s new far-right interior minister
suggested concentrating migrants in asylum centers—with all its obvious and
odious echoes of World War II.”42
Finally, a civil war began in 2014 in Eastern Ukraine that involves Russia,
which seized Crimea from Ukraine in March 2014, causing a serious deteriora-
tion in relations between Russia and the West. Both sides have built up their
military forces in Eastern Europe and routinely engage in military exercises
that escalate suspicions and tensions between them. This crisis, which largely
resulted from EU and NATO expansion, coupled with the West’s efforts to pro-
mote democracy in countries such as Georgia and Ukraine, and maybe
even Russia itself, shows no signs of ending anytime soon.43 Given this state of
affairs, Moscow is on the lookout for opportunities to sow discord in the West
and weaken the EU and NATO.
Cracks have also opened up in the transatlantic relationship, especially with
Trump’s arrival in the White House. Trump is contemptuous of almost all the
institutions that make up the liberal international order, including the EU
and NATO, which he famously described as “obsolete” during the 2016 cam-
paign.44 In a letter sent to European leaders shortly after Trump assumed
ofªce, a leading EU policymaker said that the new president posed a serious
threat to the EU’s future.45 A few months later, just after Trump moved into
the White House, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, a deeply committed
Atlanticist, warned that Europe could not depend on the United States the
way it once did. Europeans, she said, “really must take our fate into our own
hands.”46 Transatlantic relations have only worsened since then, and the likeli-
hood of a turnaround in the foreseeable future seems remote.
Bound to Fail
29
42. Patrick Kingsley, “Trump’s Immigration Remarks Outrage Many, but Others Quietly Agree,”
New York Times, January 12, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/12/world/europe/trump-
immigration-outrage.html.
43. Mearsheimer, “Why the Ukraine Crisis Is the West’s Fault”; and my reply in McFaul,
Sestanovich, and Mearsheimer, “Faulty Powers,” pp. 175–178.
44. Ashley Parker, “Donald Trump Says NATO Is ‘Obsolete,’ UN Is ‘Political Game’,” New York
Times, April 2, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/politics/ªrst-draft/2016/04/02/donald-trump-
tells-crowd-hed-be-ªne-if-nato-broke-up/.
45. James Kanter, “Trump Threatens Europe’s Stability, a Top Leader Warns,” New York Times, Jan-
uary 31, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/world/europe/trump-european-union-
donald-tusk.html.
46. Henry Farrell, “Thanks to Trump, Germany Says It Can’t Rely on the United States. What Does
That Mean?” Monkey Cage blog, Washington Post, May 28, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The 2007–08 global ªnancial crisis not only did enormous damage to many
peoples’ lives, but it also called into question the competence of the elites who
manage the liberal international order.47 In addition to the deterioration in re-
lations between Russia and the West, there are worrying signs of potential
conºict with China, which is determined to change the status quo regarding
the East China Sea, the South China Sea, Taiwan, and the China-India border.
Unsurprisingly, the United States is now more interested in containing rather
than engaging China. In fact, the Trump administration recently said that ad-
mitting China into the WTO was a mistake, as Beijing’s protectionist policies
clearly show that it is unwilling to play by that institution’s rules.48
Finally, the number of liberal democracies has been declining since 2006, re-
versing a trend that once looked unstoppable.49 Relatedly, soft authoritarian-
ism appears to have become an attractive alternative to liberal democracy, a
development that was almost unthinkable in the early 1990s. And some lead-
ers extol the virtues of illiberal democracy, while others govern countries that
are committed to political systems based on deeply held religious beliefs. Of
course, liberal democracy has lost some of its appeal in recent years, especially
because the United States’ political system often looks dysfunctional. Even se-
rious scholars worry about the future of American democracy.50
In sum, the liberal international order is crumbling.
What Went Wrong?
The early successes of the United States and its allies in building a liberal inter-
national order notwithstanding, the order contained the seeds of its own ruin.
Even if Western policymakers had been wiser stewards of that order, they
could not have extended its longevity in any meaningful way. It was doomed
to fail because it contained three fatal ºaws.
First, intervening in the politics of countries to turn them into liberal democ-
racies is extremely difªcult, and attempting such ambitious social engineering
on a global scale is virtually guaranteed to backªre and undermine the legiti-
macy of the enterprise itself. Nationalism is almost certain to cause signiªcant
International Security 43:4
30
.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/05/28/thanks-to-trump-germany-says-it-cant-rely-on-
america-what-does-that-mean.
47. John Lanchester, “After the Fall,” London Review of Books, July 5, 2018, pp. 3–8; and Adam
Tooze, Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World (New York: Viking, 2018).
48. Shawn Donnan, “U.S. Says China WTO Membership Was a Mistake,” Financial Times, Janu-
ary 19, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/edb346ec-fd3a-11e7-9b32-d7d59aace167.
49. Puddington and Roylance, “Populists and Autocrats,” p. 4.
50. William A. Galston, Anti-Pluralism: The Populist Threat to Liberal Democracy (New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2018); Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, How Democracies Die (New
York: Crown, 2018); and Cass R. Sunstein, ed., Can It Happen Here? Authoritarianism in America
(New York: Dey Street, 2018).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

resistance inside the countries targeted for regime change. Balance of power
politics will also help impede the enterprise in particular cases. States that
fear regime change—or other forms of U.S. interference—will band together
for mutual support and seek ways to thwart the United States’ liberal agenda.
Thus, Syria and Iran aided the Iraqi insurgency after the 2003 U.S. invasion,
and Russia and China have backed each other economically, militarily, and
within international forums such as the UN Security Council.
Second, the liberal international order ultimately creates conditions that lead
to serious political problems regarding sovereignty and national identity
within the liberal democracies themselves, and all the more so when efforts at
regime change fail and produce large-scale refugee ºows into liberal countries.
Again, the principal cause of the problem is nationalism, which is far from
dead even in avowedly liberal societies.
Third, hyperglobalization has produced signiªcant economic costs for large
numbers of people inside the liberal democracies, including the sole pole.
Those costs, including lost jobs, declining or stagnant wages, and marked in-
come inequality, have serious domestic political consequences, which further
undermine the liberal international order. Moreover, the open international
economy helped fuel the rise of China, which, along with Russia’s revival,
eventually undermined unipolarity, an essential condition for creating a liberal
international order.
The Perils of Democracy Promotion
The most important requirement for building a liberal international order is to
spread liberal democracy far and wide, which was initially seen to be an emi-
nently feasible task. It was widely believed in the West that politics had
evolved to the point where there was no sensible alternative to liberal democ-
racy. If so, then it would be relatively easy to create a liberal international or-
der, because spreading liberal democracy around the world would meet
little resistance. Indeed, most people would welcome the idea of living in a
Western-style democracy, as appeared to be the case in Eastern Europe after
the collapse of communism.
This endeavor, however, was doomed from the start. To begin, there never
has been and never will be universal agreement on what constitutes the ideal
political system. One can argue that liberal democracy is the best form of gov-
ernment (I would), but others will invariably favor a different governing sys-
tem. It is worth remembering that during the 1930s, many people in Europe
preferred communism or fascism to liberal democracy. One might then point
out that liberal democracy ultimately triumphed over those two “isms.” Al-
though that is true, the history of the 1930s is a reminder that liberal democ-
Bound to Fail
31
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

racy is not the preordained order of things, and it is not unusual for elites and
their publics to opt for alternative political systems. Thus, it should not be sur-
prising that illiberal democracies are appearing in Eastern Europe, while
China and Russia have embraced authoritarian rule, North Korea is a dictator-
ship, Iran is an Islamic republic, and Israel increasingly privileges its Jewish
identity over its democratic character.51 Nor should it be surprising that there
has never been a time when more than 50 percent of the countries in the world
were liberal democracies.52
This diversity of opinion about what constitutes the best governing system
combines with nationalism to make the process of spreading liberal democ-
racy around the world extremely difªcult. Nationalism, after all, is a remark-
ably powerful political force that places great emphasis on self-determination
and sovereignty. Nation-states, in other words, do not want other nation-states
telling them how they should order their political system. Thus, trying to im-
pose liberal democracy on a state that prefers an alternative form of govern-
ment is almost certain to provoke ªerce resistance.
ªghting losing wars
Trying to build a liberal international order invariably leads to wars against
minor powers that aim to turn those targets into liberal democracies. There are
signiªcant limits on how much social engineering of this sort great powers can
attempt in a bipolar or multipolar system, mainly because they must focus on
competing with each other for power and inºuence. Spreading liberal democ-
racy is of secondary, if not tertiary, importance; indeed, at times liberal states
will seek to prop up authoritarian governments if they are aligned against ri-
val great powers, as the United States did repeatedly during the Cold War.
In unipolarity, however, the sole pole is free to go on crusades to make
the world more democratic, simply because there are no rival great powers to
worry about. Thus, it is unsurprising that the United States has fought seven
wars in the years since the Cold War ended and has been at war for two out of
every three years over that period.53 Such wars, however, regularly fail to
achieve their objective.
The U.S. effort to use military force to bring about democracy has been fo-
International Security 43:4
32
51. Larry Diamond, Marc F. Plattner, and Christopher Walker, eds., Authoritarianism Goes Global:
The Challenge to Democracy (Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016); and “Jewish or
Democratic?” Economist, July 28, 2018, p. 30.
52. Puddington and Roylance, “Populists and Autocrats,” p. 4.
53. John Ikenberry maintains that for the United States to sustain a liberal international order, it
must pursue a restrained foreign policy. “The more that power peeks out from behind these insti-
tutions,” he writes, “the more that power will provoke reaction and resistance.” Ikenberry believes
that this is not a problem for the United States, however, because it has a “unique ability to engage
in strategic restraint.” Ikenberry, After Victory, pp. 270–271. But he is wrong; liberal hegemons such
as the United States are highly aggressive and adopt especially ambitious agendas, because that is
what is required to create a liberal international order.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

cused primarily on the Greater Middle East, where it has led to one failure af-
ter another.54 U.S. military forces invaded Afghanistan (2001) and Iraq (2003)
with the intention of turning them into liberal democracies. The occupying
forces not only failed to achieve that goal, but they also ended up precipitating
bloody wars that did enormous damage to political and social life in those two
countries. The main reason for this dismal record is that large-scale social engi-
neering in any society is difªcult, but it is especially daunting in a foreign
country whose political leadership has just been toppled from power. The tar-
get state will be in turmoil; the invading forces will be dealing with an alien
culture that might even be hostile to liberal democracy; and most importantly,
nationalist sentiment is sure to increase sharply and generate an insurgency
against the occupier, as the United States discovered in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Although these failures eroded public support for the liberal international
order and cast doubts on the competence of its leaders, they did not stop the
sole pole from trying to spread liberal democracy by military means, over-
extending itself even further.55 Instead, it looked for less costly ways to accom-
plish that task, which effectively meant giving up on conquering and
occupying non-democracies and employing different strategies to bring down
authoritarian leaders. Thus, when ªghting broke out among rival factions in
Libya in 2011, the United States and its European allies employed airpower to
help remove Col. Muammar al-Gaddaª from power. But the Western powers
had no way of turning Libya into a functioning state, much less a liberal de-
mocracy, with or without troops on the ground.
Also in 2011, the United States and its allies in the Middle East sought to
topple President Bashar al-Assad from power in Syria by arming and training
rebel groups that opposed him. That effort failed, however, largely because
Russia, which has had long-standing strategic ties with Syria, intervened in
2015 to keep Assad in power. Realpolitik thwarted U.S. efforts in Syria. But
even if Assad had been deposed, the end result would have been either a con-
tinuation of the conºict, as in Libya, or the installation of another ruthless
autocrat, as eventually happened in Egypt after President Hosni Mubarak was
deposed in early 2011. Liberal democracy in Syria was not a serious possibility,
but an abundance of murder and mayhem was.
turning the major powers into enemies
Finally, the crusader mentality that underpins the attempts to build a liberal
international order leads to the poisoning of relations between the unipole and
any major power in the system that is not a liberal democracy. Although the
Bound to Fail
33
54. Mearsheimer, The Great Delusion, pp. 120–187.
55. The persistence of these efforts despite repeated failures is emphasized by Walt, The Hell of
Good Intentions, pp. 137–216.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

dominant state will be strongly inclined to make war on minor powers to pro-
mote liberal democracy, it will rarely ever attack major powers for that pur-
pose, especially if they possess nuclear weapons.56 The costs would be too
great, and the likelihood of success would be especially low. Hence, U.S.
policymakers in the post–Cold War period have never seriously considered in-
vading China or Russia, even though the United States is far more powerful
than either of those countries.
Nevertheless, the United States has been committed to turning China and
Russia into liberal democracies and absorbing them into the U.S.-dominated
liberal world order. U.S. leaders have not only made their intentions clear, but
they have also relied on nongovernmental organizations and various subtle
strategies to push Beijing and Moscow toward embracing liberal democracy.
In effect, the aim is peaceful regime change. Predictably, China and Russia
have resisted the unipole’s efforts for the same reason that minor powers have
contested U.S. efforts to shape their domestic politics, and indeed for the
same reason that Americans now recoil at the idea of Russia interfering in
their country’s politics. In a world in which nationalism is the most power-
ful political ideology, self-determination and sovereignty matter hugely for
all countries.
China and Russia have also resisted the spread of the liberal order for realist
reasons, because it would allow the United States to dominate the inter-
national system economically, militarily, and politically. Neither Beijing nor
Moscow, for example, wants U.S. military forces in its neighborhood, much
less on its borders. Thus, it is hardly surprising that China talks about pushing
the U.S. military out of the Western Paciªc and that Russia has long been
deeply opposed to EU and NATO expansion into Eastern Europe. Indeed,
moving those institutions toward Russia eventually led to the Ukraine crisis in
2014. That ongoing conºict has not only poisoned relations between Russia
and the West, but it has incentivized Moscow to ªnd ways to weaken both
the EU and NATO. In short, both nationalist and realist calculations caused the
two major powers in unipolarity to contest the unipole’s efforts to build a
robust liberal international order.
Turning the Liberal Democracies against the Liberal Order
Building a robust liberal international order eventually causes serious political
troubles inside the liberal democracies themselves, because the accompanying
International Security 43:4
34
56. Building on Nuno P. Monteiro’s work, I distinguish among the sole great power, major pow-
ers, and minor powers. Monteiro, Theory of Unipolar Politics (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2014).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

policies clash with nationalism. Those problems on the home front, which
come in two forms, work to eventually undermine the order itself.
To begin with, liberal states believe strongly in the virtues of international
institutions, which leads them to delegate more and more authority to the in-
stitutions that make up the order. That strategy, however, is widely seen as evi-
dence that those states are surrendering sovereignty. One can argue about
whether those liberal countries are actually giving up sovereignty, but there is
no question that they are delegating the authority to make some important de-
cisions to those institutions, which is likely to cause serious political trouble in
a modern nation-state.57 After all, nationalism privileges self-determination
and sovereignty, and thus it is fundamentally at odds with international insti-
tutions that make policies that decidedly affect their member states.58 “The cu-
mulative effect of such expansions of international authority,” Jeff Colgan and
Robert Keohane write, “is to excessively limit sovereignty and give people the
sense that foreign forces are controlling their lives.”59
The intensity of this problem will depend on how much power and inºu-
ence the relevant institutions wield over their member states. Of course, the in-
stitutions that make up a liberal world order are designed to have a profound
effect on the behavior of their member states. This institutional inºuence inevi-
tably raises concerns about a “democratic deªcit.” Voters in those countries
come to think that the distant bureaucrats who make decisions that matter
greatly for them are inaccessible and unaccountable.
There is clear evidence of this phenomenon at play across Europe.60 Con-
sider the 2016 vote in favor of Brexit. Given the huge impact the EU has on its
members’ policies, it is unsurprising that one of the principal reasons a major-
ity of British citizens voted for Brexit is because they thought that their country
had surrendered too much authority to Brussels and that it was time to reas-
Bound to Fail
35
57. I deªne “sovereignty” as the supreme authority to make decisions for a political organization.
I believe that sovereigns can delegate the authority to make certain decisions to international insti-
tutions without surrendering supreme authority, which is the essence of sovereignty. This process
describes what has transpired in the European Union. Sovereigns can also take back the authority
they have delegated. Moreover, I do not think that sovereignty is divisible. My views are drawn
from Jean Bodin, On Sovereignty, trans. and ed. Julian H. Franklin (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1992); Mariya Grinberg, “Unconstrained Sovereignty: Delegation of Authority and Re-
versibility,” University of Chicago, October 22, 2018; and Carl Schmitt, Political Theology: Four
Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty, trans. and ed. George Schwab (Chicago, Ill.: University of
Chicago Press, 2005).
58. Robert Jackson, Sovereignty: Evolution of an Idea (Malden, Mass.: Polity, 2007), pp. 78–113.
59. Jeff D. Colgan and Robert O. Keohane, “The Liberal Order Is Rigged: Fix It Now or Watch It
Wither,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 96, No. 3 (May/June 2017), p. 42, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/world/2017-04-17/liberal-order-rigged.
60. Alberto Alemanno, “Beyond Consultations: Reimagining EU Participatory Politics” (Brus-
sels: Reshaping European Democracy project, Carnegie Europe, December 5, 2018), https://
carnegieendowment.org/ªles/Alemanno_EU_Politics_Dec20182.pdf.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

sert British sovereignty. In particular, many Britons believed that Britain
had lost control of its economic policy, which was undermining demo-
cratic accountability.61 EU bureaucrats in Brussels, who were not elected by
Britons, were seen to be the key architects of British economic policy and
other policies as well. Thus, the authors of an important study on Brexit
write: “Regaining sovereignty—taking back control—was a major theme in
the 2016 referendum.”62
Fears in the West about surrendering sovereignty were not limited to the
EU. As Robert Kuttner points out, with the blossoming of hyperglobalization
in the 1990s, the IMF and the World Bank “mutated into the opposite of the
roles imagined at Bretton Woods. They became instruments for the enforce-
ment of classical laissez-faire as a universal governing principle.”63 Unsurpris-
ingly, concerns about sovereignty have played an important role in recent
U.S. politics. In particular, Trump ran for president on a platform that em-
phasized “America First,” and he harshly criticized all the key institutions
that make up the liberal international order, including the EU, the IMF, and
the World Bank.64
The liberal international order also adopts policies that clash with national
identity, which matters greatly to people all around the world, including those
in the United States and Western Europe.65 At its core, liberalism is an individ-
ualistic ideology that places great weight on the concept of inalienable rights.
This belief, which says that every individual on Earth has the same set of basic
rights, is what underpins the universalistic dimension of liberalism. This uni-
versalistic or transnational perspective stands in marked contrast to the pro-
found particularism of nationalism, which is built on the belief that the world
is divided into discrete nations, each with its own culture. Preserving that cul-
ture is best served by having one’s own state, so that the nation can survive in
the face of threats from the “other.”66
International Security 43:4
36
61. Harold D. Clarke, Matthew Goodwin, and Paul Whiteley, Brexit: Why Britain Voted to Leave the
European Union (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2017), pp. 69–72, 86, 111–115, 141, 166–
170, 173.
62. Ibid., p. 141.
63. Robert Kuttner, Can Democracy Survive Global Capitalism? (New York: W.W. Norton, 2018),
p. 74.
64. Secretary of State Michael R. Pompeo, “Restoring the Role of the Nation-State in the Liberal In-
ternational Order,” address to the German Marshall Fund, Brussels, Belgium, December 4, 2018,
https://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2018/12/287770.htm.
65. M.D.R. Evans and Jonathan Kelley, “National Pride in the Developed World Survey Data from
24 Nations,” International Journal of Public Opinion Research, Vol. 14, No. 3 (September 2002),
pp. 303–338, doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/14.3.303; Michael Keating and John McGarry, eds., Minority
Nationalism and the Changing International Order (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001); and
Mitchell Young, Eric Zuelow, and Andreas Sturm, Nationalism in a Global Era: The Persistence of Na-
tions (New York: Routledge, 2007).
66. Liberalism also has an important particularist dimension to it, which is more in line with na-
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Given liberalism’s emphasis on individuals with equal rights, coupled with
its tendency to downplay if not ignore national identity, it is unsurprising that
the liberal international order emphasizes that countries should axiomati-
cally accept refugees seeking shelter and that individuals should encounter
few obstacles to moving from one nation-state to another for economic or
other reasons. The paradigmatic example of this policy is the EU’s Schengen
Agreement, which has largely eliminated borders among most of that institu-
tion’s member states. Furthermore, the EU is deeply committed in principle to
opening its doors to refugees ºeeing trouble spots.
In a world where national identity matters greatly, mixing different peoples
together, which is what happens when there are open borders and broad-
minded refugee policies, is usually a prescription for serious trouble. It seems
clear, for example, that immigration was the main reason British voters sup-
ported Brexit. They were especially unhappy that people from Eastern Europe
used the EU’s policy of open borders to migrate easily to Britain.67 Britain is
hardly an exception in this regard, as anti-immigrant sentiment is widespread
in Europe and fuels hostility toward the EU.68 The large numbers of refugees
from the Greater Middle East that began arriving in Europe in 2015 have cer-
tainly not been accorded the kind of welcome one would expect from states
that are at the center of the liberal international order. Indeed, there has been
enormous resistance to accepting those refugees, especially in Eastern Europe,
but also in Germany, where Chancellor Merkel hurt herself politically by ini-
tially welcoming them. This trouble over open borders and refugees has not
only called into question the EU’s commitment to liberal values, but it has also
created rifts among the member states—rifts that have shaken the foundation
of that venerable institution.
Bound to Fail
37
tionalism and which should discourage liberal states from trying to remake the world in their own
image. Speciªcally, liberalism places a high premium on tolerance, mainly because it is based on
the sound assumption that it is impossible to reach universal agreement about ªrst principles.
Mearsheimer, The Great Delusion, pp. 53–54. Thus, one might expect liberal states to work out
a modus vivendi with non-liberal states and not try to create a world populated solely by liberal
democracies. When it comes to international politics, however, the universalistic strand of liberal-
ism tends to trump the particularistic strand, which means liberal states tend to be intolerant to-
ward other kinds of political systems.
67. Clarke, Goodwin, and Whiteley, Brexit, pp. 11, 23, 53, 59, 70, 102–103, 109, 113, 122–124, 166–
170, 173, 205, 207–208. Although immigration and open borders are treated separately from sover-
eignty in Brexit, these issues are closely linked. After all, Britain is bent on exiting the EU so that it
can regain authority over its borders, which is now largely in the hands of the EU.
68. Ibid., pp. 222–229; John B. Judis, The Nationalist Revival: Trade, Immigration, and the Revolt
against Globalization (New York: Columbia Global Reports, 2018), pp. 43, 95–98; and European
Commission, “Public Opinion in the European Union,” Standard Eurobarometer 90, Autumn 2018
(Brussels: European Commission, November 2018), pp. 12–15.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The Downside of Hyperglobalization
The sharp growth in economic intercourse that has come with the establish-
ment of the liberal international order has helped cause signiªcant economic
problems inside the liberal states in the system. These problems, in turn, have
generated substantial political resistance to that order. When that happens in a
democracy, the public is likely to turn on the liberal elites and elect leaders
who support policies that are at odds with liberal principles.
The contemporary international economy is highly integrated and remark-
ably dynamic. Change occurs at warp speed, and major developments in one
country invariably have signiªcant effects in other countries. This wide-open
system has had considerable beneªts. It has led to impressive growth at the
global level, helped lift many millions of people out of poverty in countries
such as China and India, and provided huge economic beneªts for the world’s
wealthiest people. At the same time, it has caused major problems that govern-
ments are ill equipped to ªx, at least if they play according to the rules of the
liberal world order. The best way to understand this phenomenon is to com-
pare today’s hyperglobalization with the moderate globalization that obtained
under the Bretton Woods consensus from 1945 until the late 1980s.69
The Bretton Woods consensus was designed to facilitate an open interna-
tional economy, but only up to a point.70 There were, for example, signiªcant
limits on capital ºows across state boundaries. And although GATT was de-
signed to expedite international trade, governments had considerable maneu-
ver room to adopt protectionist policies when it was in their interest to do so.
In effect, governments were able to pursue policies that not only facilitated
prosperity, but also protected their citizens from the vagaries of the market.
John Ruggie famously refers to this relationship between markets and govern-
International Security 43:4
38
69. The subsequent discussion of Bretton Woods and hyperglobalization—or what is sometimes
called neoliberalism—draws heavily on Dani Rodrik, The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the
Future of the World Economy (New York: W.W. Norton, 2011). See also Barry Eichengreen, Global-
izing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System, 2nd ed. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2008); Kuttner, Can Democracy Survive Global Capitalism?; Dani Rodrik, Has
Globalization Gone Too Far? (Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics, March 1997);
Dani Rodrik, One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth (Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2017); and Joseph E. Stiglitz, Globalization and Its Discontents
Revisited: Anti-Globalization in the Era of Trump (New York: W.W. Norton, 2017).
70. The Bretton Woods system, which was negotiated at the end of World War II, focused mainly
on establishing a monetary order built around ªxed exchange rates. That core element of the sys-
tem collapsed in the early 1970s, although Western countries remained committed to limiting capi-
tal ºows and trade liberalization. Rodrik refers to this remaining set of commitments as the
Bretton Woods consensus, not the Bretton Woods system. See Rodrik, The Globalization Paradox,
pp. 69–76, 95–101. In this article, the Bretton Woods consensus refers to the entire period from 1945
to the end of the 1980s.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

ments as “embedded liberalism.”71 The Bretton Woods consensus worked
well for more than four decades, although its days were numbered by the
late 1980s.
Hyperglobalization, which began gaining traction in the 1980s and acceler-
ated after the Cold War, effectively overturned the Bretton Woods consensus.
The new order, created largely by Western policymakers, was designed to
greatly reduce regulation of global markets by removing controls on capital
ºows and replacing GATT with the WTO. This new trade organization, which
began operating in 1995, was intended to open up markets all over the world
and make it especially difªcult for governments to pursue protectionist poli-
cies. “Any obstacle to free trade,” as Dani Rodrik notes, was seen “as an abom-
ination to be removed; caveats be damned.”72 In essence, almost any kind of
government interference in the workings of the world economy was consid-
ered harmful to the liberal international order. To quote Rodrik again, “The
state went from being the handmaiden of economic growth to the principal
obstacle blocking it.”73
hyperglobalization and its discontents
Hyperglobalization has caused a number of major economic problems that
have worked to undermine the legitimacy of the liberal world order in the
states that form the core of that system. For starters, many jobs in particular
sectors of a country’s economy disappear quickly as a result of outsourcing,
throwing large numbers of people out of work.74 Sometimes entire regions see
their traditional economic base destroyed. It is often difªcult for the unem-
ployed, many of whom are unskilled workers with little mobility, to ªnd well-
paying jobs, or any job at all.75 And even if they ªnd good jobs, there is always
Bound to Fail
39
71. John Gerard Ruggie, “International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberal-
ism in the Postwar Economic Order,” International Organization, Vol. 36, No. 2 (Spring 1982),
pp. 379–415, https://www.jstor.org/stable/2706527.
72. Rodrik, The Globalization Paradox, p. 77.
73. Ibid., p. 163.
74. Automation is also responsible for the disappearance of a substantial number of jobs, although
it is difªcult to determine the relative importance of automation and outsourcing. See Susan N.
Houseman, “Understanding the Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment,” Working Paper 18-
287 (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, June 2018), doi.org/
10.17848/wp18-287; and Claire Cain Miller, “The Long-Term Jobs Killer Is Not China. It’s Automa-
tion,” New York Times, December 21, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/upshot/the-
long-term-jobs-killer-is-not-china-its-automation.html.
75. David Goodhart, The Road to Somewhere: The Populist Revolt and the Future of Politics (London:
Hurst, 2017), pp. 147–192. On the human costs of these “progressively worsening labor market op-
portunities,” see Ann Case and Angus Deaton, “Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, Spring 2017),
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/casetextsp17bpea.pdf.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

the possibility they will lose them again, given the “creative destruction” that
comes with hyperglobalization. Even people who have not lost their jobs
worry that someday they might. In brief, the dynamism inherent in the world
economy not only threatens jobs, but also fosters an acute sense of uncertainty
about the future among people everywhere.
In addition, hyperglobalization has done little to raise the real income levels
of the lower and middle classes in the liberal West. At the same time, it has
greatly increased the wages and the wealth of the upper classes.76 The result
is staggering economic inequality almost everywhere, which shows few signs
of abating.77 Indeed, the problem appears likely to be getting worse.78 Under
the Bretton Woods consensus, governments were in a good position to deal
with problems of this sort by devising redistributive tax policies, training pro-
grams for workers, and generous welfare beneªts. But in the liberal interna-
tional order, the solution to almost every problem is to let the market deal with
it, not governments, which are considered to be more of a liability than an as-
set for making the global economy work smoothly. To the extent that rules are
needed to facilitate the smooth working of the global economy, better to rely
on international institutions than governments.
Markets, of course, cannot ªx these problems; indeed, they helped cause
them in the ªrst place and are likely to make them worse in the absence of pol-
icies that states design to protect their citizenry. As one would expect, these
festering problems have led to widespread dissatisfaction with the liberal in-
ternational order and growing sentiment for governments to adopt protection-
ist economic policies, which would undermine the present system. Trump
capitalized on this hostility toward the existing order in the 2016 presidential
campaign not only by railing against international institutions, but also by
making the case for pursuing protectionist economic policies. He empha-
sized the importance of protecting U.S. workers above all else. In both the
Republican primaries and the general election, he defeated opponents who de-
fended the liberal international order and argued against protectionism.79
Since becoming president, Trump has moved in a decidedly protectionist di-
International Security 43:4
40
76. Drew DeSilver, “For Most U.S. Workers, Real Wages Have Barely Budged in Decades” (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Pew Research Center, August 7, 2018), http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/
2018/08/07/for-most-us-workers-real-wages-have-barely-budged-for-decades/; and Edward N.
Wolff, “Inequality and Rising Proªtability in the United States, 1947–2012,” International Review of
Applied Economics, Vol. 29, No. 6 (November 2015), pp. 741–769, doi.org/10.1080/02692171 .2014
.956704.
77. Facundo Alvaredo et al., “World Inequality Report, 2018: Executive Summary” (Paris:
World Inequality Lab, 2017), https://wir2018.wid.world/ªles/download/wir2018-summary-
english.pdf.
78. Walter Scheidel, The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the
Twenty-ªrst Century (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2017).
79. Judis, The Nationalist Revival, pp. 47–80, 117–142.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

rection. Ultimately, when markets clash with the deep-seated interests of large
numbers of a country’s citizens, its politics will evolve in ways that under-
mine the liberal international order.
There is another major problem that comes with hyperglobalization. The
ease and speed with which capital ºows across borders, coupled with the em-
phasis that the liberal world order places on government deregulation, make
this order prone to large-scale economic crises in particular countries or re-
gions, or even the entire world. “Periods of high international capital mobil-
ity,” Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff write, “have repeatedly produced
international banking crises.”80 In fact, there have been a number of crises
since hyperglobalization began taking root in the late 1980s.81 The most conse-
quential were the Asian ªnancial crisis of 1997–98, which came dangerously
close to spreading across the entire globe, and the 2007–08 global ªnancial
crisis, which was the most severe economic breakdown since the Great
Depression of the 1930s and did much to delegitimize the liberal international
order in the West.82 Given the continuing mobility of capital, more crises of
this sort will likely occur, further weakening the present order and perhaps
even bringing it crashing down.
A few words are in order regarding the euro, which is a key feature of the
liberal international order, even though it is part of a strictly European institu-
tion.83 When that currency was established in 1999, it represented a giant step
forward in promoting monetary union among the member states, although
there was neither ªscal nor political union to help underpin the euro. Critics at
the time predicted that without ªscal and political union, the euro would
eventually be plagued by signiªcant problems.84 Many advocates recognized
the problem, but thought that monetary union would ultimately lead to union
on all three fronts, thus eliminating the problem. But that did not happen, and
the euro encountered its ªrst major crisis in 2009, which produced not just eco-
nomic problems, but political problems as well. The crisis and the ensuing at-
tempts to solve it brought hard-edged nationalist sentiment to the surface
in Europe.
Bound to Fail
41
80. Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
Folly (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2011), p. 155.
81. Ibid., pp. 95–96, 344–347; and Rodrik, The Globalization Paradox, pp. 108–109.
82. Tooze, Crashed.
83. Ashoka Mody, EuroTragedy: A Drama in Nine Acts (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018);
and Joseph E. Stiglitz, The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe (New York:
W.W. Norton, 2016).
84. Rudi Dornbusch, “Euro Fantasies,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 75, No. 5 (September/October 1996),
pp. 110–124, doi.org/10.2307/20047747; Martin Feldstein, “EMU and International Conºict,” For-
eign Affairs, Vol. 76, No. 6 (November/December 1997), pp. 60–73, doi.org/10.2307/20048276; Josef
Joffe, “The Euro: The Engine That Couldn’t,” New York Review of Books, December 4, 1997, pp. 26–
31; and Paul Krugman, “The Plight of the Hapless EMU,” Fortune, December 21, 1998, pp. 34–36.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

The EU had great difªculty dealing with the eurozone crisis, but the prob-
lems were eventually solved by massive bailouts from institutions such as the
European Central Bank and from the U.S. government, although not before
signiªcant political damage was done to the EU. More importantly, however,
the EU has not made signiªcant movement toward ªscal and political union,
which means that the ªx is temporary and that more crises are likely in the
years ahead, which will further undermine not only the EU, but the liberal
international order more generally.
the rise of china
There is an additional problem linked to hyperglobalization that has little to
do with the growing political opposition to the international order in liberal
countries, and everything to do with the global balance of power. Until Trump
came to power in 2017, Western elites, in keeping with their post–Cold War
policy of engaging, not containing, China, were deeply committed to integrat-
ing China into the world economy, including all of its key economic institu-
tions. An increasingly prosperous and wealthy China, they assumed, would
eventually become a liberal democracy and an upstanding member of the lib-
eral international order.
What the architects of that policy did not realize, however, is that by helping
accelerate Chinese growth, they were actually helping undermine the liberal
order, as China has rapidly grown into an economic powerhouse with sig-
niªcant military capability. In effect, they have helped China become a great
power, thus undercutting unipolarity, which is essential for maintaining a lib-
eral world order. This problem has been compounded by the resurgence of
Russia, which is once again a great power, although clearly a weak one. With
the rise of China and Russia’s comeback, the international system has be-
come multipolar, which is a death knell for the liberal international order. To
make matters worse, neither China nor Russia has become a liberal democracy.
Even if China and Russia had not become great powers and the world re-
mained unipolar, the liberal order would still be falling apart today because of
its intrinsic ºaws. The election of Donald Trump, who sharply and frequently
criticized all the key elements of the post–Cold War order during his presiden-
tial campaign, is evidence of how much trouble it was in by 2016. Thus, if the
international system had remained unipolar, the liberal world order would
have devolved into an agnostic order under President Trump, as realist orders
have no place in unipolarity. There is certainly no evidence that he is commit-
ted to refashioning the existing liberal order. Indeed, he appears bent on
wrecking it. With or without China, the liberal international order was des-
tined to fail, because it was fatally ºawed at birth.
International Security 43:4
42
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

summary
The various causal processes described above have all played an important
role in subverting the liberal international order. Although each one has a dis-
tinct logic, they have often operated synergistically. For example, the negative
effects of hyperglobalization on the lower and middle classes have combined
with the nationalist resentment over immigration and the sense of lost sover-
eignty to fuel a strong populist backlash against the principles and practices of
the liberal order. Indeed, that anger has often been directed at the liberal elites
who have beneªted from the order and who vigorously defend it. That resent-
ment, of course, has had signiªcant political consequences. It has caused deep
political divisions in the United States and other Western democracies, led to
Brexit, helped put Trump in the White House, and fueled support for national-
ist leaders around the world.
Where Are We Headed?
One might acknowledge that the liberal international order is in terminal de-
cline, but argue that it can be replaced with a more pragmatic version, one that
avoids the excesses of the post–Cold War order.85 This more modest liberal or-
der would pursue a more nuanced, less aggressive approach to spreading lib-
eral democracy, rein in hyperglobalization, and put some signiªcant limits on
the power of international institutions. The new order, according to this per-
spective, would look something like the Western order during the Cold War,
although it would be global and liberal, not bounded and realist.
This solution is not feasible, however, because the unipolar moment is over,
which means there is no chance of maintaining any kind of liberal interna-
tional order for the foreseeable future. Furthermore, President Trump has no
intention of pursuing a “liberal-lite” world order, and without his support,
that option is a nonstarter. But even if Trump were not an obstacle and the in-
ternational system were to remain unipolar, the United States would fail if
it lowered its sights and attempted to construct a less ambitious liberal order.
Indeed, it would end up building an agnostic international order instead.
It is impossible to build a meaningful liberal global order with modest or
more passive policies. The enterprise requires too much social engineering in
Bound to Fail
43
85. For some different perspectives on how to reform the order, see Colgan and Keohane, “The
Liberal Order Is Rigged”; Daniel Deudney and G. John Ikenberry, “Liberal World: The Resilient
Order,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 97, No. 4 (July/August 2018), pp. 16–24, https://www.foreignaffairs
.com/articles/world/2018-06-14/liberal-world; Mazarr, Summary of the Building a Sustainable Inter-
national Order Project; and Kori Schake, America vs the West: Can the Liberal World Order Be Pre-
served? (Melbourne, Australia: Penguin Random House, 2018).
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

too many places. If it has any chance of succeeding (I think it has none), the lib-
eral unipole and its allies must relentlessly pursue highly ambitious global
policies, which is why the United States and its liberal partners acted the way
they did in the wake of the Cold War. That approach, however, is now politi-
cally infeasible because of past failures. Consequently, the liberal democracies
have no choice but to take small steps here and there to remake the world in
their own image, while adopting a live and let live approach toward most
countries in the world. That humble approach would effectively produce an
agnostic order. But that is not going to happen, because the system is multi-
polar and great power politics are once again at play. Thus, the key question
is: What kinds of realist orders will dominate the landscape in the new multi-
polar world?
the new realist orders
There are likely to be three different realist orders in the foreseeable future:
a thin international order and two thick bounded orders—one led by China,
the other by the United States. The emerging thin international order will be
concerned mainly with overseeing arms control agreements and making the
global economy work efªciently. It is also likely to pay more serious attention
than in the past to problems relating to climate change. In essence, the institu-
tions that make up the international order will focus on facilitating interstate
cooperation. The two bounded orders, in contrast, will be concerned princi-
pally with waging security competition against each other, although that will
call for promoting cooperation among the members of each order. There
will be signiªcant economic and military competition between those two or-
ders that will need to be managed, which is why they will be thick orders.
Two key features of the new multipolar world will profoundly shape the
emerging orders. First, assuming that China continues its impressive rise, it
will be involved in an intense security competition with the United States
that will be the central feature of international politics over the course of the
twenty-ªrst century. That rivalry will lead to the creation of bounded orders
dominated by China and the United States. Military alliances will be core com-
ponents of those two orders, which are now beginning to form and will resem-
ble the Soviet-led and U.S.-led orders in the Cold War.
Beijing and Washington, however, will sometimes have reasons to cooperate
on select military issues, an endeavor that will fall within the purview of
the international order, as it did during the Cold War. Again, the focus will
be principally on arms control agreements and will involve Russia as well as
China and the United States. The existing treaties and agreements dealing
with proliferation are likely to remain in place, because all three great pow-
ers will want to limit the spread of nuclear weapons. But Beijing, Moscow, and
International Security 43:4
44
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Washington will have to negotiate new treaties limiting their arsenals, as
the superpowers did during the Cold War.86 Nevertheless, the U.S.-led and
Chinese-led bounded orders will be largely responsible for dealing with core
security matters.
In military matters, the three emerging orders built around the U.S.-China
rivalry should bear a marked resemblance to the three Cold War orders, albeit
with China taking the place of the Soviet Union.
No such parallels exist in the economic realm, however. There was little eco-
nomic intercourse between the superpowers or their respective orders for most
of the Cold War. Thus, the existing international order was not concerned in
any meaningful way with facilitating economic relations between the two
sides. Economic dealings were largely conªned to the bounded orders, and
there the main objective was to pursue policies that would help gain advan-
tage over the other side. Because economic power underpins military power,
waging security competition was carried out in both the economic and mili-
tary domains.
economic cooperation and rivalry
The situation on the economic front is much different today than it was in the
Cold War, which leads to the second important feature of the new multi-
polarity that will shape the incipient orders. There is a huge amount of eco-
nomic intercourse between China and the United States, and between China
and U.S. allies in East Asia. China and the United States also trade and invest
all over the world. The security competition between the two bounded orders
is unlikely to markedly reduce those economic ºows.87 The gains from contin-
ued trade are too great. Even if the United States tries to limit its trade with
China, Beijing can compensate by increasing its trade with other partners,
such as Europe. The future, in other words, is likely to resemble the situation
in Europe before World War I, where there was an intense security competi-
tion between the Triple Alliance (Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Italy)
and the Triple Entente (Great Britain, France, and Russia), yet an enormous
amount of economic interaction among those six countries and within Europe
more generally.
Bound to Fail
45
86. The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, for example, puts limits only on U.S. and Rus-
sian arsenals, but not the Chinese arsenal, which is one reason it has collapsed. The treaty will
have to be renegotiated to include all three countries. Andrew E. Kramer, “The I.N.F. Treaty,
Explained,” New York Times, October 23, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/23/world/
europe/inf-treaty-russia-united-states-trump-nuclear.html.
87. In fact, there is abundant evidence that states often continue trading with each other when
they are at war, which is the most intense form of security competition. Jack S. Levy and Katherine
Barbieri, “Trading with the Enemy during Wartime,” Security Studies, Vol. 13, No. 3 (Spring 2004),
pp. 1–47, doi.org/10.1080/09636410490914059.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

Because the world economy will remain highly interdependent, the emerg-
ing international order will play a pivotal role in managing economic relations
among countries across the globe. Although China has a deep-seated interest
in helping the order facilitate economic cooperation, it will wield its increasing
power to reshape the new international order to its advantage. It will seek to
rewrite the rules in the order’s current economic institutions to give it more
inºuence, and it will create new institutions that reºect its growing power.88
One prominent example of the latter approach is Beijing’s establishment of the
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in 2015, which some observers see as
a potential rival to the IMF and the World Bank. Of course, this situation is
fundamentally different from how the Soviet Union behaved during the
Cold War.
That is not the end of the economic story, however, as there is sure to be an
intense economic rivalry between the two bounded orders that takes place
within the broader context of continued economic cooperation at the global
level.89 This competition will be driven in good part by security concerns.
Economic might, after all, is the foundation of military might, which means
that China has a powerful strategic incentive to possess the dominant econ-
omy in the world, which is its goal. “Made in China 2025,” for example,
is Beijing’s plan to dominate global markets in a wide range of high-
tech products. China’s strategy is to give large government subsidies to state-
owned companies and supplement their research with technology stolen
from American and other Western companies.”90 China is also using its grow-
ing economic power to coerce its neighbors in East Asia to side with Beijing
over Washington.91
The United States, of course, will ªght back against China, not just for
International Security 43:4
46
88. Michael J. Mazarr, Timothy R. Heat, and Astrid Stuth Cevallos, China and the International Or-
der (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2018); and Oliver Stuenkel, Post-Western World: How
Emerging Powers Are Remaking Global Order (Malden, Mass.: Polity, 2016), pp. 120–180.
89. The WTO, which is likely to be part of the new international order, contains provisions that al-
low for economic competition within the conªnes of a bounded order. Speciªcally, it is possible for
a group of countries to set up a preferential trade agreement that lowers tariffs and facilitates co-
operation among the members, while discriminating against nonmembers. The Trans-Paciªc Part-
nership discussed below is such an agreement.
90. Martin Feldstein, “Tariffs Should Target Chinese Lawlessness, Not the Trade Deªcit,” Wall
Street Journal, December 28, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/tariffs-should-target-chinese-
lawlessness-not-the-trade-deªcit-11545955628. See also Derek Scissors and Daniel Blumenthal,
“China Is a Dangerous Rival, and America Should Treat It Like One,” New York Times, January 14,
2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/14/opinion/us-china-trade.html; and Adam Segal,
“When China Rules the Web: Technology in Service of the State,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 97, No. 5
(September/October 2018), pp. 10–18, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2018-08-
13/when-china-rules-web.
91. Jennifer Lind, “Life in China’s Asia: What Regional Hegemony Would Look Like,” Foreign Af-
fairs, Vol. 97, No. 2 (March/April 2018), pp. 71–82, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2018-02-13/life-chinas-asia.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

security-related reasons, but also because the U.S. business community does
not want to lose out to China.92 The Trump administration’s harsh economic
policies toward China are just the start of what promises to be a long-running
and intense rivalry between the U.S.-led and Chinese-led orders.93 The United
States, for example, is sure to try to limit the transfer to China of dual-use
technologies—sophisticated civilian technologies that can be used for military
purposes. It will also try to manage its trade and investment with China, as
well as that of its own allies, in ways that do not erode their position in the bal-
ance of power and hopefully improve it.
The two bounded orders, which are beginning to form, will include in-
stitutions that aim to foster economic cooperation among their members, while
seeking to gain economic advantage over the rival order. The Obama adminis-
tration, for example, explicitly designed the Trans-Paciªc Partnership for this
purpose, although Trump withdrew from it after he became president. China’s
highly ambitious “One Belt, One Road” initiative, which was launched in
2013, is designed not just to help China sustain its impressive economic
growth, but also to project Chinese military and political power around the
globe. And because the United States refused to join the Asian Infrastructure
Development Bank, that impressive institution is likely to become a central
part of the China-led bounded order.
In short, the rivalry between the China-led and U.S.-led bounded orders will
involve both full-throated economic and military competition, as was the case
with the bounded orders dominated by Moscow and Washington during
the Cold War.94 The big difference this time is that the international order will
Bound to Fail
47
92. David A. Lake, “Economic Openness and Great Power Competition: Lessons for China and
the United States,” Chinese Journal of International Politics, Vol. 11, No. 3 (September 2018), pp. 237–
270, doi.org/10.1093/cjip/poy010.
93. See inter alia Edward Luce, “The New Era of US-China Decoupling,” Financial Times, Decem-
ber 20, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/019b1856-03c0-11e9-99df-6183d3002ee1; Raymond
Zhong and Paul Mozur, “For the U.S. and China, a Technology Cold War That’s Freezing Over,”
New York Times, March 23, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/23/technology/trump-
china-tariffs-tech-cold-war.html; Chris Uhlmann and Angus Grigg, “How the ‘Five Eyes’ Cooked
Up the Campaign to Kill Huawei,” Sydney Morning Herald, December 13, 2018, https://www.smh
.com.au/business/companies/how-the-ªve-eyes-cooked-up-the-campaign-to-kill-huawei-
20181213-p50m24.html; “U.S.-China Trade Fight Risks Fragmenting Global Market, Says Beijing
Ambassador,” Wall Street Journal, November 26, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-china-
trade-ªght-risks-fragmenting-global-market-says-beijings-ambassador-to-the-u-s-1543228321; Da-
vid E. Sanger et al., “In 5G Race with China, U.S. Pushes Allies to Fight Huawei,” New York Times,
January 26, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/26/us/politics/huawei-china-us-5g-
technology.html; and Martin Wolf, “The Challenge of One World, Two Systems,” Financial Times,
January 29, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/b20a0d62-23b1-11e9-b329-c7e6ceb5ffdf.
94. The economic and military competition between Britain and Germany before World War I is
also instructive in this regard. See Markus Brunnermeier, Rush Doshi, and Harold James,
“Beijing’s Bismarckian Ghosts: How Great Powers Compete Economically,” Washington Quarterly,
Vol. 41, No. 3 (Fall 2018), pp. 161–176, doi.org/10.1080/0163660X.2018.1520571.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

be deeply involved in managing the cooperative aspects of the global econ-
omy, which was not the case during the Cold War.95
russia and europe
What about Russia? It is certainly a great power, which is why the emerging
world is multipolar, not bipolar. But it will be by far the weakest of the three
great powers for the foreseeable future, unless either the U.S. or Chinese econ-
omy encounters major long-term problems. The key question regarding Russia
is: Which side, if any, will it take in the U.S.-China rivalry? Although Russia is
now aligned with China, it is likely to switch sides over time and ally with the
United States, simply because an increasingly powerful China is the greater
threat to Russia, given their geographical proximity. Should Moscow and
Washington forge closer relations because of their mutual fear of China, Russia
will be loosely integrated into the U.S.-led bounded order. Should Moscow
continue to have friendly relations with Beijing because it fears the United
States more than it does China, Russia will be loosely integrated into the
China-led bounded order. It is possible that Russia will try not to align itself
with either side and remain on the sidelines.96
Finally, what about Europe? Most of the countries in Europe, especially the
major powers, are likely to become part of the U.S.-led bounded order, al-
though they are unlikely to play a serious military role in containing China.
They do not have the capability to project substantial military power into East
Asia, and they have little reason to acquire it, because China does not directly
threaten Europe, and because it makes more sense for Europe to pass the
buck to the United States and its Asian allies. U.S. policymakers, however, will
want the Europeans inside their bounded order for strategically related eco-
nomic reasons. In particular, the United States will want to keep European
countries from selling dual-use technologies to China and to help put eco-
nomic pressure on Beijing when necessary. In return, U.S. military forces
will remain in Europe, keeping NATO alive and continuing to serve as the
International Security 43:4
48
95. There is a small chance that China will not continue its impressive rise and Russia will badly
falter in the decades ahead, while the United States grows increasingly powerful. Should that hap-
pen, the international system would move from multipolarity back to unipolarity, which raises the
obvious question: What would the international order look like, given that the sole pole would be
a liberal democracy? Some U.S. policymakers would surely be tempted to try to create another lib-
eral international order, but few are likely to advocate pursuing the ambitious policies that failed
so badly in the post–Cold War period. Instead, they are likely to back efforts to erect a less ambi-
tious liberal order. That effort, however, is likely to fail and lead to an agnostic international order.
96. Russia is unlikely to create a bounded order of its own if it stays on the sidelines, as it would
not be waging security competition with either side. In the unlikely event that Russia needs its
own bounded order, it heads a few weak regional institutions that might serve as the foundation
for that order: the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Collective Security Treaty Organiza-
tion, the Eurasian Customs Union, and the Eurasian Economic Union.
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

paciªer in that region. Given that virtually every European leader would like
to see that happen, the threat of leaving should give the United States sig-
niªcant leverage in getting the Europeans to cooperate on the economic front
against China.
Conclusion
The United States and its allies built a formidable order during the Cold War,
but it was neither international nor liberal. It was a bounded order whose prin-
cipal purpose was to wage security competition with a rival bounded order
dominated by the Soviet Union. Both orders were realist at their core, not lib-
eral or communist. The coming of unipolarity in the wake of the Cold War al-
lowed the victorious West—with the United States taking the lead—to begin
building a truly liberal international order. The hope was that it would act as a
handmaiden for a peaceful and prosperous world.
During the 1990s and the ªrst few years of the new century, it looked like the
liberal order was going to work as intended and would have a long life. Advo-
cates and architects could point to many successes, while acknowledging some
failures. But starting around 2005, the order began to encounter serious prob-
lems, which have multiplied with time, to the point where it has begun to col-
lapse. This outcome should have been foreseen, as the order had within
it the seeds of its own destruction and thus was destined to fail sooner rather
than later.
The attempt by the United States and its allies to create a liberal inter-
national order faced three main problems. First, it required the liberal states in
the system, especially the United States, to pursue a highly revisionist and
wildly ambitious policy of regime change that was almost certain to fail in
an era in which nationalism, with its emphasis on sovereignty and self-
determination, remains a remarkably powerful force. The policy was also sty-
mied by balance of power politics at both the global and regional levels.
Second, by pushing for the free movement of people across borders and the
delegation of substantial decisionmaking authority to international institu-
tions, the expanding liberal order caused signiªcant political problems inside
the liberal states themselves. The results often clashed with beliefs about
national identity and sovereignty, which matter greatly to most citizens in
modern nation-states.
Third, although some people and countries beneªted from hyperglobal-
ization, it ultimately caused major economic and political problems inside the
liberal democracies, which eventually led to a serious erosion of support for
the liberal international order. At the same time, the economic dynamism
that comes with hyperglobalization helped China rapidly turn itself into
Bound to Fail
49
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026

a great power at roughly the same time Russia was reestablishing itself as a
great power. That shift in the global balance of power put an end to uni-
polarity, which is a prerequisite for a liberal world order.
In the emerging multipolar world, there is likely to be a realist international
order that will be concerned with managing the world economy and also fos-
tering and maintaining arms control agreements. The emphasis in that order
will be on facilitating interstate cooperation. In addition, there are likely to be
Chinese-led and U.S.-led bounded orders that will help prosecute the security
competition that is almost certain to arise between China and its allies, on the
one hand, and the United States and its allies, on the other. That rivalry will
have both economic and military dimensions.
How should the United States act as it leaves behind the liberal international
order that it worked so assiduously to build? First, it should resist any tempta-
tion to continue trying to forcefully spread democracy across the planet via re-
gime change. Because the United States will be compelled to engage in balance
of power politics with China and Russia, its ability to engage in social engi-
neering abroad will be sharply limited. The temptation to remake the world
will always be there, however, because the United States believes so fervently
in the virtues of liberal democracy. But it should resist that temptation, because
going on liberal crusades is certain to lead to serious trouble.
Second, the United States should seek to maximize its inºuence in the eco-
nomic institutions that will make up the emerging international order. Doing
so is important for maintaining as favorable a position as possible in the evolv-
ing global distribution of power. After all, economic power is the basis of mili-
tary power. It is imperative that Washington not allow China to dominate
those institutions and use the resulting inºuence to gain power at the United
States’ expense.
Third, U.S. policymakers should ensure that they create a formidable
bounded order that can contain Chinese expansion. That task mandates creat-
ing economic institutions such as the Trans-Paciªc Partnership and a military
alliance in Asia that is similar to NATO during the Cold War. In the process,
the United States should go to great lengths to pull Russia out of China’s orbit
and integrate it into the U.S.-led order.
In sum, the time has come for the U.S. foreign policy establishment to recog-
nize that the liberal international order was a failed enterprise with no future.
The orders that will matter for the foreseeable future are realist orders that
must be fashioned to serve the United States’ interests.
International Security 43:4
50
Downloaded from http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/isec_a_00342 by guest on 05 January 2026
