hearing in Regina in a series of lec¬ 
tures on the writer’s craft). Although 
Peter Hochbaum grew up at Delta 
among waterfowl biologists, the vocab¬ 
ulary of the trade is dropped when he 
creates for us the ambience of the 
prairie marsh with lines like these: “On 
calm spring evenings when a south 
wind blows, one may stand on the lake 
ridge and watch small parties of ducks 
pass continuously overhead against the 
prairie twilight, heading in a north¬ 
westerly direction for their home 
somewhere beyond the horizon.” 
In its engagingly simple presenta¬ 
tion, this bulletin represents an inter¬ 
esting departure from the usual type 
of bulletin distributed by a govern¬ 
ment agency to publicize its program¬ 
mes.—Margaret Belcher, Regina. 
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH 
CENTRE 
by C. F. Bentley, Professor 
The International Development Re¬ 
search Centre (IDRC) is the result of 
an idea of the Rt. Hon. L. B. Pearson 
who, as Prime Minister of Canada, 
suggested that the Expo site of the 
1967 World’s Fair in Montreal would 
continue to serve mankind if it were 
used as headquarters for work devoted 
to development problems. Although not 
located in Montreal, the IDRC is now 
in existence and operational. 
The Act establishing the Centre was 
passed by the Canadian Parliament in 
the spring of 1970 and the first meet¬ 
ing of the Board of Governors was 
held in late October, 1970. The act 
clearly sets out the objects of the 
Centre as follows: 
“The objects of the Centre are to 
initiate, encourage, support and con¬ 
duct research into the problems of the 
developing regions of the world and 
into the means for applying and adapt¬ 
ing scientific, technical and other 
knowledge to the economic and soil 
advancement of those regions, and, in 
carrying out those objects 
(1) to enlist the talents of natural 
and social scientists and tech¬ 
nologists of Canada and other 
countries; 
(2) to assist the developing regions 
to build up the research capa¬ 
bilities, the innovative skills and 
the institutions required to solve 
their problems; 
(3) to encourage generally the co¬ 
ordination of international de¬ 
velopment research; and 
of Soil Science, Edmonton 
(4) to foster cooperation in re¬ 
search on development problems 
between the developed and de¬ 
veloping regions for their 
mutual benefit.” 
Although established by, and funded 
primarily by the Government of Can¬ 
ada, the IDRC is not a Canadian 
Government Agency. Chairman of the 
Board of Governors is the Rt. Hon. 
L. B. Pearson; there are ten other 
Canadian members of the Board and 
there are ten non-Canadians of whom 
four are from industrialized countries 
and six from developing countries. The 
Centre has independence fully equal to 
and rather analagous to that of Crown 
Corporations. 
A sum of about 30 million dollars 
has been provided for the initial five 
years of the Centre. It is expected 
that subsequent funding will be on a 
proportional basis related to Canada’s 
total contribution to international de¬ 
velopment. Fortunately, the Centre is 
authorized to accept contributions from 
individuals, groups, businesses, na¬ 
tional or international agencies and 
from governments. Contributors tmay 
specify how their monies are to be 
used—but the Centre is not obligated 
to accept all offers as some might be 
inconsistent with the Centre’s pro¬ 
grams or beyond its capabilities. 
The Centre has designated four 
areas to constitute the primary pro¬ 
gram activities during the initial phase 
of its operation. These areas are: 
September, 1971 
151 

Agriculture, Food and 
Nutrition Sciences 
The primary objective of work in 
this area will be to contribute towards 
improvement of the economic, physical 
and social well-being of rural peoples. 
Agricultural (which for this purpose 
includes fisheries and forestry) food 
and nutrition research will be under¬ 
taken as an integrated and inter¬ 
disciplinary activity. 
Population and Health Sciences 
This program will support and en¬ 
courage research into improved tech¬ 
niques of fertility regulation and will 
seek to improve the methods by which 
family planning services are organized. 
It will support demographic studies, 
and research into population policy. 
The Centre will support projects to 
more effectively provide integrated 
health care services to rural peoples 
in low-income countries. In the process 
of these activities, emphasis will be on 
the relationship of population growth 
and health to the development process. 
Information Sciences 
It is obvious that recorded knowl¬ 
edge is a resource, like men, money 
and materials, to be applied to improve 
conditions anywhere. A major objective 
of IDRC is to work with other national 
and international bodies to establish a 
world-wide system for processing, in¬ 
dexing and making readily available to 
those who need it, information of value 
to development. The system would in¬ 
volve advanced technology such as 
computers and micro-photography to 
marshall the stock of international 
information about development into 
much more useful listings than are 
now available. 
Social Sciences and Human Resources 
This program of the Centre will sup¬ 
port projects that supplement and 
complement the three foregoing more 
specific activities. The Centre will sup¬ 
port and encourage the exploration of 
ways which will help nations better 
provide education and training to rural 
peoples. It will try to encourage de¬ 
velopment of local and small industry 
as service needed for modernization of 
agriculture and as a means of generat¬ 
ing local non-agricultural employment. 
To this end it is necessary to study 
the nature and cause of migration 
from rural areas to choking cities, and 
find ways to foster the growth of 
small urban centres. The Centre will 
take part in the search for better ways 
and means of transferring technologies 
appropriate to developing countries to 
them. 
Examples may give a better under¬ 
standing of the practical types of acti¬ 
vities which are being undertaken. 
Members of the Board and the offi¬ 
cers of the Centre share the realization 
that population increase is perhaps the 
greatest hindrance to economic and 
social improvement in many develop¬ 
ing countries. It is therefore no coin¬ 
cidence that the first grant approved 
by the Centre was in the area of popu¬ 
lation work. The Barbados has achieved 
a substantial reduction in birth rate 
but it is not known how much of that 
accomplishment is attributable to the 
activities of the Family Planning Asso¬ 
ciation there. A grant has been made 
to support an investigation by Bajans, 
in co-operation with Canadian special¬ 
ists, aimed at finding an answer to 
that question. If the Family Planning 
Association played a significant role in 
achieving birth reduction in the Bar¬ 
bados, that approach should be a useful 
one for neighboring countries with 
similar peoples, cultures and problems 
to follow. (The Centre desires to sup¬ 
port or conduct research the results of 
which will be broadly applicable—it is 
an international-centre!) 
An evolving project, which is likely 
to be launched very soon, is a compre¬ 
hensive rural one. In the area con¬ 
cerned, cultivators with very small 
land holdings, usually less than six 
acres, are still practicing a traditional 
type of subsistence agriculture. The 
project hopes to demonstrate that crop 
yields can be substantially improved 
by use of improved varieties, practical 
pest control practices and soil fertility 
management. Integrated collection and 
transport of the produce (to an 
already assured market) will benefit 
the cultivators. So too will co-ordinated 
152 
THE BLUE JAY 

services for the supply of the neces¬ 
sary inputs. Some local services will be 
needed to provide some local non- 
agricultural employment, thereby help¬ 
ing to stem the flight from the area 
tc large urban centres. An educational 
program including services to family 
life is also intended. The major re¬ 
quirement of technical personnel will 
be provided by the host country which 
is showing enthusiasm by selecting 
only truly elite professionals to execute 
the test program. Two very well quali¬ 
fied Canadians will be attached to the 
project. If the research being under¬ 
taken in this project can achieve its 
objectives, many millions may be ulti¬ 
mately benefited. 
The International Development Re¬ 
search Centre is intended to do 
research that will contribute to im¬ 
provement of living conditions, espec¬ 
ially in developing countries. Most 
people in such countries are in rural 
parts and consequently the major 
focus of IDRC programs is there. 
JOHN LANE 
by Elizabeth Cruickshank, 
John Lane received the honorary 
degree of Doctor of Laws at the 1971 
spring Convocation of Brandon Uni¬ 
versity. 
Members of the Saskatchewan Nat¬ 
ural History Society will remember 
meeting John Lane at his first summer 
meeting at Moose Mountain Provincial 
Park in 1959, and at subsequent gath¬ 
erings. As one of the persons present 
at the Moose Mountain meet, I have 
happy personal recollections of an ex¬ 
pedition led by Jack Lane along a 
roadway being cleared. As we stepped 
over felled tree trunks, Jack’s conver¬ 
sation with a skulking wee warbler, 
with Jack imitating its resigned 
“toodle - oodle - oo” turtling sounds, 
brought the curious black - hooded, 
crepe-breasted Mourning Warbler into 
sight—a first for his companions. 
Along the way a Warbling Vireo sang 
from a nest atop the tallest poplar. 
“He sings while he’s baby - sitting.” 
Such comments and actions made any 
However, urban problems need re¬ 
search too and the Centre is support¬ 
ing, in part, investigations in eight 
major cities of less developed countries 
where acute problems exist as a result 
of migration from rural areas. Be¬ 
cause human resources, in the form of 
qualified professionals with realistic 
practical experience, are fundamental 
to improvement and to ultimate self- 
sufficiency in the new nations, it is 
Centre policy to seek and encourage 
research projects where there is a sub¬ 
stantial (and preferably dominant) 
role on the part of local scientists and 
professionals. 
The establishment of the Interna¬ 
tional Development Research Centre, 
the first institution of its kind, has 
attracted a good deal of international 
interest. It is to be hoped, and indeed 
it is expected, that this pioneering 
Canadian creation will make signifi¬ 
cant contributions to improvement of 
the human condition in the next 
decade. 
HONOURED 
2329 Athol Street, Regina 
jaunt with Jack Lane a jolly and in¬ 
formative one. 
Fortunate, too, to be a passenger in 
the Lanes’ big yellow station wagon. 
Skirting the high narrow rocky road 
along Scissor’s Creek at the Rocanville 
meet, at each rise along the way, our 
exuberant driver burst into poetry or 
song. “Up the airy mountain — down 
the rushy glen” — Or when the road 
was less interesting and conversation 
at a standstill, tuneful humming of the 
classical familiars or some of his own 
poetic compositions delighted his fel¬ 
low travellers. 
And the historical information that 
Jack offered his companions! Not just 
the items from the Historic Sites lit¬ 
erature but things like “Nora’s grand¬ 
mother made all the bread for Fort 
Ellice fortress in the troubled times of 
its early days”. Nora is his understand¬ 
ing helpmate and her grandparents 
had farmed near the famous fort. 
As a guide in Seton’s country, Jack 
September, 1971 
153