Legal Traditions of the World, H. Patrick Glenn [Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000. xxiv + 371 pp, paperback, US$29.95]
What kind of reader would be most tempted to pick up a book with the grand
title "Legal Traditions of the World"? The likely candidates, I would say, are
those who are searching for an overview of the world's legal traditions, and
those who might like to use the book as a guiding reference before entering
into a particular field. Indeed, the advancement of our understanding of dif-
ferent legal traditions is one of the aims of the author. In his work, Glenn
walks us through seven legal traditions in the order of chthonic law (perhaps
better understood as customary or indigenous law), Talmudic law (Jewish law),
civil law, Islamic law, common law, Hindu law and Asian legal traditions.
However, Glenn's ambition is not fully realised given the scope of materials
that he has to cover.
While seeking to advance the reader's understanding by mapping out a
myriad of legal traditions, Glenn's ultimate aim is to explore what we can do
with our traditions. From the outset, Glenn explains that a deeper under-
standing of traditions is essential because of a decline in faith towards
normative authority of formal sources of law, of growing collaboration among
jurists to solve world problems, and of an increasing role of legal influence in
the global scene. Throughout his work, Glenn is consciously pushing the
discussion of legal traditions onto the global stage, in particular the issue of
human rights. In each chapter, he explores how each tradition can contribute
to the human rights debate.
Because of Glenn's twin ambitions, to give an account of the legal tradi-
tions of the world and to demonstrate that we can do something with them,
the book is oriented towards these two goals. Chapters 1, 2 and 10 are for
readers "not so much interested in law, but interested in tradition and its
relation to society",' whereas the other chapters are for readers who are eager
to leam about the substantive aspects of legal tradition.
The structure and content of the book will be briefly dealt with before I
share my own views. Chapter 1 lays out the framework of the book by defin-
ing tradition as a "bran-tub of information". By this, Glenn means that tradition
is composed of collective information that is transmitted from generation to
generation. Its survival, legitimacy and authority depend on its "persuasive-
ness" to the current generation. Chapter 2 extends this concept of tradition
from a historical perspective onto the global stage. Glenn argues that grow-
ing interaction between individual states naturally results in a competition
for each tradition to influence and out-race the other. Of all the traditions,
1 At p xxii.
Vol 31 Part 2
Legal Traditions of the World 345
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 345 2001

Glenn considers Western, Islamic and Asian traditions to be the main com-
petitors in the process of globalisation. After discussing the seven chapters on
substantive laws, Chapter 10 summarises the essential elements of each tradi-
tion, and takes up the formidable task of reconciling their differences.
In the seven chapters on the substantive aspects of legal traditions, the
stated aims of Glenn are to discuss the sources and content of each particular
tradition, the justification for its lasting influence, its reception to change
and its relation to other traditions. In each of these seven chapters, Glenn
also addresses certain themes. He offers examples of state law under the par-
ticular tradition, how the particular tradition perceives the notion of rights,
how susceptible it is to corruption, and what it can offer to the entire family
of traditions. The common thread that runs through each of these seven chap-
ters is how each tradition can contribute to the advancement of human rights
issues.
Though one can have few objections to Glenn's partition of his book into
"theoretical" and "substantive" parts, and to his choice of issues in each chap-
ter, the arrangement of his seven substantive chapters is puzzling. The
arrangement of Chapters 3 to 6 (from chthonic law to common law) reflects
the placement of each tradition in historical time with the assumption that
chthonic law has its roots in time immemorial. He then treats Talmudic law,
followed by civil law with the Roman conquest of a large part of the world after
Christ. Concurrent with these developments was the simultaneous develop-
ment of the Islamic legal tradition and the common law tradition, but at later
stages in this chronological order. Hindu and Asian legal traditions are left to
be discussed at the end and they stand oddly apart from this arrangement. De-
spite Glenn's claim that readers who are only interested in one particular tradition
can just concentrate on the individual chapter, Glenn makes a lot of cross
references and comparisons between the chapters. For example, both Talmudic
and Islamic legal traditions share a common hierarchy of legal sources. They
are described by Glenn as traditions based on "revelation", touching all areas of
private law with special concerns over diet, hygiene, rituals and prayers. In the
discussion of civil and common law legal traditions, while Glenn points out
their similarity in origins and contributions to the world for their high regard to
human reason and respect to individuality, the chapters are divided by the dis-
cussion on Islamic legal tradition. A better choice may have been to group legal
traditions and religious connotation (Talmudic, Islamic and Hindu) together,
put chthonic and Asian legal traditions together for they manifest an entire
way of living, with discussion on civil legal tradition and common law tradition
closely following each other.
Arrangement of chapters aside, I also found myself in argument with Glenn
in other respects. A major criticism is that Glenn's practical aim of "doing
something" with different traditions is contradictory of the very definition of
(2001) HKLJ
346 Review
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 346 2001

tradition itself. Throughout the book, Glenn hopes that we can learn from
each tradition, draw out its best part so that we can make a hybrid of all the
best qualities. However, as intimated by Glenn himself, tradition is by nature
a home-grown phenomenon. How, then, could one transplant tradition so
easily? At points in his book, Glenn stresses that tradition is "inextricably
interwoven with one's beliefs",2 is about a way of living,' is dependent on an
"accumulating character"' with "a particular style of rationality",' and is rooted
in "a particular context".6 The result of uprooting and exporting tradition is,
therefore, bound to be futile. Perhaps Glenn himself also realises the diffi-
culty and impossibility of "mixing" and "reconciling" different traditions. The
last chapter of the book, "Reconciling Legal Traditions: Sustainable Diversity
in Law" is in fact a simple affirmation of the diversity in our world and the
philosophy that life should move on. Glenn lists what each tradition can
offer and criticises the inadequacy of each. What he means by reconciling the
different traditions is an urge for exchange of information and acceptance of
differences. The concern over the human rights debate also ends in vague
rhetoric where Glenn advises us to examine particular problems in detail in
the given circumstances of each country. However, after becoming familiar
with the people, the places, the schools, the local circumstances, and the
specifics, what standard should one apply? The local one or a universal one
yet to emerge? It would be helpful if Glenn could offer us concrete examples
of how to solve a particular problem, and to show what difference it would
make if one is to leave one's neighbours alone by developing an appreciation
for others' traditions.
Viewed from the above perspective, Glenn has arguably failed to accom-
plish the goal of informing his readers about what can be done with world
traditions and to convince them that they can solve world problems if they
are equipped with this knowledge. And what of Glenn's second goal of let-
ting his readers learn about the world's traditions? Glenn has fared much better
in this regard by delivering a colourful, interesting and stimulating account of
various traditions. The choice of adjectives in the above sentence is meant to
be individually applied to individual chapters in the book.
This is largely due to the fact that Glenn has adopted different styles of
writing in each chapter. For instance, Glenn takes the reader step by step
towards an understanding of Talmudic and Islamic legal traditions. These
two chapters reflect a clear and descriptive approach where the origins of
the two legal traditions are traced and the characteristics of each are clearly
2 At p 57, discussion on chthonic law.
At p 261, discussion on Hindu law.
4 At p 97, discussion on Talmudic law.
At p 100, discussion on Talmudic law.
6 At p 218, discussion on common law.
Legal Traditions of the World 347
Vol 31 Part 2
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 347 2001

348 Review 
(2001) HKLJ
identified. In contrast, the other chapters seem to assume that readers have a
basic knowledge of the subject matter. In the latter case, readers may also find
themselves in constant debate with the author, especially regarding the chap-
ters on chthonic, Hindu and Asian legal traditions.
To comment on chthonic legal tradition, Glenn includes African and
South-east Asian customary law, native law from North America and Inuit
legal tradition. It is, thus, difficult for Glenn to avoid making over-general-
ised and sweeping statements. Moreover, the nature of chthonic legal tradition
is often intangible and fluid. In the end, what the readers learn from this
chapter is essentially that chthonic family law "in general" is informal and
consensual, and that chthonic notions of property are "generally" for com-
munal or collective enjoyment. What we should have learnt from chthonic
thought is, however, its respect for land and environment. Even if the above
statements are true, one cannot not help question whether it is meaningful to
reduce such a kaleidoscope of colourful legal landscapes into a single formula.
Without doubt, the nature of the legal tradition concerned also poses diffi-
culties for depiction. This is equally true for the discussion on Hindu and
Asian legal traditions.
Both Hindu and Asian legal traditions have gone through evolutions of
thousands of years. Moreover, legal traditions are just facades of a more em-
bracing tradition in India and other parts of Asia. Inevitably, this brings us
back to my first major criticism: How can we export traditions? Though Glenn
quotes evidence that Hindu legal tradition does survive in east Africa and in
some Western states, he understates the fact that it is practised by Hindu
people who are living out their entire tradition. A more interesting and sig-
nificant point raised by Glenn is the possibility of Hindu law co-existing with
modern state law in India. Glenn merely raises the issue and glosses over it
without much elaboration. The nature of Hindu legal tradition could well be
an exemplar for Glenn to illustrate how legal tradition could supplement
formal legal order when the latter lacks supportive normativity.
Similar inadequacy can also be observed in the discussion on Asian legal
tradition. Other than tracing the historical development of the tradition and
its gradual displacement by Western legal systems in South-east Asia, Korea,
Japan and China, Glenn says little about the relevance of the tradition to con-
temporary Asia, and its interaction and relation to formal legal orders. Moreover,
the chapter on Asian legal tradition is also confusing. At the beginning of the
chapter, Glenn explains that Asian legal tradition, including Confucianism,
refuses to root normativity in formal structures and sanctions. He describes it as
a tradition based on "persuasion and obligation".' Glenn further points out
that there is "little place for describing the detail of Confucian regulation of
7 At p 280.
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 348 2001

Legal Traditions of the World 349
society"' for one is supposed to understand its general teaching. Anyone who
has some familiarity with Confucianism will have a hard time in accepting this
supposition. It is well known that Confucius' teachings were written in the
Three Books detailing how society should be organised and how relationships
should be ordered. It is true that Confucius despises the use of legal sanctions
and the reliance on legal rules, but the emphasis that he places on family and
morals has resulted in a much more powerful and pervasive form of social sanc-
tions. In this social world, obligation has an indispensable role to play because
it is the organising force of human relations. Despite the fact that Glenn ex-
plains the concept of li in the latter pages of the chapter as a set of moral rules,
it would have helped if Glenn could have explained at the outset the binding
nature of "persuasion" and the force of social sanctions in Asian legal tradition.
Notwithstanding these criticisms, Glenn has offered a great deal of food
for thought. I would say that the best chapters in his book lie in the discussion
on civil and common law legal traditions. In these chapters, Glenn adopts an
interpretative approach where he is making the best sense of accepted knowl-
edge and introducing new perspectives to apparently familiar areas.
Instead of reiterating the development of civil law or merely pointing out
its essential characteristics, Glenn places the discussion of civil law in the
context of the rise of Western science in the age of reason when rationality
and individuality were dominant ideals. Glenn further advances his argu-
ment by perceiving civil law legal tradition as playing a paramount role in
continental Europe because it facilitated the rise of the nation states and the
search for identity. Following this line of logic, Glenn has confidence in the
influence of civil law legal tradition on the European Union. Whether or not
one agrees with Glenn's view, he has offered a new slant on a familiar topic.
The account of common law legal tradition is even more fascinating. Glenn
starts the chapter with the bold statement that the birth of the common law is
a pure historical accident, and the prominence given to judges and the jury is
largely a result of political concern. The new rulers in 1066 were suspicious of
the pre-existing civil law systems and were eager to look for their own loyal
adjudicators. As the Normans were keen to establish their legitimacy, they were
willing to incorporate the locals into a jury system. It was only at a much later
stage that judges allied themselves with Parliament against royal executive au-
thority. Glenn also observes that common law legal traditions were heavily
influenced by Islamic legal tradition as evidenced in the development of
the Inns of Court,' and its style of debate. Continuing along the historical
trajectory, Glenn concludes by pointing out the mutation of the common law
in the American, Canadian and Australian systems, where there is a re-alliance
At p 283.
9 Atp209-210.
Vol 31 Part 2
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 349 2001

(2001) HKLJ
to its civil law counterpart. Unlike most chapters, Glenn does not end the
discussion on common law by stating what it can contribute to the world, rather
he focuses on the problems within the tradition such as the growth of large
firms which exacerbates the problem of ethical control and makes it difficult to
avoid conflicts of interest among lawyers and among clients themselves. Glenn
also attributes the problem of the "lost lawyer", those who lost sight of their
primary obligation to society, to the nature of common law tradition. Though
one may have noticed all these problems, rarely would one point one's finger at
the legal tradition. By delivering a plausible argument, the chapters on civil
and common law legal traditions have provided a thought provoking and stimu-
lating account of legal traditions.
Overall, this book may not be a suitable guide for readers who are looking
for a quick accessible reference to the terrain of legal traditions. It is hard to
do justice to any legal tradition within the length of 50 pages. To do so would
risk either giving a broad-brush overview, or delivering an advanced study of
the subject. Glenn seems to have chosen to tread a middle path. His work is
catered more to those who already have a background, however limited, of a
particular tradition or traditions and would like to know more. The detailed
footnotes and numerous references in the book are particularly helpful indi-
cators for readers who are eager to delve further into the vast sea of legal
traditions.
Anne Cheung*
* Assistant Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Hong Kong.
350 Review
HeinOnline -- 31 Hong Kong L.J. 350 2001
