I
n December 2010, The New York Times 
reported1,2 that the term ‘science’ had 
been dropped in a new long-range plan 
of the American Anthropological Associa-
tion (AAA). Where once the association had 
dedicated itself “to advance anthropology as 
the science that studies humankind in all its 
aspects”, it now promised rather “to advance 
public understanding of humankind in all 
its aspects”. 
The reporter suggested that this brought 
to a head an epic struggle in the discipline 
between the true scientists and their foes. 
Frank Marlowe, president-elect of the Evo-
lutionary Anthropology Society (a branch 
of the AAA that is curiously independent of 
its long-standing Biological Anthropology 
Section), was quoted as saying: “we evolu-
tionary anthropologists are outnumbered by 
the new cultural or social anthropologists, 
many but not all of whom are postmodern, 
which seems to translate into antiscience.” 
The new long-range plan also provoked 
rumblings of discontent (still ongoing) in the 
blogosphere, and the association’s executive 
committee scrambled somewhat belatedly to 
reassure the public — and its own members 
— that it had all been a misunderstanding. 
They had not intended to cast doubt on the 
scientific character of the discipline. And in 
fact the same committee had come up with a 
simultaneous text entitled ‘What is Anthro-
pology?’, which describes anthropology 
unambiguously as a science. 
Apparently, a committee had floundered in 
trying to come up with an agenda for anthro-
pology that was baggy enough to accommo-
date its very various research programmes. Is 
this news? Indeed it is, but not, as the bloggers 
and The New York Times suggest, because an 
anti-science conspiracy has hijacked Ameri-
can anthropology. The real shocker is that 
anthropologists cannot agree on what the 
discipline is about. Many, probably most, 
anthropologists have walked away from their 
traditional mission, which is to build a truly 
comparative science of human variation. We 
need to work out where we are now heading.
Roots and bRanches
The reason that the AAA got into such a 
pickle is that — like geography, even perhaps 
like biology — anthropology is a nineteenth-
century discipline that fragmented, spawn-
ing a variety of specializations. Biological 
anthropology, archaeology and the vari-
ous traditions of ethnography are bundled 
together in many university departments 
and professional associations such as the 
AAA and, in Britain, the Royal Anthropo-
logical Institute. However, relationships are 
often distant. The biologists do genetics, or 
neuroscience, or primatology, or chase up 
Anthropologists unite! 
Anthropology isn’t in the crisis that parts of the media would have you believe, 
but it must do better, argue Adam Kuper and Jonathan Marks.
IllustratIons by DavID ParkIns
1 6 6  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  4 7 0  |  1 0  F E b R U A R y  2 0 1 1
COMMENT
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

new developments in evolutionary theory. 
They show little interest in archaeology 
— except perhaps the archaeology of very 
ancient humans — or in ethnography, 
except for snippets of information about 
sex and violence. Some do seem to feel 
that if only they could spare the time they 
would be able to knock some evolutionist 
sense into cultural anthropology. But they 
are too busy.
Meanwhile, the ethnographers agree that 
their first task is to document the great diver-
sity of human ways of life. Generalizations 
about human nature should not be based 
on a single report of Amazonian violence, 
or Tibetan polyandry, or woman–woman 
marriage among the Lovedu of South Africa. 
But they do not agree on how to make sense 
of the customs of faraway peoples. Social 
anthropologists engage with models and 
theories current in the social sciences 
(ideally, although they seldom keep up as 
well as they should). Some cultural anthro-
pologists aim rather to understand and 
translate, and they look for inspiration to 
literary theorists and philosophers (prefer-
ably French, even if they have to be read in 
often impenetrable translations).
For a long time the main branches of 
anthropology largely ignored one another, 
but in the 1980s two radical movements 
provoked a confrontation. Sociobiologists 
claimed that genetics was about to revolu-
tionize the human sciences. These would 
become at last a branch of biology, although 
the great biologist Ernst Mayr did warn that 
“the profound differences in social behaviour 
among human groups, some of them closely 
related, show how much of this behaviour is 
cultural rather than genetic”. Sociobiologists 
also drew on ethology, 
an older movement 
that made much of 
parallels between 
human and primate 
— or even insect — 
behaviour, provoking 
Sherwood Washburn, 
a leading biological 
anthropologist, to 
comment that human ethology “might be 
defined as the science that pretends humans 
cannot speak”.
Inspired by the elegant essays of Clifford 
Geertz, another new movement appeared 
centre-stage in the 1980s (in fact another 
very old movement, in modern dress). 
Cultural theorists, identifying themselves 
with the humanities, insisted that foreign 
ways of thought are resistant to translation, 
that variation and change characterize even 
the most isolated populations, and that it is 
therefore not easy to say what the Bushmen 
do, or the Trobrianders, or for that matter the 
English (all of them? Always?), so com-
parisons are problematic. Some disciples of 
Geertz followed that road down to a relativist 
dead end. All generalizations about human 
beings were suspect, except for the iron law 
that culture trumps biology3. 
The controversies of the 1980s, which 
lingered on into the 1990s, often hinged on 
claims about race, sex and violence, and so 
they caught the attention of a wider public. 
In a popular book published in 1928, Mar-
garet Mead had reported that Samoan girls 
enjoyed sexual freedom, and so experienced 
an untroubled passage through adoles-
cence4. More than half a century later (and 
after Mead’s death), Derek Freeman trashed 
her account, insisting that the girls were 
remarkably chaste5. Rather mysteriously, the 
sex life of Samoan girls became a popular 
test-case for the nature–nurture argument. 
(Recent commentaries are kinder to Mead 
than to Freeman, although it has become 
obvious that neither Freeman nor Mead can 
be relied on uncritically for the description 
of Samoan adolescence, let alone for the 
explanation6.) 
Young women might find happiness in a 
liberated sex life, but were young men given 
rather to violence? Napoleon Chagnon 
claimed that among the Yanomami of the 
Amazon, the most violent men got the girls. 
(And he suggested that, in something like a 
state of nature, all men are Yanomami under 
the skin7.) His account of these people was 
challenged by other ethnographers, who 
reported significant local variation even 
among the 22,500-strong Yanomami, not 
least in rates of homicide and the abduction 
of women8. In any case, the Yanomami are 
not typical even of the most isolated, small-
scale, technologically limited societies. Many 
ethnographies document easy-going gender 
relationships between hunter-gatherers, 
from Alaska to the Kalahari Desert, or offer 
historical accounts of peace-loving Indian 
chiefs with many wives, presiding over a 
monastic soldiery.
Race was altogether a more serious matter, 
but on this the anthropologists were not fun-
damentally divided. The 1994 publication by 
psychologist Richard J. Herrnstein and politi-
cal scientist Charles Murray of their book The 
Bell Curve9 provoked a national debate about 
race and inequality. The AAA and the Ameri-
can Association of Physical Anthropologists 
issued parallel statements summarizing the 
scientific understanding on race. In brief, they 
agreed that human variation is structured bio-
culturally, clinally and locally. Nothing corre-
sponding to the zoological subspecies exists 
within extant Homo sapiens. Individuals and 
groups of people do indeed differ biologically. 
However, social inequalities are overwhelm-
ingly the product of political and economic 
history, not of microevolution.
In the course of the feuding 1980s, several 
flagship anthropology departments in the 
United States split up. The biologists joined 
faculties of science or medicine. Cultural 
anthropologists allied themselves with the 
humanities. Archaeologists sought shel-
ter where they could. In Europe the main 
branches of anthropology had gone their 
own ways after the Second World War. It now 
seemed as though the Americans were belat-
edly following the same route. However, in the 
new millennium, the brief and localized trend 
reversed itself. This is because there is a stu-
dent demand for the whole package, the study 
of human origins, history and diversity. 
Today, anthropologists may teach more or 
less happily in interdisciplinary teams, but 
they seldom collaborate in research projects 
that breach their disciplinary specialities. 
In the past few years 
they have drifted to 
a sadder-but-wiser 
default position, some 
documenting the 
range of differences 
in human biology, 
others studying the 
world of social insti-
tutions and belief sys-
tems. Only a handful 
still try to understand 
the origins and pos-
sible connections 
between biological, social and cultural 
forms, or to debate the relative significance 
of history and microevolution in specific, 
well-documented instances. 
This is a great pity, and not only because 
the silence of the anthropologists has left the 
field to blockbusting books by amateurs that 
are long on speculation and short on reliable 
information. Anthropologists hardly bother 
any longer to take issue with even the most 
outlandish generalizations about human 
nature. Not their business.
betteR togetheR
To be sure, it is not easy to make general 
statements about human nature, or even to 
define it. One obstacle is the often-taken-for-
granted opposition between the notoriously 
— perhaps necessarily — unstable ideas of 
‘nature’ and ‘culture’. The human species has 
been co-evolving with technology for mil-
lions of years. Advances in contraceptive 
techniques have transformed our sexual 
behaviour. The most fundamentally hard-
wired human adaptations — walking and 
talking — are actively learned by every per-
son, in each generation. So whatever human 
nature may be, it clearly takes a variety of 
local forms, and is in constant flux. 
The obvious conclusion is that inter-
disciplinary research is imperative. Yet too 
few biological anthropologists attend to 
social or cultural or historical factors. A 
minority of cultural anthropologists and 
archaeologists do apply evolutionary theory, 
or cognitive science, or adopt an ecological 
“The real 
shocker is that 
anthropologists 
cannot agree 
what the 
discipline  
is about.”
1 0  F E b R U A R y  2 0 1 1  |  V O L  4 7 0  |  N A T U R E  |  1 6 7
COMMENT
“There 
is a need 
for a truly 
comparative 
science of 
human beings 
throughout 
their history, 
and all over 
the world.”
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

perspective on cultural variation, or play 
about with the theory of games, but they 
feel that they are isolated, even marginalized. 
And they do not feature in the front line of 
current debates about cognition, altruism 
or, for that matter, economic behaviour or 
environmental degradation, even though 
these debates typically proceed on the basis 
of very limited reliable information about 
human variation. A rare exception is the 
field of medical anthropology, where cultural 
anthropologists engage regularly with biolo-
gists in studies of HIV and AIDS, or post-
traumatic stress disorders, or investigations 
of folk medical beliefs and practices. 
Yet even allowing for their current head-
down posture, anthropologists do share a 
great common cause. They would agree that 
anyone who makes claims about human 
nature must learn a lot of ethnography. 
This does not mean parachuting into the 
jungle somewhere to do a few psychologi-
cal experiments with the help of bemused 
local interpreters, or garnishing generaliza-
tions with a few worn and disputed snippets 
about exotic customs and practices. Unfor-
tunately, very nearly 
all research funding in 
the human sciences is 
directed to the study 
of the inhabitants of 
North America and the European Union. 
Ninety-six per cent of the subjects of stud-
ies reported in the leading American psy-
chology journals are drawn from Western 
industrial societies10. These represent a 
minuscule and distinctly non-random 
sample of humanity. 
So there is a need for a truly comparative 
science of human beings throughout their 
history, and all over the world. This requires 
more interdisciplinary team research in 
anthropology. A good start would be for 
anthropologists to read each other’s papers, 
to attend each other’s conferences and to 
debate concrete cases and specific hypoth-
eses. But there is no future in a return to the 
feuding parties of the 1980s. ■
Adam Kuper is a visiting professor at the 
Department of Anthropology, London School 
of Economics, London WC2A 2AE, UK.  
Jonathan Marks is in the Department 
of Anthropology, University of North 
Carolina-Charlotte, Charlotte,  
North Carolina 28223, USA.  
e-mail: adam.kuper@gmail.com
1. Wade, n. anthropology a science? statement 
deepens a rift. New York Times (9 December 
2010).
2. Wade, n. anthropology group tries to soothe 
tempers after dropping the word ‘science’. New 
York Times (13 December 2010).
3. kuper, a. Culture: The Anthropologists’ Account 
(Harvard univ. Press, 1999).
4. Mead, M. Coming of Age in Samoa (William 
Morrow, 1928).
5. Freeman, D. Margaret Mead and Samoa (Harvard 
univ. Press, 1983).
6. shankman, P. The Trashing of Margaret Mead: 
Anatomy of an Anthropological Controversy (univ. 
Wisconsin Press, 2009).
7. Chagnon, n. a. Science 239, 985–992 (1988).
8. albert, b. Curr. Anthropol. 30, 637–640 (1989). 
9. Herrnstein, r. J. & Murray, C. The Bell Curve: 
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life 
(Free Press, 1994).
10. arnett, J. J. Am. Psychol. 63, 602–614 (2008).
COMMENT
 natuRe.com
For more on working 
in anthropology see:
go.nature.com/3n11uo
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved