Japan Institute of International Affairs (JIIA)
Founded 1959. Private, non-partisan institute committed to
research on foreign affairs and security issues. Examines Japanese
foreign
policy,
provides
policy
recommendations
to
the
government and disseminates information on international
relations to the public. JIIA aims to serve as an indispensable
resource on international affairs.
Address: 3rd Floor Toranomon Mitsui Building, 3-8-1
Kasumigaseki, Chiyodaku, Tokyo 100-0013, Japan.
Website: http://www2.jiia.or.jp
President and Director General: Yoshiji Nogami.
Kiel Institute for the World Economy (Institut für
Weltwirtschaft an der Universität Kiel; IfW)
Founded 1914. Independent, international centre for research in
global economic affairs, economic policy consulting, economic
education and documentation. Research areas: the global division
of labour; knowledge creation and growth; the environment and
natural resources; poverty reduction, equity and development;
monetary policy under market imperfections; financial markets
and macroeconomic activity; reforming the welfare society.
Address: Kiellinie 66, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
Website: http://www.ifw-kiel.de
President: Prof. Dennis Snower.
Konrad Adenauer Foundation
(Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung)
Founded in 1955 as the Society for Christian Democratic Civic
Education and renamed in 1964. Political foundation that focuses
on consolidating democracy, the unification of Europe and the
strengthening of transatlantic relations, as well as on development
co-operation.
Address: Klingelhöferstrasse 23, 10785 Berlin, Germany;
Rathausallee 12, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany.
Website: http://www.kas.de
Chairman: Dr Norbert Lammert.
Korea Development Institute (KDI)
Founded 1971. Think tank set up by the government aiming
to make substantial contributions to the economic and social
development of Korea. Research focuses on providing policy
recommendations and guidance based on in-depth analyses of
international and domestic economic conditions and projections.
Address: 15 Giljae-gil, Sejong, 339-007, South Korea.
Website: http://www.kdi.re.kr
Acting President: Kim Yong-seong.
Korea Institute for International
Economic Policy (KIEP)
Founded 1990. Think tank under the affiliation of the South
Korean government. The main function of the organization is to
advise the government on all kinds of international economic
policy topics. Research programmes focus on: international
macroeconomics and finance; international trade; northeast Asian
economies; Asia-Pacific; Europe, Americas and Eurasia.
Address: Sejong National Research Complex, 370,
Sicheong-daero, Sejong-si, South Korea.
Website: http://www.kiep.go.kr
Acting President: Kim June-dong.
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
Founded
1920.
Private,
non-profit,
non-partisan
research
organization dedicated to promoting a greater understanding of
how the economy works. Concentrates on four types of empirical
research: developing new statistical measurements, estimating
quantitative models of economic behaviour, assessing the economic
effects of public policies and projecting the effects of alternative
policy proposals.
Address: 1050 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138-5398, USA.
Website: http://www.nber.org
President: Dr James Poterba.
Netherlands Institute of International Relations
‘Clingendael’
Founded
1983.
Non-profit,
independent
think
tank
for
international relations. Identifies and analyses emerging political
and social developments for the benefit of government and the
general public. Programmes include: diplomatic studies; European
studies; security and conflict; international energy.
Address: Clingendael 7, 2597 VH The Hague, Netherlands.
Website: http://www.clingendael.nl
General Director: Monika Sie Dhian Ho.
Peterson Institute for International Economics
Founded 1981. Private, non-profit, non-partisan research institution
devoted to the study of international economic policy. Research
encompasses country and regional studies, debt and development,
globalization,
international
finance
and
macroeconomics,
international trade and investment, and US economic policy.
Address: 1750 Massachusetts Ave., NW, Washington, D.C.,
20036-1903, USA.
Website: http://www.iie.com
Chairman: Peter G. Peterson.
RAND Corporation
Founded in 1948 out of US military research and development
during World War II by Douglas Aircraft. Independent, non-
profit organization dedicated to promoting scientific, educational
and charitable purposes for the public welfare. Research areas
include health, education, national security, international affairs,
law and business, and the environment. Houses three federally
funded research and development centres sponsored by the
US defence department: the RAND Arroyo Center, providing
research and analysis for the army; the RAND National Defense
Research Institute; and RAND Project Air Force.
Address: 1776 Main St., Santa Monica, CA 90401-3208, USA.
Website: http://www.rand.org
President: Michael D. Rich.
Royal United Services Institute
Founded 1831. Leading independent think tank engaged in
cutting-edge defence and security research. The institution brings
to the fore vital policy issues and offers expertise to policy makers.
Principal research areas: defence, industries and society; UK
defence; terrorism; nuclear weapons and nuclear arms control;
cyber-security; conflict, war and culture.
Address: Whitehall, London, SW1A 2ET, UK.
Website: http://www.rusi.org
Chairman: William Hague.
82
I N T E R N A T I O N A L O R G A N I Z A T I O N S