© 1955 Nature Publishing Group
No. 4491 
November 26, 1955 
NATURE 
1009 
argument as to whether some form of international 
organiution for co-ordinating the work of national 
associations for the advancement of science and the 
national associations of science writers should be set 
up. Finally, however, a recommendation was adopted 
to the effect that it was undesirable at the present 
moment to establish an international organization 
for these purposes, but that Unesco should consider 
the possibility of forming a consultative committee 
to further co-operation between the various national 
associations if this should prove necessary. 
Although the Conference produced no definite or 
positive conclusions, it was nevertheless valuable in 
showing that the problems of popularizing science 
vary greatly from country to country, and in bringing 
people together with similar interests from many 
countries. 
T. A. MARGERISON 
ROYAL BOTANIC GARDENS, KEW 
A 
REVIEW of all aspects of the work of the 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, during 1954, is 
presented in the Kew Bulletin, No. 1, 1955. 
The 
past year has been one of sustained progress, but 
various problems of accommodation remain acute-
for example, the Palm House, the Herbarium and 
Library-and are receiving close attention. 
The 
main activities of the Gardens, however, are being 
maintained with unimpaired vigour. It is impossible 
to touch on more than a few of these in this short 
article, but some idea of the nature and volume of 
the problems handled may be indicated by some 
selected references. Thus, the specimens received for 
the Herbarium, excluding those prepared at Kew 
from living material, amounted to 55,994 ; some 
9,166 sheets were received on loan; 5,652 were sent 
on loan ; 16,424 sheets were distributed as dupli-
cates; and, in all, some 47,780 sheets were mounted 
(excluding algae, lichens, fungi and bryophyta, and 
specimens received already mounted). No fewer than 
4,077 botanists paid visits during 1954, many of these 
being from overseas, attending the Eighth Inter-
national Botanical Congress at Paris. 
Here, too, 
reference may be made to the fact that 2,635 
inquiries and plant consignments were dealt with 
during the year. 
As in previous years, important activities were the 
identification of economic plant products and the 
supplying of information on economic plants : for 
example, cinnamon, groundnuts, sesamum, raffia, 
balsa, senna, sansevieria, capers, opium poppy, aloes, 
patchouli, pepper, ginger, vanilla and cardamoms. 
In relation to the present high prices of tea and 
coffee, various inquiries as to the possibility of 
growing these crops in new areas received con-
sideration. 
For many years the Gardens have rendered an 
important service to scientific agriculture by main-
taining the Quarantine House, the function of which 
is to prevent the spread of diseases and pests during 
the transference of economic plants from one part of 
the world to another. 
Thus, at the present time, 
varieties of cacao from the Imperial College of 
Tropical Agriculture, Trinidad, have occupied most 
of the available space during the year, these being 
the most promising of the Imperial College selections 
of Trinidad trees and some Amazonian forasteros 
originally collected on the Upper Amazon. Rooted 
cuttings from these plants have been suitably packed 
and sent by air to the West African Cacao Research 
Institute, Gold Coast, and to the Departments of 
Agriculture in Malaya, Ceylon and Fiji, and, with 
the exception of a consignment sent to Malaya, are 
reported to be growing successfully in their new 
environments. Material of Theobroma and the related 
genus Herrania, collected in Colombia in 1952 and 
sent to Kew via Trinidad, is now on its way to West 
Africa for the use of plant-breeders there. Various 
banana and cotton collections are also under sur-
veillance in the Quarantine House. 
A further service to countries of the British 
Commonwealth consists in obtaining plants of 
potential value. 
For example, young plants of 
ipecacuanha (Oephaeli8 ipecacuanha Rich.) have been 
sent to the Departments of Agriculture in Nigeria, 
British Honduras and Malaya for local trials. 
Work of a rather different kind consists of research 
on the systematic anatomy of the Monocotyledons ; 
notes on this important and extensive undertaking 
have appeared from time to time in these columns. 
Arrangements for the publication of this work in 
three volumes, of which the first will deal with the 
Gramineae, have now been made with the Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. A large number of routine inquiries, 
relating to miscellaneous botanical materials, in-
cluding timbers, archreological specimens, and rubbed 
and powdered herbs, have been dealt with in the 
J odrell Laboratory during the year. Among the more 
unusual samples were nylon bobbins examined on 
behalf of the Board of Customs and Excise, twigs of 
alleged apple trees, most of which proved to be plum 
suckers, submitted by the laboratory at New Scotland 
Yard, and unsatisfactory pick handles which were 
found not to have been made of the timber that had 
been specified. 
The report also deals in some detail with the pro-
gress that has been made in the preparation of the 
several regional floras, and with other taxonomic 
studies, and the cultural work in the different sections 
of the Gardens is appropriately reviewed. A compre-
hensive list of publications and a staff list conclude 
this interesting and important publication. 
OPINIONS AND SOCIAL PRESSURE 
W
HAT _is the effect of the opinions of others on 
our own ? 
How strong is the urge towards 
social conformity ? 
An American psychologist, 
Solomon E. Asch, has approached these questions by 
means of unusual experiments. These, and his find-
ings, have been described in the November issue of 
Scientific American, which contains a number of 
other articles of outstanding interest as follows : 
"Trenches of the Pacific", by R. L. Fisher and R. 
Revelle; "Synthetic Diamonds", by P. W. Bridg-
man; "Radiation and Human Mutation", by H.J. 
Muller; "'Empty' Space", by H. C. van de Hulst; 
"What makes Leaves Fall ?", by W. P. Jacobs; 
"Etruscan :\fotallurgy", by A. N. Modora; 
"Too 
Many Deer", by A. S. Leopold*. 
Dr. Asch's investigations were guided by certain 
underlying assumptions, which to-day are common 
currency and account for much that is thought and 
said about the operations of propaganda and public 
opinion. 
The assumptions are that people submit 
uncritically and painlessly to external manipulations 
by suggestion or prestige, and that any given idea or 
• Scientific American, 193 (November 1955), 2 West 45th Street, 
New York. 50 cents. 

© 1955 Nature Publishing Group
1010 
NATURE 
November 26, 1955 
voL. 176 
value can be 'sold' or 'unsold' without reference to 
its merits. Asch has described his experiments as 
follows. 
A group of seven to nine young men, all college 
students, are assembled in a classroom for a "psycho-
logical experiment" in visual judgment. The experi-
menter informs them that they will be comparing 
the lengths of lines. He shows two large white cards. 
On one is a single vertical black line-the standard 
length of which is to be matched. On the other card 
are three vertical lines of various lengths. 
The 
subjects are to choose the one that is of the same 
length as the line on the other card. 
One of the 
three actually is of the same length ; the other two 
are substantially different, the difference ranging 
from three-quarters of an inch to an inch and three-
quarters. 
The subjects announce their answers in the order in 
which t,hey have been seated in the room, and on the 
first round every person chooses the same matching 
line. Then a second set of cards is exposed ; again 
the group is unanimous. The members appear ready 
to endure politely another boring experiment. 
On 
the third trial there is an unexpected disturbance. 
One person near the end of the group disagrees with 
all the others in his selection of the matching line. 
He looks surprised, indeed incredulous, about the 
disagreement. 
On the following trial he disagrees 
again, while the others remain unanimous in their 
choice. 
The dissenter becomes more and more 
worried and hesitant as the disagreement continues 
in succeeding trials ; he may pause before announcing 
his answer and speak in a low voice, or he may smile 
in an embarrassed way. 
What the dissenter does not know is that all the 
other members of the group were instructed by the 
experimenter beforehand to give incorrect answers in 
unanimity at certain points. The single individual 
who is not a party to this pre-arrangement is the 
focal subject of the experiment. He is placed in a 
position in which, while he is actually giving the 
correct answers, he finds himself unexpectedly in a 
minority of one, opposed by a unanimous and 
arbitrary majority with respect to a clear and simple 
fact. 
Upon him are brought to bear two opposed 
forces : the evidence of his senses and the unanimous 
opinion of a group of his peers. Also, he must declare 
his judgments in public, before a majority which has 
also stated its position publicly. 
The instructed majority occasionally reports cor-
rectly in order to reduce the possibility that the 
naive subject will suspect collusion against him. 
There are eighteen trials in each series, and on twelve 
of these the majority responds erroneously. 
How do people respond to group pressure in this 
situation ? First, there are the statistical results of a 
series in which a total of 123 subjects from three 
institutions of higher learning were placed in the 
minority situation described above. 
Of the 123 put to the test, a considerable per-
centage yielded to the majority. Whereas in ordinary 
circumstances individuals matching the lines will 
make mistakes less than 1 per cent of the time, 
under group pressure the minority subjects swung to 
acceptance of the misleading majority's wrong judg-
ments in 36 ·8 per cent of the selections. 
Individuals differed in response. At one extreme 
about one-quarter of the subjects were completely 
independent and never agreed with tho erroneous 
judgments of the majority. At the other extreme. 
some individuals wont with the majority nearly all 
the time. 
The performances of individuals in this 
experiment tend to be highly consistent. Those who 
strike out on the path of independence do not, as a 
rule, succumb to the majority even over an extended 
series of trials, while those who choose the path of 
compliance are unable to free themselves as the 
ordeal is prolonged. 
The reasons for the startling individual differences 
have not yet been investigated in detail. 
At this 
point only some tentative generalizations from talks 
with the subjects, each of whom was interviewed at 
the end of the experiment, can be reported. Among 
the independent individuals were many who held 
fast because of staunch confidence in their own 
judgment. The most significant fact about them was 
not absence of responsiveness to the majority but a 
capacity to recover from doubt and to re-establish 
their equilibrium. 
Many of the individuals suspected that the majority 
were 'sheep' following the first responder, or that the 
majority were victims of an optical illusion ; never-
theless, these suspicions failed to free them at the 
moment of decision. 
More disquieting were the 
reactions of subjects who construed their difference 
from the majority as a sign of some general defi-
ciency in themselves. which at all costs they must 
hide. 
Which aspect of the influence of a majority is more 
important-the size of the majority or its unanimity ? 
The experiment was modified to examine this 
question. In one series the size of the opposition was 
varied from one to fifteen persons. 
The results 
showed a clear trend. 
When a subject was con-
fronted with only a single individual who contra-
dicted his answers, he was swayed little : he con-
tinued to answer independently and correctly in 
nearly all trials. When the opposition was increased 
to two, the pressure became substantial : minority 
subjects now accepted the wrong answer 13 ·6 per 
cent of the time. Under the pressure of a majority 
of three, the subjects' errors jumped to 31 ·8 per cent. 
But further increases in the size of the majority 
apparently did not increase the weight of the pressure 
substantially. 
Clearly the size of the opposition is 
important only up to a point. 
Disturbance of the majority's unanimity had a 
striking effect. In this experiment the subject was 
given the support of a truthful partner--either 
another individual who did not know of the pre-
arranged agreement among the rest of the group, or 
a person who was instructed to give correct answers 
throughout. 
The presence of a supporting partner depleted the 
majority of much of its power. 
Its pressure on 
the dissenting individual was reduced to one-fourth. 
Most interesting were the reactions to the partner. 
Generally the feeling toward him was one of warmth 
and closeness ; 
he was credited with inspiring 
confidence. 
Was the partner's effect a consequence of his 
dissent, or was it related to his accuracy ? There was 
now introduced into the experimental group a person 
who was instructed to dissent from the majority but 
also to disagree with the subject. 
Again the results are clear. 
When a moderate 
dissenter is present, the effect of the majority on the 
subject decreases by approximately one-third, and 
extremes of yielding disappear. Moreover, most of 
the errors the subjects make are moderate. To this 
extent the subjects broke away from the majority 
even while bending to it. 

© 1955 Nature Publishing Group
No. 4491 
November 26, 1955 
NATURE 
lOll 
On the other hand, when the dissenter always chose 
the line that was more flagrantly different from the 
standard, the results were of quite a different kind. 
The extremist dissenter produced a remarkable freeing 
of the subjects ; their errors dropped to only 9 per 
cent. Furthermore, all the errors were of the moderate 
variety. It was concluded that dissent per se increased 
independence and moderated the errors that occurred, 
and that the direction of dissent exerted consistent 
effects. 
SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION OF 
THE BELGIAN AFRICAN 
NATIONAL PARK OF THE 
GARAMBA 
By DR. TRACY PHILIPPS 
T
EN years before the Second World War, King 
Albert of the. Belgians founded the Belgian 
African National Parks and the National Parks 
Institute in Brussels for their scientific study ; his 
scientific adviser was Dr. Victor van Straelen, who 
was until 1954 director of the Royal Institute of 
Natural Sciences. 
Dr. van Straelen is president of 
the National Parks Institute, where he ~arries out 
with foresight and energy the founder's purpose, and 
to whom the preliminary report of the Garamba 
expedition is dedicated by its members. Nominated 
by the King of the Belgians as British member of 
the Institute, I have for my five-year term taken 
part in the scientific administration of the Belgian 
African National Parks ; 
the continuing British 
members are the Hon. Sir Evelyn Baring, Lord 
William Percy and Lord Willingdon. 
The conservation of natural resources, including 
the recording of their inter-relation, is the more 
static of the lnstitute's two main objectives. In the 
realm of the natural sciences, the InstitutE,'s more 
dynamic part is for the improving of natural know-
ledge of how to reconstitute Nature's ill-used or 
over-used forces, and how t o re-deploy them by 
new methods towards "delivering mankind from 
the bondage of ignorance" of himself and his 
surroundings. 
No organization offers better opportunity than the 
Belgian African National Parks for uninhibited 
observation of natural surroundings, of what grows 
there and of what lives there, inter-related and 
influenced by the total envirornnent. These reserves 
were most carefully chosen at the conjunction of 
great zoological and botanical zones, and of the 
meeting places of three main atmospheric currents. 
Botanically, the Garamba R eserve lies within Engler's 
Sudanic province, which extends roughly from the 
Senegal River to the foot of the Ethiopian plateau. 
The lnstitute's programme aims at establishing a 
scientific inventory of the fauna and flora of the 
reserves of which the Government has confided to it 
the administration. Thanks to the work already done 
on this plan, it can be said that the areas occupied 
by the Institute's four national parks between the 
Sudan and Rhodesia have become scientifically the 
best-known part of the African tropics. 
Only the 
most careful and systematic exploration enabled these 
results to be reached, and elements of remarkable 
interest to be placed at the disposal of organized 
science. 
Among the publications issued by the 
Brussels Institute during the past eight years there 
can be counted 1,334 new zoological species. These 
are headed by 561 Coleoptera. 
From the material 
collected by the Institute's scientific missions, sixty 
new botanical species have also been described. 
Recently, an important exploration and inventory 
have been made in the National Park of the Garamba, 
which lies along the north-western section of the 
Congo-Nile Divide bordering the Nilotic Sudan. The 
Garamba is situated on the confines of two great 
bio-geographic areas, the Guinean and the Sudanic. 
This recent exploration has been working on a plan 
differing from its predecessors in the other park 
reserves. 
The latter were virtually confined to the 
collection of zoological and botanical specimens. The 
Garamba expedition's programme set out to determine 
all the characteristics of the biological environment, 
including climate and soil, and then to study the 
distribution of animals and plants in relation to these 
conditions. The insect collection alone of the expedi-
tion amounts to some 1,500,000 specimens. 
The 
number is considerable in view of the sum of the 
work entailed in the preparation of this fragile and 
perishable material, which cannot be ready for study 
before 1956. It will have cost five years in mounting, 
in the ecological recording of all the conditions sur-
rounding each specimen, and in labelling. 
Competent study of collections of this magnitude, 
essential for serious knowledge of flora and of fauna, 
present great difficulties due to lack of specialists in 
various branches of zoology. Thus, several families of 
insects collected in the Albert National Park (between 
the Lakes Kivn and Albert, and including Mount 
Ruwenzori) during the exploration of 1933-35 have 
not yet been examined for lack of available specialists. 
The size of the collections from the Belgian African 
National Parks often constitutes a big problem for 
the scientist who has to examine them. 
Thus, an 
American specialist has found himself charged with 
the examination of 170,000 specimens of Chloropidae, 
a little fly of which the larvre of some species live in 
grass thatch or as parasites on non-vertebrate 
animals. 
It is difficult as yet to appreciate the full value of 
the results of the recent exploration of the Garamba 
R eserve. 
A complete abstract of the observations 
and collections will first be essential to allow of any 
general conclusion. 
The botanical specimens being 
studied show very numerous species new to the 
Congo, and one family new to science. 
The zoo-
logical collections from the Garamba include 46,776 
vertebrates, of which 2,914 are mammals, 3,122 
birds, 4,641 fish, 34,511 frogs, 1,588 reptiles, and a 
number of albino bats. 
One bio-geographical dis-
covery has, however, been made. It has long been 
observed that there is considerable similarity between 
the fish in the basins of the Nile and of the Congo, 
without there being any obvious present physical 
connexion. The Garamba expedition has now found, 
on the northern border of the R eserve, a marsh 
situated in a gap in the north-western section of the 
Congo-Nile divide; this marsh overflows in the rainy 
season both southward to the Congo towards the 
Atlantic and simultaneously northward into the 
Mediterranean basin through the Nile. 
H enri de Saeger, who organized and led the 
Garamba exploration, feels that there is good reason 
for believing that the results will be found to 
have brought to science an exceptionally rich con-
tribution. 
