CATILINA: COURT CASES AND CONSULAR CANDIDATURE
It is well known that the future conspirator, L. Sergius Catilina, was 
charged in 64, along with a number of others, before a court inter 
sicarios with offences committed during the Sullan terror of the late 
80’s.1 The general view, following Suet. Iul. 11.1, is that C. Iulius Caesar 
served as iudex quaestionis or quaesitor in these trials.2 Catilina was also 
a candidate for the consulship in that year, and thought to be backed by 
Crassus and Caesar. Two questions are raised by this case. The first is: 
when was Catilina charged? If it was before the elections, it is clear that 
an impending charge did not prevent a man from standing for office. 
And that conclusion is relevant to the reason for the rejection of 
Catilina’s professio at an earlier attempt to stand at the consular 
elections in 66, when another court case was pending. The second 
question is: did Caesar engineer Catilina’s acquittal? This is usually 
taken to be the case, with the implication that Caesar was helping to 
clear the way for Catilina’s candidature for the consulship.3
There are three important pieces of evidence for our knowledge of
1 
For a list of Catilina’s victims, see [Q. Cic.] Comm. Pet. 9-10, and Ascon. 84. 6-7 C. 
For a prosopographical analysis of the equestrian victims, see C. Nicolet, Les noms des 
chevaliers victimes de Catilina dans le Commentariolum Petitionis, in Mélanges d’histoire 
ancienne offerts à William Seston (Paris 1974) 381-95.
2 
Suet. lui. 11.1: ... atque in exercenda de sicariis quaestione eos quoque sicariorum 
numero habuit, ... Ex-aediles, as Caesar was in 64, were often chosen as quaesitores, 
especially when there was a shortage of praetors: A.H.J. Greenidge, The Legal Procedure 
of Cicero’s Time (London 1901) 432; H.E. Butler and Μ. Cary (eds ), Suetoni Divus Iulius 
(Oxford 1927) n. ad. loc.\ Α.Η.Μ. Jones, The Criminal Courts of the Roman Republic and 
Principale (Oxford 1972) 58-9. For a list of known ex-aediles who served as court 
presidents, see ibid. 128 nn. 86 and 87. On Caesar’s appointment, see Μ. Geizer, Caesar: 
Politician and Statesman? (Oxford 1968) 42 n. 7.
3 
E.g. E G. Hardy, The Catilinarian Conspiracy in its Context: a Re-study of the 
Evidence, JRS 7 (1917) 173; Μ. Cary, Rome in the Absence of Pompey, CAH 9 (1951) 489 
(“Caesar ... postponed the hearing until after the polling and eventually secured Catilina’s 
acquittal.”). Gelzer, op. cit. (n. 2) 42, comments that “powerful influences were brought to 
bear to keep Catilina alive politically” but does not name them. Cf. E. Manni, Lucio 
Sergio Catilina2 (Palermo 1969) 60-1.
127

128
B. MARSHALL
Catilina’s trial in 64, two fragments of Cicero’s speech in toga candida, 
and Asconius’ comment on the second, but there is a conflict of timing 
between Cicero and Asconius. It is worth putting the three passages 
down, so as to examine them more easily:
Cic. in tog. cand. (in Ascon. 90. 16-18 C. = fr. 17 Ρ.): 
quid tu potes in defensione tua dicere quod illi <dixerint? 
at illi multa>dixerunt quae tibi dicere non licebit.
Ibid. (in Ascon. 90. 20-24 C. = fr. 18 Ρ.): denique illi 
negare potuerunt et negaverunt: tu tibi ne infitiandi 
quidem impudentiae locum reliquisti, qua re praeclara 
dicentur iudicia tulisse si, qui infitiantem Luscium con­
demnarunt, Catilinam absolverint confitentem.
Ascon. 91. 5-13 C. (after comments on the condemna­
tions of L. Luscius and L. Bellienus, Catilina’s uncle, 
and on the execution of Q. Lucretius Ofella on Sulla’s 
orders): his ergo negat ignotum esse, cum et imperitos se 
homines esse et, si quem etiam interfecissent, imperatori 
ac 
dictatori 
paruisse 
dicerent, 
ac 
negare 
quoque 
<possent>: Catilinam vero infitiari non posse, huius 
autem criminis periculum quod obicit Cicero paucos post 
menses Catilina subiit, post effecta enim comitia con­
sularia et Catilinae repulsam fecit eum reum inter sicarios 
L. Lucceius paratus eruditusque, qui postea consulatum 
quoque petiit.
Asconius clearly says that Catilina was not brought to trial on the 
charge laid by L. Lucceius until a few months after the delivery of 
Cicero’s speech in toga candida,4 which was made in the Senate only a 4
4 
The attempt of W.C. McDermott, De Lucceiis, Hermes 97 (1969) 233-46, to 
distinguish the respected historian Lucceius from the friend of Pompeius who stood at the 
consular elections with Caesar in 60, because he cannot believe that the honourable 
scholar could be identical to the unscrupulous consular candidate, denies the explicit 
identification by Asconius here. For criticism of McDermott’s view, see E.S. Gruen, The 
Last Generation of the Roman Republic (Berkeley 1974) 141 n. 88.

CATILINA: COURT CASES
129
few days before the consular elections in 64 (Ascon. 83. 11-12 C.), the 
occasion being an attack on the vetoing of a bribery law by the tribune 
Q. Mucius Orestinus. The second fragment of Cicero, however, on 
which Asconius is commenting, implies that Catilina had already been 
charged and all that was to come was the actual trial (unless the 
statement is wishful thinking on Cicero’s part that Catilina would be 
hauled up before the court which had recently condemned other Sullan 
assassins). The fragment before that, especially potes in defensione tua 
dicere, also implies that Catilina was going to have to defend himself and 
therefore that he had already been charged. It is reasonable to assume 
that as the special court inter sicarios had already begun hearing cases 
before the elections (e.g. Luscius and Bellienus), Catilina’s case had 
been put on the list. It would be consistent with the statements of 
Cicero and the comments of Asconius to suggest that Catilina was 
charged before the consular elections but that the case was not actually 
heard until after the elections. If that interpretation is right, Catilina had 
been charged but obviously was not prevented by that from standing at 
the elections. It follows then that a person facing a charge was not 
necessarily excluded from standing at an election.
Parallels can be found in the prosecution of Clodius by Milo in 57, 
and the prosecution of Μ. Aemilius Scaurus for provincial extortion in 
54.5 Clodius presented himself as a candidate for the aedilician elections 
in 57, which Milo tried to prevent by bringing a charge against him; 
Scaurus nominated himself as a candidate for the consular elections in 
54 as soon as he returned from a provincial governorship in Sardinia, 
and his accusers quickly brought a charge of provincial extortion to try 
and block his candidature. In Clodius’ case the issue was complicated by 
the inability to hold elections in that year, and in Scaurus’ case the 
accusers tried to hurry the trial on by giving up the thirty days allotted 
to them to collect evidence, since the elections were close at hand
5 
Clodius: Cic. All. 4.3.3—5; Q.f. 2.1.2—3; Dio 39.7.3-4. Scaurus: Cic. All. 4.15.9; Ascon. 
18-19 C. For further details of Scaurus' case, see E.J. Weinrib. The Prosecution of 
Magistrates-Designate, Phoenix 25 (1971) 149, and Gruen, op. cit. (n. 4) 331-7, who 
remarks on the parallelism between this case and that of Catilina for extortion — the 
attempt to block a candidate and the extent of consular support for the defendant.

130
B. MARSHALL
(Scaurus had returned on 28th June, 54).6 But in both cases it is clear 
that the two men were not prevented from standing for office because a 
charge had been laid against them. According to John,7 the two cases 
show that the candidature of a person under a charge could be rejected 
on legal grounds only if the jury had been constituted to hear the case. 
The cases examined so far show that a person under a charge was not 
prevented from standing at an election.8
If it is the case that a person under a charge was not prevented from 
standing as a candidate, one must question a common explanation given 
for the rejection of Catilina’s candidature at the consular elections in 66. 
Catilina had returned to Rome in that year following a propraetorship in 
Africa to stand at the elections for the consulships of 65.9 His 
candidature was rejected by the consul L. Volcacius Tullus; the reason 
given by Sallust, and followed by some modern authors, is that he had 
been accused of extortion by the natives of his province and was not 
allowed to stand because he had been placed under a charge. Sallust 
adds the further reason that Catilina was not allowed to stand because 
he had not made his professio within the required period (intra legitumos
6 
Of course it could be argued that Scaurus’ case is different in that the elections were 
postponed until the middle of 53, and by that time Scaurus had been acquitted (on 2nd 
September, 54: Ascon. 18.3 C.), so that he was not facing a charge when the elections 
were held. But it could not have been known when professiones were being made that 
delays to the elections were to occur. Cf. the reasons given by the prosecutors for pressing 
on with the case (Ascon. 19.10-15 C.; Gruen, op. cit. [n. 4] 333).
7 
C. John, Sallustius über Calilinas Candidatur im Jahr 688, Rhein. Mus. 31 (1876) 
426-7; cf. Hardy, op. cit. (n. 3) 157.
8 
Τ. Mommsen, Staatsrecht Ρ 503 n. Ι.
ι) 
It is not clear whether Catilina tried to stand at the normal elections or at the 
supplementary election held after the conviction for bribery of the two men successful at 
the normal elections. After describing the conviction and disqualification of these two men, 
Sallust goes on to say (Cat. 18.2-3) that 'a little later' (post paulo) Catilina was prevented 
from standing. This could be taken to mean that he put himself forward at the 
supplementary election: so, e.g., Α. Garzetti, Μ. Licinio Crasso: l’Uomo e il Politico, 
Athenaeum 20 (1942) 24-5; G.V. Sumner, The Consular Elections of 66 B.C., Phoenix 19 
(1965) 226. The argument of Μ. Mello, Sallustio e le elezioni consolari del 66 a. C., Parola 
del Passato 18 (1963) 37-9, that the phrase used by Cicero and Asconius (professus petere 
consulatum) indicates candidature at a normal election, is a little thin; the procedure at 
both elections would presumably have been the same, and the phrase cannot be used to 
show that Catilina stood at the normal elections.

CATILINA: COURT CASES
131
dies).10 Asconius too seems to accept as the reason for the rejection of 
Catilina’s candidature the fact that he had been charged with extortion, 
if the phrase he uses, quaerebatur repetundarum, means that he had 
formally been charged." It may mean no more than informal 
complaints/2 but if Asconius does intend it to mean that Catilina had 
formally been charged with extortion, then he would be guilty of a 
contradiction, for elsewhere he says that Catilina was not charged with 
extortion till 65.13
Whether Asconius is guilty of a contradiction or not, Sallust is wrong 
in saying that Catilina was charged with extortion in 66 and so 
prevented from standing at the consular elections, for we know from 
Cicero that the trial did not take place until 65, as Cicero tells us about 
the middle of that year that he was thinking of defending Catilina.14 
Tyrrell’s solution was to postulate two trials — one for extortion in 66 
immediately after Catilina’s return from Africa (which was used as the 
reason for the rejection of his candidature) and another in 65 on a 
charge of misappropriating public money, fitting the evidence for a trial
0 
Sail. Cat. 18.3: post paulo Catilina pecuniarum repetundarum reus prohibitus erat 
consulatum petere, quod intra legitumos dies profiteri nequiverat. This reason is accepted by 
D.C\ Earl. Appian B.C. I, 14 and 'professio'. Historia 14 (1965) 328; Ε.S. Staveley, Greek 
and Roman Voting and Elections (London 1972) 210 with n. 408; Gruen, op. cit. (n. 4) 417. 
N 
Ascon. 89 ' -12 C.: paulo ante diximus Catilinam, cum de provincia Africa decederet 
petiturus consulatum et legati Afri questi de eo in senatu graviter essent, supervenisse, 
professus deinde est Catilina petere se consulatum. L. Volcacius Tullus consul consilium 
publicum habuit an rationem Catilinae habere deberet, si peteret consulatum: nam 
quaerebatur repetundarum. Catilina ob eam causam destitit a petitione.
12 
Cf. Ascon. 84.4-5 C. (legati Afri in senatu iam tum absente illo questi sunt) and 89.7-8 
C. (legati Afri questi de eo in senatu graviter <essent>).
13 
Ascon. 85.10-13 C.: ante annum quam haec dicerentur [i.e. 65] Catilina, cum redisset 
ex Africa Torquato et Cotta coss., accusatus est repetundarum a Ρ. Clodio adulescente. Cf. 
66.8-10 C.
14 
Cic. Att. 1.1.1, 1.2.1; cf. Cael. 10. He thought of defending Catilina because he had 
the jury he wanted and co-operation from the prosecutor, Ρ. Clodius; on the extent of 
Clodius’ collusion, see E.J. Phillips, Cicero, ad Atticum I. 2, Philologus 114 (1970) 291-4, 
and Gruen, Some Criminal Trials of the Late Republic: Political and Prosopographical 
Problems, Athenaeum 49 (1971) 59-62. Cicero’s comment on the jury shows that it cannot 
have been constituted until about the middle of 65 and, if John is right (see above, n. 7), 
Catilina could not have been prevented in 66 from standing at the consular elections but at 
most can only have had a charge pending against him.

132
B. MARSHALL
in that year.15 This runs counter to the evidence of Asconius who says 
that the trial instituted by Clodius in 65 was for extortion, and the only 
evidence we have from Cicero is for one trial, instituted by Clodius and 
in 65. We might further argue that a trial for extortion would not take 
place immediately after an accused person’s return, as it might take 
some time for the natives to induce some Roman citizen to undertake 
the prosecution and for the evidence to be collected.
Sallust’s additional reason that Catilina had not made his professio 
within the legal period needs closer examination. It is assumed that the 
procedure for the presentation of candidature would have been the same 
for both the ordinary and the supplementary elections held in 66,16 and 
the following discussion will not solve the question of which election 
Catilina stood at (cf. above, n. 9). There has been much discussion about 
the requirements of professio, and about Sallust’s phrase intra legitumos 
dies in particular. There would seem to be reasonable agreement that at 
this time professio was obligatory,17 that it had to be made within a 
specified period,18 but that it was not required in person until 63 (while 
presence at the actual election had been required since the second 
century).19 Now, Asconius talks about Catilina’s presentation of himself
15 
The Correspondence of Cicero- (London 1885) 1.147. This runs counter to Cicero’s 
later statements (Alt. 1.16.9; Pis. 95) that Catilina was acquitted twice, i.e. at the extortion 
trial in 65 and at the trial inter sicarios in 64.
16 
D.L. Stockton, Cicero: a Political Biography (Oxford 1971) 74 n. 19, while accepting 
that Catilina stood at the supplementary election, argues for a difference in procedure: a 
nice legal point was involved, on which the presiding magistrate took advice and concluded 
that "not having given due notice of candidature for the first election Catilina could not 
now be admitted to the second.” An argument against this interpretation of procedure is 
that in 51 Curio was able to put in a nomination at the supplementary tribunician 
elections, though he had not been a candidate at the normal elections (Gael, in Cic. fam. 
8.4.2).
17 
Mommsen. Staatsrecht Γ 501-4; Earl, op. cit. (n. 10) 329-30; cf. J. Linderski, 
Constitutional Aspects of the Consular Elections in 59 B.C., Historia 14 (1965) 439, and 
Staveley. op. cit. (n. 10) 146-8.
IK 
Generally taken to have been the trinum nundinum between the announcement of the 
elections and the day of the elections: Earl, op. cit. (n. 10) 329; cf. Staveley, op. cit. (n. 10) 
147, who argues for a comparatively short legitimum tempus.
|g 
There is much debate on this. Mommsen’s view (Staatsrecht I’ 503 n. 3) is that the 
obligation of professio in person was introduced between January 63 and July 60 (based on 
Cic. leg. ag. 2.24 and the accounts of Caesar’s consular candidature in 60); he has been 
followed by. among others. Earl. op. cit. (n. 10) 328-9; Linderski. Mélanges offerts à

CATILINA: COURT CASES
133
as a candidate to the presiding magistrate and Tullus’ consideration of 
that nomination as if procedure were being followed in the normal way. 
If that were the case, Sallust’s phrase intra legitumos dies makes no 
sense, for Asconius’ account suggests that Catilina observed all the 
requirements for making a professio. It is true that a man could persist 
with candidature though his nomination had not been accepted, or that 
a man who was legally disqualified from standing or who had not even 
been nominated could in fact receive a majority of votes in an election, 
but it is also true that the presiding magistrate, by virtue of his 
imperium, could declare that he would not return a candidate after he 
had expressed an intention to stand or refuse to put a candidate’s name 
to the vote at an election or take no notice of votes cast in favour of a 
particular person when announcing the results of an election.20 In view 
of the presiding magistrate’s powers and of the requirements of professio 
mentioned above, there would have been little point in Catilina’s 
nominating himself as a candidate outside the required period, for he 
would have realised that he would have had no chance of success. 
Hence Asconius’ account suggesting that he made his professio in the 
proper way seems preferable, and Sallust’s additional reason should be 
rejected; it was perhaps inserted by the author in view of later laws 
connected with electoral procedure, such as the lex Pompeia of 52 and 
Caesar’s candidature for a second consulship in absentia (matters which 
would have been more strikingly familiar to Sallust as an active 
politician in that later period).
If Catilina had been formally accused at the time that he announced 
his intention to stand at the elections in 66, and if a person facing a
Kazimierz Michalowski (Warsaw 1966) 523-5; Staveiey, op. cit. (n. 10) 147; Gelzer, op. cit. 
(n. 2) 64. The evidence for compulsory attendance at election is from Plut. Mar. 12 
(Marius' election in absence to the consulship of 102). The opposing view, that professio in 
person was required from earlier than the time of Marius, has been put forward by A.E. 
Astin, 'Professio' in the Abortive Election in 184 B.C., Historia 11 (1%2) 252-5, and 
J.P.V.D. Balsdon, Roman History 65-50 B.C\: Five Problems, JRS 52 (1962) 141 (accepted 
by Stockton, Quis iustius induit arma?. Historia 24 [1975] 250). Linderski, loc. cit. esp. 
524-5. criticises Balsdon’s view on the grounds that he has confused professio with 
election-presence as the latter was the only requirement. Cf. Earl's criticism (loc. cit. 331 n. 
28) of Astin’s view that compulsory professio existed early in the second century.
211 
Earl, op. cit. (n. 10) 329-30 and 331 n. 28; Staveiey, op. cit. (n. 10) 148 with n. 266, 
and 210.

134
B. MARSHALL
charge was legally barred from candidature, then it is not clear why 
Tullus found it necessary to consult his consilium before rejecting 
Catilina as a candidate, for the legal situation would have been perfectly 
clear.21 If, on the other hand, a person facing a charge was not legally 
barred from nominating as a candidate (as the trials of Catilina in 64, 
Clodius in 57, and Scaurus in 54 seem to show), or if Catilina had not 
formally been charged at the time of the elections in 66 (as has been 
argued above), it is easy to see why special action on the part of the 
consul was necessary to reject his candidature. That action was simply 
that Tullus, the consul presiding over the elections, exercised his 
prerogative of not accepting Catilina’s professio, the quite legitimate 
exercise of consular imperium.22 There had been a recent case of the 
rejection of a candidate, when C. Calpurnius Piso rejected Μ. Lollius 
Palicanus’ candidature at the consular elections of the previous year.23 In 
both cases, party political reasons can be suspected: Piso, a vehement 
inimicus of Pompeius, was trying to prevent a Pompeian candidate from 
standing (as tribune in 71, Palicanus had strongly supported Pompeius’ 
platform for his consulship in 70),24 while Catilina was suspected of 
having been put up by Crassus, and there were some leading 
conservative senators who would not like to see Crassus’ candidate 
successful. Tullus’ action was taken after consulting some of the
21 
I owe this argument to Professor J. Linderski. The line of argument has been put 
forward earlier by Hardy, op. cit. (n. 3) 157-8.
22 
On the exercise of this prerogative by the consul at elections, see Earl, op. cit. (n. 10) 
331. Staveley, op. cit. (n. 10) 210 with n. 408, says this power could only be invoked on 
strictly legal grounds: he bases this claim on the example of Tullus in 66, rejecting 
Catilina’s candidature because he was facing a charge, but it has been argued that Catilina 
was not formally charged till 65. Further, the rejection of Palicanus' candidature in the 
preceding year (see next note) does not seem to have been based on any legal grounds, 
but resulted simply from the exercise of the consul’s imperium; the argument advanced by 
Piso that he was not a fit person to hold the office because of his character (Val. Max. 
3.8.3) is hardly a legal reason for rejecting his candidature.
23 
Val. Max. 3.8.3; cf. Cic. An. 1.1.1.
24 
On Piso’s anti-Pompeian attitude, see Gruen. Pompey and the Pisones, CSCA 1 
(1968) 157-9. and L. Hayne, The Politics of Μ'. Glabrio, Cos. 67, Class. Phil. 69 (1974) 
280.

CATILINA: COURT CASES
135
senators,25 and it is likely that optimate senators opposed to Crassus 
formed at least part of his consilium. In these consultations mention was 
no doubt made of Catilina’s activities in his governorship and the 
possibility of an impeachment, and these were probably put forward as 
superficial reasons for coming to the decision not to accept his 
candidature (that may explain how involvement in a trial came to be 
part of the account of the reasons for the rejection of his candidature). 
Cicero stresses in a fragment of his speech in toga candida (quoted 
above, n. 25) that Tullus used his prerogative as electoral officer to 
reject Catilina’s professio after seeking advice; it is Asconius, in 
commenting on this fragment, and Sallust, who say that it was rejected 
because Catilina was under a charge. In doing so, the former may be 
contradicting himself (as mentioned above), and the latter has been 
shown to be wrong.
To turn to the second question: did Caesar engineer Catilina’s 
acquittal on the charge inter sicarios in 64? Both Seager and Gruen have 
recently called into question the commonly held view that he did.26 Ἀ 
more basic question has to be answered first: was Caesar the court 
president, or the prosecutor? And was he therefore in a position to 
procure Catilina’s acquittal, by the exercise of favour (if the former), or 
by collusion (if the latter), like Clodius in Catilina’s trial for extortion in 
65 (see above, n.14)? Suetonius (lui. 11.1) says quite clearly that Caesar 
exercised the presidency of the quaestio de sicariis, but other evidence 
suggests only that he was an accusator in a number of the trials against 
Sullan creatures. Cicero says that Sulla’s cruelty was requited many 
years later by Caesar; Dio says that Caesar was most instrumental in 
bringing about the trial and punishment of those who had committed 
murder during the Sullan proscriptions; and the Scholia Gronoviana says
25 
Cic. in tog. cand. in Ascon. 89.1-5 C. (=fr. 16 P.): te vero, Catilina, consulatum sperare 
aut cogitare non prodigium atque portentum est? a quibus enim petis? a principibus civitatis? 
qui tibi, cum L. Volcacio cos. in consilio fuissent, ne petendi quidem potestatem esse 
voluerunt. Asconius uses the phrase consilium publicum in his comment on this passage 
(quoted above, n. 11). Cf. Η. Frisch, The First Catilinarian Conspiracy: a Study in 
Historical Conjecture, C. & Μ. 9 (1947) 12-3.
2e 
R. Seager, The First Catilinarian Conspiracy, Historia 13 (1964) 347 n. 43; Gruen, op. 
cit. (n. 4) 77 n. 124. For the common view, see the authors cited in n. 2.

136
B. MARSHALL
that Caesar accused and condemned many Sullani.27 Each of these three 
sources may have oversimplified the situation, for they were writing 
many years later (even Cicero, whose speech containing the remark was 
delivered some twenty years after the event); apart from Catilina’s case, 
we know of at least two others (Luscius and Bellienus), both of whom 
were found guilty, and persons writing some time later could well see 
those convictions as the work of the court president as much as the 
prosecutors. If Caesar were not iudex quaestionis, but simply an 
accusator, then he can have had nothing at all to do with the acquittal of 
Catilina, since his prosecution was undertaken by L. Lucceius.
It seems hard, however, to avoid the precise and conclusive statement 
of Suetonius that Caesar was president of the court. If he was president 
of the court, then he could have used influence to favour Catilina which 
might have helped his acquittal. There are examples of the influence of 
court presidents: Μ’. Acilius Glabrio allowed Cicero to dispense with 
normal procedure and to launch straight into the examination of 
witnesses,28 thus preventing the case against Verres dragging on into the 
holiday period at the end of 70 and so being postponed; the associates 
of Verres were trying to have the trial postponed to the next year when 
one of their number, Μ. Caecilius Metellus, would be in charge of the 
extortion court;29 Cicero’s explanation of his refusal at the end of 66 to 
grant Manilius the usual postponement when he had been charged with 
extortion was that this would put the trial into the next year when the 
court president might not be so favourable, whereas he wanted the case 
to be heard before himself as praetor de repetundis;30 L. Cassius 
Longinus, praetor in charge of the treason court in 66, did not turn up
27 
Cic. Lig. 12: quae tamen crudelitas [of Sulla] ab hoc eodem [Caesar] aliquot annis post 
... vindicata est. Dio 37.10.3: ... κατηγορη-θησαυ ὲπ'ι ταΐς açayaiç καῖ εκολὰσ-θησαυ, τοΰ 
Καΐσαρος τοΰ Ίουλΐου τοϋ-θ’ ὅτι μαλιστα παρασκευασαυτος. Schol. Gronov. 293 St. (on 
Cic. Lig. 12): denique aliquot annis post occasum Sullae multos accusavit et damnavit 
Sullanos.
28 
Cic. Verr. 1.55. For Glabrio’s co-operation, see Hayne, op. cit. (n. 24) 281.
29 
Cic. Verr. 1.21 and 31; cf. Plut. Cic. 7.4.
30 
Plut. Cic. 9.5; cf. Dio 36.44.1-2. For further details and discussion of this case, see 
most recently Gruen, Notes on the ‘First Catilinarian Conspiracy’, Class. Phil. 64 (1969) 
22-3; Phillips, Cicero and the Prosecution of C. Manilius, Latomus 29 (1970) 595-607; 
A M. Ward, Politics in the Trials of Manilius and Cornelius, TAPA 101 (1970) 545-54.

CATILINA: COURT CASES
137
on the day nominated for hearing the case of C. Cornelius, and so let 
the defendant off the hook.31
These examples show that it was thought that the court president 
could exercise favour, and Caesar may well have been able to do so at 
Catilina’s trial in 64 if he were in charge of the court. But even so, there 
does not seem to have been much point: such favour could not have 
been designed to clear the way for Catilina’s candidature in 64, for it has 
been shown that the trial did not come up until after the elections in 
that year. Perhaps it was designed to keep Catilina available as a 
candidate in 63, but that raises the question whether Caesar and his 
associates continued to support Catilina in that troubled year, a question 
which is beyond the scope of this paper.32
T he U niversity of N ew E ngland, 
B ruce M arshall
A ustralia.
31 
Ascon. 59. 18-21 C.
32 
I am grateful to Professor J. Linderski and Dr. T.J. Cadoux for reading a draft of this 
paper and giving me the advantage of their criticism and advice. It should not be taken 
that they agree with all that is said.
