9
National paradigms of migration research
(with Dietrich Thränhardt)
First published in 2010 by V&R unipress as the chapter ‘Introduction:
National Paradigms of Migration Research’ (pages 9-38), co-authored with
Dietrich Thränhardt, in National Paradigms of Migration Research (IMIS-
Schriften 13), edited by Michael Bommes and Dietrich Thränhardt
Reprinted in 2011 as ‘Nationale Paradigmen der Migrationsforschung’, in
‘Migration und Migrationsforschung in der modernen Gesellschaft’ in IMIS-
Beitra¨ge 38 (pages 11-48)
Migrations are an inherent part of current processes of globalisation and in-
ternationalisation, which undoubtedly provide the foundation for the in-
creasing call for more international and comparative research. Accordingly,
the number of international research projects and networks in the research
area of migration has grown considerably over the last two decades.1
Scholars participating in this endeavour, however, soon discover that the
academic modes of conceptualising, defining and recording problems de-
pend to a large extent on the respective national histories of science. This
applies particularly to academic research into international migration and
the ensuing problems in the regions where migration begins and ends.
Research questions and approaches are frequently designed along the lines
of national traditions and patterns of state reactions towards international
migration and its societal effects. Seen in this way, migration research
seems itself to be rather a part of the complex of problems that it claims to
describe and explain. This context dependency certainly becomes more
visible in international research projects, since here researchers are more
often compelled to explicate their preconceptions.
Systematically, this leads to a number of questions: To what extent and
how is migration research shaped by ‘national paradigms’ or ‘hidden
national agendas’ like ‘race relations’ in the UK, ‘ethnic minority policies’
in the Netherlands, ‘assimilation into a French citizenry’ in France or ‘inte-
gration into a welfare state’ in Germany? These paradigms are perhaps
even present in critical efforts of scholars who strive to overcome their

very boundaries.2 How do these national patterns influence the way in
which international research and scientific modes conceptualise their re-
search questions? What are the consequences of this for the claim of scien-
tific validity with regard to propositions and applied theories? These ques-
tions have hardly been addressed systematically in migration studies
(Lavenex 2005; Vasta and Vasoo 2006) yet their investigation is an essen-
tial precondition for adequately reflexive international research.
The assumption that research may be imbued with ‘national paradigms’
is intentionally constructed in a paradoxical manner. Put in this way, we fo-
cus on one characteristic of the field of research, i.e. the indexing of the
paradigms of migration research as ‘national’. This may refer, on the one
hand, to a quite unproblematic matter of fact: Migration research takes on
different national shapes, since migration and the resulting societal constel-
lations differ in each country. As a consequence, different research ques-
tions need to be asked, and correspondingly, different theories and meth-
odological approaches need to be applied. Seen in this way, the heteroge-
neous appearance of migration research and concomitant problems of
mutual understanding may be simply the result of a lack of sufficient joint
explication and translation of approaches as well as their implicit context
dependency. This would, however, not principally foreclose scientific
claims of generalisability made by propositions on the basis of theories
and methodologies applied in nationally confined migration research. It
seems that the apparent paradox can be rectified easily and that it concerns
a rather unproblematic case: Internationalisation of research would simply
imply that nationally established approaches in migration research become
more explicit about their generalisability claims and enable a process in
which these claims are tested in an extended context of research, involving
comparative research designs and competition among alternative scientific
approaches. This will certainly be linked with the failure of research ap-
proaches and theories, i.e. we would just observe the normal and unspec-
tacular course of science not really worth specific mentioning.
However, we approach the issue of ‘national research paradigms’ in-
spired by a more far-ranging assumption: The paradigms of migration re-
search are ‘national paradigms’ not just because of their context depend-
ency and insufficient clarification of the conditions of generalisability; they
are ‘national’ because the modes of presenting problems and questions are
politically constituted by the nation states for which migration becomes a
problem or a challenge. This assumption finds initial evidence in the fact
that migration research is usually perceived as part of the applied social
sciences: This type of research emerged as a response to ‘social problems’
with the claim of contributing to their solution. This holds true for early
American sociology, whose first chair was established in Chicago at the
end of the nineteenth century, linked with the political expectation that it
would generate useful practical knowledge able to contribute to the
202
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

practical solution of those social problems stemming from immigration.3
This similarly applies to Australia (Vasta 2006) and to migration research
in different European countries since the Second World War (Vuddamalay
and Withol de Wenden 2006; Scholten 2007; Favell 2001; 2005; Boswell
2009). These practical conditions during the emergence of migration re-
search do not necessarily prove that its different traditions create ‘national
paradigms’ in the political sense introduced above, since no initial condi-
tion determines the structure of research programmes.
We take this point only as a first indicator for the validity of our as-
sumption, and it turns out that it is easy to find others: 1) Up to the
present, migration researchers tend to be rather ‘committed’ and less ‘dis-
tanced’ researchers.4 In many countries, they play a major role in concep-
tualising migration and integration policies, either directly or as govern-
ment advisors. Much research is embedded in such activities, and ‘policy
relevance’ is seen as an important criterion for migration research. 2)
During the last decades, migration research has gained prominence in the
relevant disciplines5, although it did not contribute significantly to the
theoretical or methodological progress of these disciplines. Central and
paradigmatically relevant theoretical and methodological debates in the
various disciplines have influenced migration research only to a minor ex-
tent and vice versa: the findings of migration research had and still have a
rather low impact on these (sub-) disciplines. The general (political) con-
sensus about the societal relevance of international migration – linked with
the willingness to provide more resources for research – has created a cli-
mate of reputation and recognition for migration research, which is not
substantiated by scientific achievement. Research may be confronted with
increasing expectations, but the research questions and answers as well as
research approaches remain largely the same – certainly permitting differ-
ences in scientific preferences mainly dependent on the orientations of the
researchers.
Against this backdrop, we suspect that the paradigms of migration re-
search are national in the sense that they are hybrids resulting from the
handling and redesign of politically constituted problems by means of sci-
entific research. We want to clarify if and to what extent the tension
between the national constitution of the migration problem and its scien-
tific treatment affects the scientific claim of universality. Do aspects exter-
nal to science penetrate the internal conceptualisation of problems, theory
building and research design in migration research in a way that leads to
the emergence of ‘national paradigms’ of migration research?
In order to answer these questions, we need to clarify first to what extent
the problem of migration is constituted by the organisational form of the
nation state, and how different nation states frame the specific modes of
raising problems, which in turn define the subject of research (I). Second,
we discuss how the relation between practical relevance and scientific
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
203

claim, between ‘commitment and distance’ (Elias 1956), is moderated in
migration research, and what kind of ‘national paradigms’ emerge out of
this process. The challenge is to identify the relation between politics/poli-
cies and science in different traditions of migration research. We assume
that in each case a specific relation of mutual enablement and restriction
provides the ground for different national paradigms (II). Finally, we dis-
cuss to what extent these paradigms and their foundations remain relevant
for the more and more internationally and comparatively oriented migra-
tion research.
Nation States as Constitutive Frame for the Problem of
International Migration
In all nation states, international migration and migrants become periodi-
cally a political issue, yet in varying ways and with a focus on different
topics. Therefore, an analytical framework of analysis is required that al-
lows us to account for commonalities and differences between nation states
in dealing with international migration (1). Based on this framework, we
provide some arguments for the assumption that nation states conceptualise
international migration based on their structural constitution (2). In a third
step, we discuss the extent to which these conceptualisations are mirrored
in the different national traditions of migration research (3).
1
Migration is usually defined as the movement across borders, from one na-
tion state to another – or from one society to another (Treibel 1990, 21). In
contrast, internal migration is evidently considered as normal, unproble-
matic or even functional and necessary, strengthening national cohesion
and opening access to locations where people can work and live most ef-
fectively and satisfyingly – the practical realisation of Adam Smith’s idea
of the invisible hand. In other words, internal migration in national labour
markets is not only seen as normal, it also refers to the socially institution-
alised expectation of social mobility. Internal migrants are therefore neither
perceived nor treated as migrants. Instead, the emergence of conflicts about
internal migrations usually indicates that a nation state is in crisis, that
processes of political erosion articulate themselves in increasing desires to
split up and create new states – be it a most imaginative ‘Padania’ in the
north of Italy, an independent Assam in the northeast of India, an inde-
pendent Kurdistan cutting across Turkey, Syria and Iran, or a Kosovo free
of Serbian domination.
The field of migration research dealing with international migration is
therefore over-determined by a contradiction, which has been prominently
labelled ‘the liberal paradox’ (Hollifield 1996): One central assumption of
204
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

liberalism is that the freedom of movement of people as well as of goods,
capital and services refers not only to a natural right but also provides the
basis for the smooth operation of society. Restrictions upon such freedoms
are associated with authoritarian governments – pre-modern, colonial, fas-
cist or communist – and are seen as dysfunctional for a modern, i.e. open,
economy. On the other hand, national sovereignty, including the right to
control access to state territory, remains largely unquestioned. This is taken
as a basic principle of international and national law, only slightly modified
by the non-refoulement clause of the Geneva Convention. Communitarian
philosophers have reaffirmed this position as a legitimate right of closure,
based on the operational mode of communities and the requirements for
societal cohesion (Taylor 1993; Walzer 1983; 1990).
Only a small minority of political theorists takes a principled stance
against the territorial sovereignty of states (Bauböck 1994). On the whole,
however, idealist hopes for a borderless world (Soysal 1994; Jacobson
1996) have faded away since the fall of the Berlin wall. Inside the
European Union, the liberal paradox seems to be solved: The freedom of
movement is largely institutionalised, and despite the recurrent fears ac-
companying each enlargement round, no serious social tensions have arisen
so far. The liberal paradox re-emerges, however, at the external frontier of
the EU, and new member states situated at this border have to prove their
maturity for full membership by implementing Schengen conditions and by
establishing border control capacities according to EU standards.
In more general terms, ‘the liberal paradox’ refers to a structural contra-
diction of modern world society: On the one hand, international migration
is an outcome of the social expectation involved in the institutionalised
form of mobility in modern world society, i.e. individuals are expected to
move where relevant social chances for participation and resources for an
autonomous life are available. International migration means precisely the
effort to realise opportunities for a living by means of geographical mobi-
lity. This does not per se imply structural problems for the primarily af-
fected social systems, like labour markets, education systems or families –
the freedom to move may be rather a precondition for their functioning, as
liberals argue.6 Nevertheless, most international migrations are, on the oth-
er hand, confronted with all kinds of legal and political interventions and
restrictions.
The structural basis for these regular interventions is the organisational
form of politics in modern society, i.e. the nation state. Political and legal
interventions in international migration occur regularly and not just by his-
torical chance. They make manifest the internal structural contradiction of
world society (Stichweh 1998), i.e. the permanent production of motives
for international migration – due mainly to the demand of labour markets
and the opportunities of educational systems, the institutionalisation of the
nuclear family, the worldwide communication of options by the mass
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
205

media and the accessibility of transport (just to name the most important
factors) – and the constant political effort to control these migrations7 and
to mould motives for migration, according to the specific structure of the
political system, i.e. its internal segmentary differentiation into nation
states.
One strong implication of the worldwide institutionalisation of national
states has been the partitioning of the world population into state popula-
tions (Halfmann 2005). International migrations have always challenged
this division by crossing borders in the quest for chances of social partici-
pation. The reactions of nation states towards these migrations are medi-
ated by the two constitutive dimensions that define the relation between
states and their populations: a) the dimension of loyalty refers to the
requirement that citizens and all other persons residing in a nation state ter-
ritory show obedience and participate in political decisions; it is therefore a
fundamental condition for the reproduction of state sovereignty; b) the di-
mension of provision refers to the obligation of the state to provide legal,
political and social security in exchange for loyalty coagulating in the con-
cept of the welfare state (Marshall 1950).8 Nearly all political modes of
regulating international migration are geared towards aspects linked to one
or both of these dimensions – loyalty and provision (Bommes 1999).9
These two dimensions are deeply interlinked. States shape their take on mi-
gration on the ground of patterns based on the conceptualisation of the
population as citizens resulting from historical state building processes:
How the population is constituted as a national community of citizens and
the related design of the welfare state define the common ground for all
kinds of political reactions to be found in states dealing with migration.
They are, however, differently articulated due to the different course of
state building based on different dynamics in the emergence of the state
population and the building up of welfare systems.
One major difference between European nation states and the traditional
immigration countries (USA, Canada, Australia) has always been the build-
ing process of state populations and the related concept of loyalty:
European state populations are the historical outcome of the efforts of
emerging states to establish sovereignty over a territory and a people
against competing claims of neighbouring states (Tilly 1990). Nation build-
ing in Europe took place as a process by which a population was de-
lineated and transformed into a nation, a people within a politically defined
territory (Koselleck 1992). This outlines the historical background for the
varying concepts and meanings of civic community as ‘the people’
(Brubaker 1992) and the specific relevance of the loyalty dimension in
dealing with migrants in Europe (Bade 2003). In contrast, in traditional im-
migration countries immigration has been an integral part of the population
building process by conceptualising immigrants, in principle, as future
206
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

citizens – despite the exclusion of certain migrants for a long time on racist
grounds.
The different histories of state building also provide the background for
the different meaning of the welfare dimension in Europe and in traditional
immigration countries in dealing with migration. The emerging modern
states in Europe sought to politically mediate the chances of inclusion and
exclusion in reaction to the breakdown of pre-modern stratified orders of
inclusion (Bommes 1999). The modern nation state can most generally be
defined by its successful claim of sovereignty over a territory and a popu-
lation. From the outset, this was linked to the emergence of the welfare
state (Swaan 1988). By providing chances for participation in the social
realms of the economy, law, health or education – that is within a welfare
state – the nation state created the social preconditions for a process in
which former subjects were transformed into political citizens. This was a
process in which the inclusion of the whole population into the political
system via the individual citizens and the claim of political sovereignty
over them could gain political legitimacy and universal validity. The wel-
fare state became the central authority in modern society moderating rela-
tions between the principle of universal access10 to and inclusion in the
social realms of the economy, law, education, health or politics and the em-
pirical reality of social exclusion.
The effect was that national welfare states became the institutionalised
organisational model of the political system in world society, and they have
evolved as international ‘thresholds of inequality’ (Stichweh 1998). This
means that they have guaranteed the internal loyalty of their citizens by a
welfare policy that promotes chances for inclusion based on external clo-
sure and exclusion. From its beginning, welfare provided by nation states
had a territorial index. The provisions of welfare states initially addressed
primarily citizens, i.e. those individuals perceived by states as belonging to
their territory. The nation may have been defined in either cultural (e.g.,
Germany) or republican terms (e.g., France), but in the historical context
of competitive state building processes in Europe, the common welfare of
the people of the nation – of the community of national citizens – evolved
as the general frame of reference for states (Bommes 1999). This involved
the political claim for not only formal, but also some substantial equality
for all members of the national community; a claim based on the political
form of membership, i.e. citizenship (Marshall 1950).
This European model of the national welfare state gained worldwide
relevance (Meyer et al. 1997),11 although in different ways. Again, for our
purpose, one major difference between European welfare states and the tra-
ditional immigration countries is telling: Welfare in Europe implies a more
or less thick notion of ‘the people’ as the original political collective that
defines the addressee of welfare; correspondingly, migrants are seen as po-
tentially illegitimate welfare seekers from outside. In contrast, immigration
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
207

countries conceptualise and recruit immigrants traditionally as potential
contributors to welfare – not because these countries do not provide wel-
fare in a privileging manner, addressing primarily citizens, but because im-
migrants are right from the start expected to become future citizens. In oth-
er words, the production of welfare has always been based on immigration,
whereas welfare in Europe is still to a large extent perceived as a ‘(gross)
national product’ leaving the contribution of outsiders, i.e. migrants, with
only limited acknowledgement.12
Despite these differences, in a most general sense, all national welfare
states try to privilege their citizens (or what they consider to be their core
citizens). They try
–
to open or facilitate access to the relevant social systems (the economy,
law, education, family or health) and to reduce the risks of exclusion;
–
to stabilise these systems and their capacities of inclusion (labour mar-
kets, families, education, health, etc.);
–
to equip individuals so that they fulfil the conditions for social
participation;
–
to compensate for the social consequences of failing access.
In order to achieve these objectives, states rely fundamentally on law as a
means of assigning rights and duties, of the political distribution and redis-
tribution of funds and the symbolic communication of civic duties. These
state efforts lead to highly differentiated welfare infrastructures encompass-
ing social security systems, which deal with the modern core risks of acci-
dent, health, age and unemployment, with social benefits for families, pro-
grammes to increase access to education, social benefit payments for the
long-term excluded and poor, various public provisions of social services,
etc.
National welfare states differ tremendously, even in Europe, and it seems
that this will also remain the case in the near future, despite the advance-
ment of globalisation and European integration and some, although limited,
processes of model mixing and assimilation (Obinger et al. 2006). These
differences are a result of the varied histories of national state building.
Welfare structures are the outcome of the accumulated political decisions
in history; they mould welfare in nationally specific ways with regard to
concepts of social cohesion, the size and qualities of a constituency, legiti-
mate membership and access to rights as well as notions of social risks and
failure, and expectations of mutual obligations constituted by solidarity,
which define we-collectives of insiders and complementary outsiders.
Different welfare states represent therefore different welfare cultures, i.e.
bundles of organisations, regulations and institutions referred to as welfare
states are culturally deeply imbued. Conceptions of security and insecurity,
assumptions about responsibilities for the provision of welfare, the limits
of welfare and the extent of individual self-responsibility are contingent
208
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

and not self-evident. There are always alternative ways, and it is certainly
– at least in principle – possible to organise welfare differently. Each wel-
fare state is based on different assumptions about what states should do,
and to what extent they should intervene, about the meaning and founda-
tions of freedom or solidarity, about the main institutions and foundations
of society, etc.13
2
These considerations on the relation of national welfare states and interna-
tional migration provide an adequately generalised model in order to
account for the different modes in which international, i.e. trans-border, mi-
grations are conceptualised as political issues and handled by states. By
adequately generalised, we mean that this model should allow further case-
dependent respecifications, e.g. to account for differences between large
and small welfare states, the formation problems of new nations in Asia
and Africa, the transition of countries, like Turkey, from traditional emigra-
tion countries to transit and immigration countries. We assume that these
political modes of conceptualising migration resurface in the paradigms of
migration research, mirroring country specific constellations. In the follow-
ing, we summarise the assumptions of this model:
A commonality of different states is defined by the need to solve a bun-
dle of problems, in order to build and maintain a capacity for the produc-
tion of collectively binding decisions. Essentially, this includes the enforce-
ment of the claim of sovereignty over a territory and its population, i.e. the
people. This implies, as elaborated above, the two dimensions of loyalty
and provision: What kind of loyalty is expected from whom, and who is
suspected to be disloyal (e.g. autochthonous minorities, migrants coming
from competing neighbouring states)? Who should be included in civil,
political and social provisions, and who should be excluded? What kind of
civil, political and social provisions are institutionalised, and how are they
related
to
internal
historical
conflict
constellations
and
cleavages?
Dependent on the historical handling of these constellations by states, in-
ternational migrants denote groups that stand in many respects in stark
contrast to the different demarcations and delineations resulting from state
building processes:
A. The relation between international migrants and the group of citizens is
precarious. Dependent on how delineations are defined, the conditions
for the inclusion of migrants are more or less open or restrictive, linked
with expectations concerning cultural similarity, the willingness of ac-
culturation, assimilation and loyalty. These expectations are anchored
in notions of the hereditary or acquirable character of cultural patterns,
paradigmatically articulated in the opposition of republican and ethnic
concepts of citizenship.14 These distinctions prove to be relevant not
only in Europe, but also for migrations in the successor states of the
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
209

Soviet empire or the postcolonial states of the former Third World.
Additional complications face those postcolonial migrants in Europe
for whom national citizenships had been open (like in Great Britain,
the Netherlands, France and more recently in Spain and Portugal).
After closure, however, their social position has been redefined in most
of these countries in terms of ethnic or race relations.
B. Notions of (potential) belonging organise not only the formal rules of
access to welfare provision, which may include or exclude different mi-
grants to a different extent, but also the social perceptions of the legiti-
macy to claim benefits and the chance to scandalise it publicly.
C. In different national welfare states, migrants acquire differentiated ac-
cess to social rights and provisions. This depends on the different mode
of construction of welfare states; and fairly often, it is removed from
the question of whether this access is politically perceived as legitimate:
It can be the long-term outcome of participation in the labour market of
welfare states which make access to social rights dependent on employ-
ment; it can be the effect of welfare provisions that address the legally
resident population living in the state territory.
D. Migrations become a political issue in different ways depending on the
internal order and infrastructure of states: in countries with majority
voting systems differently from countries with systems of proportional
representation; in centralistic systems differently from federalist sys-
tems; in democracies differently from dictatorships, etc. That is to say,
the forms and dynamics of the reproduction of state power are relevant
for the question of if and how migrants become an issue under the per-
spectives of loyalty and provision.
If one regards this approach as an underlying framework of reference, one
can immediately notice that international migration and migrants assume
the form of specific problems in different countries, which depend on the
design of these states, their internal way of reproducing sovereignty, and
the related conceptualisation of loyalty and power relations. This explains
the difference between immigration countries and those countries in
Europe that conceive of their form of political organisation by dint of
founding myths as the constitution of native populations on ancestral terri-
tory. We have already discussed that this leads in each case to different
conceptualisations of migrants in their relation to the state population as
well as to welfare.
Nevertheless,
the ‘multiculturalisms’ of the immigration countries
Canada, USA and Australia differ substantially from one another: In
Canada, multiculturalism has served since the 1960s as a sort of moderator
for the latent tensions between the two founding nations, while at the same
time it commits immigrants to this constellation. In Australia, it can be
traced back to a changed international situation in which the country
210
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

repositioned itself politically in the Pacific region under the motto ‘popu-
late or perish’, by opening itself to immigration from Asia since the late
1960s. Australia linked this development with a ‘re-description’ of its state
population. As in the United States, this was accompanied by recurring
fears, whether on the basis of plural origins living together harmoniously,
immigrants can turn into loyal citizens or, vice versa, whether the founda-
tion of the state, a certain degree of uniformity and coherence among its
inhabitants, is at risk. On the basis of the highly selective admission of im-
migrants, these countries also differ with regard to the access immigrants
have to welfare benefits. However, especially their selectivity reduces the
likelihood that such benefits are claimed. It is, therefore, hardly accidental
that, particularly in the US, public debates arise regularly on the issue of
the exclusion from such benefits – yet, these concern in particular illegal
immigrants before the backdrop of an economic situation in which the
extended employment of such immigrants in certain sectors of the labour
market and the continued demand for them are hardly hot topics. This
leads to hypocrisy in public scandalisation and the establishing of harsh
control and defence apparatus, in particular along the border with Mexico,
while the immigration and employment of such migrants continue
(Cornelius et al. 2009).
In Europe, despite processes of adjustment during the last 15 years, dif-
ferences between the states remain, be it between cultural and political con-
cepts of nations (Kulturnation vs. Staatsnation), between republican and
multicultural-pluralistically oriented policies, or with regard to the constitu-
tion of their welfare states. This finds expression in the conceptualisations
of migrants in relation to state populations and in the variations of what,
unlike in the United States, is in most European countries purposefully tak-
en as the ‘integration’ and not as the ‘assimilation problem’ of migrants. In
France, for instance, republicanism turns out to be a quasi-lens through
which all immigrant-related issues are seen, be it the issue of access to citi-
zenship, which as a matter of course is open to migrants conceived as im-
migrants based on the recognition of the republican order and the assimila-
tively oriented expectation to become French, the shaping of the inclusion
of migrants in the educational system, or the handling of cultural and reli-
gious pluralisation. This has the mirror effect that immigrants perceive their
actual social marginalisation as withholding the republican promise to be
part of the French nation.
In the Netherlands the conceptualisation of immigrants as ethnic minor-
ities was, since the 1970s, based on the pillar model anchored in the specif-
ic Dutch state building. Until the 1990s, the corresponding direction of
welfare state integration policies allowed the combining of post-colonial
immigration and recruited labour migration in a historically proven model.
The resulting tension between political, multicultural tolerance and the de
facto marginalisation of large sections of the immigrant population in the
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
211

labour market and in cities under well-developed welfare-state conditions
initiated the continuous and increasingly restrictive transformation of mi-
gration and integration policies, associated with both increasingly aggres-
sive, publicly expressed expectations of migrants to assimilate and consid-
erable turbulence in the political party system. In Denmark, immigration
and its consequences run counter to the country’s self-image as a culturally
and socially completely homogeneous nation.
In the British case, the conceptualisation of the immigration issue as
‘race relations’ shapes the public debate, which has its basis in the immi-
gration of ‘former subjects’ of the British Crown from the 1950s to the
1970s. Migration and opportunities for social participation of migrants are
primarily conceptualised as problems of the equitable cohabitation of
‘races’, of multicultural tolerance and anti-discrimination, which are meant
to domestically signal acceptance and equality towards immigrants, given
the closure of the British state for their home countries and for former sub-
jects of the Commonwealth in general. Historically rooted in the history of
the Empire, this conceptualisation is currently being ‘overwritten’ by a
new wave of immigration after the EU enlargement. According to the pri-
orities of New Labour, it is being replaced by a new interest in ‘indicators
of social integration’ regarding immigrants from Eastern Europe, also in
view of the increasingly apparent limits of the absorption capacity of the
‘open labour market’.
The conceptualisation of migration and migrants in Germany, which has
experienced several immigrations encompassing refugees and expellees,
‘guest workers’, asylum seekers, civil war refugees and ethnic Germans
(Aussiedler) was determined by two reference frames: a) Germany is not
an immigration country (Einwanderungsland), and therefore immigrants
(Zuwanderer) are not automatically seen as immigrants (Einwanderer);
they can and should become Germans only under restrictive conditions; b)
permanent immigration (Zuwanderung)15 and the settlement of migrants re-
fer to problems of social integration, which are the responsibility of the
welfare state. Into the 1990s, an ethnically founded citizenship barred
access to the naturalisation of migrants. Since then, under certain condi-
tions concerning integration, citizenship has become obtainable. On the
other hand, since the Second World War, the positive reference to what
constitutes a German was eclipsed and cultural difference was primarily
conceptualised as a problem for social integration, as a deficit and hurdle
for the required adaptation, particularly in education and the labour market.
This perspective remains prevalent until the present day and now also
includes ethnic Germans (Aussiedler) after their reconceptualisation from
formerly cultural Germans to culturally and socially different migrants with
typical integration problems. On the other hand, the German welfare state
proved to be inclusive in the sense that it effectively provided protection
not only for large parts of the migrant workers of the 1960s and 1970s due
212
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

to compulsory social insurance, but it also covers the basic needs (food,
clothing, accommodation, health) of all individuals residing in its territory
via the welfare state concept. To a limited extent, this also applies to asy-
lum seekers. In Germany, the problem conceptualisation of migration and
migrants revolves, therefore, mainly around the question of whether immi-
grants can provide for themselves and whether they receive social benefits
legitimately – in other words, whether in the long run they manage their
‘social integration’ successfully. This finds its most recent expression in
the fact that probably in no other country in Europe was a ‘national inte-
gration plan’ created with a comparable symbolic effort.
Moreover, the management of immigration by the Mediterranean coun-
tries in Europe is embedded in their specific state traditions. The Italian
case indicates that the political handling of the significant immigration
since the late 1980s, rooted in the demands of an EU increasingly organ-
ised in regard to migration questions, can only be explained in the context
of a growing demand for services of a familistic welfare state faced with
the demographically accelerated ageing process of its population and a tra-
dition of the legal rectification of illegal situations, be it in relation to the
building code or residence permits. In this way, as in Spain, illegal migra-
tion and its legalisation became de facto migration policy, against the
actual backdrop of an official EU-oriented policy.
Discussions about the way in which states conceptualise problems asso-
ciated with international migration are usually confined to traditional immi-
gration countries and Europe. A look at worldwide migration (Castles and
Miller 2009; Massey et al. 1998; Thränhardt and Hunger 2003) shows
quickly, however, that the political handling of international migration is
also anchored in the structures of statehood in the respective countries and
regions. As the contributions on Nigeria and Malaysia in this volume show,
both countries debate ‘social cohesion’, the definition of a constituency, of
the people constituting the nation, of its delimitation and the claim and
testing of the reach of state sovereignty with regard to migrants, who are
partly, even by dint of violence, excluded from rights and benefits and ex-
pelled from state territory.16
Public policy regarding international migration and migrants was and is
embedded in international discourses. One can characterise the late nine-
teenth and the first half of the twentieth century as the era of the preva-
lence of the nation state. This era is also associated with unquestioned
domestic assimilation policies of countries towards their minorities and im-
migrants as well as related policies, such as the one set forward by the
League of Nations, which reacted to the vulnerability of this policy, appa-
rent in forced cultural homogenisation, separatist tendencies and wars, with
the redesign of state borders based on the ‘right of self-determination of
peoples’ or with the resettlement of ethnic minorities, be it ‘voluntarily’, as
in the case of the Greeks and Turks in the Treaty of Lausanne, or coerced,
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
213

as in the case of the Allied Potsdam Agreement with regard to the
Germans in Eastern Europe.
The period since the Second World War was characterised by a decline
of nationalism in Western countries, the dominance of liberalism and the
increasing differentiation between law and politics as well as decolonisa-
tion in the Third World. This was associated with a relative decoupling of
state, nation and culture. Since then, cultural differences are seen as legiti-
mate, cultures are considered equal, and cultural pluralism is now regarded
as beneficial. An early source is the UNESCO Declaration on the equality
of cultures, which emphasised the right to diversity and its value. This has
not necessarily been replaced but, rather, has been accompanied by a ‘re-
turn of assimilation’ (Brubaker 2001) in discourse and political expecta-
tions in many countries, which does not necessarily constitute a negation
of the UNESCO Declaration but, in different ways in different countries,
calls into question the benefits and value of cultural pluralism. The need to
clarify the relationship between cultural pluralism and the indispensable
conditions for participation in the functional systems of education, the
economy, law, health, religion, and the mass media is also brought into
focus, such as the tension between human rights, cultural pluralism and rel-
ativism, respectively.
International discursive formations impact differently on the political
public as well as on policies of individual countries; they are re-articulated
against the backdrop of respective national histories. Multiculturalism, con-
cepts of diversity, integration and assimilation denote different things in
each case and can therefore not be understood adequately in isolation from
their contextual embedding.
3
International migration and its associated problems are, as shown, substan-
tially constituted by the character of policy and the specific structure of
states. They form the filter for international migration, which is essentially
caused by the mobility in modern society and thereby lend it a specific
shape as a problem. The latter is reflected in the ways of conceptualisation
in the various strands of national migration research.
Even a cursory comparative glance shows that the outline in the pre-
vious section of individual aspects of concepts of international migration
as problems in various countries finds its reflection in the main issues of
national migration research, which shall be briefly illustrated in the
following.
West German migration research formed itself by means of state-consti-
tuted migrant groups. At first, it succeeded as research into refugees and
expellees, then as research into guest workers, foreigners and ethnic
Germans (Aussiedler), before it developed into general migration research.
At the centre of its research stands the question of social integration, and
214
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

the latter, in its different ways of conceptualisation since the 1970s, is evi-
dently geared towards the guiding precepts of the West German welfare
state, its guest worker foreigner policy and later policy concerning ethnic
Germans as well as, finally, its current immigration and integration policy.
The issues of French migration research revolve around republicanism
and related questions: Which consequences do international migration and
the settlement of migrants have, especially for the associated expectations
and concepts of assimilation, citizenship and laïcité; whether immigration is
inevitably associated with the growing importance of cultural, ethnic and
religious differences; whether their public irrelevance should be maintained
or instead be replaced with forms of tiered recognition; and finally, the ques-
tions of whether such differences can be empirically recorded and whether
their relation to other social dynamics within families, on labour and hous-
ing markets, or in the school system ought to be and shall be explored.
In the United Kingdom, ‘race relations’ are the constitutive reference
point for British research on migration until well into the 1990s. The critics
of this approach distance themselves by marking this approach as ‘racist’
(Miles 1994) in a tu quoque mode and thus remain performatively tied to
the criticised frame of reference in a peculiar way. This constellation, based
on the immigrations of the 1950s to 1970s in the context of a disintegrating
commonwealth, is being increasingly replaced by more recent research,
which essentially follows the objectives of New Labour, highlights the
potential and benefits migration brings, and explores ‘indicators of
integration’.17
Migration research in the United States is often characterised by the old
question of assimilation, starting with Thomas and Znaniecki, Park and
Gordon, and ranging from Gans, Portes & Rumbault, to Alba & Nee and
Waldinger. It places at its centre the constitutive problem of the United
States – how social order and coexistence can be guaranteed on the basis
of the coming together of so many different nations/regions (e pluribus
unum). This continuation finds its plausibility in the huge waves of immi-
gration since the civil rights reforms in the mid-1960s, which currently
keeps timely the question of whether the ‘melting pot’ still works. Noted
processes of differentiation are characteristically discussed as ‘segmented
assimilation’.
In Australia, migration research and its concepts were not only shaped
by the multicultural orientation of immigration policy since the 1970s, the
latter has also significantly helped to develop this policy – not least be-
cause of its close organisational link to politics.
Especially the last example shows that the orientation of different
national migration research towards the ways in which different states con-
ceptualised international migration, immigration and settlement as political
problems did not hinder the production of solid empirical and theoretical
contributions. However, a reflection from a sociology of knowledge
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
215

perspective of this conceptually narrow focus and the often organisational-
ly close links between science and politics in the field of migration re-
search is still lacking.
National Paradigms of Migration Research? The Relationship of
Politics and Science in Migration Research
The aim of the following considerations is to develop a framework for
such a reflection. The contributions of this volume provide material, to
some extent, with which to begin such a project in a comparative perspec-
tive. Upon closer inspection, the determination of what could constitute na-
tional paradigms of migration research creates, conceptually, more difficul-
ties than the charm of this initially attractive project suggests.
A
In the previous sections, we have highlighted how deeply migration
research is imbued by its embeddedness in the respective nation states.
This does not overlook the fact that migration researchers have in turn a
significant influence on the shaping of migration policies and related prob-
lem conceptualisations in many countries. The permeation of migration
research by politics and statehood is therefore not based on a relationship
of instruction. The issue is rather the interplay between the two on the
basis – usually, at least – of mutual independence. We assume that this
independence constitutes their interdependence:18 Politics cannot produce
scientific, i.e. research-legitimated, knowledge and science, vice versa, has
no access to political power and collectively binding decision-making,19
but for central functional conditions – particularly the freedom of science
and access to resources – it remains dependent on law and its political en-
forcement as well as to a significant extent on resources made available
politically. This captures the relationship between science and politics in
very general terms, yet the issue here is how they are shaped in and impact
on the relationship between migration research and politics.
B
Migration research does not match the internal differentiation of sci-
ence into disciplines, and this justifies the assumption that it is research
with an essentially interdisciplinary orientation (Brettell and Hollifield
2000; Bommes and Morawska 2005). In the political and academic dis-
course, interdisciplinarity is, much like internationality, seen as an indicator
of quality, but initially, it primarily constitutes a problem. Migration out-
lines a field that involves many disciplines and calls for their responsibil-
ity: sociology, psychology, economics, political science, pedagogy or law,
social geography, ethnology and medicine. This characteristic transverse
position of migration as a topic repeats itself within the individual disci-
plines, as can be easily shown with regard to sociology. Here, migration
research operates as a reference point for sub-disciplinary specialisation, on
the one hand, and accordingly there exists a nationally and internationally
216
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

organised sociological migration research.
On the other hand, according to an established textbook, sociological
migration research deals with migration as the ‘permanent or increasingly
permanent move into another society or into another region by an individu-
al or multiple persons’ and ‘with the causes, course and consequences of
migration’ (Treibel 1990, 21). It can therefore hardly avoid dealing with
almost all fields with which sociology is also concerned in its various sub-
disciplines. ‘Causes’ refer to the initial socio-structural contexts of migra-
tion, which require migration sociologists to have substantial knowledge of
developmental and migration sociology as well as anthropology, in order
to produce scientifically adequate descriptions. The ‘consequences’ of mi-
gration consist in the fact that migrants often appear in all relevant social
contexts, i.e. the economy, politics, law, education, health, sports, mass
media, or religion of the target region, either individually or as families.
Therefore, migration sociologists also have to assume roles as family soci-
ologists, educational sociologists, youth or legal sociologists, labour market
researchers, business, industry or organisational sociologists, inequality
researchers, conflict sociologists, political scientists or political theorists
and so forth.20 This is almost inevitable, as migrants, like all other individ-
uals, occur in society and its differentiated social structures. They become
relevant to political, legal, economic, educational, health or religious
issues, or as members of organisations. The manner in which they appear
here makes them first visible as migrants.
This leads to the problem of generating a framework of reference for
research that tends to repeat every specialisation of the discipline and that
can therefore determine its identity only in terms of its difference from
these specialisations. In a variety of fields, it therefore continually runs the
risk of structural amateurism. This constellation recurs for migration re-
search in a similar manner in other disciplines, such as law, political sci-
ence (Freeman 2005) or linguistics (Maas 2007).
Consequently, migration research does not constitute a discipline, but
refers to a multi- and interdisciplinary conglomeration of research which
deals with issues of international migration coming from different disci-
plines. Hitherto, it is unlikely, yet not impossible, that it will evolve into a
discipline, if disciplines are understood in a preliminary way as ‘forms of
institutionalisation of processes of cognitive differentiation’ (Stichweh
1979), including the following elements: 1) a nexus of communication be-
tween researchers, 2) a body of scientific knowledge coagulated in text-
books, which is codified, accepted and teachable in the discipline, 3) a
common set of problems and questions, 4) a common set of research meth-
ods and theoretical frameworks, 5) a career structure and modes of socialis-
ing and recruiting young scholars.21 One can certainly discover elements
of an internal differentiation and of the emergence of an (international) mi-
gration research field; yet, this issue does not have to find its final answer
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
217

here. Especially, at the organisational level, the founding of research insti-
tutes and the establishing of research associations occur. Yet, there are
hardly any indications for the formation of a discipline. For the internation-
al and interdisciplinary research on migration, it can be stated in rather
general terms: ‘Since there […] is no theoretical integration of disciplines,
this form of cooperation is forced to take place at a low theoretical level’
(Luhmann 1990, 642). Instead, migration research primarily gains rele-
vance among the differentiated disciplines. However, due to its transverse
position among the disciplines and the resulting danger of structural ama-
teurism in view of the specialisations in various sub-disciplines, as men-
tioned above, it is even more confronted with the problem of defining its
constitutive problematique.
C
In section I, we argued that the problem of international migration
has its foundation in the contradiction of world society (the simultaneous
production of migration motives through its institutionalised form of mobi-
lisation and its restraint through the shape of politics) that national migra-
tion research finds its respective issues here and that thereby it mirrors,
more or less, the ways in which the respective states conceptualise their
policy issues. Due to its peculiar intra- and transdisciplinary mismatch and
the resulting problem of how to delimit those problems defining research,
one has to presume that migration research orients itself towards state con-
ceptualisations of migration for structural reasons, namely due to its free-
floating nature – not only because the politically explosive nature of the
topic guarantees attention and resources, but also because this way of con-
ceptualising offers a moderator, who serves to hold together the rather
indefinite and frayed problem field of migration research with reference to
two main views: ‘integration’ and ‘inequality’.
These have, strictly speaking, their foundation in the classical nation
state problem of cohesion vs. corrosion (integration vs. disintegration),
peace vs. conflict, in modern European terms: social cohesion vs. disinte-
gration. This problematique is rooted in the historical way the modern na-
tion state emerged and differentiated itself. The latter links its claim to
have the sovereign right to enforce collectively binding decisions within its
territory and for people residing there and constituting the state population
with the self-description as an entity, the uppermost and controlling body
of nationally conceived society. This claim is based on the argument that
the nation state is the legitimate expression and bearer of the national will
of the community, be it politically or ethnically constituted. From the per-
spective of the state, functionally differentiated society is a state-delimited
context in need of integration, which finds unity and cohesion in the na-
tion, visible despite globalisation in the ‘national economy’, in the national
education system, or in the nationally constituted welfare systems. From
the outset, cohesion and corrosion, integration and disintegration of society
are rooted in the notion of the state as an entity, as the national bond of
218
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

society. With this focus on the state, the claim of the ‘rule of the people’
permeates the community as the promise, however difficult to keep, to
steer society. Against this background, loyalty and domestic peace are
signs of the integration of society as a community, whereas disloyalty and
conflict, vice versa, are signs of disintegration. From this perspective,
states have historically viewed ethnic minorities as well as political opposi-
tion groups as potentially disloyal and conflictive – in Germany the Social
Democrats were, as is well known, seen as an ‘unpatriotic bunch (vater-
landslose Gesellen)’ (Groh and Brandt 1992). And in Britain the diverging
cultures of the emerging proletariat, on the one hand, and the bourgeoisie,
on the other hand, caused Benjamin Disraeli in the nineteenth century to
talk of ‘two nations’ before the backdrop of the social upheaval of the in-
dustrial revolution, begging the follow-up question of whether this indi-
cates the disintegration of society or casts doubt on its integration.
Cohesion and corrosion, ‘integration’ and ‘inequality’ – the central issue
of migration research captured in different terms rehearses this old prob-
lematique: the problems of differentiation and inequality, and the question
of whether and how the poor or the lower classes come to terms with un-
equal living opportunities; which potential for conflict it entails and to
what extent this is relevant for the integration of society? These questions
address migrants and the consequences of their settlement, recurrently and
especially in Europe, with its development into a world immigration region
after the Second World War, their integration perceived as precarious. And
the EU reformulates this problem in tandem with the expansion of its com-
petence claims in terms of inclusion/exclusion and social cohesion.
The main precepts ‘integration’ and ‘inequality’ of migration research
are therefore owed to the modern state, as the birth of ‘society’ in the mod-
ern social sciences has its roots in the spirit of the nation state (Tenbruck
1981; 1992). In a manner similar to hardly any other sub-discipline in the
social sciences until the present, migration research breathes the original
spirit of sociology and of social science as a science of crisis (Habermas
1981); it presents the problem of political order as the problem of cohe-
sion, ‘integration’ and the threat of internal disintegration through ‘differ-
entiation’ and ‘inequality’, paradigmatically formulated by Durkheim in
the late nineteenth century in his question about the possibility of a ‘con-
science collective’ in modern differentiated society.22
Here, for migration research, the respective terms used are not of impor-
tance: in the American context the problem of assimilation concerns the
question of how assimilation can be successful and considers cultural and
structural assimilation, i.e. the relatively identical socio-structural position-
ing and the individual and social conditions under which this can succeed,
as a prerequisite for the development of unity, whose extent has to be es-
tablished in each case. In the German context, the same debate revolves
primarily around the concepts of integration and inequality. In the Anglo-
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
219

Saxon context, racial equality, ascertainable through non-discrimination in
labour and housing markets, education, health, law and politics, is meant
to allow coexistence on the basis of unity in diversity; similar points apply
to the various types of multicultural policy. Certain aspects of policy might
favour an orientation towards unity as the demand for adjustment or align-
ment, instead of granting civil and social equality; in a republican context
migrants may be confronted with this demand. On the other hand, their
principled otherness, defining the state population by its confines, might
lead to their expulsion.
In this perspective, terminologies, the ways of conceptualisation in the
different states, and the associated migration research rearticulate the prob-
lem of ‘migration and integration’ in various ways, rooted in the various
histories of nation building. This is the exact reason for the various ways
of conceptualisation. Yet, on close inspection, the same kinds of problems
recur, and research remains tied to its state-specifically articulated prob-
lems, even if it deals with very different areas. Whether it deals with fami-
lies, education, health, work, politics, law, mass media, religion, or lan-
guage, everything is seen in terms of integration and inequality, successful
or failed assimilation, the successful or unsuccessful easing of ‘race
relations’.
D
Does it make sense to talk of ‘paradigms of migration research’, if
they are, as argued here, rather scientific rearticulations of nation state-
specific ways to constitute international migration-related problem constel-
lations? To answer this question, we first need to define the meaning,
which has until now been left open, of the term ‘paradigm’. Aware of the
elaborate discussion following the ‘paradigmatic’ investigation of Thomas
Kuhn in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1970/1976), we generally
assume that a paradigm can be recognised by the central distinctions used
to determine the subject of scientific research and the accordingly applied
theories. The empirical study of science is concerned with the question of
how science establishes the very criteria it applies to successful research.
In this context, in order to clarify what can be called a paradigm in the
strict sense, Kuhn (1970) distinguishes in his postscript between scientific
communities23 and what constitutes a paradigm in the strict sense as a
‘model’, its productive basic distinctions as starting point and basis for the
discovery, differentiation and development of problems. Paradigms describe,
therefore, functioning problem/problem-solving constellations, which are
unlimited in regard to the number of problems to be discovered yet produc-
tive, and at the same time, they allow one to turn them into common forms
of describing a problem and solving it (Kuhn 1970, 189).
The emergence of such paradigms requires the differentiation of science.
Kuhn speaks of the ‘unparalleled insulation of mature scientific commun-
ities from the demands of the laity and of everyday life’ (164). Scientists
aim to cater to the expectations of the scientific system, and their primary
220
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

audience consists of scientists. Here, Kuhn sees a significant difference be-
tween the ‘mature’ paradigm-governed natural sciences and the humanities
and social sciences in the fact that scientists of these disciplines have to
more or less familiarise themselves with the entire history of problems and
problem solutions for the area they work in; they also face a wide range of
competing paradigms, whose appropriateness they have to evaluate them-
selves from case to case. This leads to a much lamented paradigm pluralism
in these disciplines with the respective scientific communities as ‘camps’.
This might also be the basis for the tendency of social science, recognised
by Kuhn, toward the ‘choice of a research problem – e.g., the effects of ra-
cial discrimination or the causes of the business cycle – chiefly in terms of
the social importance of achieving a solution’ (Kuhn 1970, 164; emphasis
added, M.B.). Yet, this is far from compelling, and the mentioned pluralism
does not exclude scientific introversion in these disciplines and their ‘insula-
tion […] from the demands of the laity and of everyday life’. The question
is rather, under which conditions these disciplines follow such tendencies,
and what their subsequent consequences are.
E
The community of researchers on migration may certainly be con-
sidered a peculiar example for the case that the choice of research prob-
lems is recurrently justified ‘chiefly in terms of the social importance of
achieving a solution’. Migration researchers are also hardly reserved, when
it comes to communicating preferred solutions. Their majority advocates
the equality of migrants – be it as integration, reduction of barriers to as-
similation, inclusion and avoidance of exclusion, incorporation, and so
forth – and see this as a condition for the cohesiveness of society, of its in-
tegration. Hence, they still stand not only in the tradition of the social sci-
ences as a science of crisis and maintain its original spirit in their close link
to the state; they also do not aim for the ‘insulation […] from the demands
of the laity and of everyday life’, but rather continuously emphasise their
respective relevance. This applies to the various booms of migration. In
times in which migration attracts less attention, migration research follows
its daily business, that is, it delves into the ramifications of migration and
integration processes and warns of the possible negative consequences of
reduced attention to the overlooked or insufficiently noted effects of failing
integration, indicated by social inequality, social deviation, etc.24
However, if migration and integration draw attention, migration research
is a sought-after science of crisis, as migration and integration then become
synonymous with the politically communicated public perceptions of the
crisis of cohesion of a society essentially conceived as a national one
(Bade and Bommes 2004). The capability to political action is then demon-
strated nationally and at the European level by, among other means, the
funding of research – and this despite the fact that sufficient experience
already exists: ‘The politician who grants research money, founds new uni-
versities, establishes institutions can pride herself immediately, without
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
221

having to wait, whether and what the results are’ (Luhmann 1990, 639).
This leads to a peculiar state of migration research, which is not simply
caused, as one can see now, by the fact that it is traditionally rather an
applied science, because the term applied science – differently from funda-
mental research – refers to the relation of the provision of science25 to oth-
er non-scientific social fields. It points to the provision of scientifically val-
id and specifically required knowledge.26 This does however not question
the fact that applied science remains embedded in fundamental research, it
must not contradict it and does contribute more or less to it.
However, this applies at best to a limited extent to migration research.
Instead, one must probably state – pointedly – that migration research is
periodically ‘taken in’ by its subject and ‘allows itself to be abused’ by it,
as due to its proximity to politics, there ‘lies in-between’ no ‘sufficient ali-
enation’ with the ‘headstrong ability to discriminate’ of a genuine scientifi-
cally constituted theory (Luhmann 1990, 645). Inversely, this is illustrated
by the fact that migration research claims in Euro-technocratic terms its
‘policy relevance’, in contrast to what constitutes a modern science and
that it increases the ‘social imposition’ of its knowledge and answers politi-
cal questions all too often: ‘This is as it is, make it so’ (634). The risk here
is reflected in the fact that those using this knowledge turn away due to
foreseeable frustration. Thus, the permanent effect of damage to the ‘facade
of the security of scientific knowledge’ (641) increases in the case of the
contact of science with other areas of society. This becomes visible in the
recent intense public debate in Europe surrounding the question of whether
the integration of immigrants has failed and whether migration research
has failed to provide the necessary knowledge and, therefore, failed in its
role as early warning system.27 Due to its claimed practical relevance, it
can hardly refuse this task – and reinforces this point by the repeatedly
heightened claim of its policy relevance.
F
Should we, therefore, drop the concept of paradigm for migration
research and, hence, also the assumption of national paradigms in migra-
tion studies? This is not an inevitable consequence; rather, one has to ask
what kind of science migration research is. On the one hand, one can cer-
tainly talk about a community of migration researchers in the Kuhnian
sense, based on the criteria outlined above, and in recent years this applies
more and more to the national and also to the international level – remem-
ber that this was exactly the starting point for the argument developed here.
Furthermore, most migration research scientists are active in organisations
of the scientific system, in universities and research institutes. Moreover, a
consequence of the previously argued is that one can speak of paradigms
of migration studies in the sense that they display integration and inequal-
ity as central, nation state-specifically rearticulated distinctions with which
the subject of migration research and the theories it applies are delimited
and defined. In addition, this paradigm was productive, as can easily be
222
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

seen with regard to the scope and breadth of migration and integration re-
search.
The discussion of the peculiarities of migration research and the pointed
formulation that migration studies ‘allows itself to be abused’ by its subject
matter, as due to its proximity to politics it develops no ‘sufficient alien-
ness’ with a ‘headstrong ability to discriminate’ a genuine scientifically
constituted theory, is essentially based on the assertion that migration re-
search is not a case of a differentiated science in the sense introduced. To
properly understand this fact, the Kuhnian distinction between mature and
immature science is not of much help. Paradigm pluralism and competition
do not exclude the differentiation of science, rather the latter requires the
former. Therefore, this does not cover the claim that migration research is
not a differentiated science.
Rather, we have suggested earlier that migration research solves the
structural problem of its disciplinary and transdisciplinary transverse posi-
tion with reference to the political constitution of the problems of interna-
tional migration. In this way, it is and remains (from a systematic perspec-
tive), thus far a hidden reflexive theory of the political system by produc-
ing descriptions of migration studies in response to the self-descriptions of
this system and its environment, here migration and its consequences, as
its composition and not as a scientific outside description.28 The concepts
of migration research are based on an understanding of the political sys-
tem, which in reference to the latter’s self-conception, the hypostasis of its
function – to produce collectively binding decisions – the primacy of the
‘integration of society’ assigns it a kind of overall responsibility for society
and, therefore, for the problems caused by international migration.29
This policy-centric concept of society is shared by migration research
with everyday accounts, the mass media, protest movements, and with
some of the other social sciences, not least political science. There are sev-
eral reasons for this fact, which needs no further elaboration in our context.
However, the difference to political science is revealing: The latter trans-
lates the tension between science and reflexive theory of the political sys-
tem
internally
in
the
contrast
between
normative
and
descriptive
approaches, externally in its difference to political sociology. However, in
contrast, migration research turns out to be a quasi-unacknowledged reflex-
ive theory of the political system, resulting from the handling of its disci-
plinary mismatch and the subsequent scientific exclusion and determination
of its problems. The paradigms of migration research are national, as seen,
because they constitutively gain their problems from the ways in which its
respective reference state conceptualises international migration and its
consequences. This similarity is the reason for its diversity, and with regard
to these ways of conceptualisation it fleshes out its issues: the problems of
integration and inequality in different areas of ‘the society’ and their need
to be governed by politics.
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
223

From this vantage point, one can also recognise why the systematic
nature of migration research as hidden reflexive theory of the political sys-
tem does not go away through its internationalisation – a notion which we
can only touch upon here at the end. The insight that society can hardly be
conceived of as national anymore does not need further detailed reasoning
– strictly speaking, international comparative research still mostly denotes
the comparison of national ‘societies’. Transnationalism takes the criticism
of the notion of society as a national container as its starting point, in order
to continue to assume national societies (Bommes 2003b). All this aside,
the continuation of migration research as a hidden reflexive theory of the
political system seems, above all, to surface where it abandons the (exclu-
sive) reference to the state as the organisational form of the political sys-
tem. This becomes apparent in two currently important issues: In European
migration research, the main themes of ‘integration’ and ‘social cohesion’
remain;30 in the wake of the ‘high-level dialogue’ of the Global
Commission, the increasingly important field of research on ‘migration and
development’ tries to link problems of migration control with issues of in-
tegration, on the one hand, and conditions of a (failed) development policy
on the other. Again, problems are here fleshed out in reference to the polit-
ical system and its conceptualisations, oriented towards policy relevance
and practical recommendations, whether they are consequences of the in-
ternal freedom of movement within the EU, the handling of illegal immi-
grants, or migration models as a ‘triple-win’ recommendation.
Due to the outlined reasons, an internationalising migration research
should work diligently to ascertain the respective national paradigms, if
only to dissolve the preliminary sketched ‘I can’t understand you’
(Kannitverstan) situations in international research cooperation. In addition,
it would suit it well to reflect its national histories as hidden reflexive
theories of the political system, of its nation states, before it starts with en-
thusiasm to merely repeat old routines in a transformed manner at the inter-
national level.
Notes
1
One exceptional example is the research funding of the EU. Within the Sixth
Framework Programme, the Network of Excellence (IMISCOE) has been funded
since 2004 (project period: 5 years). This network comprises over 20 established
European research institutes.
2
Like in the work of Robert Miles (1993; 1994), who is clearly fascinated with the
frame of race relations as he tries to move away from it.
3
In the introduction to their monumental work The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America, Thomas and Znaniecki (1958) criticised this line of thought as an inade-
quate basis for scientific analysis as early as 1918 (first publication 1918). In princi-
ple, they see the migration and integration of Poles as a theoretically interesting case
224
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

for the constitution of social order – but in substantial parts of the book, they fail to
follow their own line of thought, i.e. to detach themselves from practical normative
issues.
4
Following a concept by Norbert Elias (1956) which was taken up by Treibel (1988)
for a sociological overview of the Ausländerforschung in Germany during the 1970s
and 1980s; see also Bommes in this volume.
5
Especially sociology, political science, ethnology, history, geography, linguistics, edu-
cation and economics. This multi- or interdisciplinary profile of migration research
will be discussed in more detail below.
6
This is why geographical mobility within nation states, due to employment, family
reunion or education, is socially not perceived as migration, and those involved are
normally not treated as migrants.
7
See Castles and Miller (2009); the Global Commission on International Migration
(GCIM) Report (http://www.gcim.org/en/finalreport.html) can be read as an effort
to overcome this basic contradiction by means of temporalisation: arguing that inter-
national migration will be to the benefit of all ‘in the long run’ – being faced how-
ever at present with all kinds of ‘short term’ barriers.
8
Not all states become welfare states, since they are not able to build up the necessary
capacity of provision. It is obvious, however, that no state can ignore the demands of
its population to care for welfare, and so-called failing states can to a large extent
not preserve the loyalty of their population because of their reduced or absent capa-
city to guarantee security and provision.
9
Current examples are the public association of migration and terrorism, which ques-
tioned the loyalty of migrants, on the one hand, and the frequent debates in nearly
all European welfare states but also in the US concerning the effects of international
migration on the capacity of welfare states in terms of costs and benefits, on the
other hand (Bade and Bommes 2004).
10
Universalism of inclusion in modern society means that nobody should be excluded
from claiming economic, legal or educational provisions, if he or she fulfils the so-
cial preconditions for these claims (Luhmann 1989). For example, one can partici-
pate in education, if one is perceived as educable; one can participate in the econo-
my, if one finds access to monetary means; one can participate in law, if one knows
how to act on behalf of one’s rights. At the same time, none of these necessarily im-
ply that inclusion always succeeds empirically – on the contrary, it often fails. Yet
the valid institutionalisation of social expectations, like the universalism of inclu-
sion, provides the ground for the perception of this failure as a problem in need of
remedy, e.g., by means of social policy.
11
See footnote 9.
12
As an effect of demographic changes, European countries start to realise the extent
to which they do rely on the attraction of immigrants. The recent debates on the in-
tegration of migrants articulate some of the fears linked with the realisation of the
increasingly fictive character of nationally delimited perceptions.
13
Different welfare states therefore make use of those institutions in different ways,
i.e. individual freedom on markets (liberty and private welfare: liberal individualistic
welfare states); families/communities (reproduction of the communitarian founda-
tions of society: conservative corporatist welfare states); the state (social equality in
labour market society; social democratic universalist welfare states). Based on those
distinctions, it is possible to categorise welfare states into different types. According
to Esping-Andersen (1990), we find three such types, i.e. the liberal, the conserva-
tive and the social democratic type of welfare state in Western society. Accordingly,
welfare states differ with regard to their extent of de-commodification, i.e. the extent
to which income and social security is made dependent on participation in the
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
225

labour market; the role and amount of residual spending, i.e. national assistance as
a percentage of social spending; their redistributive aims and capacity; their corpora-
tist structure, i.e. the differentiation of social security systems according to different
occupational and status groups; the amount of private spending for health and pen-
sion systems; their conceptual assumptions about the main provider of welfare, i.e.
the market, the family or the state. Along these lines, welfare states vary largely ac-
cording to their orientation, which can be distinguished as individualistic vs. cor-
poratist vs. universalistic. Examples of the liberal individualistic type are the UK and
the USA, for the conservative corporatist type Germany, Austria, Italy and France,
and for the social democratic universalistic type the Scandinavian countries, espe-
cially Sweden and Denmark (Esping-Andersen 1990; Schmid 2002; Opielka 2004).
Many aspects of this modelling have been criticised. Some argue that there is a
fourth type in Europe, the Mediterranean type (Ferrera 1998); some question the
empirical applicability of the model (Alber 2000). For a discussion, see also
Kaufmann (2004). During the last ten or fifteen years, there have also been exten-
sive discussions about the adaptive capacity of these different welfare state types and
their ability to cope with new constellations as a consequence of the challenges of
globalisation (see Esping-Andersen 1996; 2002; Ganßmann and Haas 1999;
Goodin et al. 1999; Alber 2000; Fligstein 2000; Kaufmann 2003; Leibfried and
Zu¨rn 2005); on a most general level, the outcome of this discussion is that those
welfare states do best which manage to combine access to labour and the provision
of welfare, instead of providing welfare as a substitute for labour – a problem mainly
for the conservative corporatist type of welfare states. In many countries, the recent
shift to so-called activating welfare policies is a reaction to these problems.
Integration policies in many countries belong in this context. Typologies of welfare
states have been developed in the context of international comparative welfare state
research. Certainly, they are to a large extent based on the analyses of leading
Western countries; see, however, Esping-Andersen (2002) for more comprehensive
comparisons. New immigration countries like Malaysia (an ethnic welfare state),
Nigeria (a corrupt state) and Hong Kong (a free market system) do not fit into these
schemes.
14
Often but misleadingly explicated by the difference between the French and the pre-
2000 German concepts of citizenship (see Hagedorn 2001 and Gosewinkel 2003).
15
Migrants who enter the country are not automatically perceived as continuous immi-
grants. So the question of whether they want to remain as immigrants is kept open
by the expression Zuwanderer whereas the expression Einwanderer in German
means that the migrant is expected to stay in the country. Choosing the word
Zuwanderungsgesetz in Germany connotes that migrants are not automatically seen
as immigrants.
16
The Gulf States are an interesting case, which we can not cover here in detail. Some
of these ‘pensioner states’, which obtain a substantial income from their energy
resources, exclude their population from political participation on the basis of pro-
viding for them. Associated with this are significant ‘modernisation deficits’ result-
ing in an insufficient workforce, at least with regard to the necessary skills for devel-
oping an infrastructure. This workforce is increasingly made up of migrants from
neighbouring countries (Egyptians, Jordanians, Palestinians, etc.) and since the
1990s from Asia, who are vice versa prepared to do such work under considerable
constraints to their private lives in view of the employment opportunities and wages
in their home countries.
17
Moreover, this also expresses the Europeanisation of research, as efforts in the
English context, promoted by the Labour government, are at the same time linked
to projects funded by the EU.
226
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

18
In such general terms, this point also denotes a commonplace in the sociological
theory of differentiation since Marx and Durkheim.
19
This is the reason why it can complain without any risk that its advice is ignored, as
it has neither to bring about the necessary decisions nor to take responsibility for
them.
20
If one accepts Treibel’s definition of the problem constellation, migration research
would also urgently require engagement with social theory – this might indeed not
be harmful, but would increase the problem of poaching in too many reserves.
21
For a historical approach concerning the relation between disciplines and interdisci-
plinarity, see Swoboda (1979).
22
Durkheim (1977); it is easy to recognise that sociology tried from the outset to dis-
tance itself from a Marxian perspective, which shares with it the assumption that
the cohesion of a society can only be conceived of in a ‘classless society’, in which
asymmetries, unintended inequalities and, hence, integration problems are absent.
23
Discernible, for instance, with regard to similar education and career, shared litera-
ture, intensity of communication and mutual references in publications, shared
standards, conferences, etc.
24
It is striking that migration research in different countries maintains its way of look-
ing at problems by tying itself to politically mediated patterns of conceptualising, in
significant isolation from the general and special theoretical debate in related disci-
plines – it operates only in a limited way with an internal orientation. In German-
speaking sociology, this can be seen in the fact that the debate about adequate theor-
etical concepts for the description and explanation of inequality, conducted for more
than twenty years in inequality research, and the question of the relation between
inequality research and differentiation theory in migration research were kept at a
distance – as if migrants were clear cut cases (of inequality), for which these debates
are of no significance. This has only started to change in recent years: Bommes
(2003a), Weiß (2005) and the latest Sinus study (Sinus Sociovision 2008) demon-
strate that this point of view has no reason apart from an established division of la-
bour between nationally oriented inequality research interested in the position of ci-
tizens in the social structure and migration research covering the ‘rest’.
25
In difference to the functional orientation of fundamental research understood as
the orientation towards securing the conditions to experience the world in the same
manner.
26
Regardless of the fact that the usability of knowledge is decided by its users and not
its producers (Wingens and Fuchs 1989).
27
In the Netherlands, there was a strong denunciation of researchers who were ac-
cused of having invented multicultural illusions. The public debate which emerged
during 2006/07 in German daily and weekly newspapers about the achievements
and failures of migration research, about right and wrong science (cf. Bommes
2006), threw glaring light on the awkward situation of migration research, accord-
ing to Kuhn (1970). He argues that solutions are only seen as sufficient when they
are accepted by many. They ‘may not, however, be drawn at random from society as
a whole’, but they have to come from the scientific community. ‘One of the strong-
est, if still unwritten, rules of scientific life is the prohibition of appeals to heads of
state or to the populace at large in matters scientific’ (168).
28
Outside descriptions are not only produced in science: The economy describes poli-
tics, education or the law under its premises and so forth. Every time the respective
system is seen with its benefits for the describing system in view, whether, for in-
stance, the educational system produces qualified individuals for the economy,
families render children educable, science produces usable knowledge for political
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
227

decisions, etc. Here the relation of the self-description of social systems and outside
descriptions by sciences is the topic (cf. in detail Kieserling 2004).
29
The role of migration research as reflexive theory (for this term, see Luhmann and
Schorr 1988) becomes apparent, once one compares it to disciplines that became
responsible for dealing with modern society in the trajectory of the scientific system:
political science for politics, economics for the economy, pedagogy for the educa-
tional system, theology for religion, etc. In all these cases, the same tension arises
between outside and self-description, formulated as the question of the extent to
which they are reflexive theories of the respective social system or scientific theories.
Reflexive theories take up the differentiated perspectives and plausibilities of prac-
tice, presuppose them, and provide them with justifications: in pedagogy, economy,
law, or (normative) political science. The described tension becomes apparent when
the societal improbability of education, economy, law, or politics can still also be-
come a topic; this can be checked by the fact that scientific contributions practically
still match the problems of the functional systems they deal with.
30
Like the name of the EU-funded Network of Excellence ‘Immigration, Integration
and Social Cohesion in an Integrating Europe’ (IMISCOE).
References
Alber, Jens (2000), ‘Sozialstaat und Arbeitsmarkt: Produzieren kontinentaleuropäische
Wohlfahrtsstaaten typische Beschäftigungsmuster? Gleichzeitig eine Abhandlung über ei-
nige Probleme komparativer statistischer Analyse’, Leviathan 28 (4): pp. 535-69.
Bade, Klaus J. (2003), Migration in European History. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bade, Klaus J. & Michael Bommes (2004), ‘Einleitung: Integrationspotentiale in modernen
europäischen Wohlfahrtsstaaten – der Fall Deutschland’, in idem & Rainer Münz (eds),
Migrationsreport 2004. Fakten – Analysen – Perspektiven. Frankfurt am Main and New
York: Campus, pp. 11-42.
Bauböck, Rainer (1994), Transnational Citizenship. Membership and Rights in International
Migration. Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Bommes, Michael (1999), Migration und nationaler Wohlfahrtsstaat. Ein differenzierungs-
theoretischer Entwurf. Opladen/Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Bommes, Michael (2003a), ‘The Shrinking Inclusive Capacity of the National Welfare State:
International Migration and the Deregulation of Identity Formation’, in Grete Brochmann
(ed.), The Multicultural Challenge (Comparative Social Research, vol. 22). Amsterdam:
JAI, pp. 43-67.
Bommes, Michael (2003b), ‘Der Mythos des transnationalen Raumes. Oder: Worin besteht die
Herausforderung des Transnationalismus für die Migrationsforschung?’ in Migration im
Spannungsfeld von Globalisierung und Nationalstaat (Leviathan Sonderband 22),
Dietrich Thränhardt & Uwe Hunger (eds). Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag, pp. 90-116.
Bommes, Michael (2006), ‘Migrations- und Integrationspolitik in Deutschland zwischen insti-
tutioneller Anpassung und Abwehr’, in idem & Werner Schiffauer (eds), Migrationsreport
2006. Fakten – Analysen – Perspektiven. Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, pp.
9-30.
Bommes, Michael & Ewa Morawska (eds) (2005), International Migration Research:
Constructions, Omissions, and the Promises of Interdisciplinarity. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Boswell, Christina (2009), The Political Uses of Expert Knowledge: Immigration Policy and
Social Research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brettell, Caroline & James Hollifield (2000), Migration Theory: Talking about Disciplines.
New York: Routledge.
228
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

Brubaker, Rogers (1992), Citizenship and Nationhood in France and Germany. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Brubaker,
Rogers
(2001),
‘The
Return
of
Assimilation?
Changing
Perspectives
on
Immigration and its Sequels in France, Germany, and the United States’, Ethnic and
Racial Studies 24 (4): pp. 531-548.
Castles, Stephen & Mark J. Miller (2009), The Age of Migration. International Population
Movements in the Modern World, 4th ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cornelius, Wayne et al. (ed.) (2009), Mexican Migration and the U.S. Economic Crisis: A
Transnational Perspective. Boulder, CA: Lynne Rienner.
Durkheim, Emile (1977), Über die Teilung der sozialen Arbeit. Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp.
Elias, Norbert (1956), ‘Problems of Involvement and Detachment’, British Journal of
Sociology 7: pp. 226-252.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (1990), The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (1996), Welfare States in Transition. National Adaptations in Global
Economies. London: Sage.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (2002), Why We Need a Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Favell, Adrian (2001), Philosophies of Integration: Immigration and the Idea of Citizenship in
France and Britain. 2nd ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Favell, Adrian (2005), ‘Integration Nations: The Nation-State and Research on Immigrants in
Western Europe’, in Bommes, Michael & Ewa Morawska (eds). Aldershot: Ashgate, pp.
41-86.
Ferrera,
Maurizio
(1998),
‘The
Four
“Social
Europes”:
Between
Universalism
and
Selectivity’, in Martin Rhodes & Yves Meny (eds), The Future of European Welfare: A
New Social Contract? London/New York: Macmillan, St. Martin’s Press, pp. 79-96.
Fligstein, Neil (2000), ‘Verursacht Globalisierung die Krise des Wohlfahrtsstaates?’ Berliner
Journal für Soziologie 10 (3): pp. 349-379.
Freeman, Gary (2005), ‘Political Science and Comparative Immigration Politics’, in Bommes,
Michael & Ewa Morawska (eds). Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 111-128.
Ganßmann, Heiner & Michael Haas (1999), Arbeitsmärkte im Vergleich. Rigidität und
Flexibilität auf den Arbeitsmärkten der USA, Japans und der BRD. Marburg: Schüren.
Goodin, Robert E. et al. (1999), The Real Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gosewinkel,
Dieter
(2003),
Einbürgern
und
Ausschließen:
die
Nationalisierung
der
Staatsangehörigkeit
vom
Deutschen
Bund
bis
zur
Bundesrepublik
Deutschland.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Groh, Dieter, and Peter Brandt (1992), »Vaterlandslose Gesellen«. Sozialdemokratie und
Nation 1860-1990. Munich: C.H. Beck.
Habermas, Jürgen (1981), Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns, 2 vols. Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp.
Hagedorn, Heike (2001), Wer darf Mitglied werden? Einbürgerung in Deutschland und
Frankreich im Vergleich. Opladen: Leske & Budrich.
Halfmann, Jost (2005), ‘World Society and Migrations. Challenges to Theoretical Concepts of
Political Sociology’, in Bommes, Michael & Ewa Morawska (eds). Aldershot: Ashgate,
pp. 129-153.
Hollifield, James F. (1996), ‘The Migration Crisis in Western Europe: The Search for a
National Model’, in Klaus J. Bade (ed.), Migration – Ethnizität – Konflikt. Systemfragen
und Fallstudien. Osnabrück: Universitätsverlag Rasch, pp. 367-402.
Jacobson, David (1996), Rights Across Borders: Immigration and the Decline of Citizenship.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
229

Kaufmann, Franz-Xaver (2003), Sozialpolitik und Sozialstaat: Soziologische Analysen.
Opladen: Leske & Budrich.
Kaufmann, Franz-Xaver (2004), Varianten des Wohlfahtsstaats. Der deutsche Sozialstaat im
internationalen Vergleich. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Kieserling, André (2004), ‘Überschätzte Reflexionstheorien. Die politische Theorie im
Vergleich’, in idem, Selbstbeschreibung und Fremdbeschreibung. Beiträge zur Soziologie
soziologischen Wissens. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 170-191.
Koselleck, Reinhart (1992), ‘Volk, Nation. Einleitung’, in Otto Brunner, Werner Conze &
Reinhart Koselleck (eds), Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe. Historisches Lexikon zur polit-
isch-sozialen Sprache in Deutschland, vol. 7. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, pp. 142-149.
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (International Encyclopedia
of Unified Science, vol. 2.2): University of Chicago Press; German: (1976) Die Struktur
wissenschaftlicher Revolutionen, 2nd revised ed. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Lavenex, Sandra (2005), ‘National Frames in Migration Research: The Tacit Political
Agenda’, in in Bommes, Michael & Ewa Morawska (eds). Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 243-
260.
Leibfried, Stephan & Michael Zürn (2006), Transformations of the State? Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Luhmann, Niklas (1989), ‘Individuum, Individualität, Individualismus’, in idem, Gesell-
schaftsstruktur und Semantik. Studien zur Wissenssoziologie der modernen Gesellschaft 3.
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 149-258.
Luhmann, Niklas (1990), Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Luhmann, Niklas & Karl Eberhard Schorr (1988), Reflexionsprobleme im Erziehungssystem.
2nd ed. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Maas, Utz (2007), ‘Sprache und Sprachen in der Migrationsgesellschaft. Die schriftkulturelle
Dimension’ (IMIS-Schriften 15). Göttingen: V&R unipress.
Marshall, Thomas H. (1950), Citizenship and Social Class and other Essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Massey, Douglas S. et al. (1998), Worlds in Motion: Understanding International Migration
at the End of the Millenium. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Meyer, Jon W. et al. (1997), ‘World Society and the Nation-State’, American Journal of
Sociology 103: pp. 144-181.
Miles, Robert (1993), The Articulation of Racism and Nationalism: Reflections on European
History. Oxford: Berg.
Miles, Robert (1994), Racism after ‘Race Relations’. London: Routledge.
Obinger, Herbert, Heinz Rothgang & Stephan Leibfried (2006), ‘The State and its Welfare
State – How do Welfare State Changes Affect the Make-up of the Nation State’, Social
Policy and Administration 40 (3): pp. 250-266.
Opielka, Michael (2004), Sozialpolitik. Grundlagen und vergleichende Perspektiven. Reinbek
bei Hamburg: Rowohlt.
Schmid, Josef (2002), Wohlfahrtsstaaten im Vergleich. Soziale Sicherung in Europa:
Organisation, Finanzierung, Leistungen und Probleme. Opladen: Leske & Budrich.
Scholten, Peter (2007), Constructing Immigrant Policies. Research-policy Relations and
Immigrant Integration in the Netherlands, 1970-2004. PhD thesis, University of Twente,
Arnhem: Printpartners Ipskamp.
Sinus Sociovision (2008), Migranten-Milieus. Lebenswelten und Werte von Menschen mit
Migrationshintergrund in Deutschland. Sozialwissenschaftliche Repräsentativuntersu-
chung für das Bundesministerium für Familie, Senioren, Frauen und Jugend. Heidelberg.
Soysal, Yasemin (1994), Limits of Citizenship: Migrants and Postnational Membership in
Europe. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Stichweh, Rudolf (1979), ‘Differenzierung der Wissenschaft’, Zeitschrift für Soziologie 8 (1):
pp. 82-101.
230
MICHAEL BOMMES (WITH DIETRICH THRÄNHARDT)

Stichweh, Rudolf (1998), ‘Migration, nationale Wohlfahrtsstaaten und die Entstehung der
Weltgesellschaft’, in Michael Bommes & Jost Halfmann (eds), Migration in nationalen
Wohlfahrtsstaaten. Theoretische und vergleichende Untersuchungen (IMIS-Schriften, vol.
6). Osnabrück: Universitätsverlag Rasch, pp. 49-61.
Swaan, Abram de (1988), In the Care of the State: Health Care, Education and Welfare in
Europe and the USA in the Modern Era. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Swoboda, Wolfram W. (1979), ‘Disciplines and Interdisciplinarity: A Historical Perspective’,
in Joseph J. Kockelmans (ed.), Interdisciplinarity and Higher Education. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press, pp. 49-92.
Taylor, Charles (1993), Multikulturalismus und die Politik der Anerkennung. Frankfurt am
Main: Fischer.
Tenbruck, Friedrich H. (1981), ‘Emile Durkheim oder die Geburt der Gesellschaft aus dem
Geist der Soziologie’, Zeitschrift für Soziologie 10: pp. 333-50.
Tenbruck, Friedrich H. (1992), ‘Was war der Kulturvergleich, ehe es den Kulturvergleich
gab?’ in Joachim Matthes (ed.), Zwischen den Kulturen? (Soziale Welt, Sonderband 8).
Göttingen: Schwartz, pp. 13-35.
Thomas, William I. & Florian Znaniecki (1958), The Polish Peasant in Europe and America
(1st ed. 1918), New York: Dover.
Thränhardt, Dietrich & Uwe Hunger (2003), Migration im Spannungsfeld von Globalisierung
und Nationalstaat (Leviathan Sonderheft 22). Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Tilly, Charles (1990), Coercion, Capital and European States: AD 990-1990. Cambridge,
MA: Blackwell.
Treibel,
Annette
(1988),
Engagement
und
Distanzierung
in
der
westdeutschen
Ausländerforschung. Eine Untersuchung ihrer soziologischen Beiträge. Stuttgart: Enke.
Treibel, Annette (1990), Migration in modernen Gesellschaften. Soziale Folgen von
Einwanderung und Gastarbeit. Weinheim and Munich: Juventa.
Vasta, Ellie (2006), ‘Migration and Migration Research in Australia’, in Vasta and
Vuddalamay (eds). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 13-78.
Vasta, Ellie & Vasoodeven Vuddalamay (eds) (2006), International Migration and the Social
Sciences: Confronting National Experiences in Australia, France and Germany. Basing-
stoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Walzer, Michael (1983), Spheres of Justice. A Defence of Pluralism and Equality. New York:
Basic Books.
Walzer, Michael (1990), The Communitarian Critique of Liberalism. Political Theory 18: pp.
6-23.
Weiß, Anja (2005), The Transnationalization of Social Inequality. Conceptualising Social
Positions on a World Scale. Current Sociology 53 (4): pp. 707-728.
Wingens, Matthias & Stephan Fuchs (1989), ‘Ist die Soziologie gesellschaftlich irrelevant?’,
Zeitschrift für Soziologie 18 (8): pp. 208-219.
NATIONAL PARADIGMS OF MIGRATION RESEARCH
231