Denaturalizing disaster: A social autopsy of the 1995
Chicago heat wave
ERIC KLINENBERG
University of California, Berkeley
It's hot. It's very hot.We all have our little problems
but let's not blow it out of proportion.... We go to
extremes in Chicago. And that's why people like
Chicago.We go to extremes.
Chicago Mayor, Richard M. Daley
During my residence in England, at least twenty or
thirty persons have died of simple starvation under
the most revolting circumstances, and a jury has
rarely been found possessed of the courage to speak
the truth in the matter.... The bourgeoisie dare not
speak the truth in these cases, for it would speak its
own condemnation.... The English working men
call this social murder, and accuse our whole society
of perpetrating this crime perpetually.
Frederick Engels,
The Condition of the Working Class in England
On June 30, 1995, the front page of Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, a journal of the Centers for Disease Control and the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, featured a report attribut-
ing 5,379 American deaths in the thirteen years between 1979 and 1992
to excessive heat. Deaths from the heat, the journal concluded, ``are
readily preventable.'' Public health experts know the risk factors asso-
ciated with heat related illness and mortality as well as the procedures
responsible parties can take to reduce them. The report lists this in-
formation and advises local o¤cials to use it when conditions warrant
intervention.1
Less than two weeks later an unusual weather system hit Chicago with
one of the most severe heat waves in its recorded history. Temperatures
Theory and Society 28: 239^295, 1999.
ß 1999 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

reached 106 degrees; the heat index, or experienced heat, climbed to
120 degrees; uncommonly ``high lows'' (daily low temperatures that
were themselves dangerously high), sparse cloud cover, and a dearth of
cooling winds kept the city broiling, without relief, for a full week.2
Although baseline temperatures were slightly less hot than some of
Chicago's heat waves from earlier summers, the combination of these
climatic conditions posed a serious threat to the health of the metro-
politan community.
Chicago was totally unprepared for this attack of the elements. The
heat turned deadly on July 13, and local media stepped up their coverage
of the morbid outcome the next day, when two toddlers su¡ocated after
the director of their day care center inadvertently left them locked
inside her truck for hours at a temperature of 190 degrees. These deaths
initiated a week of su¡ering so massive that many residents and city
o¤cials refused to comprehend or accept that it had happened. By the
end of the week, though, few could deny that the city had witnessed a
disaster of historical proportion: medical examiners con¢rmed that over
¢ve-hundred Chicagoans had died directly from the heat, public health
workers reported over seven-hundred deaths in excess of the weekly
average,3 and hospitals registered thousands of visits for weather-related
problems.
What no one has established, however, is that the processes through
which Chicagoans lost their lives followed the entrenched logic of
social and spatial division that governs the metropolis.4 Journalistically
constructed and conventionally remembered as the city's most deadly
natural disaster, the destructive 1995 heat wave was, in fact, a sign and
symptom of the new and dangerous forms of marginality and neglect
endemic to contemporary American big cities and notably severe in
Chicago, a structurally determined catastrophe for which sociological
analysis illuminates not simply the obvious relationship between poverty
and su¡ering, but some of the institutional and social mechanisms upon
which extreme forms of American insecurity are built. The Chicago
disaster reveals several forms of precariousness as of yet unmentioned
or under-developed in the emerging debate on the new urban poverty,5
including the literal social isolation of poor seniors, particularly in the
city's most violent areas; the degradation of and rising con£ict in
urban hotel residences, which constitute a large but generally unmen-
tioned sector of the low-income housing market; the changes in public
service delivery and the threats to public health stemming from priva-
tization and other radical shifts in local government administration;
240

and the new social morphological conditions of neighborhoods aban-
doned by businesses as well as the state and depopulated by residents.6
The unprecedentedly high mortality ¢gures in the 1995 heat wave
substantiate the dangers of current urban conditions: the excess deaths
per 100,000 city residents were greater in July, 1995 than in the notable
heat waves of 1955, 1983, 1986, and 1988, and only the 1955 heat wave
came close to a mortality rate as much as half that of 1995. After nearly
thirty years without a signi¢cant heat disaster, the series of deadly heat
waves that begins in the early 1980s suggests that there is a connection
among state retrenchment, rising fear of violence, and vulnerability.
The climatic conditions in 1995 were more dangerous than they had
been in earlier heat waves, but the 1995 disaster would not have been
so deadly unless the conditions of the city's most precarious residents
were more dangerous as well. In fact, scienti¢c studies show that the
di¡erences in the mortality rates between the 1995 and earlier heat waves
are not natural; that is, they are not attributable to the weather. Chicago's
own Department of Public Health researchers concede that their most
sophisticated comparative climatic analyses ``have failed to detect rela-
tionships between the weather and mortality that would explain what
happened in July,'' and suggest that sociological investigation is neces-
sary to understand the event.7 Some features of the sociospatial and
political structure of Chicago explain the unprecedented death toll, but
thus far no social scienti¢c studies have attempted to ¢nd them.
From the moment it hit the city, the heat wave has been explained and
reconstructed primarily by journalists and public o¤cials, with both
groups doing more to naturalize the disaster than to expose its social
and political dimensions. Immediately after the heat wave, Mayor
Richard M. Daley, then busy with e¡orts to improve the city's image
and revitalize its commercial core before the following summer's
Democratic National Convention, appointed ``an 18-person commis-
sion to study the epidemiological, meteorological and sociological
aspects of the heat wave.''8 While the commission included several of
the city's leading public health leaders, a gerontologist, medical doctors,
and a meteorologist, there were no sociologists in the group, no one
trained to make the sociological conclusions that appear everywhere
in the ¢nal report.9 The Mayor's Commission on Extreme Weather
Conditions, the city's most formal o¤cial statement on the disaster,
silences sociologists but articulates several sociological observations ^
an act considerably ironic given the presence in the city of the Univer-
sity of Chicago Department of Sociology, the birthplace of American
241

urban sociology. Excluding sociologists made it easier for the city
government to construct and sustain a depoliticized explanation of the
heat wave deaths; and the small number of other scienti¢c studies on
the week have done little to show the social structure of the heat wave
deaths or to contest the city's o¤cial interpretation.10
Grounded in combination of ¢eld work, interviews, statistical data,
cartographical analysis, and historical studies of Chicago,11 this socio-
logical account of the heat wave shows how the climate, the living
conditions of the city's most precarious residents, and the local govern-
ment, the organization most responsible for protecting the welfare of
citizens, interact to determine the level of danger and damage that a
disaster such as the heat wave in£icts. In 1995, the city's climatic,
sociospatial, and political conditions were all extreme: not only was
the weather unprecedentedly severe, in addition the advancing state of
poverty and the inadequacy of the state's response created an unusually
deadly crisis.12 The social conditions that both organized and natural-
ized this deadly disaster are complex, but disaster literature, urban
sociology, media studies, and environmental justice research ^ the four
¢elds of social science most directly applicable to the event ^ o¡er little
theory that adequately explains either the heat wave deaths or the
symbolic construction of them. The social science of disasters is par-
ticularly weak on this account, as it has largely focused on the con-
sequences rather than the determinants of disasters.13
Through this analysis of the heat wave I o¡er a loose model for
sociologizing, and thereby denaturalizing, disasters that are generally
constructed according to categories of common sense and classi¢ed in
a vocabulary that e¡aces their social logic. This framework suggests a
novel approach for using environmental events as revealers of social
conditions that are less visible but nonetheless present in everyday life.
The model brings to the center three social conditions and processes
that are largely peripheral to or absent from both popular and scien-
ti¢c analyses of disasters: First, the social morphology and political
economy of vulnerability that determines disaster damage;14 second,
the role of the state in determining this vulnerability at both structural
and conjunctural levels; and third, the tendencies of journalists and
political o¤cials to render invisible both the political economy of vulner-
ability and the role of the state in the reconstructions of the disasters
they produce, reconstructions that not only dominate the public repre-
sentations of the events but help organize the terms of scienti¢c studies
as well.
242

Theorizing disasters
This analysis of the heat wave, as well as the model for analyzing
disasters around which it is built, is grounded in three established
traditions and one embryonic body of social theory, all of which it
engages and develops for the study of environmental events. Its ¢rst
legacy lies in Emile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss's project to establish
the social foundations of behavior, such as suicide, or categories, such
as the person, commonly considered to be individually determined or
natural.15 In chapter three of Suicide, ``Suicide and Cosmic Factors,''
Durkheim argues that variations in collective life ^ and not, as expert
opinion posited, the heat ^ explain the relatively high rates of suicides
in summer that scientists found in every country they studied. Marcel
Mauss develops this theme in Seasonal Variation of the Eskimo: A
Study in Social Morphology, where he shows that embedded forms of
social organization ^ and not the weather ^ account for the vast di¡er-
ence in seasonal social practices of the Eskimo.16 This analysis of the
heat wave pushes Durkheim's argument even farther, showing that the
heat fails even to explain deaths o¤cially attributed to the weather.
The model is also indebted to a methodological principle of the
Durkheimian school: the notion that, as Marcel Mauss claimed, ex-
treme events are marked by ``an excessiveness which allows us better to
perceive the facts than in those places where, although no less essential,
they still remain small-scale and involuted.''17 There is an interesting
variation on this position in the literature of the second tradition of
social theory that informs this analysis of disaster, urban ecology,
ranging from the early Chicago school to the new urban sociology or
political economy approach. In his classic essay, ``The City: Sugges-
tions for the Investigation of Human Behavior in the Urban Environ-
ment,'' Robert Park urbanizes Durkheim's methodological technique,
arguing that the city is itself an extreme case that facilitates social
research.``A great city,'' Park claims, ``tends to ... lay bare to the public
view in a massive manner all the human characters and traits which are
ordinarily obscured and suppressed in smaller communities.''18
But the signi¢cance of urban sociology in this study extends beyond
this methodological point. The marks of both the ¢rst and second
waves of the Chicago School are evident throughout my analysis of
the heat wave: the case study approach; the integration of ¢eld work,
interviews, mapping, history, and statistical analysis; the emphasis on
physical and social space; the focus on community and public life; and
243

the investigation of ethnoracial di¡erentiation ^ all at the heart of
the Chicago school ^ are central to this project.19 Although it is
methodologically suggestive, the Chicago school's theoretical system
and empirical record are insu¤cient to explain the structure of the
heat wave mortality, and its biotic vocabulary for classifying urban life
could only reinforce the naturalization of the disaster. In this study, I
go to the living laboratory of the Chicago school to show that its
ecological approach to urbanism is insu¤cient to explain an ecological
disaster in Chicago itself. Only by combining the new urban sociology,
which highlights the importance of political and economic power in
the sociospatial organization of the metropolis, with elements of the
Chicago School approach is it possible to account for the geography of
urban vulnerability.20
The third tradition of sociology at the heart of this model is the project
of making visible violence that is otherwise misrecognized, of exposing
the political economy of symbolic violence and thereby opening new
spaces for analytical and political work. This project is most systemati-
cally pursued in the work of Pierre Bourdieu, who has empirically
shown the obscured machinations of power in such diverse areas as
the world of art, the educational system, and the architecture of the
home. In his recent work, Bourdieu has focused on two key sites in the
production of symbolic domination, both of which are central to the
disaster model: the state and the journalistic ¢eld. In the early 1990s,
when he was developing his work on the political ¢eld, Bourdieu
argued that state has a unique ``power to constitute and to impose as
universal and universally applicable ... within the boundaries of a
given territory, a common set of coercive norms'' and categories.21
Pushing Weber's famous formulation, Bourdieu claimed that the state
is not merely the holder of a monopoly on legitimate physical violence,
but over legitimate symbolic violence as well. To trace this violence,
Bourdieu departed from most political sociologists by examining the
e¡ects of the state outside of formal political institutions and organ-
izations, in the places where it is least recognized but perhaps most
potent.22 Although they seem unlikely subjects for political sociology,
naturalized disasters represent a promising domain for locating the
work of the state.
Bourdieu has also recognized that the media now share the role of
legitimating symbolic violence with the state. In a number of socio-
logical studies of the journalistic ¢eld, he and his colleagues have
begun to map out the ways in which the media, increasingly dominated
244

by commercial enterprises and organized according to the principles
of marketing, imposes its set of understandings and frames for de¢ning
social events into the mental structures of social actors, including
social scientists.23 These studies provide a theoretical basis for reorient-
ing the analysis of disasters toward the process of their symbolic con-
struction and the politics of hiding their sociological dimensions, and
in turn the disaster model expands the scope of this research.
The ¢nal type of theory with which the disaster model engages is the
rapidly developing social science of the environment. In its e¡ort to
broaden the scope of social research and contemporary politics by
rede¢ning nature and highlighting environmental inequality as an im-
portant but under-analyzed form of domination, environmental justice
research has established new ways of conceiving both modernization
and the forms of modern social division.24 According to most environ-
mental justice research, environmental dangers such as proximity to
hazardous waste storage facilities and polluting industries, unsafe
water sources, and unsanitary residential conditions are largely dis-
tributed according to the class, ethnoracial status, and political power
of communities.25 In their attempts to denaturalize nature, environ-
mental justice scholars have noted the possibility of treating catastro-
phes as social events, but they have not yet developed a set of principles
for doing this work or a major study of a speci¢c disaster.26 Most
disaster literature has also failed to integrate the new environmental
science into its perspective. In the heat wave, however, dangers speci¢c
to the most neglected urban environments contributed to the organi-
zation of disaster deaths. The mortality patterns of the disaster, it was
clear, re£ected the inequalities of the city's built environment, leaving
environmental justice scholars with a problematic for theoretical expan-
sion that is central to their project.
The study of the heat wave engages several important bodies of social
theory, but building a model for studying disaster based on vulnerabil-
ity, the state, and the symbolic construction of the event is more than
an academic task. Putatively environmental urban disasters will likely
increase in the future because two processes at the heart of current
economic and social development are also directly linked to the struc-
ture of disaster vulnerability. First, retrenchment of the welfare state,
which is not merely an empirically observable trend in advanced soci-
eties but also a mandate of major international development organiza-
tions, means that governments will likely be less and less able and
willing to protect their more precarious residents. Second, advanced
245

forms of marginality, such as neighborhood and community degrada-
tion, housing crises, and health deterioration, are themselves advancing;
that is, the rise in endangered urban populations is not a completed
historical change but a process whose e¡ects lie ahead of us.27 As it
develops, more urban dwellers become vulnerable to the external haz-
ards, such as environmental events, that they once might have been
able to survive. Global warming, if it is indeed occurring, makes these
two processes all the more dangerous because it raises not only the
temperature of the earth but also the number of extreme weather sys-
tems, including heat waves, blizzards, and other potentially deadly
storms. As these processes continue and interact the project of develop-
ing social autopsies for disasters grows politically and scienti¢cally more
relevant. This examination of the 1995 Chicago heat wave, as well as the
model of analysis it establishes, is therefore motivated by the notion,
heretofore the guiding principle of forensic science, that by studying
death we gain capacity to understand life as well as to protect it.28
Urban onslaught: The mounting spectacle of death in the city
Return to Chicago: Tuesday, July 12; sunny and still; temperature near
100³, heat index 102³, the streets ablaze; the air sticky, almost thick
enough to chew. The heat came announced. Forecasters, watching the
warm air rising from the South, predicted a hot spell several days
before Chicago cracked 90³, and local television news broadcasts
warned of an imminent ``summer sizzler'' through the night of July 11.
According to Kathryn D. Sullivan, the former head of the National
Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration and leader of a survey team
investigating the heat wave deaths, ``the National Weather Service
issued warnings of the developing heat several days in advance''29 ^
enough time, argued Dr. Carol Rubin, who directed a study of the heat
wave for the Centers for Disease Control, ``to disseminate prevention
messages to the public.''80 Some Chicagoans were prepared, others
acted quickly to protect themselves. Stores carrying air conditioners
and fans sold out their supplies by the afternoon, leaving teams of
eager shoppers on long, fruitless searches for home cooling systems.
City dwellers swarmed the beaches: 90,000 crammed a modestly sized
downtown beach alone. Those far from the lakefront sought park water
fountains, public pools, or, if none of these was accessible, open ¢re
hydrants to get them through the day.
246

But Chicagoans needed air conditioning to survive such extreme heat,
and as the city got its ¢x on arti¢cial cooling its demand for electricity
reached an all-time high, totally overwhelming the normal capacity of
Chicago's utilities provider, Commonwealth Edison (Com Ed). Com
Ed was not adequately prepared for this soaring use of power and its
equipment broke down precisely when its customers most needed energy.
Com Ed's generators began failing on Wednesday and continued to
malfunction through the weekend. Friday, after the three consecutive
days of record-breaking energy consumption and a sweeping series of
power failures around the city, two large circuit breakers went out at
the Northwest station within an hour. Disarray at the utility company
left some communities without electricity ^ and therefore without air
conditioning, fans, elevators, refrigeration, and television and radio
(where Chicagoans could tune in to broadcasts about the heat and
instructions on how to stay safe) ^ for two days or more, and the
temperature never moderated.
Thursday the thirteenth was Chicago's most uncomfortable day. Some
regions of the city reported temperatures of 106³ and heat indices as
high as 126³; indoor temperatures in high-rise apartment buildings
without air conditioning topped 115³ even when windows were open;
and school buses, trapped in mid-day tra¤c while carrying children on
summer ¢eld trips, grew so hot that dozens of young campers, weak
and nauseous from heat exhaustion, had to be pulled out of the stu¡y
vehicles and hosed down by ¢re department workers to prevent them
from passing out. Massive water treatments were a survival technique
the emergency workers might have borrowed from inhabitants, espe-
cially the young, of the poorest and most underserved areas of the city.
These Chicagoans, the most likely to lack access to cool spaces, had no
choice but to open their neighborhood ¢re hydrants, creating public
fountains and turning the streets into waterparks, oases where the
able-bodied could transform deadly conditions into spaces for frolic
and relief.
But this popular survival strategy among disadvantaged urban dwell-
ers otherwise trapped in the heat has a dangerous unintended e¡ect:
massive use of ¢re hydrants as cooling devices depletes local water
supplies ^ enough, in extreme cases, to leave entire communities with-
out running water for extended periods. On Thursday, the hottest day
in city history, Chicagoans opened over three-thousand ¢re hydrants,
consuming so much water that several neighborhoods lost almost all of
their pressure for hours or more. Television news reported that the city
247

was ¢ghting a ``water war'': over one-hundred crews circulated through
Chicago to close the hydrants and police threatened anyone caught
tampering with emergency water sources with a $500 ¢ne, but people
in the streets persisted, using acetylene torches, sledgehammers, power
drills, and saws to generate a £ow of water. Threatened with the possi-
bility of losing their best source of relief from the heat, groups of youths
``showered nine water department trucks with gun¢re, bricks or rocks ...
and caused minor injuries to four workers'' who tried to seal the
hydrants.31 This violent struggle for such a basic resource was truly
tragic, for these deprived communities would lose no matter what the
¢nal result. If sealing the hydrants would have helped overheated
residents regain water pressure, it also would have meant submitting
to the more dangerous pressures imposed by the limited resources of
the neighborhood and the intensity of the heat.
By Friday the environmental onslaught began to overcome the meager
forms of resistance mounted by the city's most susceptible residents.
Extreme heat, medical research has established, breaks down bodily
defenses after at least forty-eight hours of uninterrupted exposure, and
on the third consecutive day of 100³-plus apparent temperatures the
collapsing public health was great enough to cripple much of the city's
system of emergency medical care and post-mortem examination. The
numbers are startling. The baseline death rate in Chicago during July
is roughly 72 per day, and there is usually little variance in this rate. On
Friday, however, 188 Chicagoans died, with so many of the corpses
requiring autopsy that the Chief Medical Examiner's o¤ce had to
make special arrangements to handle the intake. The day was a har-
binger of what would come when the lag e¡ects of earlier heat took
their course and the temperatures failed to drop below the 90³s. Satur-
day was massively deadly: 365, or 293 over the norm, died in one day;
Sunday, with 241 mortalities, was almost as bad; Monday the rate had
dropped, but only to 193; Tuesday it hovered 34 above the norm, at
106; and for the next two days it remained 20 above average (see
Figures 1 and 2).
This profusion of death overwhelmed the morgue, where on average
medical examiners see 17 bodies a day and storage facilities as well as
sta¤ng levels are designed to accommodate this load. A serene modern
building several blocks west of the downtown Loop and across the
street from the city's largest public hospital, the morgue became the
symbolic center of Chicago's crisis as the number of corpses delivered
there exceeded its holding capacity by hundreds and a large brigade of
248

Figure 1. Heat-related deaths and temperature.
[Source: Steven Whitman, Chicago Department of Health.]
Figure 2. Estimated excess mortality.
[Source: Steven Whitman, Chicago Department of Health.]
249

journalists, health workers, and city o¤cials rushed to the area to
attend to the spectacle. Recognizing that the soaring death toll could
bring chaos to his o¤ce, Dr. Edmund Donoghue, the county's Chief
Medical Examiner, made emergency arrangements to handle the excess
bodies.
Donoghue assembled forensic and public health workers to assist his
sta¡ on marathon shifts, but what made the scene in the city of Upton
Sinclair's dystopic vision most unusual, indeed fantastical was the £eet
of 48 foot-long refrigerated meat-packing trucks, volunteered by a
civic-minded owner of a local trucking company, brought in to hold
the bodies as medical workers raced to complete their autopsies. The
company delivered a few trucks on Friday when the death count ¢rst
jumped, but these ¢lled so quickly that his crew had to return with
several more the next day. At the height of the heat wave's destructive-
ness ten large trucks, along with a tra¤c jam of ambulances, police
wagons, and ¢re department vehicles used to deliver bodies from
around the city, television and radio vans, and health workers' cars
crammed the area surrounding the morgue, forming a parade of death
so enormous, so surreal, that it seemed impossible to believe that this
was happening in the center of the city.
Locating the symptoms: An anatomy of urban su¡ering
During the heat wave, geography was linked to destiny. The processes
that killed so many city residents were concentrated around the low-
income, elderly, African-American, and more violent regions of the
metropolis, the neighborhoods of exclusion in which the most vulner-
able Chicagoans make their homes. Similarities between maps of the
heat wave's deaths and maps of ethnoracial and class division reveal
the social and structural underpinnings of the event. Figure 3, the map
of the Chicago community areas with the highest death rates, shows
that the community areas32 hit hardest by the heat wave lie on the
south and southwest sides of the city, historically the homes of the
city's African-American community and a diverse group of workers
long involved in the industrial economy.33 This map is particularly
striking because it illustrates a ring of high-death areas, beginning at
Burnside in the south and continuing north through Uptown and
Edgewater, circling but not extending into the Loop, the Near North
Side, Lincoln Park, and Lake View ^ four areas that house some of the
most privileged communities in the city. Read against the history of
250

Figure 3. Chicago community areas with highest heat-related death rates.
251

Figure 4. Chicago community areas per capita income, quartiles, 1989.
252

Figure 5. Community areas with highest homicide rates, 1994^1995.
253

ethnoracially driven battles for control of space at both the state and
street levels ^ ranging from Chicago's urban renewal and public housing
programs to the race riots in which white communities attacked African
Americans who tried to move into predominantly white neighbor-
hoods34 ^ this ring of death perfectly expresses the human cost of
long-standing ethnoracial exclusion in the metropolis. Historic tech-
nologies of power, division, and di¡erentiation, and not, as the early
Chicago school urban sociologists would have theorized, natural ecolog-
ical patterns of migration and progression, explain the spatial patterns
of mortality.
The heaviest concentration of high-death areas is in the neighborhoods
immediately south of the Loop, beginning at the Near South Side,
progressing south into the historic Black Belt and beyond to the newer
African-American communities, such as Woodlawn and Chatham,
east and further south; and another pocket with high mortality rates
starts west of the Loop in the Near West Side area, extends through the
western portion of the Black Belt (stopping before West Gar¢eld Park),
and moves north into West Town and Logan Square. As Figures 4 and
5 show, both of these large regions are notable for their high levels of
poverty and violent crime. Of the ¢fteen community areas with the
Table 1. Chicago community areas with highest heat-related death rates
Community area
Heat-related
deaths/100,000
Percent of population
black
Median family
income ($)
Fuller Park
92
99
8,371
Woodlawn
73
96
17,714
Archer Heights
54
0
37,744
Grand Crossing
52
99
22,931
Washington Park
51
99
9,657
Grand Boulevard
47
99
8,371
McKinley Park
45
0
31,597
North Lawndale
40
96
14,209
Chatham
35
99
29,258
Kenwood
33
77
31,954
Englewood
33
99
22,931
West Town
32
10
20,532
Brighton Park
31
0
30,677
Burnside
30
98
30,179
Near South Side
29
94
7,576
Chicago
7
39
30,707
Data based on 514 heat-related deaths located by the Illinois Department of Public
Health.
254

highest death rates during the heat wave, eleven contained unusually
high proportions of people living below half of the o¤cial poverty line,
and ten are home to populations between 94 and 99 percent black. In
addition, high community area death rates are strongly associated with
high rates of homicide and the number of seniors living alone.35
There is, however, an analytical danger in using community area data
to document the spatial logic of the heat wave's e¡ects. The large size
and overall ethnoracial or class diversity of some of the community
areas hide smaller pockets of poverty, crime, and even high heat-wave
deaths in neighborhoods within them. One single block in Uptown
notorious for its dilapidated single-room occupancy dwellings, for
example, was the spot of at least seven heat-related deaths, making it
perhaps the most deadly location in the city; yet Uptown as a whole
was not one of the ¢fteen areas with the highest general death-rates.
This does not mean that community area measures do not show
the relationships between area characteristics and heat-related deaths.
Rather, if there is a risk of ecological fallacy here it is that community
area data might underestimate the connections among poverty, crime,
and heat-related deaths because, as we see in Uptown and Woodlawn,
where three people died at a private nursing shelter housing seniors on
public aid, they do not capture the intensity of heat-related problems in
the area's most degraded sections, streets, and buildings.36
The demographics of mortality also ¢t a pattern ^ this one familiar to
public health researchers and practitioners ^ predicated on the age,
gender, and ethnoracial status of city residents. Seventy-three percent
of the 525 Chicagoans whose deaths were medically con¢rmed as
``heat-related'' during the month of July were over 65 years old; the
death rate for seniors above 65 was 16 times higher than the rate for
Table 2. Total heat-related deaths by age and ethnoracial status, Chicago residents
Age
Non-Latino white
Non-Latino black
Non-Latino other
Latino
Total
555
27
39
0
1
67
55^64
25
45
1
4
75
65^74
62
64
0
1
127
75^84
90
66
2
1
159
85+
28
42
1
2
93
Total
252
256
4
9
521
Source: Chicago Department of Public Health.
255

those under 65. Race and ethnicity mattered also: non-Latino blacks
were almost twice more likely than non-Latino whites to die of the
heat. Although African Americans make up 39 percent of the city
population and African-American seniors represent less than one-
third of Chicago residents over 65, black seniors constituted 45 percent
of the deaths for Chicagoans 65 and over, and non-elderly blacks, who
accounted for 59 percent of all deaths among those under 65, died even
more disproportionately. Latinos, though, who number about 19 per-
cent of the city population, represented only 2 percent of the overall
mortality. Men died in greater numbers than women; they were 2.5
times more likely to die because of the heat.37 These numbers (with the
exception of the low rate for Latinos, which I address below) largely
con¢rm the trends reported in several studies of heat-related mortality
published before the 1995 Chicago disaster, all of which might have
helped the local government establish a plan for identifying and aiding
the most vulnerable groups before the heat became so deadly.
``Government alone cannot do it all'': City services in the
empowerment era
The city government neglected to design a plan for protecting its
residents during the heat wave, but its failure to ensure the welfare of
its endangered constituents was also linked to a two-layered political
crisis common to local governments since the radical reduction of
public services in the 1980s: ¢rst, the general poverty of the state
because of the massive cutbacks in spending for social services, and
second, given this state of destitution, the lack of mechanisms and
organizational competency to activate even the paltry programs that
remain. The ¢rst layer of this crisis, the decrease in resources available
to public service programs, has been well documented by social scien-
tists and public policy experts.38 The second layer of the crisis, which
was shaped by the new organizational techniques and service princi-
ples that structure local government, proved especially dangerous for
Chicago residents during the heat wave. If the general neglect of
Chicago's most vulnerable residents established the potential for such
a deadly disaster, the acute failure of the local government ensured the
¢nal outcome.39
Given the entrenched American history of city governments' unrespon-
siveness to the needs of poor communities, it would have been surprising
if the local Chicago government had e¡ectively protected local resi-
256

dents during the crisis. As organizations, city governments function
poorly to secure the welfare of people in need, and they do so only in
unusual circumstances.40 In the current structure and spirit of local
government, the state is even less willing and able to provide key
services to marginalized residents. Splintered into several departments
and jurisdictions, partially privatized through sub-contracts to other
agencies and corporations, lacking oversight while driven mostly by
the strategies of individual administrations, guided by the logic that
citizen ``consumers'' are responsible for securing their own access to
services, and more interested in policing than protecting residents of
distressed neighborhoods, Chicago's political machinery all but broke
down when its most precarious patrons needed it most.
During the heat wave several city departments failed to provide services
that, had they been activated, would have saved hundreds of lives. The
Police Department neglected to activate the local units designed to
assist seniors, even though the heat wave represented precisely the
kind of situation in which they would have been e¡ective. The police,
whose nearly one-billion dollar budget has been partly justi¢ed through
the development of community policing, proved to have little ability to
mobilize its resources during the crisis. Other agencies also neglected
to take emergency measures. The Fire Department, which is responsible
for the O¤ce of Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Services, had
no mechanism for issuing a heat emergency. The Department of
Human Services did little to contact isolated seniors to warn them of
the dangers of the climate, nor did it provide adequate transportation
and security to help vulnerable residents travel to the few public cool-
ing centers that the city had opened. The Department of Public Health
had no mechanism for coordinating emergency medical services,
which were so strained by the outbreak of illness and death that many
hospitals were unable to admit people in need of urgent care or to help
¢nd alternative hospitals. Throughout the city, public agencies rejected
o¡ers from volunteers because they had no idea what to do with them.
Agencies such as the Department on Aging that did activate their
emergency measures for assisting city residents could do little to over-
come the shortcomings of the other o¤ces.
There are two primary explanations for this broad set of failures. First,
in the new administrative logic of state agencies, problems such as the
heat wave are not the exclusive concern of public service providers.
For, as the Mayor's Commission on the heat wave insists,``government
alone cannot do it all,''41 and residents themselves must take responsi-
257

bility for securing their own welfare and keeping themselves out of
hospitals and other places that provide public assistance. In most
American cities, local governments now claim that their role should
no longer be that of universal provider, but of enabler.42 Appropriating
the discourse of empowerment as a moral justi¢cation to abandon
poor communities, state administrators and politicians, convinced that
the best way to protect the poor is to force them to protect themselves,
are relinquishing responsibility for many of their services to the people
least able to provide them. The rapid introduction of market operating
principles and discourse into the public sector has facilitated this
process. People in need are now considered consumers of public goods
in a competitive market rather than citizens entitled to bene¢ts because
they are members of a political community. As consumers, they are
expected to provide for themselves in the available market of services.
Yet poor, in¢rm communities are likely to be poor consumers of public
services, in part because they have less access to information and thus
a limited set of choices from which to choose. Indeed, social workers in
the city report that the most deprived senior clients are the least able to
claim the public bene¢ts ^ ranging from health care and prescription
drugs to social security income ^ for which they are eligible because
they have trouble interpreting the complex forms and bureaucratic
requirements that they must ¢le and ful¢ll. Many of the Chicagoans
who died or required emergency care during the heat wave were no
doubt among those who, failing to master the system, became, in the
state's logic, their own victims.
The second cause of the local government's failure, and also the
mechanism that facilitates the rise of this new philosophy for urban
governance, is the radical decentralization, fragmentation, and priva-
tization of the social-service programs and downsized public agencies
that they city has preserved. Fragmentation of city departments coupled
with the state's importation of £exible, lateral management systems
from the private sector left the local government with little capacity to
coordinate services during an emergency.43 Lacking clear oversight,
every agency became partly responsible for handling the crisis, which
made the collective action problem of passing the buck all the more
dire.
Both of these problems a¡ected the crisis in medical services during
the heat wave. Between July 13 and 16, twenty-three of forty-¢ve hospi-
tals in the city network went on bypass status, whereby they refused to
accept new patients for emergency care because they were using all
258

their urgent care facilities. In one period eighteen hospitals went on
bypass status at the same time, making it impossible for residents in
the most a¡ected areas to receive timely medical attention. According
to a report issued by the Chairman of the State Senate Public Health
and Welfare Committee, the south and southeast sections of the city,
both of which contain disproportionately high levels of low income
and black populations, had ``very few, if any, hospitals ... available to
accept patients delivered by emergency ambulance''; but ``the Chicago
Department of Health was apparently not aware of the magnitude of
the crisis at area hospitals.''44
The city had no government agency to monitor hospitals' policies for
turning away patients and it is not clear that all of the decisions to
enter bypass status were appropriate. With so many emergency rooms
shut down and no central program to notify ambulances when and
where hospitals closed or re-opened, people in need of emergency
treatment were shuttled from area to area until their driver could ¢nd
an available facility, and ambulances were so tied up that at least ¢fty-
¢ve emergency cases went unattended for more than thirty minutes, a
response time the city itself considers totally unacceptable. These con-
ditions explain how an administrator at one hospital south of the Loop
could report receiving patients from more than ten miles south of
her hospital. The medical systems in poorer areas of the city, long
insu¤cient for the needs of the local population but reduced even
further by cuts in public health programs since the 1980s, all but
collapsed under the pressure of the heat.
Home alone, home afraid, home sick: The rise of literal
social isolation
In the city's o¤cial view, however, real fault for the health crisis lay in
the hands of the poor and isolated seniors who, when contacted by
neighbors or service agencies, did not heed the instruction to leave
their apartments and ¢nd air conditioning or at least to open their
windows and doors. According to the Mayor's Commission, this
showed ``that those most at risk may be least likely to want or accept
help from government,''45 but in fact it exempli¢ed the extent to which
public agencies and o¤cials, who by out-sourcing service provisions to
private contractors increasingly distance themselves from impover-
ished areas of the city, have failed to recognize the level of insecurity
and the depth of deprivation in the most distressed communities.
259

Ground-level scrutiny of the everyday world of Chicago's most preca-
rious residents reveals that they did not refuse to leave their homes
because they do not want or are unwilling to accept help from govern-
ment, but because the proximate social and spatial conditions in which
they live make it unacceptably di¤cult or risky to leave their apart-
ments.
The advancing deterioration of neighborhood infrastructure has been
particularly damaging to the city's poor elderly, thousands of whom
have responded to the environmental changes by barricading them-
selves in their small homes, using their walls to protect themselves
from a world they perceive as too threatening to enter, all but aban-
doning a society that has thoroughly abandoned them. Seniors who are
trapped within their own residential units represent an emerging group
of thoroughly marginalized city residents ^ the literally socially isolated
^ who, according to several case managers who work with them, rarely
leave their residential units, have little contact with family and friends,
and, because of cutbacks in public health and transportation programs
(essential for bringing them to health providers), are unable to receive
many of the basic services they need to stay healthy.While the size and
demographic composition of this group is unclear ^ three case managers
at Metropolitan Family Services independently estimated that 90 per-
cent of their clients are socially isolated, and a recent study found that
48 percent of the city's elderly have no one available to help them46 ^ it
is signi¢cant enough to constitute a major problem in the life of the
city. In fact, social service workers, political organizers, and city o¤-
cials share at least one position in their analysis of the heat wave: the
literally socially isolated made up a signi¢cant number of the people it
killed.
The status of the literally isolated should not be confused with that of
the communities William Julius Wilson designates as socially isolated
because of their ``lack of contact or of sustained interaction with
individuals and institutions that represent mainstream society.''47 While
there is considerable debate about the empirical status of Wilson's
socially isolated urban communities and the social and economic
e¡ects of the kind of social isolation he describes,48 the silent deaths
of Chicagoans living alone and out of touch with members of their
communities signal the dire reality of an emerging, emergency social
condition ^ social life constrained by in¢rmity or fear and reduced to
the boundaries of a tiny apartment ^ whose features and consequences
have received scant attention from scholars and policy makers.
260

During the heat wave, researchers from the Division of Epidemiolog-
ical Studies at the Illinois Department of Public Health report, the
high correlation between community area heat-related death rates and
community area homicide rates indicated both the depth and the
dangerousness of fear itself. High levels of violent crime in concentrated
areas, the researchers explain, ``can create fears in£uencing people's
desire to open windows, leave home, or stay away from home for
extended periods. Even during a heat wave, these fears may cause
additional reluctance to go to cooling centers or to open windows.''49
Such fear and isolation among the elderly is all the more understand-
able in light of the observations of Elijah Anderson, who argues that
for residents of high crime areas becoming violent oneself is a logical
adaptation that enables self-preservation.50 For seniors, particularly
those who are unhealthy, becoming violent is a less viable option.Their
retreat into seclusion re£ects a lack of alternatives in their struggle for
security.
This problem can be particularly onerous for seniors living in senior
public housing units, where changes in city housing policy have forced
many to give up not only the public parks and streets that once framed
their communal lives but the public spaces within their own apartment
buildings as well. Several years ago the Chicago Housing Authority
(CHA) opened senior buildings, dispersed throughout the city but
generally located in safer areas than the family public housing com-
plexes, to people with disabilities as well as seniors. When legislative
changes made people with substance abuse problems eligible for social
security insurance, the CHA welcomed them into senior housing units
as well. This act of accommodation has proven disastrous for senior
residents and the communities they had once established within their
buildings. The mix of low-income substance abusers, many of whom
continue to engage in crime to ¢nance their habits, and low-income
seniors, many of whom keep their savings and everything else they own
in their tiny apartments, creates a perfect formula for instilling inse-
curity deep in the buildings' environments. Elderly residents of senior
buildings throughout the city now voice the same complaint: they feel
trapped in their rooms, afraid that if they leave they might be attacked
or have their apartment robbed, and many refuse to go out even to the
ground £oor common rooms. Their urban burrows are sealed tightly
and it is not uncommon to ¢nd make-shift security systems designed to
ward o¡ invaders. One woman I visited had wedged a piece of metal
into her door so that it screeched noisily enough to awaken everyone
261

on her side of the £oor when it closed; and a client of a social worker I
shadowed has wired his door-knob to an electrical current so that it
shocks everyone who touches it unless he disconnects the wiring. By
1996 the CHA had acknowledged the problem its housing policy has
created, and it has pledged to remove people with substance abuse
problems from the senior buildings within the next few years. Until
then, however, insecurity will rule the lives of many seniors living in
public housing.
The tale of two neighborhoods: Variations in the social morphology
of poverty
The peculiar sociospatial arrangement grouping seniors, perhaps the
most vulnerable city residents, with young substance abusers, who are
among the city's most threatening to poor seniors, represents an extreme
form of social instability, but degraded living conditions in other areas
of the city have given rise to similar protective and isolating practices.
Urban social networks, historically rooted in family and neighborhood
life, have long grounded the everyday worlds of city dwellers, creating
not only a communal basis for social life but also a set of extended
kinship ties that ensure the welfare of community members during
hard times. Indeed, one of the great strengths of the Chicago school of
urban sociology was its attention to the importance of relationships
within neighborhoods in structuring the quality of community life ^ a
point contemporary social scientists often overlook as their focus shifts
away from the community life of cities. The power of these networks to
preserve the health of local communities was evident in the Latino
communities, which, despite a general socioeconomic status that placed
their collective well-being at risk, withstood the heat wave much more
e¡ectively than any other ethnic group in the city. While the relatively
low proportion of seniors in Latino communities accounts for part of
the low Latino mortality rate, age does not fully explain why Latinos,
who comprise about 23 percent of the city population, represented two
percent of heat wave deaths.
Here sociological studies provide evidence for what public health
workers could only guess: although Latinos have also su¡ered from
the decline in state programs and local economic opportunities, the
close social ties in many of Chicago's Latino communities, extending
through several generations and sustained by better neighborhood
conditions, help maintain the vitality of collective life and ensure that
262

the most precarious members are looked after.51 There is, however,
great variation in the social networks within the Chicago Latino com-
munity, and it would be wrong to assume that Chicago Latinos are
universally more socially integrated than other groups. Community-
based networks di¡er not only according to cultural traditions but to
local institutions, sociospatial and economic conditions, and environ-
mental and demographic pressures as well; and there are notable
di¡erences on these counts among, for example, Chicago's Mexican
American, Central American, and Puerto Rican communities.52 While
it is important to guard against over-generalizing from some Latino
communities' cultural practices and reifying the trope of Latino com-
munity solidarity,53 the remarkable success of Chicago's Latino com-
munity in surviving the heat wave suggests that some general features
of Latino social morphology help bu¡er Latino residents of Chicago
from some of the most damaging consequences of urban poverty and
meteorological shock.
It is possible to provide a provisional explanation for the common
social, spatial, and economic conditions that enabled Chicago's Latinos
to withstand the heat.54 First, the organization of what Carlos Ve¨ lez-
Iba¨ ·ez calls ``clustered households,'' namely, the proximal residential
patterns of family members and close relations, provides the geo-
graphical basis for intense social ties and, during the heat wave, close
attention to the status of frail or unhealthy family members. Second, the
strength of lineal relations across generations, speci¢cally the integration
of elders into the family lives or even the homes of younger family
members, allows for intimate provision of care during bouts of illness
or crises. Third, conditions of the Chicago labor market and the size of
Latino household clusters make it likely that at least some members of
the network will be able to provide the resources necessary to avoid the
most dangerous problems related to poverty. All of these forms of socio-
spatial organization, particularly the last, are predicated on the condi-
tions of the broader economic and political environment, as all require
a material substratum of tangible goods to function e¡ectively.
The embeddedness of cultural practices within the socioeconomic con-
ditions of local communities helps account for why even low-income
Latinos survived the heat wave more successfully than Chicago's most
disproportionately impoverished group, African Americans. Although
commonly positioned together as the subjects of popular, scholarly,
and political discourse on the putative ``urban underclass,'' low-income
Latino and African-American communities have, in fact, experienced
263

poverty di¡erently as changes in local labor markets and state policies
have imposed di¡erent pressures on the groups.55 In Chicago, the ordi-
nary cultures of low-income blacks and Latinos are structured around
great variations in the location and composition of neighborhoods as
well as in the vitality of the job market. Simply put, low-income Latino
communities and low-income African-American communities are
situated in areas with objectively di¡erent characteristics, character-
istics that are of vital importance to the welfare and life chances of
local residents.
To begin, Chicago's low-income Latino communities live largely outside
of the most extreme poverty areas in the city, and the neighborhoods
they inhabit are more animated by commercial activity, institutional
vitality, architectural integrity, and public space utility than those in
the most disadvantaged African-American neighborhoods.56 Indeed,
twelve of the thirteen community areas with the highest poverty levels
in the city are home to populations over 90 percent black (the remain-
ing community is over 70 percent black), whereas none of the ¢fteen
areas with the most concentrated poverty is primarily Latino. Latino
neighborhoods are also more ethnoracially and ethnically integrated
than Chicago's low-income black community areas, which are among
the most segregated places in the country. As Massey and Denton
argue, this integration helps create a basis for political coalitions that
¢ght to improve daily conditions as well as to ensure that the state
provides services in emergencies such as the heat wave. While there is
no systematic evidence that low-income black communities were more
neglected than other communities during the heat wave, the social
service workers I interviewed reported that their clients living in all
black, low-income areas received little assistance from the state. Many
social service providers refuse even to enter the most stigmatized
African-American neighborhoods in the city, and among those who
do it is common to avoid them after mid-morning, when the streets are
perceived to be more dangerous. A number of the city's black politi-
cians expressed frustration with the social service e¡orts of the current
political regime, arguing that Mayor Daley had long neglected the
city's black community and that it was no surprise to see his adminis-
tration do it during the crisis.
Low-income Latino neighborhoods are distinct from poor African-
American areas, then, because they are not entirely low-income areas,
they are not as sharply segregated, and they rest upon a comparatively
more sound material substratum. As the heat wave made clear, the
264

social morphology of Latino poverty in places such as South Lawndale
provides possibilities for well-being, and in crises even survival, that
are less available in the most severe African-American poverty areas.
During the heat wave the variations between the sociospatial character-
istics of Chicago's low-income African American and Latino commun-
ities became most clear on the west side of the city, where neighboring
communities, North Lawndale and South Lawndale (areas 29 and 30,
respectively, in ¢gures 3^5), could not have experienced the heat wave
more di¡erently. In North Lawndale, where 96 percent of the residents
are black, the heat-related death rate, about 40 per 100,000, was
among the highest in the city; in South Lawndale, where 85 percent of
residents are Latino (which is unusually concentrated for Latinos in the
city), the heat-related death rate, about 3 per 100,000, was among the
lowest, even though four of the ¢ve community areas it borders ranked
with the ¢fteen most devastated places in the city (see Figure 3 and
Table 1). Although the Chicago Latino community has relatively few
seniors, and some local commentators speculated that this demographic
characteristic accounted for the low Latino heat-related mortality rate,
it is worth noting that South Lawndale has a comparatively high level
of aged persons living alone, whereas North Lawndale has one of the
lowest levels of seniors living alone in the city. Both areas are among
the most impoverished neighborhoods in Chicago, but it was the work
of the state, the texture and intensity of the communities' poverty, and
the relationship between socioeconomic conditions and the local cultural
practices related to it that largely determined the fate of area residents.
While most scholarly and popular discourse for describing and classi-
fying urban poverty would de¢ne both North and South Lawndale as
high poverty or underclass areas, ¢eld work and survey research in the
two communities illustrate major distinctions between the two neighbor-
hoods and enable a more nuanced account of local conditions. Census
data from 1990 point to some of the key di¡erences in the demographic
and economic features of the areas. In 1990, the median annual family
income in Chicago was about $ 31,000, but only $ 23,000 in South
Lawndale and a mere $ 14,000 in North Lawndale. The same year 22
percent of South Lawndale residents lived below the poverty line and
14 percent of the civilian labor force was o¤cially unemployed; in
North Lawndale 44 percent of the population was impoverished and
27 percent o¤cially unemployed ^ meaning that poverty in North
Lawndale was not only more severe (in terms of income) but also
more pervasive than in South Lawndale.57
265

The labor market has had a deep in£uence on the demographic com-
position of the areas. The 1990 North Lawndale population was about
47,000, a decrease of 23 percent from 1980 and an indicator of the mass
exodus of residents in search of a better living environment; in South
Lawndale, however, the 1990 population was about 81,000, an increase
of 8 percent from 1980 and a sign of the area's renewed attractiveness.
Maintaining vigor while changing from a largely white, working-class
community to a predominantly Latino area during the past two decades,
South Lawndale is growing through a di¡erent stage in its development
than North Lawndale, which has been declining since the late 1960s.
If abstract statistical information about the two communities does not
show the on-the-ground conditions of everyday life, qualitative descrip-
tions portray the life of the neighborhoods with brutal clarity. Formally
known as south Lawndale but renamed Little Village by residents eager
to dissociate their neighborhood from the stigma of Lawndale, the
streets in this densely populated Latino area are animated and busy.58
This vigorous street activity is a key source of community life, the socio-
spatial foundation of the social networks that connect local residents.59
Once Twenty-Sixth Street but now called Calle Mexico, the commercial
heart of the Little Village is full of display signs advertising in Spanish,
lined with restaurants, banks, clothing stores, grocers, medical centers,
and travel agencies, and crowded with street vendors, shoppers, and
community residents. A large arch stands at the main entry to the
street from the East, greeting visitors with the words, ``Bienvenidos a
Little Village,''and other signs with the name Little Village are scattered
around the area.60 Surrounding streets are predominantly residential,
with housing stock of varying quality but few abandoned buildings.
The remnants of the city's once £ourishing manufacturing economy
are south of 31st Street, where there are still some open facilities.61
The neighborhood changes gradually as it extends northward, until it
reaches Cermak Avenue, the main border between the Little Village
and North Lawndale. Although they are only a few blocks away, the
core streets of North Lawndale contrast sharply with Calle Mexico.
Eerily void of human tra¤c, streets such as 16th Street, Ogden Avenue,
and Roosevelt Road feel ghostly with their decaying buildings, boarded
windows, empty lots, closed shops, liquor stores, and small fast food
joints. Over 40 percent of the land in North Lawndale is vacant, and
the general quality of the once-elegant housing stock is poor. The street
activity that animates collective life and connects social groups in the
Little Village is markedly less prosperous here.62 According to one
266

study. North Lawndale has 48 state lottery agents, 50 currency ex-
changes, and 99 licensed bars and liquor stores, but only one bank and
one supermarket for its population of nearly 50,000.63 Development
projects have been limited and, until recently, too meager to succeed.
In 1981, Pyramidwest Development Corporation sponsored construc-
tion of the federally subsidized Lawndale Terrace, but its plans for a
shopping center and an industrial park failed because no major tenants
were interested in them; and in 1987 a non-pro¢t organization's e¡ort
to build a small business ``incubator'' building collapsed as well.
The neighborhood was not always so degraded. In the early twentieth
century North Lawndale was a booming community, home to Polish,
Czechoslovakian, and Russian Jewish immigrants. In the 1940s African
Americans attempted to join the mix, but white residents would not
tolerate their presence and by the 1950s they were moving out in mass.
North Lawndale, which became the main point of entry for blacks
migrating from the south, experienced another population boom in the
1950s, when the number of African Americans increased from 13,000
to more than 113,000 in less than a decade.64 In the 1960s, though,
state-sponsored urban renewal programs and construction of ethno-
racially segregated public housing reorganized the neighborhood for
the worse, and the area was further damaged as segregation fostered
neglect from other segments of the metropolitan community.
Pushed on a descending path by the state and hostile whites, North
Lawndale was the site of large riots after Martin Luther King's assas-
sination in 1968, and the next year its largest employers began to move
out. The community was once the home for two large factories, the
Hawthorne plant of Western Electric with over 43,000 jobs, and a
Harvester plant which employed 14,000 workers, and was also the
world headquarters for Sears Roebuck, which provided over 10,000
local jobs. Harvester left the community at the end of the 1960s and
Sears quickly followed, moving most of its o¤ces downtown but
leaving a catalog distribution center and about 3,000 jobs until 1988.
The Hawthorne factory closed down gradually, shutting its gates for
good in 1984. This large corporate abandonment generated a deeper
cycle of commercial £ight, as local banks, small stores, and many small
businesses lost their basis of support and relocated or closed them-
selves. The process of economic and social decay has continued in the
last decades, intensifying to catastrophic levels in the 1980s and 1990s
as funding for urban programs and local demand for industrial labor
disappeared.
267

This short narrative of North Lawndale's decline, culminating in the
large death toll during the heat wave, illustrates the depth of the relation
among state programs, economic vitality, and community organization.
Indeed, it is impossible to understand why conditions there are cur-
rently so dangerous, why residents are so insecure not only during
unusual crises but in their everyday lives, without tracing the pattern
of ethnoracially charged intolerance at the community and state level,
strati¢cation followed by a period of malign neglect and industrial
abandonment. In North Lawndale, the relationship of state, economy,
and society produced atrophy rather than synergy as the demise of
each component forced the degeneration of the others. Perhaps what
is most striking is that so many residents continue to press for their
neighborhood's development and to struggle to improve the welfare of
their community. Despite all of its recent problems the community has
fought to enact school reform, establish a community banking center,
build more housing, and spark new commercial and cultural activity.
While the west side of North Lawndale has witnessed little progress,
the east side is currently experiencing a major spark of development,
especially in the area surrounding the old Sears headquarters. There
are two banks in the vicinity, several new housing developments with
homes and apartments selling for up to $200,000, a multiplex movie
theater, a major chain drug store, and a large mall that should be
operating by the end of 1998. If, as planned, a full service grocery store
opens there in 1999, it will be the ¢rst of its kind in the area for decades.
Despite these successes, the material conditions of the neighborhood
frustrate other potential development projects, instilling deep forms of
insecurity in life of the community as well as in those who invest there.
Throughout Chicago, the new structures of deprivation and division in
low-income communities such as North Lawndale have shaken the
foundations of social life. Fear stemming from the violence of everyday
life, which is especially pervasive in neighborhoods where the under-
ground economy has replaced the formal commercial market and
violent crime levels are signi¢cantly higher than in other areas of the
city, strikes at the heart of urban social networks by engendering distrust
and undermining neighborhood solidarity.65 But there are other bases
for the decline in social networks that impairs the health of urban
dwellers. As neighborhood decay has left parks, streets, and commer-
cial institutions less viable as public spaces for community life, the
local government has reduced the availability of public transportation
in the city's already underserved neighborhoods, making it all the
more di¤cult for residents to visit or be visited by friends and organ-
268

izations in other areas of the city and almost impossible to get to and
from work. The shortage of transportation poses particularly serious
problems for seniors and the ill when they need medical care ^ and
many of the city's most in¢rm residents fail to receive the treatments
they need largely because they are unable to reach medical institutions
^ and it restricts the possibilities for social connections in the city as
well.
E¡ectively cut o¡ from the circulation of primary goods, such as
decent housing, health care, and work opportunities, as well as from
other residents of the city, the most deprived neighborhoods bear the
stigma of failure and decay and threaten to mark residents similarly.
Many respond exactly as have the residents of North Lawndale ^
further dissociating themselves from their neighbors, grounding their
own identities against the dominant narratives and representations of
denigration that de¢ne their communities, and establishing a social
distance that enables a preservation of dignity and self-respect but
jeopardizes the viability of collective organization and support ^ even
when they cannot physically leave the neighborhood.67 The danger of
these arrangements could not be better exempli¢ed than it was during
the heat wave, when it became clear that this emerging form of urban
alienation is a social problem of grave signi¢cance.
Down and out in Uptown: An urban inferno on SRO ``death row''
This was news to no one in the single-room-occupancy dwellings (SROs)
that house thousands of Chicagoans on the edge of homelessness.
Scattered throughout the city but heavily concentrated in low-income
neighborhoods, these units represent the last option of insulation from
the dangers of life on the streets but impose their own set of threats to
the security of residents. SROs vary greatly in quality and form: several
hundred units are funded with federal housing grants, well kept, sta¡ed
by trained social workers and busy with programs for job training,
substance abuse treatment, and habilitation to working life. But most
for-pro¢t buildings lack these services entirely and function instead as
little more than low-grade shelters for the marginal or mentally ill.
Managed well, SROs can be an e¡ective and realistic source of housing
for urban residents otherwise unable to enter the housing market.
Historically, they have constituted an important alternative for single
people and poor families looking for inexpensive housing in city centers;
269

and even today, there are more people living in hotels than in all of
America's public housing.68 In the last ¢fty years, however, two changes
in government policy have reduced the viability of SRO housing, de-
grading the stock of the buildings and the quality of life for their
residents. First, the urban renewal programs of the 1950s and 1960s
and urban development programs of the 1970s led to the destruction or
conversion of millions of units, but the federal government funded or
assisted virtually no new hotel-style public housing until recently. The
destruction of SROs continued into the 1980s, with Chicago alone
losing almost 23,000 units ^ the equivalent of 92 public housing projects
^ from 1973 to 1984.69 Second, changes in mental health policy sparked
a massive in£ux of former patients into the low-end of the housing
market and drastically altering the conditions of life in the hotels. By
the 1970s, SROs had become homes for some of the most precarious of
the elderly and poor, but demand for them remained high because of
the lack of other housing options.
Many hotel proprietors take advantage of this market condition by
charging relatively high prices but neglecting to maintain the quality
of their buildings or properly train their sta¡s. In the most degraded
hotels, which social workers call ``street hotels'' or ``open hotels,'' it is
common to ¢nd unprotected windows, open elevator shafts, uncollected
garbage, rats, broken toilets, old wiring, and no ¢re alarms.When they
want to turn-over clientele and raise prices, managers have been known
to shut o¡ heat and hot water, lock toilets, close elevators in tall
buildings, plug room locks, lose mail, refuse entrance to social service
providers, fumigate rooms while residents are in them, remove lobby
furniture, and send thugs to intimidate residents.70 These SROs, as the
clerk in one of Uptown's most dilapidated hotels told me, serve as
places ``where people come to maintain their addictions, live alone, and
die.'' This was never more true than during the heat wave, when the
architectural and social conditions in the SROs made them the most
dangerous places in the city, more dangerous, even, than the streets.
In the large Wilson Club Hotel it seems a miracle that only a few
residents died in the heat. Managers there have used thin wood to
subdivide the former industrial building into hundreds of units large
enough to ¢t only a bed, a dresser, and a chair. The wood divisions stop
several feet below the high, concrete ceilings, but residents and their
property are protected by a key-lock door and chicken wire pleated
atop the wooden walls to serve as ceilings where none other exists.
There are a few windows on the exterior walls and ¢re escapes on every
270

£oor, but these o¡er little ventilation to the residents lodged in the
belly of the building; and there is no air conditioning in the dim public
space on the ground £oor, which was always empty when I visited.71
Unlike the non-pro¢t SROs, there are no services connecting residents
to medical or vocational support structures in the area; and the man-
agement's policy of non-intervention in the lives of building residents is
guided by a principle of tolerance and respect that would be admirable
were so many of the building's residents not so dangerously ill. Health
failures are not uncommon there, nor in the other nearby SROs
(organized similarly and also home to multiple heat wave deaths).
Neighborhood residents, who have tried for years to have the SROs
improved, note that the heat wave merely heightened what is in e¡ect a
permanent health crisis in the buildings.72 They know from the fre-
quent circulation of ambulances on the block that it doesn't take the
heat to put SRO occupants at risk of disaster.
At Lakefront, the federally subsidized single-room occupancy complex
scattered a few blocks away from the row of dilipadated SROs, resi-
dents fortunate enough to have found a place there were well guarded
from the dangerous weather. With the large sta¡, comfortable, air con-
ditioned lounges, and well-maintained residential units made possible by
government funding, Lakefront's managers can help occupants through
emergencies such as the heat wave as well as the daily struggle to
establish personal health and security in the tough city. But few can
get housing in complexes like Lakefront: of the city's known SRO units
more than 90 percent are in for-pro¢t buildings such as the Wilson,
and less than a thousand o¡er services comparable to Lakefront's.
There are so many applicants to the government subsidized buildings
that they now refuse to accept more names to the waiting list; and
those who do reach the top of the list must pass an elaborate screening
and selection process, designed to weed out applicants who are using
illegal drugs or give evidence of behavioral problems deemed unman-
ageable by the sta¡, to obtain a unit. While in the past years Lakefront
has expanded the number of buildings it operates, there are no plans
for reproducing the Lakefront model on a scale large enough to provide
better housing for the thousands of Chicago SRO occupants on the
edge. In fact the very opposite is true: in the era of state retrenchment
even programs that show such clear bene¢ts to residents' health are in
jeopardy of being eliminated if they cannot ¢nd private support.73
During crises, such as the heat wave, and during mundane, normal
conditions, the radical di¡erences in SROs such as Lakefront and the
271

Wilson illustrate the two-fold political problems ^ the miserly welfare
state coupled with the political weakness of most marginalized groups
^ for Chicagoans living on the edge. The impoverished federal and
local welfare states are unable to a¡ord high quality single-room occu-
pancy dwellings for the great majority of SRO occupants, and conse-
quently most people moving into or out of homelessness ¢nd their
e¡orts to attain health and stability, let alone opportunity for advance-
ment, upset by the brutal conditions of their residential units. Margi-
nalized from the ¢rst, structural level of state programs, poor urban
residents unable to enter the public or non-pro¢t housing sector are
then doubly excluded at the second, conjunctural level of state services,
the protection from daily and emergency problems, because of their
weak political power and position. In a series of interviews, residents
of the Lakefront buildings explained that not only did their adminis-
trative and social worker sta¡s personally check on occupants and
encourage them to come down to the air conditioned lounges, but
police and ¢re department o¤cers as well as local social service agen-
cies such as Red Cross also visited, bringing food and cold drinks.
Residents of the Wilson and, no doubt, the for-pro¢t SROs like it,
received far less assistance and in turn were more likely to be among
the many who died alone.
Naturalizing disaster: The politics of representing death
As the death toll in the SROs and other poor areas of the city began
to mount, local journalists and governmental o¤cials established their
roles as the primary explicators of the disaster for the urban commun-
ity. The heat wave became a public event only after it was reconstructed
in the journalistic ¢eld and political ¢eld, both of which operate
according to their own sets of pressures, forces, and purposes, and
therefore produce information that, though presented as fact, repre-
sents journalistic and political ways of seeing and not seeing the social
world. For di¡erent reasons, journalistic and political representations
of the heat wave de-emphasized the social and political determinants
of the disaster. Local political o¤cials had obvious incentives to portray
the heat wave as either a non-event or as a natural, and therefore
uncontrollable, disaster, one that no one could have anticipated or
done anything to prevent. If the event was de¢ned politically then they
would be implicated in the disaster; and in an urban community that
recently ended the political career of its mayor, Michael Bilandic, in
part because of his failure to manage a blizzard, local o¤cials under-
272

stood what was at stake for them in the heat wave. The explanation for
how and why journalists contributed to the naturalization of the disaster
is more complicated, but the answer lies in the conditions of production
in the journalistic ¢eld, including not only the commercial interests
and motives of the ¢eld, but also (and relatedly) the routines and
dispositions of journalists themselves.
The local media initially considered the heat wave to be a trivial story
and covered it with light features such as one about the di¤culty of
¢nding air conditioners, but when the mortality levels began to rise the
press shifted its coverage to the story of the deaths.74 Yet the immedi-
ate visibility of the crisis did not prevent Mayor Daley from attempting
to conceal or de£ect attention away from the city's morbid condition.
Daley, holder of the mayorship his father had made the throne of
machine politics, had won his seat in 1989 on the grounds that, ``We
can't close our eyes to [Chicago's] problems any longer. Being account-
able starts in City Hall. Because the responsibility for managing the
city lies with the mayor ... I won't wait until disaster strikes.''75 But
under the heat he changed his message. Refusing to acknowledge that
the city had failed to protect the health of its citizens, Daley, who had
neglected to issue a Heat Emergency Warning and to activate several
possible emergency procedures during the city's deadliest week, groped
wildly for alternative explanations or scapegoats he could blame for
causing the crisis.
Confronted with early reports of the soaring death rates, Daley's initial
response coupled denial with naturalization. ``Every day,'' he lectured
the press, ``people die of natural causes. You can't put everything as
heat-related.... Then everybody in the summer that dies will die of the
heat.''76 His skepticism was a challenge not only to the empirical
connection between the weather and the overload at the morgue and
in the hospitals, but also to the medical and scienti¢c credibility of
Dr. Edmund Donoghue, whose tenure as the county's chief medical
examiner long outdates that of the mayor and whose professional
reputation is outstanding. Public denial thus proved an untenable,
even embarrassing, o¤cial position for the city ^ especially when the
body count mounted and Dr. Donoghue, told of Daley's criticisms,
defended his claim to the media and received the support of his
colleagues in the ¢eld. ``The mayor is entitled to raise questions,'' the
medical examiner explained diplomatically, but ``If anything, we're
underestimating the number of heat-related deaths.''77
273

Having failed with his ¢rst explanation, the Mayor corrected himself
with a new tactic: ``I am not questioning anybody dying,'' he next
asserted, and ``I'm not insensitive,'' yet if the deaths were linked to the
heat, he insisted, they were not related to the city's policies for handling
the situation.78 Instead, Daley claimed that two other parties were
liable for the disaster. First he sounded a populist appeal, citing
Commonwealth Edison, long a target of citizen scrutiny and discon-
tent because of its near-monopoly on utilities provision, for its inability
to maintain power supplies when they were most needed. ``My o¤ce
has been in touch with Commonwealth Edison throughout this power
failure, but I'm not happy with their response.'' In fact, he threatened,
the utilities provider might be in violation of its franchise agreement
with the city and therefore liable for damages.
His next move, however, was an attack on the very constituency that
has long given him their support. Invoking the bi-partisan logic of
personal responsibility now ubiquitous within the American political
¢eld, Daley and his administrators blamed the victims of the heat
waves themselves, as well as their families and friends, for failing to
take care of themselves and each other. It is not the government, Daley
and other city o¤cials explained, but individuals who ensure their
survival under extreme conditions. The heat wave deaths, in other
words, were caused by behavioral de¢ciencies rather than structural
conditions or political failures. ``We're talking about people who die
because they neglect themselves,'' argued Daniel Alvarez, the city
Commissioner of Human Services. ``We publicized common sense
ideas, what the mayor was saying, drink plenty of water. These are
people who don't read the newspapers, who don't watch television'';
and Daley cautioned that ``we need to be sure seniors do not become
victims of their own independence.''79 The city government, the mayor
claimed, ``did all it could,'' and Alvarez added that ``We did everything
possible, everything possible.'' Sheila Lyne, Chicago's Health Commis-
sioner, made the point most emphatically: ``We acted in an emergency
alert. Get that straight. We did it all.''80 With scapegoats established
and the city government vindicated, the Mayor and his sta¡ closed
their defense of the city government by re-naturalizing the disaster.
After all, the city's line concluded, the government cannot be held
responsible for the heat.81
The truth, of course, is that the city government's many critics never
argued that the city should be held responsible for the heat ^ only for
the response to it, which was notably poor. But by representing the
274

criticisms of their response to the heat wave as manifestly ridiculous
and capitalizing on the broader cultural notion that personal responsi-
bility determines individual well-being, city o¤cials managed to shield
themselves from public scrutiny, deny liability for the deaths, and
obscure what might have been the disaster's most obvious lesson: the
simple fact that when government fails to secure the basic welfare of its
citizens external forces beyond its control (such as the weather) can be
uncontrollably dangerous.
During the heat wave, the frame of the ``natural disaster'' provided the
city government with a perfect vehicle for de¢ning the event in an
explicitly non-political and commonsensical vocabulary with which its
constituency and other observers would be comfortable and familiar.
In addition, the debate over the death attribution kept journalists and
residents focused on the question of whether the disaster was, in fact,
real, long enough to de£ect a public debate on the patterns of the
deaths. As Erving Go¡man explains, an event that is framed as natural
is seen as inevitable, impossible to redirect, let alone prevent. ``Success
or failure in regard to [natural] events is not imaginable; no negative or
positive sanctions are involved. Full determinism and determinateness
prevail.''82 The natural frame through which public o¤cials explained
the heat wave deaths accounts for why the disaster, an unplanned
accident in the scheme of news stories, did not produce the revelatory
e¡ects that Harvey Molotch and Marilyn Lester's theory of public
events predicts. Molotch and Lester argue that during accidents, ``event
makers [such as public o¤cials] are initially not ready and thus the
powerful could give uncoordinated, mutually contradictory accounts.''
Unforeseen crises, then, tend to ``foster revelations which are otherwise
deliberately obfuscated by those with the resources to create routine
events.''83 During the heat wave, Chicago event makers did indeed
provide uncoordinated, contradictory, even inaccurate accounts of the
deaths, and the local media o¡ered moderate criticism of these slip-
pages.84 Yet the discourse of the natural disaster as well as the public
debate over the accuracy of the medical examiner's death attributions
allowed political o¤cials to manage their misstatements and prevent
the catastrophe from exposing what Molotch and Lester would consider
the hidden order of the city. The frame itself prevented most Chicagoans,
including most journalists who covered the disaster, from penetrating
through the o¤cial debate to the social determinants of the crisis.85
The naturalizing frame, however, only partly explains why Mayor
Daley's political reputation survived the crisis so well. Given Mayor
275

Bilandic's political demise in the aftermath of the blizzard, the question
^ which should be accompanied by the reminder that disaster manage-
ment was not the only issue in Bilandic's mayorship86 ^ remains: how
is it that a natural disaster that kills hundreds of residents is less
politically damaging than a disaster whose most signi¢cant e¡ect was
to block roads, stall public transportation, close schools and busi-
nesses, and restrict movement in the city? The answer is, in part, that
the blizzard was much more damaging to Chicagoans with political
clout than the heat wave, which, while killing hundreds, had almost no
impact on elites and did relatively little harm to businesses.87 By dis-
abling the transportation infrastructure on which modern Chicago has
been built, the blizzard produced major damage for the city's businesses
and trapped many residents in their homes and neighborhoods.88 The
most public and scandalous of Bilandic's blunders was his decision to
speed circulation on the elevated train lines by cutting o¡ service to the
city's black neighborhoods. This move earned Bilandic charges of dis-
crimination and weakened his support among south side blacks (but
not among west side blacks, whose support he retained). More impor-
tantly, though, Bilandic's failures contributed to his unpopularity
among white ethnic neighborhoods on the city's northwest side, where
in the election he lost to Jane Byrne by 13,000 votes, and in the white
liberal community along the lakefront, where Byrne beat him by 21,000
votes.
The second reason that Bilandic's foibles were so politically damaging
is that the local press mercilessly criticized Bilandic for his mismanage-
ment of the crisis. The ChicagoTribune played a particularly important
role in reporting on the mayor. The paper made special investigations
into Bilandic's administration and exposed corruption in an organiza-
tion that had been awarded contracts to develop a snow removal plan.
After Bilandic announced the successful clearing of public lots that he
planned to open for parking, thereby clearing the streets, a team of
Chicago Tribune investigators discovered that the lots remained un-
cleared and published a story that represented the mayor as the perpe-
trator of the city's real ``snow job.'' During the heat wave, the local
press was less critical of Mayor Daley's performance. Even Chicago
Tribune journalists report that several of their editors believed the
mayor's claims that the heat wave deaths were not, in fact, related to
the heat. The local press did not spare City Hall entirely in its report-
ing, but the major papers and television stations did less to uncover the
hidden story of the disaster than they had in earlier years.
276

Local media and the symbolic construction of catastrophe
The few citizen groups and political activists who did challenge the city
government's version of the heat wave story and use the accident to
expose a hidden social order had few resources to help them make their
case. Overwhelmed by the power of local o¤cials to explain and
memorialize the disaster for the urban community, grass-roots groups
struggled to mount a powerful counter-narrative in a contest where
words were weapons and interventions pointing to social inequality
and state incompetence threatened to disrupt the urban regime. Metro
Seniors in Action, an organization of some 10,000 low- to middle-
income elderly Chicagoans, forged one of the strongest e¡orts to rep-
resent the disaster to the city, yet while their spokespersons received
some attention from the major media their analysis of the event never
emerged as a serious challenge to the dominant representations of the
week. Their own newspaper, the Metro Senior, published two front-
page stories, entitled, ``Heatwave Ravages Seniors, Daley Passes Buck,''
and ``The Mysterious Disappearing Senior Citizen Police Unit,'' in
which sta¡ writers editorialized about the city government's role in the
deadly week. One month after the heat wave, the journal's lead article
opened: ``We will never forget the summer of 1995. The summer that a
heat wave killed more people than the Chicago ¢re and the Oklahoma
City bombing combined.... (T)hese deaths were preventable, and our
city o¤cials' attempt[ed] to de£ect criticism by blaming the victims
themselves.... Fortunately Metro Seniors was on hand to set the re-
cord straight ... Metro Seniors told the true story. The city could have
done more. A LOT MORE.''89 Though the paper was read almost
exclusively by group members, it stands as testimony to the e¡orts of
community-based organizations to inscribe an alternative history of
the event onto the record, as well as to their limited ability to accom-
plish this re-writing.
For both small groups such as Metro Seniors and major political
institutions, the key to establishing an interpretation of the heat wave
deaths was to gain access to the major commercial media, whose
ability to produce and provide the most information about the city, as
well as the categories and classi¢cation in which this information is
framed, enable them to dominate the public life of the metropolis.90
Although there was considerable variation in the coverage among
di¡erent local media and even within individual news ¢rms,91 the great
majority of the media coverage failed to establish the political deter-
minants of the heat wave deaths, contributing, instead, to the natural-
277

ization of the disaster. The two most prominent sociological theories of
media production, which I'll characterize roughly as political economy
and organizational,92 would suggest two di¡erent explanations for why
local journalists covered the event as they did. The political economy
theory of the media would explain either that the coverage was natu-
ralized because the political implications of the story would have
damaged the interests of media owners or their allies, or that it took
its shape largely because the commercial imperatives of the news ¢rms
led journalists to write for a mass audience that had less interest in the
political sociology of the event than in the more sensational elements
of the story. The organizational theory would explain that the heat
wave story was de-politicized because the internal culture of major
news ¢rms is mostly a-political, and that vocational pressures speci¢c
to news workers make it unlikely that the social and political dimen-
sions of a story such as the heat wave will ¢gure prominently in news
coverage. While both of these theories account for some of the heat
wave coverage, neither of them adequately explains the local media's
representations of the disaster.
The problem that both conventional theories of media production
share is that they fail to recognize that the conditions of journalistic
production that determine the content of journalistic work include
both the external pressures on the journalistic ¢eld from political and
economic imperatives, and the internal pressures from the organiza-
tion of news production.93 There is a strong relationship between the
internal structure of news organizations and the position of the news
¢rms in the broader political economy, and these relations are best
conceptualized in a sociology of the media that attends to the connec-
tions between external and internal determinants of news production
rather than emphasizing one at the expense of the other.
In Chicago, the media reconstructed the heat wave as a naturalized
disaster because a complex set of pressures speci¢c to the journalistic
¢eld recon¢gured the event through the act of journalistic production.
Four important conditions of the ¢eld best account for the coverage of
the event. The ¢rst is the commercial nature of the major media, which
impels each organization to construct stories that appeal to their mar-
kets. Stories must be consumable, which means that they must appeal
to common sense, they must deliver to paying readers news that they
want to read. In the heat wave, this meant that coverage focused on the
spectacular rather than the social features of the event, that the cover-
age was more narrative than analytical, and that the complex processes
278

that killed residents were rendered simply. Second, the symbiotic and
often personal relationships between journalists (particularly beat re-
porters who cover local politics) and public o¤cials privileges politi-
cians with unmatched power to explain public events and makes
criticism of these o¤cials a risk for reporters, who fear damaging their
connections.94 During the heat wave, public o¤cials used this power to
de¢ne the event, and even when their statements proved manifestly
untrue they had ample opportunity to explain why they had erred and
provide alternative explanations for the deaths. Third, journalists
themselves are trained to write for their market, and they are unlikely
to have any special skills for analyzing a complicated event such as
the heat wave or for understanding the sociological structure of the
disaster.95 As increasingly elite professionals, they are also unlikely to
have special knowledge of the conditions of urban poverty that were so
important in the heat wave. In fact, their social status, training, and
work experience make it likely that they will exoticize and misrepre-
sent the low-income neighborhoods.96 Finally, the routines and pres-
sures of journalistic production, including the short time available for
research, reporting, and writing, make it di¤cult for journalists to
establish systematic analyses of disasters such as the heat wave.
The story of the coverage at the Chicago Tribune, which provided a
considerably more sophisticated view of the heat wave than the major
television news programs, illustrates the blend of internal and external
or commercial pressures that in£uenced the heat wave coverage. The
Chicago Tribune's reporting of the event began lightly, with journalists
writing articles about topics such as how women could remain fashion-
able in the heat, and printing story leads such as ``Stop your whining.
So what if it got up to 97 degrees on Wednesday, tying the record. Even
though tens of thousands of Chicago-area residents probably su¡ered
through the ¢rst day of an anticipated week-long heat wave, for many
others,Wednesday's weather was just a walk in the park,''97 even as the
¢rst Chicagoans were dying of the heat. When an editor recognized that
the mortality rates were unusually high, he sent a group of reporters
into the streets to get descriptions of the death spots, but, he explained,
when the bodies started to over-¢ll the morgue it became clear that
``the scene was at the medical examiner's o¤ce.''98
The morgue became a focus of the paper's reporting not because it was
the most important aspect of the heat wave, but because it ¢t the
journalists' own profession's criteria for ``good copy'': it was sensational,
dramatic, human, graphic, and therefore visually powerful, unusual,
279

extreme.99 Moreover, unlike the scattered deaths in low-income neigh-
borhoods with which most reporters are unfamiliar, the scene at the
morgue was centralized and easy to cover: journalists could wait at the
morgue and the news ^ in the form of dead bodies ^ would come to
them. Perhaps most importantly, though, the scene fascinated the
reporters themselves. It introduced novelty and excitement into their
own work routines and thereby quali¢ed as a major story for the news
because it was a major event for the news reporters. Commercially, the
mass of dead bodies at the morgue made for an eminently salable
spectacle, thereby adding an additional commodity value to the event.
Altogether, then, forces speci¢c to the journalistic ¢eld turned a socially
and politically trivial feature of the heat wave into the symbolic and
material center of the event.
If the paper's production team was careful to construct a sensational
story of the bodies at the morgue, it was less concerned with explaining
the conditions and patterns of the heat wave deaths. It is not that the
paper failed to provide information about the demography of the
deaths. In fact, unlike all of the other news media, the major news-
papers published rough maps of the deaths (albeit arranged only by
sociologically meaningless zip codes, and never with connections to
the social and economic characteristics of high-death areas) and lists
of the names and ages of many of the deceased (albeit not with any
adjoining sociological information, such as ethnoracial status or
neighborhood). ``We didn't do a lot of charts and statistical data,'' one
editor explained, ``because we were covering it as a human interest
story and a medical science story ... we were looking for good story
telling'' more than systematic knowledge.100 But even the most socio-
logically driven stories failed to provide serious analysis of the deaths,
and some of them even distorted the truth of the disaster. The headline
of one article about the dead, for example, claimed that ``Casualties
of Heat Just Like Most of Us: Many Rejected Any Kind of Help,''
thereby obscuring not only the characteristics of the victims but the
processes that killed them. According to one of the copy editors re-
sponsible for the headline, they chose it ``to broaden the appeal of the
article to readers and get them into the story,'' not because it accurately
represented the death trends.101 Below, the text, which might have clari-
¢ed the structure of the event, reported that ``In the stream of bodies,
numbers and questions, the victims of this natural disaster slid quickly
into anonymity.''102
280

After the heat wave, though, one senior editor who was dissatis¢ed
with the paper's coverage of the disaster used his seniority and his
popularity to convince the lead editors of the paper to allow him to
organize a team of reporters to do a major story of heat wave victims,
one that would provide pro¢les of their lives and deaths as well as
establish a more systematic analysis of the disaster. It would be a huge
project, one that was totally unusual for the paper (and possible mostly
because of the editor's status). The editor's plan was to use about eight
reporters, each of whom he would send into a neighborhood in which
there were a large number of deaths, to learn everything they could
about the people who died. For the special project, the reporters would
be able to break out of the standard conditions of production and to
take the time that they otherwise never have to learn and write about
the event. The reporting, they hoped, would produce pro¢les of roughly
one-quarter of the dead, which they would use for a major story about
the disaster.
The editor got his reporters, and over a three-week period they pro-
duced a large number of pro¢les, although not as many as he had
planned. In addition to the pro¢les, they obtained an exhaustive list of
the dead from the medical examiner, which they used to map the
deaths, and, although the reporters lacked sociological or statistical
training, amidst ``a whole lot of numbers and statistics that in them-
selves re£ected certain facets of the heat wave but didn't point to any
absolutes,''103 they discovered that ``most of the deaths were in poor
areas of the city.''104 With the help of another of the more experienced
Chicago Tribune editors, a long-standing advocate of civic journalism at
the paper, the team developed a standard questionnaire for reporters
to use in their interviews about the deceased. They were convinced that
they had a major story on their hands, and they wanted to make sure
that the reporting for the project would help them see whatever patterns
of death there were to ¢nd. When the reporting was over, they had a
huge amount of information about the victims and they were prepared
to write a major piece.
But before they began writing they ran up against the business interests
of the paper, which ultimately determine whether a story is news-
worthy. ``By the time we got done [reporting],'' one reporter recalls, ``it
was September, and it was a very serious decision as to whether people
were still interested in this story.'' Originally supportive of the project,
the editors now worried that the story would not work. ``There was a
perception that our readers didn't care....When it starts to become fall
281

or winter in Chicago how many people are going to read about a
summer thing?''105 Ultimately, the top editors decided that not many
of them would. Despite the large amount of resources they had com-
mitted to the project, they decided that rather than printing the major
story they had planned they should run only a short narrative about
the deaths followed by about eleven short vignettes about individuals
who died. The ¢nal story, which was based on a draft that was never
¢nished because the author was on vacation, contained no systematic
analysis of the deaths and showed little evidence of the extensive
reporting that went into it.106 O¡ the record, one editor reported being
``extremely disappointed'' with the ¢nal product. ``We could have had
a fantastic story,''107 a reporter lamented, but good reporting and a
deadly crisis of historical proportion were not enough to make the
news valuable.
The heat is o¡: The everyday state of urban emergency
Two weeks after the deadly heat wave the weather challenged the city
again. On July 29 another heat wave, less severe than the ¢rst in both
intensity and duration, moved into Chicago, but this time local o¤cials
implemented and executed an emergency plan powerful enough to
stem the damage. Contradicting its own public position that the govern-
ment cannot take responsibility for securing the health and welfare of
its citizens, the city spent several million dollars a day on emergency
services: it opened seventy cooling centers and extended hours at
beaches and public pools; assigned ¢ve times more senior police units
and state employees to check on seniors than it did during the ¢rst heat
wave, and sent public health o¤cials to nursing homes; developed a
system for coordinating emergency health care services; brought in a
sta¡ of nearly two-hundred to contact the vulnerable residents it could
identity by phone and opened emergency lines to handle calls about the
heat; and worked with local media to broadcast heat emergency warn-
ings, encourage families and neighbors to check on one another, issue
instructions on how to ``beat the heat,''and list procedures for handling
heat-related illnesses. There is no telling how many lives these programs
saved, but after the second heat wave abated the city reported only two
heat-related deaths, a decrease in mortality that suggests not only how
e¡ective the state can be when it works actively to secure the health of
its residents, but also the extent to which the deaths in the ¢rst heat
wave were politically over-determined. Of course, the response to the
second heat wave was exceptionally strong only because local o¤cials
282

feared a reprise of the disaster that, at two weeks old, remained in their
memories. Without this unusual condition it is unlikely that the city
government would provide the resources necessary to overcome the
state of poverty and fear that endangers Chicago's residents or the
poverty of the state that renders its everyday social supports so insu¤-
cient.
By the summer of 1996 the city was even better prepared for such
catastrophes: pamphlets about heat risks were everywhere in the city
and the media broadcast public warnings often; the local government
established a registration system allowing any Chicagoan to request
phone or personal contact during all weather-related emergencies and
even maintained a World Wide Web site devoted exclusively to the
threat of heat;108 the Department of Public Health was working to
develop a system for coordinating emergency medical services and the
Department on Aging was expanding its network of vulnerable seniors
and using its impressive number of senior community centers to educate
participants about seasonal survival strategies. Chicago has at least
learned how to handle the heat during isolated emergencies, and it is
unlikely that another heat wave will prove so disastrous for the city
again.Will something else?
It seems likely, if only because a jubilant discourse of local prosperity
and urban revitalization has taken hold of the city, rendering the
extreme poverty of the most marginalized areas all the more invisible
precisely at the moment when welfare ``reform'' pulls the meager safety
net from beneath the poor. The irony of Chicago's elaborate heat
emergency plan is that, although it enables the state to treat the symp-
toms of future weather disasters, its neglect of the built environmental
and morphological conditions that create such dangerous urban life all
but ensures that the everyday crisis, the slow death, the normalization
of collective insecurity in the most impoverished and stigmatized
neighborhoods will continue. Adept when it comes to handling the
heat, the city government is far less capable of dealing with the poverty,
isolation, and insecurity that make the weather so dangerous.
The heat wave is now becoming a central part of Chicago folk-lore,109
but much of the popular discourse on the event lacks the insights into
the structure of the city that the disaster might have exposed. If the
heat wave's mythical obituary conceals the very processes that pro-
duced its e¡ects, though, the story of its largest funeral speaks its
deepest truth. For far from being ``the great equalizer,'' the deaths of
283

the Chicagoans for whom no one cared only reinforced and made
permanent the degradation of their lives.110 At the end of August,
1995, over a month after the week of death had passed, the bodies of
forty-one heat wave victims remained unclaimed at the morgue, leav-
ing the city to care for them. On August 25, Chicago buried these
neglected corpses, along with twenty-seven other unclaimed bodies in
the city, in a row of plywood boxes marked only by medical case
numbers and yellow paper tags tacked onto the side. A Catholic priest
who helped o¤ciate the funeral ^ which was so brief that two of the
ministers invited to participate arrived minutes late and missed it
entirely ^ found the discordance of the gruesome event in a city brim-
ming with pride and anticipating renewed international praise too
much to bear. ``You always hear about mass burials around the world,
in war and disaster,'' he lamented. ``And this was home. This was
Chicago.'' Yet there was no one, save a few reporters and a smattering
of curious bystanders, to witness the city dispose of the remains, and
now they have settled into the earth without stirring up much attention
at all. The large grave, which is over 160 feet long, has no tombstone,
no sign, nothing to show that the bodies buried therein testify to the
expendability of life on the margins of a major American metropolis at
the close of the millennium. For the city, the presence of the mass,
anonymous grave matters little: almost no one is interested in a reminder
of what is otherwise so easy to forget.
Acknowledgments
A large group of friends and colleagues have helped me not only to
analyze the disaster, but also to alleviate the human di¤culties of
researching and writing about an event as traumatic as the heat wave.
Foremost among them are the numerous Chicagoans, from all areas
and institutions in the city, who shared with me their experiences in
and thoughts about the disaster. I thank them for their countless con-
tributions to the study. This article, and the larger project on deprivation
in Chicago from which it stems, is much stronger thanks to the com-
ments and suggestions of Manuel Castells, Kimberly McClain DaCosta,
Barbara Epstein, Claude Fischer, Sam Kaplan, Michael Rogin, Mart|¨n
Sanchez-Jankowski, Jillian Sandell, Nancy Scheper-Hughes, Margaret
Weir, and Kate Zaloom. A special note of gratitude goes to Lo|«c J. D.
Wacquant, who has taught me the principles of sociological vision that
guide this research and has supported this project ^ with remarkable
energy and enthusiasm ^ at every stage of its development. I also thank
284

the Theory and Society Editor whose extensive comments pushed me
to clarify many points in the analysis, and Suzanne Lagershausen,
who helped make the maps. The research has been supported by the
Jacob Javits fellowship program of the U.S. Department of Education,
a National Science Foundation graduate fellowship, and a research
grant from the Humanities Division of the University of California,
Berkeley.
Notes
1. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ``Heat-Related Illnesses and
Deaths ^ United States, 1994^1995,'' Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 44/
25 (1995): 465^468.
2. The heat index measures both temperature and humidity, which together deter-
mine how a typical person experiences the heat. It is analogous to the wind-chill
factor, which measures experienced cold during the winter. Scientists have long
associated high temperatures in cities with the urban ``heat island'' phenomenon,
but only recently have some environmental scientists found that much of the
modern warming of the earth takes place at night.
3. Excess death rates measure the number of deaths for a given period of time in
relation to the baseline death rate. The Chicago Department of Public Health
reported 739 excess deaths during the week of the heat wave, 696 excess deaths for
the month of July. Note furthermore that Chicago's mortality rates did not dip in
the months following the heat wave; the heat, then, did not (as some initially
conjectured) simply kill people who would have died soon thereafter anyway.
According to Whitman and his colleagues, heat-related death rates measure the
absolute number of cases in which examiners attributed mortality to one of these
criteria: ``1) a measured body temperature of 4105³F (440.6 ³C) before or
immediately after death; 2) evidence of high environmental temperature at the
scene of death, usually greater than 100³F; or 3) the body was decomposed and
investigation disclosed that the person was last seen alive during the heat wave and
that the environmental temperature at the time would have been high.'' Steven
Whitman et al., ``Mortality in Chicago Attributed to the July 1995 Heat Wave,''
American Journal of Public Health 87/9 (September, 1997): 1515^1518.
4. Here I use ``logic'' to refer to the structure and course of the disaster as well as to
the social order of the city, since it is the latter that largely determined the former.
5. Among the major statements in this discussion are Peter Marcuse, ``What's So
New About Divided Cities?'' International Journal of Urban and Regional Research
17/3 (1993): 355^365; Peter Marcuse, ``The Enclave, the Citadel, and the Ghetto:
What Has Changed in the Post-Fordist U.S. City,'' Urban A¡airs Review 33/2
(1997): 228^264; Lo|«c J. D. Wacquant, ``The Rise of Advanced Marginality: Notes
on its Nature and Implications,'' Acta Sociologica 39 (1996): 121^139; Douglas
Massey, ``The Age of Extremes: Concentrated A¥uence and Poverty in the
Twenty-First Century,'' Demography 33/4 (1996): 395^412; and Manuel Castells,
End of Millennium (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998).
6. There are several reasons to think that these conditions are not unique to Chicago,
and in fact the heat wave provided some of them. Milwaukee, about one-hundred
285

miles away, experienced 91 heat-related deaths during the week. As in Chicago,
this mortality level cannot be explained by the heat alone.
7. Whitman et al.,``Mortality in Chicago Attributed to the July 1995 Heat Wave,'' 1517.
8. City of Chicago, Mayor's Commission on ExtremeWeather Conditions (November,
1995).
9. See the list of participants in the Mayor's Commission on Extreme Weather Con-
ditions, 38.
10. The most signi¢cant and impressive scholarly study of the heat wave, authored by
a team of researchers from such prestigious public health research centers as the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and the Epidemic Intelligence Service and
published in the July 11, 1995 edition of the New England Journal of Medicine,
clari¢es many of the crucial public health lessons from the event but does little to
show the social and political processes that made some areas of the city more
vulnerable than others. The well-funded case-control study, conducted by a large
team of researchers, matches 339 relatives, neighbors, or friends of heat wave
victims with 330 controls according to neighborhood and age to determine the
major risk factors for dying during a heat wave. The results of the study are
important for helping public health workers and policy makers identify and assist
vulnerable populations: they found that there were fewer deaths among people
who had a working air conditioner, access to an air-conditioned lobby, or ability to
visit another place with air conditioning; and a higher risk of deaths among people
who lived alone, on the top £oor of a building, in apartment houses, in single room
occupancy dwellings, in homes with a small number of rooms, who had less access
to public transportation, and who were socially isolated. The study, which opens
with the claim that ``Hot summer weather cannot be prevented; however, morbidity
and mortality related to summer heat can be reduced,'' no doubt makes a great
contribution to the e¡ort to achieve this. What it does not do, though, is illustrate
the conditions that make communities, rather than individuals, susceptible to
health disasters. In focusing on individuals and ¢nding controls for each subject
within his or her own neighborhood, the authors of the study provide only a
partial analysis of the heat wave's e¡ects. Their methodological approach leaves
the di¡erences between ``community areas'' invisible, displaces social inequality
from the center of the story, and shows only implicitly the relationships among
poverty, race, neighborhood conditions, political power, and death. See Jan Semenza
et al., ``Heat-Related Deaths During the July 1995 Heat Wave in Chicago,'' The
New England Journal of Medicine 335/2 (1996): 84^90.
11. In this article, I draw upon several months of ¢eld work in Chicago; over forty
interviews with city residents, public o¤cials, social service providers, and jour-
nalists who covered the disaster; statistical studies and reports from the census,
the Chicago and Illinois Departments of Public Health as well as from the Cook
County O¤ce of the Medical Examiner; a survey of television and newspaper
accounts of the week; and historical studies of the city's low-income neighborhood
to analyze the heat wave deaths.
12. As the Chicago Public Health Department study notes, the less dangerous weather
does not alone account for the di¡erences in mortality rates. The new forms of
marginality I discuss, however, had become more severe by 1995 than they were in
the 1980s, when the isolation of seniors (see discussion below, especially the
analysis of senior public housing), the changes in the public health system (espe-
cially the privatization of service providers), the density of poverty, and the rate of
homelessness, which in turn changed the environment in the hotel residences (see
286

below), had not reached the levels that they would by 1995. See Massey, ``The Age
of Extremes: Concentrated A¥uence and Poverty in the Twenty-First Century,''
and Wacquant, ``The Rise of Advanced Marginality: Notes on its Nature and
Implications.''
13. The most widely known sociological account of a disaster, Kai Erikson, Everyting
in Its Path: the Destruction of Community in the Bu¡alo Creek Flood (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1976), points toward but does not establish the structure of
vulnerability that determined the deaths from the Bu¡alo Creek £ood. Erikson's
more recent book is more explicit about the importance of vulnerability in disas-
ters, but again it focuses on the experience of disasters and does not systematically
establish the human precariousness that makes them so damaging. Kai Erikson, A
New Species of Trouble: The Human Experience of Modern Disasters (New York:
WW Norton, 1994).
14. Perhaps the most familiar case in which the political economy and structural
morphology of vulnerability determined disaster mortality is the Titanic accident.
First class passengers, whose wealth allowed them to obtain positions at the higher
(and in this case safer) levels of the ship and gave them priority in the rescue,
survived at a much higher rate than passengers seated in lower class positions.
Passengers with the lowest class tickets su¡ered the highest mortality rates. Yet
wealth does not always protect against disaster damage. Note, for example, that
earthquakes in modern cities might be most disastrous for wealthy home-owners
who accept the risk of building expensive homes on mountain cli¡s, or that forest
¢res might a¡ect only residents wealthy enough to build homes in expensive,
greener areas, such as the Oakland and Berkeley hills. In these crises, however,
the order of assistance, organization, and reconstruction is often determined by
the wealth and political power of the communities a¡ected: more elite areas are
rebuilt and repaired much more quickly than disadvantaged areas. See William
Cronon, ``Introduction: In Search of Nature,'' Uncommon Ground: Toward Rein-
venting Nature (New York, NY: WW Norton, 1995).
15. See Emile Durkheim, Suicide (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1951); and Marcel
Mauss, ``A Category of the Human Mind: The Notion of a Person, the Notion of
a Self.''
16. Durkheim, Suicide, 105^121, see especially 107^111; Mauss, Seasonal Variation of
the Eskimo.
17. Mauss,``A Category of the Human Mind: The Notion of a Person, the Notion of a
Self,'' reprinted in M. Carrithers, S. Collins, and S. Lukes, editors, The Category of
the Person (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 1^25.
18. Robert Park, ``The City: Suggestions for the Investigation of Human Behavior in
the Urban Environment,'' reprinted in Richard Sennett, editor, Classic Essays on
the Culture of Cities (Englewood Cli¡s, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1969), 130.
19. For a theoretical appraisal of the Chicago school, see Andrew Abbott, ``Of Time
and Space: The Contemporary Relevance of the Chicago School,'' Social Forces 75/4
(1997): 1149^1182; Ulf Hannerz, Exploring the City (New York: Columbia, 1980).
20. For a useful overview of the political economy paradigm, see John Walton,``Urban
Sociology: The Limits and Contributions of Political Economy.''Annual Review of
Sociology 19 (1993): 301^320.
21. Pierre Bourdieu and Lo|«c J. D. Wacquant, An Invitation to Re£exive Sociology
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 112.
22. For his most recent analysis of the hidden e¡ects of the state, see Pierre Bourdieu,
The State Nobility (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1996).
287

23. See Pierre Bourdieu, Sur la Te¨ le¨ vision (Paris: Liber Editions, 1996); the collection
of essays on the media in Pierre Bourdieu, editor, La Misere du Monde (Paris,
Editions du Seuil, 1993); Patrick Champagne, Faire L'Opinion (Paris: Les Editions
de Minuit, 1990); Serge Halimi, Les Nouveaux Chiens du Garde (Paris: Liber Edi-
tions, 1997); and the special edition of Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales
101^102, (1994), which is devoted to the journalistic ¢eld.
24. See Andrew Szasz and Michael Meuser, ``Environmental Inequalities: Literature
Review and Proposals for New Directions in Research and Theory,'' Current
Sociology 45/3 (1997): 99^120.
25. Major early statements of this positions include US General Accounting O¤ce,
Siting of Hazardous Waste Land¢lls and Their Correlation with Racial and Eco-
nomic Status of Surrounding Communities, GAO/RCED^85^75 (Washington, DC:
Government Printing O¤ce, 1983); Commission for Racial Justice, United
Church of Christ, Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States: A National Report
on the Racial and Socioeconomic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous
Waste Sites (New York: Public Data Access, 1987); for a more recent sociological
study, see Robert Bullard, Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and Environmental
Quality, 2nd edition (Boulder: Westview Press, 1993); and for overviews of the
literature, see Szazs and Meuser (1997); Racquel Pinderhughes, ``The Impact of
Race on Environmental Quality: an Empirical and Theoretical Discussion.''
Sociological Perspectives 39/2 (1996): 231^239; and Eric Klinenberg, ``La Gauche
Ame¨ ricaine De¨ couvre la `Justice Ecologique,''' Le Monde Diplomatique, February,
1998.
26. Historian William Cronon has noted the possibility of doing this kind of work. He
argues that ``Every environmental disaster, all the way up to global warming,
stands as a potential indictment of the ignorant or culpable human actions that
contributed to it.'' William Cronon,``Introduction: In Search of Nature.''
27. See Wacquant, ``The Rise of Advanced Marginality: Notes on its Nature and
Implications,''and Castells, End of Millennium.
28. Thomas Noguchi and Joseph DiMona, Coroner at Large (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1985).
29. The Washington Post, April 12, 1996, A17.
30. U.S. Centers for Disease Control,``Heat-Related Mortality ^ Chicago, 1995.''
31. The Chicago Tribune, July 17, 1995, p. (2)5.
32. Chicago's concept of a ``community area'' was established more than ¢fty years
ago through the work of the Social Sciences Research Committee of the University
of Chicago, with the cooperation of local agencies and the United States Bureau of
Census. According to the authors of the Local Community Fact Book, the com-
munity areas were originally drawn on the basis of consideration such as: ``(1) the
settlement, growth, and history of the area: (2) local identi¢cation with the area:
(3) the local trade area; (4) distribution and membership of local institutions; and
(5) natural and arti¢cial barriers such as the Chicago River and its branches,
railroad lines, local transportation systems, and parks and boulevards.'' The com-
munity areas do not correspond precisely with Chicago's neighborhood and com-
munity structure. In fact they are arti¢cial constructions of social scientists and
bureaucrats more than they are organic categories known and used by city resi-
dents. Community areas are useful for comparing areas of the city mostly because
statistical data for them goes back several decades and allows for comparative and
historical analysis, and because census track data are sometimes too small to
reveal trends and tendencies in aggregated communities. There are now 77 com-
288

munity areas in the City of Chicago, with 1990 populations ranging from 6,828
(Near South Side) to 114, 079 (Austin), and averaging around 36,000.
33. St. Clair Drake and Horace Cayton, Black Metropolis (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993 (1945)); Arnold Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); Thomas Philpott, The Slum and the
Ghetto (Belmont, Cal.: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1978); William Kornblum,
Blue-Collar Community (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974); Gerald
Suttles, The Social Order of the Slum; Ethnicity and Territory in the Inner City
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968).
34. See Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto.
35. See Tiefu Shen et al., ``Executive Summary: Community Characteristics Corre-
lated with Heat Related Mortality, Chicago, Illinois, July, 1995,'' unpublished
manuscript.
36. Public health researchers often use census-level data for their studies, but in
Chicago it is conventional to use community areas as standard units of measure-
ment and the published studies of the heat wave have been based on community
area data.
37. See Steven Whitman, ``Mortality and the Mid-July Heat Wave in Chicago,'' pre-
sentation to the Chicago Board of Health (September 20, 1995); and Whitman
et al.,``Mortality in Chicago Attributed to the July 1995 Heat Wave.''
38. See, for example, the articles collected in George Peterson and Carol Lewis,
Reagan and the Cities (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 1986).
39. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce study of the heat wave, ``City
o¤cials had neither the experience nor emergency response capabilities to trans-
late the physical characteristics of the heat wave into human impact ... While
public health o¤cials made e¡orts to mitigate the impact of the heat wave within
their communities, neither [Milwakee or Chicago] was prepared to respond to the
heat emergency as a city-wide disaster.'' U.S. Department of Commerce, National
Disaster Survey Report: July 1995 Heat Wave (Silver Spring, Maryland: U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1996), viii^ix.
40. See Charles Perrow and Mario Guille¨ n, The Aids Disaster (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1990), for a discussion of the ways in which the least politically
powerful people with AIDS, poor people of color who were intravenous drug
users, were neglected by the organizations who managed the AIDS crisis. Perrow
and Guillen a¤rm a central claim of urban regime scholars, that lack of resources
makes poor and minority communities least able to mobilize the government to
support their needs, thus triggering a vicious cycle in which they are deprived
further and made even more politically expendable. For statements of this position
from urban regime theorists, see, among others, Clarence Stone, Regime Politics:
Governing Atlanta, 1946^1988, (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1989); and
Steven Elkin, City and Regime in the American Republic (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1987).
41. City of Chicago, Mayor's Commission on Extreme Weather Conditions.
42. Robin Hambleton, ``Future Directions for Urban Government in Britain and
America,'' Journal of Urban A¡airs 12/1 (1990): 75^94.
43. On the rise of decentralization and private sector management techniques in local
governments, see Hambleton, ``Future Directions for Urban Government in Britain
and America.''
44. ``Illinois Senate Public Health and Welfare Committee. Report of the Heat Related
Deaths in Cook County,'' (November, 1995), 3^4.
289

45. City of Chicago, Mayor's Commission on Extreme Weather Conditions, 4.
46. Interviews with social workers, Metropolitan Family Services, June 1996; and
M. Fleming-Moran et al., Illinois State Needs Assessment Survey of Elders Aged
55 and Over (Bloomington: Heartland Center on Aging, Disability and Long
Term Care, School of Public and Environmental A¡airs, Indiana University, 1991).
47. William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1987), 60.
48. Wilson's use of social isolation is troubling because he employs it to refer to a set of
social relations that sociologists can only understand by engaging in ethnographic
or detailed survey work, but his conception is in fact a derivation of the spatial
relations for which his 1987 book has evidence. ``Social isolation,'' in this formula-
tion, is descriptively inaccurate, as it actually means social contact with the wrong
people. Moreover, Wilson does not provide empirical evidence to show that iso-
lation from ``mainstream society,'' as distinct from spatial segregation by race or
class, state retrenchment, or corporate abandonment, is responsible for the decline
of work in the low-income black communities he studies.
49. Shen, Tiefu, et al., ``Executive Summary: Community Characteristics Correlated
with Heat Related Mortality, Chicago, Illinois, July, 1995.''
50. See Elijah Anderson, ``The Code of the Streets,'' Atlantic Monthly 273/3 (1994):
80^94.
51. See William Julius Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban
Poor (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1996); John Betancur, ``The Settlement Experi-
ence of Latinos in Chicago: Segregation, Speculation, and the Ecology Model,''
Social Forces 74/4 (1996): 1299^1324; Carloz Velez-Ibanez, ``U.S. Mexicans in the
Borderlands: Being Poor without the Underclass.'' In Joan Moore and Raquel
Penderhughes, editors, In the Barrios: Latinos and the Underclass (New York:
Russell Sage, 1993); Felix Padilla, Puerto Rican Chicago (South Bend: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1987); Susan Keefe and Amado Padilla, Chicano Ethnicity
(Albequerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1987).
52. See Betancur, ``The Settlement Experience of Latinos in Chicago: Segregation,
Speculation, and the Ecology Model,'' and Padilla, Puerto Rican Chicago.
53. See Alejandro Portes and Doug Macleod, ``What Shall I Call Myself? Hispanic
Identity Formation in the Second Generation,'' Ethnic and Racial Studies 19/3
(1996), for an illustration of the sociological vacuousness of the category, ``His-
panic.''
54. The ¢rst three parts of this scheme rely heavily on Carlos Ve¨ lez-Iba¨ ·ez's work
on low-income Mexican Americans in the borderlands, which provides a model
against which urban ethnographers can compare their own ¢ndings on other
communities.
55. See Moore and Pinderhughes, In the Barrios: Latinos and the Underclass.
56. See William Julius Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban
Poor.
57. The density of poverty, Douglas Massey argues in ``The Age of Extremes: Con-
centrated A¥uence and Poverty in the Twenty-First Century,'' matters because ``as
the density of poverty rises in the environment of the world's poor, so will their
exposure to crime, disease, violence, and family disruption.'' In another article,
Massey shows that the density of poverty has an especially powerful e¡ect on
crime rates. According to his estimates, every one point increase in the neighbor-
hood rate of poverty raises the major crime rate by 0.8 points. See Douglas
Massey, ``Getting Away with Murder: Segregation and Violent Crime in Urban
290

America,'' University of Pennsylvania Law Review 143 (1995): 1203^1232. Massey
also cites a study that uses Columbus, Ohio data to show that the violent crime
rate for neighborhoods with a poverty rate of over 40 percent is over three times
higher than it is in neighborhoods with a poverty rate below 20 percent. See
Laurence Krivo and Ruth Peterson, ``Extremely Disadvantaged Neighborhoods
and Urban Crime,'' Social Forces 75/2 (1996): 619^650.
58. For the classic discussion of the politics of neighborhood identi¢cation and iden-
tity construction, see Albert Hunter, Symbolic Communities: The Persistence and
Change of Chicago's Local Communities (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1974). According to Hunter and Gerald Suttles, ``Residential identities ... are im-
bedded in a contrastive structure in which each neighborhood is known primarily
as a counterpart to some of the others.'' Quoted in John Logan and Harvey
Molotch, Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1987).
59. For classic statements of how street life is the vital link in social networks and the
source of community animation, see Suttles, The Social Order of the Slum, and
Herbert Gans, The Urban Villagers (New York: The Free Press, 1962).
60. The abundance of such visible markings supports Logan and Molotch's argument
that the contrastive structure of neighborhoods ``means that community resources
are desired not just to secure better material conditions, like nice parks, but to
display success compared to other neighborhoods seeking the same resources....
[I]t is ^ in a competitive market society ^ also a way of gaining access to other
rewards by establishing one's credentials, by demonstrating that one comes from a
good place.'' Logan and Molotch, Urban Fortunes, 107^108.
61. The description here is based on observation as well as the neighborhood summary
listed in The Chicago Community Fact Book, 110.
62. The degradation of street life in North Lawndale also represents a change from
the sociological account of Chicago's African-American neighborhoods in Black
Metropolis, where Drake and Cayton describe an active public sphere. According
to Wacquant, the most degraded neighborhoods in both the United States and
France have changed ``from communal `places' su¡used with shared emotions,
joint meanings and practices and institutions of mutuality, to indi¡erent `spaces'
of mere survival and contest.'' Wacquant, ``The Rise of Advanced Marginality:
Notes on its Nature and Implications.''
63. Lo|« c J. D. Wacquant and William Julius Wilson, ``Poverty, Joblessness, and the
Social Transformation of the Inner City,'' in Reforming Welfare Policy, edited
by David Ellwood and P. Cottingham (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1989), 91.
64. See Chicago Fact Book Consorium, 107; and Hirsch, The Making of the Second
Ghetto, 185.
65. This change in the social life of poor communities is all the more disastrous
because, as Logan and Molotch argue, the informal exchange of services and
assistance on which poor communities depend is ``made possible only by a viable
community,'' and ``poor people's use values are particularly damaged when their
neighborhood is disrupted.'' Logan and Molotch, Urban Fortunes.
66. See Laurie Kaye Abraham, Mama Might be Better o¡ Dead (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1993).
67. See Lo|«c J. D. Wacquant, ``The New Urban Color Line: The State and Fate of the
Ghetto in PostFordist American,'' in Social Theory and the Politics of Identity, ed.
Craig Calhoun, (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1994).
291

68. For the most thorough historical account of hotel residences, see Paul Groth,
Living Downtown (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994). For a recent
study of SROs in Chicago, see Charles Hoch and Robert Slayton, New Homeless
and Old: Community and the Skid Row Hotel (Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 1989).
69. Groth, Living Downtown, 9^10.
70. Groth, Living Downtown, 287^290.
71. The conditions in the worst SROs resemble the ``cattle-sheds for human beings''
described by Frederick Engels. Engels's remark that ``such a district exists in the
heart of the second city of England, the ¢rst manufacturing city of the world,'' has
an ironic resonance for the case of Chicago, America's own ``second city'' and
historical manufacturing center. See Frederick Engels, The Condition of the Working
Class in England (Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers, 1984).
72. In the SRO population census they conducted in 1984, Hoch and Slayton found
that 38 percent of SRO residents had serious illnesses, but only 42 percent had
health insurance. Hoch and Slayton, 127, 134.
73. As the city attracts attention for redeveloping Cabrini-Green, the downtown
public housing complex with the most potential to be converted into valuable real
estate, thousands of city residents living in unsafe conditions will remain neglected.
74. Interviews with Chicago journalists.
75. Chicago Sun Times, July 25, 1995: 25.
76. Chicago Tribune, July 25, 1995: (7) 1.
77. Chicago Tribune, July 20, 1995: 1; and Los Angeles Times, July 23, 1995: A1.
78. NewYork Times, July 21, 1995: IV, 2.
79. Chicago Sun Times, July 25, 1995: 25; The Washington Post, August 26, 1995: A1;
and Chicago Tribune, July 18, 1995: (2) 4.
80. Metro Senior, No. 93, September-October, 1995; Chicago Sun Times, July 18, 1995,
1; Chicago Tribune, July 18, 1995: (2) 4.
81. It is important to note that most environmental scientists would, in fact, challenge
even the argument that the government, as well as corporations, cannot be held
responsible for the heat on the grounds that global warming has produced not only
a gradual elevation of the earth temperature but hotter heat waves, more severe
droughts, and stronger storm systems. According to a U.S. Government study
directed by a member of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, there is a 90 to 95 percent likelihood that the emission of greenhouse
gases such as carbon dioxide is responsible for the increased incidence of extreme
precipitation, over-all precipitation, and above-normal temperatures in many
areas of the country from 1980 to 1994. Thomas Karl, leader of the research team
at the National Climatic Data Center con¢rms this in his report that ``we seem to
be getting these storms of the century every couple of years.'' These and other
scienti¢c studies show that in an era of massive environmental destruction not
even the weather is natural, and that government policies toward corporate and
private pollution have helped produce the hazardous weather systems that promise
to return with greater frequency in the future. See The NewYork Times, September
18, 1995: A1, and January 14, 1996: (4) 4.
82. Erving Go¡man, Frame Analysis (New York: Harper Colophon, 1974), 22.
83. Harvey Molotch and Marilyn Lester, ``News as Purposive Behavior: On the
Strategic Use of Routine Events, Accidents, and Scandals,''American Sociological
Review 39 (1974): 109^110.
84. According to my informants in the local press, many journalists, however, believed
292

the mayor's misleading claims about the deaths even after the medical examiner
made his medical attributions.
85. In the rare cases when this frame broke down, the dominant secondary frame ^
again established by local o¤cials ^ was what Go¡man calls the frame of ``fortu-
itousness,'' that is, when ``An individual [or group], properly guiding his doings,
meets with the natural workings of the world in a way he could not be expected to
anticipate, with consequential results.'' Go¡man, Frame Analysis, 33. As I noted
above, public health o¤cials have long been aware of the risk factors for heat wave
deaths as well as of the programs that they can employ to reduce these risks. Yet
local o¤cials worked hard to argue that no one could have expected such a strong
heat wave (or that it could not be responsible for the heat) and that the state's
response was proper. The history of the event thus supports Go¡man's argument
that the cultural notion of fortuitousness enables ``the citizenry to come to terms
with events that would otherwise be an embarrassment to its system of analysis,''
albeit with the important addition that the state is the key agent in the production
of this frame. Frame Analysis, 35.
86. For a thorough discussion of Bilandic's electoral loss to Jane Byrne, see Paul
Kleppner, Chicago Divided: The Making of a Black Mayor (DeKalb: Northern
Illinois University Press, 1985), chapter 5.
87. Some stores and businesses that lost their electricity, particularly those that
stocked frozen perishables, and local agriculture were more damaged by the heat
wave. Nonetheless, the overall e¡ect of the heat wave on business was less severe
than the blizzard.
88. For the best historical account of how business and commercial interests established
Chicago's built environment, see William Cronon, Nature's Metropolis: Chicago
and the Great West (New York: WW Norton, 1991).
89. Metro Senior, No. 93: 1^4.
90. See, among others, Ju« rgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public
Sphere (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1984), and Manuel Castells, The Power of Identity
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1997).
91. Newspapers, more than other media, tend to publish a broad set of positions on
political and social matters, many of which contrast and con£ict with one another.
Daily papers do this in part because they produce quantitatively more news than
other news media and they have su¤cient space and sta¡ to express several kinds
of analysis and description; and also because they are more open than other
media, particularly more than television, to the contributions of people outside
the ¢rm. These contributions generally take the form of editorial pieces, which are
prominent parts of the paper, but they may also come in the form of news articles
from free-lance reporters. During the heat wave, the local papers did present a
broader range of coverage than the other local media.
92. For the most known analysis of the political economy of news production, see
Noam Chomsky and Edward Herman, Manufacturing Consent (New York:
Pantheon, 1988); see also Phillip Schlesinger, ``From Production to Propaganda?''
Media, Culture, and Society II (1989): 283^306. For the best organizational study
of the news, see Herbert Gans, Deciding What's News (New York: The Free Press,
1979). Gans claims that most journalists in the major media he studied were
apolitical, or at least not politically driven. For other major organizational studies
of the news, see William Breed, ``Social Control in the Newsroom: A Functional
Analysis,'' Social Forces (May 1955): 326^335; Lee Sigelman,``Reporting the News:
An Organizational Analysis,''American Journal of Sociology 79/1 (1973): 132^151;
293

and Gaye Tuchman, ``Objectivity as Strategic Ritual: An Examination of News-
men's Notions of Objctivity,''American Journal of Sociology 77/4 (1972): 660^679.
Michael Schudson, ``The Sociology of News Production,'' Media, Culture, and
Society 11 (1989): 263^282, discusses the weaknesses of the distinct approaches to
the media, but he does not go so far as to suggest methods for integrating them.
93. The problem with organizational studies of media production is that the explan-
ation for why journalists report the news the way that they do does not lie com-
pletely within the news ¢rms themselves. News reporting, and the journalistic ¢eld
in general, is deeply a¡ected by the broader social, political, and economic context
in which it is located. Failing to recognize this is to fall victim to the internalist
fallacy, a trap into which cultural analysts often slip, which political economists
and structuralis social scientists often cite as the fatal myopia of ethnographic
research and organizational studies of the media. On the other hand, more struc-
turalist accounts of media production often fail to recognize that forces outside the
journalistic ¢eld a¡ect action in the ¢eld only through mediating forces internal to
the ¢eld itself. Claiming that news content, for example, is determined by condi-
tions in the ¢eld of the state or the economic ¢eld, is to commit the short-circuit
fallacy, the blindness to the intermediary mechanisms and channels through which
forces move from one ¢eld to another.
94. See Gans, Deciding What's News; Edward Sigal, Reporters and O¤cials (Boston:
Heath, 1973); Phyllis Kaniss, Making Local News (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1997).
95. Kaniss argues that local reporters are particularly incompetent at dealing with
numbers and statistical analysis, both of which are essential for establishing
patterns of heat wave deaths.
96. For an illustration of this misrepresentation in the French journalistic coverage of
the banlieu, see Patrick Champagne,``LaVision d'Etat,'' La Mise© re du Monde; and
for a discussion of the tendency to exoticize the ghetto, see Lo|«c J. D. Wacquant,
``Three Pernicious Premises in the Study of the American Ghetto,'' International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 21/2: 341^353. For the argument that
journalists themselves are becoming more elite and professionalized, and therefore
less connected to the social lives of average Americans, see James Fallows, Break-
ing the News (New York: Panthon, 1996). In an interview, one of the Chicago
Tribune journalists who covers urban poverty criticized his colleagues for their
weak and inaccurate coverage of poor neighborhoods.
97. ChicagoTribune,``If You Can't Stand the Heat,You Must Be Out-of-Towner,'' July
13, 1995. The headline for the article on fashion in the heat wave read, ``Gimme
Swelter! It's the Height of the Steamy Season, But the Heat Doesn't have to Sap
Your Style. Here's How to Ward o¡ Wardrobe Wilt and Makeup Meltdown.''
98. Interview with Chicago Tribune editor.
99. See Gans, Deciding What's News, and Bourdieu, Sur la Television, where Bourdieu
argues that journalists often select the details to include in stories not because they
are unusual and interesting in general, but because they are compelling for jour-
nalists' themselves.
100. Interview with Chicago Tribune editor.
101. Interview with Chicago Tribune copy editor. Note that the headlines serve as
marketing tools to hook readers as well as instruments for emphasizing particular
angles or aspects of a story. Copy editors produce them through an economic and
aesthetic logic that does not necessarily mirror the logic of the stories themselves.
102. The Chicago Tribune, July 18, 1995: (2) 1.
294

103. Interview with reporter.
104. Interview with reporter.
105. Interview with reporter.
106. The Chicago Tribune, ``The Heat Wave Victims: Joined in Death,'' November 26,
1995.
107. Interview with reporter.
108. Visit the site at: http://www.ci.chi.us/mayor/HotWeather/
109. ``Now and for the rest of our lives,'' says one member of Chicago's severe-weather
commission, ``we'll be telling our grandchildren about the summer of 1995. People
will be talking about this forever.''
110. For an analysis of the social and symbolic signi¢cance of funeral rituals and burial
conditions, see Nancy Scheper-Hughes, Death Without Weeping (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1992).
295