Vol. 11, No. 2 
                International Journal of Multicultural Education 
2009 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
Professional Book Review 
 
Payne, C., & Strickland, C. S., (Eds.). (2008). Teach Freedom: Education for Liberation 
in the African American Tradition. New York: Teachers College Press. 288 pp., ISBN: 
978-0807748725 (pbk). $29.95. 
 
Reviewed by Brian Williams, Georgia State University, U. S. A. 
 
In 2005, Civil Rights activist and former Student Non-violent 
Coordinating Committee organizer Robert Moses launched a campaign 
aimed at engaging the country in a conversation concerning the creation 
of a constitutional amendment that would guarantee a quality public 
school education for every child in the United States of America. The 
idea is rooted in traditions that define education as a civil right necessary 
for participation in the development, transformation, and maintenance of 
a democratic nation. Furthermore, it challenges current notions that 
characterize schools as institutional structures responsible for training and credentialing 
the majority of students for service in the labor market. The book, Teach Freedom: 
Education for Liberation in the African American Tradition, examines the historical and 
contemporary movements that undergird Moses’ idea.  
The book, edited by Charles M. Payne and Carol Sills Strickland, is a part of the 
Teaching for Social Justice Series edited by William Ayers and Therese Quinn.  In this 
anthology, various scholars, activists, and scholar-activists uncover the unique history of 
liberatory education in the African American community.  The book is presented in four 
parts which highlight different time periods in African American history after the Civil 
War.  Articles in the first part of the book, entitled “Projecting Imagination beyond 
Circumstance,” examine the role of the school and the African American teacher in the 
education of African Americans in post-Civil War America.  While brief, the articles in 
the part of the book provide the reader with a foundational understanding of the African 
American community’s intimate connection to education for liberation and philosophy 
which undergirded this type of education. 
Part two, entitled “Building the Army of Democracy,” introduces the reader to the 
Citizenship Schools and the work of fundamental women educators like Ella Baker and 
Septima Clark in the late 1950s and early 1960s.  The Citizenship Schools served as a 
subversive form of resistance to systems of oppression related to voting and democratic 
participation. The schools educated thousands of African Americans and dramatically 
increased the number of registered African American voters in the South at the time.   
The contributions in part three, “The 1960s: From Freedom to Liberation,” focus 
on the modes of liberatory education that occurred during the 1960s and 1970s. Authors 

Vol. 11, No. 2 
                International Journal of Multicultural Education 
2009 
 
 
2 
 
 
writing in this section examine the role of the Freedom Schools, the inspired movements 
and progressive pedagogy of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), 
and the emergence of the “Black Power” and the Black Panther Party Schools. These 
articles build on the book’s theme of education as a political enterprise. They also 
provide valuable insight into the philosophical differences that distinguished SNCC’s 
Freedom School from the Black Panther Party Schools. Regardless of the educational 
movement, however, the authors in the section underscore the value of “movement 
schooling” in the development of African American students who were aware of the 
nation’s oppressive structures and prepared to critique them. 
The fourth and final section of the book, “Sankofa: Looking Back to Look Forward 
– Contemporary Expressions of Education for Liberation,” examines contemporary 
models of liberatory education that are rooted in the African American tradition. The 
nine articles found in this chapter examine the complex ways in which today’s educator-
activists are using the lessons of the past to address the modern needs of the African 
American community. Each of the examples in this section of the book offers evidence 
of the resilience of this educational tradition over time. The programs explored in this 
section include the Sunflower County Freedom Project and the Children’s Defense 
Fund Freedom Schools. 
Teach Freedom is valuable reminder of education’s potential to serve the needs 
of oppressed people and inspire movements for social justice and active civic 
engagement.  The book offers a much needed counter-narrative to the standardization 
movement that currently drives educational policy and practice in the United States.  
This narrative is made even more powerful by the organization of the articles along a 
historical timeline.  By doing this, the book displaces the myth that liberation-inspired 
educational movements occurred in a disconnected fashion during distinct moments in 
the nation’s history. Instead, the reader is able to clearly trace the evolution of ideas 
from Reconstruction to the modern day as well as connect today’s educational 
movements to those that came before.  In effect, it replaces questions regarding the 
presence of educational movements in history with questions regarding the various 
models of educational movements in history.  In this way, the book inspires readers to 
consider the various ways that they might continue to enact education for liberation.