Factors contributing to changes in food practices 
of a black South African community  
OPSOMMING 
 
Merkbare veranderinge in die lewenstyl van die 
swart bevolkingsgroepe in Suid-Afrika is die afgelo-
pe vier dekades waargeneem. Voedselpraktyke as 
deel van lewenstyl het gevolglik ook verander. On-
langse publikasies waarin hierdie veranderinge ge-
rapporteer word, benadruk die voeding- en gesond-
heidsrisiko’s wat hierdie veranderinge tot gevolg 
het, en betreklik min aandag word gegee aan die 
veranderende voedselpraktyke wat daarmee ge-
paard gaan. Gevolglik is daar beperkte inligting oor 
die voedselpraktyke van die verskillende etniese 
groepe in Suid-Afrika bekend, aangesien die klem 
grootliks geplaas word op wat geëet word. Ten ein-
de sinvolle voeding-onderrig en -intervensies te kan 
deurvoer behoort daar ook insig en begrip te wees 
vir waarom mense eet wat hulle eet. 
 
‘n Studie met die doel om die huidige voedselprak-
tyke asook die betekenis wat aan voedsel geheg 
word, te verstaan, beskryf en verduidelik, is onlangs 
in die Mmotla gemeenskap, 55 km noordwes van 
Pretoria, uitgevoer. Een van die doelwitte van die 
studie was om die huidige eetpatrone (maaltydpa-
trone en -samestelling) te beskryf, asook hoe hier-
die patrone ontwikkel en verander het. In hierdie ar-
tikel word die eetpatrone van die Mmotla gemeen-
skap beskryf tesame met die redes waarom hierdie 
praktyke tans gevolg word, en dit word ook in ver-
band gebring met die gerapporteeerde voedsel-
praktyke in die literatuur.  
 
‘n Kwalitatiewe navorsingstrategie is gevolg en 
data-insamelingstegnieke soos fokusgroepbespre-
kings, individuele onderhoude en deelnemende 
waarneming is gebruik. Die vroulike inwoners van 
Mmotla was die teikenpopulasie en verskeie  etnie-
se groepe waaronder die Ndebele, Noord-Sotho, 
Tswana, Tsonga, en Swazi was verteenwoordig in 
die gemeenskap. Die onderhoude en besprekings 
is op band vasgelê en verbatim transkribeer, en 
aangevul deur volledige veldnotas. Die data-ontle-
ding is met behulp van die rekenaarsagtewarepro-
gram Atlas.ti uitgevoer, en die “grounded theory”-
benadering is gevolg.  
 
Die maaltydpatrone en -samestelling gedurende 
weeksdae en oor naweke is  weergegee. Die prose-
dure by die bediening van maaltye en die tipe voed-
sel wat tydens spesiale geleenthede en feesvie-
ringe bedien word, word uitgelig. Aspekte wat ‘n di-
rekte invloed op die huidige praktyke het, is voed-
selverkryging, toegang tot elektrisiteit, die beskik-
baarheid van inheemse groente, en die bekostig-
baarheid en beskikbaarheid van voedsel. Sosio-kul-
Annemarie T Viljoen, Priscilla Botha and C C Boonzaaier  
46 
turele invloede waaronder die invloed van die blan-
kes, gerief, die kerk, belangrikheid van etniese iden-
titeit, gesondheid en opvoeding blyk ook belangrike 
bydraende faktore te wees. Die bydraes van hierdie 
invloede op verandering van die tradisionele na die 
huidige 
praktyke 
word 
gerapporteer, 
en 
die 
belangrikste invloede blyk die onmiddellike om-
gewing (natuurlike sowel as mens-gemaakte), te-
same met ekonomiese en sosio-kulturele faktore te 
wees. . 
 
 
 
—  Mrs AT Viljoen 
Department Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria 
 
—  Prof P Botha 
Department Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria 
 
—  Prof CC Boonzaaier 
Department Anthropology and Archaeology 
University of Pretoria 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The South African society is in a process of radical 
change, and one of the greatest changes that have 
been observed is in the life-styles of the black popula-
tion groups, where a shift from the traditional life-style 
to a partially Western-oriented life-style is noticed. 
Food practices (including food choices and food con-
sumption patterns as well as food related behaviours), 
which can be considered as part and parcel of life-
style, are therefore also subject to change (Oltersdorf 
et al, 1999; Grunert, 1993). A gradual shift towards the 
Western-oriented diet by black South Africans has 
been reported over almost the past four decades 
(Bourne & Steyn, 2000; Labadarios, 2000; Labadarios 
et al, 1996; Van Eeden & Gericke, 1996; Bourne et al, 
1994; Crous & Borchardt, 1982; 1984; 1986; Manning 
et al, 1974; Lubbe, 1971; Leary, 1969; Oudkerk, 
1965). These changes can be attributed amongst oth-
ers to migration, urbanisation, acculturation, education 
and economic development (Walker & Charlton, 2001; 
Labadarios et al, 1996; Walker, 1995; Bourne et al, 
1993). 
  
Gradually the indigenous African people of South Af-
rica upon contact with Western-oriented societies not 
only adopted some aspects of the Western food sys-
tem, but also adapted and changed their traditional 
food practices with their increased exposure to West-
ern foods. This interaction with the Western-oriented 
 

47 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 
food ways resulted in a process of “Nutrition in transi-
tion” (Bourne & Steyn, 2000; Nestle et al, 1998; 
Labadarios et al, 1996; Walker, 1995; Bourne et al, 
1994; Bourne et al, 1993). An unfortunate characteris-
tic of nutrition transition is that people become 
“acculturated into preferring and consuming a diet 
high in fat” (Nestle et al, 1998). Popkin (1994) raised 
the same concern with regard to the “shift in the com-
position of diets” in developing countries that shows a 
tendency towards an increased consumption of satu-
rated fat, sugar and refined foods – with a resultant 
lower fibre intake.  
 
These undesirable outcomes of acculturation and ur-
banisation usually culminate in increased mortality 
and morbidity rates as a result of chronic non-
communicable diseases typically associated with the 
Western 
life-style 
(Walker 
& 
Charlton, 
2001; 
Labadarios et al, 1996; Walker, 1995; Bourne et al, 
1993). It is expected that the occurrence of these de-
generative diseases will continue to rise and an in-
creased burden will be placed on the public health 
services in South Africa (Labadarios et al, 1996; 
Walker, 1995; Bourne et al, 1993). A strong emphasis 
is therefore placed on the investigation into the nutri-
ent content of the diets of the different population 
groups and the composition of risk profiles for chronic 
non-communicable diseases among the different 
South African population groups. 
 
The recent South African studies quoted above, how-
ever, only reported on the nutrient content of the diets 
and the health consequences of these diets for spe-
cific groups in the South African population.  The cur-
rent knowledge base on the food practices of the 
South African population as a whole, is however still 
fragmentary. Current research mainly deals with what 
is consumed, i.e. meal composition, meal patterns and 
the nutrient content thereof, and results with regard to 
the food practices in South Africa therefore predomi-
nantly provide information on what some sectors of 
certain population groups eat. 
 
To be able to deliver meaningful nutrition education 
and intervention programmes as well as effective con-
sumer facilitation to all South Africans, a thorough 
understanding of why people use and consume the 
food they do is also needed. To be able to better un-
derstand the reasons for food choices an in-depth 
knowledge of the food choice processes and food 
practices is needed (Croll et al,  2001; Paisley et al, 
2001; Reynolds et al, 1999; Falk et al, 1996). Knowl-
edge of the socio-cultural, historical, and demographic 
factors contributing to these is also advisable for a 
holistic approach (Nestle et al, 1998). In this regard, 
South African researchers also recommended a holis-
tic approach that would include a sound knowledge of 
the food habits of the different population groups for 
successful nutrition interventions in South Africa (Van 
Eeden & Gericke, 1996; Bourne et al, 1993).  Since 
these recommendations were made, limited research 
was initiated or reported, in reputable journals on the 
South African population. There is therefore a real 
need to investigate the factors that may contribute to 
changes in the food practices of the different South 
African population groups.  
A study with the overall goal to understand, describe 
and explain the current food practices and the mean-
ings attached to them, was undertaken amongst se-
lected members of a black South African community 
residing in a densely populated area 55 km north-west 
of Pretoria, in the vicinity of the Tswaing Meteorite 
Crater. One of the objectives of this cross-cultural 
study was to determine the current eating patterns 
(meal patterns and composition of meals) of this group 
and how and why these have developed or changed 
over time. In this article the current eating patterns in 
this community will be reported and placed into con-
text with the reported changes in the food practices of 
black South Africans as reported in literature, and 
possible explanations for the changes will be offered.   
 
 
RESEARCH DESIGN  
 
A qualitative research strategy was followed employ-
ing various qualitative research techniques in this ex-
plorative, descriptive and explanatory study to reach 
the set research goal and objectives.  Focus group 
discussions, individual interviewing, participant obser-
vation and selected techniques from the Participatory 
Rural Appraisal (PRA) methodologies were used as 
data collection techniques. These techniques were 
considered appropriate to answer the research ques-
tions as formulated, and were chosen to complement 
and reinforce each other and to aid in triangulation. 
Each technique as such provided the means to view 
the problem from a different point of view (Babbie & 
Mouton, 2001:275; Strauss & Corbin, 1998:11; Trollip, 
1995; Miles & Huberman, 1994:438).  
 
Food practices are complex and multidimensional, 
and as such necessitated that the data collection be 
conducted in two phases. During the first phase of the 
data collection, the aim was to get acquainted with the 
participants, their current food practices and the struc-
tural environment of the village. The structural envi-
ronment included aspects of the natural and man-
made physical environment, political influences, eco-
nomic situation and the available technological re-
sources of the village. To become familiar with the 
research setting, techniques from the PRA method, 
focus group discussions (FGDs) and participant ob-
servation were employed. The second phase dealt 
with data collection on the socio-cultural environment 
and the personal domain of the participants, which 
was done by means of individual interviewing. 
 
Gaining access 
 
Access to the community was gained through a col-
league who was involved in a beadwork income-
generating project in the community. A negotiating / 
introductory meeting was held with the members dur-
ing which the aim of the research and the research 
procedure were explained to them. 
 
Sampling 
 
Target population     Female residents in the Mmotla 
community were the target population.  The population 
composition consists of various ethnic groups, such as 

 
the Ndebele, Tswana, Northern Sotho, Tsonga and 
Swazi. Although the Mmotla community is composed 
of various ethnic groups, all the informants were fluent 
in Tswana, which is used as the local language. Al-
though they were fluent in Tswana, most informants in 
this study could be described as having low literacy 
skills.   
 
Sampling technique      The sampling technique as-
sociated with qualitative research is that of non-
probability sampling (Babbie & Mouton, 2001: 166; 
Neuman, 2000:196) and, as explained by Neuman 
(2000:196), the purpose of non-probability sampling is 
“… to collect specific cases, events, or actions that 
can clarify and deepen understanding”.  This sampling 
technique is therefore less concerned with representa-
tiveness and deals more with the relevancy of the 
chosen persons to the research topic (Flick in Neu-
man, 2000:196). Other authors such as Hammersley 
and Atkinson (1995:45) and Miles and Hubermann 
(1994:30) also refer to the importance of matching the 
cases with the research problem of a study. Babbie 
and Mouton (2001:288) explain that a smaller sample 
may often be used in the interpretative research para-
digm because “sampling is often purposeful and di-
rected at certain inclusive criteria rather than random”. 
 
Different techniques of sampling were employed for 
each phase of the data collection and different criteria 
were set for selecting informants in each of the 
phases. In the first phase, FGDs were used to 
“explore” and become acquainted with the community 
and to gain an understanding of the life-world of the 
informants (De Vos & Fouché, 1998:81), to get a 
broad overview of the food practices of the commu-
nity, and lastly to determine to what extent modern 
and traditional food practices were followed. In the 
second phase, various individual interviews were con-
ducted with “thoroughly enculturated” (Spradley, 
1979:47-51) informants, because the objective was to 
gain greater and deeper insight into the traditional and 
modern food practices of this community. 
 
Selection of informants     Four FGDs were held 
during the first phase of the data collection. Three 
groups comprised adult females, and the fourth group 
consisted of grade 11 and 12 school girls. Volunteers 
who were available on the weekdays that the re-
searcher could visit the village formed the first group. 
During the first phase of the data collection and spe-
cifically the FGD with the first group, the researcher 
tried to “keep the collection process open to all possi-
bilities” –  according to the guidelines of Strauss and 
Corbin (1998:206). This implied that, when sampling 
during the initial phase of a study, the researcher 
should be “open to those persons, places and situa-
tions that will provide the greatest opportunity for dis-
covery”.  In the first group, informants represented all 
the major ethnic groups residing in the village. For the 
second and third focus groups, purposive or judge-
mental sampling, as described by Babbie and Mouton 
(2001:167) and Neuman (2000:199), was employed. 
This was done to ensure that the informants engaged 
in the focus groups complied with criteria that were set 
according to the aims of the FGDs. 
   
The criteria set were to include informants from all 
ethnic groups in the community, and the sample was 
therefore selected purposively to include specialists 
and laypersons from all the major ethnic groups resid-
ing in the community (Turner, 1967:27-43). Specialists 
were able to supply more objective and comprehen-
sive information, while laypersons were able to relate 
action-field information from their own subjective view-
point as informants in rituals and ceremonies. Care 
was taken to include specialists such as izinyangas or 
zangomas (traditional healers) and older females, 
especially those who still adhere to traditional beliefs 
and practices, as well as those who have knowledge 
of earlier social customs. Ordinary people who are 
knowledgeable on traditional customs and food prac-
tices and who still participated in traditional rites and 
ceremonies were regarded as laypersons. To be able 
to ensure that sufficient data on the traditional and the 
modern food practices were captured, the aim was to 
include young as well as older adult females, as well 
as more educated and less educated persons. The 
focus group with eight schoolgirls was formed to get 
the younger females’ perspective on the traditional 
and the modern food practices. It was decided to in-
clude this age group of 16-18 years because at this 
age, young people already have established ideas 
about their food habits and food preferences and are 
able to communicate them (Story et al, 2002; Wood-
ward et al, 1996; Ton Nu et al, 1996).    
 
The adult informants were recruited from the income-
generating project and from learners who attended 
literacy classes for adults. Three focus groups were 
formed, with a total of 35 adult informants. The num-
ber of informants in each group who attended the dis-
cussions ranged from 8 to 12 informants per group. 
Between 9 and 11 focus group sessions were needed 
to cover all the topics with each of the three adult 
groups. After conducting FGDs with the three adult 
groups and the school girls, the researcher had a 
broad and general overview of the food practices cur-
rently followed in the community as well as the extent 
to which the traditions and customs of each of the 
ethnic groups represented in the focus groups were 
still practised. 
 
In the second phase of the study, the individual inter-
views were conducted to be able to gain a deeper 
understanding of the traditional and current food prac-
tices in this community. Six informants were identified 
as suitable interviewees for the individual interviewing 
on the grounds of their cultural knowledge and life 
experience. The non-probability technique of theoreti-
cal sampling was employed for the selection of the 
participants for the individual interviews. This type of 
sampling is indicated during the process of data analy-
sis when the grounded theory approach is used, and 
the rationale for the sampling is based on the emerg-
ing concepts transpiring during the data analysis that 
“have relevance to the evolving theory” (Strauss & 
Corbin, 1998:202). This implies that during the re-
search process the theoretical interest that develops 
or the new insights that are gained will guide or steer 
the decision of what data needs to be collected next 
and where the data could be collected (Neuman, 
2000:200; EM Schurink, 1998:254). 
48 

the participants. Data was collected through various 
techniques including looking, listening, enquiring and 
recording. The data collected obviously included the 
researcher’s interview transcriptions and field notes 
(observational notes, theoretical notes and methodo-
logical notes). Other material such as photographs, 
video recordings, newspaper articles, and other docu-
ments and artefacts produced by the informants or 
others, which were readily available in the field setting, 
were also collected, viewed, photographed or copied – 
with the permission of the informants, as advised by 
Jorgensen (in WJ Schurink, 1998:284). 
 
To further the holistic and contextual approach of this 
study, selected techniques of data collection from the 
PRA approach were also used to gather data. The 
PRA approach was developed to actively involve 
members from rural communities in data collection to 
enable researchers to explore the unique local knowl-
edge that indigenous people possess with regard to 
their own situation as well as the local context of the 
community (Collins, 1999:102). These techniques rely 
on the perspectives of the informants regarding their 
own situation and environment (Babbie & Mouton, 
2001:320). Data on the structural environment was for 
example obtained by using this technique.  As indi-
cated by Wetmore and Theron (1998), the researcher 
learns directly on site, and also face to face from the 
participants. Through this process local physical, tech-
nological and social knowledge was gained. These 
techniques have been found to be especially suitable 
for subjects who have a low literacy level or are illiter-
ate (Trollip, 1997). 
 
 
Individual interviewing      During the second phase 
of the data collection process, individual interviewing 
was used as data collection technique. The purpose of 
individual interviewing was to obtain the informants’ 
personal perceptions of their food practices and the 
meanings attached thereto, through carefully planned, 
semi-structured conversations. Although a list of topics 
were at hand to guide and remind the researcher what 
had to be covered in each interview, the list of topics 
was not used in a prescriptive manner. A degree of 
flexibility was maintained and the discussions were in 
the form of conversations. Each was adapted to pro-
mote the natural flow of the conversations, because 
the purpose was to obtain an in-depth understanding 
of some topics that were only broadly discussed in the 
FGDs with knowledgeable persons. It further provided 
the opportunity to delve deeper and “provide perspec-
tives that were underrepresented in FGDs”.  The indi-
vidual interviews also gave knowledgeable informants 
the opportunity to elaborate on topics that were not 
fully uncovered or explored in the FGDs (Morgan, 
1997:23).     
 
Following the advice of Falk et al (1996), all first inter-
views were based on the same interview guide. 
Guides for the second and following interviews were 
developed after transcription and preliminary analysis 
of the first interview, and were personalised for each 
informant. Emerging themes were covered in the sec-
ond and successive interviews.  
In selecting the sample for the FGDs and individual 
interviews the sample extensiveness was determined 
by how soon theoretical saturation and information 
redundancy was reached. 
 
Data collection  
 
Focus group discussions (FGDs)      Phase 1 of the 
data collection started with the FGD as the 
“exploratory technique”, because it was believed that 
this was an appropriate technique for this cross-
cultural study, through which the researcher would be 
able to get acquainted with the informants and be-
come familiar with the food practices followed by indi-
viduals and groups in the community. This approach 
was in line with Morgan’s (1997:22) recommendation 
that FGDs could be a good starting point for individual 
interviews where either the topic of discussion or the 
informants were unfamiliar to the researcher. It can 
also help in identifying individuals that would be suit-
able as informants in the individual interviews, be-
cause focus groups are useful to “reveal the range of 
the future informants’ thoughts and experiences prior 
to the first individual interview”.  
 
Apart from being an excellent data collection tech-
nique in exploratory studies or in studies where proc-
ess evaluation is important (Betts et al, 1996), the 
FGDs is also an effective technique to obtain data 
from adults with low literacy skills (Betts et al, 1996; 
Keim et al, 1999). Other advantages of FGDs relate to 
the cultural background of the informants and the type 
of data that can be obtained. In cross-cultural studies, 
FGDs seemed to be acceptable to cultural groups 
where a high premium is placed on group participa-
tion, because it seemed as if the informants were 
more at ease when they were interviewed in a group 
as opposed to individually. In this study this was the 
case in the beginning of the data collection phase. 
Trollip (1991:77) reported the same experience with a 
group of Ndebele women, and ascribed this to the 
cultural background of the informants, where the 
group and group participation was important, and ar-
gued that this could be a reason why this technique 
was also successful in her research. 
 
Participant observation and PRA     Through the 
process of participant observation, in which the re-
searcher adopted the role of peripheral member as 
described by Adler and Adler (1987:36-39), the re-
searcher had the opportunity to observe the infor-
mants in their own natural environment. The re-
searcher got involved in the life-world of the subjects 
by conducting the research in the natural environment 
of the informants, namely the village of Mmotla. Dur-
ing these visits, the researcher had to drive through 
the village to reach the informants and venues where 
the FGDs and interviews were conducted. This gave 
the researcher an opportunity to observe the infor-
mants in their natural environment and to enquire, 
observe and record data relevant to the research 
problem.  Data regarding the structural environment 
were mainly obtained by this technique and this in-
cluded data on the natural surroundings and available 
resources that had an impact on the food practices of 
49 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

 
Procedures during FGDs and individual interviews 
 
The duration of the focus group discussions and indi-
vidual interviews ranged from 90 to 120 minutes each. 
As a result of the language barrier between the re-
searcher and the informants, a male and female inter-
preter who were both fluent in English and Tswana, 
assisted the researcher in the data collection. The 
female interpreter performed the role of interpreter 
and facilitator during the discussions. The male inter-
preter also acted as scribe and took notes in English 
of the discussions between the informants that were 
mostly in Tswana. These notes then also served as a 
back-up recording of the main points that were dis-
cussed. This was valuable as some discussions were 
very lengthy and involved, and sometimes the inter-
preter left out or forgot something that was mentioned 
and it could then be retrieved and added. The re-
searcher directed the questions to the female inter-
preter who then posed the questions to the informants 
in Tswana. Exchanges between informants in the fo-
cus group were also in Tswana. This was then trans-
lated back into English for the researcher. The scribe 
also assisted from time to time at the request of the 
female interpreter to assist her with the translations 
and explanations. To guide the discussions, a semi-
structured interview schedule was used. Open-ended 
questions on specific themes and topics were typed 
out and copies were made available to the interpret-
ers. This helped and ensured that the interpreters 
understood the aspect that was under discussion and 
also aided in translating the probes / questions more 
accurately. Both the FGDs and the individual inter-
views were audio-taped.  
 
Transcriptions 
 
Verbatim transcriptions were made of the audio-taped 
FGDs and interviews. Impressions and observations 
from the researcher’s field notes and the notes kept by 
the scribe were added to the transcripts. An independ-
ent person, who was fluent in Tswana and English 
and who stood outside the context of the study, 
checked the transcriptions for accuracy as well as 
completeness of the translations.  
 
Data analysis 
 
The grounded theory approach of data analysis as 
outlined by Strauss and Corbin (1998:55-241) was 
employed, using the qualitative software package At-
las.ti. Data analysis continued throughout the study 
and the analysis procedures included open, axial and 
selective coding to identify the emergent themes and 
the relationships between the themes. Each new data 
set from each of the FGDs and the individual inter-
views were compared with the existing data. New 
themes that emerged and those already identified 
were used to compile aggregated descriptive summa-
ries of the practices and procedures as they related to 
the food practices of this community. These summa-
ries served as another form of data reduction and pre-
liminary analysis (Achterberg, 1988). The transcrip-
tions, field notes and observations were hereby put 
together in a more coherent, systematic and organ-
ised manner – thus contributing to a data set that was 
easier to handle and work from. 
 
 
FINDINGS AND INTERPRETATION  
 
Biographic profile of participants 
 
Thirty-five adult females (N = 35) participated in the 
FGD represented by the Ndebele (n = 17), Northern 
Sotho (n = 4), Swazi (n = 2), Tsonga (n = 6) and 
Tswana (n = 6) ethnic groups. Six females partici-
pated in the individual interviewing, of whom four were 
identified during the FGD.  The mean age of the par-
ticipants was 57 years and ranged from 25 to 76. 
Eight schoolgirls between the ages of 16 and 18 
formed a separate FGD to determine the younger 
generation’s food practices.   
  
Current food practices  
 
A description will be given of the meal patterns and 
the composition thereof as consumed on weekdays 
and weekends as reported by the participants them-
selves. This will be compared to the published litera-
ture on the meal patterns and food choices of the 
black South African population, to explicate the 
changes that have taken place during the past cen-
tury. Other related aspects to food practices such as 
the acquisition, preparation, storage and preservation 
of the food, as well as the serving of meals and cele-
brations will also be included. 
 
Current meal pattern and composition of weekday 
meals     The informants revealed that they ate three 
meals a day with in-between meal snacking during 
weekdays. The following meal pattern and composi-
tion was indicated: 
 
Breakfast      This meal can be described as a bread-
based meal for most. Tea and brown bread seemed to 
be popular. The brown bread was consumed as such 
or with either margarine, peanut butter, jam, egg or 
tomato-and-onion gravy as a spread or accompani-
ment. Alternatively a soft porridge prepared from ei-
ther maize-meal or sorghum-meal was enjoyed. This 
was served with milk and or sugar. 
 
In-between meals      Beverages such as tea, cor-
dials, milk or only water were often consumed. Fruit 
such as oranges and apples were also enjoyed as 
snack.  
 
Lunch     Some participants indicated that they would 
again only have bread for lunch, with an accompani-
ment as indicated for breakfast. It was explained that 
most people who work as well as some of those who 
stayed at home, had bread for lunch. However, others 
who worked or stayed at home, ate stiff maize-meal 
porridge with some kind of relish. The relish was either 
vegetable-based or protein-based. The following 
vegetable-based relishes were indicated: morogo 
(prepared from indigenous or wild greens), spinach, 
cabbage and potatoes or tomato-and-onion gravy or 
achaar. Summer crops, when available, such as Ma-
raca (an indigenous kind of summer squash) or maize 
on the cob were also mentioned as items on the sum-
50 

mer menu. The most popular protein-based relish was 
moatwana (also known as chicken runners – a stew 
prepared from chicken feet). Other relishes prepared 
from indigenous beans were also mentioned; how-
ever, these were only used when the ingredients were 
available.  
 
Supper     Stiff maize-meal porridge with a vegetable 
and/or protein-based relish was served at supper, the 
main meal of the day. The vegetable-based relishes 
were similar to those prepared for lunch and this 
seemed to be the general practice.  Offal products 
from either chicken or beef, mostly intestines, were 
frequently served on weekdays at this meal. It was 
revealed that meat such as beef or chicken could be 
included; however, this only happened occasionally 
during weekdays as this was served more often over 
weekends. Tea as beverage was often consumed 
after supper. 
 
Current meal pattern and composition of weekend 
meals     There was a noticeable difference between 
meals served on Saturdays and Sundays and those 
served during weekdays. A larger variety of items and 
more expensive foods seemed to be included over 
weekends.  
 
Saturdays     Breakfasts on Saturdays were reported 
to be similar to those served during the week and 
were either a bread-based meal or a soft porridge 
prepared from either maize or sorghum meal or oats, 
served with milk and/or sugar. The accompaniments 
with the bread, however, often included more expen-
sive foods, such as cheese and French polony. One 
participant indicated that, due to more time available, 
she often baked scones for breakfast on Saturdays. 
For the other meals on Saturdays, different kinds of 
foods than those consumed during weekdays were 
indicated. The move seemed to be away from the 
traditional-type to the more Western-oriented, easy-to-
prepare convenient food items. Some participants 
mentioned that lighter meals were prepared, and oth-
ers included more meat for lunch and or supper. 
Some indicated food that was easier to prepare such 
as pap and boerewors, rice and minced meat, or re-
ported that only two meals were prepared instead of 
three. Chips (French fries) was a popular dish for Sat-
urdays and was served with fish or formed part of the 
popular Spahtlo, a combination of bread, cheese, 
French polony and achaar.   
 
Sundays     Sundays are regarded as very special 
days and this was also reflected in the meals that 
were served. A similar pattern as indicated for Satur-
days and weekdays was followed for breakfast for 
those who ate breakfast.  Some however, did not eat 
breakfast due to religious prescriptions. The elaborate 
Sunday midday meal can be described as the culinary 
highlight of the week and this meal received much 
attention. In most households, rice and/or stiff maize-
meal porridge was served with chicken or meat (beef), 
and at least three different types of vegetable dishes 
and/or salads were prepared to accompany these.  A 
dessert of either jelly or canned fruit served with cus-
tard sauce or ice cream was usually included. Cold 
drinks such as cordials were enjoyed after lunch. In 
some households, enough food was prepared for both 
the midday and evening meals and the leftovers of the 
midday meal were then served for supper. In other 
cases, supper was a light meal of bread and tea. 
 
Historical perspective on the evolution of the  
eating pattern 
  
Compared to the traditional food habits of the black 
South African population, the above meal pattern and 
food choices indicate that marked changes have taken 
place from those reported in the literature. These 
changes have taken place gradually but it seemed to 
have gained momentum from the mid-1960s onward 
towards a more Western-oriented eating pattern and 
food choices. The determinants and influences con-
tributing to these changes as reported in the literature 
and explained by the participants in this study, will be 
explicated by giving a historical overview of develop-
ments and changes that took place during the last 
century.  
 
The available literature on the eating patterns re-
vealed that the eating pattern and the type of food 
consumed were very similar for all the different ethnic 
groups, although minor or subtle differences were 
noted.  A summary of the major changes in the eating 
patterns as reported in the literature is given in Table 
1 and compared to those currently observed in the 
Mmotla community. 
 
Meal pattern and composition     The general pat-
tern followed by all the groups reported in publications 
up to 1939 was that two meals a day was the norm 
(Turner, 1909:6; Osborn & Noriskin, 1937; Ashton, 
1939; Bryant, 1939:8). The first meal was enjoyed late 
morning between 11:00 and 12:00, while the second 
meal of the day was served after sunset around 17:00 
to 20:00. These meals consisted of the ground staple 
starch (maize) prepared into a stiff porridge served 
with a relish or side-dish. Researchers are not certain 
when exactly maize became the principle staple food, 
but it can be assumed that it must have been since 
the early 1900s as Turner (1909:6) already mentioned 
maize as an important staple grain. Other grain 
sources such as sorghum and millet were however 
also 
used 
extensively 
(Bryant, 
1967:271-272; 
Schapera & Goodwin, 1962:131). The type of relish 
consumed with the stiff porridge was either milk (fresh 
or sour), or a vegetable relish or legumes. The meal 
pattern and composition of these meals during the 
week and over weekends were similar.    
 
This meal pattern and composition seemed to have 
been followed by most groups up to the mid-1950s, 
when changes were first noticed with regard to the 
meal pattern and composition thereof (White, s.a.; 
Oudkerk, 1965; Walker, 1966). Evidence that the tra-
ditional pattern was still being followed, was however, 
indicated by others (Bruwer, 1963:108-11; Quin, 1964; 
Mönnig, 1967:188-192; Leary 1969). Reasons for the 
changes were given as urbanisation, and the in-
creased contact with Western-oriented ways through 
missionaries and in schools and through the employ-
51 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

52 
 
TIME PERIOD 
Early days 1909 – late 1930s 
Beginning of change 1960s up to mid-1990s 
Current pattern in Mmotla in 2003 
Number of meals 
2 
3 
3 
Weekdays     
  
Breakfast 
Soft maize-meal porridge with / without milk, or 
bread and tea 
Breakfast 
Soft porridge (maize-meal / mabele, with / without milk or 
sugar), bread with spread or eggs, tea 
First meal (late morning 11:00 
– 12:00) 
Stiff maize-meal porridge and 
relish* 
Lunch 
Stiff maize-meal porridge and relish*, or bread and 
tea 
Lunch 
Bread with spread and tea or bread with achaar and chips 
or stiff maize-meal porridge and relish (cabbage & pota-
toes, spinach, moatwana) 
Second meal (sunset, early 
evening, 17:00 – 20:00) 
Stiff maize-meal porridge and 
relish* 
Supper (main meal) 
Stiff maize-meal porridge and relish* 
Supper (main meal) 
Stiff maize-meal porridge with relish either vegetable-
based (morogo, cabbage, leputsi, spinach) or meat / 
chicken or beef offal or chicken offal 
Weekends   
Same pattern and food items as 
on weekdays 
Different pattern and food items than on weekdays 
 
Saturdays 
Breakfast and lunch : Stiff maize-meal porridge and 
relish* Saturday evenings. Fish & chips 
 
Sunday lunch Rice / samp (instead of pap), meat 
or chicken, vegetables and salads. Dessert : jelly / 
tinned fruit & custard 
Different pattern and food items than on weekdays 
 
Saturday (Meal pattern changed) 
Stiff maize-meal porridge and meat. Spathlo – Chips, 
achaar & bread, fish & chips 
 
Sundays 
Breakfast  Similar to weekdays 
Lunch Rice, mealie rice, potatoes and/or pap 
Chicken or meat (beef), vegetables (3 or more), salads, 
dessert: jelly & custard / tinned fruit / ice cream, cold 
drinks 
 
Supper Left-overs from lunch or bread and tea 
* Examples of relishes 
Milk (fresh or sour) 
Morogo 
Other vegetables and legumes 
* Examples of relishes 
Small quantity of meat / meat sauce or tomato-
onion sauce, or cabbage and potatoes or morogo 
References 
Turner, 1909 
Osborn & Noriskin, 1937 
Ashton, 1939 
Bryant, 1939 
Oudkerk, 1965 
Walker, et al 1992 
Manning, et al 1974 
Crous & Borchardt (1982, 1984) 
Brink & Boshoff, 1983 
Van Eeden & Gericke, 1996 
    
TABLE 1: 
COMPARISON OF EATING PATTERNS IN MMOTLA WITH THOSE REPORTED IN LITERATURE FROM 1909 UP TO THE MID-1990s  
 

ment of women as domestic workers in white house-
holds (White, s.a.; Walker, 1966). The opening of 
stores in the Reserve areas was another influencing 
factor and contributed to the introduction of Western 
food items in these remote areas. In this regard, White 
(s.a.) observed that the Zulu people in the Valley of a 
Thousand Hills in KwaZulu-Natal adopted three meals 
a day and that changes in food preparation methods 
were also evident, as spices and more fat were now 
used in the preparation of dishes. The introduction of 
“modern foods” such as white flour, white bread, 
sugar, sweetened condensed milk, sweets, cordials, 
tea, biscuits, buns and cakes, curry powder and chil-
lies, as well as the increased availability of machine 
ground maize products such as samp, mealie-rice and 
maize-meal, was reported by White (s.a.). Walker 
(1966) observed similar trends and admitted that, al-
though information on the dietary aspects of the black 
population was “relatively scanty” during this time pe-
riod, some modifications to the traditional diet was 
noted. The modifications to the traditional diet were 
attributed to climatic and agricultural conditions that 
were often unfavourable as a result of intermittent 
periods of drought, but were most of all due to in-
creased employment and cash earnings that enabled 
the people in the Reserves and rural areas to pur-
chase Western-types of food products. Those residing 
in urban areas had adapted to a partly Western diet 
and enjoyed three meals a day. With regard to the 
composition of these meals it was reported that al-
though maize-meal was still very popular, bread had 
now become one of the major sources of energy in the 
diet of the urban black person. An increased con-
sumption of sugar, meat and milk was also noted. 
Meat was now included at one or more meals a day. 
In this comparison between rural and urban people’s 
food consumption, Walker (1966) reported that the 
urban populations consumed more tea, coffee, soft 
drinks, fat and tinned foods than those in the rural 
areas.  
 
Urbanisation     The influence of urbanisation contin-
ued during the following four decades and became 
more prominent, as reported in various studies that 
were done amongst the different ethnic groups.  Oud-
kerk (1965), in a study on the dietary habits of urban 
black school children in Pretoria, also observed a 
Western eating pattern during the week, where the 
consumption of three meals a day was the norm and a 
different eating pattern during weekends was re-
ported. He reported that on Saturdays fish and chips 
were popular for lunch. On Sundays some reported 
that they had no breakfast and that lunch consisted of 
meat (usually beef), potatoes, samp or mealie-rice, 
accompanied by three or four vegetable dishes, and a 
dessert of jelly and custard was also enjoyed. For 
supper on Sundays, the leftovers of lunch were eaten 
together with stiff maize-meal porridge. Oudkerk 
(1965) found, similar to Walker (1966), an increased 
consumption of milk, the inclusion of meat at least 
once a day and that brown bread and maize products 
as well as beverages such as tea and soft drinks were 
popular.  The consumption of eggs was minimal, only 
13% of the study population (N = 576) used eggs once 
a week, while others indicated a less frequent use, 
and 46% indicated that they never used eggs. The 
use of fats and oils in food preparation was indicated 
as low (Oudkerk, 1965).  Manning et al (1974) con-
ducted a study in Guguletu near Cape Town and 
found similar tendencies with regard to the meal pat-
terns and the kinds of food items included in meals. 
 
During the 1970s and 1980s, the differences in the 
dietary pattern between the rural and the urban popu-
lation groups were still noticeable – as reported in the 
studies by Lubbe (1971) and Crous and Borchardt 
(1982, 1984, 1986). In the studies of Lubbe (1971) 
and Crous and Borchardt (1986), it was observed that 
in the rural Venda communities the traditional pattern 
of two meals a day was still followed. Crous and Bor-
chardt (1986) noted that the exceptions were in 
households with school-going children, where three 
meals were served and an early morning breakfast 
was included to provide for children who now had to 
adhere to set school hours. Maize-meal porridge was 
the staple food, and was supplemented with relishes 
prepared from either cultivated or wild greens. Al-
though popular, meat was seldom used as a relish 
and occurred only occasionally as a delicacy on the 
menu. Traditional beverages prepared from cereals 
were still used extensively and Lubbe (1971) ob-
served that only 3% of the rural participants (N = 266) 
drank tea, and that bread was consumed by only 2%, 
and when consumed it was not part of a meal but 
eaten as a between-meal snack. In the 1986 study by 
Crous and Borchardt, it was found that to a large de-
gree the pattern reported by Lubbe (1971) was still 
adhered to, with a few changes. Meat was still a 
scarce commodity and was only consumed a few 
times per month, as it was not readily available. Bread 
was regarded as a treat and was used in small quanti-
ties compared to maize-meal porridge, and when 
used it was usually as a supplement to the porridge in 
a meal. Consumption quantities were calculated to be 
530 g per person in a month (approximately 10 slices 
of bread). The preparation methods of the side-
dishes / relishes were modified in comparison to the 
traditional: increased quantities of salt, oils and fats as 
well as vegetables such as onions, tomatoes and 
potatoes when available, were added to the stewed 
green leafy vegetables. The degree of inclusion of 
Western-type foods seemed to depend on the avail-
ability and affordability of these items. 
 
The urban groups’ food consumption pattern in the 
above studies by Lubbe (1971) and Crous and Bor-
chardt (1984) could already be described as “semi-
Western”. Lubbe reported that two and three meals a 
day were consumed, while Crous and Borchardt 
(1984) found that three meals a day was the general 
norm in Atteridgeville near Pretoria for those who 
were employed, while those who stayed at home had 
two meals a day. In both these studies it was revealed 
that maize-meal was still the staple grain and that the 
meat consumption was considerably higher in com-
parison to what was reported for the rural communi-
ties. Although a vegetable-based relish was still con-
sumed daily, it now formed a minor part of the meal. 
Lubbe (1971) indicated that in the urban population, 
bread (mostly white bread) was consumed as a snack 
53 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

or as part of the early-morning meal. Crous and Bor-
chardt (1984) found that bread had become an impor-
tant breakfast item, as 96% of the participants re-
ported that brown bread was consumed at this meal 
due to its convenience. Accompaniments to the bread 
included margarine, jam, peanut butter, eggs and sour 
milk. Lunch was usually stiff maize-meal porridge with 
a relish of either meat or vegetables or insects or milk 
or sour milk. Bread was used to a lesser extent for 
lunch with similar spreads as indicated for breakfast. 
The main meal of the day was supper and this con-
sisted of either the popular starch or maize-meal por-
ridge or samp or mealie-rice or rice served with either 
a meat-based or a vegetable-based relish or fish. A 
tendency to follow a different meal pattern over week-
ends was noted by Crous and Borchardt (1984) and 
was confirmed by other studies in the Pretoria region 
(Crous & Borchardt, 1982; Brink & Boshoff, 1983).  
Fish and chips were often purchased for the Saturday 
evening meal and the Sunday midday meal was 
served as the main meal. This meal was reported as 
an elaborate meal consisting of meat or chicken 
served with rice as starch and accompanied by at 
least three to four vegetable or salad dishes, and end-
ing with dessert in the form of jelly and/or canned fruit 
with custard sauce. 
  
Changes in the type of beverage consumption were 
also noted. Lubbe (1971) reported a decreased intake 
of traditional beverages and the acquiring of the habit 
of enjoying Western-type beverages such as tea, cof-
fee, Milo and soft drinks. The frequent consumption of 
tea was also indicated in the study by Crous and Bor-
chardt (1984) where 95% of the participants indicated 
that tea was consumed regularly but mainly with 
breakfast. An increased use of flavourants such as 
salt, sugar, fats and oils and spices in food prepara-
tion, was noted. In a study by Crous and Borchardt 
(1982), similar trends with regard to meal patterns and 
types of foods were reported for the urban Pedis. 
 
In other rural communities, changes have also been 
reported due to influences from environmental 
changes such as improved infrastructure and socio-
economic circumstances due to employment opportu-
nities in urban areas. The study by Walker et al (1992) 
evaluating and comparing the consumption patterns of 
elderly black women in a community in the Magalies-
burg region in the former Western Transvaal in 1969, 
and again 20 years later in 1989, is probably a good 
reflection of what was happening in other similar 
South African black communities. Unfortunately, only 
the type of food consumed was given in this study and 
no mention was made of the meal patterns. The diet 
consisted of maize products as staple grain, brown 
bread, vegetables and fruit in season, and legumes. 
Dairy produce was consumed only occasionally and 
meat was included once or twice a week mainly in the 
form of intestines, chicken and polony. In comparison 
to 20 years earlier, it was observed that the consump-
tion of maize products had declined and that there 
was an increase in the bread consumption due to the 
improved distribution of bread to rural areas and its 
convenience factor.  An increase in fruit and vegetable 
consumption was noted with, however, the unfortu-
nate decline in the consumption of wild greens and 
legumes. No reason was given for this decline. Also 
noted was the increased consumption of sugar and 
fat. It was indicated that the diet of the rural poor 
blacks changed little from day to day and that all ate 
similar foods. The improved infrastructure and trans-
port system probably contributed to the observed 
changes, as it became possible to shop more fre-
quently in nearby rural towns.  
 
During the 1990s, a number of studies reported on the 
eating patterns of the black population in South Africa. 
Unfortunately, these studies did not give detailed infor-
mation on the meal patterns and in most cases re-
vealed only the overall impressions with regard to the 
consumption of certain food items. The trend of an 
increase in brown bread consumption was however, 
noted in a number of independent studies. Steyn et al 
(1990) compared the eating patterns of rural and ur-
ban adolescents of different ethnic groups in the 
Western Cape during 1985 and found that brown 
bread was more frequently consumed than stiff maize-
meal porridge in both the rural and urban black 
groups, although maize-meal was rated as a popular 
food item. In this study, the urban groups consumed a 
larger variety of food items than was the case in the 
rural groups. Two studies conducted in the former 
Homeland of Lebowa reported on the dietary habits of 
Pedi households.  Ladzani et al (1992) also found an 
increase in brown bread consumption and noticed the 
popularity of fish and chicken as relishes. Steyn et al 
(1993) in a study of Lebowa school children confirmed 
these results and reported that brown bread and 
maize porridge were regarded as staple foods. Brown 
bread and stiff maize-meal porridge together with fruit 
and eggs were the most popular items consumed at 
school. Large quantities of brown bread and maize 
were eaten with morogo, cabbage, chicken or tomato-
onion gravy, while white bread was consumed in 
smaller quantities. Tea was the most popular bever-
age. This study by Steyn et al (1993) confirmed the 
results obtained by MacKeown et al (1989) and 
MacKeown et al (1994) on the food intake of school 
children in the former Transvaal.  
 
In the BRISK study by Bourne et al (1993) in the Cape 
Peninsula, the conclusion was also drawn that there 
was a move towards the Western-oriented diet, with 
an increase noted in the consumption of meat, refined 
cereal and fat. In contrast to other studies conducted 
during this time, only 25% of this study population 
consumed three meals a day. The meal pattern was 
described as “erratic”, as almost half of the partici-
pants ate two meals a day and snacking “contributed 
considerably to the daily intake”. Van Eeden and 
Gericke (1996) in a study during 1992 amongst stu-
dent teachers in Home Economics from rural and ur-
ban areas in South Africa, reported that three meals a 
day with in-between meal snacking was the general 
pattern followed. The main meal of the day was 
served in the evening and most of the participants 
revealed that they followed a combination of the tradi-
tional and the Western-oriented dietary pattern and 
admitted a decreased consumption of traditional 
foods. In a study on the food habits of conscripts in 
54 
 

the former South African Defence Force during 1993–
1994, most of the participants from the black groups 
indicated that three meals a day were consumed and 
similar findings with regard to the Western-oriented 
food intake were reported (Viljoen & Gericke, 2001). 
 
Other related aspects to the current food practices 
 
Serving of meals     The informants in the current 
study indicated that the Western-oriented way of serv-
ing all the menu items on one plate – as opposed to 
the traditional custom of serving the staple grain in 
one dish and the side-dish or relish in another – was 
the practice followed in most households. Household 
members were now seated at a table during meals 
and ate together as a group. The traditional way of 
serving meals seemed to have fallen away, although it 
seemed as if a small minority still follow the old cus-
tom where different age and gender groups are 
formed during meals that then enjoy their meals to-
gether.  
 
Celebrations and special occasions     The older 
informants indicated that traditionally only the major 
celebrations that marked the different life stages such 
as name giving, initiation, weddings and funerals, 
were celebrated. Today a number of celebrations and 
special occasions have been added and in some fami-
lies, celebrations such as the name giving and initia-
tion have fallen away.  With regard to funerals, there 
seem to be other celebrations that are added and that 
are celebrated at some time after the death and fu-
neral of a person. For example, the end of the mourn-
ing period for a widow is nowadays marked by the 
celebration where “the black is taken off”, usually one 
year after the death of her husband. The erecting and 
unveiling of the tombstone has become an important 
social event and a big celebration is associated with 
this occasion. It is now also customary to celebrate 
birthdays, Christmas and New Year’s Day. Other so-
cial occasions and celebrations mentioned that have 
become important events are church conferences, 
baptism and night vigils – these however, seem to be 
closely associated with the different Church groups to 
which the informants belong.   
 
With regard to the type of food served at these cele-
brations and occasions, an interesting trend was re-
vealed. At the traditional celebrations the specific tra-
ditional dishes that were customarily associated with 
these celebrations were prepared and served side-by-
side with the “modern” more Western-type of foods.  
On the other hand, at the newer / more modern cele-
brations the common practice is to serve Western-
type foods. However, certain traditional dishes will 
always be served at any celebration – be it modern or 
traditional – and dishes mentioned were the traditional 
staple food of stiff maize-meal porridge, ting Mabele 
(sour sorghum porridge) and traditional beer.  The 
reason given for this was that men preferred these 
traditional dishes and that the satiety value of these 
was higher as compared to that of the modern food.   
 
Food acquisitions     Most of the informants are not 
in the position to cultivate any crops for own consump-
tion, as was the case before they settled in Mmotla. 
The natural environment of the village severely ham-
pered crop production due to amongst others the poor 
soil condition, the arid climate and the lack of water. 
Most households do not have piped water, with the 
result that water has to be transported in large plastic 
containers on wheelbarrows from central water points 
or from neighbours who have boreholes. In times of 
drought, wild greens are also not readily available in 
the veld to be gathered. Therefore most of the infor-
mants relied on what the local food markets had to 
offer.  
 
The basic food commodities are obtainable from the 
village shops. Two general dealers, a butcher, a bak-
ery, and a green grocer are centrally situated. A num-
ber of small “spaza shops” and street vendors are also 
scattered throughout the village. A “spaza shop” is 
usually operated in a suburb, sometimes in the yard of 
the owner (it can even be part of the house), and can 
be described as a small-scale “convenience store” 
where a limited number of basic food items such as 
bread, coffee, tea, sugar, condiments, toiletries and 
cleaning aids may be purchased. Most of the spaza 
shops sell fresh brown bread that is delivered on a 
daily basis early in the morning from big bakeries in 
Pretoria. The informally operating street vendors, on 
the other hand, offer a wide range of products: any-
thing from electrical appliances, jewellery, sweets, 
chips, fruit, vegetables and meat can be obtained from 
them.  
 
Although the basic food commodities are obtainable 
through these shops and vendors, they are expensive 
in comparison to the prices asked by shops in Pretoria 
and the nearby big centre of Mabopane. Some of the 
informants indicated that they have the means to 
travel by taxi or with their own transport to purchase 
some of the non-perishable foods in bulk on a monthly 
basis at Hypermarkets and big Supermarkets in either 
Pretoria or Mabopane. The only items purchased lo-
cally were the heavy items such as large bags of flour, 
maize-meal and sugar, and also the perishable items 
such as fresh meat, fruit and vegetables. The others 
however, have to solely rely on the more expensive 
items offered by the local shops and vendors. 
 
Access to electricity      Access to electricity and the 
subsequent ownership of electrical household appli-
ances have contributed to changes with regard to the 
preservation, storage and preparation methods fol-
lowed. The food preservation and storage methods 
seemed to fall into two categories. The indigenous and 
more traditional food items were still preserved ac-
cording to the traditional methods, whereas the other 
more modern Western-type of food items are pre-
pared, preserved and stored by means of the available 
modern technology. All the households in the village 
have access to electricity and most are in possession 
of electric stoves. Refrigerators, however, are owned 
by the minority and those who do not own one, often 
store some of their perishable commodities at relatives 
or neighbours who have refrigerators or deep freez-
ers. 
 
55 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

Although some of the indigenous vegetables were not 
always readily available due to drought or other obsta-
cles in cultivating them, these were still preserved by 
means of the traditional method of sun drying when 
they were in abundance. Other vegetables were 
stored in the refrigerator by those who have access to 
one.  Meat was not preserved by the traditional 
method of drying any more (Coetzee, 1982:165), but 
was frozen when they had large quantities. This was 
however, seldom the case. 
 
Preparation methods have also changed from the 
traditional to the more modern Western-oriented way 
of food preparation. In comparison to the traditional 
method of boiling meat and vegetable dishes, the fol-
lowing preparation methods were now common prac-
tice. Meat was fried in oil or grilled in the oven and 
more spices were added. Baked products such as 
scones, queen cakes, and a small cupcake-type of 
soft cake called “dikuku” were standard items that 
were baked and served at all special occasions and 
celebrations. 
 
Factors contributing to the current food practices  
 
The most prominent themes that emerged from the 
transcripts with regard to the reported changes related 
to the immediate natural and technological (man-
made) environments that determined and influenced 
the availability and affordability of food items. The 
other themes related to the socio-cultural environ-
ment, where the influence of the white people, the 
church and convenience were prominent themes. The 
other socio-cultural themes may be associated with 
the different generation groups in the sample. The 
older participants often mentioned health-related con-
sequences and ethnic identity, whereas the younger 
participants seemed to be more influenced by social 
status and education. 
 
Natural and man-made environments    Two factors 
from the natural and man-made environments that 
influenced the current food practices were the avail-
ability and the affordability of food. 
 
Availability    Availability seems to play a major role 
in the type of food that can be gathered, cultivated or 
purchased and this has a direct influence on the food 
that is chosen for consumption. The limited availability 
of indigenous vegetables and grain products was of-
ten mentioned as reason for not consuming these as 
often as had been the traditional custom. It was often 
mentioned that the lack of water was a big obstacle 
and the main reason why these crops were not culti-
vated. 
 
“Then that thing with struggling with the water, be-
cause they saw there is no water here to plant the 
traditional foods.” 
 
Other contributing factors were natural ecological fac-
tors such as the poor soil condition and climate. How-
ever, when the rainfall was good, indigenous green 
leafy vegetables will be in abundance in the veld and 
the gardens, and these will then be gathered in spring 
and summer to be dried and stored for winter months. 
 
* “Yes you see there is a drought this year, I always 
make at my place here, my place is very small, but it 
has always made a lot of morogo.”  
 
It was revealed that when the circumstances are fa-
vourable, some people cultivate indigenous crops and 
these will be sold to the community when available.  
 
* “…… they sell these things and we eat as in the 
olden days.” 
 
At times indigenous vegetables, especially legumes, 
are available from street vendors or at markets and 
sometimes these are bought in bulk from farms where 
they are still cultivated. The informants purchase 
these with great enthusiasm when they have the op-
portunity. 
 
  * “Other people bring these things here, you can 
bring legumes here and we buy it. One, two, three, 
finish!” 
  
“ Nowadays they buy these, there are some people 
who will go to the farm to buy in bulk and when they 
come here they sell to everyone.”   
 
It became clear that indigenous vegetables were still 
popular here, as in the rest of Africa (Grockowski et al, 
2003), and that the limited consumption of these items 
was mainly due to their not always being readily avail-
able. When people came to live in Mmotla they be-
came dependent on what the stores in the area had to 
offer, because they were not in a position to cultivate 
their own crops. They therefore had no option but to 
adapt their diet and to include the “modern food items” 
that were available in the local stores. 
  
Affordability     One of the other important themes 
that emerged from the discussions was money and 
the high food prices. The money available not only 
determined the kinds of foods that could be pur-
chased, but also the frequency thereof. This largely 
contributed to the current food pattern on weekend 
days that differed from those during weekdays.  Dur-
ing the week meat, for example, was not eaten on a 
daily basis and most of the participants indicated that 
they ate it at most three times a week, because it was 
too expensive to eat on a daily basis. Therefore the 
less expensive cuts of meat and more often offal prod-
ucts of chicken and beef (that is of course reasonably 
priced) would be included on a more regular basis. 
Crous and Borchardt (1984) and Ladzani et al (1992) 
reported similar trends with regard to meat consump-
tion. Another reason why more bread-based meals 
were consumed was related to the affordability of rel-
ishes. Food prices determined what was eaten with 
the stiff maize-meal porridge. Bread was often con-
sumed as a meal at lunch because no relish was 
needed or less expensive accompaniments could be 
served with it than would be the case when stiff maize-
meal porridge was prepared.  
 
 * “As now when the things go up [in price] and be-
come a little bit expensive, we don’t have any more 
56 
 

money to buy something to eat with the porridge in the 
morning or in the day [lunch] and again in the evening. 
Then we start to eat bread in the morning and during 
the day [lunch], and then in the evening we will eat a 
full meal.”  
 
The explanation for the different food and meal pat-
tern over weekends was that more money was avail-
able over weekends. Most labourers were paid 
weekly, on Fridays, with the result that more money 
was available to spend on food purchases over week-
ends. 
 
“… even Fridays are special because people get sal-
ary and they are happy because they got money and 
then they can buy anything they want to make them 
happy.” 
 
“Over weekends people come from work and then 
they have pay. So that is why they buy more food.” 
  
It was also explained that expensive items for break-
fast such as cheese and French polony were only 
consumed when money was available, and in most 
cases this would be over weekends.  Others, who 
received a monthly pension, or where the breadwinner
(s) in the household earned a monthly salary, indi-
cated that they purposely set money aside for those 
extra and or special food items for weekends. 
 
“… during the course of the week there is not enough 
money … and the other thing is that most of the peo-
ple who are working, get paid on Fridays. And those 
who get paid monthly they don’t want to waste it on 
food in the week.” 
 
The number of dishes prepared on a Sunday were 
determined by the amount of money available. 
 
 * “Then on Sundays if I have money left, I will buy all 
the vegetables.” 
 
“… the number of dishes will depend on the available 
money.” 
 
“However, if money is scarce bogobe and morogo will 
be eaten for Sunday lunch.” 
 
It became clear that certain items were only prepared 
and served when they could afford them, such as 
meat, dessert and cool drinks.  The reason why most 
celebrations and occasions were celebrated over 
weekends, and why even children’s birthday parties 
were postponed to weekends, was because more 
money was available to purchase the extra and spe-
cial foods needed for these celebrations. 
 
The former staple grain sorghum was still regarded as 
a special and important grain. However, as a direct 
result of its price, it was now prepared only on special 
occasions.  
 
“…. but it is just that mabele (sorghum) is so expen-
sive. The packages they are small, you can’t buy it in 
large quantities. Most people will say mabele is the 
first one [referring to preferred grain].” 
 
It became clear that in this community, food choice 
and consumption are severely restricted by high food 
prices. Van Eeden and Gericke (1996) also mentioned 
that the high cost of certain food items prohibited or 
restricted the consumption thereof in other black 
South African groups.    
 
Socio-cultural environment     Factors in the socio-
cultural environment that influence current food prac-
tices are the influence of white people, convenience, 
the influence of the church, ethnic identity, health-
related aspects, education and social aspects.  
 
Influence of white people     A prominent influence 
contributing to the observed changes in food practices 
was attributed to women who were employed as do-
mestic workers in white households. Here they ob-
served and/or were taught certain food preparation 
methods and were also introduced to the food eaten 
by white people. They admitted that they learnt new 
ways of food preparation as domestic workers in the 
white households and then copied the food prepara-
tion methods and even taught other relatives and 
friends the European way of food preparation. Prepa-
ration methods of meat, vegetables, and salads were 
mentioned as well as the baking of cakes, scones and 
bread.  
 
“Ja, she was working as a domestic [worker]. An old 
white lady taught her to cook.” 
 
This elderly woman could recall all the food prepara-
tion techniques she was taught while being employed 
as a domestic worker. She knew how to can fruit, cook 
jam and make butter and boerewors. She was taught 
how to bake and mentioned that she could bake 
bread, scones and cakes. Another 71-year-old partici-
pant who worked as a domestic worker for more than 
35 years, explained: 
 
“… changes started when she began working, be-
cause she saw how the white people prepared their 
food on Sundays and then when she was home for 
weekends once a month she bought some of the food 
they (the whites) were cooking and made it for her 
family.” 
 
A younger participant, who had never been employed, 
was taught by her sister how to cook certain dishes. 
 
“… but her sister learnt her a lot, because she used to 
work as a domestic [worker]. Then she learnt how to 
cook from her in the weekends when she came home. 
Then in the weekends she [the sister] will cook for 
them and serve the food at the table, and then she 
said the family must come and sit at the table, and the 
sister taught them how to use fork and knife.” 
 
The preparation methods of the indigenous vegetables 
have also been altered to suit the modern palate. 
Similar to what Manning et al (1974) reported, in-
creased quantities of oil, spices, tomatoes and onions 
were also added to dishes prepared from indigenous 
57 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

vegetables. Peanut butter replaced ground legumes 
as flavouring in some traditional dishes.  The Euro-
pean-type of vegetables are often served raw or cold 
as vegetable salads with generous quantities of may-
onnaise added to some of them. 
 
Convenience     Certain items have been adopted 
into the diet because of their convenience. The rea-
sons for the high consumption of bread were its avail-
ability and convenience (Manning et al, 1974; Crous & 
Borchardt, 1984). It was regarded as an acceptable 
alternative for the staple grain porridge that was other-
wise served for either breakfast or lunch. It was quick 
and easy to prepare and especially when only a few 
members of a household were present, because it 
was considered too much of an effort to prepare stiff 
maize-meal porridge for a small number of household 
members. 
 
“ Bread and eggs are easier to prepare and quicker as 
when you have to cook pap.” 
 
“If you have things to go with bread you need not 
make pap.” 
 
“… it is easier to prepare [serve] bread.” 
 
Certain traditional beverages such as mageu and oth-
ers such as ginger beer are not prepared as often any 
more, or have been replaced by more convenient al-
ternatives such as concentrated fruit drinks or cor-
dials. 
 
 * “… they change, they prepare things that are quick 
to prepare.” 
  
Manning et al (1974) also mentioned that mageu was 
replaced by more convenient alternatives such as tea, 
coffee and mineral drinks. 
 
The preparation methods for meat and vegetables 
have also changed and it was explained that the tradi-
tional preparation method of boiling was too time con-
suming. Most of the participants therefore fried meat 
in oil or grilled it in the oven. The same applies to 
some vegetables, as the boiling of some vegetables 
(such as cabbage and spinach) has been occasionally 
replaced by stir-frying, and others are often served as 
salads.  
 
Church     Apart from the well-known prescriptions 
and proscriptions with regard to food that were im-
posed on members of certain church groups, there 
were also some churches that strictly prohibited their 
members from consuming certain traditional foods. In 
this regard Schapera and Goodwin (1962:360) gave 
the example of beer drinking that was strictly forbid-
den. The participants mentioned that the preparation 
and consumption specifically of fermented dishes 
were restricted, and gave this as the reason why 
some do not use traditional beer or sour porridge any 
more.  
 
“There was this discussion at the church where some 
said that if they are not allowed to drink beer, and then 
they should also not be allowed to use ting [sour por-
ridge].” 
 
Some churches also influence the meal pattern of 
their members on Sundays because they prohibit 
them from eating breakfast.   
 
“… they are not allowed to go to church when they eat 
breakfast because they are not allowed to eat before 
Holy Communion.” 
 
Ethnic identity     The older informants were more 
familiar with some of the traditional dishes and still 
prepared them when the opportunity arose and at spe-
cial celebrations / occasions.  This was regarded as 
an expression of their cultural identity, and they ex-
plained that they made sure that they got hold of cer-
tain expensive and / or scarce ingredients to enable 
them to prepare these traditional dishes. Examples 
were given of special traditional dishes that were pre-
pared over the festive season. Family members who 
were home from the urban areas during this period 
also requested that these dishes be prepared, be-
cause the ingredients were often not obtainable in the 
urban areas and some of the dishes were very time-
consuming to prepare. It became clear that a degree 
of emotional value was attached to some of these 
traditional dishes.  
 
“Morogo and tokomane will be prepared on Christmas, 
because the relatives from the township, because they 
don’t eat morogo regularly, so when they come here 
they want to eat morogo. So there will be morogo on 
Christmas day.” 
 
Another participant explained that a special traditional 
dish “unohlogoza” is prepared for special occasions in 
her family.  She took a lot of trouble to find the specific 
grade of sorghum and then took great care to grind it 
herself for this special dish.   
 
They felt that it was important that the younger gen-
eration should become acquainted with such customs.   
 
“…  they want to show the new generation the Nde-
bele tradition, their traditional dishes, … even if they 
have these special occasions. Each and every special 
occasion has its traditional dish. So they must know 
when this traditional occasion, … this special dish 
must be served.”    
 
In the same vein they pointed out how important it was 
that a Ndebele woman had to be able to prepare the 
two kinds of traditional beer “tlhabalala” and “tlhodla” 
properly. This was regarded as the hallmark of “a 
good Ndebele woman”.   
 
One elderly participant was very proud of the fact that 
her grandchildren enjoyed some of the traditional 
dishes and they asked her to prepare these during 
school holidays when they visited her. She explained 
that her children do not prepare the traditional dishes 
any more and that she was the one who introduced 
the grandchildren to these dishes. 
 
58 
 

“She feels happy when the grandchildren like the tra-
ditional food.”  
 
It was a great treat for them when she served these 
dishes on the traditional grass mats and they were 
always very eager that she must eat with them on the 
mat. 
 
“… grandma come and sit down here with us.” 
 
Although it was mostly the elderly participants who 
communicated strong feelings about the conservation 
of their culinary heritage, some of the younger genera-
tion, for instance the scribe, stressed the importance 
for him to follow the traditions of his ethnic group.  
 
“In my case I won’t eat mealie [maize] porridge, only 
mabele [sorghum]. Then the reason is, it is a spiritual 
prescription. Because my ancestors have eaten 
mabele, so I must follow the same path. Then there is 
no way that I can eat white pap, it does not cover my 
tradition, so I still eat mabele pap.” 
       
The older men were not very fond of the modern 
Western-type of food and therefore the traditional sta-
ple food of stiff maize-meal porridge was prepared for 
them when some of the modern starch items were 
served on Sundays and at celebrations. The emo-
tional value that was still attached to the staple food 
maize was often evident.  
   
“There are older people who still like the traditional 
food, like her husband. When it is Sunday she will 
have to cook pap for him, he doesn’t enjoy rice.” 
 
“The other thing is most men like traditional food, they 
don’t like rice.” 
 
Health-related aspects     The older informants ex-
plained that the reason for including more brown 
bread in their diet was related to certain illnesses they 
have or because it is healthy. The local clinic staff told 
them that it is healthy to eat brown bread.  
 
“Most of the reasons are for the high blood [pressure] 
where they are restricted to most of [meaning they 
were advised not to eat] the food such as sugar, white 
pap and fish oil.”   
 
“… so sometimes it is for health reasons that they eat 
bread” 
 
Others indicated that certain items were included or 
excluded from their diets because of health reasons. 
 
“Mabele [sorghum] is eaten regularly by some be-
cause this is based on the person’s health and own 
rituals.” 
 
“Coffee is not good for people with high blood 
[pressure].”  
 
On the other hand, certain traditional dishes and bev-
erages were not consumed or prepared any more by 
some of the older people because they do not agree 
with them any more. One participant told how she 
loved mageu but does not prepare it any more be-
cause it causes heartburn. 
 
Education     The older informants were concerned 
that their children were not adhering to traditions any 
longer. The younger adult informants revealed that 
they followed the more modern ways as a result of the 
influence of education and social aspirations. 
 
 “Then the other thing we, … new generation, we are 
educated enough that is why we want to eat more 
food [larger variety] and fancy ones.” 
 
Social aspects     Similar to other cultures, certain 
foods were also associated with joyous and special 
occasions. Weekends were regarded as very special, 
because this was often the only time that a family or 
household members could be together. Over week-
ends friends and families visited each other and al-
most all celebrations were scheduled for weekends. 
As explained above, more and special foods were 
purchased and prepared compared to during the 
week.  
 
“Sundays … it is special, because everybody is at 
home, that is why they cook this special food.” 
 
The younger adults associated social status with fol-
lowing the modern Western-oriented food practices. It 
seemed to be important to follow the professional peo-
ple such as teachers, lawyers and health-care workers 
in the community.   
 
“The changes are because we are now mixed to-
gether [rich and poor, educated and less educated] so 
when the rich start to buy rice, vegetables, and the 
poor then come around, they will start to buy the same 
stuff, even if they don’t have money.” 
 
Children often influenced their parents after they had 
observed how other people behave. One participant 
explained that her children told her that to sit on the 
floor during mealtimes was not appropriate any more, 
and they told her: 
 
“… this is an olden days thing, you can’t do it any 
more.” 
 
Another explained how the manner in which food was 
served changed because her children wanted it that 
way.  
 
“Since her children grew up they see the other people, 
[how] they serve food and then it changed. But when 
her husband was still there [alive] they used to dish up 
in two plates.”   
 
It seemed that the older generation still valued the 
traditional ways of serving and eating meals, whereas 
the younger, more educated generation preferred the 
Western-oriented practices and associated them with 
being educated.   
 
 
59 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

CONCLUSION 
 
The influences contributing to the change and devel-
opment of food practices with regard to the meal pat-
terns and the composition of meals, were reported. 
The most prominent influences may be attributed to 
the natural and man-made environments, while eco-
nomic / financial influences and influences from the 
socio-cultural environment are also reflected.  
 
The gradual move towards the more Western-oriented 
food practices in this community started about four 
decades ago when this settlement was founded as a 
so-called Trust Area.  The lack of water inhibited the 
cultivation of indigenous crops with the result that the 
community has become dependent on purchased 
food items offered by the local stores. This, together 
with the increased contact with the Western-oriented 
life-style of the nearby large cities of Pretoria and Jo-
hannesburg and the employment and education op-
portunities offered by these cities, resulted in adapta-
tions to the traditional food practices.  
 
Although there is evidence that the current food prac-
tices in this community are leaning more toward the 
Western-oriented practices, certain traditional food 
practices are still adhered to, for example certain tra-
ditional dishes are still prepared and these will be 
available at both the more traditional as well as mod-
ern celebrations and special occasions. The traditional 
staple food, stiff maize-meal porridge, traditional beer 
and ting mabele (sour sorghum porridge), will always 
be served at such occasions. The importance of the 
staple food is evident in the fact that it is prepared at 
least once a day in most households, and when rice 
and other starches are prepared, stiff maize-meal 
porridge will be prepared for the older men who prefer 
it to the other starches. The influence of some church 
groups with regard to food prescriptions and proscrip-
tions has also become evident. Certain churches pro-
hibit the consumption of fermented products such as 
traditional beer and sour porridge, with the result that 
some people do not prepare and consume these 
items any more. 
 
Another aspect that has an important influence on the 
current food practices in this community relates to 
economic factors and the fact that most labourers are 
remunerated on Fridays. During the week, the food 
choices are more limited compared to weekends 
when more funds are available to purchase meat and 
other special food items. Meat consumption during the 
week is therefore limited and offal products of beef 
and chicken are consumed as relishes instead. Con-
venience is another important factor in the food 
choices made. The increased consumption of bread in 
comparison to the traditional foods is attributed to 
convenience as well as the affordability of relishes to 
accompany it.  It is easier to serve bread for breakfast 
than to prepare porridge, and bread is always readily 
available. Bread could be served with less expensive 
accompaniments as opposed to the more expensive 
relishes needed to accompany stiff maize-meal por-
ridge. 
 
In comparison to the traditional practices, food prepa-
ration methods have also undergone changes. Con-
venience and time-constraints as well as access to 
electricity and electric stoves contributed to these 
changes. Frying has become a preferred method to 
cook meat and certain vegetables, and large quanti-
ties of oil and fat are used. Vegetable salads and 
starch-based salads have become very popular and 
these are often prepared with generous quantities of 
mayonnaise.   
 
 
APPLICATION 
 
Awareness of the above influences could serve as a 
foundation for effective nutrition education pro-
grammes. The insights gained into the current food 
practices of this community could be used to empower 
them to alter or improve on some of these practices in 
order to prevent the negative consequences of the 
“nutrition in transition”. Through nutrition education 
programmes and consumer facilitation, they could be 
assisted to find methods to adapt some of their food 
preparation methods to decrease the amount of fats 
and oils used. The nutritional contribution of certain 
traditional and indigenous ingredients needs to be 
acknowledged and emphasised, and the inclusion and 
promotion of these ingredients in food preparation 
needs to be encouraged. Assisting and encouraging 
the development and adjustment of traditional recipes 
to appeal more to the modern Western-oriented palate 
would probably achieve this. 
  
 
LITERATURE LIST  
 
ACHTERBERG, C. 1988. Qualitative methods in nutri-
tion education evaluation research. Journal of Nutri-
tion Education 20(5):244-250. 
ADLER, PA & ADLER, P. 1987. Membership roles in 
field research. London. Sage. 
ASHTON, EH. 1939. A sociological sketch of Sotho 
diet. Transactions of the Royal Society of South Africa 
27:157-167. 
BABBIE, E & MOUTON, J. 2001. The practice of so-
cial research. South African edition. Cape Town. Ox-
ford University Press. 
BETTS, NM, BARANOWSKI, T & HOERR, SL. 1996. 
Recommendations for planning and reporting focus 
group research. Journal of Nutrition Education 
28:279–281. 
BOURNE, LT, LANGENHOVEN, ML, STEYN, K, 
JOOSTE, PL, LAUBSCHER, JA & VAN DER VYVER, 
E. 1993. Nutrient intake in the urban African popula-
tion of the Cape Peninsula, South Africa. The BRISK 
study. Central African Journal of Medicine 39(12):238-
247. 
BOURNE, LT, LANGENHOVEN, ML, STEYN, K, 
JOOSTE, PL, NESAMVUNI, AE & LAUBSCHER, JA. 
1994. The food and meal pattern in the urban African 
population of the Cape Peninsula, South Africa. The 
BRISK study. Central African Journal of Medicine 40
(6):140-148. 
BOURNE, LT & STEYN, K. 2000. Rural/urban nutrition 
related differentials among adult population groups in 
60 
 

South Africa, with special emphasis on the black 
population. The South African Journal of Clinical Nutri-
tion (February Supplement):S23-S28. 
BRINK, A & BOSHOFF, E. 1983. Babavoeding in Ga-
Rankuwa, 
Bophuthatswana: 
voedselverbruik 
en 
maaltydpatrone. Tydskrif vir Dieetkunde en Huishoud-
kunde 11(1):9-13. 
BRUWER, FP. 1963. Die Bantoe van Suid-Afrika. 
Hersiene 
uitgawe. 
Kaapstad. 
Afrikaanse 
Pers-
Boekhandel. 
BRYANT, AT. 1939. A description of native foodstuffs 
and their preparation. Pretoria. Government Printers. 
BRYANT, AT. 1967. The Zulu people. 2nd ed. Pieter-
maritzburg. Shuter & Shooter. 
COETZEE, R. 1982. Funa food from Africa. Roots of 
traditional African food culture. Pretoria. Butterworths. 
COLLINS, K. 1999. Participatory research. A primer. 
Johannesburg. Prentice-Hall.  
CROLL, JK, NEUMARK-SZTAINER, D & STORY, M. 
2001. Healthy eating: what does it mean to adoles-
cents? Journal of Nutrition Education 33:193-198. 
CROUS, JM & BORCHARDT, S. 1982. Eetgewoontes 
van Pedi-huisgesinne in Atteridgeville. Tydskrif vir 
Dieetkunde en Huishoudkunde 10(1):29-31. 
CROUS, JM & BORCHARDT, S. 1984. Dieetpatrone 
van Venda-gesinne in Atteridgeville. Tydskrif vir Dieet-
kunde en Huishoudkunde 12(2):41-44. 
CROUS, JM & BORCHARDT, S. 1986. Dieetpatrone 
van Venda-gesinne in Tshikunda Malema. Tydskrif vir 
Dieetkunde en Huishoudkunde 14(2):44-47. 
DE VOS, AS  & FOUCHE, CB. 1998. General intro-
duction to research design, data collection methods 
and data analysis. In DE VOS (Ed). Research at grass 
roots. A primer for the caring professions. Pretoria. JL 
van Schaik. 
FALK, WL, BISOGNI, CA & SOBAL, J. 1996. Food 
choice of older adults: a qualitative investigation. Jour-
nal of Nutrition Education 28:257-265. 
GRUNERT, KG. 1993. Towards a concept of food-
related life-style. Appetite 21:151-155. 
GOCKOWSKI, 
J, 
MBAZO’O, 
J, 
MBAH, 
G 
& 
MOULENDE, TF. 2003. African traditional leafy vege-
tables and the urban and peri-urban poor. Food Policy 
28:221-235. 
HAMMERSLEY, M & ATKINSON, P. 1995. Ethnogra-
phy. Principles in practice. 2nd ed. London. Routledge. 
KEIM, KS, SWANSON, MA, CANN, SE & SALINAS, 
A. 1999. Focus group methodology: adapting the 
process for low-income adults and children of His-
panic and Caucasian ethnicity. Family and Consumer 
Sciences Research Journal 27(4):451-465. 
LABADARIOS, D (Ed). 2000. National food consump-
tion survey in children aged 1-9, South Africa. 1999. 
Pretoria. Department of Health: Directorate of Nutri-
tion. 
LABADARIOS, D, WALKER, ARP, BLAAUW, R & 
WAKER, BF. 1996. Traditional diets and meal pat-
terns in South Africa. World Review on Nutrition and 
Dietetics 79:70-108. 
LADZANI, R, STEYN, NP & NEL, JH. 1992. A socio-
economic profile of households in semi-rural areas of 
Lebowa with specific reference to dietary habits. The 
South African Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 4
(3):60-63.  
LEARY, PM. 1969. The diet of Pedi school children. 
South African Medical Journal 43:792-795. 
LUBBE, AM. 1971. Dietary evaluation. South African 
Medical Journal 45:1289-1297. 
MACKEOWN, 
JM, 
CLEATON-JONES, 
PE, 
GRANATH, L, RICHARDSON, BD & SINWEL, RE. 
1989. A study of the relative amounts of food items 
consumed by South African preschool children. The 
South African Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 1
(3):19-22.  
MACKEOWN, JM, CLEATON-JONES, PE & SENE-
KAL, M. 1994. Individual food items in the diets of 
South African preschool children – energy, total pro-
tein, carbohydrate, fibre, added sugar and fat intake. 
The South African Journal of Food Science and Nutri-
tion 6(3):94-98. 
MANNING, EB, MANN, JI, SOPHANGISA, E & 
TRUSWELL, AS. 1974. Dietary patterns in urbanized 
blacks. South African Medical Journal 48:485-497. 
MILES, MB & HUBERMAN, AM. 1994. Qualitative 
data analysis. 2nd ed. London. Sage. 
MÖNNIG, HO. 1967. The Pedi. Pretoria. JL van 
Schaik. 
MORGAN, DL. 1997. Focus groups as qualitative re-
search. 2nd ed. London. Sage. 
NESTLE, M, WING, R, BIRCH, L, DISORGA, L, 
DREWNOWSKI, 
A, 
MIDDLETON, 
S, 
SIGMAN-
GRANT, M, SOBAL, J, WINSTON, M & ECONOMOS, 
C. 1998. Behavioral and social influences on food 
choice. Nutrition Reviews 56(5):S50-S74. 
NEUMAN, WL. 2000. Social research methods. Quali-
tative and quantitative approaches. 4th ed. London. 
Allyn & Bacon. 
OLTERSDORF, U, SCHLETTWEIN-GSELL, D & 
WINKLER, G. 1999. Assessing eating patterns – an 
emerging research topic in nutritional sciences: intro-
duction to the symposium. Appetite 32:1-7. 
OSBORN, TWB & NORISKIN, JN. 1937. Data regard-
ing native diets in Southern Africa. South African Jour-
nal of Science 33:605-610. 
OUDKERK, ACF. 1965. Eating habits of urban Bantu, 
with special reference to the school-going child. South 
African Medical Journal 39:1148-1150. 
PAISLEY, J, SHEESHKA, J & DALY, K. 2001. Qualita-
tive investigation of the meanings of eating fruits and 
vegetables for adult couples. Journal of Nutrition Edu-
cation 33:199–207. 
POPKIN, BM. 1994. The nutrition transition in low-
income countries: an emerging crisis. Nutrition Re-
views 52(9):285-298. 
QUIN, PJ. 1964. Foods and feeding habits of the Pedi. 
South African Medical Journal (26 December):969-
971. 
REYNOLDS, KD, HINTON, AW, SHEWCHUK, RM & 
HICKEY, CA. 1999. Social cognitive model of fruit and 
vegetable consumption in elementary school children. 
Journal of Nutrition Education 31:23-30. 
SCHURINK, EM. 1998. Designing qualitative re-
search. In DE VOS, AS (Ed) Research at grass roots. 
A primer for the caring professions. Pretoria. JL van 
Schaik. 
SCHURINK, WJ. 1998. Participant observation. In DE 
VOS, AS (Ed) Research at grass roots. A primer for 
the caring professions. Pretoria. JL van Schaik. 
SCHAPERA, I & GOODWIN, AJH. 1962. Work and 
wealth. In SHAPERA, I (Ed) The Bantu-speaking 
61 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 33, 2005 

tribes of South Africa. London. Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.  
SPRADLEY, JP. 1979. The ethnographic interview. 
New York. Holt, Reinhardt & Winston. 
STEYN, NP, BADENHORST, CJ & NEL, JH. 1993. 
The meal pattern and snacking habits of schoolchil-
dren in two rural areas in Lebowa. The South African 
Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 5(1):5-9. 
STEYN, NP, WICHT, CL, ROSSOUW, JE, KOTZE, TJ 
v W & LAUBSCHER, R. 1990. The eating patterns of 
adolescents in the Western Cape. The South African 
Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 2(2):23-27. 
STORY, M, NEUMARK-SZTAINER, D & FRENCH, S. 
2002. Individual and environmental influences on ado-
lescent eating behaviors. Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association 102(3):S40-S51. 
STRAUSS, A & CORBIN, J. 1998. Basics of qualita-
tive research. 2nd ed. London. Sage. 
TON NU,C. MACLEOD, P & BARTHELEMY, J. 1996. 
Effects of age and gender on adolescents’ food habits 
and preferences. Food Quality and Preference 7
(3/4):251-262. 
TROLLIP, AM. 1991. Die betekenis van geakkultu-
reerde kledingpraktyke vir geselekteerde Ndzundza-
Ndebele-vroue. PhD-tesis. Universiteit van Pretoria. 
TROLLIP, AM.1995. Meaning of blankets, towels and 
T-shirts in the context of acculturation. South African 
Journal of Ethnology 18(4):150-154. 
TROLLIP, AM. 1997. Towards developing a model for 
the empowerment of rural South African women. Jour-
nal of Dietetics and Home Economics 25(1):2-10. 
TURNER, GA. 1909. The diet of the South African 
Natives in their kraals. Pretoria. Government Printing 
and Stationery Office. 
TURNER, V. 1967. The forest of symbols. Aspects of 
Ndembu ritual. London. Cornell University Press. 
VAN EEDEN, TS & GERICKE, GJ. 1996. Effect of 
acculturation on habitual food intake and dietary pat-
terns of rural and urban black home economic stu-
dents. South African Journal for Food Science and 
Nutrition 8(3):85-94. 
VILJOEN, AT & GERICKE, GJ. 2001. Food habits and 
food preferences of black South African men in the 
army (1993-1994). Journal of Family Ecology and 
Consumer Sciences 29:100-115. 
WALKER, ARP. 1966. Nutritional, biochemical and 
other studies on South African populations. South 
African Medical Journal (17 September):814-852. 
WALKER, ARP 1995. Nutrition-related diseases in 
Southern Africa: with special reference to urban Afri-
can populations in transition. Nutrition Research 15
(7):1053-1094 
WALKER, ARP & CHARLTON, KE. 2001. Nutrition 
and aging in Africa: transitional changes. Nutrition 
Today 36 (1):37-42. 
WALKER, ARP, WALKER, BF & WALKER, AJ. 1992. 
Comparison of nutrient intakes of South African eld-
erly rural black women in 1969 and 1989. Journal of 
Human Nutrition and Dietetics 5:169-177. 
WETMORE, SB & THERON, F. 1998. Community 
development and research: participatory learning and 
action – a development strategy in itself. Development 
Southern Africa 15(1):29-54.  
WHITE, E. s.a. Report on the investigation into the 
nutritional habits and problems of the Zulu in the Val-
ley of a Thousand Hills. Durban. Department of Nutri-
tion.  
WOODWARD, DR, BOON, JA, CUMMING, FJ, BALL, 
PJ, WILLIAMS, HM & HORNSBY, H. 1996. Adoles-
cents’ reported usage of selected foods in relation to 
their perceptions and social norms in those foods. 
Appetite 27:109-117. 
62 
 
