The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
22 
The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education 
in perspective 
SPT Malan 
OPSOMMING 
 
Uitkomsgebaseerde onderwys (UGO) word deur 
sommige as 'n paradigmaskuif in die onderwys ge-
propageer.  Die doel van die artikel is om hierdie 
aanspraak toe te lig teen die agtergrond van veral 
vier onderrig- en leerbenaderings, naamlik doelwit-
gerigte onderrig, bevoegdheidsgebaseerde leer, be-
meesteringsleer, en kriteriumgerigte onderrig en as-
sessering.   
 
Teen die agtergrond van die voorgemelde benade-
rings word getoon dat UGO nie 'n paradigmaskuif 
meebring nie.  UGO kan ten beste beskryf word as 'n 
eklektiese onderwysfilosofie wat op die beste ele-
mente in hierdie onderwysbenaderings berus.  Oor-
eenkomstig die behoeftes en eise wat aan 'n nuwe 
demokratiese Suid-Afrika gestel word, is die elemen-
te egter in 'n visioenêre raamwerk saamgevoeg om 
aan die land se mensekragbehoeftes en werkvereis-
tes te voldoen. 
 
Daar is ook voordele aan UGO verbonde.  Die be-
langrikste hiervan is die nasionale fokus op onder-
wys as 'n middel tot 'n doel en nie 'n doel op sigself 
nie.  ‘n Behebtheid met toetse en eksamens word 
versag met behulp van deurlopende assessering, en 
die resultate van sodanige assessering word in ‘n re-
mediërende hoedanigheid aangewend.  Voorberei-
ding vir lewenslange leer word op dié wyse 'n hoë 
prioriteit. 
 
Onderwyspraktisyns, leerders en ouers sal elkeen 
hul bepaalde rol moet speel om te verseker dat UGO 
'n sukses is.  Dit verg uiteraard harde werk en toewy-
ding van diegene wat met onderwys en opleiding ge-
moeid is.  Praktisyns moet daarop ingestel wees om 
onderrig- en leersituasies vaardig te beplan en te be-
stuur sodat die beoogde leeruitkomste ten beste re-
aliseer.  Vaardigheidsgebaseerde assessering in ou-
tentieke omstandighede moet die basis vir betrouba-
re inligting van hoogstaande gehalte vorm. 
 
Die werklike waarde van UGO sal eers beoordeel 
kan word wanneer die eerste geslag leerders wat 
aan die UGO-stelsel blootgestel was die arbeids-
mark betree of vir hoëronderwysopleiding aanmeld. 
 
 
 
—  Prof SPT Malan  
Department of Teaching and Training Studies 
Faculty of Education 
University of Pretoria 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Education is aimed at creating teaching and learning 
environments that would bring about desired changes 
in learners, whether to be more knowledgeable, better 
skilled or to influence their attitudes and values pos i-
tively.  The essence of teaching and learning is to 
plan teaching events (contents, strategies, etc) and to 
ascertain to what extent learners have acquired the 
intended competences.   
 
Uncertainty about the desired learning outcomes and 
failure to assess outcomes properly could end in a 
situation where learners only attained pseudo-
knowledge, 
pseudo-skills, 
pseudo-attitudes 
and 
pseudo-values.  On completion of their studies these 
learners are awarded a certificate inherently implying 
that they have attained certain competences whereas 
in fact they have not.  Disenchantment with education 
in this regard is obvious - but not a new phenomenon. 
 
Dissatisfaction with education policies and practices 
have time and again led to initiatives to adjust these 
practices and systems to meet the needs of learners 
at the time. However, not all of these turned out to be 
to their advantage, which gave rise to revised initia-
tives. 
 
Outcomes -based education [OBE] is currently fa-
voured internationally to promote educational renewal 
and has been implemented in countries such as Can-
ada, the United States and New Zealand. However, it 
has already elicited harsh criticism from opponents of 
the movement (Claassen, 1998; HTTP, 1994).  South 
Africa is introducing its own version of OBE as the 
basis of Curriculum 2005 (Claassen, 1998; Malan, 
1997:73).  And, as elsewhere in the world, reactions 
vary between commendation by its proponents and 
denouncement by its critics. 
 
Curriculum compilers in South Africa hail OBE as a 
major paradigm shift in education (Reddy, 1995:13; 
Department of Education, 1997b; Arjun, 1998).  But 
how original is the OBE dispensation, and does it ac-
tually represent a paradigm shift?  This article ad-
dresses these issues by tracing the roots of OBE and 
by putting outcomes -based education into perspec-
tive. 
 
 
WHAT IS OUTCOMES-BASED EDUCATION? 
 
William Spady is regarded as OBE's leading advocate 
and a few points he makes would suffice. 
 

The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
23 
Spady (1994:1) defines OBE as a … comprehensive 
approach to organizing and operating an education 
system that is focused on and defined by the success-
ful demonstrations of learning sought from each stu-
dent.  Outcomes are … clear learning results that we 
want students to demonstrate at the end of significant 
learning experiences  … and … are actions and per-
formances that embody and reflect learner compe-
tence in using content, information, ideas, and tools 
successfully (Spady, 1994:2).  Regarding the OBE 
paradigm, Spady (1994:8) states: … WHAT and 
WHETHER students learn successfully is more impor-
tant than WHEN and HOW they learn something.  
 
Ten key components underlie what is termed the out-
comes-based information age paradigm (Spady, 
1994:36-40). At issue here is whether it is in fact a 
new education paradigm. 
 
 
THE ROOTS OF OBE 
 
Spady (1994:4) concedes that the world is filled with 
examples of outcomes -based models, and even that 
outcomes -based systems go back at least 500 years 
to the craft guilds of the Middle Ages.  The concept of 
outcomes -based models and systems is therefore not 
new. 
 
Analysis of educational reform movements in the past 
reveals prominent features of OBE embedded in the 
educational approaches described below. 
 
The educational objectives movement 
 
Incongruity between what is being taught and what is 
being learned led to the setting of objectives for teach-
ers and learners.  McAvoy (1985:28) traced the docu-
mented use of objectives in education back as far as 
1860 when Spencer in Britain formulated objectives 
according to a classification of human activities.  In 
1924 Herbart in Germany stressed the importance of 
lesson planning and stating objectives to guide teach-
ing activities.  In 1949 Tyler gave further impetus to 
the objectives-oriented movement by stressing the 
importance of objectives in curriculum design and 
teaching practices.  He listed four questions as the 
basis for his means -end or product-oriented rationale 
for curriculum design (Tyler, in Arjun, 1998:24): 
♦
What educational objectives should the school aim 
to achieve? 
♦
How does one select learning experiences that 
are likely to be useful in attaining these objec-
tives? 
♦
How should learning experiences be organised for 
effective instruction? 
♦
How would the effectiveness of learning experi-
ences be evaluated? 
 
Tyler's rationale has been used extensively by cur-
riculum practitioners and formed the basis of 
Wheeler's well-known model of curriculum design 
which served as the main curriculum design model for 
several decades (Arjun, 1998:24). The basic OBE phi-
losophy for curriculum design is firmly rooted in both 
Tyler's and Wheeler’s models. 
 
During the fifties the work of Bloom (1956) and his co-
workers on developing taxonomies for educational 
objectives became important. These benchmarks 
were used in the formulation of objectives and the de-
velopment of criteria to establish whether learners 
have actually attained acceptable standards com-
pared to the desired learning outcomes.  Bloom's 
(1956) work, particularly in the cognitive domain, re-
mains invaluable for OBE assessment. 
 
After Bloom came Mager whose work was first pub-
lished in 1962. It … captured the imagination of many 
teachers and helped spark off a wave of enthusiasm 
(and controversy) over objectives (McAvoy, 1985:29).  
Guidelines (HTTP, 1999) on how to write learning out-
comes in OBE closely resemble Mager's (1984:23-
104) guidelines in terms of expected performance, the 
conditions under which it is attained, and the stan-
dards for assessing quality. 
 
The competency-based movement 
 
Competency-based education was introduced in 
America towards the end of the 1960s in reaction to 
concerns that students are not taught the skills they 
require in life after school.  The same concern has 
been expressed about education in South Africa. 
 
Competency-based education is based on six critical 
components (Van der Horst & McDonald 1997:10-11): 
♦
Explicit learning outcomes with respect to the re-
quired 
skills 
and 
concomitant 
proficiency 
(standards for assessment) 
♦
A flexible time frame to master these skills 
♦
A variety of instructional activities to facilitate 
learning 
♦
Criterion-referenced testing of the required out-
comes 
♦
Certification based on demonstrated learning out-
comes 
♦
Adaptable programmes to ensure optimum learner 
guidance  
 
All six components are prominent in the OBE ap-
proach.  Competency-based education also supports 
the notion that the learner is accountable for his or her 
own achievements. This is another major tenet under-
pinning OBE. 
 
The mastery learning movement 
 
Mastery learning was initially introduced to provide 
intervention programmes for learners with mild dis-
abilities and those who were at risk in traditional edu-
cational settings (Guskey et al, 1995).  The authors 
state that research has confirmed the applicability and 
value of mastery learning in education to provide 
learners at all levels with similar, individualised assis-
tance.  With sufficient opportunities and supported by 
an appropriate learning environment, materials and 
guidance, most learners would be successful in their 

The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
24 
learning tasks. This notion is also reflected in OBE. 
 
The following main characteristics of mastery learning, 
also reflected in OBE, apply: 
♦
Ascertaining prerequisite knowledge or skills to 
attain goals 
♦
A flexible time frame to achieve goals 
♦
Using different media and materials to create en-
riched teaching / learning contexts 
♦
Formative evaluation to provide feedback for both 
teaching and learning improvement  
 
Criterion-referenced instruction and assessment 
 
Criterion-referenced instruction and assessment are 
well known and form an integral part of all types of 
performance-based assessment.  Mpepo (1998) de-
scribes criterion-referenced instruction as a form of 
mastery learning.  It is based on attaining specified 
objectives and on testing for competence in terms of 
the criterion stated in the objective.  This form of in-
struction compares a learning outcome or mastery of 
competencies with a predetermined external standard.  
Achieving the set standard signifies 'success', and 
failing to achieve the standard implies 'not yet up to 
standard’, which is followed by remedial intervention. 
 
Criterion-referenced assessment is the preferred 
mode of assessment in OBE. 
 
Integrating educational approaches 
 
In lobbying for a change to the traditional approach to 
teaching and learning, Malan and Jorissen (1990) and 
Kachelhoffer et al (1992) initiated a three-tiered eclec-
tic framework for curriculum design and teaching / 
learning practices.  The roots of this framework are 
firmly embedded in all the above-mentioned move-
ments.   
 
The following are the main features of the model – 
and distinctive features of the current OBE approach: 
♦
It is needs-driven.  Curricula are designed in 
terms of the knowledge, skills and attitudes ex-
pected from graduates and aim to equip students 
for lifelong learning. 
♦
It is outcomes-driven.  The model has a line that 
runs from taking cognisance of training needs to 
setting an aim (purpose) for the programme, goals 
for syllabus themes, learning outcomes, and finally 
assessing the learning outcomes in terms of the 
set learning objectives. 
♦
It has a design-down approach.  Linked to 
needs and the purpose of the programme, learning 
content is only selected after the desired outcomes 
have been specified.  Content becomes a vehicle 
to achieve the desired learning outcomes which 
are aimed at inculcating a basis for life-long learn-
ing. 
♦
It specifies outcomes and levels of outcomes.  
Learning objectives are described in terms of 
Bloom's (1956) cognitive, affective and psychomo-
tor domains and set according to Mager's (1984) 
guidelines for formulating objectives. 
♦
The focus shifts from teaching to learning.  The 
model has a student-centred learning approach 
where lecturers act as facilitators.  Study guides 
help the learners to organise their learning activi-
ties, and group work, continuous assessment and 
self-assessment are major features. 
♦
The framework is holistic in its outcomes fo-
cus.  Although the learning objectives are aimed at 
learning at grass-roots level, they are linked to 
goals and aims at higher levels.  Attaining learning 
objectives is therefore not an end in itself; it pro-
vides building blocks for achieving higher-level out-
comes. 
 
Table 1 depicts the coherent and holistic relationship 
between the aim of a programme, its goals, learning 
objectives and evaluation strategies.  The learning 
objectives are clearly not set for the sake of achieving 
the objectives per se, but they serve as a means to 
attaining a programme aim.  This same coherent and 
holistic premise underpins OBE. 
 
 
OBE IN PERSPECTIVE 
 
Does OBE represent a paradigm shift? 
 
It is true that the official version of the curriculum sys-
tem which OBE is replacing does not meet modern 
educational needs or expectations.  In terms of the life 
skills learners need and the demands of the work-
place, the dominant transmissional approach did not 
prepare learners adequately for work, further or higher 
education, or life in general (Reddy, 1995:7-8).  This is 
the same kind of disenchantment that initiated the 
competency-based movement. 
 
However, does replacing the previous system with an 
OBE approach represent an educational paradigm 
shift?  Are OBE and its philosophy and practice so 
different that being promoted as an educational para-
digm shift is warranted?  The answer to this question 
is an emphatic no.   
 
According to Mouton (1996:204), a paradigm repre-
sents … a collection of mutually accepted achieve-
ments (including the theories, exemplary solutions, 
predictions and laws).  In this sense, a paradigm is 
primarily a model for conducting normal research.  
When OBE being a paradigm shift is analysed in 
terms of these constructs, it becomes difficult to sup-
port the claim. 
 
There is as yet no collection of mutually accepted 
achievements in terms of new theories on OBE, there 
are no exemplary solutions to the challenge of total 
intellectual and potential development of learners, pre-
dictions of the value of OBE have not been proven, 
and laws validating OBE as an acceptable practice 
and construct are not apparent.  In other words, no 
research base to verify the claims of OBE has yet 
been established and the claim of a major paradigm 
shift can therefore not be substantiated. 
 

TABLE 1:  THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN A PROGRAMME AIM, GOALS, LEARNING OBJECTIVES AND EVALUATION STRATEGIES 
 
 
Cognitive levels ∗∗ 
Method of evaluation 
Aim of 
programme 
Goals of syllabus 
themes 
Learning content 
(themes only) 
Learning objectives 
K 
C 
AP 
AN 
S 
E 
 
Syllabus theme 1 
 
Goal(s): 
--------------------------
--------------------------
------------------ 
Study unit 1.1 
-------------------------------
--------------------- 
 
 
 
Study unit 1.2 
-------------------------------
--------------------- 
 
 
 
Study unit 1.3 
-------------------------------
--------------------- 
1.1.1 
Learning objective: 
 
-------------------------- 
1.1.2 Learning objective: 
 
-------------------------- 
 
etc 
 
1.2.1 Learning objective: 
 
------------------------- 
1.2.2 Learning objective: 
 
------------------------- 
 
etc 
 
1.3.1 Learning objective: 
 
-------------------------- 
 
etc 
 
  
X 
 
   
  
  
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
   
  
  
  
X 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
X 
 
 
Computer-based test (self-
evaluation) 
Portfolio 
 
 
 
Self-evaluation 
 
Group evaluation 
 
 
 
Open-book test / exam 
 
Aim: 
------------------------
------------------------
---------------------- 
Syllabus theme 2 
 
Goal(s): 
--------------------------
--------------------------
------------------ 
etc 
Study unit 2.1 
-------------------------------
--------------------- 
 
 
Study unit 2.2 
-------------------------------
--------------------- 
etc 
2.1.1 
Learning objective: 
 
------------------------- 
2.1.2 
Learning objective: 
 
------------------------- 
 
 
etc 
   
  
  
  
X 
 
 
   
X 
Assignment 
 
 
Class test 
 
 
 
                                                 
∗  K = Knowledge;  C = Comprehension;  AP = Application;  AN = Analysis;  S = Synthesis;  E = Evaluation 
 
The ’new paradigm’ of outcomes-based education in perspective 
25 
ISSSN 0378-5254  Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28:  2000 

The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
26 
At best OBE may be described as an eclectic philoso-
phy which takes the best from several past educa-
tional approaches and incorporating them in a new 
system that is appropriate to the needs and demands 
of a new, democratic South Africa.  OBE's rationale 
and practices may be set in a different context for dif-
ferent needs, but its tenets can be clearly traced to 
older approaches, once also heralded as ideal solu-
tions only to be discarded. 
 
In terms of Kuhn's scheme of scientific revolution, Ar-
jun (1998) also indicates that OBE does not represent 
a paradigm shift.  The author contends that although 
the science of education is in the midst of a paradig-
matic crisis, the means -end paradigm of Tyler is still 
dominant.  In fact: Even the proposed new curriculum 
makes use of this paradigm, which indicates that 
there is no major paradigm shift (Arjun, 1998:25). 
 
OBE as a transformational approach 
 
Contrary to the transmissional approach of traditional 
teaching, Spady (1994:94-98) characterises OBE as 
a systems transformation approach.  Claassen 
(1998:34) states: OBE is a transformational perspec-
tive on the curriculum .  It offers a dialogue between 
learner and the curriculum where the learner interacts 
with sources of knowledge, reconstructs knowledge, 
and takes responsibility for his or her own learning 
outcomes.  In the same way the teacher becomes a 
facilitator in the teaching and learning situation in-
stead of acting as a source of information transferring 
content to learners.  From this viewpoint the transfor-
mational character of OBE is influenced by the mas-
tery learning and competency-based education move-
ments. 
 
Spady (1994:36-40) identifies ten key components 
that underlie OBE as a transformation approach, 
namely outcomes -defined, expanded opportunities for 
learners, performance 'credentialing', concept integra-
tion, instructional coaching, culminating achievement, 
'inclusionary' success, cooperative learning, criterion 
validation and collaborative structures.  Van der Horst 
& McDonald (1997:20) redefined these components 
as characteristics of transformational OBE.  When 
these characteristics are analysed in terms of their 
foundational roots (as indicated above), the eclectic 
nature of OBE becomes obvious (see Table 2). 
 
The characteristics of OBE are listed in the first col-
umn, and the major roots of each characteristic are 
indicated in brackets.  Transformational aspects that 
apply to each characteristic appear in the second col-
umn (Department of Education, 1997a:7; Van der 
Horst & McDonald, 1997:20; Claassen, 1998:35-36). 
 
As indicated in Table 2, it is only in terms of 'Geared 
towards integrating concepts across the curriculum 
and learning areas' and 'Based on collaborative struc-
tures allowing for democratic inputs from the commu-
nity' [OBE's sosioconstructivist approach], where no 
definite roots can for certain be traced to the educa-
tional approaches described earlier on.  All other 
characteristics and their accompanying transforma-
tional aspects of OBE are firmly based on other edu-
cational approaches, reflecting the eclectic nature of 
the OBE approach. 
 
Claassen (1998:38) notes that proponents of OBE 
often express a simplistic and one-sided critique of the 
discredited previous educational model in South Af-
rica.  Looking at transformational aspects, it is obvious 
that many progressive educators, trainers, schools 
and educational ins titutions have in any case been 
adding value to curricula by following a learner-
centred and problem -based learning approach. 
 
Was the previous system that bad?  One only needs 
to look at the scientific, economic and political 
achievements of many people who are products of the 
old system to appreciate the fact that they excelled 
despite the much critiqued transmissional mode of 
teaching.  It is a matter of experience to confidently 
state that a transmissional approach will always have 
a place in education.  In fact, many students and 
teachers still prefer a transmissional rather than a 
transformational approach.  The reason is simple:  it is 
much easier to teach and to learn within a transmis-
sional framework.  However, the broader educational 
context necessitate an official move to a transforma-
tional approach. 
 
Assessment 
 
The ultimate purpose of assessment is to validate 
learning outcomes – be it for diagnostic, formative or 
summative purposes.  The role of assessment in OBE 
is part and parcel of the aims of assessment in all its 
root models.  OBE, however, highlights continuous 
and criterion-referenced assessment. 
 
OBE aims to assess the competences of learners in 
their totality.  It takes a holistic approach in describing 
the competence of a learner in terms of knowledge, 
skills and values, and assessing competence by using 
a variety of assessment approaches.  In fact, the 
smallest unit of assessment must cover the integrated 
knowledge, skills and values that apply in practice in a 
specialised 
context 
(Department 
of 
Education, 
1998:26).  This calls for performance-based and au-
thentic assessment strategies against the background 
of criterion-referenced assessment. 
 
Fraser (1999:16) describes authentic assessment as 
… assessment tasks that resemble skills, activities 
and functions in the real world and in school.  Authen-
tic assessment aims at determining competences in 
contexts that closely resemble situations in which 
these competences are required.  Assessment then 
becomes a learning experience in which learners are 
prepared to apply their knowledge, skills and values in 
an integrated manner. 
 
Assessment of knowledge, values and skills relates to 
assessing elements in the cognitive, affective and psy-
chomotor learning domains.  The taxonomies of 
Bloom (cognitive domain), Krathwohl (affective do-

The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
27 
Characteristics 
Transformational aspects 
Outcomes define OBE 
 
(Educational objectives, competency-based, mas-
tery learning) 
Learners are future-oriented.  They are informed about what 
they have to achieve and the quality of such achievement.  
The process shifts from a content-based input approach to a 
competence-based output approach where certification vali-
dates the achieved competences.  Attaining outcomes are 
not bound by time and calendar constraints. 
OBE allows for expanding learning opportunities 
beyond traditional seat time as learning time 
 
(Competency-based, mastery learning) 
The focus is on achieving outcomes according to ability.  
Achievement is supported by flexible time frames and not 
bound by closed, structured teaching time.  Learning pro-
grammes are open-ended and creative.  Learners are en-
couraged to form own insights and create own solutions. 
Based on successful attainment of predetermined 
performance outcomes 
 
(Educational objectives, competency-based, mas-
tery learning) 
Learners advance through the system when they are able to 
demonstrate attainment of the desired outcomes.  They are 
assessed continuously and facilitated to attain these desired 
outcomes. 
Aided by instructional guidance where learners 
receive continuous learning support 
 
(Competency-based, mastery learning) 
Teaching is no longer aimed at covering the curriculum 
(content-driven), but instead at learners discovering new 
knowledge, skills and attitudes by reconstructing content for 
themselves with creative guidance by the teacher. 
Builds on a culminating achievement of desired 
learning outcomes 
 
(Competency-based, mastery learning) 
Attaining outcomes provides the foundation for applying ac-
quired knowledge, skills and attitudes, leading to the attain-
ment of ultimate desired outcomes. 
Geared towards integrating concepts across the 
curriculum and learning areas 
 
(New.  Not a main feature of previous ap-
proaches) 
The focus shifts from atomistic mastering of content as an 
end in itself to using content as a vehicle towards holistic 
conceptual frameworks across the curriculum. 
Success-oriented allowing for individual learners 
to succeed according to own abilities. 
 
(Mastery learning) 
Capacity building according to learners' own abilities is para-
mount.  The selection-oriented approach of pass or fail is 
reduced.  All learners progress according to ability.  
OBE is characterised by cooperative learning  
 
(Not a main feature in mentioned approaches, but 
cooperative or collaborative learning as such is 
not new  (also see Johnson et al, 1998:28-29)) 
Individual contest and competition decrease and teamwork 
is encouraged. 
Attainment of outcomes is confirmed by criterion 
assessment 
 
(Competency-based, with roots in criterion-
referenced instruction) 
The emphasis shifts from attaining a pass mark or distinction 
to a demonstration of competence at predetermined levels.   
Criterion-referenced assessment focuses on assessing out-
comes and not grading as such. 
Based on collaborative structures allowing for de-
mocratic input from the community 
 
(New.  Not a main feature of previous ap-
proaches) 
The OBE curriculum is open to the environment.  The cur-
riculum is democratised and is the result of negotiation, not 
fixed and changeable (ie a sosioconstructivist approach). 
TABLE 2:  FEATURES OF A TRANSFORMATIONAL OBE APPROACH 

The 'new paradigm' of outcomes-based education in perspective 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
28 
main) and Harrow (psychomotor domain) remain in-
valuable frameworks for assessing acquired knowl-
edge, skills and values in terms of OBE (Van der 
Horst & McDonald, 1997:176-178).   
 
The Department of Education's viewpoint is that the 
smallest unit of assessment must include the integra-
tion of knowledge, skills and values.  Within this con-
text performance-based authentic assessment strate-
gies are pivotal in assessing learning and critical 
cross-field outcomes. 
 
 
IN CONCLUSION 
 
OBE is firmly rooted in past educational approaches 
and does not represent a paradigm shift as advocated 
by OBE proponents.  At best OBE can be described 
as an eclectic educational philosophy taking the best 
from previous approaches and framing it in a new vi-
sionary system that is appropriate to the needs and 
demands of a democratic South Africa.  As in the 
case of previously highly publicised - but at some 
stage discredited - educational approaches, only time 
will reveal the true value of OBE.  With a sociocon-
structivist base that makes allowances for stakeholder 
input, OBE may become a living educational model, 
adapting to new demands  and needs. 
 
There are many positive sides to OBE, as its transfor-
mational approach indicates.  It brings about a na-
tional focus on education as a means to an end and 
not an end in itself.  It forces uncoordinated and lais-
sez-faire educational planning, managing and teach-
ing practices into the background and introduces stra-
tegic educational planning that is aimed at achieving 
results. 
 
Educational practitioners, learners and parents all 
have to play their particular roles to ensure that OBE 
works.  Learners have to assume greater responsibil-
ity and actively participate in the learning process. 
And, hopefully, this will contribute to restoring a cul-
ture of learning in many schools.  On the other hand, 
implementing OBE in all these environments poses a 
major challenge in terms of its being accepted. After 
all, a transmissional approach is easier on educators 
and students alike. 
 
Educational practitioners have to become more at-
tuned to planning and managing learning environ-
ments and must be committed to the ideal of valid and 
reliable assessment.  Parents (the larger community 
for that matter) have to exercise their democratic right 
to ensure that the quality of education remains un-
questionable and that learners are properly prepared 
for life after school or higher-education studies.   
 
Concerned groups in the USA took up this challenge 
and it caused the downfall of the OBE paradigm in the 
United States.  In his most recent book, Spady 
(1997:3) concedes:  What seemed to be an impend-
ing systemic paradigm shift in thinking, policy, and 
practice toward educational change in the early '90s, 
lies largely lost under an avalanche of political reac-
tion and reforms that tinker rather than reform.  (Refer 
to his Chapter 3, What went wrong, for an overview of 
resistance and reactions to OBE.)  
 
What is going to happen in South Africa?  If OBE sur-
vives, the academic quality of the first entrants of the 
OBE cohort into the workplace and higher-education 
sectors will not only reveal the assumed benefits and 
values of OBE, but its shortcomings as well. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ARJUN, P.  1998.  An evaluation of the proposed new curric-
ula for schools in relation to Kuhn's conception of paradigms 
and paradigm shifts.  South African Journal of Higher Educ a-
tion 12(1):20-26. 
BLOOM, BS (ed).  1956.  Taxonomy of educational objec-
tives.  Handbook 1.  Cognitive domain.  New York.  McKay. 
CLAASSEN, C.  1998.  Outcomes-based education: some 
insights from complexity theory.  South African Journal of 
Higher Education 12(2):34-40. 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.  1997a.  Information bro-
chure:  Curriculum 2005. Lifelong learning for the 21st cen-
tury.  Pretoria. 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.  1997b.  Call for com-
ments.  Government Notice no 18051.  Pretoria.  Govern-
ment Printer. 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.  1998.  Norms and stan-
dards for educators.  Pretoria.  Government Printer. 
FRASER, WJ.  1999.  The foundations of continuous as-
sessment:  its link to performance-based, authentic, compe-
tence-based and outcomes-based assessment.  University 
of Pretoria.  Unpublished article. 
GUSKEY, TR, PASSARO, PD & WHEELER, W.  1995.  
Mastery learning in the regular classroom.  Teaching Excep-
tional Children 27(2):15-18. 
HTTP. 
 
1994. 
 
http.//www.i2i.org/SuptDocs/IssuPprs/
IsOBEduc.htm.  
HTTP.  1999.  http.//www.up.ac.za/announce/intranet/saqa/
saqagdls.html#LEARNING. 
JOHNSON, DW, JOHNSON, RT & SMITH, KA.  1998.  Co-
operative learning returns to college.  Change July / Au-
gust:27-35. 
KACHELHOFFER, PM, MALAN, SPT & KNOETZE, JG.  
1992.  Riglyne vir kurrikulumontwikkeling.  In Malan, SPT & 
Du Toit, PH (reds).  Suksesvolle onderrig.  Riglyne vir 
dosente, onderwysers en opleiers.  Pretoria.  Academica. 
MAGER, RF.  1984.  Preparing instructional objectives .  2nd 
ed.  Belmont, California.  David S Lake Publishers. 
MALAN, B. 1997.  Excellence through outcomes.  Cape 
Town.  Juta. 
MALAN, SPT & JORISSEN, HW.  1990.  'n Kurrikulumont-
wikkelingsmodel as kriteriumraamwerk vir formatiewe kurri-
kulumevaluering.  Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif vir Hoër Onder-
wys (Spesiale uitgawe):71-79. 
McAVOY, BR.  1985.  How to choose and use educational 
objectives.  Medical Teacher 71:27-35. 
MOUTON, J.  1996.  Understanding social research.  Preto-
ria.  Van Schaik. 
MPEPO, CC.  1998.  Criterion-referenced instruction (CRI) 
as a form of mastery learning.  Educamus 34(3):8-9. 
REDDY, K.  1995.  The inclusion of technology as a subject 
in the national curriculum.  A significant paradigm shift for 
education in South Africa.  MEd thesis.  University of Preto-
ria. 
SPADY, WG.  1994.  Outcome-based education.  Critical 
issues and answers.  Arlington.  American Association of 
School Administrators. 
SPADY, WG.  1997.  Paradigm lost.  Reclaiming America's 
educational future.  Arlington.  American Association of 
School Administrators. 
VAN DER HORST, H & MCDONALD, R.  1997.  OBE.  A 
teacher's manual .  Pretoria.  Kagiso. 
