The Word is life: 
African theology as biblical and 
contextual theology1 
 
Ernest van Eck 
Department of New Testament Studies 
University of Pretoria 
 
Abstract 
This article reflects on the development of African theology from its 
beginning up to the end of the twentieth century. A critical 
assessment of this development and the current state of African 
theology is given. The future and possible shortcomings of African 
theology are also discussed. It is argued that for African theology to 
make a difference in a multi-cultural and multi-contextual Africa, it 
should consider being contextual and Biblical. For Christians the 
Word means life, is life, and promises life in its fullness. If African 
theology purports to be Christian, this should also be one of its 
premises. 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
From a non-African perspective, this article reflects on the past and current 
state of African theology and hermeneutics, as well as its future. First, the 
historical development of African theology is traced since its beginning in 
more or less the first half of the twentieth century. In its beginning African 
theology was mostly reactive and apologetic, and consisted mainly of 
comparative studies. In the latter half of the twentieth century this religious 
studies framework was replaced by a theological framework: African 
theologians concentrated on liberation theology, and the first efforts to 
produce an inculturated African theology can be traced. At the end of the 
twentieth century African theology became more assertive and proactive. 
During this period African theologians concentrated on the African context as 
subject for the interpretation of the Bible. This development is critically 
                                                     
1 Lecture given at the opening of the academic year of the African Institute for Missiology 
(AIM) on 27 January 2005 at Klipdrif, Hammanskraal.  
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
679 

The Word is life: African theology 
assessed, where after a few suggestions are made (from a non-African 
perspective) with regard to the possible task and focus of African theology in 
the future. 
 
2. 
BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION IN AFRICA: A HISTORICAL 
OVERVIEW 
 
2.1 
Introductory remarks 
The earliest Christian attempts for a systematic Biblical interpretation can be 
traced back to Africa (Ukpong 2000:3) 2. The exegetical development in 
Biblical studies after the Enlightenment is well recognized: The allegorical 
method of interpretation was first replaced by the historical-critical reading of 
the Biblical text (the eighteenth century), and then by an array of literary 
approaches in the nineteenth century (e. g., colon analysis, structural 
analysis, speech-act theory, reader-response criticism, semiotics, 
narratology). To this, certain “post-modern” readings of the Biblical text like 
deconstruction and social-scientific criticism can also be added. 
 
In Africa south of the Sahara the impact of these modern methods 
began to be felt more or less in the middle of the twentieth century, 3 and by 
the 1970’s the use of these methods in Biblical interpretation (especially in 
academic circles) became the norm (Ukpong 2000:4). Thus, although 
(systematic) Biblical interpretation has its roots in Africa, Biblical interpretation 
in Africa today is mostly the product of the modern methods of Western 
interpretation and exegesis. 
 
In spite of this, however, Biblical scholars in Africa have developed a 
parallel method of exegesis which, in the words of Ukpong (2000:3) has as its 
main focus the “encounter between the Biblical text and the African context.” 
In this method(s) the Biblical text is linked to the African context in such a way 
that the focus of interpretation is on the communities that receive the text 
rather than on those communities that created the text, or the text itself. This 
                                                     
2 The earliest attempts in this regard can be traced back to the city of Alexandria and the work 
of inter alia Clement of Alexandria and Origen (second to third centuries), and patriarchs such 
as Athanasius and Cyril (fourth to fifth centuries; Trigg 1988:21, Gibellini 1994b:1). Although 
allegorical and uncritical (in the modern sense), the foundation laid by this tradition lasted in 
the Western church till the onset of the Enlightenment (Trigg 1988:21; see also Ukpong 
2000:3). It was also the church in Alexandria that, in the middle of the fourth century, brought 
Christianity to Ethiopia (Gibellini 1994b:2). Also, the first translation of the Old Testament into 
Greek (Septuagint) took place in Africa (Alexandria; Mbiti 1994:27; see also Abogunrin 
2000:36). 
 
3 According to Ukpong (2000:4) this date corresponds with the period of political 
independence in most African states and the founding of African universities where these 
modes of Biblical interpretation were taught. 
 
680 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
method, developed for Africa in Africa, can broadly be referred to as 
inculturation hermeneutics. 
 
We now turn to a more concise description of the developments that 
have taken place in the method of Biblical interpretation in Africa. The purpose 
of this description is twofold: Firstly, to trace the developments that have taken 
place in an African reading or comprehension of the Bible (in other words: 
What do we have), and secondly, to critically assess if any contribution can be 
made to such a reading of the Bible from a non-African standpoint (in other 
words: What can be done). 
 
2.2 
The development of Biblical interpretation in Africa 
According to Ukpong (1999a:281-289, 2000:5-18) the developments that have 
advanced in an African reading of the Bible can be divided into three phases, 
namely 1930 to the 1970’s, the 1970’s to the 1990’s, and from the 1990’s 
onwards. 
 
2.2.1 Reactive and apologetic (1930-1970s) 
The origin of modern African Biblical studies can be seen as a response to the 
condemnation of African religion and culture by Western Christian 
missionaries: African culture and religion was seen as demonic and immoral, 
and treated with the intend to destroy it before any Christianity could take 
roots in Africa (Ukpong 2000:5). In a reactive and apologetic manner, 
attention was focused on legitimizing African religion and culture, by way of 
comparative studies  which took the form of showing continuities and 
discontinuities between the culture of Africa and the Bible, especially the Old 
Testament (Ukpong 1999a:282-284).4 
 
Comparative studies carried out in this period were, for example, the 
possible physical contact between Africa and the ancient Hebrews, 
correlations between the Hebrew language and certain African languages 
(see Williams 1930) and similarities between aspects of African culture and 
that of the Hebrews (such as the sense of community, sacrifices and the 
conception of God (Williams 1976). The result of these comparative studies 
was that African traditional religion came to be seen as “Africa’s Old 
Testament”, a kind of praeparatio evangelica, a fertile ground for sowing the 
gospel message. 
 
Several objections have been raised to the legitimacy of these 
comparative studies, since ancient Israel and contemporary Africa are not 
                                                     
4 According to Dickson (1984:181) the New Testament shares the same cultural world view as 
the Old Testament, and therefore work done on the Old Testament was considered to extend 
to the New Testament also. Literature in this regard, however, indicates otherwise. 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
681 

The Word is life: African theology 
only geographically but also temporally far apart.5 Ukpong (1999a:283), 
nonetheless, argues that these studies can be justified since it only focused 
on existential and not essential continuities and discontinuities between 
ancient Israel and contemporary Africa. One weakness, however, is that no 
hermeneutic conclusions were drawn to show how the results of these studies 
affect Christian life and thought in the concrete (Ukpong 1999a:283). 
 
2.2.2 First steps towards inculturation and liberation (1970s-1990s) 
In the mid 1970’s the reactive approach gave way for a more proactive 
approach: The context of Africa started to emerge in the hermeneutic 
encounter with the Bible, and a more theological framework replaced the 
religious studies framework.6 From this new approach two ways of reading 
Scripture crystallized: The inculturation approach and liberation theology7 
(Ukpong 2000:7; see also Gibellini 1994b:6; Du Toit 1998:378-380). 
 
In the inculturation approach the main emphasis is the desire to make 
Christianity relevant to the African religio-cultural context (Ukpong 2000:7). It 
focuses on two methods of reading Scripture, namely, Africa-in-the-Bible 
studies and evaluative studies. 
 
In the Africa-in-the-Bible studies8 the emphasis lies firstly to rectify the 
negative images about Africa and its people that are embedded in certain 
                                                     
5 To this can be added the opinion of Tienou (1990:75): not only is the assumption that 
African culture and that of ancient Israel are very similar debatable, but also one can ask if 
one can speak of “African culture”, since contemporary Africa (culturally wise) is as complex 
as any other country in the world. 
 
6 Onwu (1984:35-37) is of the opinion that this shift in Biblical studies in Africa already 
occurred as early as the 1960’s. With the formation of the AACC (All African Conference of 
Churches) in 1963 in Kampala it became clear that the Western church (in its missionary work 
in Africa thus far) had not only been speaking in Africa to Africans in a “strange or partially 
understood” language (Onwu 1984:35), but also (and as result of this) that the church in 
Africa should attain selfhood by researching the primary sources themselves and express 
what is understood from these sources in African accents. It was time to rethink the Christian 
faith that was received from Western missionaries, especially in terms of Africa’s 
socioeconomic and political experiences such as human rights, freedom, poverty and hunger. 
This new perspective gave way for the dominant themes that would occupy African theology 
for the decades to come: liberation, salvation, mission and Christology. 
 
7 Ukpong (1999a:280) describes the difference between the methodologies of the 
inculturation approach and the liberation approach as follows: inculturation models focus on 
world-view, cultural identity, cultural values and disvalues as well as oppression as issues 
within the context, and the Bible is studied in relation to these. In the liberation 
model/approach the focus is oppression, since the context is understood as situations of 
societal tension, oppression and marginalization.  
 
8 This kind of research is often inspired by the movement referred to as “Afrocentrism”, which 
seeks to articulate the role and contribution of Africa in world history (Ukpong 2000:7). 
 
682 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
traditional readings of some Biblical texts,9 and the identifying of the presence 
of Africa and its people in the Bible and their contribution in Biblical history10 
(see Ukpong 1999a:284-286). The focal point of evaluative studies, on the 
other hand, is to evaluate the encounter between African religion, culture, and 
the Bible, and evaluate this encounter in terms of an African understanding of 
the Bible. The purpose of this method is to facilitate the communication of the 
message of the Bible within the African context, from which a new 
understanding of Christianity can evolve that is both Christian and African 
(Ukpong 1999a:286, 2000:9). This method characteristically makes use of the 
historical-critical method to analyze the Biblical text, and anthropological and 
sociological approaches to analyze the African context. 
 
At least five different approaches can be identified within the evaluative 
method (see Ukpong 1999a:286-289, 2000:9-11): 
 
• 
Elements of African culture, religion, beliefs, concepts or practices (that 
are taken for granted) are evaluated in terms of the Biblical text, to 
arrive at a Christian understanding and practical application thereof. 
 
• 
By using a Biblical text or Biblical theme, elements of African culture 
and religion are challenged. In principle this approach is critical towards 
issues in society and the church. 
 
• 
Texts are interpreted against the background of African culture and 
religion, aiming to arrive at a new understanding of the text that would 
be African and Christian. 
 
• 
The use of concepts from either Scripture or African culture to show the 
continuity between African culture and Christianity. 
                                                     
9 An important theme in this regard, which has appeared in different versions, is the so-called 
curse of Ham. In Genesis 9:18-27 Ham sees his father Noah drunk and naked, and instead of 
covering him he reports this to his two brothers Shem and Japheth, who cover their father. By 
doing this Ham, following Hebrew tradition, committed an act of disrespect towards his father. 
Because of this, Noah curses Canaan, Ham’s son. A fifth century Midrash, as well as the 
Babylonian Talmud interpret this text in such a way as to indicate that Africans are cursed and 
black because of the curse of Ham. For a comprehensive study on the interpretation of this 
and other relevant texts (e. g., Gn 10:1-14 and 1 Chr 1:8-16), as well as the ideological basis 
of domination that underlies such a reading of this narrative, see Peterson (1978), Rice 
(1972:17-25) and Isaac (1980:4-5).  
 
10 These studies are a direct reaction on the de-emphasis and exclusion by Western 
scholarship of Africa and its contribution to Biblical history; such as the point of view found in 
many Biblical studies that Egypt belong to the ancient Near East rather than Africa. An 
example of this kind of study is that of Mafico (1989) and Adamo (1987, 1992) that seeks to 
confirm Africa’s presence and influence for example on the religion of the patriarchs. 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
683 

The Word is life: African theology 
• 
The study of Biblical texts to identify Biblical models or Biblical 
foundations for aspects of contemporary church life and practice in 
Africa.11 
 
Liberation theology, on the other hand, evolved out of the influence of socialist 
ideology which arose a greater consciousness about the need for theology to 
show concern for secular issues (Ukpong 2000:7). Theology, if it wants to be 
African theology, has to say something about oppression, poverty and 
marginalization. This liberation approach is expressed in liberation theology 
(hermeneutics), black theology and feminist hermeneutics. Liberation 
hermeneutics uses Scripture “as a resource for struggle against oppression of 
any kind based on the Biblical witness that God does not sanction oppression 
but rather always stands on the side of the oppressed to liberate them” 
(Ukpong 1999a:292, 2000:12; see also West 1997:111).12 The account of 
God’s political liberation of Israel from Egypt in Exodus is seen as the ground 
text for the hermeneutics of political liberation,13 and texts such as Exodus 
23:11 (God’s calls on Israel to take special care of the poor amongst them), 
Amos 2:6-6 and 5:21-24 (God’s call to deal justly with all) and Luke 4:18-19 
and 6:20-21 (Jesus’ sympathetic attitude to and teachings in favor of the poor) 
are used as support for a hermeneutics of economic liberation. 
 
Black theology is a form of liberation hermeneutics that focused 
especially on the issues of apartheid and racial discrimination that prevailed in 
South Africa until 1994 (Ukpong 1999a:292; 2000:12; Mushete 1994:22-23; 
West 1997:111). Black theology (with its focus on issues such as race, class 
and gender) intended to make Africans aware of their situation of oppression 
based on their skin colour, the need to analyze their situation, and the need to 
struggle against it. In this kind of hermeneutics, liberative themes in the Bible 
are used as a resource of empowerment for the struggle for liberation. 
Feminist theology, on the other hand, focuses on the oppression of 
women not only in contemporary society, but also in the life of the church. In 
                                                     
11 These evaluative approaches resulted in the insight that African culture and religion should 
not only be seen as a kind of praeparatio evangelica, but “indispensable resources in the 
interpretation of the gospel message and the development of African Christianity” (Ukpong 
2000:11; his italics). 
 
12 The theme “liberation” has been criticised by Mbiti (1978:72-75) on the ground that it is very 
often discussed with only a few scriptural references. 
 
13 Mugambi (1974:41-42) has correctly indicated that the idea of liberation is inherent to the 
concept of salvation. He argues that in the African context (and in any context, for that matter 
– EvE), and in the Bible, salvation as a theological concept cannot be complete without 
liberation as a socio-political concept, since there is a political ingredient in the Bible that 
cannot be ignored if one is to remain faithful to the Biblical narrative (see also Boesak 
1979:173-174). 
684 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
an attempt to liberate woman from this situation, feminist theologians have 
particularly paid attention to the following topics: A critique of the 
androcentrism by which the Bible is sometimes interpreted, a critique on 
androcentrism in the Bible itself, and the interpreting of Scripture from the 
perspective of the African women’s experience (a recovery of the sometimes 
forgotten and muted voices;14 see Ukpong 1999a:293-294). 
 
2.2.3 Inculturation hermeneutics and contextual Bible study (1990s-) 
Since the 1990’s Biblical studies in Africa became more assertive and 
proactive, and started to make an independent contribution. Especially the 
approaches of inculturation and liberation that crystallized in the previous 
period were carried forward with new orientations. Two of these orientations 
are the role that the ordinary African reader started to play in the academic 
reading of the Bible (contextual Bible study), and the second orientation seeks 
to make the African context the subject for the interpretation of the Bible. 
Thus, since the 1990’s the African context is used both as critical resource for 
Biblical interpretation and the subject of interpretation (see Ukpong 
1999a:289-290, 1999b:320-321, 2000:15). 
 
In regard to contextual Bible study, the Bible is read against a specific 
and concrete (human) situation such as oppression or poverty with the 
purpose of personal and social transformation. This approach shares the 
purpose, for example, of black theology, but recognizes specifically the input 
and concerns of the ordinary African reader. It also incorporates the 
interaction between an ordinary and academic reading of the Bible.15 
 
Some of the criticism regarding inculturation hermeneutics done up to 
1990 was its lack of attention to social issues like poverty, oppression and 
marginalization (Ukpong 2000:16). With reference to liberation hermeneutics, 
the main criticism was its lack of attention given to specific African religio-
cultural issues such as the belief in ancestors, spirits, spirit possession and 
witchcraft (Ukpong 2000:16). Since 1990 inculturation hermeneutics thus 
started to follow a more holistic approach to culture whereby both secular and 
religious aspects of culture are taken into consideration: The Bible is to be 
read not only within a religious context, but also in terms of the economic, 
social and political contexts of Africa (see Ukpong 1999a:281; Mushete 
                                                     
14 According to Ukpong (1999a:293-294, 2000:14-15) at least five approaches to feminist 
hermeneutics by African theologians are discernable: the challenging of the conventional 
androcentric interpretation of Scripture; the reinterpretation of Biblical texts that are 
oppressive to women; analysis of texts that are positive towards the role of women in the 
history of salvation and the life of the church; the identifying of basic principles in the Bible 
that affirms the basic equality of man and woman; and the interpretation of Scripture in terms 
of the experience of the African woman. 
 
15 For examples of such readings of the Biblical text see West (1993; 1996:21-41; 2002). 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
685 

The Word is life: African theology 
1994:16). Understood as such, the African context forms the subject of 
interpretation of Scripture. This means that certain basic assumptions that 
belong to the root paradigm of African culture (e. g., Africa’s unitive view of 
reality whereby reality is not seen as composed of matter and spirit, the 
sacred and the profane is a unity and visible, and the sense of community 
whereby a person’s identity is defined by the group) play a role when the 
Biblical text is analyzed. Ukpong (2000:17) defines the basic hermeneutic 
theory at work of this kind of inculturation hermeneutics as follows: “the 
meaning of a text is a function of the interaction between the text in its context 
and the reader in his/her context”.16 Only when the Biblical text is analyzed 
from this point of departure, can the Bible be read in a way that it reflects the 
viewpoints, life concerns and issues (economic, political and sociological) that 
are important for African Christians.17 Or, in the words of Mushete (1994:20): 
“African theology (must be a theology that – EvE) validity operates on the 
basis of the cultural and religious experience of the African peoples, a 
theology that responds to the questions posed by African society.” 
 
3. 
AFRICAN THEOLOGY AND THE HERMENEUTICS OF 
INCULTURATION: WHERE DO WE STAND? 
As indicated above, African theology has developed considerably during the 
past century. First the approach was reactive and apologetic, then liberation 
theology and the beginnings of an inculturation theology came to the fore. 
Finally, a hermeneutic of inculturation became the focus point. The reason for 
this specific development in African theology is evident: In the work of African 
scholars the context of Africa started to play an increasing role. This process 
resulted in a theology by Africans in Africa for Africa: African theology is only 
African if the African context is used both as resource for interpretation as well 
as the subject of interpretation. 
 
The question, however, can rightly be asked if African theology, based 
on a hermeneutic of inculturation, has amply developed hitherto that it has 
really made a difference in African society and the church, and for that matter, 
in South Africa. African scholars are divided on this point. While some believe 
that African theology is thriving, others are of the opinion that there is still a 
long way to go. 
                                                     
16 Elsewhere, Ukpong (1994:41) defines inculturation hermeneutic as follows: An inculturation 
hermeneutic is characterized by “the utilization of the resources of the culture being 
evangelized in expressing the Christian faith”, the Bible is read in such a way that it 
“challenges and animates culture”, and this is done “from the perspective of the culture and 
through the agency of an insider or insiders in the culture”.  
 
17 See the article of Ukpong (1995:3-14), Rereading the Bible with African eyes, in which this 
exegetical method is explained in full and practically applied. 
686 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
 
According to West (1997:115), if the above development of African 
hermeneutics is taken into consideration (as described in section 2), we do 
not stand on the eve of an African Bible studies, we are well into its dawn. 
What is needed now is that Biblical scholars and ordinary people from poor 
and marginalized communities should work jointly in reading the Bible and 
commit themselves to practice theology in our South African context (West 
1996:22-23). The struggle against apartheid indeed demanded new readings 
and theologies. The struggle for full liberation and life continues, and that 
requires that African Biblical scholars build on what they have learned. The 
great danger is that the readings and theologies that resourced the struggle of 
the oppressed and marginalized are in danger of being forgotten as the 
church heaves a sigh and begins to pick up the patterns of the past. This, 
according to West (1996:23), “is our deepening interpretive crisis”. 
 
How can this “crisis” be addressed?  Only when the Bible is critically 
read from and with the perspective of the marginalized and the poor, and this 
reading of the Bible remains related to social transformation (West 1996:28). 
Or, in other words: When “community consciousness” (the needs, 
experiences, questions, interests and reading and resources of the 
community) and “critical consciousness” (the work of socially engaged Biblical 
scholars) are equal partners in reading the Bible (West 1996:28). 
In this regard Biblical scholars have a lot to offer, especially a critical 
reading of the Bible and a critical appropriation thereof. What are also needed 
in this endeavor are not only the readings of the Bible by the poor and the 
marginalized, but also a willingness to break “their culture of silence”. Grass 
root communities that read the Bible must be willing to articulate what they 
believe, experience, and hope. According to West (1996:32), contextual Bible 
study (in which both academics and community take part on an equal basis) 
provides the setting and circumstances in which this can happen. When 
Biblical scholars read the Bible with ordinary readers, these readers can take 
and use what they need to empower them, whilst Biblical scholars 
concurrently can be positively influenced by the experiences, interest, 
questions, resources and readings of those on the margins (see West 
1996:38).18 
 
Muzorewa (1990:168) agrees with West in regard to the current state of 
African theology. African theologians are beyond the stage of being pedantic 
                                                     
18 West (1996:26-27) argues that at least three “threads” within Biblical studies can facilitate 
the connection between Biblical scholars and ordinary communities that read the Bible: 
African theology requires contact with the experiences of ordinary communities, the post-
modern shift allows Biblical scholars to abandon their quest for the certainty of the “right” 
reading in favour of more useful readings, and reader response criticism has introduced 
Biblical scholars to a reader that is no longer perceived as a passive receiver of authorial or 
textual meaning. 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
687 

The Word is life: African theology 
over the definition of African theology: African theology has emerged from a 
new African hermeneutic that addresses questions that are African and its 
answers speak to the African situation in the light of the Word of God 
(Muzorewa 1990:168).19 African theologians, however, need to review some 
of the tools they have used since the rise of African theology, and also 
consider other tools they could use to ensure the originality, continuity, 
authenticity and relevance of African theology. 
 
In the first place African theologians must abandon borrowing 
theological concepts and tools such as Western philosophy, since it cannot 
serve African religious needs (Muzorewa 1990:169). By using borrowed 
theologies Christianity remains foreign to the African people. Secondly, 
African theology must place human existence before faith, since the African is 
first human being and then believer. In doing this, African theology will focus 
on the importance of belief in the God that creates and sustains the African 
people. Many Africans live at a subsistence level, and therefore most of their 
actions are motivated by the will and desire to survive both physically and 
spiritually now, and then eternally. In the third place, African theology must 
seek for continuity between Christianity (what Muzorewa [1990:170] calls 
“special revelation”) and traditional African religion (general revelation), since 
most Africans experience a higher developed understanding of their faith 
through the framework of their indigenous religious beliefs (Muzorewa 
1990:170-171). Moreover, in African theology general revelation should take 
precedence over special revelation.20 Finally, African theology must emanate 
from insights gained from everyday incidents in our lives (Muzorewa 1985, 
1990:174). 
Du Toit (1998:374) also argues that an African inculturation 
hermeneutic that does not also include traditional African culture and religion 
                                                     
19 Muzorewa (1990:174) defines African theology as follows: “African theology is a reflective 
interpretation of what the biblical God is doing to enhance African survival through the agency 
of people who are informed by Scripture and traditional concepts of the God who is revealed 
to us through the faith and the life of Jesus Christ.” 
 
20 In this regard, Muzorewa (1990:172-174) argues as follows: Can African theology be both 
genuinely true to African tradition and Christianity without contradiction or compromise? 
Muzorewa answers this question positively. In most African patriarchal communities, for 
example, the son is only known by reference to his father. This we also find in John 3:16. 
Also, the doctrine of the Trinity teaches us that the Father and the Son is one and God is 
three in one. Why does traditional religion accept this? In Western Christianity God acts in 
history as Father, Son or Holy Spirit. For the indigenous African God also acts in history, and 
what matters for them is not the mode of being involved, but that action is divine. African 
theologians, therefore, should do theology starting out with general revelation, since the 
African person relates more readily to that what he considers as his own. 
688 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
as a resource for doing theology, will never produce a real African theology.21 
He agrees that most African theologians involve themselves in liberation 
issues and the post-colonial urge to find what is typical of African theology (Du 
Toit 1998:395). This, of course, is understandable. If one’s history is colonial 
and filled with apartheid, poverty, enslavement, exploitation, suffering and 
oppression, African theology, to be contextual, must address these issues. An 
emphasis on these issues only (i. e., liberation), however, has led to at least 
three shortcomings in current African theology: To much emphasis is put on 
economic and political liberation at the expense of the spiritual (Du Toit 
1998:378), African theology is too concerned with ways to construct an 
African theology totally different and independent of its Western theological 
influences (Du Toit 1998:379), and African theology does not take traditional 
African culture and religion seriously in consideration in their hermeneutic 
encounter with the Bible22 (Du Toit 1998:381). 
 
Du Toit (1998:380-85) argues that a theology that can be called African 
should at least take the following into consideration: 
 
• 
It must be understood that the text that is analyzed by African 
hermeneutics is much wider than the Biblical text. The African world as 
text should be taken more seriously, since, in African traditional religion 
and culture, the “unwritten script” (e.g., riddles and proverbs, song and 
dancing, rites and ceremonies, myths and folk-tales, shrines and 
sacred places) should also be taken into account. The African world is 
a world of spiritual forces (good and evil), a world of charms and 
                                                     
21 Uka (1991:157-160) and Parratt (1983:90) argues that traditional African religion can be 
described in terms of experience, revelation, Scripture, tradition, culture and reason: Africans 
know and encounter the mysterious dimensions of life (reflected for example in myths); 
revelation does not only come via Scripture, but is also revealed in nature, at special places 
through symbols, myths and idols; the text of traditional African religion is not written, since 
“scripture” is also found in songs, arts, symbols, sayings, beliefs and customs, prayers, 
names, riddles and  places; traditions that are orally transmitted from generation to generation 
form an essential part of traditional African religion; and African reason is integrated with all 
other faculties of the human being (e.g., African believe in God and spirits, but are not 
interested in rationally defining these realities). 
 
22 In terms of including traditional African culture and religion as a resource for doing theology, 
Du Toit (1998:395-396) divides the work of African scholars in two categories. The so-called 
“old guard” (that includes scholars like Fashole-Luke, Idowu, Mbiti, Mosala and Sawyer) 
focuses mainly on liberation issues. They have taken Western Christian theology, developed 
it in African terms, and called it “indigenization” (Du Toit 1998:395). African traditional values 
and experiences are passive partners, and a Western form of hermeneutics is used that does 
not suit the African context. They also stress the centrality of the Bible as the only source for 
the development of an African theology, especially the Old Testament. In such a theology, for 
example, the African concept of time and history cannot play a role. “New guard” theologians 
(that include scholars like Boulaga, Ela, Moyo, Bediako and Oduyoye [1979]), on the other 
hand, reject the so called indigenization process by affirming traditional African values. The 
new guard theologians freely make use of African traditional values, and follow a style of 
confrontation towards anything that is oppressive to that what is African. 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
689 

The Word is life: African theology 
amulets, sacrifices, ancestral worship and witches and wizards (see 
Zahan 2000:3-25). Understood as such, African hermeneutics is a 
religion without a book, but not without a text: A text that not only 
consists of suffering and dependence, but also a specific culture, self 
understanding and world view. Moreover, many Biblical concepts 
simply do not exist in African culture, or have a totally different 
meaning. 
 
• 
African hermeneutics, in the second place, would be sterile if it is not a 
hermeneutics of protest: It should protest against anything and anyone 
that hinders the restoration of the identity and ethos of the homo 
africanus. 
 
• 
Following from the point above, African theology should be a 
hermeneutics of sociocritical theory: A hermeneutics that exposes the 
role of institutions, traditions and texts as instruments of power, 
domination and social manipulation. In this regard, for example, 
economic upliftment must be of high importance. 
 
• 
The close relationship between the Biblical world and that of traditional 
Africa (such as demon possession, healings and miracles) should be 
appropriated in a more structural manner. 
 
• 
Additionally, African theology should aid proper education, a culture of 
learning and work ethics. 
 
• 
Finally, African hermeneutics should realize that African theology, 
although studied by a minister of religion or a theologian, actually 
belongs to the community. In African context, hermeneutics is the 
indaba of the community. 
 
In short: Africa must find its identity in the religion typical of Africa – only then 
will theology and church be able to play a meaningful role in the social life of 
the people of Africa. 
 
This, of course, does not mean that neither the Bible nor Western 
theology should be simply brushed aside (Du Toit 1998:375-376). The Bible 
should not be too easily interpreted in the light of traditional African religions, 
rather than according to its own canons. A return to the original languages of 
the Bible and functional exegesis of the Biblical text are still necessary. Also, 
much can still be learned from Western theology, exegesis and hermeneutics. 
 
In regard to the current state of African hermeneutics and theology, 
Tienou (1990:73-77) agrees with Du Toit on several points. Tienou (1990:73) 
690 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
is of the opinion that African theology, thus far, had little impact on the daily 
grassroots church life in Africa. The modern quest for an inculturated African 
theology had two starting points: European colonialism and Western 
missionary efforts in the past century (both which can be seen as foreign 
forms of control/domination in terms of inter alia politics and economics). 
African theology still struggles with the context of this birth, and too many 
African theologians cannot understand African theology apart from these 
events. Moreover, the fact that the beginnings of African theology arose in a 
setting of political, cultural and religious domination means that from its very 
inception the African theological movement had an apologetic dimension 
(Tienou 1990:74).23 African theologies were “theologies of antithesis: African 
theology is what European theology is not” (Tienou 1990:74).24 Also, African 
theology is too academic and abstract. Tienou is therefore not surprised that 
African theology had failed to produce a theology that is practical and speaks 
to African people at grass root level. Likewise, in its current phase, African 
theology still seems to battle with the context of its naissance, still seems to 
be in its infancy, and an uphill road is lying ahead. 
 
For Tienou the way forward for African theology (to be really African 
and practical) is the following: The Africanness of African theology should not 
be measured by its degree of dissimilarity with Western theology. Rather, the 
Africanness of any theology that purports to be African should be measured 
by the degree to which it speaks to the needs of Africans (and South Africans) 
in their total context (Tienou 1990:76; my italics). 
 
[The] correctness of indigenous African theologies should be 
judged by the degree to which they are faithful to the Christian 
Scripture. In that sense, African theologies have the same 
reference point as any other Christian theology. If we maintain the 
double concern of relating the totality of biblical revelation to the 
                                                     
23 Because of this, some scholars have suggested that African theology is inscribed in the 
movement of political and cultural emancipation of the African peoples. Tienou (1990:74) 
stresses this characteristic of African theology by indicating that African theology, especially in 
its beginnings in the 1950’s, not only seek to legitimize the existence of an African indigenous 
theology, but was also directed not to the African church, but to the mentors and peers of 
African theologians. 
 
24 There are many examples of African theologies that are written on the premise of the 
existence of an essential cultural (and philosophical) difference between Africa and the West. 
Mbiti, for example, proposes that eschatology should be built on an African concept of time; 
Sawyerr and Sundkler focuses on the African concept of family as basis for African 
ecclesiology; and others have developed a Christology that portrays Jesus Christ as the great 
ancestor or the master of initiation rites (see Tienou 1990:75). In this process of taking the so-
called African tradition seriously, however, some of these scholars appear at times to be more 
apologists for non-Christian theology and religion. Moreover, often the implicit assumption of 
scholars to attach great value to African traditional cultures seems to be that Biblical cultures 
and religions and African ones are similar (Tienou 1990:75). 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
691 

The Word is life: African theology 
totality of the situation of African Christians, African theology will 
truly become a discipline at the service of the church. 
 
4. 
AFRICAN THEOLOGY AS BIBLICAL AND CONTEXTUAL 
THEOLOGY: THE WORD IS LIFE 
Understanding (and knowledge) is always contextually (and socially) based 
and related to specific social circumstances. In the words of Mushete 
(1994:19): “All theology is culturally and socially situated.” This is also the 
case in any hermeneutic endeavor. We understand and interpret the way we 
do because “we are we.” African theology, therefore, is no different from 
Western theology in the sense that both theologies are contextually and 
ideologically driven. What is important in any hermeneutic enterprise is not the 
correctness of its interpretations or results, but the critical realistic honesty by 
which it is undertaken. 
 
There always are good reasons why people understand the way they 
do. Hermeneutics does not only help us to understand why people differ, it 
also shows us the (power) strategies people use to get their point across and 
accepted. The differences that emerge from the hermeneutic enterprise 
remind us that texts are interpreted by different people from different contexts 
with different ideologies. The task of hermeneutics therefore is not to 
undermine creative and individual understandings, but to make us aware “of 
our specific culture of understanding, of possible logical mistakes in the 
process of interpreting, and of possible power strategies underlying our style 
of interpretation” (Du Toit 1998:376). Hermeneutics also helps us to 
understand ourselves and others and the way we are influenced, for example, 
by culture, religion, pre-understanding and ideology. Hermeneutics concerns 
our worldview: The way we try to find meaning in our lives, it concerns our 
understanding of God, our relationships with other humans, it concerns our 
present difficulties and challenges (see Du Toit 1998:378). As such, African 
hermeneutics will only produce an African theology if it is critically realistic in 
terms of its context and purpose. 
 
In this regard, the argument that African theology should be different 
from and abandon anything that is Western (see e.g. Muzorewa 1990:169) 
needs some rethinking. African theology does not need to be different, it 
needs to be contextual. The question should not be “what is different”, but 
rather “is it contextual?”  By contextual is meant a contextual critical reading of 
Scripture and the critical appropriation thereof, or, diversely, a theology that 
arises from the African context, in that context for that context (West 1996:32). 
African theology should be, like any other theology, purpose and context 
692 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
driven. Only then will it speak on behalf of the people for the people, and will it 
make a difference in society and church. 
The worth of any theology can never be assessed by the margin in 
which it differs from other theologies; its worth lies in the difference it makes in 
a specific context for the people that live in that context. Liberation theology 
(which made use inter alia of the Western historical-critical method as a form 
of exegesis) did exactly that: It made a difference. It was a contextual 
theology, a practical theology for a specific context, and a specific situation.    
I therefore fully agree with Tienou’s (1990) argument that African theology, as 
long as it ideologically and not contextually driven (read: It must be different 
than Western theology), will fail to produce a theology that is practical and 
which will make a difference for Africans in Africa. What we need is a theology 
that addresses the context in which Africans live, not a theology that say it is 
different.25 
Secondly, African hermeneutics, if it wants to produce an African 
Christian theology, should be Biblical. Christianity does not belief in the Bible, 
but in the God of the Bible. Christians believe however, that this God speaks, 
and has spoken to them through his Word, and therefore see Scripture as the 
first and foremost source for theology and a Christian life. In this regard 
Parratt (1983:92) urges African theologians to take a genuine Biblical 
hermeneutics seriously, as a good deal that passes as African theology is 
inadequate since it lacks a solid foundation in Biblical exegesis. Some African 
theologians concentrate so exclusively on traditional African religions as their 
source, that they discard the Bible altogether. 
 
African theology, if it wants to be Christian, should be Biblical. In the 
Bible the life (words and deeds) of Jesus Christ, as the Word, speaks of God 
as the Creator of new life. He is our Savior from sin and from ourselves. The 
message of Jesus, although fundamentally religious in its essence, indeed 
had social and political implications. Jesus proclaimed, inter alia, that God is 
available to all his people, also the so-called social outcasts, the lame, the 
sick and blind, and the unclean. In his kingdom everybody was equal, women 
were welcome, and He practiced an open table. His household was open to 
all, everybody was welcome, everybody was equal, and nobody was 
excluded. To become part of this new household meant true life, implied 
taking care of others, and living this new household meant protest against 
anything that was unjust. It was a kingdom of protest. 
                                                     
25 Efforts to reread the Bible through African eyes sometimes simply reverse the politics of 
privilege, amounting to nothing more than an anti-Western bias (Fanon, in Wan 2000:111). In 
fact, such a rereading sometimes fall prey to the tendency to use the object of discontent as a 
legitimating agent: claiming Biblical sanction (Punt 2004:142). 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
693 

The Word is life: African theology 
African theology, it if it wants to make a difference for Africans in Africa 
(and for that matter in South Africa) should be exactly that: A theology of 
protest. It should protest, on a Biblical basis, against everything in its context 
and social life that is not Biblical: Corruption, poverty, crime, not caring for the 
sick (especially those with HIV/Aids), nepotism, misuse of (political) power, 
the abuse of women, to name but a few. It must, however, also attend to the 
spiritual needs of people. 
In short: African theology, if it wants to make a difference in Africa for 
Africa, should be contextual and Biblical, and be able to address the needs of 
the people who live in that specific context. In the words of West (1996:24; my 
italics): 
 
The South African context is a context in which biblical 
interpretations do matter; they shape our world. As the South 
African context constantly reminds us, biblical interpretations have 
life and death consequences; they shape the type of responses the 
state, church, and ordinary people make to particular social 
realities. 
 
Only in Jesus Christ new life is possible, and only Jesus Christ is the Word of 
God. The Word, therefore, is life. And as West (1996:24) reminds us, Biblical 
interpretations have life and death consequences. A theology that is not 
Biblical, does not address the needs of the people, and does not give life to 
people in the context they live in, is worthless. 
Many African scholars are already following this road. Mugambi 
(1974:37; 2001:19) and Boesak (1979:173-174), for example, correctly argue 
that the idea of liberation is inherent to the Biblical concept of salvation, and 
that salvation as a Biblical concept cannot be complete without liberation as a 
spiritual and sociopolitical concept. Masamba ma Mpolo (1983:19-40), in a 
historical-critical analysis of the Gospel of John, has indicated that Jesus as 
the Bread of Life, Light of the World, the Good Shepherd, Living Word, Truth 
and Life is the One that brings an all encompassing salvation. And Sawyerr, 
Mbiti and Enang (see Onwu 1984:38) have indicated that the Biblical concept 
of salvation not only underscores the need for deliverance from sin, but also 
from sickness, poverty and evil forces. 
A last case in point: In a historical-critical and literary study on the 
Lucan view of Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world, Abogunrin (2000:27-43) 
concludes that, although the idea of political liberation indeed is present in 
Luke, a liberation more complete that leads to the total well-being of God’s 
people is intended. Abogunrin correctly argues that the cultural context in 
which the Gospel was first preached is very similar to most African contexts. 
The African worldview is still dominated by belief in the reality of spirits, 
694 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
witches, wizards, ancestors and divinities. The wearing of charms, rings and 
amulets by various categories of people reveals the nature of this belief. In the 
Lucan gospel the salvation by Jesus Christ is related to the person’s body, 
health, victory over demonic powers, provision of daily needs, and the total 
well-being of the society in which the person lives. Jesus’ salvation turned his 
environment upside down. Luke, according to Abogunrin (2000:36), teaches 
us that for one who has been reconciled with God through Jesus Christ, “the 
visible and invisible, the known and unknown, can no longer have any terror 
because Jesus the crucified risen Lord now fills the whole universe as 
Redeemer and Lord.” This study of Abogunrin is Biblical,26 practical, 
contextual and applicable. Moreover, the hermeneutics applied is African in 
the sense that it is contextual. 
 
5. 
THE WAY FORWARD? CAUTIOUS OBSERVATIONS 
FROM A NON-AFRICAN PERSPECTIVE 
Tienou (1990:76) is of the opinion that the history of African theology, as well 
as its contents, thus far has revealed that the establishment of a genuine 
African Christian theology is still in the future tense. This is debatable. African 
theology has come a long way, and has made an impact on the theological 
world, as well as in the life of many people of Africa. African theology can look 
back on many fruits, especially political and social liberation. African theology, 
however, currently finds itself in a situation, politically and socially, that differs 
in many ways from the situation in which it was born. Political liberation has 
                                                     
26 Ukpong (1994:43) identifies five different approaches to Christology in African theology: 1) 
the incarnational approach based on the doctrine of Christ, the eternal Word of God, taking 
human nature in Jesus. The presupposition of this approach is that just as the eternal Word of 
God became incarnate in human nature to bring redemption to humanity and creation, God’s 
word and the Christian faith must become “incarnated” in human cultures; 2) the logos 
spermatikos (seeds of the word) approach which uses the idea of the eternal Logos (Word) – 
in whom all things were created – to show that Christ pervades in all human cultures, even if 
he is not known or identified as such. To attain its fullness of meaning, cultures must be 
opened and converted to Christ; 3) the functional analogy approach which seeks to describe 
Jesus’ redemptive functions in terms of analogous African thought categories (such as Jesus 
being the greatest ancestor or brother-ancestor [see e g Kabasélé 1991a:116-127], Jesus 
being the master of initiation [Sanon 1991:85-102], Jesus as chief [Kabasélé 1991b:103-115], 
and Jesus as healer [Kolié 1991:128-150]); 4) the paschal mystery approach which uses the 
death and resurrection of Jesus as the centre and starting point of Christology. This 
Christology works with the understanding that Jesus, after his death and resurrection, belongs 
to all cultures and can identify with them through the proclamation of the gospel; and 5) the 
Biblical approach which is based on New Testament statements about the universal 
dimension of Christ and Jesus’ identity with the Father (for a different categorization and 
description of African Christology see inter alia Onwu 1984:42; Nyamiti 1991:3-23; Waruta 
1991:52-64]). The work of Abogunrin, clearly, is not Biblical as in the Biblical approach 
described above. It is Biblical in the sense that, like the work of Ukpong (1994), its takes its 
cue from the basic outline of Jesus’ ministry of preaching (that the kingdom of God as new 
and different), healing (e.g., his healing of illnesses that were considered as spirit possession) 
and teaching (the parables he spoke which he drew from his hearers’ culture and daily life 
experiences). 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
695 

The Word is life: African theology 
been accomplished in most contexts, and a new postcolonial context with its 
challenges has to be addressed. The spiritual needs of the people of Africa 
are now the most important need on the continent, and should get its rightful 
attention. To this can be added the providing of Africa and all it people with 
Biblical moral values, as well as a solid work ethics. In regard to these 
identified needs, the following cautious suggestions are made which can be 
helpful on the road that awaits African theology: 
 
• 
African theology must be Biblical and contextual. The Africanness of 
any theology (that purports to be Christian) should be measured by the 
degree to which it speaks to the needs of Africans in their total context, 
and be judged by the degree to which it is faithful to the Christian 
Scripture. Understood as such, African theologies have the same 
reference point as any other Christian theology. 
 
• 
For African theology the relationship between theology and secular 
activity should be extremely important. The final worth of African 
theology (and for that matter any theology) should not be measured in 
terms of a “correct” and “outogeneous” hermeneutics and theology or 
dogmatic belief, but rather in imperatives for action. In the words of 
Mushete (1994:25): “Will Christians in Africa be counted among those 
agents who are inactive and ineffective in promoting social and human 
development?”  In Africa and South Africa all Christians (theologians, 
ministers, church and community) should aim to follow the example set 
by Jesus: Jesus (and the apostles) proclaimed the gospel to the Jewish 
people from within the perspective of the Jewish culture and challenged 
that culture to respond to the gospel. His message turned the 
environment and cultural protocols upside down (see Abogunrin 
2000:31). Inculturation is not new: It was part of the missionary 
activities of Jesus (Ukpong 1994:40). 
 
• 
The need for African theology to be contextual also relates to the fact 
that it seems to be impossible to talk of culture in Africa in the present 
day without coming against the question whether one should speak of 
African culture or cultures. In the words of Tienou (1990:75): “it is well-
known that contemporary Africa is as complex as any other continent in 
the world. Africa of the twentieth century may rightly be regarded as the 
home of hybrids of cultures”. This also holds true for the different 
contexts Africans find themselves in. The South African context, and 
culture, for example, has changed considerably over the past 10 years. 
696 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
A theology and hermeneutics that are able to address the social and 
spiritual needs to whom it is addressed, should therefore not only be 
specific related, but also adaptable. In the African context, especially, a 
theology that is able to identify changing needs and situations should 
be a prerequisite. 
 
• 
The impression one gets when reading the work done thus far by 
African theologians is that, at least in the majority of cases, the Old 
Testament features very prominently. Taking the political and social 
history of Africa into consideration, this state of affairs is in a certain 
sense understandable. The time, however, has come for African 
theology to also focus on the New Testament and its message of 
salvation in Jesus Christ (with all its consequences). The kingdom that 
Jesus proclaimed has definite social implications for Africa today. The 
New Testament, moreover, has a lot to say about the spiritual needs of 
the African people. Paul’s understanding of the Christ event in terms of 
justification by faith, reconciliation, and love, to be new in Christ and to 
have peace with God, must become an essential part of African 
theology, at least if it wants to be Christian. 
 
• 
From what have been said thus far, it is quite obvious that not much 
attention has been paid to the relationship between Christianity and 
traditional African religion. The reason for this is the complexity of this 
relationship. Many questions in this regard are still to a large extent 
problematic: Where should one start when doing theology in Africa? 
Should one start with indigenous religious belief, or with the Bible? 
Which should take precedence: General revelation or special 
revelation? African culture, for example, has a unitive view of reality, a 
specific understanding of the divine origin of the universe and time, and 
puts emphasis on the concrete rather on the abstract. Reality is filled 
with witchcraft, ancestry, sacred places and time, spirits and divinities 
and many other elements that are foreign to “outsiders”. How seriously 
should African theology take the message of the Bible that Jesus Christ 
not only delivered us from sin, but also, for example, from evil forces 
leading to a total well-being, to serve God without hindrance? The New 
Testament is clear on the fact that the message of Jesus turned the 
culture and environment of his day upside down. Should this have any 
implications for the relationship between Christianity and African 
traditional indigenous beliefs? Should African theology be Christian, or 
only partly Christian? Are African theologians critical enough towards 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
697 

The Word is life: African theology 
certain indigenous cultural beliefs? More specifically: Can the Biblical 
message of the final coming of Christ, the end of all things and the 
beginning of something new, be shoved aside because African culture 
has a different (cyclical) concept of time? Can Jesus be God and also 
the eldest or most important brother? Moreover: How Christian should 
African theology be? Or, put more bluntly: Can an African theology, 
which insists on building primarily on the foundation of traditional 
beliefs, be called Christian at all?  These very difficult questions need 
serious attention. A starting point to address these problems may lie in 
the warning of Tienou (1990:75): In taking seriously the so-called 
African traditional culture some theologians produce a theology that 
appears at times to be not only apologetic in essence, but also non-
Christian. Maybe we should all rethink the way in which culture shapes 
and influences the theologizing process. 
 
• 
Some African theologians should also rethink their open hostility 
towards Western exegetical methods. African theology in the past has 
made fruitful use of various “Western” exegetical methods (see section 
2 above). In the recent past, Khathide (2003) for example, has 
employed a social scientific analysis to study spirit possession in the 
first century Jewish world and Africa. The results of this study are worth 
taking notice of. 
 
• 
A final remark: Theological education in Africa should contribute, in no 
small way, to establish a Biblical and contextual African theology. 
Curricula should make provision for African theology and exegesis. 
When teaching, theologians should always be willing to rethink own 
cultural assumptions. Moreover, students from an African background 
should qualify themselves to such an extent that they themselves can 
become lecturers. 
 
To conclude: If African theology wants to be Christian, it should be Biblical 
and contextual. The first and foremost resource for African theology, as in any 
other theology that purports to be Christian, should be the word of God. The 
results of African theology should make a difference in all walks of life. 
Understood as such, the Word indeed means life, is life, and promises life in 
its fullness. 
 
That was what Jesus the Savior did – heeling the sick, feeding the 
hungry, giving hope to the hopeless, and warmly receiving those 
698 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
rejected by society and making them new people. The message of 
the Gospel will be more meaningful if the church does not 
compromise its prophetic voice in Africa (and South Africa – EvE), 
but speaks as the mouthpiece of the oppressed, the downtrodden, 
the poor, the homeless, and the hungry … The message must be 
followed by concrete examples in meeting most of the needs as 
much as possible. Jesus provides total liberation. This work of the 
church is the only way the message can become meaningful in 
Africa and the rest of the world. 
 
(Abogunrin 2000:43)27 
 
Works consulted 
Abogunrin, S O 2000. The Lucan view of Jesus Christ as the saviour of the world 
from the African perspective. Journal of Religious Thought 54(55), 1-22. 
Adamo, D T 1987. The black prophet in the Old Testament. Journal of Arabic and 
Religious Studies 4, 1-8. 
Adamo, D T 1992. Ethiopia in the Bible. African Christian Studies 8, 51-65 
Appiah-Kubi, K & Torres, S (eds) 1979. African theology en route. Maryknoll, NY: 
Orbis Books. 
Boesak, A 1979. Liberation theology in South Africa, in Appiah-Kubi & Torres 
1979:173-174. 
Dickson, K A 1984. Theology in Africa. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. 
Du Toit, C 1998. African hermeneutics, in Maimela, S & König, A. Initiation into 
theology: The rich variety of theology and hermeneutics, 373-398. Pretoria: 
Van Schaik. 
Gibellini, R (ed) 1994a. Paths of African theology. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. 
Gibellini, R 1994b. African theologians wonder … and make some proposals, in 
Gibellini 1994a:1-8. 
Isaac, E 1980. Genesis, Judaism and the sons of Ham. Slavery and Abolition 1, 1-9. 
Kabasélé, F 1991a. Christ as ancestor and elder brother, in Schreiter 1991:116-127. 
Kabasélé, F 1991b. Christ as chief, in Schreiter 1991:103-115. 
Khathide, G A 2003. Spirits in the first-century Jewish world, Luke-Acts and in the 
African context: An analysis. PhD-dissertation, University of Pretoria. 
Kolié, C 1991. Jesus as healer? in Schreiter 1991:128-150. 
Mafico, T L J 1989. Evidence for African influence on the religious customs of the 
patriarchs, in Wiggens, J B & Lull, D J (eds), Abstracts: Society of Biblical 
Literature, 91-115. Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press. 
Masamba ma Mpolo 1983. Jesus Christ, Word of life, in Sober, R & Appiah, E V (ed). 
An African call for life, 19-40. Nairobi: Uzima Press. 
Mbiti, J 1978. The Biblical basis in present trends of African theology. African 
Theological Journal 7, 72-85. 
                                                     
27 To this the following remark of Onwu (1984:46) can be added: “In Africa, vulnerability and 
underdevelopment are basic. Coincidentally, these were also problems that angered Jesus in 
his own day. They should be the core concerns of Africans in Biblical studies today. … We 
Biblical scholars cannot claim to have done our work well until our … insights have been 
communicated with vital interest and power to congregations in our land and abroad.” 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
699 

The Word is life: African theology 
Mbiti, J 1994. The Bible in African culture, in Gibellini 1994a:27-39. 
Mugambi, J N K 1974. Liberation and theology. WSCF Dossier 5, 41-42. 
Mugambi, J N K 2001. Foundation for an African approach to Biblical hermeneutics, 
in Getui, M N, Maluleke, T S & Upkong, J S (eds), Interpreting the Bible in 
Africa, 9-29. Nairobi: Acton Publishers. 
Mushete, A N 1994. An overview of African theology, in Gibellini 1994a:9-26. 
Muzorewa, G 1985. Origins and developments of African theology. Maryknoll, NY: 
Orbis Books. 
Muzorewa, G 1990. A definition of a future African theology. Africa Theological 
Journal 2, 168-179. 
Nyamiti, C 1991. African Christologies today, in Schreiter 1991:3-23. 
Oduyoye, M E 1979. The value of African religious beliefs for Christian theology, in 
Appiah-Kubi &Torres 1979:109-116 
Onwu, N 1984. The current state of Biblical studies in Africa. Journal of Religious 
Thought 41, 35-46. 
Parratt, J 1983. African theology and Biblical hermeneutics. African Theological 
Journal 12, 85-99. 
Peterson, T 1978. Ham and Japheth: The mythic world of whites in the antebellum 
South. London: Scarecrow Press. 
Punt, J 2004. Current debates on Biblical hermeneutics in South Africa and the 
postcolonial matrix. Religion and theology 11, 139-160. 
Rice, G 1972. The curse that never was (Genesis 9:18-27). Journal of Religious 
Thought 29, 1-25. 
Sanon, A T 1991. Jesus, master of initiation, in Schreiter 1991:85-102. 
Schreiter, R J 1991. Faces of Jesus in Africa. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. (Faith and 
Culture Series.) 
Tienou, T 1990. Indigenous African theologies: The uphill road. International Bulletin 
of Missionary Research 14, 73-77. 
Trigg, J W 1988. Biblical interpretation. Wilmington: Michael Glazier. 
Uka, E M 1991. Readings in African traditional religion: Structure, meaning, 
relevance, future. New York: Peter Lang. 
Ukpong, J S 1994. Christology and inculturation: A New Testament perspective, in 
Gibellini 1994a:40-61. 
Ukpong, J S 1995. Rereading the Bible with African eyes: Inculturation and 
hermeneutics. JTSA 41, 3-14. 
Ukpong, J S 1999a. Models and methods on Biblical interpretation in Africa. Neue 
Zeitschrift fur Missionswissenschaft 55, 279-295. 
Ukpong, J S 1999b. Developments in Biblical interpretation in modern Africa. 
Missionalia 27, 313-329. 
Ukpong, J S 2000. Developments in Biblical interpretation in Africa: Historical and 
hermeneutic directions. JTSA 108, 3-18. 
Wan, S 2000. Does diaspora identity imply some sort of universality?: An Asian-
American reading of Galatians, in Segovia, F F (ed), Interpreting beyond 
borders. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. (The Bible and postcolonialism 
3.) 
Waruta, D W 1991. Who is Christ for Africans today?: Priest, prophet, potentate, in 
Schreiter 1991:52-64. 
West, G O 1993. Contextual Bible study. Pietermaritzburg: Cluster Publications. 
700 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 

 
 
Ernest van Eck 
West, G O 1996. Reading the Bible differently: Giving shape to the discourse of the 
dominated. Semeia 73, 21-41. 
West, G O, 1997. On the eve of an African Biblical studies: Trajectories and trends. 
JTSA 99, 99-115. 
West, G O  2002. Unpacking the package that is the Bible in African Biblical 
scholarship, in Ukpong, J S et al (eds). Reading the Bible in the global village: 
Cape Town, 65-94. Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature. 
Williams, C 1976. The destruction of black civilization: great issues of race from 
4500BC to 2000AD. Chicago, IL: Third World Press. 
Williams, J J 1930. Hebrewisms of West Africa: From Nile to Niger with the Jews. 
London: George Allen & Unwin. 
Zahan, D 2000. Some reflections on African spirituality, in Olupona, J K (ed), African 
spirituality: Forms, meanings and expressions, 3-25. New York: Crossroad. 
 
 
HTS 62(2) 2006 
 
701 
