ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit 
of clothes:  A conceptual framework 
OPSOMMING 
 
Met in agneming van die probleme wat die Suid-
Afrikaanse kledingindustrie en veral kleinhande-
laars tans in die oog staar, is dit duidelik dat, ten 
einde te kan oorleef, kleinhandelaars gefokus moet 
kompeteer met ander wat saam met hulle in die 
mark werk. Vir meeste kleinhandelaars is dit ‘n pri-
oriteit om verbruikerstevredenheid te bewerkstellig. 
‘n Beter begrip van die verbruiker se probleme, be-
hoeftes en verwagtinge, in hierdie geval die vroeë-
adolessent s’n met betrekking tot die pas van haar 
klere, kan die kleinhandelaar in staat stel om die 
verbruiker beter te bevredig. Die doel van die studie 
is die ontwikkeling van ‘n konseptuele raamwerk 
wat in navorsing na die vroeë-adolessent se ver-
wagtinge met betrekking tot die pas van haar klere, 
gebruik kan word. Vanuit die literatuur en vorige 
navorsing het dit duidelik geword dat fisieke, psigo-
sosiale en kognitiewe ontwikkeling tydens vroeë-
adolessensie ‘n rol mag speel in die verbruiker se 
verwagtinge en die probleme wat sy met die pas 
van haar klere mag ondervind. Verder dat haar be-
grip van die pas van klere asook haar spesifieke 
kognitiewe redenasie ‘n invloed mag hê op haar 
verwagtinge met betrekking tot die pas van haar 
klere asook die wyse waarop sy pas as deel van die 
kwaliteit van klere evalueer. Dit was verder duidelik 
dat dit vir haar moontlik nie net gaan om die funk-
sionele dimensies van pas as deel van die kwaliteit 
van klere nie, maar veral ook om die estetiese di-
mensie van pas en wel dat die klere sensories mooi 
moet pas, haar emosioneel moet bevredig en vir 
haar bepaalde kognitiewe betekenis moet hê. Ge-
noemde konsepte behoort deeglik in gedagte ge-
hou te word in navorsing omtrent die vroeë-
adolessente dogter se verwagtinge met betrekking 
tot die pas van haar klere. 
 
 
 
—  Ms T Tselepis 
Department of Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria  
 
—  Prof HM de Klerk 
Department of Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria  
BACKGROUND 
 
Taking into account the problems experienced by the 
South African clothing industry and especially in retail, 
it is clear that retailers have to compete in a very fo-
cused way with others sharing the same market 
(Njobeni, 2003). For most retailers it is a priority to 
provide customer satisfaction. This endeavour is a 
long-term customer-oriented marketing strategy to 
retain loyal customers (Cronje et al, 2002:181). Sie-
ben (1991), Hawkins et al (1998:22) and Solomon and 
Rabolt (2004:21) hold that it is a more advisable strat-
egy to keep present consumers and keep them satis-
fied, rather than continually looking for new customers 
or focusing on a different market. According to Schiff-
man and Kanuk (2000:3) the only true competitive 
edge is to garner consumer satisfaction. To accom-
plish this, knowledge is required of their marketing 
needs, problems, expectations and similar aspects. 
Hawkins et al (1998:13) and Schiffman and Kanuk 
(2000:3) are of the opinion that a better understanding 
of consumer conduct will enable the retailer to satisfy 
customer needs, better see to their requirements and 
even to predict consumer behaviour. 
 
From the clothing side Dickerson (2003:21) points out 
that the clothing industry finds it increasingly difficult to 
satisfy the consumer because, apparently, consumer 
priorities have changed markedly in the last decade. 
Where, during the eighties, consumers would easily 
have bought fashionable clothing and were prepared 
to pay an appreciable amount for a specific brand 
name, consumers are now generally more value-
driven and expect more for what they are prepared to 
pay. According to Ostroff, in Solomon and Rabolt 
(2004:21), the expectations of American clothing con-
sumers were heightened during the previous decade 
as to what their clothes and the purchasing experi-
ence should signify for them. On the other hand, these 
consumers have become progressively less satisfied 
with what they were offered. 
 
Word-wide and also in South Africa, little research has 
been done on early adolescents as a consumer mar-
ket, especially regarding their evaluating criteria, ex-
pectations and problems relating to clothing. Adoles-
cents normally have a great interest in clothes and in 
their own appearance. They use clothes to feel better 
about their bodies, to conform to their peer group and 
to conform to specific role models (Kelly et al, 1974; 
Kaiser, 1990:39; Sproles & Burns, 1994:149; MacGil-
livray & Wilson, 1997). According to Marshall et al 
(2004:18-21) the early adolescent market is one of the 
fastest growing clothing markets in America. The 
same could probably be said of the situation in South 
Africa. 
Thea Tselepis and Helena M de Klerk 
83 

Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 32, 2004 
84 
about the actual, functional problems of the fit, such 
as too long or too narrow or that it is uncomfortable. 
The drastic physical bodily changes tend to lead to the 
investigation and study of the self, physically as well 
as socio-psychologically (Louw, 1990:404; MacGil-
livray & Wilson, 1997). The ultimate appearance and 
fit of clothes should, therefore, not only be comfortable 
(i.e. functional) and pleasing to the senses (for exam-
ple accentuating a slender waist). It also has to meet 
with her socio-psychological needs. The latter can 
never be judged separately from physical develop-
ment. 
 
Socio-psychological development 
 
The early adolescent has a predominant need to be-
long to and to obtain recognition from the peer group 
(Kelley et al, 1974; Louw, 1990:441; MacGillivray & 
Wilson, 1997). Most adolescents try to become inde-
pendent of their parents and exchange this depend-
ence on their parents to dependency on the peer 
group (Gormly & Brodzinsky, 1989:324; Louw, 
1990:442). The peers constitute a reference group to 
which the adolescent wants to belong and with whom 
she compares herself. In terms of clothing, fashion is 
used as a norm, indicating the dress code and how 
clothes should fit (Sproles & Burns, 1994:149). The 
peer group is thus the group from whom the early ado-
lescent girl wants to receive feedback about her cloth-
ing and her general appearance in relation to the norm 
set by fashion (Sproles & Burns, 1994:141-149; Haw-
kins et al, 1998:215). MacGillivray and Wilson (1997) 
are of the view that clothing during adolescence is 
mainly used to show  
Group-identity. The adolescent would, therefore, in-
tentionally manage her appearance allowing the peer 
group to evaluate it as a guideline and acknowledge it 
as part of the peer group (Sproles & Burns, 1994:150).  
 
It is possible to infer therefore that the early adoles-
cent, also as regards the fit of her clothes, wants to 
conform with the peer group and that it could probably 
cause problems for her. A possible problem that could 
result regarding the fit of clothes is that fashion styles 
don’t necessarily suit all figure types. Fashion does 
probably guide the concepts of the early adolescent 
about what clothes are pretty and acceptable. How-
ever, the bodies of early adolescent girls don’t neces-
sarily resemble the bodies of the models who exhibit 
the clothes via the media. The media often creates an 
unrealistic image of bodies and the fit of apparel that 
the early adolescent tries to follow slavishly (Kaiser, 
1990:129-131; Sproles & Burns, 1994:147). The result 
is that adolescents and, specifically in this case, the 
early adolescent often experiences her body nega-
tively and could experience problems about her body 
image (Kaiser, 1990:106; Parker et al, 1999:297-312). 
 
Body image, according to Kaiser (1990:98) may be 
defined as the individual’s perception of her own body, 
but also the feelings regarding her body. Early adoles-
cents have, possibly because of bodily changes, defi-
nite problems about the fit of their clothes, and also 
because of the emphasis of the media and the peer 
group on the ideal body at this period, a negative body 
Early adolescence for girls is the ages between thir-
teen and fifteen, but it could begin as early as age 
eleven. It is also the period in the individual’s life when 
drastic changes at the physical, socio-psychological 
and cognitive levels are taking place. These could 
have marked implications on the problems, needs and 
expectations about the clothing of the early adoles-
cent. Taking into account the physical changes, it 
could be argued that it could affect the fit of her 
clothes. Ranges for children may no longer fit her 
while the sizes and proportions of adult ranges are 
also not suitable for her changing body. She may also 
not be satisfied with the styles available in the chil-
dren’s or adult ranges. The result is a dissatisfied con-
sumer and more returns to the dealer due to clothes 
that do not fit properly.  
 
In order to address the problem it is necessary, in the 
first instance that a comprehensive study be under-
taken of the physical, socio-psychological and cogni-
tive changes that take place during the early adoles-
cent years and the implications that these might have 
on the fit of their clothes. Secondly, that fit is studied 
as part of quality evaluation of clothes when the con-
sumer is in the process of making a purchasing deci-
sion1. 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE EARLY ADOLESCENT 
CONSUMER 
 
Physical, socio-psychological and cognitive changes 
during early adolescence may influence these girls’ 
expectations and problems regarding the fit of their 
clothes. 
 
Physical Development 
 
Physical development during early adolescence refers 
to the growth and changes of the early adolescent’s 
body. Growth takes place relating to height, mass, 
bodily proportions and the development of secondary 
sexual characteristics. During this growth stage the 
body might appear out of proportion. Girls’ growth 
already starts between the ages of nine and eleven 
years and peaks at about twelve and a half. Hips be-
come broader and adipose tissue appears around the 
hips and legs, while the breasts are also developing 
markedly. One could speculate that these physical 
changes could influence her evaluation of her clothes 
and could possibly cause complications, especially 
regarding the fit of clothes. The fact that clothing re-
tailers provide special clothing ranges for the adoles-
cent doesn’t necessarily satisfy the early adolescent’s 
unique requirements about fit.  
 
Physical changes of the body, however, are not only 
about the consequences that she might experience 
1  The term clothing means any thing that covers the 
body 
The term clothing product/item refers to one single 
item, for example a skirt 
The term clothes/garments refer to outer clothes, also 
known as apparel 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
image (McClelland, 2000; Kowalski, 2000). They, 
therefore, not only have problems relating to the form-
ing of realistic perceptions of their bodies, but also 
experience negative feelings about their bodies and, 
ultimately, also about their whole appearance and the 
total self. At this stage eating disorders such as ano-
rexia nervosa or bulimia generally develop (Kowalski, 
2000; Thompson & Chad, 2000). One way of support-
ing the early adolescent to develop a positive body 
image, a positive self concept and an own identity is 
through her clothing. Her clothes should fit her in such 
a way that in wearing them, they satisfy her expecta-
tions, in that they suit her body, assist her in meeting 
the peer group’s norms and let her feel she is in com-
mand of herself.  
 
Cognitive development 
 
The early adolescent girl finds herself in the formal, 
operational development phase of cognitive thought 
(Louw, 1990:418). She can now think in abstracts, for 
example that wearing a garment can have emotional 
and cognitive significances. The formal, operational 
thoughts are also applied to problem solving. She is 
capable to plan in detail and is able to test each alter-
native solution to a problem without actually doing it. 
She is now able to visualise a garment on herself 
without having to don it. However, to consider more 
than one alternative can frequently lead to confusion, 
for example when she has to make a choice between 
different 
clothing 
items 
during 
decision-making 
(Gormly & Brodzinsky, 1989:308).  
 
A possible problem for the early adolescent could be 
in terms of clothing purchases as a result of limited 
understanding (knowledge and experience) of gar-
ment fit and lack of knowledge about factors that influ-
ence fit, such as body shape, type of fabric and de-
sign. Understanding, according to Plug et al (1988:30) 
may be defined as a “cognitive, thus abstract and gen-
eralised impression of a thing or a class of things. The 
understanding takes together characteristics of things 
that are common to all members of a class and, what 
is important, to understand the thing and to distinguish 
it from others. Understanding is therefore defined by 
indicating to which class of things it belongs and by 
pointing out other distinguishing features…”. Under-
standing thus includes the consumer’s theoretical/
technical knowledge of fit of clothing products, but 
also knowledge based on previous experiences. This, 
however, doesn’t include other cognitive and emo-
tional needs relating to the fit of clothes. 
 
The above definition of understanding agrees closely 
with the definition of a cognitive schema that is de-
fined as a cognitive structure that contains knowledge 
about a concept/stimulus. A cognitive schema in-
cludes the characteristics of a concept and the rela-
tionship between the characteristics (Fiske & Taylor, 
1991:97, 98). A cognitive schema is, according to 
Fiske and Taylor (1991:97) a category that assists the 
individual to understand her environment. It contains 
generic knowledge and accentuates a person’s active 
construction of reality. The inference follows that an 
understanding of a concept and a cognitive schema 
are synonymous. Understanding is thus defined from 
the standpoint of cognitive theory as a cognitive 
schema/framework that had developed from earlier 
theoretical knowledge or experience. The cognitive 
framework that the early adolescent girl has about the 
fit of clothes plays an important part in relation to her 
expectations and her evaluation of the fit of her 
clothes. 
 
The importance of a cognitive schema resides in the 
fact that it influences the encoding of new information 
and that it contains a memory of previous information 
about concepts that enable a person to draw infer-
ences from proof and argumentation (Fiske & Taylor, 
1991:121). Olson (1981:71) is of the opinion that one 
cannot make sense of a stimulus if it cannot be com-
pared with existing knowledge and be fitted into a sen-
sible category. DeLong et al (1986:17) conjecture that 
a cognitive schema includes a person’s appreciation 
of the characteristics of a concept, situations of use 
and evaluation, and rules for decision-making. By im-
plication this means that the clothing consumer’s cog-
nitive schema about a good fit could, for example, 
include her appreciation of fit (for example that the 
clothes should fit tightly), situations of use (to wear 
more daring clothes to an evening occasion), and 
evaluation or decision-making rules (such as when a 
garment will only be purchased if the hemline has a 
certain width). 
 
Cognitive schemata of consumers differ because ex-
isting theoretical/technical knowledge, previous ex-
periences and the specific situation where a decision 
has to be made, all differ. The fact that attention paid 
to a stimulus is selective by nature, can cause evalua-
tion to be subjective. Hawkins et al (1998:291) con-
sider that a person attends to stimuli regarding things 
in which a person has an interest in and can interpret. 
Therefore each consumer will take into account stimuli 
that she regards as important. It is only relevant 
knowledge that will be recalled during evaluation/
decision-making (Olson, 1981:70). By implication this 
means that the early adolescent girl probably has an 
existing schema about a suitable fit, that this schema 
includes her theoretical/technical knowledge about a 
good fit as well as previous experiences. Thus, when 
she evaluates the fit of a garment, she will evaluate 
the aspects of the garment that she finds important 
and compares it with her existing knowledge and her 
personal schema. 
 
When making a suitable decision or evaluation, new 
information is integrated with existing knowledge 
structures (Olson, 1981:70). However, it is the view of 
Baron and Byrne (1997:91) that a person, when con-
sidering a purchase, doesn’t necessarily go through 
the whole decision-making process every time. People 
often select an easier cognitive path to reach a deci-
sion. Two such cognitive shortcuts that consumers 
often use during the decision-making process and, 
specifically, during the evaluation of the product is the 
so-called false-consensus effect and the use of extrin-
sic factors as symbols of specific intrinsic factors or 
characteristics of the product. 
 
85 

Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 32, 2004 
fit. This implies that the expectations would not neces-
sarily be realistic, but may even be totally unrealistic. 
 
Taking into account the expectancy-disconfirmation 
theory, this implies then that unrealistic expectations 
could lead to cognitive disconfirmation when the con-
sumer, in the after-sales situation, wearing the gar-
ment, realises that it in fact does not meet with her 
expectations (Solomon & Rabolt, 2004:452). Con-
sumer satisfaction is thus, in the opinion of Sieben 
(1991) and Solomon and Rabolt (2004:453-455) an 
after-sales evaluation of a product, judging whether 
the product realizes or surpasses the expectations of 
the consumer. This then relates to how the consumer 
had evaluated the characteristics of the product during 
the process of deciding about the purchase and, in 
this case, the fit of the item.  Unrealistic expectations 
that were probably mainly based on the subjective use 
of cognitive shortcuts instead of being based on 
knowledge and experience about the product may 
result in an unsatisfied consumer. Figure 1 is a sche-
matic representation of the above. 
 
From the schematic representation it is clear that: 
 
♦ The physical development of the early adolescent 
may result in her experiencing certain functional 
and appearance problems with the fit of her 
clothes, which in their turn might play a part in the 
expectations that she has about the fit. 
♦ The socio-psychological development of the early 
adolescent may influence the needs that she has 
regarding the fit of her clothes, for example that it 
should agree with the norms of the group and the 
media, allow her to feel in control or dominant, and 
that these needs might impact on how she expects 
her clothes to fit her. 
♦ She might have expectations about the functional 
fit of her clothes (in that it should be comfortable), 
the aesthetic appearance of her clothes (that it 
accentuates the best features of her body), as well 
as the socio-psychological aspects of the fit of her 
clothes (that it lets her feel in control or dominant, 
feminine, etc.). 
♦ The cognitive development of the early adolescent, 
and specifically her understanding of the fit of 
clothes - whether as a result of earlier knowledge 
and experience or as the result of her cognitive 
reasoning and, specifically, the cognitive shortcuts 
that she may employ - may have an influence in 
the way she evaluates her clothing. 
♦ The evaluation of the fit of her clothes cannot be 
judged separately from her expectations and also 
not divorced from the eventual satisfaction she 
may obtain from wearing the clothes. 
♦ The eventual satisfaction when fitting clothes can-
not be seen apart from the expectations that she 
had had about the fit. 
 
The concept of fit within the evaluation of the quality of 
garments, however, is multi-dimensional by nature. 
Therefore attention is given to the concept of fit as 
part of quality evaluation. 
 
 
The early adolescent can evaluate the fit of a garment 
on basis of the false-consensus effect, which is the 
tendency of people to assume that all important others 
think in the same way (Baron & Byrne, 1997:93). It is 
often used in a situation where the individual doesn’t 
have a strong cognitive schema relating to the product 
or the situation (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:145-147). 
The early adolescent could possibly use this shortcut 
as she can be very egocentric (Gormly & Brodzinsky, 
1989:310; Louw, 2000:145-147). This aspect will pos-
sibly also influence her evaluation of the garment’s fit, 
as she might consider that her criteria for evaluating 
the fit are shared by everybody, especially by the peer 
group.  
 
A second shortcut that is generally used by consum-
ers is the use of specific extrinsic factors as indicative 
of specific intrinsic characteristics of the product – 
again usually in situations where little knowledge ex-
ists about the intrinsic factors (Eckman et al, 1990; 
Schiffman and Kanuk  (2000: 145-147). The inference 
can be drawn that extrinsic factors are also sometimes 
used to evaluate the fit of clothing items when the 
early adolescent has a limited understanding and thus 
little knowledge of and/or experience with the specific 
clothing product.  
 
 
EXPECTATIONS OF THE EARLY ADOLESCENT 
CONSUMER 
 
The question is: what does the foregoing imply for the 
expectations of the early adolescent when it comes to 
the fit of clothes? Expectations may be defined as the 
anticipation of an occurrence that will happen (Plug et 
al, 1988:322). Expectations are subjective by nature 
and serve as a standard for evaluating products (Dube 
& Schmitt, 1991). Erasmus and Donoghue (1998) 
indicate that expectations arise from needs, normative 
standards, theoretical knowledge, recommendations 
by others and personal experience. Foxall and Gold-
smith 
(1994:22-23) 
and 
Schiffman 
and 
Kanuk 
(2000:133-134) hold that consumers have certain ex-
pectations about the product and how the product will 
function. These expectations are the result of theoreti-
cal/technical knowledge of the product and what the 
product is able to accomplish, but also the result of 
previous experiences with the product, and is also 
based on socio-psychological needs that the product 
could possibly or has to satisfy. Therefore, it implies 
that the early adolescent may have certain expecta-
tions about how her clothes should fit, as well as what 
it ought to do and mean for her as a person. These 
expectations may be functional (such as that the 
clothes should fit comfortably), be aesthetic in appear-
ance (in that it matches her figure well, or has a pleas-
ing appearance),  and also that the clothing should 
satisfy her socio-psychological needs. These expecta-
tions 
are, 
according 
to 
Solomon 
and 
Rabolt 
(2004:452) not only the result of her understanding of 
how clothes can and should fit (where this under-
standing is based on theoretical knowledge and/or 
previous experience), but also the result of her own 
socio-psychological needs and personal cognitive 
reasoning about her clothes and, here, specifically its 
86 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
has the capacity to satisfy the explicit and implied 
needs of consumers (Brown & Rice, 1998:37). Ac-
cording to Holbrooks, in Oliver (1996), quality is the 
reaction to the extrinsic clues of excellence, while Pe-
ters and Waterman, in Sieben (1991:66), see it as “…
about 99,9% state of mind. It is attention to ‘trivia’ and 
the presence of persistence, not magic, that lead(s) to 
excellence”. Broadly speaking, quality may be defined 
as the pre-eminence or excellence of a product, while 
observed quality can be taken to be the consumer’s 
evaluation of the total of a product’s pre-eminence or 
excellence (Zeithaml, 1998). According to Fiore and 
Damhorst (1992) the observed quality of a product, in 
this instance a clothing product, can be defined as the 
estimated capabilities of the product to provide satis-
faction in relation to other alternatives. Zeithaml 
(1998) and Schiffman and Kanuk (2000:145-146) add 
FIT AS COMPONANT OF QUALITY EVALUATION 
OF CLOTHING 
 
The concept of quality 
 
Research related to the significance of quality and the 
way whereby consumers evaluate the quality of prod-
ucts, especially clothing products, has been increas-
ingly pleaded for since the eighties. Unfortunately, 
little research has been done in this area since the 
late-eighties and no relevant research in this area 
could be discovered that specifically refers to the 
evaluation by South African adolescent clothing con-
sumers of the quality of clothing products. 
 
The International Standards Organisation defines 
quality as the totality of characteristics of a whole that 
87 
FIGURE 1: 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT, EXPECTATIONS AND 
 
 
EVALUATION OF FIT OF CLOTHES AND SATISFACTION DURING THE AFTER-SALES 
 
 
PERIOD 
EARLY ADOLESCENT CONSUMER 
Physical development  
- Functional aspects 
- Aesthetic aspects 
 
Cognitive development
- Understanding and 
reasoning 
- Knowledge, experience 
and shortcuts 
Socio-psychological 
development 
- Group and media 
- Body image 
- Feeling of control, 
dominance, etc. 
EXPECTATIONS RELATING TO THE FIT OF CLOTHES 
- 
Functional expectations 
- 
Socio-psychological  expectations 
- 
Expectations about aesthetic appearance 
EVALUATING THE FIT OF CLOTHES DURING PURCHASING 
SATISFACTION DURING THE AFTER-SALES PERIOD 

Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 32, 2004 
that clothing consumers infer that this estimated capa-
bility to provide satisfaction, is derived from the intrin-
sic characteristics of the product it self, and also from 
other extrinsic variables.  
 
Quality judgement of clothing items/products  
 
From theory and research about the decision-making 
of the clothing consumer, it is clear that the evaluation 
of a clothing product is an important step in the deci-
sion-making process and that it includes aspects such 
as the evaluation of the quality of the product (Fiore & 
Damhorst, 1992). According to Rogers and Lutz, in 
Fowler and Clodfelter (2001), the level of quality of a 
clothing product is a difficult factor to isolate and de-
fine when a clothing product has to be evaluated. 
However, quality is still regarded as one of the main 
reasons for a consumer’s dissatisfaction with clothing 
products (Fowler & Clodfelter, 2001). 
 
Seen from the clothing marketing’s perspective, Sie-
ben (1991) and Yoon and Kijewski (1997) point out 
that the quality of clothing products is associated with 
the extent to which it satisfies the consumer’s needs. 
Brown and Rice (1998:38-39) add that the quality of 
clothing products have two dimensions, namely, a 
physical dimension, specifying what the clothing item 
is, and a behavioural dimension indicating what the 
clothing item can achieve. As the physical features 
influence the behavioural characteristics, clothing con-
sumers select clothing products because of the prod-
ucts’ physical characteristics which they believe will 
then cause specific behaviour. Physical characteristics 
include the intrinsic factors of the product such as the 
design, textiles used, construction and finish that can-
not be changed without changing the product itself. 
Sieben (1991), Brown and Rice (1998:38-39) and Ger-
sak (2002) add that the behavioural characteristics of 
clothing products can be divided into functional as well 
as aesthetic behavioural characteristics. Functional 
behavioural characteristics refer to the durability of the 
clothing product, for example suitability for various 
purposes and occasions and that the clothing item will 
keep its appearance and structure when being worn 
and cared for, or that the clothing item fits comfortably. 
Aesthetic behavioural characteristics refer to the pret-
tiness or aesthetic experience of the clothing item 
whether on a sensory level (e.g. in that the fabric 
doesn’t bunch up), emotional (evoking specific feel-
ings for the wearer), or cognitive (in that it has a cer-
tain symbolic significance for the wearer). 
 
According to Abraham-Murali and Litrell (1995), 
Zeithaml (1998) and Brown and Rice (1998:43) con-
sumers can evaluate a product at the point of pur-
chase or when using it. They found that the compre-
hensive satisfaction of a consumer with the quality of 
a clothing item, such as its fit can be measured at the 
point of purchase, and also when the item is used and 
again when it is discarded. From the research it is, 
however, clear that clothing consumers, in many 
cases, do not intentionally evaluate the quality of the 
clothing item before, during or after the purchase of 
that item and that the quality, in many cases, is in-
ferred from specific extrinsic indicators, such as the 
brand name or the store where it was bought. A spe-
cific brand name product may be beautiful for the early 
adolescent because it fits well on her body (satisfy her 
senses), or perhaps because it makes her feel in con-
trol (addressing the emotions), or maybe because it 
has significance for her seeing that she belongs to a 
specific group (cognitive). 
 
Clothing consumers have specific expectations about 
the product as a result of previous experiences with a 
similar product or from available information that could 
possibly refer to quality (Muller, 1983; Solomon, 
1996:325). Fiore and Kimle (1997:55), in addition, 
argue that the interaction between the clothing product 
and the body can further complicate the decision 
about whether to buy the clothing product because it 
doesn’t only engender sensorial reactions from the 
consumer, but also emotional and cognitive reactions. 
The consumer is, therefore, not only concerned about 
the functional quality of the clothing product, but par-
ticularly about the comprehensive satisfaction regard-
ing the sensorial, emotional and cognitive elements. 
From this a total aesthetic experience ensues for the 
consumer (Fiore & Kimle, 1997:26). The ultimate goal 
of the evaluation of the quality of clothing products is 
that the consumer will be so satisfied with the product 
that it would lead to future purchases. 
 
The concept of fit 
 
Fit may be defined as the way a clothing item con-
forms to the body (Workman & Lentz, 2000) or the 
relationship between the clothing item and the body 
(Ashdown & DeLong, 1995). Stamper et al (1991:295) 
define a well-fitting garment as one that is comfortable 
to wear, with sufficient room to allow for easy move-
ment, no unnecessary wrinkles and bunching of the 
fabric nor a display of bagginess, and that it should be 
aesthetically acceptable as well as fashionable. A 
clothing item with a good fit ought to conceal the 
wearer’s figure faults, compliment the body and pro-
vide well-balanced proportions (Tate, 2004:65). A gar-
ment of the correct size, in combination with the cor-
rect body measurements ought to result in a notable fit 
(Tate, 2004:65). Liechty et al (2000:56-58) determined 
that a good fit is based on three factors, namely bal-
ance, room for movement and appearance. Balance 
means that the garment has to be donned to evaluate 
the hang of the constituent parts making up the gar-
ment and judging whether the whole garment is hang-
ing on the body as it was intended to hang. At the 
same time all the seams have to be in their appointed 
places. Room for movement involves that aspect of 
sufficient space for easy movement when walking, 
ascending and descending stairs, sitting and kneeling 
down. Appearance means that the garment should not 
sidle into unsightly wrinkles, or present undesired 
bunching of the fabric, or start pulling in awkward di-
rections. 
 
With fit as a component of the quality of clothes, con-
sumers are concerned in the first place with the func-
tional characteristics of the fit. The garment must be 
comfortable with enough room for movement for a 
specific purpose. Secondly it has to fit well in that it 
88 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
flatters the body, hangs well and does not pull discon-
certingly. Above all the garment must suit the occa-
sion and the prescripts of fashion. From this theory it 
is clear that certain intrinsic factors of the garment, 
such as fabric, style and design, construction and size 
could influence the final fit of the garment. The aes-
thetic dimension is however, not only concerned with 
the sensorial appreciation of beauty, but also with the 
extent that the garment conforms to the socio-
psychological needs of the wearer. Where intrinsic 
characteristics may primarily influence how well the 
garment fits, extrinsic factors have a part to play in the 
emotional and cognitive-aesthetic dimensions and 
thus satisfying of the socio-psychological needs of the 
wearer.  
 
Intrinsic factors that influence fit     Fabric is an 
important intrinsic factor that, according to Kadolph et 
al (1993:7), can influence the aesthetic appearance as 
well as the physical comfort of a garment. This means 
by implication that garments of different fabrics will 
look differently on a specific body, because they could 
hang differently or because of a difference in elasticity 
of the fabric.  In this manner a garment with lots of 
elasticity would probably require less room for move-
ment and ultimately influence the fit of the item. 
 
Style/design is a second dimension that is important 
for the garment’s suitable fit. Although style is influ-
enced by fashion, it should accord with a specific fig-
ure type (Rasband, 1994:20; Tate, 2004:65). A gar-
ment, therefore, has to fit a specific figure to effect a 
well-fitting garment. Some styles are more suitable for 
some figures, while such styles would never look ac-
ceptable or be comfortable with other figures. It is, 
therefore,  not only about freedom of movement, fabric 
and the size of the garment, but also about  the choice 
of a specific style that would compliment a specific 
type of figure (Huck et al: 1997).  
 
Brown and Rice (1998:139) explain that problems with 
fit could also be the result of bad construction, such as 
puckered and skew seams. To ensure a well-fitting 
garment it is finally necessary that the garment be of 
the correct size for that specific person. Brown and 
Rice (1998:131) point out that many consumers are 
not knowledgeable about taking measurements of 
their own bodies to enable them to decide on an ap-
propriate sized garment. Furthermore, consumers lack 
certain knowledge of the way in which the size of gar-
ments is determined and how the sizes are indicated. 
This inability lessens their chances of obtaining well-
fitting clothes. 
 
Knowledge and experience of the intrinsic factors of 
clothing products that can influence these functional 
and aesthetic behavioural dimensions can thus sup-
port the early adolescent in her evaluation of the fit of 
her clothes because she can realistically evaluate the 
fabric, style/design, construction and size, taking into 
account her expectations about how her garments 
should fit. It is probably unrealistic to expect that the 
majority of consumers and more specifically the early 
adolescent will have any significant technical knowl-
edge or experience of the construction of a garment 
and how that would ultimately influence the fit. It is 
probably more realistic to expect that the early adoles-
cent has knowledge or experience about sizes, choice 
of style for her figure, and maybe the influence of the 
elasticity’s of various fabrics. This knowledge could be 
used when quality is evaluated during decision making 
to ensure satisfaction when the clothes are worn. The 
last three intrinsic factors should therefore be included 
when researching the early adolescent’s knowledge of 
and evaluating her ability to choose garments that fit 
well. 
 
Extrinsic factors of fit     The early adolescent also 
has socio-psychological needs that may influence her 
expectations about the fit of her clothes. Fiore and 
Kimle (1997:42) are of the opinion that clothing can be 
beautiful for the consumer and can satisfy her be-
cause it pleases her at the emotional and cognitive 
levels and can satisfy her socio-psychological needs. 
Although the intrinsic factors of a clothing item can 
also play a part here, consumers (especially when 
they lack knowledge and experience of the product) 
often use extrinsic factors and a particular way of 
thinking to satisfy these socio-psychological needs. 
 
Gersak (2002), North et al (2003) and Tate (2004:366) 
argue that consumers usually use brand names, price 
and place of purchase, especially when they lack 
knowledge, to evaluate the garment’s quality, which 
includes its fit. These extrinsic factors could also have 
a bearing on the satisfaction of the clothing con-
sumer’s socio-psychological needs because she can 
use them in her cognitive reasoning as symbols. It 
thus becomes meaningful for her and has nothing to 
do with the functional and beauty dimensions of the fit, 
but rather that she can use it to satisfy a specific 
socio-psychological need. A specific brand name ex-
emplifies status or enables the consumer to function in 
a group. Taking into account the early adolescent’s 
physical development it can also be argued that physi-
cal development and body growth can now often lead 
to specific problems of fit and that a negative body 
image often occurs in these years. A specific brand 
name could cause the early adolescent to feel more 
positive about her body, even if, from a purely techni-
cal viewpoint, the fit is not altogether correct. Finally, 
seen from the socio-psychological development of the 
early adolescent it is manifestly clear that the group is 
becoming increasingly important. The opinions of the 
group and the mass-media about the fit of clothes 
could be important in her expectations about how her 
clothing should fit (May & Koester, 1985:232; Moschis, 
Moore & Stanley in Shim & Koh, 1997; Marshall et al, 
2004:21). Based on the preceding discussion the 
schematic framework illustrated in Figure 2 is pro-
posed. 
 
From the schematic representation the following can 
be inferred: 
 
♦ The intrinsic factors of the clothing item such as 
the fabric, style/design, construction and size can 
influence fit as component of the quality of the 
clothes. 
♦ The behavioural characteristic of clothing items 
89 

Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 32, 2004 
must include the functional behaviour, for example 
that the clothes should fit comfortably and be suit-
able for the figure, purpose, or occasion. 
♦ Behavioural characteristics also include the aes-
thetic in that the fit creates an aesthetic experi-
ence. This means that not only should the fit be 
beautiful in that it flatters the figure or that the gar-
ment doesn’t pull awkwardly, but also that it will be 
emotionally pleasing (for example creating a sense 
of dominance for the consumer in the group) and 
also that it will be cognitively-aesthetically beautiful 
(in that it has significance for her standing in the 
group). 
♦ When the consumer has little or no knowledge and 
experience of the part played by the intrinsic fac-
tors and therefore is unable to relate those to the 
garment when evaluating its fit, she tends to make 
greater use of extrinsic factors such as brand 
name, price and similar aspects, to guide her as 
indicators for fit. 
 
 
PROPOSED CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR 
RESEARCH 
 
Taking the above literature into account, the following 
schematic conceptual framework is proposed for re-
searching early adolescent girls’ expectations about 
the fit of clothes. 
 
From the above schematic conceptual framework the 
following aspects can be inferred: 
 
♦ The physical development and changing body of 
the early adolescent can cause certain problems 
with the fit of her clothes. She has specific func-
tional needs regarding the fit of clothing. This has 
to do with the functional and aesthetic expecta-
tions that she has about the fit of her clothes, in 
that it should be comfortable and allow sufficient 
room for ease of movement, that it should suit her 
body, that it is suitable and has to be beautiful ac-
cording to the occasion as well as the standards of 
fashion.  
♦ Socio-psychological needs that the early adoles-
cent might have and that probably also originate 
from her socio-psychological development is to be 
found, in the first place, at the emotional level. This 
means that she can through fit, provide positive 
support for her feelings about her body, or that it 
allows her to feel in control of herself or even being 
dominant in the group. Secondly this occurs at the 
cognitive level in that the brand name, price, store 
and satisfying the norms set by others (for exam-
INTRINSIC FACTORS 
-  Fabric 
-  Style/design 
-  Construction 
-  Size 
FUNCTIONAL BEHAVIOR
-  Comfort 
-  Suitable for figure 
AESTHETICAL BEHAVIOUR 
-  Sensorial beautiful  
-  Emotionally beautiful 
-  Cognitively beautiful 
EXTRINSIC FACTORS
-  Brand name 
-  Price 
-  Store 
-  Opinions of others 
FIGURE 2: 
THE INFLUENCE OF INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC FACTORS ON THE FUNCTIONAL AND 
 
 
AESTHETIC BEHAVIOUR OF CLOTHING PRODUCTS 
90 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ple the peer group, mass media, current fashion) 
become significant for her and are indicative of her 
standing or that she is part of the group. These 
socio-psychological needs apparently influence the 
expectations that she has about the fit of her 
clothes. When evaluating the fit these needs may 
have such an overriding effect that she can ignore 
any consideration (in terms of knowledge and ex-
perience) of the contribution of the intrinsic factors 
of the clothing item. She is free to take cognitive 
shortcuts such as false-consensus or make sub-
jective use of extrinsic indicators of fit such as 
price or brand name as indicator or symbol. 
♦ Understanding (knowledge and experience) of the 
intrinsic factors of a clothing item that can influ-
ence fit, should play a part in the expectations that 
she has about the fit of her clothes, especially in 
relation with the functional and aesthetic expecta-
tions. To realize her expectations it should, how-
ever, be used objectively during the evaluation of 
the fit of the clothing. 
 
Unrealistic expectations or irresponsible evaluating, 
not based on theoretical/technical knowledge or previ-
ous experience could lead to cognitive disconfirmation 
when, after the item has been bought, the adolescent 
wears the item and then realises that it in fact does 
not comply with her requirements and that the sought-
after quality has not realized for her. 
 
Considering the multi-dimensionality of the concepts 
as well as the fact that little is known about this con-
sumer group’s needs, problems and expectations re-
garding the fit of their clothing, it is suggested that a 
well considered conceptual framework that contains 
all indicators and relationship is used in research. It is 
FIGURE 3: 
PROPOSED SCHEMATIC CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR RESEARCHING EARLY ADO-
 
 
LESCENT GIRLS’ EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THE FIT OF CLOTHES 
91 
PHYSICAL 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
CHANGING BODY 
UNDERSTANDING OF 
INTRINSIC FACTORS 
(Knowledge and experience) 
- 
Fabric 
- 
Style/design 
- 
Size 
SOCIO-PSYCHOLOGICAL 
NEEDS 
-  Emotional (dominance, 
body image, etc) 
-  Cognitive (significance of 
brand name, store, price, 
opinion of others) 
EXPECTATIONS OF FIT 
 
Functional 
 (Comfort) 
 
Aesthetic beauty  
(Fits the body, fashionable, doesn’t pull) 
 
Socio-psychological 
 (Emotional feelings, cognitive meaning) 
EVALUATING THE FIT 
AFTER-PURCHASE SATISFACTION 

Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 32, 2004 
further suggested that a combined quantitative-
qualitative research approach is used. This ought to 
provide the prospective researcher the opportunity not 
only to single out possible relationships between con-
cepts, but also to determine other possible new di-
mensions as perceived by the consumer.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ABRAHAM-MURALI, L & LITTRELL, MA. 1995. 
Consumers’ conceptualization of apparel attributes. 
Clothing and Textiles Research Journal 13(2):65-73. 
ASHDOWN, SP & DELONG, M. 1995. Perceptual 
testing of apparel ease variation. Applied Ergonomics 
26(1):47-54. 
BARON, RA & BYRNE, D. 1997. Social psychology. 
8th ed. Boston. Allyn & Bacon. 
BROWN, P & RICE, J. 1998. Ready-to-wear apparel 
analysis. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. 
Prentice Hall. 
CRONJE, GJ, DU TOIT, GS, & MOTLATLA, MDC. 
2002. Inleiding tot die bestuurswese. 5de uitgawe. 
Kaapstad. Oxford. 
DELONG, MR MINSHALL, B & LARNTZ, K. 1986. 
Use of schema for evaluating consumer response to 
an apparel product. Clothing and Textile Research 
Journal 5 (1):17- 26. 
DICKERSON, KG. 2003. Inside the fashion business. 
7th ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. Prentice Hall.  
DUBE, L & SCHMITT, BH. 1991.The processing of 
emotional and cognitive aspects of product usage in 
satisfaction judgments. Advances in Consumer Re-
search 18:52-56. 
ECKMAN, M DAMHORST, ML & KADOLPH, SJ. 
1990. Toward a model of the in-store purchase deci-
sion process: consumer use of criteria for evaluating 
women’s apparel. Clothing and Textiles Research 
Journal 8(2):13-22. 
ERASMUS, A & DONOGHUE, S. 1998. Consumer 
satisfaction: an unattainable ideal? Journal of Family 
Ecology and Consumer Sciences 26(1):35-42. 
FIORE, AM & DAMHORST, ML. 1992. Intrinsic cues 
as predictors of perceived quality of apparel. Journal 
of Consumer Satisfaction, Dissatisfaction and Com-
plaining Behaviour 5:168-178.  
FIORE, AM & KIMLE, PA. 1997. Understanding aes-
thetics for the merchandising and design professional. 
New York. Fairchild. 
FISKE, ST & TAYLOR, SE. 1991. Social cognition. 
2nd ed. New York. McGraw-Hill. 
FOWLER, D & CLODFELTER, R. 2001. A comparison 
of apparel quality: outlet stores versus department 
stores. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Manage-
ment 5(1):57-66. 
FOXALL, GR & GOLDSMITH, RE. 1994. Consumer 
psycology for marketing. London. Routledge. 
GERSAK, J. 2002. Development of the system for 
qualitative prediction of garments appearance quality. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Clothing 
Science 
and 
Technology 14 (3/4):169-180. 
GORMLY LY, AV &  BRODZINSKI, DM. 1989. 
Lifespan human development. 4th ed. Chicago. Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston. 
HAWKINS, DI, BEST, RJ, & CONEY, KA. 1998. Con-
sumer behavior: building a marketing strategy. 7th ed.  
Boston. McGraw Hill. 
HUCK, J, MAGANGA, O & KIM, Y. 1997. Protective 
overalls: evaluation of garment design and fit. Interna-
tional Journal of Clothing, Science and Technology 9
(1): 45-61. 
KADOLPH, SJ, LANGFORD, AL, HOLLEN, N & 
SADDLER, J. 1993. Texliles. 7th ed. New York. 
Macmillan. 
KAISER, S. 1990. The social psychology of clothing: 
symbolic appearances in context. 2nd ed. New York. 
Macmillan. 
KELLEY, EA DAIGLE, CW, LAFLEUR, RS, LAF-
LEUR, J & WILSON, LJ. 1974. Adolescent dress and 
social participation. Home Economics Research Jour-
nal 2(3): 167-175. 
KOWALSKI, KM. 2000. Focuses on the impact of 
eating habits on teenagers’ overall health. Inset: Rec-
ognizing eating disorders. Current Health 27(4):6-12. 
LOUW, DA. 1990. Menslike ontwikkeling. 2 de uit-
gawe. Pretoria. Haum. 
LIECHTY, EG, POTTBERG, DN, & RASBAND, JA. 
2000. Fitting and pattern alteration: a multi-method 
approach. New York. Fairchild. 
MACGILLIVRAY, MS & WILSON, JD. 1997. Clothing 
and appearance among early, middle and late adoles-
cents. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal 15(1): 
43-50. 
MARSHALL, SG, JACKSON, HO, STANLEY, MS, 
KEFGEN, M, & TOUCHIE-SPECHT, P. 2004. Indi-
viduality in clothing selection and personal appear-
ance. 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. Pren-
tice Hall.  
MAY, JK & KOESTER, AW. 1985. Clothing purchase 
practices of adolescents. Home Economics Research 
Journal 15(3): 226-236. 
McCLELLAND, S. 2000. Distorted images: western 
cultures are exporting their dangerous obsession with 
thinness. MacLean’s 41-46. 
MULLER, JM. 1983. Verbruikerstevredenheid met 
tekstielprodukte. Tyskrif vir Dieëtkunde en Huishoud-
kunde 11(1):28-33. 
NORTH, EJ, DE VOS, RB & KOTZE, T. 2003. The 
importance of apparel product attributes for female 
buyers. Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer 
Sciences 31:41-51. 
NJOBENI, S. 2003. SA’s clothing industry in trouble. 
Moneyweb. Available on line. URL: http://mny.co.za/
M
N
M
e
n
t
o
r
.
n
s
f
/
0
/
C2256A2A005298FAC2256DD50019F297? 
OLIVER, RL. 1996. Varieties of value in the consump-
tion satisfaction response. Advances in Consumer 
Research 23: 143-147. 
OLSON, JC. 1981. Criteria for food acceptance. Zu-
rich. Forster. 
PARKER, S, NICHTER, M, NICHTER, M, VUCK-
OVIC, N, SIMS, C & RITENBAUGH, C. 1999. Body 
image and weight concerns among African American 
and White adolescent females: differences that make 
a difference. In Damhorst, L, Miller, KA & Michelman, 
SO.1999. The meanings of dress. New York. Fair-
child. 
PLUG, C, MEYER, WF, LOUW, DA & GOUWS, LA. 
1988. Psigologie-woordeboek. Johannesburg. Lexi-
con.  
92 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 32, 2004 
Early adolescent girls’ expectations about the fit of clothes: a conceptual framework 
RASBAND, J. 1994. Fabulous fit. New York. Fairchild. 
SCHIFFMAN, LG KANUK, LL .2000. Consumer 
behavior.  7th ed. New York. Prentice–Hall. 
SHIM, S KOH, A. 1997. Profiling adolescent con-
sumer decision-making styles. Clothing and Textiles 
Research Journal 15:50-59. 
SIEBEN, WA. 1991. An interdisciplinary concept of 
apparel quality. International Textile and Apparel 
Association Special Publication  4:65-73. 
SOLOMON, MR. 1996. Consumer behavior: buying, 
having, and being. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs. Prentice 
Hall. 
SOLOMON, MR & RABOLT, NJ. 2004. Consumer 
behavior in fashion. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey. 
Prentice Hall.  
SPROLES, GB BURNS, LD. 1994. Changing appear-
ances: understanding dress in contemporary society. 
New York. Fairchild. 
STAMPER, AA, SHARP, SH & DONNEL, LB. 1991. 
Evaluating apparel quality. 2nd ed. New York. Fair-
child. 
TATE, S L. 2004. Inside fashion design. 5th ed. Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey. Prentice Hall. 
THOMPSON, AM & CHAD, KE. 2000. The relation-
ship of pubertal status to body image, social physique 
anxiety, preoccupation with weight and nutritional 
status in young females. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health 91(3):207-211. 
WORKMAN, JE & LENTZ, ES. 2000. Measurement 
specifications for manufacturers’ prototype bodies. 
Clothing and Textiles Research Journal 18(4): 251-
259. 
YOON, E & KIJEWSKI, V. 1997. Dynamics of the 
relationship between product  features, quality 
evaluation and pricing. Pricing Strategy and Practice 5
(2):45-60. 
ZEITHAML, VA. 1998. Consumer perceptions of price, 
quality, and value: a means-end model and synthesis 
of evidence. Journal of Marketing 52: 2-22. 
93 
