Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
37 
Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: 
Improvement or decline? 
RC O’Neill & Laetitia Viljoen 
OPSOMMING 
 
Die Witskrif in 1995 van die Departement van Han-
del en Nywerheid oor ‘n nasionale strategie vir die 
ontwikkeling en bevordering van klein onderne-
mings in Suid-Afrika het spesiale melding gemaak 
van die bevordering en bemagtiging van vroue in al-
le bedryfsektore. Klein ondernemings bied aan 
vroue toegang tot ekonomiese geleenthede by wy-
se van entrepreneurskap en indiensneming. Die 
klem op die ontwikkeling van vroulike entrepreneurs 
was waarskynlik ‘n poging om die wanbalans tus-
sen die geslagte en die besit van besighede reg te 
stel asook om die probleem van werkloosheid in 
Suid-Afrika aan te spreek. 
 
Die vraag ontstaan of die posisie van vroulike en-
trepreneurs met betrekking tot finansiering, konsul-
tasie, opleiding en die verskaffing van infrastruktuur 
enigsins na die verskyning van die Witskrif verander 
het. ‘n Delphi-ondersoek is onder kenners omtrent 
die ontwikkeling van vroulike entrepreneurs in Suid-
Afrika uitgevoer om hulle siening van steun aan 
vroue-entrepreneurs vóór en ná 1995 te bepaal. 
Hoewel daar steeds struikelblokke in die weg van 
vroue se toetrede tot die besigheidswêreld bestaan, 
was die meeste respondente in die Delphi-onder-
soek van mening dat die posisie van vroue-entrep-
reneurs verbeter het. 
 
 
 
—  Dr RC O’Neill 
Department of Business Management 
University of Stellenbosch 
 
—  Ms Laetitia Viljoen 
Department of Consumer Science: Food, Clothing, 
Housing, University of Stellenbosch 
INTRODUCTION 
 
According to The State of World Population study of 
the United Nations, Africa is expected to experience 
an average population growth of 2,7% compared to a 
world increase of 1,5% and only 0,3% in the devel-
oped nations in the 30-year period from 1994 to 2024. 
The report noted that cities in Africa were growing 
faster than in any other region of the world. Most of 
this growth was due to migration and hopes of escap-
ing rural poverty and not really because real opportu-
nities existed in the cities.  
 
The study concluded that urban migration, especially 
in developing countries, is virtually unstoppable, and 
that social and community dynamics will have no 
other option but to go with the flow. A successful ur-
ban future depends as much as anything else on en-
gaging all members of the community, especially 
women and the poor in a constructive political proc-
ess.  
 
The report emphasised that women could play a key 
role in making cities sustainable in integrated plans 
that linked balanced development of rural and urban 
areas to the alleviation of poverty (Nevin, 1996). 
 
The availability of entrepreneurs may be considered 
the most important prerequisite for economic develop-
ment in a country. Without entrepreneurs it becomes 
the task of the state to organise development - without 
the incentive of potential personal gain. The lack of 
entrepreneurs often results in a second-best solution 
(Botha, 1993).  
 
The 1995 publication of the White Paper on the De-
velopment of Small Business indicated that the gov-
ernment in South Africa realised the importance of 
developing entrepreneurship and small businesses. It 
was stated that small, medium and microenterprises 
(SMMEs) offered an important vehicle to addressing 
the challenges of job creation, economic growth and 
equity in South Africa:  “The stimulation of SMMEs 
must be seen as part of an integrated strategy to take 
this economy onto a higher road – one in which our 
economy is diversified, productivity is enhanced, in-
vestment is stimulated and entrepreneurship flour-
ishes” (White Paper, 1995:5). 
 
The common image of an entrepreneur is someone 
who owns a small business. There is widespread ac-
ceptance of the notion that entrepreneurship is a vari-
able phenomenon and that it has underlying dimen-
sions. The most frequently cited dimensions are inno-
vativeness, risk taking and proactive behaviour. A 
contemporary perspective is that entrepreneurs are 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
38 
found in organisations of all sizes and types and that 
small-business owners are not necessarily entrepre-
neurs (Morris & Hooper, 1996). The expressed inten-
tion to stimulate entrepreneurship by developing 
SMMEs is logical, as small businesses may be con-
sidered a natural port of entry into the business world 
(Vosloo, 1994:159). 
 
The White Paper made special reference to the devel-
opment of female entrepreneurs. One specific objec-
tive underlying the support framework of the national 
small-business policy is to facilitate equalisation of 
income, wealth and economic opportunities, with spe-
cial emphasis on supporting the advancement of 
women in all business sectors. (White Paper, 
1995:15).  
 
South Africa is looking for an industrial policy away 
from import substitution towards employment creation, 
more equal income distribution and endogenous 
growth. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
are expected to be flexible and therefore able to react 
quickly to liberalisation of the South African economy 
while playing a decisive role in local economic devel-
opment (Kesper, 1999). 
 
According to Scarborough and Zimmerer (2000:16), 
women face discrimination in the workforce. They ar-
gue that small businesses have been offering women 
opportunities for economic expression through em-
ployment and entrepreneurship. This emphasis on the 
development of female entrepreneurs is understand-
able if we know that women represent more than 50% 
of the South African population but own approximately 
33% of existing businesses. In fact, male-owned busi-
nesses outnumber female-owned businesses by more 
than two to one (Women’s Net, 1999). 
 
 
OBJECTIVE OF THE RESEARCH AND OUTLINE 
OF PROCEDURE 
 
Entrepreneurship and the role of entrepreneurs in 
small-business development have been popular top-
ics with politicians and policy makers in addressing 
issues such as finding solutions to unemployment and 
economic development problems. It remains to be 
seen, however, whether the words of politicians would 
manifest themselves in actions. This applies to both 
the current and the previous governments as South 
Africa still does not dispose of an extensive entrepre-
neurial culture.  
 
This paper emphasises female entrepreneurship. 
Business ownership is much less common among 
women than men, and the need for entrepreneurial 
development is consequently much greater among 
women. 
 
This study aimed to determine whether government 
initiatives to develop entrepreneurship have improved 
the position of female entrepreneurs in South Africa. 
The literature on the development of female entrepre-
neurship was examined, and a Delphi study was con-
ducted among experts in the field of small-business 
development. The successes, failures and challenges 
of entrepreneurship development among South Afri-
can women were investigated. The findings have 
been summarised, caveats were pointed out, and rec-
ommendations were made for future actions and re-
search. 
 
 
APPROACHES 
TO 
DEVELOPING 
ENTREPRE-
NEURSHIP 
 
There should be no difference between initiatives to 
encourage entrepreneurship among men and women. 
Recent efforts to emphasise the development of fe-
male entrepreneurs could be because men have in 
the past been favoured when it came to entrepreneu-
rial assistance - at the expense of women. Encourag-
ing female entrepreneurship could in this context be 
seen as an attempt to tip the scales for a more even 
distribution of entrepreneurial aid.  
 
General initiatives to encourage entrepreneurial de-
velopment are discussed in this section. Problems 
facing female entrepreneurs and initiatives to encour-
age female entrepreneurship are reviewed. 
 
General initiatives to encourage entrepreneurial 
development 
 
There is no consensus on appropriate policy models 
and the role of the state in encouraging entrepreneur-
ship. Three public policy models have been traced in 
the literature and are discussed for introduction pur-
poses 
 
The laissez–faire approach           This 
approach 
allows entrepreneurial start-up, survival, growth or 
decline in a market economy to develop spontane-
ously without any assistance or interference from the 
state. Whatever happens in the marketplace is seen 
as part of the business game (Peterson, 1988). It is 
doubtful whether underdeveloped and developing 
economies, with limited resources and serious unem-
ployment, can afford the laissez-faire approach to 
small-business development. 
 
The limited-environment policy approach  In terms 
of this approach, government participation is limited to 
creating a favourable tax climate and an enabling eco-
nomic environment (Peterson, 1988). Although this 
approach is more encouraging than the laissez-faire 
approach, it may not offer enough to small businesses 
in the underdeveloped and developing economies. 
This policy could be appropriate in some countries. 
Establishing a more enabling economic environment 
without special assistance in, for example, Poland, 
caused a large number of entrepreneurs, male and 
female, to start their own businesses (Zapulska, 
1997). 
 
The strategic interventionist approach       This 
is 
the opposite of the laissez-faire approach. In this case 
governments actively encourage small-business de-

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
39 
velopment through favourable tax concessions (Adibi, 
1996; Goodman et al, 1992:78; Steel, 1993:43), de-
regulation (Buvinic, 1993:295; Goodman et al, 
1993:78-81; Osei et al, 1993:70; Pearce & Sawyer, 
1996; Steel, 1993:43), and educational training for 
entrepreneurs (Bergqvist, 1995; Erwee, 1987; Maas, 
1993; Maheda, 1996; Peterson, 1988). The strategic 
interventionists assume that the basic economic infra-
structure is available or being provided (Maheda, 
1996; Simoncelli, 1997; Steel, 1993:44, 48). Further 
aid encompasses financial aid packages (Goodman et 
al, 1992:75-77; Loxton, 1997:1; Maheda, 1996; Mann 
& Thorpe, 1998; Osei et al, 1993:57; Steel, 1993:47), 
counselling programmes, procurement policies and 
programmes, and effective business advocacy pro-
grammes that alert bureaucrats to the economic bene-
fits of small-business development. There could be 
additional aids to promote the development of an en-
trepreneurial culture (Maas, 1993; Pearce & Sawyer, 
1996; Simoncelli, 1997; Steel, 1993:39).  
 
In the underdeveloped countries and in a developing 
country such as South Africa, the strategic interven-
tionist approach would be the most appropriate, pro-
vided that assistance and expenditure are closely 
monitored in the light of relatively limited capital re-
sources. The strategic interventionist approach pre-
dominates in the White Paper on Small Business in 
South Africa (1995:24-36). In principle it addresses 
most establishment needs in the small-business sec-
tor and should by implication be suitable for men as 
well as women of all racial groups. The authors con-
sequently considered the problems facing female en-
trepreneurs. 
 
Problems facing female entrepreneurs 
 
Historically the collateral requirements of financial in-
stitutions in South Africa and perceptions of risk as 
well as political factors promoted the totally uneven 
distribution of loans to blacks and women.  
 
The data on female-owned businesses are limited 
(Churchill, 1992:585), and the need for further re-
search on female entrepreneurs has been identified 
as long ago as the early 1980s (Kasarda, 1992:3). 
Dolinsky et al (1993) are of the opinion that most inter-
national studies on female entrepreneurs suffered 
from limitations that precluded their generalisation. 
Most used convenience sampling, small sample sizes, 
have a limited geographical scope and individuals 
were seldom observed over an extended period.  
 
The uneven distribution of business ownership be-
tween males and females could to a considerable ex-
tent be attributed to entry barriers experienced by fe-
males in particular, for example insufficient access to 
finance and credit facilities (Brown, 1997; Kolvereid et 
al, 1993, Maysami & Goby, 1999, Schutte et al, 1995, 
World Bank Group, 1999). Contrary to the general 
trend, the UK study of Rosa et al (1994) did not sup-
port the view that there is discrimination against 
women when it comes to bank loan applications. 
 
Other entry barriers were insufficient recognition by 
governments of the role women play in the economies 
of developing countries in particular (Brown, 1997), 
limited education and vocational training in developing 
countries in particular (Chandralekha et al, 1995), no 
collateral and no or a poor credit history, no business 
track record, lack of legal status (Brown, 1997), family 
commitments of married women (Hamilton, 1993; 
Stoner et al, 1990), and female entrepreneurs avoid-
ing the male-dominated business sectors (Erwee, 
1987; Adams et al, 1999). 
 
The problems facing female entrepreneurs in general 
are recognised by the South African government. The 
White Paper (1995) emphasises the following aspects 
relating to female entrepreneurs: 
 
♦
Problems female entrepreneurs experienced in the 
past with regard to legal status and access to fi-
nance (White Paper, 1995:12) 
♦
Special needs of female entrepreneurs with regard 
to the provision of appropriate infrastructure (White 
Paper, 1995:32) 
♦
Special training needs of female entrepreneurs 
(White Paper, 1995:33) 
♦
The need for tax concessions to large enterprises 
to support female entrepreneurs (White Paper, 
1995:38)  
♦
The need to improve the position of female entre-
preneurs as an initial high-priority target area in the 
small-business development effort (White Paper, 
1995:48).  
 
In emphasising these problems the government by 
implication recognised the potential role of female en-
trepreneurs in the future economic development of 
South Africa. 
 
General initiatives to support female entrepreneur-
ship 
 
Based on the problems female entrepreneurs faced, 
initiatives that aimed to address imbalance in business 
ownership had to focus on: 
♦
easier access to finance and credit for female en-
trepreneurs 
♦
government recognition of the role females play in 
the economy (Government assistance was cited 
as an important contributor to the business suc-
cess of female entrepreneurs in Singapore 
(Mayasami & Goby, 1999). Mlambo-Ngcuka 
(1996) suggested that governments in the South-
ern African Development Community (SADC) 
should target females as beneficiaries of govern-
ment programmes for entrepreneurial develop-
ment.) 
♦
business skills training (Dolinsky et al (1993) found 
that less educated women may face financial and 
human capital constraints that limited their busi-
ness pursuits.) 
♦
addressing problems such as lack of collateral and 
credit history (World Bank Group, 1999) (Buttner 
(1993) found that collateral requirements for fe-
male entrepreneurs in Canada were higher than 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
40 
for men. A similar trend was identified in South 
Africa (White Paper, 1995:31).) 
♦
overcoming problems posed by the absence of a 
business track record  
♦
the legal status of women 
♦
the family commitments of married women  
♦
helping females to enter male-dominated business 
sectors.  
 
Ideally all the above should be addressed to improve 
the position of female entrepreneurs. In South Africa 
some initiatives resulted from the White Paper on 
Small Business (1995). The Department of Trade and 
Industry (DTI) was entrusted with coordinating the 
implementation of the government’s strategy to sup-
port the SMMEs mapped out in the White Paper. In 
September 1995 the DTI set up the Centre for Small-
Business Promotion to perform this role. Its major fo-
cus was to provide a platform for all levels of govern-
ment – national, provincial and local – to align their 
policies and support measures for SMMEs. 
 
The National Small Business Council (NSBC), a 
statutory body to promote and represent the interests 
of SMMEs, was created in terms of the National Small 
Business Act, 1996 (Act 102 of 1996). This act illus-
trated how serious the government was to establish a 
solid policy framework for small-business develop-
ment (Ndwandwe, 1998). The NSBC’s role was to 
strengthen small-business associations and create a 
platform for SMMEs to have a say in government pol-
icy (Ndwandwe, 1998). Together with the NSBC, two 
other development bodies, namely Kuhla Enterprise 
Finance and Ntsika Enterprise Promotion, formed the 
three pillars of the government’s strategy to promoting 
a strong SMME sector (Ndwandwe, 1998). The NSBC 
was liquidated by the DTI in 1998 (Ndwandwe, 1998). 
The other two development bodies are discussed be-
low. 
 
Khula Enterprise Finance Limited               T h i s 
company was founded in 1996 with the mission to 
ensure improved availability of loans and equity capi-
tal to SMMEs. A subsidiary of Khula, namely Khula 
Institutional Services, identified specific financing 
problems among rural women and subsequently 
launched the Khula Start and Micro Start programmes 
in 1998 to promote delivery of microcredit to rural 
women and the poor. These loans range from R300 
to R3 500, and 70% of the loans were to go to women 
(Khula Enterprise Finance Limited, 1999). Khula Ca-
pacity Building is also involved in the training of both 
male and female retail financial intermediaries. 
 
Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency         T h i s 
agency was founded in 1996 to focus on services 
such as entrepreneurial and business training, busi-
ness linkages, and policy and information research. 
Local business service centres would provide coun-
selling and basic training services as well as business 
development services that concentrate on setting up 
manufacturing 
technology 
centres. 
Ntsika 
has 
pledged its special support for women’s enterprise 
initiatives (Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency, 
1999).  
Both these institutions were established to promote 
small-business development, and both suffered grow-
ing pains due to “delays in the implementation of oth-
erwise faultless policies”. On the positive side, how-
ever, government took notice of these problems and 
subsequently announced the formation of the National 
Small Business Regulatory Review (NSBRR) in 1998. 
The NSBRR had to review the impact of current legis-
lation on small businesses (Ndwandwe, 1998). For the 
purposes of this section - which is primarily concerned 
with government interventionist policies following the 
introduction of the Small Business Act of 1996 - no 
other small-business development initiatives (eg Busi-
ness Partners, Triple Trust and initiatives by NGOs 
and banks) are discussed. 
 
The impact of these small-business development ef-
forts on female entrepreneurs, established by way of a 
Delphi study, is considered in the next section. 
 
 
DELPHI STUDY OF FEMALE ENTREPRENEUR-
SHIP 
 
The lack of data about the impact of small-business 
development initiatives on the promotion of female 
entrepreneurship motivated the authors to use a Del-
phi technique to obtain information. The Delphi tech-
nique is a group survey procedure that consists of se-
quential probing phases to solicit information on a 
specific topic (Neill & Stout, 1998). The group supplies 
individual estimates, views or assumptions that are 
refined and summarised for further rounds of probing 
or questioning in order to reach consensus (Kotler, 
2000:127). The Delphi technique was chosen because 
it is useful for probing a complex topic among a group 
of knowledgeable individuals. This technique does not 
require time and the expense of bringing these indi-
viduals together to reach consensus in a systematic 
manner (Neill & Stout, 1998) 
 
Forty-nine prominent individuals in the field of small-
business development - academics, researchers and 
top-level managers of small-business development 
agencies and financing institutions - were chosen for 
the first round of the Delphi survey. The authors as-
sumed that these individuals would know about and 
understand issues pertaining to female entrepreneurs 
due to their intensive involvement in small-business 
research, development, financing and training. 
 
The first round of the Delphi study was conducted in 
June 1999. The questionnaire was designed to obtain 
the respondents’ opinions on various matters pertain-
ing to identified problem areas. These areas were as-
sumed to pose problems for female entrepreneurs 
who wanted to enter the business world, and included 
financial assistance, consulting services, training and 
infrastructure. The respondents were inter alia asked 
whether they were aware of special projects to en-
courage or promote the development of female entre-
preneurs, and to express an opinion on the position of 
female entrepreneurs since the release of the White 
Paper on Small Business Development in 1995. The 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
41 
questionnaire made provision for comments and sug-
gestions on addressing problem areas. 
 
Only fourteen of the 49 individuals identified for the 
Delphi study completed the questionnaire in the first 
round. The main reasons for not responding were that 
serious deficiencies in the available data or a total 
lack of quantitative information on female entrepre-
neurs complicated the task of substantiating opinions 
about the development of female entrepreneurs.  
 
Individual estimates and opinions expressed in the 
first round were summarised and returned to the 
same 14 respondents in November 2000 (17 months 
later). The aim of the second round was to determine 
whether the respondents would reach consensus. 
The respondents were asked whether they agreed or 
disagreed with the summarised views and assump-
tions set out as statements for round two. Twelve of 
the 14 individuals approached in round two re-
sponded. The second round confirmed the findings of 
the first round. 
 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
The two consecutive rounds of the Delphi study pro-
duced a high degree of consensus. The findings on 
the identified special problems of female entrepre-
neurs who planned to enter the world of business are 
briefly discussed below. 
 
Financial assistance 
 
Sixty-four per cent of the respondents were of the 
opinion that the number of start-up loans to female 
entrepreneurs had increased since 1995. However, 
50% of these respondents said that this increase only 
applied to microloans and that discrimination was still 
prevalent with regard to bigger loans. Seventy-one 
per cent believed that loans had increased since 
1995, but half again pointed out that this was mainly 
true of microloans. Only 57% said that loans to exist-
ing female-owned businesses had increased since 
1995.  
 
More intense female activity in the business world, an 
increase in the number of microloans, and the deter-
mination of females to succeed were offered as rea-
sons for the increase. The reluctance of financial insti-
tutions to assist females was mentioned as a stum-
bling block. This view was in agreement with data col-
lected in the literature. 
 
Special problems in obtaining finance or credit 
 
In accordance with the literature survey, the following 
specific problems were listed of female entrepreneurs 
who tried to obtain finance: 
 
♦
Lack of collateral 
♦
No credit record 
♦
Discrimination against women  
♦
Most assets registered in husband’s name 
♦
Inability to qualify for loans due to stringent criteria 
applied by banks 
♦
Lack of business and management experience. 
 
Consulting services  
 
A small majority (57%) stated that the consulting ser-
vices provided to female entrepreneurs have in-
creased since 1995. It was emphasised, however, that 
this increase applied to all businesses. Serious con-
cern was raised about the lack of coordination be-
tween service providers and the fact that capable insti-
tutions had not been sufficiently empowered by gov-
ernment. As consulting services are deemed an impor-
tant element in the strategy interventionist approach 
South Africa needs, this facet has to be addressed. 
 
Training  
 
A small majority of 57% commented that the training of 
female entrepreneurs had increased. However, the 
same percentage expressed the opinion that training 
to the entrepreneurial business sector had increased 
in general since 1995. The respondents mentioned no 
fewer that 25 different training providers. As this could 
encourage duplication, some coordination is obviously 
needed to ensure optimal efficiency in the small-
business training sector. 
 
Suggestions on improving the training of female 
entrepreneurs 
 
♦
Specially developed entrepreneurship develop-
ment programmes 
♦
Training the trainers 
♦
Subsidising training 
♦
Financial institutions including the cost of training 
in financing 
♦
Linking training to services such as mentoring and 
aftercare 
♦
Training being skills-based 
♦
Training being sector-focused 
♦
Training being similar for males and females but 
open-minded as adaptations could be needed 
♦
Training in life skills (planning and budgeting skills) 
for the less educated 
 
Infrastructure  
 
Most of the respondents (86%) were not aware of any 
additional infrastructure for female entrepreneurs since 
1995. Problems were mentioned with regard to the 
infrastructure for female entrepreneurs in rural areas, 
for example water, electricity, roads, communication 
and business sites, but no specific urban deficiencies 
were mentioned. It was pointed out that women in the 
rural areas faced the same problems as men, except 
that the position of women was worse because of land 
ownership restrictions. Some of the respondents com-
mented that the ownership problem should be ad-
dressed by the Department of Land Affairs. It was sug-
gested that partnerships be formed between infra-
structure providers to improve the position in general, 
and that the GEAR programme be should be “geared 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
42 
up”. Based on the strategic interventionist point of 
view mentioned in the literature, infrastructure has to 
be attended to. 
 
Special projects to encourage female entrepre-
neurship 
 
Half the respondents were not aware of special pro-
jects since 1995 to encourage the development of 
female entrepreneurs. This response could be attrib-
uted to insufficient marketing of these projects, as the 
respondents who had been aware of such projects 
mentioned no fewer than 11 projects. These projects 
have to be promoted better. 
 
General comments 
 
The majority of the respondents (71%) believed that 
the position of female entrepreneurs had improved 
since 1995. They based this belief on the following: 
 
♦
Women were now more accepted as equals. 
♦
Government policies favoured females. 
♦
Women entered the market at a faster rate than 
before. 
♦
Awareness has grown of the need for female en-
trepreneurs.  
♦
More people, and consequently more women, 
were entering the business world. 
 
It was mentioned on the negative side, however, that 
women were still facing discrimination in the absence 
of support systems and difficulties in obtaining loans 
from financial institutions. This corresponded with the 
general trend mentioned in the literature. 
 
Barriers to entering the business world 
 
The respondents believed that female entrepreneurs 
faced the following problems in this regard: 
 
♦
Access to finance 
♦
Lack of collateral to obtain loans 
♦
Lack of business experience and training 
♦
Lack of support from families 
♦
Lack of acceptance in the community and male 
prejudice 
♦
Lack of management skills 
♦
Poor access to information and advice 
♦
Lack of entrepreneurial spirit and knowledge in the 
field of business. 
 
These barriers correspond with those mentioned in 
the literature. Many of these can be overcome by fe-
male-focused assistance programmes steered by the 
government and the private sector. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The findings have to be interpreted with caution in 
view of the fact that the response rate in the first 
round of the Delphi study was less than satisfactory. 
Despite this limitation, however, the corroborating 
findings may claim convergent validity in terms of pre-
vious studies mentioned in the literature survey. 
 
The following corroborating findings in the empirical 
study and the literature survey apply: 
♦
Women struggled to gain access to finance. 
♦
They lacked collateral to qualify for loans. 
♦
They had insufficient business experience and 
training (corresponding with previous findings in 
developing countries). 
♦
They received little support from their families. 
♦
They were not accepted in their communities and 
were subject to male prejudice. 
♦
They lacked the required management skills, often 
due to a history of discrimination in their careers. 
♦
They had poor access to information and advice.  
♦
They lacked an entrepreneurial spirit and had in-
sufficient knowledge about their chosen fields of 
business. 
 
The research aimed to determine whether the position 
of female entrepreneurs has improved in South Africa. 
The following statements are based on consensus 
among the respondents in the second round of the 
Delphi study: 
 
Financial assistance        Financial 
assistance 
to 
female entrepreneurs has improved but only in terms 
of micro-loans. Many barriers still existed with regard 
to small, medium and large loans. 
 
Consulting services         The provision of consulting 
services has increased slightly, but coordination and 
funding were needed to utilise resources optimally. 
 
Training The provision of training has increased 
slightly, but again coordination is needed to avoid du-
plication and to improve the quality and efficiency of 
the available services. Additional financial assistance 
is needed for training. 
 
Infrastructure     The provision of infrastructure to 
female entrepreneurs has not improved and serious 
problems still existed in rural areas. The land owner-
ship issue with regard to females in rural areas has 
been mentioned as a problem, but is being investi-
gated in the National Small-Business Regulatory Re-
view. 
 
Special projects to encourage female entrepre-
neurship             Few of the respondents were aware 
of such projects, but eleven projects were in fact men-
tioned and this emphasises the need for promotion. 
 
General comments           Although little has changed 
in the position of female entrepreneurs in South Africa 
since the publication of the White Paper in 1995, the 
respondents did comment that there has been some 
change for the better. There have been some accep-
tance by communities, more government policies, 
greater awareness of the role female entrepreneurs in 
the economy, and more business start-ups. 
Many barriers to female entry into the business world 
still exist, however. Most of these barriers correspond 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
43 
with the findings in the literature survey and are there-
fore not unique to South Africa. 
 
 
OPPORTUNITIES  
 
Apart from addressing the barriers to female entry 
into the business world, the following were suggested 
in the course of the empirical survey to improve the 
development of female entrepreneurs in South Africa: 
 
♦
Focus on the provision of modular training pro-
grammes in basic business skills. 
♦
Develop the competitive advantages of women in 
the service, sewing, knitting and tourism indus-
tries. 
♦
Advocate changing roles in families, emphasising 
that it is acceptable for women to become entre-
preneurs. 
♦
Build self-confidence through motivational link-
ages. 
♦
Eradicate obstacles in the regulatory environment 
that discriminate against women. 
♦
Concentrate on capacity building and support ac-
cess to finance, information, training, advice and 
consulting services. 
♦
Pay special attention to the plight of female entre-
preneurs in rural areas (training, finance, infra-
structure and land ownership). 
 
CAVEATS 
 
♦
Unsatisfactory response in the first round of the 
Delphi study  
♦
Absence of a national register of female-owned 
businesses  
♦
Inability to use a representative sample of female 
entrepreneurs in the study 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ADAMS, M, BHOWAN, K & O’NEILL, C. 1999. Do female 
entrepreneurs avoid the male-dominated business sectors? 
Paper presented at the South African Entrepreneur and 
Small Business Association Conference, Kempton Park, 
South Africa. 
ADIBI, E. 1996. The impact of state and local taxes on job 
creation, business failure, and business formation. Journal of 
Private Enterprise11(2):107-118. 
BERGQVIST, T. 1995. Training entrepreneurship: an empiri-
cal model in Sweden. Paper presented at the Internationalis-
ing Entrepreneurship Conference in Bunbury, Australia. 
BOTHA, DJ. 1993. The government and economic develop-
ment. South African Journal of Economics and Management 
Sciences 9:8-18. 
BROWN, RC. 1997. Access to finance for women in busi-
ness: myths or realities. Keynote address at the International 
Conference for Women in SMMEs, Stellenbosch, South Af-
rica. 
BUTTNER, EH. 1993. Female entrepreneurs: how far have 
they come? Business Horizons 36(2):59-63. 
BUVINIC, M. 1993. Promoting women’s enterprises: what 
Africa can learn from Latin America, in Helmsing, AHJ & 
Kolstee, TH (eds). 1993. Small enterprises and changing 
policies. Exeter. IT Publications. 
CHANDRALEKHA, K, LAVOIE, D, FERHANA, K & 
APARNA, I. 1995. Making of rural entrepreneurs - role of 
support systems. Paper presented at the Internationalising 
Entrepreneurship Conference in Bunbury, Australia. 
CHURCHILL, NC. 1992. Research issues in entrepreneur-
ship, in Sexton, DL & Kasarda, JD (eds). 1992. State of the 
art entrepreneurship. Boston. Kent. 
DOLINSKY, AL, CAPUTO, RK, PASUMARTY, K & QUAZI, 
H. 1993. The effects of education on business ownership: a 
longitudinal study of women. Entrepreneurship Theory and 
Practice 18(1):43-53. 
ERWEE, R. 1987. Entrepreneurship as a career option for 
women: an overview of research. South African Journal of 
Business Management 18:152-161. 
GOODMAN, JP, MEANY, JW & PATE, LE. 1992. The gov-
ernment as entrepreneur, in Sexton, DL & Kasarda, JD 
(eds). 1992. State of the art entrepreneurship. Boston. Kent. 
HAMILTON, D. 1993. Ecological basis for the analysis of 
gender differences in the predisposition of self-employment, 
in Klandt, H. 1993. Entrepreneurship and Business Develop-
ment. Avebary. Aldershot. 
KASARDA, JD. 1992. Introduction in Sexton, DL & Kasarda, 
JD (eds). 1992. State of the art entrepreneurship. Boston. 
Kent. 
KESPER, AP. 1999. Small clothing manufacturers in the 
Johannesburg inner city. Urban Forum 10(2):135-164. 
KOLVEREID, L, SHANE, S & WESTHEAD, P. 1993. Is it 
equally difficult for female entrepreneurs to start businesses 
in all countries? Journal of Small Business Management 31
(3):42-51. 
KOTLER, P. 2000. Marketing management (10th ed). New 
Jersey. Prentice Hall. 
KHULA ENTERPRISE FINANCE LIMITED. 1999. http://
www.khula.org.za. Accessed 16 April 1999. 
LOXTON, L. 1997. Call to subsidise small business loans. 
Weekly Mail and Guardian 28 February.  
wysiwyg://32/http://web.sn.apc.org/wmail/issues/970228/
bus27.html. 
MAAS, GJP. 1993. Stimulating creativity and cultivating an 
entrepreneurial culture in South Africa. South African Journal 
of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management 5
(2):48-56. 
MAHEDA, D. 1996. Financial constraints on small business 
entrepreneurs: a Transkei case study. Acta Academica 29
(1):70-89. 
MANN, V & THORPE, R. 1998. Characteristics of Asian and 
white female business owners. Journal of Consumer Studies 
and Home Economics 22(4):221-229. 
MAYSAMI, RC & GOBY, VP. 1999. Female business owners 
in Singapore and elsewhere: a review of studies. Journal of 
Small Business Management 37(2):96-105. 
MLAMBO-NGCUKA, P. 1996. Keynote address at Interna-
tional Business Linkage Conference for Female Entrepre-
neurs in the SADC Region, Johannesburg. 
MORRIS, MH & HOOPER, VA. 1996. Contemporary issues 
in entrepreneurship: research perspectives from within South 
Africa. South African Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small 
Business Management 8(2):14-15 
NDWANDWE, M. 1998. Letdown for SMMEs. Enterprise 
127:60-61. 
NEILL, LA & STOUT, BL. 1998. Selection of evidences that 
assess mastery of teaching proficiencies: a Delphi process 
model. Journal of Family and Consumer Sciences Education 
16(21):76-84. 
NEVIN, T. 1996. Africa’s dilemma: population growth means 
the continent is breeding itself into poverty. Finance Week 4-
10 July:33.  
NTSIKA ENTERPRISE PROMOTION AGENCY. 1999. 
http://www.ntsika.org.za. Accessed 16 April 1999. 
OSEI, B, BAAH-NUAKOH, A, TUTU, K & SOWA, NK. 1993. 
Impact of structural adjustment on small-scale enterprises in 
Ghana, in Helmsing, AHJ & Kolstee, TH (eds). 1993. Small 
enterprises and changing policies. Exeter. IT Publications. 
PEARCE, JA & SAWYER, CE. 1996. Promoting a market 

Support for female entrepreneurs in South Africa: improvement or decline? 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
44 
economy to encourage entrepreneurial initiatives. The Jour-
nal of Private Enterprise 11(2):46-62. 
PETERSON, R. 1988. Understanding and encouraging en-
trepreneurship internationally. Journal of Small Business 
Management 26(2):1-7. 
ROSA, P, HAMILTON, D, CARTER, S & BURN, S. 1994. 
The impact of gender on small business management. Inter-
national Small Business Journal 12(3):25-32. 
SCARBOROUGH, NM & ZIMMERER, TW. 2000. Effective 
small business management (6th ed). Upper Saddle River, 
NJ. Prentice-Hall. 
SCHUTTE, JL, BOSHOFF, AB & BENNETT, HF. 1995. To-
wards establishing biographical and business background 
profiles of entrepreneurs from two ethnic and gender groups. 
Journal of Industrial Psychology 21(3):18-23. 
SIMONCELLI, F. 1997. South Africa for entrepreneurs – a 
positive outlook. Entrepreneur 16(1) 4-7,15. 
STEEL, W. 1993. Analysing the policy framework for small 
enterprise development, in Helmsing, AHJ & Kolstee, TH 
(eds). 1993. Small enterprises and changing policies. Exe-
ter. IT Publications. 
STONER, CR, HARTMAN, RI & ARORA, R. 1990. Work-
home role conflict in female owners of small businesses: an 
exploratory study. Journal of Small Business Management 
28(1):30-38. 
VOSLOO, WB (ed). 1994. Entrepreneurship and economic 
growth. Pretoria. HSRC. 
WHITE PAPER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND 
INDUSTRY. 1995. National strategy for the development and 
promotion of small business in South Africa. Pretoria. Gov-
ernment Printer. 
WOMEN’S NET. 1999. Annual review: the state of small 
business in South Africa. Ntsika Enterprise Promotion 
Agency and Centre for Small Business Promotion. http://
womensnet.org.za/enterprise/wesa.html. Accessed 16 April 
1999. 
WORLD BANK GROUP. 1999. Overview: the gender dimen-
sion of poverty in sub-Saharan Africa. http://www.worldbank.
org/html/afr/bp/gender/spastat.html. Accessed 1 May 1999. 
ZAPULSKA, A. 1997. A profile of woman entrepreneurs and 
enterprises in Poland. Journal of Small Business Manage-
ment 35(2):111-117. 
 
