Hans Abbing
Why Are 
Artists Poor?
The Exceptional Economy 
of the Arts 
Amsterdam University Pr e s s

Why Are Artists Poor?


Why Are Artists Poor?
The Exceptional Economy of the Arts
Hans Abbing
Amsterdam University Press

Photo front cover: Hans Abbing, Amsterdam
Cover design: Joseph Plateau, Amsterdam
Lay-out: Adriaan de Jonge, Amsterdam
ISBN 90 5356 565 5
NUGI 911/651
Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam, 2002
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the written permission of both
the copyright owner and the author of the book.

Table of Contents
Preface 11
1
Sacred Art   
Who Has the Power to Deﬁne Art? 17
1
Art is What People Call Art 18
2
Cultural Inferiority and Superiority Color the Economy of the 
Arts 20
3
‘Art is Sacred’ 23
4
‘Art is Authentic’ 25
5
‘Art is Superﬂuous and Remote’ 27
6
‘Art Goes Against the Rules and so Adds to Cognition’ 
(Goodman) 28
7
‘Artists Resemble Magicians’ (A personal view) 29
8
The Mythology of the Arts Inﬂuences the Economy of the Arts 30
9
Conclusion 32
2
The Denial of the Economy   
Why Are Gifts to the Arts Praised, While Market Incomes Remain
Suspect? 34
1
The Arts Depend on Gifts and Trade 38
2
The Amount of Donations and Subsidies is Exceptional 40
3
‘Art that is Given Must not be Sold’ 42
4
‘The Market Devalues Art’ 44
5
The Arts Need the High Status of the Gift Sphere 46
6
The Economy in the Arts Is Denied and Veiled 47
7
A Dual Economy Requires Special Skills 48
8
Conclusion 50
5

3
Economic Value Versus Aesthetic Value   
Is There Any Financial Reward for Quality? 52
1
Aesthetic Value and Market Value Differ in Deﬁnition 55
2
‘In the Market there is no Reward for Quality’ 56
3
Values are Shared 58
4
There is No Such Thing as a Pure Work of Art 60
5
Buyers Inﬂuence Market Value and Experts Aesthetic Value 62
6
Power Differences Rest on Economic, Cultural and Social 
Capital 64
7
In Mass Markets Quality and Sales Easily Diverge 66
8
The Strife for Cultural Superiority in the Visual Arts (An 
Example) 67
9
The Power of Words Challenges the Power of Money 69
10 The Government Transforms Cultural Power into Purchasing 
Power 70
11 Donors and Governments Know Best 73
12 Market Value and Aesthetic Value Tend to Converge in the Long
Run 74
13 Conclusion 76
4
The Selﬂessly Devoted Artist   
Are Artists Reward-Oriented? 78
1
The Selﬂess Artist is Intrinsically Motivated 81
2
Rewards Serve as Inputs 83
3
Artists are Faced with a Survival Constraint 85
4
Autonomy is Always Relative 87
5
Intrinsic Motivation Stems from Internalization 88
6
Habitus and Field 90
7
Selﬂess Devotion and the Pursuit of Gain Coincide 92
8
Artists Differ in Their Reward-Orientation 94
9
Types and Sources of Rewards Matter to Artists 96
10 Three Examples of Orientation Towards Government Rewards in
the Netherlands 99
11 Conclusion 101
5
Money for the Artist   
Are Artists Just Ill-Informed Gamblers? 103
1
Incomes in the Arts are Exceptionally High 106
2
Art Markets are Winner-Takes-All Markets 107
3
People Prefer Authenticity and are Willing to Pay for It 110
4
Incomes in the Arts are Exceptionally Low 111
5
Five Explanations for the Low Incomes Earned in the Arts 113
6
TABLE OF CONTENTS

6
Artists are Unﬁt for ‘Normal’ Jobs 115
7
Artists are Willing to Forsake Monetary Rewards 116
8
Artists are Over-Conﬁdent and Inclined to Take Risks 117
9
Artists are Ill-Informed 119
10 Conclusion 122
6
Structural Poverty   
Do Subsidies and Donations Increase Poverty? 124
1
Artists Have Not Always Been Poor 126
2
The Desire to Relieve Poverty in the Arts Led to the Emergence of
Large-Scale Subsidization 128
3
Low Incomes are Inherent to the Arts 129
4
The Number of Artists Adjusts to Subsidy Levels 131
5
Subsidies in the Netherlands Have Increased the Number of Artists
Without Reducing Poverty 132
6
Subsidies Are a Signal that Governments Take Care of Artists 136
7
Subsidies and Donations Intended to Alleviate Poverty Actually 
Exacerbate Poverty 137
8
Low-priced Education Signals that it is Safe to Become an 
Artist 140
9
Social Beneﬁts Signal that it is Safe to Become an Artist 141
10 Artists Supplement Incomes with Family Wealth and Second 
Jobs 143
11 Artists Reduce Risks by Multiple Jobholding 144
12 Artists Could be Consumers rather than Producers 146
13 Is there an Artist ‘Oversupply’ or are Low Incomes Compensated
For? 147
14 Conclusion 149
7
The Cost Disease   
Do Rising Costs in the Arts Make Subsidization Necessary? 152
1
‘Artistic Quality Should Remain the Aspiration, Regardless of the
Costs’ 154
2
‘The Arts are Stricken by a Cost Disease’ 156
3
Technical Progress has Always been a Part of the Arts 158
4
There is no True Performance 160
5
The Taboo on Technical Innovation in Classical Music is a Product
of the Times 162
6
The Cost Disease Contributes to Low Incomes while Internal Subsi-
dization Contains the Cost Disease 164
7
There is no Limit to the Demand for Works of Art 167
8
Changing Tastes Can Also Cause Financial Problems 169
7
TABLE OF CONTENTS

9
Pop Music has Attractive Qualities that Classical Music Lacks 171
10 Subsidies and Donations Exacerbate the Cost Disease 174
11 Conclusion 178
8
The Power and the Duty to Give   
Why Give to the Arts? 181
1
Donors Receive Respect 183
2
Donors Have Inﬂuence and are Necessarily Paternalistic 186
3
Art Sublimates Power and Legitimizes the Donor’s Activities 188
4
Gifts Turn into Duties 191
5
Donations and Subsidies are Embedded in Rituals 193
6
Artists Give and Pay Tribute 194
7
Family and Friends Subsidize Artists 197
8
Private Donors Give to Street Artists as well as to Prestigious Art 
Institutions 199
9
Corporations and Private Foundations Support Art 200
10 Conclusion 201
9
The Government Serves Art   
Do Art Subsidies Serve the Public Interest or Group Interests? 203
1
Art Subsidies Need Reasons 206
2
‘Art Subsidies are Necessary to Offset Market Failures’ 208
3
‘Art has Special Merits and must be Accessible to Everyone’ 210
4
The Merit Argument has been Used Successfully 211
5
‘Government Must Help Poor Artists’  213
6
‘Art is Public and the Government Must Intervene to Prevent Under-
production’ 215
7
‘Art Contributes to Economic Welfare and so Must be 
Supported’ 218
8
‘Society Needs a Reserve Army of Artists and must therefore 
Support Art’ 219
9
Government Distorts Competition in the Arts 221
10 Self-Interest Hides Behind Arguments for Art Subsidies 224
11 The Art world Beneﬁts from Subsidies 225
12 The Government is under Pressure to Subsidize the Arts 227
13 Conclusion 230
8
TABLE OF CONTENTS

10 Art Serves the Government   
How Symbiotic Is the Relationship between Art and the State? 232
1
Governments Have Interests and Tastes 234
2
Art Appears to be Less Serviceable than it was during Monarchical
Times 237
3
European Governments Carried on the Former Patronage 240
4
Veiled Display Serves Social Coherence 242
5
The Cultural Superiority of the Nation Needs Display 244
6
Government Taste Serves Display 248
7
Governments are Willing to Support the Arts 250
8
An Arts Experts Regime Harmonizes Government and Art World
Interests 252
9
Conclusion 254
Appendix: Differences between Government Involvement in the
Arts in the us and in Europe 255
11 Informal Barriers Structure the Arts   
How Free or Monopolized Are the Arts? 259
1
In other Professions Barriers Inform Consumers, Restrain Producers
and Limit Competition 262
2
The Arts Resist a Formal Control of Numbers of Artists 263
3
In the Past Numbers of Artists were Controlled 265
4
Granting Certiﬁcates to Commercial Galleries in the Netherlands
(An Example) 267
5
Characteristics of Informal Barriers 268
6
Informal Barriers Protect Collective Reputations 271
7
Innovations in the Arts are Protected and Indirectly Rewarded 272
8
The Arts are Structured and Developments are Controlled 274
9
The Risks of Some are Reduced at the Expense of Others 276
10 Conclusion 277
12 Conclusion: a Cruel Economy   
Why Is the Exceptional Economy of the Arts so Persistent? 280
1
The Economy of the Arts is an Exceptional Economy 282
2
Despite the Many Donations and Subsidies Incomes are Low in the
Arts 283
3
A Grim Picture has been Drawn 284
4
Winners Reproduce the Mystique of the Arts 287
5
Society Needs a Sacred Domain 289
6
Future Scenarios with More or Less Subsidization 291
9
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Epilogue: the Future Economy of the Arts
Is this Book’s Representation of the Economy of the Arts 
Outdated? 295
1
Signs of a Less Exceptional Economy of the Arts 295
2
Artists with New Attitudes Enter the Scene (1) 298
3
Artists with new Attitudes Enter the Scene (2) 300
4
‘Art Becomes Demystiﬁed as Society Becomes More Rational’ 301
5
‘Borders in and Around the Arts Disappear’ 303
6
‘New Techniques, Mass Consumption and Mass Media Help 
Demystify the Arts’ 306
Notes   311
Literature   349
Index of Names   361
Index of Subjects 365
10
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preface
Why is the average income of artists low? Why do so many people still
become artists despite the prospects of a low income? And why is it that
the arts rely so heavily on gifts like subsidies and donations? Are these
three phenomena related? Is it because most artists earn so little that the
arts receive so many subsidies and donations? Or is the abundance of
artists and their low incomes due to the fact that the arts receive dona-
tions and subsidies? Do artists who earn low incomes sacriﬁce them-
selves for their art, or are they being sacriﬁced by a system that pretends
to support them?
In this book I will study the causes and consequences of the pervasive
gift sphere in the arts, as well as low incomes and a large quantity of
artists. I reject the argument that people do not care enough about art
and that, consequently, an artist’s income remains low and thus donors
eventually get involved. (Regardless of one’s deﬁnition of art, the expen-
diture on art products has never been large. Nevertheless, during the last
decades, western nations expenditures on art have risen more than
incomes. Thus, the notion of under-consumption is hard to maintain.) In
order to explain the pervasive gift sphere, I examine the artists’ motiva-
tions, attitudes in the art world, and the myths surrounding art. The
argument I advance in this book is that the economy of the arts is excep-
tional. The impact of the mystique of the arts calls for a multidisciplinary
approach. Therefore, I will employ insights taken from sociology and
psychology. Nevertheless, my neoclassical background in economics will
shine through throughout the course of the book.
As an artist I am immersed in the art world. When I look around me
there is much that puzzles me. I know of artists who earn a lot of money
and I have one or two colleagues who do relatively well. Other colleagues
manage to survive, like I do, because they sell their work regularly,
receive grants and subsidies, or they have interesting second jobs. Most
of my colleagues, however, are poor. They hardly sell, have lousy second
jobs, and yet they carry on. I don’t understand why they just don’t quit
the profession.
11

As an economist and social scientist I cannot ignore this confused
state of affairs. Using a phrase of Deirdre McCloskey, I climb up to the
tenth ﬂoor and gaze down at the art world. I notice that the economy of
the arts, in its basic structure, resembles that of, say, food-production.
Both economic sectors are involved in buying and selling, while prices
govern supply and demand. Nevertheless, I remain puzzled by what I see.
For instance, I can’t comprehend the numerous donations and subsidies
nor the abundance of artists willing to work for low pay. Even from this
perspective on the tenth ﬂoor I ﬁnd it difﬁcult to see patterns in the ongo-
ing process.
The contrasts and Janus-like quality of the arts are puzzling for artist
and economist alike. Therefore, this book proposes that the artist and
economist join forces. They will look down from the tenth ﬂoor together.
Because their knowledge and perspective can reinforce each other, they
start to discern patterns in the arts economy. This book tries to explain
these patterns.
The most striking aspect in these patterns is the two-faced character
of the economy of the arts. The contrast is visible from outward signs.
On the one hand there is a world of splendor, of magniﬁcent opera
houses, chic openings, of artists earning very high incomes and of rich
donors whose status is enhanced by their association with the arts. On
the other hand there is the large majority of artists earning little or noth-
ing; often they lose money by working in the arts and make up for the
losses by working in second jobs or accepting support from their part-
ners. Moreover large sums of social security and other allowances not
intended for the arts ﬂow into it.
The contrast also shows from attitudes in the arts that are intrinsically
two-faced. On the one hand money and commerce are rejected. On the
other hand trade is very present in the temple of sacred art, as it was in the
temple of the Jews. The temple of art cannot exist without trade. More-
over, the trade in art proﬁts from the belief that art is sacred and beyond
commerce. For art-dealers denying the economy is proﬁtable: it is com-
mercial to be anti-commercial. Such denial and simultaneous embrace of
money is present in almost any transaction in the arts. Does this double
moral standard contribute to the strong contrast between wealth and
poverty in the arts? These are challenging questions that this book on the
exceptional economy of the arts tries to answer.
The Art Forms Addressed Because I am a visual artist I shall use exam-
ples from the visual arts more than from other art forms, but this does
not imply that my analysis only applies to the visual arts. On the con-
trary, in principal, I treat any object or activity that people in the West
12
PREFACE

call art. For the analysis of the economy of the arts it is important how-
ever, to acknowledge that experts (or the general public) sooner call cer-
tain objects and activities art than other objects and activities. For in-
stance opera is often ‘more art’ than pop music. In order to study this
phenomenon, no art form, low or high, will be excluded from the analy-
sis.
There is one exception; my analysis does not refer to the applied arts,
but only to the ‘ﬁne arts’ as they are called in the Anglo-Saxon countries
or the ‘autonomous arts’ as they are called in mainland Western Europe.
In the applied arts, the surplus of artists is not as large and income is more
reasonable. In other words, the economy of the applied arts is not that
exceptional.
The book analyzes the economy of the arts in mainland Western
Europe, Britain and the usa. A recurring focus in the book will be com-
paring the economy of the arts in mainland Western Western Europe and
the usa. In many respects Britain ﬁts in somewhere in the middle. There-
fore the book pays no separate attention to the economy of the arts in
countries like Canada, Australia, or Japan.
Method and Form Letting the artist and economist join forces is easier
said than done. The culture of economists differs from the culture of
artists, as was observed in The Two Cultures by C. P. Snow.1 Artists and
economists speak different languages. Nevertheless, the apparent con-
ﬂict also offers ample material for analysis. Therefore I shall begin each
chapter with a confrontation between my beliefs as an artist and my
beliefs as an economist and social scientist. In other words, by taking
both points of view seriously, I will try to deal with the economic impact
of the mystique of the arts. In doing so, I will also employ insights from
the ﬁelds of sociology and psychology.
But by using the artist’s perspective along with that of more than one
academic discipline I run the risk of losing readers along the way. On the
one hand, artists and other people working in the art as well as readers
educated in another social science may ﬁnd the story to be too economic,
while those educated in economics may ﬁnd the arguments too artistic or
sociological. I must also warn the reader that this book does not intend
to produce the precise, rigorous and parsimonious research often associ-
ated with economics. In order to make sense of the exceptional economy
of the arts I shall stress the many ambiguities that confront the study of
this peculiar economy. Nevertheless, by attempting to satisfy both the
artist and economist inside me, I hope to satisfy the reader as well.
The analysis in this book rests on existing theories, available data, and
on my own ‘ﬁeldwork’ in the arts. The observations I make as an artist
13
PREFACE

are an important ethnographic empirical source within an interpretative
approach to economics.2 They contribute to the picture of the arts eco-
nomy as I portray it in this book. I have tried to create a convincing pic-
ture. In this context, I advance a series of theses and propositions. I
would be the ﬁrst to acknowledge that the empirical support for some of
these theses is insufﬁcient. I also feel that more input from institutional
economics would have been fruitful. Because, after all, I am desperate to
resume my artwork, I am more than happy to let other, more skilled and
patient researchers ﬁll these lacunae. I certainly hope that my picture of
the economy of the arts will inspire readers to draw their own picture.
Only then will something like a ‘true’ picture begin to emerge.
The questions that are raised at the end of each chapter will hopefully
serve to stimulate the discussion. I included them to make the reading of
the text less passive. The questions do not have a single ‘correct’ answer.
The questions will hopefully invite the reader to reﬂect on the chapter’s
ﬁndings.
For Whom I Have Written the Book The ﬁrst group I had in mind while
writing this book is artists. My colleagues are likely to recognize much of
what I have written. The analysis will hopefully help them to develop a
better understanding of their economic situation. I do not expect them to
agree with all of my conclusions, but I think they will enjoy the discus-
sion. Because of its critical stance, I think that this book should be a must
read for all prospective artists. It should make them want to reconsider
their decisions that led them to become artists.
This book is also written for economists interested in culture. I expect
that for them it will contain some new and sometimes controversial
insights. The same goes for other social scientists. I have tried to present
economic insights in a way that will make them more accessible and
interesting for non-economists.
Foremost, I have written this book for art administrators and people
working in arts-related jobs. Because they are the ‘mediators’ between
the arts and the rest of the world, they must be especially puzzled by the
exceptional character of the economy of the arts. I expect that they as
well as students who intend to ﬁnd arts-related work shall beneﬁt most
from my book. This would apply to students following a variety of
courses in cultural studies, cultural economics, art economics, art his-
tory, art marketing, and art management. The book does not offer
straightforward advice, but hopefully its insights will provide the reader
with cognition, inspiration, pleasure, and some useful despair.
14
PREFACE

Acknowledgements The Art Department of the ing Group, the Erasmus
University, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sciences (ocw) and
the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research (nwo) all made
ﬁnancial contributions.
I am especially thankful to my friends Arjo Klamer and Olav Velthuis.
Klamer contributed in several ways to this book. First, he came to Rot-
terdam and gathered an inspiring group of young scholars around him.
This gave my withering interest in economics a new impetus. Second, it is
nice competing with Arjo. I try to show that some of my views are better
than his. Thirdly and most importantly, he contributed by respectfully
criticizing the manuscript. (Even an extremely authority-phobic person
as I am could handle this criticism from a ‘superior’ friend.) Olav and I
share important socio-political views. Therefore he has been a most wel-
come sparring partner throughout the writing process. Our discussions
encouraged me to go further than I otherwise would have gone.
I also want to thank the following people who all made essential con-
tributions to the book: Steve Austen, Maks Banens, Mark Blaug, Deirdre
McCloskey, Krista Connerly, Peter Cross, Wilfred Dolfsma, Maarten
Doorman, Bregje van Eekelen, Karlijn Ernst, Marlite Halbertsma, Sicco
Heyligers, Teunis IJdens, Suzanne Janssen, Rianne Lannoy, Berend Jan
Langenberg, Wouter de Nooy, Henk van Os, Pieter van Os, Bart
Plantenga, Merijn Rengers, Marc Roscam Abbing, Barend Schuurman,
Irene van Staveren, Ruth Towse, Rolf Toxopeus, Giga Weidenhammer,
Rutger Wolfson, and P.W. Zuidhof.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the following towns which I vis-
ited between August 1997 and February 2001 while writing this book.
Apart from Amsterdam I also ventured to Bangkok, Barcelona, Brussels,
Budapest, Istanbul, Liège, London, Poznan, Prague, and Reciﬁ. These
lively towns and the people I met there made this project worthwhile. For
most of the people I met, art meant little or nothing. I am amazed that I
still manage to make such a fuss about it.
15
PREFACE


Chapter 1
Sacred Art 
Who Has the Power to Deﬁne Art?
Feeling Uncomfortable About Art
Alex, who is both artist and economist, lives in a house with six adults and
two children. They share a living room and eat dinner together. The other
adults have above average educations and work in technical professions.
Alex noticed that at home he usually behaves like an economist rather than
an artist. That way they all speak the same language. When he begins to
behave like an artist, his housemates feel less comfortable.
Once a week Alex picks little Judith, one of the children in the house, up
from school and they spend the afternoon together. Sometimes they visit
galleries or museums. Judith is four and still enjoys it. The other day her fa-
ther, Eddy, conﬁded to Alex that he is pleased that Alex is bringing some
cultural education into Judith’s life. She really can’t expect to receive much
cultural education from her parents, Eddy added apologetically.
Cultural Superiority versus Inferiority
Alex ﬁnds it hard to characterize his own art. People knowledgeable about
art usually characterize his artwork as so-called contemporary or avant-
garde. They add that his art reveals aspects of outsider art or ‘art brut’.1
Alex thinks that this puts him in a no-man’s-land where his work is
respected in both avant-garde art and traditional circles. He exhibits in both
areas. However, Alex soon discovered that these two areas in the arts do
not carry the same weight in the art world.
Each year Alex exhibits his pastel drawings of ‘heads’ – as he calls them – in
an annual portrait show. The portrait painters who exhibit in this show have
one thing in common: they are not ashamed to reveal their traditional
schooling. One day during the course of the show, Alex had to be an atten-
dant. He had plenty of time to watch people. From earlier experience he
already knew that the longer visitors remain in front of a particular artist’s
work the higher their appreciation of the work. Most of the people, how-
ever, pass right by his work without stopping, as if there’s nothing to see.
When he confronts them later, they usually apologize, even though they do
not realize he is the artist. They usually say something like: “I suppose it is
17

good, but personally I don’t like it.” But he is delighted to learn that some
visitors – a minority – only have eyes for his work. When Alex confronts
them they will angrily declare that his work is the only thing here that could
be called art. Alex notes that these visitors express this as if it were a fact.
Unlike the earlier group, they did not express it as a personal opinion. There
was no apology. Alex is struck by the asymmetrical nature of the behavior of
these two groups.
Why is it that Eddy, in the ﬁrst illustration, apologizes for being unable
to provide his daughter with a more culturally oriented upbringing? And
how can we explain why the exhibition’s ordinary visitors, the ones who
prefer the traditional paintings, apologize for not showing more interest
in the avant-garde paintings, while those who prefer the avant-garde
paintings are angry at being confronted with the more traditional paint-
ings?
To be honest, as an artist and an art lover, I take the difference in
behavior for granted. I think that certain kinds of art are superior to
others, and therefore, I ﬁnd it natural that one group has no respect for
the art preferred by the other and that the latter group looks up to the art
of the ﬁrst group. As a social scientist however, I am sometimes bewil-
dered by the asymmetry in the groups’ respective appraisals, and I desire
to understand it.
Is it possible that certain artworks are ‘more’ art than others? This
depends on one’s deﬁnition of art. So, what is art? Although this is prob-
ably the last question one would expect in a book about the economy of
the arts, I intend to show that the discussion of the question is essential
for the analysis of the arts economy.
1
Art is What People Call Art
When I am among colleagues in the arts, we always end up in discussions
about what art is and what isn’t. But when I am among economists in the
art-economics ﬁeld, we never discuss this question. Likewise, in books
and articles on the economics of the arts, economists seldom pay atten-
tion to the deﬁnition of their subject matter. David Throsby, in an impor-
tant review on the progress of cultural economics, writes: “When asked
to deﬁne jazz, Louis Armstrong is reputed to have replied, ‘If you got to
ask, you ain’t never going to know.’”2 Throsby then dismisses the ques-
tion of deﬁning art. What he is suggesting by this is that if you need to ask
what art is, you will never know. At the same time, Throsby expects his
readers to know what art is. Meaning that it is tacit knowledge; that it’s
18
SACRED ART

not only impossible but also unnecessary to put such knowledge into
words.
Not deﬁning the subject matter can be tricky. After all, economists
discussing art always have an implicit notion of what art is and isn’t in
the back of their minds, and this notion necessarily inﬂuences their ﬁnd-
ings.3 For instance, in many studies on the economy of the arts no atten-
tion is paid to pop music, while the reasons for this oversight are unclear.
Is it because pop music isn’t art, or are there other reasons?
As an artist and art lover I want to believe that works of art are prod-
ucts that have intrinsic qualities that ultimately turn them into art. Cer-
tain forms of music and painting are art, others are not. But if somebody
were to ask me to name the qualities that turn paintings into art, I may
well point to qualities that some of my colleagues would disagree with.
Hence the heated discussions. Evidently, contradicting views exist on
what art is, and this does not help in the construction of a timeless deﬁni-
tion of art.
Given these kinds of controversies, it is understandable that econo-
mists do not feel competent enough to make absolute statements about
what art is. The subject matter can also be discussed in relative terms,
however. How do people deﬁne art? Do some people have a larger say in
the deﬁnition of art than others? And how do these differences translate
to the economy of the arts?
In mentioning Louis Armstrong, Throsby touches upon a phenome-
non that is important in the present context. If Throsby had written his
article on the economics of the arts in the days Louis Armstrong was
active as a musician he would never have cited him. The amazing thing is
that in those days most people would not have called Armstrong an
artist. At that time jazz was not art. It is likely that Armstrong did not see
himself as an artist. He must have certainly seen himself as a ﬁne musi-
cian and a great entertainer, as did his audience, but not as an artist.
Since then, Jazz has turned into art, even with retroactive effect. So
Throsby can cite Armstrong with no qualms in his treatise about art.
It is surprising how the boundaries of art can change so profoundly.
Values have changed and so has the deﬁnition of art. Back then Jazz was
not considered ‘real’ art and now it is. On the other hand, many art lovers
consider the late nineteenth century German symbolist paintings hardly
as ‘real’ art anymore. Thus it follows that what people call art is relative;
it is not based on intrinsic qualities, as the artist inside me would like to
believe.
Because what is considered as art is relative, I prefer to follow the soci-
ological approach: art is what people call art. The demarcation of what
art is, is based on the judgment of people, where ‘people’ can be a small
19
ART IS WHAT PEOPLE CALL ART

group of insiders or the general population. In the sociological approach
to art it is often an ‘art world’ that deﬁnes what art is in a speciﬁc artistic
area.4 The term implies that people who have a relative big say in the deﬁ-
nition of art are related; they are part of a group or ‘world’. Such worlds
can be deﬁned narrowly or broadly. If not indicated otherwise, I use art
worlds in a broad sense.
In calling certain phenomena art, people are in effect ranking these
phenomena. People are always distinguishing products that are consid-
ered art from those that are not. Behind this binary ordering lies a contin-
uous ordering. People classify products as being more or less ‘art’. Some-
where a demarcation line is drawn: above this line art is considered high
art, ﬁne art, or ‘real’ art, while below this line we ﬁnd low art, popular
art, or non-art.
Because the arts evolve and new genres arise, an art world is continu-
ously repositioning this demarcation line. This is apparent from the Jazz
example. When relatively small art worlds are analyzed, there can be as
many orderings and lines and subsequent deﬁnitions of art as there are
art worlds. Within society, however, such different opinions ‘add up’ and
a dominant deﬁnition emerges. That deﬁnition ends up governing the
economy of the arts.
It is clear that this book will not answer the literal question ‘what is
art?’ Nobody can accurately detect art by using some objective device.
Instead people are asked what they think art is. In this context it should
be noted that when people call certain things art, they do not all have the
same say or vote. Some have a bigger say than others. This is comparable
to the market where some have more money to spend than others. There-
fore, art is what people call art, acknowledging that some people have a
bigger say in it than others have (thesis 1).
2
Cultural Inferiority and Superiority Color the Economy of the Arts
As an artist I cater almost exclusively to the rich and well-educated.
Sometimes I feel uncomfortable about this. I often don’t feel my work is
any better than that of ‘artists’ whose work can be found in open-air
markets for instance, and who sell their work to the not so rich and the
not as well educated people. I don’t understand why my work is judged to
be true art while theirs is not. As a social scientist I want to understand
this phenomenon. That’s why I climb up to the tenth ﬂoor in the hope of
seeing a pattern to what is going on.
From the tenth ﬂoor I notice that the phenomenon is not unique. First
of all, I see many other examples of systematic differences in taste
20
SACRED ART

between the higher and lower strata in classes. I notice, for instance, that
the printer of this book, with his working-class background, buys Guns
and Roses cds, comic books, and a little sculpture of a dolphin to put on
his windowsill. These things represent art to him. The editor of this
book, who has a more upscale upbringing, buys cds with music com-
posed by Paganini and goes to the museum of modern art to look at
paintings by Lichtenstein and sculptures by Jeff Koons. That is her art.
Tastes differ; this is not so special. At ﬁrst sight, these divergent prefer-
ences appear to originate from non-overlapping, separate realms, which
are based on completely different and irreconcilable views of what art is.
Then I notice that the editor and the printer know about each other’s
choices when it comes to art, albeit not in detail. They judge each other’s
art. On the one hand, comic book drawings are less art to the editor than
Lichtenstein’s blow-ups. As a matter of fact, she actually resents the
printer’s choices in art: “This is not art!” On the other hand, the printer
could well say something like: “Well, yes, this classical stuff – what was
the name? Paginanni? – is of course ‘real’ art and Guns and Roses is not.
Yes, I know, classical music is ‘real’ art, and I suppose I should know
more about it, and about the things in museums of modern art as well but,
well, you know, it’s just not for people like me.” Evidently he looks up to
the editor’s high art, while the editor looks down on the printer’s low art.
Research has shown that social classes are not only vaguely aware of
each other’s preferences, but that they order them more or less similarly.5
What is high for the editor is also high for the printer. Therefore judg-
ments regarding art are largely similar between various social groups.
They run parallel. However, judgments concerning each other’s art
choices do not run similar. On the contrary, they are asymmetrical.
It is this apparent asymmetry or non-reciprocity in judgments that is
so striking. People have notions regarding the art of other social groups
and they assess these notions. Group A puts down the art of group B,
while group B looks up to the art choices made by group A. I call this the
phenomenon of asymmetric judgment or cultural asymmetry.6 It is this
asymmetry that is revealed by the illustrations. In the ﬁrst illustration the
a-cultural housemate apologizes for not being culturally educated. The
second illustration reveals a group apologizing for preferring traditional
art, while the group that prefers contemporary art scolds the traditional
art group for their preferences. The fact that those moving up the social
ladder are more likely to change their choice of art than those moving
down also proves that judgments are asymmetrical. Two types of art
exist: superior and inferior art, high and low art, or real and non-art.
Normally, people are so involved in discussions regarding high versus
low art that they are unable to develop a tenth-ﬂoor perspective to see
21
CULTURAL INFERIORITY AND SUPERIORITY COLOR THE ECONOMY OF THE  ARTS

patterns in their and other people’s behavior. From the tenth ﬂoor, how-
ever, we observe that there is considerable social agreement on what is
‘real’ art and what is not. Within a given culture, a dominant and univer-
sal undercurrent exists which determines what is more and what is less
art.7
Much of the reasoning in later chapters rests on the thesis that because
of cultural inferiority and cultural superiority judgments are asymmet-
ric. The thesis rests on ﬁve generally held assumptions.
1 There exists a general social stratiﬁcation in society. Some people hold
higher positions, with more wealth and honor than other people, and
most people are aware of these positions.
2 People want to ‘better themselves’. (This is a basic assumption in eco-
nomics.) This implies that people prefer climbing up the social ladder
to falling down.
3 Because people aspire to higher positions on the social ladder, they
focus on the symbolic goods and practices, including works of art and
ways of consuming art, of those people in higher positions. They look
up to these goods and practices. It is their future. On the other hand,
they try to distance themselves from people lower than them on the
social ladder. They look down on their goods and practices.
4 Because of its symbolically rich content art is used to mark one’s social
status.
5 Social coherence in society is strong enough to maintain a shared
notion of high and low art.8
If these assumptions are correct, they offer a solution to the questions
raised in the illustrations. ‘Why do the lower classes look up to the art
chosen by the upper classes, while the latter look down upon the art of
the former?’ ‘How can we explain why Eddy and the people at the exhibi-
tion look up to the ﬁne arts and apologize for knowing so little about it?’
Because people want to improve their social standing, they are generally
oriented towards the art of the people above them, and apologize for
their own choices. ‘And why do people broadly agree on what real art is?’
Due to social cohesion people share a general notion of high and low in
society.
Generally these assumptions are seldom disputed. Nevertheless, some
people argue that the differences between high and low art have started
to disappear.9 It’s true that some contemporary consumers of high art
also quite publicly consume low art as well. This could signify that cul-
tural asymmetry would become less important. For instance, I listen to
Tom Jones even though I have little in common with the average Tom
Jones fan. This kind of cosmopolitan omnivorousness, as Peterson calls
22
SACRED ART

23
‘ART IS SACRED’
it, however, does not necessarily contradict the notion of asymmetry.10
(1) This phenomenon is for the most part non-reciprocal; it applies
mostly to elite art consumers and seldom to the average consumer of low
art.11 (2) It is often more relevant to look at the ways in which art prod-
ucts are consumed.12 Even when certain works of art, like Van Gogh
paintings, are ‘shared’ by high and low groups, the ways in which the art-
works are consumed and the symbolic practices in which they serve differ
between the various classes.13 For instance, when lower class art
becomes part of the omnivorous consumption patterns of higher classes
these patterns are sometimes ‘camp’. A double moral standard is
involved here: consumers both admire and mock the culture of the lower
classes. Therefore, I do not think that the difference between high and
low art is necessarily disappearing and I maintain that the thesis of asym-
metric judgment remains valid.14
By the way, as is common in the ﬁeld of economics, I use such terms as
‘consumption’, ‘to consume’, and ‘consumer’ in a broad sense. Some
readers will probably associate consumption with ‘using up’, but in this
book, consuming art does not imply that art is swallowed. Watching, lis-
tening, and attending can all be forms of consumption.
As long as there is social stratiﬁcation and as long as art products are
used to mark a person’s position on the social ladder, an asymmetric
judgment of art products will exist. People higher on the ladder look
down on the art of people lower than them, while the latter do not look
down on, but look up to the art of the former (thesis 2). It follows that the
power to deﬁne art is not distributed equally among social classes (thesis
3). People in higher positions have a de facto larger say in the deﬁnition
of art than people in lower positions (thesis 4). Whether they are aware
of it or not, people in higher positions appropriate the deﬁnition of art.
3
‘Art is Sacred’
Art is apparently attractive to the higher social classes. So what are the
attractive qualities that people in the art world associate with art?
Sacredness is one such quality and a relatively constant one at that.
Long before Romanticism, people associated art with what was con-
sidered sacred, an association that became ﬁrmly established during this
period. And ever since Romanticism, people have tended to call what
they perceive as sacred objects and activities art and vice versa. By calling
objects and activities art they become consecrated. What people label as
art tends to be considered sacred or to stand for sacred matters.15
It is important to emphasize that this view does not imply that art is

sacred in any objective sense. (Nor that the author believes art to be
sacred. On the contrary, many insights in this book tend to demystify
art.) Yet, it is also important to acknowledge that when a general belief in
art’s sacredness exists in society, anyone can harbor traces of this belief.
I am no different. I too tend to put art on a pedestal, as if it were holy
and therefore in need of special treatment. Let me offer two examples.
First, when I meet youngsters who are interested in becoming artists, I
immediately start to stimulate them. I would not bother if all they
wanted to become was a hairdresser or a manager. Only later will I
inform them that there are already too many artists and that art might
end up disappointing them. Second, recently in a Dutch journal I advo-
cated for lower subsidies for the arts in the Netherlands. After I had writ-
ten down my opinion, I noticed that I was my own worst enemy. Even
before anybody reacted, I started to feel guilty and I had many sleepless
nights. It felt as if I had somehow desecrated art.
Many artists and art lovers experience art as intrinsically sacred. The
work of art is animated. Not only is the artist ‘in’ the work of art, but
often God or a supernatural power as well. Art is miraculous. It is a gift
from above and artists are gifted. Because the source of the gift is
unknown, a miracle is involved that goes beyond human understand-
ing.16
It has been suggested that in its sacredness, art has joined religion and
to some degree taken its place.17 Whether this is true or not, part of art
consumption clearly resembles religious consumption. For instance, the
silence in museums and at classical concerts reminds us of religious wor-
ship.18 Art has an aura, as Walter Benjamin called it. He drew attention
to the cult value of art and the ritual functions of art.19 The higher the
cult value of objects and activities and the more important their ritual
functions, in other words, the more sacred objects and activities are, and
consequently, the more likely they will be called art. (Benjamin expected
that the technical reproduction of art would lead to its demystiﬁcation.
But thus far, technical reproduction has not put an end to the cult of art.
It has instead only added new forms.)
The fact that art or the ﬁne arts are put on a pedestal may serve a pur-
pose. Art probably represents or expresses values that are of the utmost
importance to society. Art, like religion, manifests the basic values in
society and the changes in those values. Moreover, works of art comment
on these values, often less directly, but not necessarily less effectively
than the stories in the great religious books once did. In their recording
capacity, art offers an amazing archive of what came before. No history
book can compete with the vividness of old paintings, sculptures, and lit-
erature. ‘Art’ is a treasure trove consisting of almost everything of value
24
SACRED ART

that our ancestors have left behind. This way art stands for the accumu-
lated past. It is above all this quality that adds to the assumed sacredness
of art. Artists, like priests, both guard this treasure trove and add to it.
Because art represents high values, it is looked up to. Art as a bearer of
the values of civilization must be sacred.20 The same applies when art
expresses important values inherent to the identities of nations or of
ethnic and religious groups.
The perversity of the low or popular ‘art’ of the common man adds to
the sacredness of high art. Low ‘art’ degrades, while ﬁne art ennobles. To
Allen Bloom in his book The Closing of the American Mind, rock music
offers “nothing high, profound, delicate, tasteful, or even decent”, while
ﬁne art, including classical music, is “something high, profound,
respectable”.21 Therefore, the asymmetrical valuation in the arts does
not only follow from the sacredness and therefore absolute superiority of
the ﬁne arts, but also from the perversity of low ‘art’.
In other respects as well, art’s sacredness does not stand on its own. It
interacts with other relatively constant factors to determine what people
call art, like the authenticity, uselessness, and remoteness of art, ele-
ments that will be discussed in the following sections.
4
‘Art is Authentic’
A work of art and its maker are said to be authentic. In a formal sense,
they are authentic if the artist in question is the only one who could have
made the particular work of art.22 A unique ﬁngerprint of the artist
somehow manages to creep into the work of art, its style, the signature or
some other quality.23 In expressionist works of art the personal touch is
very visible; people ‘recognize’ the artist in the work of art. In other
works of art this quality remains more hidden; in fact, so much so that
sometimes only the artist’s signature can be veriﬁed as genuine.
Because of authenticity people look up to art and artists. What else can
explain that in 1998 the Dutch government was prepared to pay 36 mil-
lion Euro (appr. 32 million Dollars) for an unﬁnished painting by Mon-
drian, as mentioned in the illustration on page 232? After all, it’s just a
piece of linen on a wooden frame with some dots of paint on it.24 Much
cheaper copies could easily be produced, which in their appearance could
offer almost anything the original offers. Nevertheless, people believe
that the original is irreplaceable, because they know that Mondrian made
this speciﬁc work of art. They feel that in one way or another he is ‘in’ the
painting. Or, to give another example, only the extreme importance of
authenticity can explain that the price of a Rembrandt painting drops to
25
‘ART IS AUTHENTIC’

less than a tenth when experts prove that a student of Rembrandt painted
it.
The extraordinary value of authenticity in modern art has a long his-
tory, which commences in the Renaissance. Prior to the Renaissance,
works people now call art were basically multiples usually made by
trained artisans. The producers never intended to let their personalities
inﬂuence their work. It was during the Renaissance that works of art
began to become animated – the artist ‘entered’ the work of art. There-
fore, the signature of the artist was no longer irrelevant. Animation was
clearly a magical act. Gradually it began to render the work of art sacred,
and little by little this sacredness started to rub off on artists as well.
Before the Renaissance, people were primarily part of a group. Since
the Renaissance, authenticity has gradually become one of the highest
ideals in modern society. Only with Romanticism did this ideal become
clearly embodied in speciﬁc individuals, above all in so-called bohemian
artists. Culture as a representation of a superior reality was an ‘inven-
tion’ of Romanticism, as was the notion of free disinterested, sponta-
neous ‘creation’, founded on innate inspiration.25
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, artists began to emerge as
bohemians who stood next to the bourgeoisie. At ﬁrst these bohemian
artists were relatively unimportant. By the end of the nineteenth century,
their numbers had increased and by the early twentieth century the pres-
ence of bohemian artists was felt everywhere. At present, the bohemian
artist serves as the role model for almost all artists. Even for those (post-
modern) artists who oppose this model and try to develop a new model,
the old model remains the point of reference.
Artists were and are the only people who can give veriﬁable proof of
their uniqueness, of their authenticity. Although in everyday life, the
bourgeoisie may have shown their contempt for bohemian artists, they
also developed feelings of jealousy for these artists as well as an increas-
ing esteem for successful artists and art generally. Successful artists were
viewed as the sole producers of authenticity. True artists were and are
geniuses. This worship of art has become very important in the twentieth
century.
Beginning with the Renaissance and up to Romanticism, some artists
were held in high esteem but they did not offer an alternative to the bour-
geois lifestyle, which was ﬁrmly implanted in the world of business and
commerce of those days. However, over the last one hundred and ﬁfty
years artists and the arts have become symbols of an alternative to the
bourgeois lifestyle. It was a romantic, not a realistic alternative; and this
probably added to its allure. Since Romanticism, society has worshipped
authentic and sacred art.
26
SACRED ART

Art consumers often try to identify with one or more of their favorite
artists. By listening to their works or by surrounding themselves with
their works they share a little of the artist’s uniqueness.26 Artists are
adored. In the market, this leads to extremely high prices as well as high
incomes for a small select group of artists.
Even today people are still jealous of artists. It is telling that when I am
at a social gathering of scientists, the host will usually introduce me
emphatically as an artist. Moreover, I get far more attention than I
would get, were I presented as an economist. This implies that a romantic
vision of the arts still exists. In our rational modern society art ﬁlls a void
or compensates for what is missing in our everyday lives. The arts offer a
romantic alternative (thesis 5).27
5
‘Art is Superﬂuous and Remote’
Remoteness and uselessness are two other relatively constant factors
that can often be found in objects and activities that people call art and
consequently, add to the notion of art’s sacredness. Art tends to be
detached from the needs of everyday life.28 Food for instance, fulﬁlls
needs. Among its functions are nourishment and social gatherings. But
art seems to serve no such purpose; it is superﬂuous, luxury par excel-
lence. The aesthetic experience thus is an aim in itself.
According to Laermans, classical music and modern visual art are
considered art because people have conferred the characteristics of use-
lessness and luxury on them. Their only acknowledged purpose is the
rendering of an aesthetic experience. Pop music and other forms of mass-
produced low art products, on the other hand, are not art, because
people need them in order to identify with other people, to ﬁnd role
models, to understand life and most importantly, to learn about what is
good and what is bad.29
In this respect it is revealing that when artists in low art genres such as
pop music or advertisement design try to join the ﬁne arts, they often
claim that their products have become more formal and more detached
and therefore less useful.
If art has little use value it becomes a luxury and thus works of art can
be found primarily among wealthy people and institutions. Since their
daily needs are fulﬁlled they can afford art. In this respect, art is aristo-
cratic. It comes to people who never had to work hard to be able to buy it
and who apparently do not ‘need’ it. The fact that art and the consump-
tion of art are elevated above the daily worries of the vast majority of
mankind, gives art its special status.
27
‘ART IS SUPERFLUOUS AND REMOTE’

Art as a luxury good is also remote; it is hard to access. It is often
expensive. Many people lack the funds or the mental space to afford such
a luxury. They are too involved in the provision of the demands of every
day life. So they look up to those who can afford art. And they look up to
art. It partly explains the asymmetry in the perception of art that was dis-
cussed earlier. Outsiders get glimpses of the large and impressive paint-
ings in the museums of modern art and of expensive operas performed in
splendid opera houses; therefore they look up to these institutions,
which, to them, are so inaccessible in their remoteness. There is a parallel
here with the church. In churches and cathedrals people also received a
hint of the actual thing that remained partly hidden. Therefore, those
who have access to works of art are a bit like gods, apparently free of
earthly worries.30
In ‘what people call art’, a subjective experience of uselessness is a re-
latively constant factor that makes art even more sacred. This is what
matters in the context of this chapter. Nevertheless, from the tenth ﬂoor
we can see that ‘useless’ ﬁne art is actually put to many uses. From here
we can see, for instance, that all the different aforementioned uses of pop
music apply to the ﬁne arts as well. High art also serves a function in the
development of identities and in the learning about good and bad. More-
over, high art has functions of its own. It is used for distinction.31 People
impress other people by displaying the assumed uselessness of their art;
in consuming art they reveal how free they are of daily worries. And they
use art to defend their high social position.
6
‘Art Goes Against the Rules and so Adds to Cognition’ (Goodman)
Two more relatively constant factors in the deﬁnition of art need to be
discussed because they play a role in this book’s analysis: inventiveness
and illusion. Ever since Hegel, philosophers of art have viewed works of
art as part of a chain of inventions. Hegel, Adorno, Goodman, Barthes,
and Lyotard, all of whom represent important schools of thought, have
emphasized that works of art follow from one another.32 Art is unﬁn-
ished in its form.33 Later works of art both follow and challenge their
predecessors. By innovating, artists deliberately break rules.34 Some-
times innovation or change is seen as progress in art but not necessarily
so.35 (It clearly does not represent progress for a postmodernist like
Lyotard. Moreover, innovation is certainly not a constant feature of art
at all times and in all cultures.)
In Goodman’s approach for instance, artists violate existing rules by
introducing new metaphors, which link two symbol systems.36 In doing
28
SACRED ART

so they create illusions. Therefore, new art challenges minor or major
taboos (thesis 6). When Van Gogh changed the existing visual ‘language’
he encountered nothing but resistance, while today people everywhere
appreciate the changes he instituted. And meanwhile, Marcel Duchamp
was at ﬁrst unsuccessful in attempting to exhibit his now famous foun-
tain. He was altering the parameters of art and so, of course, he encoun-
tered resistance.37 Breaking down taboos can take many forms. In the
seventies, the Dutch author Kellendonck was the ﬁrst to write dialogues
in dialect in a short story, which was otherwise written in standard
Dutch. In doing so he broke with the formal rules of that time.38 Mean-
while, the visual artist Marcus Harvey ‘painted’ the portrait of an Eng-
lish woman, who had murdered many children. He composed the face of
this woman by using hundreds of prints of the hands of actual children.39
Thus he managed to break both contextual and formal rules – rules with
respect to decency (subjects that can and cannot be treated) and with
respect to the means used.
According to Goodman then, what differentiates art from non-art
(but not from science) is the alteration of the rules by the artist. Unlike
artisans, artists change the rules more or less deliberately. This is how art
contributes to cognition.40 It shares this quality with science. Goodman
takes the drive in both art and science to be curiosity, with its purpose
being cognition in and for itself.41
7
‘Artists Resemble Magicians’ (A personal view)
Why do works of art, as Goodman proposes, contribute to cognition?
They do so because they touch and amaze audiences. They make audi-
ences think again. The artist creates an amazing illusion. The music of
Brahms for instance, does not really take the listener on a trip in an Arca-
dian landscape. Nor does a painting by Breughel make the viewer liter-
ally join in a gay wedding. Artists use their imagination to create illu-
sions. These illusions often lead the person who enjoys the work of art to
an illusionary ‘better’ world. In this manner, artworks are romantic. But
the illusions in art not only serve as a form of escapism; they also rouse
the audience. This happens when the creative artist introduces new and
unexpected metaphors. Because of their freshness such illusions draw
attention.
Through imagination and the creation of illusion, artworks annoy,
amaze, or touch art consumers and force them to reconsider their
views.42 Science cannot exist without illusion either. A graph is just as
far removed from reality as a life drawing. By creating illusions, both art
29
‘ARTISTS RESEMBLE MAGICIANS’ (A PERSONAL VIEW)

and science add to cognition, although granted, in different ways. But
since we live in a scientiﬁc society the discrete illusions of science look
familiar; they no longer amaze us. Artistic illusions on the contrary, con-
tinue to surprise us. Thus we are more likely to experience them as ‘mag-
ical’.
The connection between art and the miraculous has always existed.
Works from the past, which we now call works of art, often had the
status of a miracle in their time. They derived that status from the use of
exceptionally precious materials or from a new or virtuoso technique.
More recent artworks amaze because of the introduction of innovations
that were hitherto inconceivable, and which make us think and feel dif-
ferently. In this respect, it is the density in most works of art as opposed
to the discreteness in works of science that makes them mysterious.43 In
many ways, art appears magical and the artist resembles a magician.
Metaphorically speaking, the artist is a magician. Actually they are
pseudo-magicians; they only pretend that they can perform magic. It
looks like they have access to supernatural powers, but they do not. They
create illusions.
Art can be ‘magical’ without being sacred. The ‘magical’ aspect of art
merely explains why art is more likely to be perceived as sacred than sci-
ence.
8
The Mythology of the Arts Inﬂuences the Economy of the Arts
Society either harbors beliefs about art that contribute to the fact that it
is perceived as sacred, or such beliefs follow from art’s sacredness. The
beliefs that I have overheard I have listed in the following table. I will dis-
cuss these beliefs or myths in the course of the book. The collection of
related myths I call the mythology of the arts.
These widely shared beliefs can also be called myths, because people
don’t believe that they need veriﬁcation. They depend on one another,
but they are not always consistent. People in the art world tend to resolve
discrepancies in order to keep the myths intact. For instance, even
though artists may suffer from poverty, lack of recognition, and other
drawbacks, they are compensated by the fact that they receive endless
satisfaction from their work. Another example is that although art is
remote and sacred, everyone has an equal chance to succeed. Meanwhile,
art that is sacred and remote seems to imply that a separate caste of
people, the high priests of art, control and protect art and keep intruders
at a distance. This contradicts the message that anybody who is talented
enough has an equal chance of becoming a successful artist. Because the
30
SACRED ART

high priests sometimes allow people to join the caste irrespective of their
birth or social class, equal chances go hand-in-hand with remoteness and
sacredness.
In this book I intend to show that the myths or persistent beliefs about
art and artists make the economy of the arts exceptional (thesis 7).
31
THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARTS INFLUENCES THE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS
table 1 the mythology of the arts
1
Art is sacred.
2
Through art, artists and art consumers relate to a sacred world.
3
Art is remote and superﬂuous.
4
Art is a gift.
5
Artists are gifted.
6
Art serves the general interest.
7
Art is good for people.
8
Artists are autonomous; other professionals are not autonomous.
9
There is freedom of expression in the arts.
10
The work of art is authentic and the artist is the unique creator of
it; in other professions such authenticity does not exist.
11
Creating authentic work gives one endless private satisfaction.
12
Artists are selﬂessly devoted to art.
13
Artists are only intrinsically motivated.
14
Money and commerce devalue art.
15
Artistic quality can only exist if it is independent of costs and de-
mand.
16
Artists have to suffer.
17
Talent is natural or God-given.
18
Everybody has the same chance of being gifted or talented.
19
Certain talents in the arts only appear later in someone’s career.
20
Because extraordinary talent is rare, only a large pool of artists
can provide society with a few extremely talented artists.
21
Success in the arts depends on talent and commitment exclusively.
22
The arts are free. The barriers that exist in other professions are
absent in the arts.
23
Successful artists are often self-taught.
24
Given talent and commitment, equal chances exist in the arts; the
best is victorious.
25
Because the best win, the arts are democratic and righteous.
26
The high incomes earned by some artists are fair.

9
Conclusion
How come Eddy and the people at the exhibition, in the two illustrations
at the beginning of the chapter, lookup to the ﬁne arts and apologize for
knowing so little about it? The answer lies in the way art is deﬁned.
The way people deﬁne art is an important preliminary subject for
anyone studying the economy of the arts. Although tastes differ between
individuals and between social groups, there exists an almost universal
underlying stratiﬁcation of high and low art and of art versus non-art in
society. Even when people do not like high art they still look up to it,
while people who do not like low art look down on it. Cultural inferior-
ity and cultural superiority lead to this asymmetry in judgments. There
exists a shared underlying ordering of higher and lower art. Not every-
body has the same powers to inﬂuence this stratiﬁcation and thus help
deﬁne art. Art is what people call art, but some social groups have a
bigger say than others. They appropriate the deﬁnition of art. Their art is
considered true art.
Certain objects and activities are more likely to be called art than
others. This tends to be so when these objects or activities are authentic
and remote and are relatively easily associated with the sublime and the
sacred. Moreover, art has become a symbol of the prestige of individual-
ity. This prestige originated in the Renaissance and gained momentum
during Romanticism. As a result, authentic art and artists are now
highly valued and the arts are extremely attractive. The arts offer a
romantic alternative to everyday life.
Viewed from a distance, another constant that determines what
people call art can be observed. Art tends to be part of a chain of inven-
tions. Many philosophers of art have expressed this notion. For instance,
Goodman stresses the changing of the symbolic ‘languages’ by artists.
He stresses that art and science have much in common. Unlike the scien-
tist, however, the artist is more like a magician. This explains why art is
more likely to be viewed as sacred than science. But although art is
thought to belong to a sacred world, it also has strong ties with
Mammon. The following chapter examines the consequences of having
ties with both the sacred world and the world of money.
Discussion
1 Is there an underlying ordering of works of art, which is largely shared
within a certain culture? 
2 Is it true that an asymmetry in judgments exists implying that con-
32
SACRED ART

sumers of high art look down on low art, while consumers of low art
look up to high art?
3 Due to rapid technical developments, the coherence of cultural values
can be reduced to the point that an underlying ordering from high to
low art temporarily ceases to exist. Is this the present-day case?
4 Can you provide some arguments that contradict or support the thesis
that art partially replaces religion?
5 Can you defend the argument that high art is useless against the argu-
ments in the text that stress its usefulness?
6 Can you provide some arguments, which contradict the notion that
art, like science, contributes to cognition?
33
CONCLUSION

Chapter 2
The Denial of the Economy
Why Are Gifts to the Arts Praised, 
While Market Incomes Remain Suspect? 
‘How Much Does this Painting Cost?’
When you enter a commercial gallery and you want to know the prices of
the exhibited artworks, you’re in trouble. If you’re not familiar with galleries,
you’ll probably look for a price tag placed near the artworks. Anywhere
else, from the supermarket to the car showroom this procedure will get you
the information you want. Not so in a gallery. If you’re clever you’ll look in an
odd unexpected corner to ﬁnd a sheet of paper with a pricelist. But often
there is no pricelist and so you muster up a little courage and approach a
desk somewhere in the back of the gallery. There you’ll ﬁnd the owner or an
assistant busy on the phone, trying to make the fax work, typing or just look-
ing bored; anyway, she pretends you are not there. Almost annoyed, she
hands you the list. Meanwhile, you will have noticed that there is no cash
register anywhere. You wonder if there is some old cigar box with money in
it somewhere hidden in a cupboard.
When artworks are sold, you may ﬁnd that red stickers cover their prices on
the list. For an instant you’re tempted to lift up a sticker to ﬁnd out the price.
After all, like most shoppers, you like to make price-quality comparisons.
But then you feel the eyes of the assistant on you and you decide not to.
You remain much longer in this gallery than you had intended. Since it was
such a big deal to get the list you feel you cannot hand it back too soon.
Anyway, you will certainly think twice about entering a gallery ever again.
How to Make a Deal in a Chic Way
Sacha Tanja runs the art collection of the ING Group, the second largest
bank in the Netherlands (and one of the largest bank-insurance companies
in Europe) and as a result she oversees the highest private budget spent on
visual art in the Netherlands. Sacha Tanja visits the Alex’s studio together
with two assistants. They stay for about one and a half hours. They drink tea
and chat about everyday matters. There is no exalted discussion about high
art. In the meantime, she and her assistants sort through Alex’s work. They
make selections and sub-selections. They do it efﬁciently. Within the ﬁrst
quarter of an hour, one of the assistants – not Mrs. T! – casually asks for
34

Alex’s prices. During the rest of their visit there is no further reference made
to prices or money whatsoever. At the end of the visit, Sacha tells Alex she
wants four drawings. Alex thinks she has made a good choice. Of course
Alex is happy. Nevertheless, Alex wonders what would have happened if he
had asked less for the drawings. If she had only given him a hint, Alex would
have offered her a considerable discount for the four drawings. Would she
then have bought six instead of four, or maybe she would return sooner to
his studio to buy more? Alex decides to give her a discount the next time
she comes – if there is a next time.
Although Sacha Tanja did not bargain, it is not true that her bank does not
care about prices. By chance, Alex’s economics colleague, Arjo Klamer,
happens to meet Sacha in a different context only a week later. As a true
economist he questions her about prices, and he asks her about Alex’s
prices. She admits that she likes Alex’s drawings, but ﬁnds them a bit
expensive. ‘For work on paper, that is’, she speciﬁes. With so many pur-
chases every year she certainly knows the market.
Somewhat further in the past, Mr. O. visited Alex’s studio. He had been
there before. O is a wealthy man and a passionate collector. He has money
to spend, but he also cares about his collection. Therefore, he naturally
wants to get as much for his money as possible. This time there was no
chitchat. The artist and O talk about art, about how art enriches one’s life,
and about the unique qualities of Alex’s work. Alex’s work is put on a
pedestal. It embarrasses him. Mr. O selects drawings, asks Alex for
advice, but ﬁnally makes a choice very much independent of Alex’s opinion.
Then, after about an hour, the money part starts. He ﬁnds Alex prices too
high, although Alex has already offered him a discount for being a regular
customer. Alex’s work is no longer special. O knows the market too and
talks about other recent purchases. So they come up with some argu-
ments, each of them relevant and surprisingly down to earth. Alex enjoys
this part of the visit much more than the fuzzy talks about high art, and he
guesses that Mr. O. does as well. In a complicated deal involving some
frames as well, they end up with a price, which is 15% less. Alex would
have made the deal for less, just as Mr. O probably would have been pre-
pared to pay more. So they both feel good, but they don’t reveal it. This
episode takes about ﬁfteen minutes. After this and before Mr. O leaves they
engage in another discussion about high art. Mr. O praises Alex’s work
even more. Alex gets the feeling that he wants to obliterate the earlier talk of
money, which he considers degrading to both of them.
In the case of Sacha Tanja, the conversation concerning money was
reduced to an absolute minimum. In Mr. O.’s case it was set neatly apart
from the rest of the conversation. If Alex was asked which approach he
prefers, Alex would answer that although he likes bargaining he prefers
35
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

Mrs. T’s minimalist approach. He ﬁnds it chic.
Most of Alex’s art colleagues, who evidently lack his economic training,
hate the money part. When Alex and his colleagues get together, it is
common practice to sneer about those rich but greedy collectors who
always want to bargain. But, although they don’t like to admit it, Alex knows
that some of his colleagues are really good at playing the money game.
Allow your Dealer to be the Maecenas
Alex recently found himself another dealer with whom he is very pleased.
Amazingly, she pays him every three months. With his former dealer Alex
had ﬁghts over money all the time. She always owed him money. Her
arrears extended back almost two years and that was just too much – even
in this arena where everybody is always short of money. Alex’s former
dealer was obviously short of money, but Alex found out that she owed him
more than any of her other artists. Why? Maybe Alex had been too easy on
her in the past. He never confronted her. At some stage in the game he
changed tactics and got tougher. He remained polite, but every time he
saw her, he brought up the issue of money. He wrote letters threatening to
involve a collection agency. This new strategy made a difference, but not in
the way he had hoped. She owed him almost as much in debt as before but
now she was also afraid of him. She didn’t mount any new shows and
dropped him from her other activities as well. Alex wondered what he’d
done wrong. Was there something his colleagues knew that he didn’t?
Eventually, Alex discovered that his colleagues and dealer were playing a
game that he didn’t play. As soon as she had any money, she would pay the
most grateful of her artists. This meant that an artist with a heartbreaking
story would get paid before someone more legally deserving. One artist
complained about how she was freezing in her studio while stirring the
paint, which was thickening due to the cold, all because she did not have
enough money to pay for heat. And another colleague got hysterical and
shouted awful insults at the dealer. Afterwards they made up and became
even better friends. The dealer paid them instead of Alex .
Alex began to understand that the name of the game was generosity. Alex’s
dealer had to be allowed to play the part of the generous one. It’s a role that
history had made for her: she had to be the Maecenas. Never mind that
Alex was actually sponsoring her with an interest-free loan. Alex did not
play the game right because he did not give her the chance to play her role
as the generous one. The rules of the game include a taboo that prevents
an artist-dealer relationship from being a normal business relationship.
Nevertheless, Alex kept thinking that his former dealer was just being irra-
tional. She stood to lose one of her better selling artists. If she just changed
her role she would ultimately be better off, at least in the short run. Alex real-
36
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

ized that over time she got stuck playing the game. She’s probably too old
to learn a new game. But should she? Alex gradually began to understand
that he might be the irrational one, the exception to the rule. If this was the
game the art world played, Alex’s dealer would be better off if she stuck to
the game.
Alex has tried to learn the rules, but unsuccessfully. Now he more or less
‘knows’ the rules, but he has never managed to internalize them and apply
them ‘naturally’. Alex thinks it’s because he started off as an economist and
only later went to art school. In the relationship with his dealer he automati-
cally fell back on the economist’s game of quid pro quo: you get something
from me if I get something from you. This and similar experiences taught
Alex that all these games are extremely serious. One has to believe their
importance and their possible rewards. Games cannot be played con-
sciously and deliberately, as Alex has tried. Only those who do not intend to
play the game are really good at it.
Is the presence of money and dealing in the arts unable to bear the light of
day? The three illustrations above clearly show that art is traded, but in a
veiled manner. In the commercial gallery the paintings have no price
tags. Sacha Tanja, who buys drawings for her bank does not openly ask
for the price of the drawings she wants, and collector Mr. O. strictly dif-
ferentiates between talking about the artworks’ qualities and bargaining
over prices. But ultimately, the example of the gallery owner is the most
amazing. Why does the owner only want to pay Alex the money she owes
him as long they both agree to pretend that her paying him is a gift not an
obligation? All this leads to the central question of Chapter 2: why is the
economy denied in the arts?
Behind this denial lies a controversy. As an artist (and an art lover) I
believe that art is special. And therefore I am convinced that money
should not interfere with art. Being an artist I must relate to art, not to
the market. I want to keep money out of my relationship with art. But at
the same time, it confuses and annoys me that I have to deal with money
to keep my little enterprise in business. I understand that to serve a higher
purpose I need money to survive, but it doesn’t feel right. I want art to
belong to a sacred world and not to the world of Mammon.
As an economist I cannot tell whether dealing in art is good or bad, but
I know that the use of money and markets has its advantages, which is
also true in the case of art. Because art is so diverse, exchange in kind
would certainly be less efﬁcient than deals involving money. Therefore,
as an economist, I am not amazed to see that Mammon is present in the
arts and that much art is traded, from theatre seats to paintings.
37
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

1
The Arts Depend on Gifts and Trade
For many people the commercial low arts, embedded as they are in the
world of money, serve as a warning against the intrusion of money into
the ﬁne arts. It is generally thought that contact with commercial popu-
lar culture debauches people.1 Thus it follows that if high art were to
become commercialized it would lose its ennobling character. Neverthe-
less, as an artist, I have to admit that money also plays a role in the ﬁne
arts.
I don’t like it, but I notice that art is often used for investment pur-
poses, for speculation, or to launder money received under the counter,
and that large sums are earned from forged art. Moreover, I see that art is
often used as entertainment, for decorative purposes. I feel bad when I
see my dealer selling my drawings to people who primarily want them to
impress other people. To be honest, as an artist I even ﬁnd it hard to swal-
low that works of art are traded, sometimes for large sums of money. And
ultimately I am uneasy with the fact that art is measured in monetary
terms.
At ﬁrst this list of connections between art and Mammon seems to be
at odds with the persistent beliefs that connect art with a sacred world,
listed in table 1 in section 1.8. However, the two lists are not of the same
order. Table 1 refers to beliefs while the list above refers to perceived phe-
nomena. People believe in art’s sacredness and therefore don’t consider
art as an instrument of Mammon. They cannot deny however, that art is
sometimes used for monetary gain.
In the second place, when artists and art lovers resist money, this
seldom means money in a literal sense. After all, the arts welcome large
sums of money received in the forms of subsidies and donations. There-
fore, money (or the world of money) represents a type of measurement in
the market, and is not directly associated with donations and subsidies.
It is obvious that art is bought and sold and thus measured in mone-
tary terms. But because art is considered sacred and because the sacred
doesn’t rhyme with commerce, one would expect commerce in art – like
other ‘evils’ in the arts – to be relatively unimportant. Is commerce then,
unimportant in the arts? In order to determine its role, we need to ﬁrst
make some slightly technical remarks about what commerce is and isn’t.
In every economic sector goods and money continuously change
hands. First, commerce can lead to reallocation, i.e., market transac-
tions. For instance, when a painter sells a painting, the painting is
handed over to the buyer, for which the painter receives money. Second,
reallocation can result from gifts. When a composer receives a stipend,
money is shifted from donor to recipient. Finally, forced transfers can
38
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

also lead to reallocation. Visual artists, for instance, are obliged to pay
value-added tax and thus, funds move from artists to the taxman.
Market transactions and gifts are voluntary transactions. Seller and
buyer can both say no to a particular transaction and the same applies to
the donor and recipient. Forced transfers are involuntary transactions.
They encompass such varied phenomena as taxes, tributes, duties, black-
mail, theft, and forced confrontations (like the inevitable ‘consumption’
of sculpture and advertising in public space).
These latter involuntary transactions can be said to take place in an
imaginary area of obligatory transfers. Voluntary transactions take
place in an imaginary area of voluntary exchanges that consists of two
sub-areas: the gift sphere and the market sphere. (The latter can also be
called the economic, monetary, or commercial sphere.) I call these areas
spheres, because they not only differ in the kind of transactions – trade or
gift – but also in attitudes and values. Anti-market values, for instance,
are an important factor in the gift sphere.
Given the way I have deﬁned these three areas, the government oper-
ates in all three of them. Through taxes and regulations it operates in the
area of forced transfers. When a government agency purchases a work of
art, for instance to hang in a museum, it is active in the market sphere,
like any other buyer. And when the government subsidizes art or artists
or offers a tax deduction, the government is operating in the gift sphere
like any other donor.2
After these observations on transfers, market transactions, and gifts, I
now return to the question of the importance of commerce in the arts.
Although the line between gifts and market exchange is not that clearly
deﬁned, it is clear enough to present some rough estimates on the relative
size of these two spheres in the arts. It turns out that gifts are relatively
important in the arts. Donations and government subsidies on average
constitute about 85% of the income generated in structurally subsidized
classical music, dance and theatre in mainland Western Europe, Britain,
and the us. The other 15% are derived from market activities.3 It is
worth noting that the total amount of donations and subsidies is almost
as high in the us as it is in mainland Western Europe. (In European coun-
tries like France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden direct per
capita government spending on the arts is around eight to ten times
higher than in the us and two or three times as high as in Britain. Taking
into account tax deductions the per capita government spending on art is
however, higher in the us than in Britain and it is less than half of the
spending in mainland Western Europe. Adding private giving, total com-
bined per capita giving, including government, foundations, companies,
and private citizens, in the us is around 80% of that in mainland West-
39
THE ARTS DEPEND ON GIFTS AND TRADE

ern Europe. Because private per capita consumption of structurally sub-
sidized performing art in the us is also somewhat lower than in Europe,
the relative difference disappears.4 The relative size of the market sphere
is not larger in the us than in Europe.)
However, these are ﬁgures for structurally subsidized art companies;
they are not representative for the arts, not even for the arts in a narrow
sense. Outside of the structurally subsidized companies, many other
companies receive fewer donations and subsidies and depend far more on
the market for their income. In literature and the visual arts market
income share is seldom less than 70 percent. (In the Netherlands with its
generous subsidies the visual arts nevertheless, derive 73% of their
income from the market.5)
To estimate these ﬁgures for the arts in general it makes a difference
where the line between art and non-art is drawn. Is pop music included
or excluded? But even when art is deﬁned in a narrower sense, a propor-
tion of 50% gift and 50% market is a reasonable guess in my view.6 Irre-
spective of exact proportions, one can safely state that the arts have a
strong footing in both the gift sphere and the market sphere (thesis 8).
2
The Amount of Donations and Subsidies is Exceptional
Many gifts to the arts are easily overlooked. For instance, in the us, uni-
versities employ many artists who are seldom required to teach very
much. Therefore, a large portion of their salaries can be considered a
subsidy. Tax deductions and a lower value added tax for art products
also represent indirect forms of subsidies. The same applies to perform-
ing artists in France who thanks to special rules receive a considerable
subsidy from the nation’s total work force. Sometimes the source of gov-
ernment gifts is hard to trace. For instance, the gifts of some large foun-
dations partly stem from government money, although they appear to
derive from private sources. Meanwhile, in Britain, lottery money is
poured into the arts. This is often considered an important alternative to
subsidies. Nevertheless, looking from the tenth ﬂoor, it is a veiled form of
subsidies and not an alternative to subsidies.7
As noted earlier, the fact that gifts are important in the arts does not
mean that the market is unimportant. But is commerce as important as it
is in other professions? No, it’s not. Compared with professions that
require a similar level of training, artists receive the lowest amount of
income from the market, and the highest amount from gifts. There is one
exception: the clergy; only reverends and priests receive more income
from gifts than artists. This comparison between artists and the church
40
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

conﬁrms the parallel between art and religion that was discussed earlier,
and it makes the existence of a special or sacred status of art more plausi-
ble. In every other profession, the share of market income is much
larger.8 The large presence of donations and subsidies in the arts is
exceptional (thesis 9).
Have the arts always relied so heavily on gifts?9 The gift sphere has not
always been that important in the arts, and it may not always remain this
important. Although in the past, Patron and Maecenas aided artists,
their aid was of secondary importance. Their primary aim was to obtain
artistic services and products. The Maecenas commissioned art to be
made for them. Patrons employed artists. They were employers, more in
a feudal than in a capitalistic sense. Aid was a secondary consideration.10
The same applies to the ﬁnancial support offered by the bourgeoisie in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. During that period,
courts and nobility had largely given up being involved in the arts and
governments had not yet stepped in. The bourgeoisie sometimes formed
associations in order to consume art collectively, primarily in the per-
forming arts. The aim was to enjoy works of art in the select company of
like-minded people. This primarily involved market transactions. The
motive of supporting art was of secondary importance.11
Today however, gifts are far more important in the arts than in other
sectors. This led to one of the three central questions of this book: Why is
the gift sphere so large in the arts? Is it possible that donors and govern-
ments support the arts to reduce the level of poverty among artists? Do
donors and governments support the arts to prevent the arts from dimin-
ishing or even disappearing because rising costs would otherwise make
art products unaffordable? Is it possible that gifts to the arts serve as cor-
rections of so-called market deﬁciencies, because otherwise certain art
products would be unavailable in the market? Or do donors and govern-
ments support art because they receive beneﬁts in return?
Successive chapters will address these questions. The answers shall
supplement one another. In advance of the analysis, it should be noted
that because of the high level of esteem and sacredness of the arts, artists,
private donors, companies, foundations and governmental bodies
receive beneﬁts from their gifts to the arts. They share in the high level of
esteem that is accorded the arts. In this respect, the sizeable gift sphere is
not only a consequence of the many gifts; it is also a condition for these
gifts. The arts can only be accorded such high esteem if the arts continue
to receive large numbers of gifts, which allows the arts to appear to
belong to the gift sphere as opposed to the market sphere. This is because
the gift sphere is associated with high values, while the market stands for
low values.
41
THE AMOUNT OF DONATIONS AND SUBSIDIES IS EXCEPTIONAL

3
‘Art that is Given Must not be Sold’
Is giving more honorable than trading? And if so, why? Why does the gift
sphere represent high values and the market low values? The following
two sections will discuss a number of the assumed virtues of the gift
sphere.
But ﬁrst I will mention some of the characteristics that make market
transactions and gifts similar and different. Both gift giving and market
exchange are voluntary and they imply reciprocity; some kind of return is
involved. Nevertheless, in market transactions the quid pro quo is more
important. Here there’s usually a stronger focus on returns and anticipa-
tion of returns and there is generally more certainty about returns. A
larger part of returns is covered by a form of contract and can, if neces-
sary, be legally monitored. Finally, prices and the willingness to pay play
a larger role in market transactions than in the gift sphere where trust and
idiosyncrasy play a relatively more important role, and returns come
more commonly from third parties.
Unlike the market, money does not rule the gift sphere where there is
no transparent proﬁt motive. Giving naturally represents a virtue in this
sphere. Giving promotes other virtues like sharing, generosity, selﬂess-
ness, social justice, personal contact and respect for non-monetary
values. These virtues and their inherent values overlap and are interde-
pendent.12 They are attractive to the arts. At the same time they are sup-
posed to be vulnerable: the market and its inherent system of measure-
ment and calculation is thought to endanger these values. Also, the
virtue of one sphere is the vice of the other. Therefore, in discussing the
virtues of the gift sphere, I shall add critical comments which indirectly
refer to market virtues.13 (The comments commence with the word
‘however’ in Italics.)
1 The virtue of giving beﬁts the arts. The act of giving is often cele-
brated. When donors give to the arts it is a clear example of a virtue.
Sometimes the act of receiving art is also celebrated. Often art itself is
seen as a gift; it is a gift from God or from a supernatural benefactor,
and hence the artist is seen as gifted. This is part of the mythology of
the arts as noted in table 1 in section 1.8. Next, if art manages to affect
the viewer or listener this is also considered a gift. Because a work of
art is the emanation of its maker’s gift and the audience receives it as a
gift, it is a gift and it should be treated as a gift. It cannot be left to the
market. Turning a work of art into a commodity can lead to its ulti-
mate destruction.14
However, as long as the gift comes from human benefactors, people
can question the gift giver’s motives. When a donor uses a gift as a
42
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

way to show off, a virtue turns into a vice. (And when it comes to the
notion of a supernatural donor, not everybody agrees that such a
donor even exists.)
2 Sharing is another virtue of the gift sphere. A gift is usually given by a
donor to a recipient implying that the donor no longer has access to
this gift. In sharing however, the object is used collectively. People
share culture. They share it in different circles including family, neigh-
bors, towns, and nations. No payments are involved. This kind of
sharing is often automatic; a clear example of this is a shared language
as part of a culture. But a sculpture located in a public space is also
shared. When a collector lends a painting to a museum it is a form of
sharing. Sharing is praised in the art world. It is often a dogma, that
(high) art should be shared by disseminating it so that everyone can
enjoy it.
However, sharing not only implies inclusion; it also implies exclusion.
The sharing of important aspects of art and culture is often limited to
certain groups. For instance, the ﬁne arts are shared and simultane-
ously monopolized by certain elites. Generosity to insiders goes
together with a de facto exclusion of outsiders.15 With regard to the
diffusion of the ﬁne arts, the modern market is probably more respon-
sible for the democratization and emancipation of the ﬁne arts than
the gift sphere.16
3 Also related to sharing and giving are the virtues of generosity and self-
lessness. Art and artists stand for autonomy, disinterestedness, and
even self-sacriﬁce. Art benefactors and artists are supposed to be self-
less, and only concerned about art. The life of the ideal artist is sup-
posed to be a continuous story of giving, giving to art.
However, as we shall see in Chapter 4, artists are not that selﬂess; they
are focused on the rewards that come with ‘serving art’ to better them-
selves.
4 The gift sphere, unlike the market, is also supposed to contribute to
social justice. Most charity appeals to principles of social justice. In
this context, it is striking how often people in the art world stress that
art should be accessible to all and how unfair its inaccessibility due to
high prices is. Art is not just some ordinary consumer good; it’s sup-
posed to be vital for people’s development and therefore their chances
in life. Therefore a social right to have access to art is often mentioned,
which, in turn is a common argument for subsidies.
However, the wish to diffuse art often stems from a double standard.
When diffusion fails to broaden a particular genre of art, it turns out
that art is not for everybody after all and this, in turn, only adds to the
prestige of the art consumer.17
43
‘ART THAT IS GIVEN MUST NOT BE SOLD’

4
‘The Market Devalues Art’ 
5 Personal contact can also be considered a virtue of the gift sphere. Per-
sonal identity matters here and relationships are therefore idiosyn-
cratic. In the market, many deals are made regardless of who you are.
But donors give to artists not only because of their work, but also
because of their personalities, their looks, their age, sex, interests, etc.
People care about the person they give to and about their relationship
with that person. This fundamental human need is easier catered to in
spheres outside the market. Commerce not only devalues the artwork,
but also the unique personalities of the donor and artist.
However, idiosyncrasies are not absent from the market sphere.18 For
instance, in the visual art market idiosyncrasy plays an important role.
Many visual art buyers have relationships with particular artists and
dealers. In the second illustration, the deal between Alex and collector
Mr. O was only successful because of their particular personal rela-
tionship, while in the third illustration, the dealer only paid the artist
after he showed his gratitude.
Secondly, the problem of inclusion and exclusion arises again with
regard to idiosyncrasy. Including a group based on personal grounds
implies the exclusion of other groups. Thus, idiosyncrasy can imply
inequality and even racism. In this respect, the relative lack of personal
contact encountered in the market can actually be a virtue instead of a
vice. Nobody checks behavior or clothing or starts an insider conver-
sation in the book or cd departments of most large stores (This is cer-
tainly the case in branches of a well-known chain of cheap drug stores
in the Netherlands, where anybody can buy excellent Bach cds.) On
the other hand, in the gift sphere, many personal barriers hamper cul-
tural exchanges.
6 Finally, while the market devalues art, the gift sphere makes a virtue of
how it respects the unique and indivisible qualities of art. In the
market art has a pricetag. Once art is priced it is compared with other
art and other consumer goods. By considering works of art in terms of
money, the indivisibility of a unique work of art is necessarily lost. By
pricing works of art, their use and usefulness is captured in exact num-
bers. Art ceases to be useless and turns into a non-art commodity.
Therefore, pricing and money are not neutral. According to the socio-
logist, Georg Simmel, money disrupts art.19 The economist, Arjo
Klamer, agrees.20 On the other hand, the gift sphere doesn’t offer
pricetags that measure art in monetary terms and thus devalue it. The
gift sphere respects the value of art.
However, in contemporary gift-giving, money also plays a role as an
44
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

intermediary. Therefore, if anything is to blame for art’s devaluation
it’s not so much money but the exchange rates or prices, which are the
cornerstone of markets. And, in this respect, the gift sphere is ulti-
mately not that different. Exchange rates – albeit vaguer ones – also
operate in the gift sphere.
In this context, I will make a few comments on the devaluation argu-
ment. First, devaluation can only be relevant if a depreciation in value
and its opposite, an appreciation in value, are viewed as social processes.
And thus, because the gift sphere increases the prestige of art, the market
concomitantly devalues art.
Next, it should not be forgotten that although most donations and
subsidies in the arts lead to lower prices, these artworks are not free.
They are still priced and sold in the market. Even though 50% to 85% of
all income in classical music comes from the gift sphere, virtually one-
hundred percent of classical music, live concerts, and cds are sold on the
open market, albeit for artiﬁcially low prices. And although live classical
music has a pricetag, it nevertheless has also has a lot of prestige. There-
fore, it seems that the pricing does not necessarily devalues art.21
People in the art world often argue that exact monetary valuations
undermine the aesthetic value of art. Some social scientists agree with
this view; others disagree.22 I don’t disagree because, as I shall show in
Chapter 3, any social circumstance can inﬂuence an aesthetic experi-
ence. Therefore, it would be strange if pricetags didn’t inﬂuence aesthetic
value. But within a social process, such inﬂuence can take a variety of
forms, it not only decreases value, it also increases value.
In the everyday world, people measure art and aesthetic value. They
do it all the time. Past and present aesthetic experiences are discussed and
compared with friends. Opinions change. Even the most unique, sub-
lime, moving, or astonishing art experiences only have these qualities in
relation to other experiences. Without comparing price, size, length, key,
or color there would be no aesthetic experience. There would be no art,
sublime or not. Comparing and ordering are such basic activities that
there is no a priori reason why they should necessarily devalue art or
increase its value. Because any aesthetic experience rests on measure-
ments and comparisons, there is no basis for the notion that measure-
ment devalues art (thesis 10).
Nevertheless, with the virtues people attribute to the gift sphere it is
not that amazing to predict that as long as the arts belong to the gift
sphere they will remain highly esteemed.
45
‘THE MARKET DEVALUES ART’

5
The Arts Need the High Status of the Gift Sphere
As Bourdieu has emphasized however, gifts need to be interpreted as a
denial of self-interest in the short run, so that beneﬁts can be reaped in the
long run.23 Nevertheless, because of the seeming absence of self-interest,
giving has a higher status than buying and selling. Long-term support for
anti-commercial values does exist in our society. Even with all the pres-
ent-day praise of the market, commercial values are always on the defen-
sive. They are suspect. Participating in market activities can easily give
someone a bad conscience. The contempt for money and those who
openly pursue monetary gain is widely shared and has deep roots. The
gift sphere has a lot of status; the values of the gift sphere have more
status than the values of the market sphere (thesis 11).
Works of art often symbolize the superiority of the values of the gift
sphere and the inferiority of market values. For instance, in theatres all
over the world, the commercial aspect continues to be ridiculed and dis-
paraged. Scrooge appeals to the imagination. Like earlier audiences,
modern audiences continue to laugh at the Pantalone character in a
Commedia del Arte play, Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice, Molière’s
The Miser, or the greedy right wing homosexual in Schlingensief’s con-
temporary piece, ‘Bring Me the Head of Adolf Hitler’.24 Moreover, even
today, people continue to jeer at the cartoon ﬁgure of Disney’s Uncle
Scrooge (Dagobert Duck). This demonstrates that the contempt for the
pursuit of money still is an essential ingredient in our education.
Art apparently has a lot of status. Below are some indications of this.
table 2 signs of the high status of the arts
1
Some artists earn extremely high incomes. 
2
The prices of most old and some contemporary art are extremely
high. 
3
Donations and subsidies form a large part of the income in the arts. 
4
Donations and subsidies are seldom questioned. 
5
Many people want to become artists in spite of the prospect of low
ﬁnancial rewards. 
6
Artists and others employed in the arts give large amounts of
money to the arts by funneling income from second jobs,
allowances, or inheritances into the arts. 
7
Art students have more status than other students have.
8
Even young and unsuccessful artists have a special status. 
9
People admire and envy artists.
10
The government, royalty, and important corporations all consume
art.
46
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

11
Works of art are used at funerals, when heads of state visit as well
as for many other important ceremonies and functions. 
12
Members of the social elite, like ministers, heads of ministries and
ceos visit important concerts, plays and exhibitions. They con-
sume far more art than average people.
13
The public consumption of works of art – classical concerts,
modern art exhibits – requires that the audience observe a certain
kind of silence, speaking in whispers if at all. This solemnity is
comparable to that of religious ceremonies.
It might be instructive to apply the above list, which is not exhaustive, to
other sectors of production, for instance to that of food production and
food producers, science and scientists, or religion and priests. What we
discover is that right now in Europe even priests score lower than artists
on the esteem scale. (In the us however, many people may well admire
successful businessmen like Bill Gates more than well-known artists.)
The status of artists is indeed high.25 Even many scientists, despite the
relatively high status of their profession, look up to artists, while few
artists envy scientists. It is this strange ‘inexplicable’ level of envy that
points to ‘something unusual’ going on in the arts. (Sometimes people’s
attitudes towards artists appear two-sided, ambiguous. People pity and
mock poor artists, but nevertheless envy them.26)
The arts have an exceptionally high status (thesis 12). It is likely that
their status can only be this high because the arts are inextricably afﬁli-
ated with the gift sphere, which also has high status. To a lesser degree,
the high status of the gift sphere also depends on the high status of the
arts. The arts adhere to the values of the gift sphere and reject the values
of the economic sphere (thesis 13).
6
The Economy in the Arts Is Denied and Veiled
The value system in the arts is two-faced and asymmetrical. Although in
general the market is oriented towards money and proﬁt, the arts cannot
openly reveal this kind of orientation when they operate in the market.
This approach would certainly harm artistic careers and therefore, long-
term incomes as well. It speciﬁcally harms the proﬁtable afﬁliation of the
arts with the gift sphere, and it is therefore punished by the art world.
Thus, proﬁt motives are not absent, they are merely veiled, and publicly
the economic aspect of art is denied.
Another value system exists in the gift sphere. It emphasizes selﬂess
47
THE ECONOMY IN THE ARTS IS DENIED AND VEILED

devotion to art and condemns the pursuit of monetary gain. This value
system is highly valued and is expressed quite openly. It thus looks as if
this value system controls the art world. Nevertheless, many transactions
are guided by a normal, but veiled orientation to market values.
Because one value system is veiled, while the other is open, an asym-
metrical two-faced value system exists. In this respect, it is noteworthy
that it is often commercial to be a-commercial. Expressing anti-market
values can add to one’s success in the market. Artists, dealers, or editors
who exhibit a lack of concern for money may well enhance their market
value. This implies that the economic sphere and the gift sphere are
related.
The two-faced or plural value system coincides with a dual economy
where one economy operates in the market sphere and the other in the
gift sphere.27 In both, people increase their welfare by ‘serving art’, gain-
ing recognition, earning money, etc. A dual economy exists in other sec-
tors as well.28 But only the arts maintain a one-sided appeal on the values
of the gift sphere.29
The way companies sponsor art also reﬂects the denial of the economic
aspect. Nowadays most sponsorship comes down to a simple market
deal: the sale of speciﬁc advertising rights. But the rituals that belong to
the gift sphere are maintained because they are valuable to the partici-
pants.30 Market deals take on the appearance of gifts.
It is now possible to answer the questions raised earlier by the illustra-
tions at the beginning of this chapter. Why does the dealer want the artist
to pretend that when she pays him his cut, she is doing him a favor? It is
because by pretending that they are operating in the gift sphere, they can
veil their market transaction. Artist and dealer deny the market eco-
nomy. In the other illustrations, the economy is denied by not including
price tags in a commercial gallery, by limiting the talk of money to an
absolute minimum and by placing the talk of money in a separate sphere
unrelated to art. Most of the other illustrations in this book also indi-
rectly demonstrate the denial of the economy in the arts.
In order to maintain their high status the arts reject commercial values
and deny the economy (thesis 14).
7
A Dual Economy Requires Special Skills
How can artists and intermediaries who deny the economy make a
living? Some evidently do. Anti-market behavior can be proﬁtable.
Sometimes, the more anti-commercial artists and intermediaries present
themselves, the higher their status and incomes are. Such a-commercial
48
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

attitudes don’t follow from a strategy. Artists behave a-commercially
because they are artists. In the course of the history of the artistic profes-
sion this type of behavior became part of the artist’s ‘character’.31 Artists
have learned to play ‘games’ in two spheres. That is how they earn a
living.
Any game requires knowledge of the rules and subtleties of the game.32
Although this is often denied, proﬁts can be made or prizes can be won in
both market games and non-commercial games. Moreover, all these
games have an internal logic. Therefore, as has been noted earlier,
economies can be said to exist in- and outside the market.
While operating simultaneously in both the market sphere, and the
gift sphere, artists and other people working in the arts have developed
skills in the games of both spheres. (Although Alex’s colleagues in the
second illustration declare that they don’t like the money game, they are
good at it.) Many present-day artists and others working in the arts have
a sense for market games. But they honestly deny this and openly play
non-commercial games, most of all the game of being selﬂessly devoted
to art. They do so by denying the economy and veiling their market activ-
ities.33 In this sense they have a split personality.
Marcel Duchamp, Andy Warhol, and Jeff Koons are possible exam-
ples of artists who contradict the denial of the economy. These artists
knew the rules of the various games inside and out. Duchamp challenged
the rules by showing the relative value of artistic objects. Meanwhile
Warhol and Koons openly displayed their interest in money and market
values.34 (Maybe this is a case of desiring ‘to kill the very thing you
love’?) These artists are exponents of a trend that lasts to the present day.
Again and again artists provoke the existing order of denying the econ-
omy. Their behavior is shocking, but at the same time the art world loves
it. By being ironic about what lies at the core of the arts, the art world
playfully consolidates the denial of the economy. De facto the repressive
tolerance of the art world renders the artists who were involved harmless.
Another example demonstrates that games used to deny the economy
can take different forms that demand different skills. A colleague of
mine, Olav Velthuis, has questioned gallery owners about their pricing
policies.35 Given the denial of the economy, you would expect the people
he interviewed to feel uneasy and reluctant to talk about their own calcu-
lations and strategies. Velthuis found that gallery owners in the ‘lower’
art circles showed more uneasiness and were more reluctant to answer
his questions about prices than those in the higher or contemporary art
sectors. The ‘low’ art group of gallery owners apologized more often
about the fact that ‘after all they had to run a business’ as if this were a
sin. And between responses they made all sorts of remarks to demon-
49
A DUAL ECONOMY REQUIRES SPECIAL SKILLS

strate their unassailable love of art. I asked Velthuis if he therefore
believed that the denial of the economy is less strong in high art circles.
He did not think so. He prefers to describe their tactics as a ‘double
denial’. The game is more reﬁned in these circles. The ‘low’ art gallery
owners, in their search for recognition, felt obliged to stick to the rules,
whereas the avant-garde gallery owners applied the rules naturally and
knew when they could deviate from them. In the presence of my col-
league they could playfully joke about money and prices and thus display
the true aristocratic traits that the newcomers lack.36
Evidently, in spite of their denial of market values and their split per-
sonalities, artists and other people working in the art operate comfort-
ably in both the gift sphere and the market sphere without losing their
sanity.
8
Conclusion
Why can’t the presence of money and commerce in the arts bear the light
of day? In the commercial gallery in the earlier illustration, the paintings
had no price tags. Sacha Tanja who bought drawings from Alex for her
bank did not directly ask about their prices, and collector Mr. O kept the
bargaining and conversational aspects of art strictly separate. Finally, the
example of the gallery owner is the most extraordinary. Why indeed did
the owner only want to pay Alex his cut in the context of the charade
where they both pretended that payment was a gift not an obligation?
The answer lies in the necessary denial of the economy in the arts.
Even though artists and art lovers tend to disapprove of the monetary
connection in art, this connection is nevertheless undeniably present.
Although donations and subsidies are more important than they are in
other sectors, approximately half of the art world’s income derives from
the market. Evidently the arts seem to operate successfully in both the
market and gift spheres. (The latter includes subsidies.)
Nevertheless, the values of the gift sphere come ﬁrst. The virtues of the
gift sphere are attractive. The high status accorded the gift sphere
enhances the status of the arts. Several phenomena conﬁrm the high
status of art and artists.
The association of the arts with non-commercial values has grown in
importance over the last one hundred years. The economy is denied. Art
products are sold in the market, but often in a veiled manner. Art and
artists are highly esteemed. This kind of status could never have existed if
the arts had embraced commerce instead. It is commercial to be non-
commercial.
50
THE DENIAL OF THE ECONOMY

It can be argued that the denial of the economy in the arts has passed
its zenith.37 For instance, among performing art companies there is less
resistance to commercial attitudes than there was twenty years ago.
Other signs (to be discussed later) point in the same direction. Neverthe-
less, even if the denial has passed its zenith, it is still strong and it is likely
to continue to inﬂuence the economy of the arts for at least another ﬁfty
years.
Finally, even if readers agree that money and markets are indispensa-
ble to the arts, they can still maintain that money is a necessary evil in the
arts. ‘After all, aesthetic value has nothing to do with market value.’
Therefore the next chapter examines the relationship between aesthetic
and market values.
Discussion
1 Gallery owners in the ‘low’ arts were said to be relatively orthodox in
their denial of the economy. They feel the need to be more Catholic
than the pope. Or is there a better, more down to earth explanation?
One could maintain that they are secretive about their price policies
because they are more closely related to normal commerce and there-
fore they are more aware of competition than high art galleries. They
hide their price-policies, not because they deny the economy, but
because of competition. How can one tell the difference?
2 Is the contempt for money in society and in the arts becoming less
important? For instance, art administrators in the performing arts
appear to deny the economy less than they did twenty years ago. Does
this change in behavior reﬂect a trend that contradicts this chapter’s
ﬁndings?
51
CONCLUSION

Chapter 3
Economic Value Versus Aesthetic Value
Is There Any Financial Reward for Quality?
Market Success Demonstrates Low Quality, But not if the Artist’s own
Work is Successful
When Alex goes to the local pub with his artist friends, a recurrent theme in
their conversations is the question of whether the prices of artworks reﬂect
their artistic quality. The other day the work of a colleague who has recently
become successful in the market was being discussed. They scolded him
for accepting such high prices for such dreadful paintings. (This particular
colleague frequents a different bar.) They are angry at the stupid art world,
which buys all this crap – literally and ﬁguratively. They question the existing
order, in what it does to sales and reputations, but mostly regarding its criti-
cal judgment.
Alex and his colleagues can be expected to think this way. Within their
group, they have developed a speciﬁc notion about aesthetics. As artists, it
is essential to them to offer, through artistic means, critical commentaries
on society, including the market. Because people cannot be expected to
purchase painful commentary, society should furnish a sanctuary for art
outside the realm of the market. For them this is the raison d’être for subsi-
dies. Thus, it’s fairly obvious that their notions about aesthetics means that
art with a low market value has a high aesthetic value and vice versa.
Later on, that evening something strange happens. Alex’s colleagues ask
him whether he has sold anything during his present exhibition. They con-
gratulate Alex when he tells them he has sold several drawings. They say
he deserves it. One colleague says she thinks Alex’s work has improved a
lot over the past two years. Alex suddenly realizes that they often berate the
market when it favors artists who are not their friends, and conversely, if
one of their own suddenly tastes success, they tend to attach almost too
much signiﬁcance to it. The market suddenly goes from being something
coincidental to something righteous. And so they have to justify its right-
eousness by concluding that Alex has worked hard and that his work has
improved. But Alex wonders: maybe his work did not improve at all. Is it
possible that his colleagues look at his work afresh because it is selling and
that they suddenly see qualities they did not see before?
52

Deciding on the Value of One’s Work
Adrian, a former student and Alex’s good friend, has become successful, in
the market as well as in the eyes of the critics. Since Adrian is now well
known, sometimes at exhibitions people tell Alex that they like his work, but
that it is too much like Adrian’s work – as if Alex is trying to copy Adrian’s
work. Alex ﬁnds this hard to swallow. After all, he is twenty-ﬁve years older
then Adrian. When they ﬁrst met, Alex already had his own style, all before
Adrian had even entered art school. Adrian’s work hangs on his wall and
Alex’s work hangs in Adrian’s house. Due to a common interest and
because of some mutual inﬂuence, their work is related. But if one inﬂu-
enced the other at all, Alex must have inﬂuenced Adrian, not the other way
around.
Whenever somebody close to him, like Adrian, becomes successful, Alex
feels the need to suddenly reevaluate his own work. The market value of
Adrian’s work has increased a great deal to the point where it now has a
much higher market value than Alex’s work. Thus, it’s only natural that Alex
questions the aesthetic value of his and Adrian’s work. Does increased
market value mean that the quality of Adrian’s work is also that much higher
than his own? Somewhat to his relief, Alex realizes that it’s not just the work
that matters. External factors also play a role. Adrian’s youthfulness and
good looks certainly make a difference in the art world. Plus Adrian’s artis-
tic form and temperament seem to suit the spirit of the times.
Therefore, Alex tries to formulate all the possible external factors that might
inﬂuence public opinion, but also his own assessments of his own and his
friend’s work. This way he hopes that his work will no longer be inferior.
Even though the market and critics prefer his friend’s work, when it really
comes down to it, his own work is just as good.
But Alex remains uncertain. He tells himself that the market and the critics
can’t be totally wrong, and so Adrian’s work must have qualities his own
does not. Moreover, Alex ﬁnds the notion that he could be just fooling him-
self by bucking the opinions of both the market and the critics unbearable.
In the end, he has decided that his friend’s work is better. Adrian is a damn
good painter.
Art That Ends Up on the Garbage Dump
Alex and his colleagues are serious about their art materials and tech-
niques. Because of the paint, paper, and canvas and the techniques they
employ, their works might well last a thousand years. They seriously ponder
the possibility that their art might live forever. Which means that if their art is
valuable now, it will continue to be valuable in the future. And if it is not valu-
able now, it is bound to become so in the future.
Two decades ago, Alex met an art historian, Soﬁa, whom rudely opened his
53
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

eyes when she told him that the overwhelming majority of artworks end up
in a garbage dump. This might happen in part during an artist’s lifetime and
in part shortly after his or her death. Within ﬁfty years of an artist’s death,
some ninety percent of his or her manuscripts, scores, compositions, and
paintings have disappeared into the rubbish bin. These are averages of
course. A rather small selection of artists still has its work intact but for the
vast majority, their work has all but vanished. She also noted that of all the
paintings that hung on walls in the Netherlands during the Golden Age, less
than one percent have survived to the present day.1
Alex was shocked. It was not so much the perception of his art that was
threatened, but of art itself. Deep down Alex had always cherished the holi-
ness of art and its enduring value. He thought that this value stemmed from
an intrinsic quality of art that other products lack. And because an intrinsic
quality doesn’t just disappear over time, Alex assumed that valuable art
now would still be valuable in a thousand years.
In the following years, Alex gradually came to terms with the temporality of
his art and of the art he loved and admired. To his own amazement, Alex felt
an enormous sense of relief. He no longer had to work for posterity.
Instead, he could produce drawings for people, alive now, some of whom
are his personal friends. These people evidently have some use for his
drawings. But it’s very likely that in half a century his drawings will be lost.
Who cares? He’ll be dead by then anyway. Since this revelation, Alex has
found it easier to take responsibility for his art. Having a responsibility for
the rest of eternity was always a bit too much responsibility. And so like a
loaf of bread, most art works get used up. And Alex now thinks this is the
way it should be.
Does aesthetic value diminish? Is that why so many works of art end up
in a garbage dump? And why do artists remain so ambiguous about
market value? One minute, artists are scolding the market because it has
nothing to do with quality and the next their appreciation of Alex’s work
is determined by its success in the market. And so when Alex’s friend
Adrian becomes successful on the market, Alex ﬁrst tries to play it down
by questioning market value, but in the end he comes to the conclusion
that his friend’s work is simply better.
Although I do not always behave accordingly, as an artist it is my con-
viction that the quality of my artwork is not related to my success or lack
of success in the market. I don’t think that artists who earn more neces-
sarily make better art. In my view artists who earn much money can still
make bad art. If there is any relationship at all, I would have to agree with
my colleagues who insist that success and low artistic quality go hand-in-
hand. Although I actually earn a substantial portion of my income
54
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

through the market, as an artist I am convinced that aesthetic value is
independent of market value.
But as an economist, I disagree with this. As an economist I believe
that quality in general corresponds with success in the market. I’m sure
that artists and art lovers alike will accuse me for being cynical. They
would do well to paraphrase Oscar Wilde: “Here is this economist who
knows the price of everything and the value of nothing”. Be that as it
may; I think I have a point. Otherwise, Alex and his colleagues would not
be so ambivalent when it comes to market value.
In this chapter, my aims are limited. I don’t intend to present a compre-
hensive study of how prices and aesthetic judgments in the arts evolve.2
Nor do I contrast cultural values with economic values as Throsby does.3
I merely want to demonstrate that aesthetic value, deﬁned in a limited
sense, and economic value are systematically related.
1
Aesthetic Value and Market Value Differ in Deﬁnition
Before embarking on a discussion of the relationship between aesthetic
and economic value, the meanings of these terms should be clariﬁed. As
with the term ‘art’, I prefer to deﬁne aesthetic value more obliquely. So-
called experts deﬁne aesthetic value. Aesthetic value is what experts call
aesthetic value. The experts include artists, critics, mediators, and con-
sumers with authority in the art world. They comprise the acknowledged
leading experts of the art world. Similar to our earlier deﬁnition of art,
not everyone wields the same amount of authority in the establishment of
aesthetic value: the inﬂuence of some experts is larger than that of others.
Aesthetic value resembles a weighed average. But unlike market values,
aesthetic values differ only in an ordinal sense. For instance, some
experts might ﬁnd that painting A has more aesthetic value than that of
painting B, but they cannot tell how much more.
This sociological approach to aesthetic value – which places the power
of evaluation in the hands of experts – can offer a special perspective to
the questions raised in the illustrations above. But it should be borne in
mind that it also circumvents numerous issues and problems regarding
the value of artworks that are of interest in other settings.4
The economic value of a work of art is its value in terms of money.
(Here as in ‘economic sphere’, and later in ‘economic capital’ and ‘eco-
nomic power’, ‘economic’ is used in a monetary sense.) Most of the time
‘economic value’ is synonymous with ‘market value’, i.e., the amount of
money involved in the selling and buying of artworks. Because economic
value is measured in terms of money, it is possible to make precise com-
55
AESTHETIC VALUE AND MARKET VALUE DIFFER IN DEFINITION

parisons. For instance, the market value of painting A is 1.8 times as high
as that of painting B.
Although price is often thought to represent market value, this corre-
lation is only appropriate in the case of unique works of art. In all other
cases, like the sale of books, cds and seats at a performance, only rev-
enues from sales can represent market value. These revenues are deter-
mined by multiplying price by quantity.5 For instance, cds by My Morn-
ing Jacket are the same price as Spice Girls cds, and yet the market value
of a Spice Girls cd is much higher, because sales of Spice Girls cds are
much higher. (In this speciﬁc case, quantity is a fair determinant of
market value, but to be safe, it is always better to multiply price and
quantity.)
2
‘In the Market there is no Reward for Quality’
There is no reward for good art in the market. And it’s not just artists and
art lovers who go around saying this. The notion that artistic quality
does not ‘pay’ permeates every level of society. The cleaning woman and
the lawyer alike may express as their opinion that true art does not pay
and that artists must suffer. This is common wisdom that is deeply
rooted in our society. As an artist, I also adhere to this view.
As an economist however, I oppose the notion that there is no relation-
ship or even a negative one between quality and market value. I believe
that market value and aesthetic value generally correspond. ‘In the
market, artists are justly rewarded for the quality of their artworks.’
These two opinions are basically as different as day and night. I begin by
putting them in some perspective.
First, I look at the artist’s argument, which also includes most art
lovers: market value does not reﬂect quality. The relationship can, in
fact, be negative. High aesthetic value can actually be linked to low
market value and vice versa. Three different interpretations of this prem-
ise are possible.
1 Aesthetic value and economic value belong to independent spheres.
Values deviate randomly and are only coincidentally similar. There is
no relation whatsoever between these two values.
2 Aesthetic value and economic value belong to non-reciprocal spheres.
Aesthetic value is independent, while market value depends, to vary-
ing degrees, on aesthetic value. Buyers listen to experts but not vice
versa. A positive but one-way relationship exists in which aesthetic
value remains an autonomous uncontaminated factor.
3 Aesthetic value and economic value belong to hostile spheres. An
56
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

inverse relationship exists. Market value reduces aesthetic value. The
implicit message is that market value is dangerous for art; thus it must
not interfere with aesthetic value. Because aesthetic value is not natu-
rally autonomous, autonomy should be the goal of those you care
about art.6
My description of the market and the gift sphere in the previous chapter
implies the presence of hostile spheres not unlike interpretation number
three. In commerce everything is measured in monetary term, which
tends to degrade art; it lowers a particular artwork’s aesthetic value. And
so evidence of commerce must be swept under the mat. Meanwhile, art
lovers consider aesthetic value the essence of art. If art is sublime or
sacred, it’s because of its aesthetic value. And thus, artists and art lovers
feel the need to safeguard the notion of aesthetic value from contamina-
tion by market value.
Governments also seem to think there is a negative relationship
between aesthetic and market value. For instance, in efforts to promote
‘quality’ in the arts, many governments tend to subsidize young artists
who have not yet succeeded in the market. So, in the eyes of many govern-
ments, low market value can correspond with high aesthetic value. In
fact, the very existence of government subsidies in the arts presumes an
overall negative relationship between aesthetic value and economic
value.7
I now turn from the artist’s opinion to the opposing argument, that of
the economist: market value corresponds with aesthetic value in the arts.
The economist, William Grampp, defends this position most fervently.
“In saying that economic and aesthetic values are consistent, I mean that
if outside the market painting A is said to be superior to painting B then
on the market the price of A will be higher than B.”8 Formulated in a dif-
ferent manner it begins to sound less pleasant: If the price of A is higher
than that of B, then A is superior. I shall refer to this assumed (ordinal)
correspondence as the thesis of correspondence between aesthetic and
economic value or simply, Grampp’s thesis.9 Grampp does not say so,
but a clear implication of his thesis is that, if one artist earns more than
another, the ﬁrst is the better artist. For instance, if Lucian Freud earns
more than Jeff Koons, his work must be artistically superior. It is an
implication most art-lovers will strongly repudiate. (Grampp refers to
unique paintings and can therefore use price instead of market value.
Because the analysis in this chapter also refers to multiples, like graphics,
books, and cds, I use market value to represent economic value.)
Grampp’s discussions of the correspondence between the two values
certainly does not imply a one-way inﬂuence, i.e., that market value is
57
‘IN THE MARKET THERE IS NO REWARD FOR QUALITY’

determined by aesthetic value. They depend on one another. In his view,
aesthetic value cannot be an independent value as it also depends on eco-
nomic variables such as relative scarcity. For instance, Grampp suggests
that if Rembrandt had produced even fewer self-portraits both their
market and aesthetic value would be even higher than they already are.10
In the context of our purposes, the thesis of correspondence offers a
fruitful starting point for our analysis of economic and aesthetic value.
The thesis is clear and precise, however in principal, it can be refuted.11
The thesis of correspondence is part of a broader and more relevant
thesis. Economists like Grampp and Tyler Cowen claim that free markets
and commerce in the arts more often promote quality or aesthetic value
than harm it.12 But because this kind of thesis is harder to assess, it is not
dealt with in this chapter.
To repeat, the economist defends the position that market perform-
ance and quality in the arts largely correspond.13 Thus, on average,
artists get what they deserve. If they suffer, it’s because the quality of
their work is low. On the other hand, the art world defends the position
that quality in the arts exists irrespective of market performance. Artists
may suffer because they lack market income while they are indeed
making great art.
Before attempting to assess these positions, I will brieﬂy discuss the
question of whether market value and aesthetic value are social values.
3
Values are Shared
Social variables are essential in this book’s approach to the economy of
the arts. Nevertheless, the term ‘social’ does not really exist in the tradi-
tional economic approach. This approach is based on individual prefer-
ences. Although individual preferences do get funneled into the market,
thus inﬂuencing market value, it is not considered a social process.
Market value then, is the automatic outcome of the interactions of
numerous independent individuals who cannot alone inﬂuence the out-
come. Therefore, market value is not a social value, but an objective
value.
Modern economists, however, are well aware that preferences are not
given and independent; preferences are interdependent.14 Nevertheless,
in their view standard economic theory offers a useful ‘approach’, not
necessarily a realistic view of the world. At the same time, most econo-
mists do not disagree with the thesis that market value is a social value.
It should be acknowledged however, that individuals are the building
blocks of economic theory. Economists adhere to so-called methodologi-
58
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

cal individualism.15 If social values in fact exist, they stem from individ-
ual values or preferences. Sociologists, on the other hand, base their
approach on social values, which they believe are not the sum total of
individual values. Social values maintain a relative autonomy.16 As long
as we take social values seriously, there is no need to take sides in this
complex controversy.17
In the context of this book, an analysis of value concepts is not neces-
sary and would ultimately be confusing.18 The distinction between ﬁrst
order and higher order values (or meta-values) – as noted by social scien-
tists as well as economists – cannot be ignored however.19 Taste and con-
sequent shopping behavior rest on ﬁrst-order values. Take Mr. Williams;
he has a higher order value because he wants to be regarded as ‘a man of
his time’. Thus, he prefers ﬁction by young authors, which represents a
ﬁrst-order value. This implies that higher-order values and ﬁrst order
values are contingent or interdependent, but not in a deterministic way.
Contradictions between ﬁrst and higher order values are not uncom-
mon. Mr. Smith, for instance, buys Tom Jones cds and goes to see porno-
graphic ﬁlms, but at the same time, he is ashamed of this kind of con-
sumption. Evidently, his conscience tells him that he should prefer other
kinds of music and ﬁlms. In his conscience, he has internalized higher
values that are more important to him than his daily values.
Without the possibility of individuals maintaining contradictory
values, the cultural inferiority and consequent asymmetry in judgment
described in Chapter 1 could not have existed. For instance, in practice
people with lower levels of education buy different art than people with
higher levels of education; their ﬁrst order values differ. Nevertheless,
when the ﬁrst are asked to order low and high art their higher order
values correspond in a general sense with the elite ordering. Therefore in
their case, ﬁrst and higher order values must contradict.
Social values that are primarily shared within a speciﬁc group result in
a group attitude. Artists and economists, for instance, have different
attitudes. To a lesser degree, the same applies to different groups of
artists, such as composers and choreographers. The typical elements of
these attitudes are commonly knowledge. So, it should not be too amaz-
ing to learn that the controversies between the artist in me and the econo-
mist in me – presented in each chapter’s introduction – are largely pre-
dictable.
59
VALUES ARE SHARED

4
There is No Such Thing as a Pure Work of Art
Are art lovers correct in saying that aesthetic value is independent of
values such as market value and other social values? If the various
spheres are indeed independent or non-reciprocal, then there is either no
relation between aesthetic and market value, or market value adapts
itself to aesthetic value, but not vice versa.
The way aesthetic value has been deﬁned here makes it a social value
by deﬁnition: individual experts who necessarily listen to one another,
collectively determine aesthetic value. Nevertheless, for many experts
aesthetic value is an altogether independent value that is hidden in the
artwork.
Let us take a closer look at expert behavior. I mention four cases in
which market value is inﬂuenced by social circumstances, in two of
which aesthetic value is also effected.
1 The instant that new techniques of measuring characteristics unseen
by the human eye revealed that a painting by Rembrandt was made by
one of his students or that a Picasso lithography was a fake, the prices
of these works tumbled as does their aesthetic value in the eyes of
experts.
2 When any of the Marilyn Monroe portraits by Warhol goes up for
sale, it consistently fetches higher prices than his other portraits.
Moreover, within Warhol’s oeuvre, the Monroe portraits received a
lot of attention from experts who wrote more positive reviews about
them than about the others.
3 Until recently, companies, but also foundations and government-insti-
tutions, bought relatively many large and colorful abstract expression-
ist paintings to use as decoration in halls or behind desks. Because of
this demand the market value of this type of painting was higher than
it would otherwise have been. Experts however, will fervently declare
that the aesthetic value of these paintings was not inﬂuenced by the
use these institutions made of the paintings.
4 Copies of an etching are exactly alike, but they differ in their prove-
nance, i.e., the documentation of their ownership history: one etching
has been part of a royal collection since it was created, while the other
has not. And so, the ﬁrst sells at a higher price than the latter. But for
experts this difference does not matter.20
In all four examples, social factors have inﬂuenced market value. In the
ﬁrst two, they have also inﬂuenced the experts’ aesthetic opinion.21 (In
the third experts deny any inﬂuence. If we were to look from the perspec-
tive of the tenth ﬂoor however, we could probably prove that also in the
60
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

third example the experts were inﬂuenced by the omnipresence of those
eye-catching abstract expressionist paintings, but were evidently
unaware of it.) In any case, the ﬁrst two examples tell us that even experts
admit that their aesthetic judgment is sometimes inﬂuenced by social cir-
cumstances.
The examples are instructive because they show that experts draw a
line. In this case, the line is drawn between the second and the third exam-
ple. Rules and conventions among experts govern what enters into the
determination of aesthetic value. The existence of these rules and conven-
tions means that aesthetic value is in practice a social construction.
These remarks have not even touched upon the possibility that art
might have intrinsic aesthetic value independent of expert decree. Can
art be intrinsically valuable? People clearly desire this idea of intrinsic
value. Many art lovers, and I’m no exception, are looking for pure works
of art. They want to believe in a naive or virginal approach to listening,
reading and looking, as if the book, tone or painting is the ﬁrst one. They
believe that only in this mode can they remain truly receptive to art. The
belief that art is sacred only feeds the notion of a primeval aesthetic expe-
rience comparable to that of a unique religious experience. But people
are never completely open nor do they live in a void. Their social values
and relation to art, determines which elements in an artwork are read,
heard, or seen.
If a Van Eyck painting were left behind for an indigenous tribe in New
Guinea, the tribe would probably treat it like any other panel. Because
the members of the tribe have a different social setting, they won’t see
anything extraordinary on the canvas. The only value it might have is as
a shingle to ﬁx a roof or as ﬁrewood.
In one of the above illustrations, Alex tries to compare his work with
that of his successful friend, Adrian. His friend’s work has a higher
market value and experts pay more attention to it. Alex however, believes
(or hopes) that when the social impact is removed, his work will be con-
sidered no worse than Adrian’s. He prefers to compare the ‘intrinsic’
values of ‘pure’ artworks. But it’s impossible to eliminate all social
values and begin with a blank slate. In practice, Alex only discounts
those values that he personally doesn’t want interfering with the art-
work’s ‘intrinsic’ value, such as their age difference. But a more agree-
able value, such as the homoerotic content of their work, continues to
assert its inﬂuence on his judgment of ‘intrinsic’ value.
Barbara Smith has pointed out, that by subtracting all social values
one is left with no value at all. She writes, “When all such utilities, inter-
ests, and particular sources of value have been subtracted, nothing
remains. Or, to put this in other terms: the ‘essential’ value of a work of
61
THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS A PURE WORK OF ART

art consists of everything from which it is usually distinguished.”22
Therefore, the division between aesthetic and non-aesthetic values nec-
essarily depends on social judgment.
Aesthetic judgments vary according to time and to the social group
involved. It thus follows that, contrary to the claim of many art lovers
and artists, art has no intrinsic value (thesis 15). Aesthetic value is not an
independent value, but a social value (thesis 16). This conclusion clears
the path for the discussion of the main question of this chapter: how are
aesthetic and market value related? Is there a negative relationship as
many artists and art lovers believe, or is it positive as the economist
believes?
5
Buyers Inﬂuence Market Value and Experts Aesthetic Value
Who determines aesthetic value and market value? In discussing the con-
troversy regarding the relationship between aesthetic and market values,
it might be helpful to try to answer this question ﬁrst.
Who determines market value? As previously noted, in standard eco-
nomics, there are numerous independent players who determine price. In
neo-classical economics, so-called ‘sovereign’ consumers come ﬁrst. Pro-
ducers are relatively unimportant; they adapt their behavior to the
wishes of consumers. Our argument as well is based on the notion that
producers are relatively unimportant when it comes to directly inﬂuenc-
ing the market value of art-products.23 (If they do manage to, it is usually
via experts as co-producers. As we shall see, such experts inﬂuence
market value via their opinion on aesthetic value.)
Not all consumers inﬂuence market value. And when they do, they do
so to varying degrees. In so-called deep-pocket markets, buyers need
deep pockets (lots of money) to participate and ultimately inﬂuence
market value.24 Important paintings are sold in deep-pocket markets. I
will ﬁrst look at an individual transaction. When a speciﬁc painting is
sold, it appears that one rich person’s willingness to pay determines its
market value. As noted earlier, however, other wealthy people operating
in the background also help to determine market value. This becomes
particularly clear in an auction setting. The more interested people with
money attending the auction, the higher the price. (In a commercial
gallery the mechanism is much the same, but more indirectly and with
more constraints.25)
If instead of noting the market value of a single painting, we look at
the value of the entire body of work, for instance of a certain genre, its
market value depends on the willingness of a group of buyers to pay. Sup-
62
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

pose we compare the developments in the sales of new ﬁgurative paint-
ings and abstract expressionist paintings. And suppose we ﬁnd that the
sales of the ﬁrst increase more than the latter’s. In that case, it means that
the relative willingness of rich consumers to pay for new ﬁgurative art
has increased. Metaphorically speaking, people who can afford such
paintings can be said to have ‘voted’ for the goods on sale. Therefore,
market value is not unlike the outcome of an electoral process where
people with enough money ‘vote’ for products. In this example, new ﬁg-
urative art is the winner compared over abstract expressionism.
Not only deep-pocket markets but also so-called mass markets exist in
the arts.26 For instance, cds and books are sold in mass markets. They
are relatively cheap and therefore more people can afford them. Here as
well market value depends on consumers’ willingness to pay. But here
willingness to pay is reﬂected not in higher prices but in higher sales. In a
mass market, the metaphor of an electoral process is even more apropos.
Buying a cd by a popular composer or a book by a successful author
immediately adds to sales. The fact that these purchases are often
recorded in best-seller lists adds to the voting analogy.
But not just technically reproduced art is sold in mass markets; art
museums and cinemas also operate in mass markets. The live performing
arts operate in an intermediate position, because attending a live per-
formance is relatively more costly, but not as costly as buying paintings.
Meanwhile, overly expensive performance art outings – operas or small
exclusive pop concerts – tend to operate in deep-pocket markets.
In both mass and deep-pocket markets, the sine qua non of inﬂuence
on market value is purchasing power. People must have sufﬁcient money
and be prepared to spend it on the works concerned. The difference,
then, between mass and deep-pocket markets is that low prices means
more people are able to participate in mass markets than in deep-pocket
markets. Thus, market value in deep-pocket markets depends on the
willingness of a small group of rich people to pay, while in mass markets
it depends on the willingness of large groups of less wealthy consumers to
pay.
In keeping with our electoral process metaphor, people can be said to
vote for various products in the art market, and market value can be said
to be the outcome of this process. It is not a democratic process however.
The number of votes people can cast depends on their purchasing power.
In extreme deep-pocket markets, small groups or maybe even a single
person can decisively inﬂuence market value. When one of the Saatchi
brothers, from the London advertisement agency Saatchi and Saatchi,
started buying Damian Hirst’s artworks for their private collection, the
pricetag for these works immediately increased. And when he then subse-
63
BUYERS INFLUENCE MARKET VALUE AND EXPERTS AESTHETIC VALUE

quently sold off the collection’s Sandro Chia paintings, the monetary
value of Chia’s oeuvre decreased considerably.
Because the rich have large reserves of disposable income, their eco-
nomic inﬂuence on market value is considerably larger than of the poor.
But this only applies to individuals or to groups of the equal size. If prices
are low enough and the group of ‘poor’ people is large enough, their col-
lective economic power can be just as decisive. Social groups who in the
past had little disposable income to spend on luxury goods have since
gained a considerable degree of purchasing power. They tend to spend
more and more on cheap, mainly technically reproduced, art products
and thus they have a sizeable inﬂuence on the market value of these prod-
ucts. Therefore, it’s really not so surprising that, unlike art dealers,
record companies prefer to target the tastes of these masses instead of
small wealthy groups of art consumers.
Thus, in mass markets large groups willing to spend money on art
determine market value, while in deep-pocket markets a small group of
rich people willing to spend their money on art determines market value.
If these groups, in fact, determine market value, who determines aes-
thetic value? Given the deﬁnition of aesthetic value as formulated above,
experts determine aesthetic value. Like buyers, experts can be compared
to voters. And like market value, aesthetic value can be compared with
the outcome of a voting process. In the case of aesthetic value however, it
is not purchasing power, but the power of words or cultural power that
determines the number of votes participants have. An expert with a good
reputation evidently has a larger say in the determination of aesthetic
value than an unknown art historian who has just earned his or her mas-
ters degree.
It must be noted that in our approach in this chapter, we do not pay
separate attention to the inﬂuence of producers – artists, record compa-
nies, publishers, and other participants in the art world. – but this does-
n’t mean that producers are irrelevant in the determination of aesthetic
and market value. For the sake of the argument however, I place ‘produc-
ers’ in the category of ‘experts’. In the words of Bourdieu, they produce
belief.27 They inﬂuence aesthetic value and, if market value and aesthetic
value are not independent of one another, they also indirectly inﬂuence
market value. (In later chapters, speciﬁc attention will be paid to the
power of producers and their institutions.)
6
Power Differences Rest on Economic, Cultural and Social Capital
Is it possible that the powers of the social group that leading experts
64
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

belong to are different from those of consumers? On average art con-
sumers are part of a social group that has relatively more economic capi-
tal (wealth) and income at its disposal and thus has more purchasing or
economic power. When buying art they use their economic power to do
so. Their spending inﬂuences the market or economic value of art. Mean-
while, experts are part of a social group that has much cultural capital
and therefore, more cultural power. The experts use their cultural power
in the arts. Their cultural inﬂuence or cultural authority affects the aes-
thetic value of art.
Economic capital consists of money and assets like real estate that can
be quickly converted into cash. (As with the terms ‘economic’ sphere,
‘economic’ value and ‘economic’ power, the use of the term ‘monetary’
or ‘ﬁnancial’ capital instead of ‘economic’ capital would have been
preferable, but by using ‘economic capital’ I do not deviate from
common usage.28)
Sociologists introduced the concepts of cultural capital and social cap-
ital. Recently, an increasing number of economists have started to use
these terms as well.29 Cultural capital refers primarily to incorporated
abilities and dispositions. Cognitive abilities are part of cultural capi-
tal.30 Social capital refers to present and potential resources that arise
from a network of social relations. Reputations often symbolize the pos-
session of social and cultural capital. Unlike economic capital, social and
cultural capital cannot easily be exchanged or bought and sold.31
The differences are relative. On the one hand, the experts’ social
group not only has cultural capital, but also some economic capital.
After all, most experts have more money to spend than average people.
But each expert has less to spend than the average rich person who buys
paintings; and as a group experts have also less to spend than the large
group of buyers of books. On the other hand the ‘money-people’ buying
visual art not only have economic capital but also some cultural capital.
They certainly have more than average cultural capital, but nevertheless
their cultural capital is less valuable than the experts’ cultural capital.
Economic capital is important in the market; it enables spending. Col-
lective spending determines the market value of a group of art products.
In determining aesthetic value, cultural capital is the most important.
With their capital, experts inﬂuence aesthetic value. They do so within a
discourse among themselves and within larger social groups of which
they are part. Collectively, they select and weigh the factors that deter-
mine aesthetic value. Social scientists have written extensively about this
selection and weighing process.32
In the establishment of aesthetic value, the possession of cultural capi-
tal is decisive and in the establishment of market value, it is the posses-
65
POWER DIFFERENCES REST ON ECONOMIC, CULTURAL AND SOCIAL CAPITAL

sion of economic capital that matters (thesis 17). If the social group
accommodating important buyers and the social group accommodating
leading experts differ in their composition of capital and, consequently,
in their tastes as well, this explains that economic and aesthetic value do
not always correspond.33 They may even have a negative relationship as
some artists and art lovers insist. 
7
In Mass Markets Quality and Sales Easily Diverge
Why does the art that experts judge as inferior often sell so well in mass
markets? In fact, it sells better than ‘quality art’. This is a common phe-
nomenon in the mass markets of books, cds, ﬁlms, and videos. For
instance, the market value of Steven Spielberg ﬁlms is much higher than
the market value of Werner Herzog ﬁlms. The same applies to the books
of Allistair McClean in comparison to those of William Golding. Never-
theless, most experts would agree that Herzog and Golding offer higher
aesthetic value.
Unlike deep-pocket markets, it is unlikely that this phenomenon is
caused by the variance in the composition of capital between average
experts and average buyers. (Experts are likely to have both more money
and more cultural capital than average buyers, but not necessarily in dif-
ferent proportions.) It is caused by differences in the collective purchas-
ing power that determines market value. Average buyers with average
tastes enter mass markets in large numbers and so boost the market value
of art that experts have deemed to have little aesthetic value. Therefore,
the difference in purchasing power between large groups with little cul-
tural power and small groups with a lot of cultural power offers a rather
obvious, but easily ignored, reason for the occurrence of deviations
between mass market aesthetic and market values.
In mass markets, the general rule is that aesthetic value deviates from
market value. This is shown in the cases of the two directors and the two
authors. In mass markets, large groups of consumers buy works of art,
such as books and cds or tickets to live performances and ﬁlms. Even
though individual people may have little disposable income, collectively
they have a great deal of money to spend and they spend it on numerous
cheap works of art, thus boosting their market value.
Whereas, the collective inﬂuence of mass consumers on market value
increases in proportion to their numbers, the same does not apply to their
inﬂuence of aesthetic value, however. It is true that they have their own
experts who share their various tastes. These experts tell their stories on
popular television programs and in the daily newspapers. Nevertheless,
66
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

despite their large numbers, the overall inﬂuence of these experts in terms
of determining aesthetic value is relatively small. They have little cultural
power or inﬂuence, especially compared to the group of high culture
experts. And because these high culture experts tend to belong to differ-
ent social groups, their cultural preferences differ and they attach little
aesthetic value to the art preferred by the average consumer. (In this case,
although collective spending is the sum of individual spending, the col-
lective cultural inﬂuence is not the sum of the individual cultural inﬂu-
ences. Unlike money, cultural capital is embodied and is thus difﬁcult to
transfer from one person to another. Numbers do not necessarily add up
to cultural power.)
The lack of correspondence between aesthetic and market value in
mass markets is related to the phenomenon of cultural asymmetry, which
was discussed in Chapter 1. The argument was that as long as there is
social stratiﬁcation and as long as art products are used for designating
one’s position in social space, judgments about art will remain asymmet-
rical. People from the upper echelons of society ‘naturally’ look down on
the art of those below them, while the latter ‘naturally’ look up to the art
of the former. Although the lower classes of consumers are not wealthy,
cumulatively they have a lot of money to spend. And even though they
may admire their social superiors, they do not spend their money accord-
ingly. And so here is where market value deviates from aesthetic value.
Because high culture experts come from the upper echelons of society,
their tastes are necessarily different from the average consumer. There-
fore, economic value and aesthetic value tend to systematically deviate in
mass markets (thesis 18). This proves that both the economist and the
artist are sometimes right and sometimes wrong. High aesthetic value
and low market value can go together, but not necessarily. The devia-
tions in value reveal differences in power. It took quite an effort to reach
this rather obvious conclusion. But this will make it easier to explain
deviations in economic and aesthetic value in deep-pocket markets.
8
The Strife for Cultural Superiority in the Visual Arts (An Example)
The visual art market is a deep-pocket market. It offers a good opportu-
nity for us to discuss the possible deviations between aesthetic and
market value. In numerous countries over the last decades, a divergence
between market and aesthetic value has developed in two important
styles in the visual arts. In comparing these styles, a refutation of the
economist’s notion that quality and sales correspond seems to emerge.
The two style groups are not always called by the same names. I follow
67
THE STRIFE FOR CULTURAL SUPERIORITY IN THE VISUAL ARTS (AN EXAMPLE)

Nathalie Heinich who uses the relatively neutral terms ‘modern art’
versus ‘contemporary art’.34 Within brackets I shall however, also use
the more commonly used terms ‘traditional art’ versus ‘avant-garde
art’.35 The styles involved are difﬁcult to describe. They are probably best
understood in connection with the names of well-known artists associ-
ated with the two groups. In Britain for instance, Damian Hirst repre-
sents contemporary (avant-garde) art, while Freud, Auerbach, and Kitaj
represents modern (traditional) art. It must be emphasized that in this
book the term ‘avant-garde’ refers to a group of related and established
styles and not to avant-garde in a literal sense. (After all, art cannot be
established and avant-garde at the same time. Currently, ‘cutting edge
art’ sometimes replaces the terms ‘contemporary art’ and ‘avant-garde
art’. In Britain, ‘traditional art’ or ‘modern art’ is also called ‘serious
art’.)
Modern (traditional) artists develop their art from within an existing
long-standing artistic tradition. The motto is continuation with modiﬁ-
cation. Another characteristic is the emphasis on authenticity. The per-
sonal touch of the artist is easily recognizable. Contemporary (avant-
garde) art, on the other hand, tries to offer an alternative to earlier art
movements, such as realism and impressionism, in particular. Sometimes
visible references are made to these earlier styles, but more as a comment,
than as an extension of the already established tradition. Authenticity is
not altogether absent, but also not over-emphasized. This kind of art
tends to be self-referential. That is particularly true in conceptual art and
in installations.
The market value of modern (traditional) art is as high or higher than
the market value of contemporary (avant-garde) art. Top incomes are
higher in the modern (traditional) area than in the contemporary area.
For instance, Lucian Freud earns considerably more than Damian Hirst.
Nevertheless, the main difference has less to do with extremely high
incomes, than with the number of artists who earn attractive to fairly
high incomes. That number is also thought to be higher in the modern
(traditional) area.
In the Netherlands, these two markets could be separated reasonably
well until quite recently. Because most important critics tend to ignore
traditional art, people tend to think that the market is small. But judging
from art fairs, and artists I know, a different picture begins to emerge.
Modern (traditional) visual art by living artists probably has at least as
large a share (if not a larger share) of the total market than avant-garde
art does.36 But when it comes to aesthetic value, a different picture
begins to develop. Whereas the market value of modern (traditional) art
tends to be higher, its aesthetic value is lower than that of contemporary
68
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

(avant-garde) art. Most of the acknowledged leading experts tend to
favor avant-garde art. It should be noted, however, that both modern
(traditional) art and contemporary (avant-garde) art have their own cir-
cles of experts. For instance, in Britain in the nineties, Damian Hirst was
the darling of the avant-garde experts and his work was considered of the
highest aesthetic value. Traditionalist experts meanwhile, preferred the
work of Freud and Auerbach.
At present, in most countries the contemporary (avant-garde) art
experts are more inﬂuential. They don’t value modern (traditional)
works of art. That is why the aesthetic value of traditional visual art is
considered less than that of avant-garde art despite its higher market
value. The inﬂuence of traditionalist experts, then, is obviously much
less, but not altogether absent either. This varies from country to coun-
try. Dutch traditionalist experts ﬁnd themselves more and more in the
shadows of the avant-garde experts. In Britain however, the two aesthetic
camps continue to compete. There traditionalist experts and artists do
not submit to the dominance of the avant-garde and still ﬁght for a return
of their past supremacy.
9
The Power of Words Challenges the Power of Money
Why do the contemporary (avant-garde) visual art experts have more
cultural authority than the modern (traditional) visual art experts?
Apparently the avant-garde’s cultural capital is more valuable than the
traditionalists. The avant-garde experts belong to the so-called ‘new cul-
tural elite’, which challenges the traditionalist ‘economic elite’. The tra-
ditionalists are connected with the economic elite that has most eco-
nomic capital.37 Thus we can say that the two groups differ in the
composition of their capital.
These elites are obviously made up of different types of people. The
economic elite can buy art; sometimes art that costs millions. The cul-
tural elite meanwhile is made up mostly of well-educated wage earners
with less money to spend and thus buy fewer and cheaper artworks.
These elites have different social histories and thus, different tastes.38
The cultural elite tends to prefer avant-garde art, while the economic
elite prefers more traditional visual art.
Nevertheless, one elite does not exclusively determine market value
while the other does not exclusively determine aesthetic value. Indirectly,
the economic elite inﬂuences aesthetic value while the cultural elite inﬂu-
ences market value. On the one hand, experts, such as art historians,
who are part of the cultural elite, advise collectors with a lot of economic
69
THE POWER OF WORDS CHALLENGES THE POWER OF MONEY

capital. On the other hand, price and revenue ﬂuctuations from sales
inﬂuence the decisions of experts whether they are aware of it or not.
Therefore, values are not independent of one another and most likely
over time they tend to converge.
Nevertheless, this convergence can be disturbed by future events that
come from outside. The very emergence of a cultural elite itself can be
seen as an important convulsion. The phenomenon of people with much
cultural capital and little economic capital is new. (It could be a tempo-
rary phenomenon.) The present-day cultural elite did not exist a century
ago. This new elite both depends on the old economic elite, and chal-
lenges its power.
No area is better suited for opposition than that of artistic values, the
area where the cultural elite feels most at home and where its cultural
capabilities or capital serve it well. In order to challenge the economic
elite, the cultural elite embraces the avant-garde, especially in the visual
arts. It tries to legitimize its emergence by associating itself with modern,
innovative, and often intellectual art. The economic elite, with stronger
roots in the past, naturally prefers serious or traditional art, which tends
to legitimize its long-term existence.39
Successful challengers move from a position of social inferiority to
one of equal status, and ﬁnally to a situation of social superiority. In all
of these situations different kinds of deviation in aesthetic and market
value may occur. And so, the artist is often correct because aesthetic and
market value can have a negative relationship. Nevertheless, in deep-
pocket markets deviations tend to be temporary, because money and cul-
tural authority tend to coincide over time. In this case the economist is
right. It follows that the deviation of aesthetic and market value in deep-
pocket markets stems from strife for social superiority (thesis 19).
10 The Government Transforms Cultural Power into Purchasing Power
How can inﬂuential experts with little money but with an opinion that
deviates from the established market ‘opinion’ make themselves heard in
deep-pocket markets? Why are the artworks these experts prefer made at
all if most wealthy art buyers express no interest in it? After all, experts
are powerless unless their opinion circulates and their choice of art is
exhibited. Who ﬁnances their art and dissertations?
Even though the old economic elite primarily buys modern (tradi-
tional) art, a considerable market for contemporary art also exists. Four
circumstances should be taken into consideration regarding this situa-
tion.
70
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

1 A major portion of contemporary artworks are produced by young
artists and are sold for relatively low prices. Almost anyone with an
above-average income, from teachers to civil servants, can afford to
buy contemporary art, even though it might not be every month. And
small sums multiplied by large numbers of sales begin to add up.
(Especially at the bottom end of deep-pocket markets large numbers
are not irrelevant.)
2 Although the economic elite in general has a more traditional taste,
considerable deviations do exist. Different subgroups within the elite
have different social histories. For instance, some families have been
rich for a long time; they earned their money in industry, others in
trade. While other families, the so-called ‘nouveau riche’ only more
recently became wealthy. Given these differences, it is sometimes
advantageous for certain groups within the economic elite to side with
the new cultural elite. Therefore, it should not be surprising that a
(growing) minority of private collectors buys contemporary art.
3 The same argument applies to corporations. The minority of corpora-
tions that collect contemporary art continues to grow. Collections,
such as the Peter Stuyvesant collection, for instance, draw its share of
attention. Shareholders may not always agree with the choices of the
art purchased, but shareholders’ inﬂuence is limited. Within these cor-
porations the higher-ups, primarily a new well-educated cultural elite,
have a considerable amount of leeway when it comes to purchasing art
more to their tastes.
4 Most importantly, however, is the fact that in many countries, govern-
mental bodies and institutions (partly) ﬁnanced by the government,
purchase contemporary art or subsidize contemporary art.
This means that governments with their large art budgets can certainly
harm the economic hegemony of the wealthy. If government spending on
visual art is added to private and corporate spending, the average taste of
art consumers shifts considerably. This way governments, willingly or
unwillingly, are also players in the arena of cultural strife.
In the Netherlands, this latter phenomenon is of particular impor-
tance. In 1996, between one quarter and one third of all sales in the
visual art market were ﬁnanced with public money.40 The money came
from the central government, local governments, museums and other
institutions that spent public money buying visual art. Not much tradi-
tional (modern) art was bought and commissioned with this government
money. Therefore, if it is true that the traditional (modern) art market is
about the same size as the contemporary (avant-garde) art market, gov-
ernment spending accounts for sixty percent or more of the sales of con-
71
THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFORMS CULTURAL POWER INTO PURCHASING POWER

temporary art. This implies that in the Netherlands, not unlike in other
mainland Western European countries, the avant-garde visual art
market is above all a government market (thesis 20).41
Extensive government involvement in mainland Western Europe has
become possible with the emergence of the new cultural elite in and
around government bureaucracies. Its members occupy important posi-
tions in the various government administrations. Therefore, it is only
natural that in the conﬂict between avant-garde and traditional visual
art, governments in a number of European countries have sided with the
cultural elite.
At the same time, most governments are not supposed to have a taste of
their own. They are only supposed to be promoting ‘quality’ in the arts.
The question of what quality is, is left up to the experts. Nevertheless,
most government-appointed experts come from the new cultural elite.
Therefore, by spending money on contemporary art, the government not
only follows in the footsteps of the new cultural elite, it also gives cre-
dence to the cultural elite’s notion of quality. In this manner, govern-
ments increase the value of the new cultural elite’s cultural capital.
Because of government intervention, contemporary art has emerged
as the only relevant area in the visual arts in the Netherlands. The victory
of contemporary art is almost complete. In the market, traditional
(modern) art is still important, but the aesthetic value battle has been
lost. Those working in the traditional (modern) sphere tend to implicitly
acknowledge the superiority of contemporary (avant-garde) art. The
deviations between market value and aesthetic value has not quite disap-
peared yet, but the social strife is largely over.
Compared to mainland Western Europe, British government involve-
ment is quite modest. That is why the struggle in Britain is still largely
undecided. It is tempting to compare the British situation with that of
mainland Western Europe with respect to the effects of government
involvement on the development of the visual arts. It is my personal opin-
ion that because there is less governmental intervention and because tra-
ditional (modern) art is still militant in Britain, the artistic level in both
the traditional and the contemporary art worlds is higher in Britain than
in mainland Western Europe.
Viewing the works of artists like Freud, Auerbach, and Kitaj, or the
modern portraits featured in the National Portrait Gallery in London, it
is not difﬁcult to see that the artistic level is high in the modern (tradi-
tional) arena. In my view, contemporary (avant-garde) art in Britain is
also far livelier and more inventive than mainland Western Europe’s.
Contemporary art in for instance the Netherlands and even more in
France suffers under its easy victory: it is complacent.42 Because the
72
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

British avant-garde is still being challenged, it remains competitive and
alert; it observes its opponents and appropriates the most interesting
aspects of its opponents’ art. Unlike in the Netherlands, this results in an
exiting and interesting cultural climat in Britain’s visual arts.43 It is
inevitable that even despite the paucity of government intervention, con-
temporary art will ultimately triumph in Britain as well, but the resulting
cultural climate will be enriched rather than impoverished.
To return to the main issue of this paragraph: in buying art and giving
to art, governments use their economic power to increase the market
value of art which the reigning experts have judged to be of high aes-
thetic value (thesis 21).
11 Donors and Governments Know Best
Why is the gift sphere in the arts relatively large? Is it because govern-
ments and donors side with the new cultural elite and subsidize its art? If
this is true, it cannot be the whole story. After all, the government and
donors also fund classical music, which is a favorite of the economic
elite. Moreover, the market value of classical music would go down with-
out subsidies and donations, while the market value of contemporary
visual art continues to rise regardless. A broader argument may apply
here. Whenever market value is lower than aesthetic value according to
leading experts, governments and donors tend to step in. They use their
economic power through purchases and gifts to protect ‘quality’. By
giving, they support ‘quality’ and so they bring the market value closer to
the aesthetic value.
As noted in the beginning of the chapter, governments generally subsi-
dize arts activities that experts believe to be aesthetically valuable and
could not thrive or perhaps even survive without government support.
This applies to young unknown visual artists receiving grants as well as
to prestigious orchestras and opera companies.
In the case of mass markets – books or ﬁlms, for instance – govern-
ment and funding organization intervention is limited. They give ‘qual-
ity’ a chance to survive, but any attempt to substantially increase the rel-
ative share of ‘quality art’ in these markets is too costly. But on the other
hand, in the intermediate markets of say live music and theatre, for
instance, and in the deep-pocket visual art market, donors and govern-
ments often manage to increase the relative market value of ‘quality art’.
(In the case of the visual arts they do this not only through subsidies and
donations but also through purchases.)
Government subsidies to the arts can be explained in more than one
73
DONORS AND GOVERNMENTS KNOW BEST

way, as will be shown in the course of this book. One explanation, sug-
gested above, has been that leading experts and the social groups they
belong to have an inﬂuence on the government. (This would be a form of
so-called rent seeking.) But when you hear the arguments of govern-
ments and donors, another explanation comes to the fore. Donors and
governments care about people and therefore they worry about ‘high
quality’ art. They believe average people show too little interest in ‘qual-
ity art’ and buy less ‘quality art’ to their own detriment. They believe
that average consumers underestimate the beneﬁts of ‘quality art’.
Therefore, they use their economic resources to buy art and support the
arts. This is certainly one possible reason why the gift sphere is so large.
It is a so-called merit good argument. Art has special merits that people
are insufﬁciently aware of and therefore donors and governments sup-
port art. Donors and governments know what is ‘best’ for two reasons:
they know what art is ‘best’ and they know what is ‘best’ for the people.44
This chapter’s provisionary thesis on the recurring issue of the large
size of the gift sphere reads as follows: The gift sphere in the arts is large
because governments and donors believe people underestimate the value
of ‘quality art’. Therefore, they protect and stimulate ‘quality art’
through donations and subsidies (thesis 22). Their support helps bridge
the gap between high aesthetic value and low market value.
12 Market Value and Aesthetic Value Tend to Converge in the Long Run
When the government and donors bridge this gap between aesthetic and
market value, the correspondence between these values increases. And as
the conﬂict between modern and contemporary visual art groups gradu-
ally disappears, the correspondence between aesthetic value and market
value in the visual arts also increases. Is there a long-term tendency
towards convergence then? If that is indeed the case then the economist is
correct after all. A number of factors point in that direction.
1 Consumers care about the opinions of experts, while experts are inﬂu-
enced by consumer behavior, whether they are aware of it or not.
When the Saatchi brothers boosted the prices of Damian Hirst’s work
and devalued Sandro Chia’s work, experts largely heeded the Saatchi’s
behavior and changed their aesthetic judgments. On the other hand,
art collectors heed expert opinion, for instance by consulting publi-
cized ratings, which show that the prices of the works of certain artists
are out of line with the experts’ assessments. This is how they discover
whose work is on the rise and whose value is collapsing. By buying or
selling the works of these artists they consequently draw the market
74
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

value closer to that of aesthetic value.45
2 As noted above, government tastes can be at odds with those of the
average consumer. This implies that government subsidies and pur-
chases bend market value towards aesthetic value, which is the case in
the Netherlands. Government subsidies and purchases can also indi-
rectly bend market value towards aesthetic value because they have a
signaling effect. They alert buyers that what they support is ‘high
quality art’ and consequently consumers start to purchase more of it.
3 In the long run, artworks with much aesthetic value can earn artists
high symbolic rewards as well as market income. Bourdieu observed
that publishers of serious literature and dealers of avant-garde visual
art are less interested in immediate returns than their ‘lower’-end col-
leagues are.46 They make long-term investments. And when, perhaps
decades later, it turns out that they were instrumental in launching
important artists, they and the artists may be rewarded with everlast-
ing recognition, fame, and money.
4 As noted, in the long run the two social groups – one with economic
capital and the other with cultural capital47 – will probably begin to
resemble one another more and more until they fuse and aesthetic and
market value correspond.
Although these forces may bring aesthetic and economic values together
in the long run, they can just as easily be thrown off balance again. When
the higher echelons become more alike, chances are that new social
groups will emerge in the struggle for social supremacy. They are bound
to bring along new forms of cultural capital that will inﬂuence aesthetic
value and thus lead to fresh offshoots. If this is a cyclical process, long-
term convergence is doubtful.
All these forces also apply to mass markets but less ﬁrmly. For
instance, in the case of ﬁlms, it is possible that in one hundred years,
Herzog may be better remembered and more honored than Spielberg. But
even then, it is unlikely that over that period of time, his movies would
have earned more money than Spielberg’s. (This does not contradict
Bourdieu’s argument, because his approach is based on symbolic
rewards. Therefore, in Bourdieu’s view, Herzog’s work could, in the long
run, generate most symbolic returns, but not necessarily more monetary
rewards.) Donations and government spending probably can’t bridge the
gap between aesthetic and market value in the mass markets because it
would just be too costly.
Another difference between mass and deep-pocket markets is that the
gap in values in deep-pocket markets disappears when large artistic areas
are set apart. If one looks only at traditional or only at contemporary
75
MARKET VALUE AND AESTHETIC VALUE TEND TO CONVERGE IN THE LONG RUN

visual art, for instance, the gap all but disappears. Both areas have lead-
ing experts whose judgment on aesthetic value does not deviate much
from the market value. On the other hand, agreement between market
value and expert judgment exists only in small artistic areas, or subcul-
tures when we are dealing with technically reproduced pop music.
Because of the ever-decreasing price of the technical reproduction of
sound, images, and words on cd, video, cd-rom and dvd, the purchas-
ing power of large subgroups breeds all sorts of subcultures with separate
aesthetics of their own.
Are pop music and new media art forms the precursors of a postmod-
ern era in which many different values with relatively little coherence
coexist? And will the other arts follow suit? Asymmetrical assessment
would then become a thing of the past. Formulated differently: is it possi-
ble that over time the arts will splinter into more and more subcultures,
which peacefully coexist? Will the thesis of convergence break down alto-
gether in a postmodern era? The Epilogue will deal with these questions.
13 Conclusion
Why do Alex’s colleagues, in the illustration earlier in this chapter, pub-
licly ridicule market values, and yet, appear to be fascinated by them?
And why – to Alex’s relief – is it that on average an artwork’s aesthetic
value doesn’t remain constant, but diminishes over time, as well as
market value?
Apparently, artists are aware that market value and aesthetic value
sometimes correspond. Publicly they nevertheless reject market value
because they want to believe in the independence of aesthetic value or in
a negative relationship between quality and price. But aesthetic value
cannot be independent; it cannot rest on the intrinsic qualities of a work
of art. Instead aesthetic value is a social value, that is inﬂuenced by social
circumstances including market value. Because aesthetic value is a social
value, it can diminish when works of art gradually become less useful.
Economic and aesthetic value are interdependent. However, this inter-
dependence does not necessarily imply the correspondence the economist
predicted; nor does it necessarily imply a negative relationship like the
artist predicted. In this respect, both artist and economist are wrong.
When the power to buy and the power to tell what is good and what is
bad art rests with one group, market and aesthetic value may correspond.
When these powers are in the hands of different social groups, low qual-
ity can have a high market value as well as vice versa.
In markets where expensive art products are sold, like paintings, the
76
ECONOMIC VALUE VERSUS AESTHETIC VALUE

latter situation is relatively rare. If it does occur, it is a sign of social strife:
groups moving up the social ladder challenge the groups above them.
When, however, art products are cheap, like books, a negative relation-
ship is more often the rule than the exception. Social stratiﬁcation
assures that the purchasing power of large groups is not related to the
cultural power of experts who point out good and bad art.
Both artist and economist are wrong about the relationship between
price and quality. General statements about the relationship between
market value and quality are not possible. However, it appears that the
economist’s view is more often right when it comes to analyzing deep-
pocket markets, while the artist’s view is more often right when it comes
to mass markets.
Donors and governments interfere in the development of market and
aesthetic value. For instance, in the recent strife for supremacy between
traditional and avant-garde visual art, governments in most mainland
Western European countries have sided with the avant-garde favored by
the new cultural elite.
The general interference via donations and subsidies in the arts
increases the size of the gift sphere. The answer to the recurring question
of why the gift sphere is so large in the arts, lies with the desire by donors
and governments to protect ‘quality art’ from the market, because of its
special merits, even if other interests lie hidden behind this desire.
Artists, art lovers and donors want to believe that economic value
devalues and corrupts art and that only aesthetic value should matter.
Whether or not deliberately they side with one form of power, the cul-
tural power of the well educated, while dismissing the economic power
of not only the well-to-do but also the general masses. But both values
are revealing. While many people consider it a struggle between art and
money, between aesthetic and economic value, between good and evil,
the sacred and the worldly, the spiritual and the vulgar, it is basically the
ﬁght between different forms of power. The power to tell what is good
and what is bad in the arts competes with purchasing power.
Discussion
1 Is it true that aesthetic value cannot rest on the intrinsic qualities of art
alone?
2 Can you provide some arguments against the thesis that aesthetic
value and economic value tend to converge over time?
3 Can you provide some examples that show your own appreciation of
art having been inﬂuenced by price or market success?
77
CONCLUSION

Chapter 4
The Selﬂessly Devoted Artist
Are Artists Reward-Oriented?
Former Teachers and Experts Looking over the Artist’s Shoulder
Alex considers himself a selﬂess and autonomous ﬁne artist, but some
years ago something happened that made him rethink his position.
Alex always works with a model. He asks the model to look him in the eyes
while the model is sitting. This is an intense experience for both of them.
Alex does his best to record the experience in his drawings. While he is
drawing, the model’s feelings and judgments seem to be reﬂected in the
model’s eyes. However, Alex gradually discovered that he was also pro-
jecting his own feelings onto his model. The model’s eyes can turn into the
eyes of people Alex has known. Quite often, it’s his father looking at him
through the model’s eyes. What is brought into the drawing is a mixture of
the model, Alex and the people Alex carries inside him. In this short-term
symbiotic relationship the model and Alex fuse. There is nothing peculiar
about this symbiosis. It is Alex’s little artistic trick; other artists have their
own tricks.
However, a few years ago, while Alex was drawing in this way, he had a
unique experience that relates to the present topic. Alex was drawing a
model who was also an art student. Before they began, they chatted awhile
and it turned out that the model knew a lot about drawing. Alex also got the
impression that this model was not pleased with Alex’s intuitive drawing
style. His interests were more conceptual. Alex started to draw him. The
model’s eyes gradually changed into those of Alex’s condemning father.
And then something unexpected happened. Alex realized that it was no
longer his father looking at him but Rudi Fuchs, the director of the Stedelijk,
the most prestigious museum of modern art in the Netherlands. His eyes
certainly were not approving of what Alex had drawn thus far. (Alex cannot
remember what became of this particular drawing, which probably means
it did not turn out to his liking.)
This was a shock to Alex. It gave him an uncanny awareness of his limited
autonomy. Since then he has come to the realization that all the time he
thought he was alone in his studio with his model, there were actually many
people present looking over his shoulder. Apart from Mr. Fuchs, there were
78

colleagues, critics, several art school teachers, a few of Alex’s students,
some important buyers and some members of committees who decided on
Alex’s applications for government subsidies. For about a year after this
experience, his studio actually felt like a crowded place. After a year, these
same people were still around, but Alex’s awareness of their presence had
been reduced to what it had been before. Nevertheless, Alex was sure that
they were continuing to inﬂuence him just as much. Or maybe they inﬂu-
enced him even more, because he was less aware of their power. Once
again, Alex had internalized these inﬂuences.
Concessions in Order to Guard One’s reputation
Shortly after leaving art school, Alex began concentrating on drawing
heads using live models. At the same time, he was doing commissions for
portraits as well. These portraits were like his heads, except that Alex
thought the commissioned work never reached the quality level of the
autonomous artwork. The portraits were in his own style, but consistently
less bold. Alex sometimes wished the two sides of his work were more dis-
tinct from one another, so as not to confuse people and potentially damage
his young reputation as a draughtsman with a distinctive style. So he began
to reduce the number of commissions and Alex currently does not accept
commissions anymore. This was not a conscious choice of his. Alex just
began to realize that he enjoyed commissioned work less and less. But he
was sure that his displeasure was due to worries about his reputation. By
just about cutting out commissions altogether Alex lost some income, but
his reputation began developing the way he wanted it to.
Recently Alex started to apply more energy to his photography at the
expense of his drawing. This was a conscious choice he made. He just
wants to be an avant-garde artist. Even though his drawings are not consid-
ered traditional, they never really earned him an established position in the
avant-garde. Alex expects that his photography has more of a chance of
gaining some recognition in the avant-garde. If that happens it is much
easier to have his drawings considered as avant-garde as well. Therefore,
although Alex enjoys drawing more and considers his drawings as artisti-
cally interesting, he spends most of his time on photography now.
No Bargaining with Autonomy – The Audi Deal
Recently the German car manufacturer Audi offered the most important
modern art museum in the Netherlands, Amsterdam’s Stedelijk Museum,
an interest-free loan to ﬁnance the building of a new wing. In return, Audi
put one of its cars on display in a space next to the new restaurant. In
another adjoining space, separate from the general exhibition halls, exhibi-
tions that refer indirectly to Dutch-German relations would occasionally be
79
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

organized. Audi would possibly serve in an advisory capacity for these exhi-
bitions. A squabble developed, ﬁrst in the daily newspapers and later in the
city council. Critics thought that the director of the museum, Rudi Fuchs,
was compromising their museum’s autonomy. They also thought that,
issues of autonomy aside, it was a bad deal – Audi was getting too much for
too little.
This kind of deal is unique and there is no set price. And so it is only natural
that city council and other interested parties evaluate the deal. One evening
Alex went to a forum about the proposed deal at the Erasmus University.
The main faculties here are business administration and economics. So,
Alex expected the members on the panel and the audience to have few
objections based on principle against the deal. This turned out to be true,
as three out of four members of the panel were fervently in favor of this kind
of deal. ‘If museums can sell attractive tie-in products to ﬁrms, like adver-
tisement space or by letting ﬁrms connect their brand name to the name of
the museum, it would be stupid not to seize the opportunity.’
What amazed Alex however was that these business-minded panel mem-
bers and many member of the audience all had one condition. ‘The director
of the museum must maintain his autonomy.’ They were adamant, this was
an all or nothing affair. If Audi gets even the least bit of say in the curating
process, the deal cannot go through. ‘You can’t bargain autonomy.’ Alex
proposed that the director could have ‘more or less’ autonomy and that his
autonomy could also increase by the extra funds he would have at his dis-
posal after the deal. However, Alex’s notion did not appeal to them. In fact,
it was members of the university business department who were the most
adamant about the notion that autonomy is all-or-nothing and that money
should have no inﬂuence in the matter. Alex could not help thinking that the
resolve of these ‘money-people’ clearly demonstrated the importance of
the denial of the economy in the arts.
The Audi deal fell through. It failed at a point in time when there was
increased public discussion in the Netherlands about the autonomy of the
arts. It was during this time that the State Secretary for Culture proposed to
ﬁnancially reward performing art companies if they would actively work
toward increasing the attendance ﬁgures among the young. The rest would
be penalized by having their subsidies cutback. Parliament blocked the
proposed legislation, even going so far as to pass a resolution ordering the
minister to respect the autonomy of art institutions. This example as well,
proved that autonomy is considered an all-or-nothing affair.
Artists are supposed to be selﬂessly devoted to their art. Are artists
immune to rewards? How immune is Alex when he feels people gazing
over his shoulder, who either praise his work or condemn it? And when
80
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

Alex decides to concentrate more on his photography, is it for the praise
or is it merely to ‘serve art’? A similar question can be posed to the
museum director who is seeking to close a sponsorship deal with the
Audi automobile manufacturer. Does he in turn lose his autonomy?
As an artist, I believe that artists are selﬂessly devoted to art. They
serve art, not Mammon. If artists should emphasize anything, it should
be the artwork, not proﬁts. I see myself as a selﬂess and autonomous ﬁne
artist. My friends also see me that way. They note how I stubbornly do
my own thing year after year, ignoring customers and the art world at
large. (However, I must admit, that on occasion, I catch myself showing
off this selﬂess devotion when I’m among friends. Why do I do it? It wor-
ries me, but I try not to think about it.)
As an economist, I believe that artists, like everybody else, are selﬁsh;
they try to ‘better themselves’, whether they are conscious of it or not.
This is the only way that I can explain the behavior of artists. Alex, for
instance, admitted that he now concentrates on photography in order to
be more successful. Therefore, I see no reason to make an exception for
artists.
1
The Selﬂess Artist is Intrinsically Motivated
Why is this total dedication to one’s art so important for artists and the
art world? Why are the demands placed on artists so much higher than
for the rest of society (save perhaps those who join the church)? This is
because art is sacred. This high status must be protected. If artists were
not totally dedicated to art and would make commercial compromises,
as ordinary mortals do, it would diminish the status of art. The mythol-
ogy surrounding the arts is at stake. Therefore artists, the art world and
society must condemn ‘self-interested’ or ‘commercial’ artists, or rather,
artists they judge to be ‘self-interested’ or ‘commercial’.
The question, however, should be whether artists are really all that
selﬂessly devoted to art or whether it’s not part self-interest that moti-
vates them. Is making art an aim in itself or is it a means of achieving per-
sonal gain? Are artists then ‘selﬂess’ or ‘self-interested’? The most
common interpretation of the term ‘commercial’ is that ‘commercial’
artists are ‘self-interested’ in the sense that they choose the most prof-
itable activities inside and outside the art world, not for the sake of art
but for their own sake. If, at some stage, photography offers higher gains
than drawing, the ‘commercial’ artist competent in both ﬁelds, will give
up drawing for photography or acting to consultancy. The attraction can
be monetary as well as non-monetary. Other than pure monetary gain,
81
THE SELFLESS ARTIST IS INTRINSICALLY MOTIVATED

the commercial artist can also be seeking rewards like recognition and
fame. (Although the artist who seeks monetary gain is usually much
more likely to be labeled ‘commercial’ than the artist who seeks recogni-
tion, I prefer to use the term in a broader sense.)
The well-being of a commercial artist depends on external rewards
like money, recognition, fame and not on the ‘making of art’. A non-
commercial artist, one ‘selﬂessly’ devoted to art, on the other hand, is
only concerned with the ‘making of art’. There are no external rewards.
Some will argue that the selﬂess artist does not exist. (In standard eco-
nomic theory, people are selﬁsh by deﬁnition.1) It seems that even totally
‘selﬂess’ artists proﬁt from (derive ‘utility’ from) their ‘selﬂess’ behavior.
They receive ‘internal rewards’ or ‘self-rewards’ in the form of ‘private
satisfaction’, as economists say.2 Their behavior, in fact, betrays that
they seek internal rewards. Therefore artists can be said to be intrinsi-
cally motivated, and in the strictest sense, there is no such thing as a self-
less artist. Nevertheless, I prefer to interpret selﬂessness as being exclu-
sively intrinsically motivated, and therefore artists can be ‘selﬂess’.
Because I prefer a broader interpretation, I place the term ‘selﬂess’ in
quotations. The commercial artist, on the other hand, is exclusively
extrinsically motivated and therefore ‘self-interested’.
Economists seldom pay much attention to inner gratiﬁcation or pri-
vate satisfaction through internal rewards. (An exception is Bruno Frey,
who recently introduced the concept of intrinsic motivation in econom-
ics. He uses the concept in broader sense than I do.3) Intrinsic motivation
can play a role in any profession. However, it is very likely that internal
rewards are even more important for artists than for other
professionals.4 This would mean that artists are relatively more ‘selﬂess’
in the sense that artists are more intrinsically motivated than other pro-
fessionals (thesis 23). If this is true, it implies that external rewards are
less important for artists. They are more likely to be byproducts of
making art than ends.5 This does not mean that the executive and the
commercial artist, who are both in it for the money, don’t receive any pri-
vate satisfaction, but it is more likely to be less important and more of a
byproduct.
Most of the time artists are viewed as either selﬂess or commercial. It
appears to be an all-or-nothing affair. This is the way society and the art
world tend to employ these concepts. One false step and the artist
becomes once and for all a commercial artist. Nevertheless, it is more
appropriate to see these concepts as extreme positions on a scale with
many positions in between. Being devoted or commercial is a matter of
degree. For instance, Alex’s choice to concentrate more on photography
than on drawing was probably more of a compromise: this choice partly
82
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

‘serves art’ and internal rewards and partly ‘serves money and recogni-
tion’.6 Either way, it adds to the artist’s state of well-being. Most artists
are constantly making compromises; their actions simultaneously serv-
ing both purposes, although some of these actions primarily serve ‘art’
while others primarily serve ‘money and recognition’. It follows that
most artists are situated in-between; they are neither totally commercial
nor totally selﬂess. Nevertheless, I shall continue to confront the notion
of the totally ‘selﬂess’ artist with the totally ‘commercial’ or ‘self-inter-
ested’ artist, not because I think these extremes exist but because the con-
frontation tells us something about the intermediate positions.
It should be noted that usually only behavior counts in the economic
approach; intentions are irrelevant.7 In practice, the common assump-
tion in the economist’s approach is that people are ‘self-interested’, not
by deﬁnition but because their behavior shows it: they apparently try to
become better off. Therefore the next assumption is that people are after
external rewards like money and status. I go along with the ﬁrst assump-
tion, but in this chapter I am trying to demonstrate that when it comes to
the arts, internal rewards also matter. The chapter explores the border
between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
Economists often further narrow down these assumptions by assum-
ing that ‘self-interested’ people are only interested in money, i.e., their
well-being depends solely on monetary gain. For economists this is a
‘shortcut’. They don’t deny that recognition and other forms of non-
monetary rewards can matter to people, but in terms of explaining
behavior, they think money can represent and therefore replace other
forms of rewards. In the next chapter, I shall demonstrate that they are
wrong when it comes to the arts. Non-monetary rewards play a signiﬁ-
cant role and cannot be ignored.
2
Rewards Serve as Inputs
When I observe young artists, I am tempted to think that economists are
right in assuming that artists seek monetary gain. Young artists are often
obsessed with money. Take the models I work with; most of them are
young dancers and I notice that money is extremely important to them –
far more than others their age. This is the last thing you’d expect from
artists who are supposedly devoted to art. However, the instant my
models earn some money dancing, they are suddenly unavailable for
modeling – not even if I offer them far above the normal wage. This
implies that the pursuit of money does not necessarily negate one’s devo-
tion to art. On the contrary, young artists are moneygrubbers precisely
83
REWARDS SERVE AS INPUTS

because they want to ‘serve art’. In general, they earn very little as artists.
The only way to survive as an artist is to have a second job. These jobs are
often non-arts related jobs such as cleaning, waiting tables, modeling,
etc. But sometimes they are indeed arts-related jobs such as teaching or
producing minor forms of art, such as portrait painting or acting in com-
mercials.
For the economist this is an example of roundabout production. In
order to cut down a tree one ﬁrst has to produce an axe. Waiting tables in
a restaurant and modeling are both means toward the end of ‘serving
art’. The incomes these types of indirect employment produce serve as
inputs in a production process, the production of a contribution to art.
Rewards can be means.
Not all of an artist’s rewards are necessarily employed as a means
towards artistic ends. These rewards can also lead to personal advance-
ment. For instance, when an actor over acts, she’s probably doing so
more because she loves applause than the fact that it suits the play. Nev-
ertheless, it is often difﬁcult, if not impossible, to determine whether cer-
tain types of behavior serve art, the artist, or both.
In the illustration above, Alex considered the aesthetic value of his
photography to be less than that of his drawing, but nevertheless began
to spend more time on his photography. He ﬁgured this move would help
his reputation and that people would eventually come around to pay
more attention to his drawings. Or was Alex just disguising his quest for
praise? Or is it precisely the other way around so that his well-being does
not dependent on praise but only on his contribution to art? In order to
contribute to art, his works of art must be seen. And Alex could be right
in believing that to make people notice his drawings he needs to enhance
his artistic career and reputation via a detour into photography. It is
most likely, however, that ‘serving art’ and receiving praise both con-
tribute to Alex’s well-being. Money and recognition serve both as input
and as end.8 The same probably applies to artists with teaching jobs.
These kinds of jobs offer artists the means to go on producing art, while
at the same time they usually offer some form of immediate private satis-
faction as well.
In theory, if one were privy to an artist’s alternatives, one could then
determine which alternatives best serve art and which lead to the most
personal gain. Depending on the circumstances, these alternatives may
coincide, but that is probably rare. One could then tell whether artist’s
behavior is selﬂess or commercial. In reality however, it’s never possible
to know the full range of possibilities artists have and how they serve art
and artist. The conclusion then, is that it is often impossible to distin-
guish ‘selﬂess’ devotion to art from personal advancement and to distin-
84
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

guish artists who are primarily selﬂess from artists who are primarily
commercial (thesis 24).
3
Artists are Faced with a Survival Constraint
Why is it that when my models earn some money, they suddenly quit
modeling and lose further interest in earning money? The answer is that
for them money is not an end but a means. As soon as they earn enough
money to survive, they prefer to ‘serve art’ by spending more time
making art instead of earning money through modeling. (This could be
proof of ‘selﬂess’ devotion, as was the case in the previous section. And,
like in the previous section, a cynic could very well argue the opposite;
that these youngsters don’t care about art at all, and are only interested in
wealth and fame. It is probably a combination of both scenarios. In this
section however, for the sake of the argument, I assume they’re only after
non-monetary rewards.)
The economist would characterize the choice these youngsters face as
a maximization problem. What combination of time spent on art versus
time spent earning an income outside the arts serves their artistic goals
best? Time and money are not inﬁnite and they are dependent on one
another. More artistic time means less income; and more income means
less time for art.9 Usually there are many choices and alternatives. Take,
for example, a visual artist who has received a considerable raise at her
second job and now earns more than she needs to just get by. She can now
either reduce her work hours to spend more time on her art, or she can
continue to work the same hours in order to save money so she can pur-
chase the video equipment she needs to make the videos she wants to use
in her installations. There are obviously an inﬁnite number of possibili-
ties.
So we see how individual artists who increase their incomes beyond
what they need for mere survival can still be devoted to art, as long as
they put extra income toward artistic aims. However, empirical evidence
reveals that when artists’ incomes increase, artists generally prefer to
spend more time making art, and less time working in a second job.10 In
the trade-off between more money for art and more time for art, the
choice is usually time for art.11 This is certainly true for performers, like
actors and musicians, who need relatively less money for equipment.
When artists start earning less, they have little choice. They are usu-
ally forced to ﬁnd a second job or increase their hours at a second job, in
order to live and survive as artists. A survival constraint, as Throsby has
coined it, exists for artists.12
85
ARTISTS ARE FACED WITH A SURVIVAL CONSTRAINT

These kinds of constraints can vary with time and can also vary
between artists and between nations. First of all, artists are never totally
devoted to art; and so there are varying degrees to which they forsake
money. There is no speciﬁc income level where an artist suddenly loses
interest in money, but there is a range. Second, artists have different
monetary needs when it comes to the purchase of art supplies. And third,
the notion of what constitutes a decent minimum income varies from
community to community. In Europe, having a subscription to a daily
newspaper is generally regarded as necessary for a decent lifestyle, while
in the us, owning a car is essential. It thus follows that the survival con-
straint is an average that varies between countries. Generally, the sur-
vival constraint for artists can best be interpreted as a minimum income
zone, an area in which money rapidly loses its importance.13
The phenomenon that a non-arts job or a job that involves the produc-
tion of commercial art almost exclusively serves the ‘real’ art job is an
extreme case of so-called internal subsidization. (In internal subsidiza-
tion or cross-ﬁnancing, income from one activity is used to subsidize a
loss-making activity within the same enterprise.) This extreme case of
internal subsidization is not limited to just artists. Young art companies
are sometimes also forced to produce minor forms of art in order to sur-
vive. (Or they pay their artists such low hourly incomes that the latter are
forced to earn extra income in second non-arts or art-related jobs.) The
same applies to many small or fringe art institutions that mediate and
distribute art, including alternative exhibition spaces, alternative movie
theatres, small alternative festivals, small-scale ﬁlm and video producers
and distributors etc. The employees these organizations hire are almost
always young and their attitudes are similar to those of young artists. By
being underpaid they, in fact, subsidize the loss-making art institution.
Is it possible that it’s not just money, but also other rewards, like
recognition, that serve as artistic inputs? And if so, is there a survival
constraint for recognition like there is for money? Alex decided to turn to
photography to boost his reputation, because he thought that in order to
‘serve art’ he should be more well-known. Being fairly unknown or
having an inappropriate reputation limits artists in their abilities to get
their art across and properly ‘serve art’. In this scenario, recognition
becomes a means rather than an end. It is quite possible, then, that artists
need some recognition to be able to make art. But this minimum might
differ considerably depending on an artist’s personal background. More-
over, with immaterial rewards like recognition it’s even more difﬁcult
than with money to tell whether they represent a constraint in ‘serving
art’ or serve ‘selﬁsh’ aims. (Who can tell for sure whether the overly dra-
matic actor is a pompous ass who is ﬁshing for as much applause as he
86
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

can get, or whether he needs a minimum of applause just to be able to
perform?)
Applause and other immaterial rewards can also serve as inputs or as
constraints. Although this view might alter the way we look at artists, its
practical signiﬁcance is limited. In the case of material or monetary
rewards on the other hand, the notion of inputs and a (largely ﬁxed) mon-
etary survival constraint is useful, as will be shown in the analysis of
incomes in the arts in the next two chapters. In the arts, there is a largely
ﬁxed survival constraint for artists. As long as artists earn less than a
minimum level of money, artists seek money in order to make art, but
when funds are sufﬁcient they quickly lose interest in earning money
(thesis 25).
4
Autonomy is Always Relative
Was Alex autonomous when he was painting commissioned portraits to
ﬁnance his true art? And how autonomous is the young writer who
washes dishes in a restaurant forty hours a week? Or does Mr. Fuchs,
director of the Stedelijk Museum, relinquish his autonomy by allowing
Audi to sponsor the museum’s new wing?
The main question in this chapter is whether artists are ‘selﬂessly’
devoted to art or ‘self-interested’. It is a relevant question in a book about
the economy of the arts. The question is related to a more general ques-
tion: are artists autonomous or dependent? Because people easily con-
fuse the two questions, I will now make a few comments on autonomy.14
Autonomy refers to the liberty people have to follow their own will
independent of others. In the arts, this is primarily seen as a matter of
artistic freedom. If an artist chooses to make an artistic compromise in
exchange for more rewards, he or she ends up with less artistic freedom.
But the same applies to an artist forced to work long hours in a restau-
rant.
Autonomy in the arts is an emotionally charged concept. ‘True artists
must be autonomous.’ ‘The autonomy of the arts needs to be protected at
all costs.’ Because the notion of autonomy is charged, people tend to see
autonomy as an all-or-nothing affair. ‘If Mr. Fuchs closes the deal with
Audi, he will relinquish his autonomy.’
But autonomy is clearly a relative concept. For Mr. Fuchs, one sponsor-
ship contract might mean a sacriﬁce of more autonomy than another one.
This is not much different from the issue of relativity as applied to the
notion of a ‘selﬂess’ devotion to art. Both autonomy and selﬂessness con-
sist of a large range of intermediate positions between the two extremes.
87
AUTONOMY IS ALWAYS RELATIVE

(Theoretically it’s possible that there is a generally accepted point
between complete autonomy and complete dependence where autonomy
or artistic liberty is supposed to end.15 But in practice, the cut-off point is
continuously shifting depending on the prevailing rhetoric.) 
When proposals that will reduce autonomy are suggested, people will
consistently warn of future forfeitures of artistic autonomy. These all-or-
nothing doomsday arguments concerning the loss of autonomy serve
opportunistic purposes. They basically thwart discussions about degrees
of autonomy. This happened at an Amsterdam city council meeting
where politicians successfully argued that Rudi Fuchs would relinquish
his autonomy, if the Stedelijk and Audi were to close a sponsorship deal.
In so doing they managed to stiﬂe skeptics or render them suspect by
making the skeptics look like they were against autonomy in the arts.
Because autonomy is relative, the advantages and disadvantages of the
various options surrounding autonomy can be compared. The Audi deal
would have reduced autonomy in a number of ways. For instance, the
new wing would be called the Audi Wing but more importantly, the
director would be required to occasionally produce an exhibition that
referred to Dutch-German relations, with Audi representatives serving
in advisory capacity. On the other hand, the extra money would also
enhance the director’s autonomy. More exhibition space would mean
more liberty in the curating of exhibitions. Suppose Mercedes presented
a deal involving less money, but also fewer conditions. Suppose that the
only condition was that the new wing would be named the Mercedes
Wing. Even then, some would argue, the director is compromising his
artistic freedom. Exhibitions in the Mercedes Wing would be ‘colored’
by this namebrand. As we noted earlier, social circumstances necessarily
inﬂuence art and its aesthetic value. These examples clarify the notion
that autonomy is always relative (thesis 26).16
5
Intrinsic Motivation Stems from Internalization
The average ﬁne artist responds to rewards and is thus never totally
autonomous. Artists reward and punish themselves and so does society.
There are considerable rewards for artists who appear to be autonomous
and ‘selﬂessly’ devoted to art, just as there are reprimands for those who
are plainly commercial artists.
On the one hand, by making art, artists receive private satisfaction.
Creating art is fulﬁlling in itself. The ‘joy of self-expression’, as Tyler
Cowen calls it, is one form of private satisfaction.17 The satifaction
comes from the ‘labor of love’ and stems from an ‘intrinsic drive’.18 The
88
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

awareness of ‘serving art’ also gives an artist private satisfaction. But
compromising one’s artistic goals can lead to uneasiness, for instance in
the form of guilt feelings. The notions of rewarding and punishing one-
self are important if one is to understand an artist’s behavior. It puts the
notion of the ‘selﬂess’ artist in perspective and also explains the stub-
bornness of artists who continue to ‘serve art’ with few external rewards.
At ﬁrst glance, self- or internal rewards appear to be inevitable
byproducts of making art. But they are more than mere byproducts; they
also motivate artists. Artists reward or punish themselves with every
stroke of the brush, every written line, every musical note set to paper as
they try to ‘serve art’ and produce high art that matters. The entire
notion of suffering may have been exaggerated in the old romantic view
of the arts, but famous artists in their diaries accurately describe the ups
and downs caused by the doubts they have about their own work.19
These diaries also reveal that there were always alternatives. Because of
internal rewards and punishments, artists often choose one course over
another. Artists can therefore be said to be intrinsically motivated.
Because internal rewards like private satisfaction and external
rewards like the pleasure derived from recognition are hard to separate,
it is difﬁcult to measure precisely how important intrinsic motivation is.
Nevertheless, in the popular image, the ‘selﬂess’ artist is largely intrinsi-
cally motivated and the ‘commercial artist’ is primarily externally moti-
vated. To exaggerate this popular view, heroic, ‘selﬂess’, and totally
intrinsically motivated artists for whom external rewards are only a
means for them to ‘serve art’ stand on one side, while extrinsically moti-
vated ‘artists’ motivated solely by external gain – money, fame, and
recognition – stand on the other. These notions are part of the mythology
of the arts.
But if one were to search for the origin of internal and external
rewards one would discover that they are not at all distinct notions.20
The internal rewards or private satisfaction artists ‘give’ themselves stem
from rewards that originally came from outside. In their youth, people
internalized the rewards and punishments they received from their par-
ents, schools, neighborhoods and various other environments. Despite
differences in personal histories, many of these internalized values are
social values. For instance, would-be artists learn and internalize the
existing social values applied to art and artists. They learn at an early age
that culture expects ﬁne artists to be ‘selﬂess’ and autonomous. Art for
art’s sake and artists being ‘selﬂess’, caring only for art, are important
notions in our culture, to the point that they are part of our general edu-
cation. Children notice that the ‘selﬂess’ artist is esteemed and is seen as
the standard for other artists. The commercial artist is scolded. He serves
89
INTRINSIC MOTIVATION STEMS FROM INTERNALIZATION

as a warning to other artists. Young potential artists internalize these
values.
Later on during the period of education and training, the values of the
profession get internalized.21 Rewards and punishments contribute to
the internalization of the more detailed values the profession embraces.
And so it is institutions – from family through art school – that play an
important role in the internalization process.22 The fact that in the illus-
tration former teachers are peering over Alex’s shoulder demonstrates
that he internalized earlier rewards and punishments.
Intrinsic motivation and internal rewards derive from the accumula-
tion of past external rewards and punishments. Because internal
rewards stem from earlier external rewards, they can deviate from pres-
ent external rewards and even go off in a totally different direction.
There are artists for instance who have plenty of chances to earn money
or become celebrities without punishment by the art world, but prefer to
disregard these opportunities. This is not a congenital defect. This kind
of behavior can be best explained through how an artist is trained. In the
case of these artists the internalization process assures that earning
money or becoming a celebrity are not valid options.23 Because the com-
mercial artist also harbors internalized values, it is impossible to say
whether the selﬂess artist is more intrinsically motivated than the com-
mercial artist or vice versa.
Internalization is not a random process. Not all past advice, praise,
reward, or condemnation is of equal importance. Rules that make sense
in relation to each other form clusters and become more important. The
result is a more or less coherent system of rules in the form of orders and
bans that refer to a wide variety of actions. This result can be referred to
as the personal value system or conscience of the artist.24 It is related to
the sociological notion of habitus.
6
Habitus and Field
The economic approach we have employed thus far has not been very
subtle. Concepts like reward and constraint coincide well with the econo-
mist’s preference for logical, closed reasoning, but outcomes tend to be
discrete and no intermediate positions are recognized. It is either free
choice or determinism.25 On the one hand, the most common view in
economics is that individuals are free; they make rational choices and
maximize rewards. On the other hand, in an attempt to ‘socialize’ eco-
nomics behavior can easily become totally socially determined. If all
internal rewards were reduced to internalized external rewards, as we
90
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

implied in the previous section, the outside world would completely
determine behavior. Individuals would have no choice. (And so we must
conclude that in both these views the terms ‘selﬁsh’ and ‘selﬂess’ are basi-
cally meaningless.)
In order to develop a better understanding of the relation between
intrinsic and extrinsic values, between subjective individuals and their
objective surroundings, it is useful to look at socialization in terms of
sociology. Among the major socialization theories, Pierre Bourdieu’s
habitus-ﬁeld theory is presently used most often. Moreover, Bourdieu
and his followers have applied it extensively to the arts. Because of its
subtlety and complexity this theory requires extensive explanation,
which is not possible within the scope of this book. Instead, this slightly
abstract section only brieﬂy treats some of its main concepts.26
The habitus is the principal component of this theory. It is related to
the terms ‘conscience’ and ‘attitude’ that we used earlier. The habitus is
the subjective counterpart of the objective forces surrounding the indi-
vidual. The habitus, allows individuals to believe that they understand
their social surroundings. There is no calculation of behavior; it’s intu-
itive.
The habitus is more than just a set of (internalized) values and rules. It
can be seen as a collection of incorporated dispositions such as the incli-
nations to think, perceive, value, and act.27 These dispositions are linked
to a person’s position in a particular ﬁeld. As a mental structure, the
habitus connects the objective outside world with the subjective self. It is
a complicated process that excludes the two opposing conclusions named
earlier: man is certainly not totally free, but on the other hand, the notion
that the individual is totally socially and biologically determined, is also
not justiﬁed. The habitus ‘leaves room to move’.
The inclinations to think, perceive, value, and act have become incor-
porated over time. The habitus accommodates past experiences in a
cumulative form. And because no two people have exactly the same his-
tory, the habitus differs from one person to another. But at the same
time, people often share a common background and environment.
Therefore the notion of a modal habitus that is shared by a group makes
sense.28 The higher order values discussed in the previous chapter are
part of such a modal habitus; they connect people. But it’s not just
values, the inclination to see, think, and act can also be shared. A habitus
gives people a practical sense, a feel for the game. It doesn’t prescribe
actions in speciﬁc situations, but instead, the habitus allows people to
ﬁnd common solutions.
A modal habitus allows people in a group to work together without
being supervised, i.e., without the impetus of external punishment or
91
HABITUS AND FIELD

reward. (They arrive at a natural solution to the so-called free-rider
problem.) That people play the game without being aware of it becomes
evident when people with a different habitus try to work together. Then
there can be a conﬂict and things go wrong as they did in the illustration
on page 36 where Alex and his dealer failed to come to terms, because
they ‘spoke different languages’.
The habitus is associated with one’s position in a ﬁeld. The term ‘ﬁeld’
has almost the same meaning as the term ‘world’, as in art world. Fields
are chosen so that dispositions within a ﬁeld depend on one another
while remaining relatively independent from the dispositions in other
ﬁelds. Therefore, ﬁelds have a degree of relative autonomy. Medicine, the
arts, banking, and politics are examples of such ﬁelds. The modal habi-
tus among these ﬁelds is quite different. A banker’s disposition has little
to do with that of a musician’s, while musicians have more in common
with writers. Nevertheless, because the positions of writers and musi-
cians are different within the arts ﬁeld, their habitus is different as well.
A ﬁeld can be viewed as a topological map of positions that differ
socially. It is primarily a topology of stratiﬁcation. In the arts, positions
connected with high and low art, for instance, say, literary ﬁction and
science ﬁction, have different locations within the ﬁeld of literature.
High and low positions apply not only to artists, but also to art media-
tors, art critics, art consumers, government ofﬁcials in charge of arts
policies etc. These positions become more meaningful with respect to
social stratiﬁcation, the further they are divided according to the various
genres and sub-genres of art.
By occupying different, i.e., higher and lower positions within a ﬁeld,
groups necessarily relate to one another. Their habitus simultaneously
differs and corresponds. Dominance and submission depend on one’s
position in a particular ﬁeld. The existing order is reproduced via the
habitus. In a simpliﬁed version, the habitus among the low arts ‘allows’
an artist to operate commercially; while the habitus among the high arts
‘forces’ the artist to forget commerce. But these positions are intercon-
nected because the habitus of either ﬁeld inclines the artist to view high
art as superior to low art. This was discussed earlier as the phenomenon
of cultural asymmetry.29
7
Selﬂess Devotion and the Pursuit of Gain Coincide
Are artists who are devoted to art selﬂess or at least unmotivated by
external rewards? Conversely, are commercial artists self-interested and
only motivated by external rewards? In terms of the habitus-ﬁeld theory,
92
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

these two groups do not differ in terms of selﬂessness and motivation.
Selﬂessness and selﬁshness usually coincide with one another. (Neverthe-
less, as concepts they are not meaningless, unlike they tend to be in pure
economics.) Translating these outcomes into economic terminology,
selﬂessness is usually no more or no less intrinsically and extrinsically
motivated than an orientation on external rewards, such as money and
recognition. Dispositions in either direction are ‘built’ into the same
habitus.
Looking at the habitus, it is impossible to say whether artists have
only one goal (or one consistent welfare function) like ‘serving art’, while
other objectives remain secondary and only represent conditions that
must be met to ‘serve art’. Within their habitus, artists have a range of
dispositions, which cannot be reduced to one goal. Artists are players in
complicated games with many prizes. A special ‘sense of the game’
enables artists to make moves that enable them to remain devoted to art
and other moves that serve other goals.30
Not all artists play the same game. The games and their stakes differ
depending on the artist’s particular habitus and on their speciﬁc position
in the ﬁeld. Sometimes people from a variety of positions meet for a col-
lective game. For instance, dealers and artists are players in a collective
game. And because they share a ‘sense of the game’, they play their game
in an intuitive manner. However, as we noted earlier, when a player has a
habitus that deviates from the rest, this player will tend to break the
rules, which leads to frustration and problems. This happened to Alex in
the illustration on page 36 when because of Alex’s profoundly internal-
ized habitus as an economist, he did not play the dealer’s game according
to the rules.31
In this respect my economist’s habitus is also different from a sociolo-
gist’s and this puts limits on the multidisciplinary approach of this book.
A bird is known by its song and a man by his language. Therefore, I tend
to use the language of economics to explain sociological insights.
Because the economist’s language was developed for other purposes, this
is clearly not the best solution. So in the remainder of this chapter and in
the following chapters I will actually take a step back. By primarily argu-
ing in the language of economics and employing terms like ‘interest’,
‘strategy’, ‘reward’, and ‘the pursuit of gain’ I necessarily simplify. And
although I will continue to keep the habitus-ﬁeld theory of sociology in
the back of my mind, part of its richness will be lost. Nevertheless, I hope
to prove that the present approach is more useful for the study of the eco-
nomics of the arts than a mono-disciplinary approach.32 33
93
SELFLESS DEVOTION AND THE PURSUIT OF GAIN COINCIDE

8
Artists Differ in Their Reward-Orientation
By claiming that artists are rewards oriented and by using the term
‘reward’ I now return to the economic approach. (However, by referring
to a rewards orientation, i.e., a term that is related to ‘inclination’, I
reveal how the habitus-ﬁeld theory is at the back of my mind.) In the ear-
lier sections, the analysis revealed that all artists are oriented towards
rewards; they need rewards in order to make art and to ‘better them-
selves’. Currently I am wondering why artists have different reward ori-
entations. For instance, why do certain artists seek recognition from the
government, while others prefer market rewards? As noted before, it’s
these kinds of inclinations that gradually became part of the habitus of
artists. To understand the variations in reward orientation I will, once
more, take a look at the formation of the habitus.
In their development as artists, artists acquire the appropriate cultural
capital, which is not just some automatic process, but a social experience
as well.34 Much of the discussion that goes on between students involves
a collective assessment of the teachers’ values, including their thoughts
on rewards. Groups of artists with common backgrounds and educa-
tions basically develop the same artistic conscience or habitus and the
same reward orientation.
In this respect, it should be noted that the habitus encompasses many
areas. No aspect of culture is excluded beforehand. The habitus deals
with ‘technical’ matters such as how artists use their paint; how musi-
cians play the piano, sing, use their bodies, etc. Artists also adopt inclina-
tions to employ certain styles while ignoring others or treat certain sub-
jects and not others.
The habitus also ‘tells’ which exceptions to basic values are allowed.
For instance, it’s not so taboo these days for certain ‘avant-garde’ visual
artists to make an occasional commercial wink, resulting in a more
accessible piece, but only if they prove somehow that it’s not coming
‘from the heart’ and that they are ‘above it all’. Or older artists can
pursue external rewards to improve their position, but only within
limits.
Differences in the reward orientation of artists come about in the vari-
ous styles of upbringing, their educations, and their formal arts training.
Fine arts colleges prepare their students for other positions in the art
world than low arts or applied arts colleges. Moreover, no student starts
his or her education as a tabula rasa. Schooling augments the founda-
tions laid during childhood given various socio-economic back-
grounds.35
Limiting the discussion to orientations on rewards, it should be noted
94
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

that in the ﬁne arts students are more often trained to pursue internal
rewards. Art must be considered a labor of love based on an intrinsic
drive. Therefore external rewards can only be inputs enabling the artist
to make art. The latter is a ‘leisurely’ attitude. Students usually come
from above-average social backgrounds. Thus, these avant-garde artists
tend to carry along a relatively high amount of economic and social capi-
tal. They come from well-to-do families more often than in other ﬁelds
and professions. Because there is money in the family, they can afford to
earn less. Social capital gives them ﬂair, self-assurance, and a sense of
audacity.36
Although students in the better ﬁne arts colleges are encouraged to
‘serve art’ by ‘doing their own thing’, these schools also encourage artists
to seek external rewards in the form of ‘recognition from peers’. More-
over, in some countries, students learn that accepting government money
is less objectionable than accepting money from a corporation or earning
money in the market.37
The reward orientation taught in lesser ﬁne arts and in applied arts
schools is less anomalous. As in most technical and vocational training,
commercial success is encouraged and thus to make products that sell.
However, part of this education system encourages a submissive attitude
towards the ﬁne arts.
Existing inclinations result in various mixtures of products and
rewards. In order to analyze these mixes, I found it useful to chart incli-
nations on the basis of three characteristics or dimensions:
1 the product mix,
2 the types of rewards, and
3 the sources of the rewards.
First, most artists are inclined to choose a certain combination of prod-
ucts. Their product mix leads to rewards.38 (Painter A specializes in com-
missioned portraits and still-lifes rather than landscapes and composer B
specializes in music for choirs rather than instrumental music.) Second,
artists are inclined to choose a certain combination of types of rewards
such as private satisfaction, money, status, recognition, etc. Finally,
artists are inclined to prefer a certain combination of reward sources,
such as governmental, corporate, private buyers or donors.39 I call the
combination of sources and types of rewards that artists seek the motiva-
tional mix of artists.
Artists necessarily position themselves in respect to these three dimen-
sions. Due to their inclinations, they take positions in an imaginary
three-dimensional space of products, rewards, and reward sources. For
instance, artist C specializes in installations (dimension 1). This gives her
95
ARTISTS DIFFER IN THEIR REWARD-ORIENTATION

private satisfaction, recognition, and some monetary gain (dimension
2). The recognition she receives comes from peers and the government,
while most of the little money she earns comes from the government
(dimension 3). This position, with respect to the three dimensions,
reﬂects her present specialization on products and rewards.40
Specialization largely follows from the phenomenon explained earlier,
that rewards are also means. For instance, for the development of her
career, governmental recognition is an essential input for artist D, while
for artist E it is almost worthless.
In this three-dimensional space, endless combinations of productive
activities and types and sources of rewards are theoretically possible.
Nevertheless, because of the habitus, most artists have little room to
maneuver in. Artists are not likely to leap to positions further away, and
when they try, they usually end up worse off. (Economists call this phe-
nomenon path dependency. Once people are on a certain track, they tend
to continue, because alternatives become less and less attractive.)
(By assuming that the artist does not want to ‘end up worse off’, I go
back to the common assumption of standard economics that entrepre-
neurs choose the mix of products and rewards that maximizes their goal,
and so I return to the economic metaphor of maximizing individuals.
The notion of the habitus certainly was not meant to be connected to this
metaphor, but in the present context and with the present restraints I see
no harm in it.41)
It follows that artists position themselves in the three-dimensional
space so they can maximize their goals, whether this is to serve art, serve
oneself, or both. Because rewards like money and recognition always
serve as inputs as well, and because one type and source of reward is
more valuable as an input than another, artists care about the source and
type of rewards. They weigh one form of reward against another when
choosing their positions.
Because artists differ in their habitus, they also differ in their orienta-
tion concerning products, types and sources of rewards (thesis 27).
9
Types and Sources of Rewards Matter to Artists
For me as an artist it is of the utmost importance that I receive recogni-
tion from my peers. Feeling ignored by my colleagues is the worst thing
that can happen to me. The second worst thing is not selling; not so much
because I need the money, but because I need it as a form of legitimiza-
tion. Therefore, in my motivational mix, I am oriented toward recogni-
tion from peers and from consumers in the market. Another artist who
96
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

truly beliefs in art for art’s sake, is only interested in private satisfaction.
Meanwhile, a third artist is considered commercial because he seeks
monetary gain in the market and fame amongst the general public. A
fourth is primarily concerned with money and recognition gained from
the government.
Various types and sources of rewards are not independent. For
instance, certain artists consider the government money they earn from
selling a painting to the government as more ‘valuable’ than the same
amount money earned from a corporation for the sale of the same paint-
ing. Because there is no difference in the money itself, the example shows
that the sale of the painting also provides recognition, which for these
particular artists is higher in the case of selling to governments.
In the ﬁne arts, the ‘value’ of money earned in the market is often low.
It can even damage reputations and consequently, recognition by one’s
peers. Although in the ﬁne arts as well money is earned in the market, the
orientation towards money from the market is usually veiled. However,
in this respect age matters. The habitus of older artists sometimes
‘allows’ them to be more openly oriented towards money and fame. Col-
leagues and commentators often stress that these artists have put in many
years and have thus clearly demonstrated their selﬂess devotion to art.
Therefore, they ‘deserve’ these types of rewards. Although these older
artists may actively seek the rewards, the rewards are seen as accidental
gifts bestowed on artists with impeccable reputations. (However, if older
artists become too straightforwardly interested in money and fame, their
art world will expel them. In the visual arts in the Netherlands, the inter-
nationally known Cobra painter Corneille is a good example. The musi-
cian André Rieu and the composer Henryk Gorecki are other examples.
Such ‘defectors’ have, for one reason or another, developed a deviant
habitus.)
As can be expected, artists in the lesser ﬁne arts are generally more
openly money-oriented than those in high ﬁne arts positions. It would be
incorrect however, to assume that in their motivational mix money is the
only thing that counts. Take for example artists who paint the kind of art
that can be bought in ‘the store around the corner’. These painters see
themselves as artists and present themselves as such.42 In their circle, the
taboo on openly earning money is less strong than among other artists.
Nevertheless, the habitus of these artists is not independent of the habi-
tus in higher cultural ﬁelds, and therefore, they sometimes exhibit anti-
money behavior as well, which serves to compensate for their commer-
cial demeanor. And even though in their motivational mix money ﬁgures
more heavily than in the case of artists in the high arts, private satisfac-
tion and recognition by one’s peers are almost just as important. The
97
TYPES AND SOURCES OF REWARDS MATTER TO ARTISTS

painters I met, who make paintings that sell in the ‘stores around the
corner’, all displayed a strong sense of pride in their technical abilities
and a zeal to perfect these abilities, which is hard to explain from an ori-
entation that focuses exclusively on money.
In a speciﬁc reward mix rewards from certain sources and types tend
to arrive in speciﬁc proportions. Usually when one type and source of
reward increases, other sources and types increase as well. For instance,
when certain artists receive more money from the government their
recognition among their peers also increases and vice versa. Therefore,
artists tend to remain in more or less the same position in the three-
dimensional space of orientation with regard to products and rewards or
they follow a ﬁxed route that ﬁts in with their careers. This is again a
matter of path dependency.43 Successful careers often gradually evolve
from a one-sided orientation into a broader orientation. The initial spe-
cialization can lead to a winner-take-all situation. For instance, later on
successful government artists tend to also become successful in the
market.44
When something unexpected happens however, artists are sometimes
forced to leap to another position. For instance, a young avant-garde
writer unexpectedly receives an extremely important award early in her
career.45 In this case, she jumps to a new position and thus the balance in
her rewards is lost. Her reputation takes a turn that she can neither cor-
rect nor adapt to. If the award comes too early in one’s career, one is
likely to ‘lose’ or end up worse off.
The effect that a substantial and prestigious sale has can be signiﬁcant.
However, continuous small rewards can also be of the wrong type and
not ﬁt a particular artist’s reputation. Therefore, as they shape their long-
term careers, artists often respond to such outside interventions with
counteractions, which will hopefully correct or neutralize the unwanted
‘rewards’. These actions are generally subtle. They range from changes in
the group of people an artist hangs out with, to small changes in their
product style to prevent a recurrence of the undesired effect. One has to
develop an eye for this kind of corrective behavior in order to spot it. I
think I see it all the time both in my own actions and in those of my col-
leagues. It also applies to Alex’s behavior in the illustration where Alex
decides to concentrate on photography because he wants to correct what
he considered was a growing misunderstanding about his reputation.
In all these cases, path dependency is involved. If an artist has been on
a ‘wrong’ track for too long, it is difﬁcult to correct. The rewards
received have accumulated in a speciﬁc combination of monetary, cul-
tural, and social capital, which cannot easily be altered.46 Writers who
evolved into popular television presenters and whose books then, conse-
98
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

quently, started selling extremely well, are good examples. They are rich
and famous, but often lack literary recognition. Sometimes with some
enormous effort, they can manage to gain some respect in literary circles,
but they seldom become fully recognized. Many successful new media
artists ﬁnd themselves in a similar situation.
As they try to guide the development of their careers, artists attempt to
control the rewards and products. If necessary, they adapt their products
and their marketing activities (which are part of the production process).
Various orientations towards sources and types of income correspond
with various marketing activities. For instance, certain commercial tal-
ents are more effective in dealing with gallery owners or impresarios
than they are with government institutions. Different attitudes and
social networks or, in other words, different forms of cultural and social
capital are involved.
In practice, artists specialize in certain marketing activities and atti-
tudes. Therefore, artists can be classiﬁed accordingly. For instance,
artists who specialize in government recognition and money can be
called government artists, while others can be referred to as market
artists, business artists, television artists, etc. Once the corresponding
inclinations have been internalized and have become part of the habitus,
it is hard to change one’s position. For instance, when the average gov-
ernment artist loses his government income, it becomes difﬁcult for him
or her to ﬁnd a way into the private market, and vice versa.
10 Three Examples of Orientation Towards Government Rewards in the
Netherlands
The following three examples show the effects on the behavior of artists
oriented toward government rewards.
1 In Dutch subsidized theatre, the number of opening nights is large in
relation to the total number of people who attend. Although compa-
nies appear to be better off, if plays ran longer with fewer opening
nights, and therefore lower cost per seat, they prefer to have more
opening nights.
This can only be understood by taking into account an extreme orien-
tation toward government rewards, both in terms of money and recog-
nition. On average, these companies depend on the government for
about 85% of their income. Therefore, they naturally orient them-
selves almost exclusively towards the government. Of course, they
seek recognition from peers and experts as well, but primarily from
among those peers and experts whose judgment matters to the govern-
99
THREE EXAMPLES OF ORIENTATION TOWARDS GOVERNMENT REWARDS

ment committee members who ultimately decide on subsidies. And, in
general, these committees are impressed by many opening nights and
consider them as a sign of quality.46
2 In the late seventies and early eighties a ‘palace-revolution’ took place
at the better Dutch visual art academies. In a relatively short period of
time most of the older teachers were forced to leave and were replaced
by young teachers.
On average, teachers at these schools are also relatively successful
artists. Building on their own experiences they help show potential
artists the way. These older teachers had been fairly successful in the
private market with a style that in Chapter 3 we called traditional
(modern) art. Their main source of income was the private market.
However, in the seventies, a new avant-garde (contemporary) market
began to open up, and this is where the younger generation of teachers
were most successful. This market was heavily dependent on govern-
ment subsidy.
Between 1950 and 1996, the government considerably increased its
purchases of visual art as well as the subsidization of visual artists. In
the Netherlands, the part of the visual artist’s professional income that
comes from public sources increased from almost nothing to 45% or
even more.47 The national government, in alliance with the younger
artists and the new cultural elite, was almost exclusively interested in
avant-garde visual art and hardly any money went for traditional
visual art. (Only local governments spend relatively small amounts of
money on the latter.)
Due to the new and substantial government demand for avant-garde
visual art, the cultural capital of the older teachers, who were prima-
rily engaged in traditional visual art, declined rapidly. The younger
teachers’ experience, who sold their work mostly to the government
and received government subsidies, had suddenly become more valu-
able than the older teachers’ experiences in the private market. The
‘palace-revolution’ led to a purge of the older teachers from the princi-
pal schools.48 Students consequently developed a more government-
oriented habitus as well.
Of course, these kinds of conﬂicts are fought in almost exclusively
artistic terms, but viewed from the tenth ﬂoor, the changes in income
sources and the corresponding changes in career paths clearly show
the importance of rewards. The example also reveals that, although
the average habitus is not immune to market forces, a fundamental
change in reward orientation is usually accompanied by a change in
personnel.
3 The gradual abolition in the eighties of an extremely generous subsidy
100
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

scheme for visual artists in the Netherlands shows that a considerable
reduction in subsidies affects artists’ behavior.50 The scheme was orig-
inally created to reduce the hardships of visual artists. It was replaced
by a less generous system of subsidies. As a consequence, a relatively
large number of those who had proﬁted from the previous subsidy
system left the arts because they were unable to successfully adapt
their reward orientation. They had specialized in government orienta-
tion. Their earlier successful dealings with the government had col-
ored their habitus, which left it unﬁt for the private sector.51 Younger
colleagues, who had no experience with this scheme, naturally devel-
oped a different orientation.
11 Conclusion
Artists are supposed to be selﬂessly devoted to art, but it is hard to tell if
they are selﬂess or to what degree they are selﬂess as opposed to commer-
cial. If artists seek rewards, this can imply that they are more or less com-
mercially oriented, but the rewards can also be means to selﬂessly ‘serve
art’. Therefore Alex’s claim that by concentrating more on photography
he serves art may very well be true, but it’s also possible that he’s merely
after applause or both. Moreover, if Alex is exclusively intrinsically
motivated his motivation nevertheless stems from earlier external
rewards. After all, he has admitted that while drawing in his studio he is
sometimes inﬂuenced by the imagined reactions of former teachers. Nev-
ertheless, selﬂessly devoted or not, it is likely that artists are more intrin-
sically motivated than other professionals.
The example of Alex imagining the presence of former teachers while
he is drawing also demonstrates that internal rewards have a social
origin; they stem from past external rewards. This notion has been devel-
oped in a more elaborate form, in the sociological notion of the habitus.
Some of the peculiar inclinations, as well as the limited ‘choice’ artists
often have, become more comprehensible when the notion of the habitus
is kept in mind. Selﬂessness and selﬁshness are not meaningless concepts,
but they often coincide. The habitus approach can be illuminative and
helpful to the economist, even when he decides to continue with the tra-
ditional economic approach, employing the traditional terminology.
Artists who occupy different social positions within the arts have dif-
ferent orientations towards external rewards. Some artists choose recog-
nition, while others prefer fame or money. Some concentrate on peers,
others on governments and still others on the market. Given their habi-
tus, individual artists do not easily change their orientation. For
101
CONCLUSION

instance, many European artists have a predominant orientation on gov-
ernmental rewards, and when governments change or reduce rewards,
artists are often at a loss.
Although an orientation towards rewards can explain the behavior of
artists, this does not imply that artists can freely choose other artistic
activities and other types and sources of rewards. If they choose other
combinations, they usually end up worse off because their habitus and
capital does not make a good ﬁt for these positions. What often appears
to be a noble lack of interest in rewards and an admirable perseverance in
one’s artistic choice can also be interpreted as the result of the limitations
of one’s social position.
Artists are relatively highly intrinsically motivated. As far as they are
also extrinsically motivated, recognition is often more important than
money. It follows then, that the belief in the economic approach, that an
interest in money can sufﬁciently explain behavior, is inadequate when it
comes to the arts (as well as most other professions). The fact that money
is relatively unimportant in the arts is further corroborated by the exis-
tence of a survival constraint for artists. When a certain amount of
money comes in, artists suddenly lose interest in earning more money.
Together with a strong intrinsic motivation, this phenomenon serves as
our ﬁrst explanation of why incomes are relatively low in the arts, as will
be discussed in greater depth in the following chapter.
Discussion
1 ‘If Alex does such and such he loses his autonomy’. How should a sen-
tence like this be interpreted? Is the difference between autonomy and
non-autonomy an absolute or a relative difference?
2 Can you explain why artists who seek fame, are more likely to become
suspect than artists who seek recognition from among their peers?
3 To some artists money represents a constraint rather than a goal.
Could this also apply to other rewards like, recognition from peers
and experts?
102
THE SELFLESSY DEVOTED ARTIST

Chapter 5
Money for the Artist
Are Artists Just Ill-Informed Gamblers?
Taking the Reckless Decision to Enter the Arts
At the age of thirty, Alex decided to stop working as an economist. At that
time, Alex unintentionally joined a life drawing class, and three months later,
he was admitted to art school. Alex had decided to become an artist. It was
a sudden and reckless decision. Alex felt relieved. It felt like he had ﬁnally
discovered his destiny. He was not worried about his chances. On the con-
trary, Alex tried not to think about it. In the back of his mind, he must have
known that the odds were against him, as they are against any average art
student. Therefore, Alex told himself that he had no choice. If he wasn’t
going to pursue a life in the arts, he might as well just die. Alex was also con-
vinced that anybody as conﬁdent as he was about becoming an artist, was
bound to be a success one way or another. He stuck to a simple belief: the
more dedicated he was, the more inevitable his chances of success.
Looking back at that time, Alex realizes that, now as back then, he had
numerous choices. Becoming an artist was only one. Therefore, by not
pondering the odds, Alex tried to convince himself of the reasonability of
being unreasonable. As he now realizes, someone who makes it in the arts
is so unusual, that the desire to become an artist is little more than leaping
off a cliff with one’s eyes closed.
The life drawing class that Alex presently teaches is made up of artists, art
students, and some extremely talented amateurs. The work of some of
these amateurs is better than that of the artists and would-be artists. Alex
has initiated some discussions between the amateurs and artists. In the
course of the conversations, it turns out that some of these amateurs are
aware of their talent. Some had even contemplated going to art school, but
decided not to in the end. One of the reasons they hesitated to enter the art
world was the many uncertainties involved in an arts career. They seem
less reckless than the artists. Moreover, they demonstrate that almost
anyone can ﬁnd out that one’s chances of success in the art world are low.
Nevertheless, they are often apologetic about their decisions.
103

Making Jokes about Becoming Rich and Famous
Alex remembers that in his last two years at art school he and his class-
mates used to make a lot of jokes about becoming rich and famous. There
was something obligatory about it. Alex was at the stage when the cards
were being shufﬂed, when teachers select certain students to launch into
the art world – usually one or two per class. Naturally, everyone was nerv-
ous. The chances of success of those who go unselected are not quite
zero, but certainly diminish considerably. For the majority their dreams of a
career in the arts are over, even though it will take some ten years to admit
it. The jokes serve a magical purpose. Their ironic jokes about fame and
fortune exorcised their fears about their own futures.
The jokes are double-edged because, on the one hand, students begin to
realize that most of them probably won’t be rich and famous any time soon.
On the other hand, by jokingly exaggerating their chances of fame and for-
tune, they are effectively mocking fame and wealth and are implicitly
expressing their faith in the notions of the selﬂess artist and the denial of the
economy. But above all, the jokes demonstrate their reluctance to face real-
ity and that fame and fortune was on their minds all along. Alex is sure that
back in those days they all fantasized about money and fame. Occasionally
Alex still catches himself fantasizing about fame and fortune, even though
his chances are no better now than they were back then.
Dropouts Who Become Artists
Alex believes these days that the seeds of his decision to go to art school
were planted much earlier than when he ultimately decided to change pro-
fessions. Looking back, Alex now realizes that the dice were cast in his
family at an early age. His older brother was set to receive the bulk of the
family inheritance, which consisted mostly of cultural capital. His brother is
currently a professor like his father before him. In this kind of family, there
just isn’t much chance to share the cultural inheritance. And so Alex chal-
lenged fate by pursuing an academic career in economics even though
economics is a subject alien to the general interests of his family. Needless
to say, his decision did not pan out, and at age thirty Alex decided to go to
art school. Alex felt relieved because he no longer had to ﬁght destiny. But
he was also titillated by the possibility of actually succeeding and thus
wreaking revenge on the rest of the family.
Although this appears to be an extremely private story, Alex doesn’t think
so. A historian told him about the roles that are assigned to the various chil-
dren in well-to-do families. For several centuries, up until around the First
World War, the eldest son in these families was destined to carry on the
family business, while the younger males often ended up serving in the
army or joining the church. (Meanwhile, not all women in the family married;
104
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

some became nuns or spinsters.) This was how family capital remained
undivided and vigorous. Alex thinks that today the arts among the higher
echelons of society, sometimes serve a purpose similar to what the army
and church once did, albeit less convincingly. (Even today ﬁrst-born sons
are underrepresented at ﬁne arts colleges.1)
Given the odds in the arts, becoming an artist is basically a form of degra-
dation especially when one compares it to the far more lucrative possibili-
ties of those who take over the family business, or their traditions in the sci-
ences or politics. But then again, these ‘drop-outs’ are not necessarily
always worse off being artists. Even if they’re unsuccessful as artists they
can still maintain some ambiguous hint of status. Moreover, successful
family members often end up looking after their artist siblings. And most
importantly, by choosing another path, the ‘drop-outs’ do have a little more
chance to recover ground on successful family members, even a slight
chance of actually surpassing them. In the past, some exceptional sons
end up becoming bishops or generals. And today, an artist at least has a
small chance of attaining a kind of fame and fortune the rest of the family
never even dreamt of.2
Why is it that prospective artists like Alex seem so reckless? Are the arts a
kind of lottery system where prizes are high, but the odds on success very
small? And, is it true that artists ignore available information about these
bad odds? This chapter attempts to address these questions. Above all, it
attempts to explain why a low-income existence is the destiny for the vast
majority of artists. It also looks at why only a small minority of artists
will earn a high income from their art.
It goes without saying that people are impressed by the high incomes
that famous artists earn. Not only do these incredible incomes go hand-
in-hand with the glitter of stardom; these incomes also conﬁrm the
sacred status of the arts and the genius of the particular artist. Strangely
enough, the obverse, the notion of the starving artist, also conﬁrms the
special status of art. But the phenomenon of the starving artists must
remain an exceptional image. Because to learn that the phenomenon of
low income is not just isolated to a few individual artists who happen to
be poor, and affects the large majority of artists is an unpleasant and
therefore readily overlooked view.
In the previous chapter, we were concerned with the selﬂess or reward-
oriented artist and the boundary between intrinsic and extrinsic motiva-
tion. Because this chapter tries to clarify the issue of an artist’s income in
terms of money, we now focus on the boundary between the orientations
on monetary and non-monetary rewards.3
As an artist, I am convinced that high incomes are well-deserved gifts
105
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

for talented artists and poverty is caused by a general lack of public inter-
est in the arts. In other words, the general public and the government
spend too little on the arts. As an economist, however, I disagree. I do not
believe in permanent under-consumption. Yet, I certainly ﬁnd it hard to
believe in permanent overproduction either. Therefore as an economist I
am at a loss. I don’t understand why artists put up with such low
incomes. As an economist, I prefer to think of poverty in the arts as a
temporary phenomenon. Because if incomes are low enough, it should
mean fewer people will want to enter the art world, which means that the
sector should shrink and that incomes will subsequently rise to a normal
level. I notice however, that so far this has still not happened.
1
Incomes in the Arts are Exceptionally High
Using the term ‘artist’ in a broad sense and, at the same time, disregard-
ing the difference between high and low art, it turns out that an
extremely small group of artists earns astronomical amounts of money.
Movie actors and pop musicians belong to the group of professionals
who annually top the lists of the highest professional incomes. Actor
Leonardo DiCaprio earned $37 million in 1998, ﬁlm director Steven
Spielberg $175 million and the singer Robbie Williams $56 million.
After taking into account potential earnings Forbes constructs its
annual celebrity top 100 for the us. The three mentioned above appear in
the top ten. So do the Spice Girls, Harrison Ford, Celine Dion, and the
Rolling Stones. In 1998, there are only two non-artists in the top ten:
Oprah Winfrey and sports superstar, Michael Jordan. No other profes-
sional, whether surgeon, lawyer, scientist or accountant, has a remotely
comparable annual income.4 5
The annual celebrity top 100 that Forbes publishes every year includes
40 athletes and 40 so-called ‘entertainers’. (Apart from a few television
personalities like Oprah Winfrey, the ‘entertainers’ group consists only
of artists.) The average income of ‘artists and other entertainers’ on the
list turns out to be ﬁve times higher than that of the athletes. It should be
noted however, that the income gap between artists and athletes was
larger 10 years ago and may well eventually disappear in the years to
come. Also, Forbes points out that it is becoming more and more difﬁcult
to distinguish athletes from artists. Successful athletes, like Michael
Jordan, boost their incomes even more by launching acting or singing
careers.
Although it’s the entertainment or ‘low’ arts that dominate the
celebrity top 100 – followed by sports – this does not mean that there are
106
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

no lofty incomes among the ‘serious’ artists.6 Moreover, because the
careers of many top pop artists are relatively short-lived, the picture
would look much different, if one considered lifetime earnings. In that
case, a singer like Pavarotti and a writer like John Irving are likely to
move much closer to the top.
In this respect, it is instructive to look at the monetary value of a body
of work rather than on single works of art. For instance, the present value
of Van Gogh’s total output could well exceed the lifetime income of any
modern superstar, given the price paid for individual works. (In 1990,
Van Gogh’s portrait of Dr. Gachets sold for $82.5 million.) The same
applies to the hypothetical value of the oeuvre of certain writers and
composers, if copyrights would last forever. The value of the collective
works of Shakespeare, Dostoyevsky, Bach, Beethoven, or Mozart would
be astronomical. Not that these works are so ‘serious’ that they have no
entertainment value. In their own time, these works were considered
entertaining. Exactly because certain kinds of art are relatively ‘rich’ in
meanings, it can serve different functions for successive generations.
Therefore, their life cycle is long and their hypothetical all-time market
value can be extremely high. Nevertheless, in this chapter I shall concen-
trate on actual incomes and not hypothetical incomes.
Top incomes in the arts (broadly deﬁned) are considerably higher than
in all other professions that require similar levels of training (thesis 28).
2
Art Markets are Winner-Takes-All Markets
There exists a number of markets where a large and often increasing part
of consumer spending ends up in the pockets of a small number of pro-
ducers, while the majority of the producers earn little or nothing.7 Those
near the top secure a disproportionate share of the particular market’s
income. Although there is usually more than one winner, ﬁguratively
speaking ‘winner takes all’, as Robert Frank and Philip Cook wrote. For
instance, professional tennis players operate in a ‘winner-takes-all’
market. There are thousands of tennis players all over the world offering
high quality performances, but only a select few earns the big incomes,
while the vast majority cannot even earn a basic living from playing
tennis.
In normal markets, remuneration depends mostly on absolute per-
formance. The seasonal worker who picks tomatoes is paid for the
number of boxes he ﬁlls. If A ﬁlls 100 boxes and B 99, A receives 1%
more income. Most remuneration in production is directly or indirectly
based on absolute performance as well. In winner-takes-all markets how-
107
ART MARKETS ARE WINNER-TAKES-ALL MARKETS

ever, reward depends more on relative performance than on absolute
performance.8 If athlete A runs 1% faster than B and wins, she may very
well take all the prize money and so earn inﬁnitely more than B. Frank
and Cook present the example of StefﬁGraf who became the world’s
number one female tennis player, after Monica Seles, who had been
number one for years, was forced to withdraw after she was stabbed by a
lunatic. Within a few months, Graf’s income doubled even though her
absolute performance probably had not changed during this period.
After Seles’ withdrew, Graf’s relative performance increased however.
A feature of winner-takes-all markets is, as Sherwin Rosen noticed
earlier, that small differences in quality, talent, or effort often lead to
enormous differences in income.9 The objective differences in the
absolute performance of top athletes are small and yet income differences
are enormous. The same applies, for instance, to soloists in classical
music.10 In the arts, remuneration rests largely on relative performance.
Slight differences in performance can lead to large income differentials
(thesis 29).
Winner-takes-all markets are not just limited to arts mass markets
such as mechanically or electronically reproduced music and literature.
In the current visual art world as well, the value of the ‘star’s’ signature is
related to relative performance. Old art is sold in a winner-takes-all
market as well. Otherwise, there would be no signiﬁcant drop in value of
a painting formerly thought to be painted by Rembrandt when experts
ﬁnally prove that one of Rembrandt’s student painted it. After all, the
difference in quality between this painting and a real Rembrandt was
very difﬁcult to discern; and yet the difference in value is immense.11
Even though the winner-takes-all perspective is not limited to mass
markets of mostly technically produced and distributed goods, due to
economies of scale, the effects are the most pronounced in these kinds of
markets. The services offered by the top performers can be reproduced,
or ‘cloned’, at very little additional cost.12 Copies of a master recording
cost no more for a top singer than for a second-rate singer. The same
applies in the case of a television broadcast of a particular concert. Inter-
national stars control these markets and there is little room for talents of
less renown. Along with the ever-increasing impact of technical repro-
duction, extreme winner-takes-all markets also become more and more
important.
Other than the inﬂuence of economies of scale, ‘natural limits on the
size of the agenda’, or as Frank and Cook have termed it, ‘mental-shelf-
space limitations’, also contribute to the emergence of winner-takes-all
markets.13 Earlier I spoke of a ‘limited star capacity’.14 This means that
people tend to remember the relevant details of only a limited number of
108
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

products such as product names or the names of its authors. Otherwise, a
consumer’s life becomes unnecessarily complicated and unpleasant. It
generally pays to remember the names of artists who are already
renowned. By listening to others one can save on so-called search costs.
Moreover, being familiar with the same artists adds to the pleasure of
communicating about them with others.15 For the average art consumer
it makes sense to limit one’s energies to a small number of already
famous artists. This ‘limited star capacity’ of consumers helps to explain
the astronomical incomes that some artists fetch (thesis 30).
People are clearly different in mental-shelf-space. Some people recog-
nize more artists’ names than others. There are many different ways to
use one’s shelf space. One jazz aﬁcionado might specialize in interna-
tional jazz musicians. He might be familiar with all the big names past
and present, but he might be totally unfamiliar with the local jazz scene
or musicians in other genres. Meanwhile, someone else might know a
few international jazz musicians, some local jazz musicians and some
musicians in world music. The ﬁrst one is probably an international jazz
specialist, while the latter is probably more of a generalist. (Some people
who don’t care about pop music may still be familiar with the names and
tunes of a few international or local stars, because pop music is a perva-
sive part of general culture.)
Just because people want to save time and money researching various
artists and athletes, while still being able to carry on a conversation
about famous athletes or artists does not mean that everybody every-
where has the same list of preferred athletes and artists. There might be a
somewhat homogenous character to lists of international stars but when
it comes to local ‘stars’, the lists will vary because various social groups
seek distinction. This continual need for distinction clearly puts a limit
on the homogenizing aspect in the winner-takes-all markets. The
extreme of one single winning star serving all of the consumers and
attracting all of their spending cannot exist. Therefore, the centralizing
power in winner-takes-all markets is balanced by the need for distinction
(thesis 31). The signiﬁcance of that need appears to be increasing in
modern society. Therefore, a variation in styles and artists is bound to
endure. Pop music, for instance, clearly exhibits both aspects. On the one
hand with its cult of stardom the centralizing power is strong, but on the
other hand this power is balanced by the need for distinction of all sorts
of subcultures causing continuous change and innovation at local levels.
One way to compete with the stars in any particular genre is to copy
their formula. Sometimes formulas, as for instance in so-called boy-
bands, last a while and copyists can hit the charts be it usually for a short
time only. But for more lasting recognition and ﬁnancial success imita-
109
ART MARKETS ARE WINNER-TAKES-ALL MARKETS

tion is not enough. For instance, many musicians have chosen to imitate
George Michael (who himself started of copying others). But these ‘pla-
giarists’ hardly made a dent in his share of the market. The only way to
compete with the star is to ﬁnd a way around the star’s relative monopoly
by offering a different product in order to attract unsatisﬁed and new
groups of consumers. Therefore, contrary to Frank and Cook’s thesis,
the increasing importance of winner-takes-all markets does not neces-
sarily impoverish cultural life (thesis 32).16 Both imitation and constant
diversiﬁcation are part of the system.17
3
People Prefer Authenticity and are Willing to Pay for It 
Because the arts operate in winner-takes-all markets, some artists’
incomes are high. But this does not explain why top incomes in the arts
are higher than incomes in other winner-takes-all professions. Why do
successful pop musicians and top ﬁlm actors earn more than lawyers and
athletes?
Artists, lawyers, and athletes are alike in the sense that small differ-
ences in talent can mean signiﬁcant differences in income, even though
their absolute performances may be nearly equal. The slightly better
lawyer wins the case and ends up earning far more than her counterpart.
The same goes for the athlete who runs just a little bit faster than the rest
of the pack. In both cases, the difference is small, but clear. But the case
involving the arts is not the same. Performance among athletes and
lawyers can be measured, while in the arts essential differences cannot be
measured exactly.18
Relative performance in the arts is not so much about quantities that
can be measured objectively, like with lawyers and athletes, but also on
authenticity.19 For the art consumer authenticity is important; art repre-
sents authenticity.20 An artist’s unmistakable ﬁngerprint can be detected
in the work of art. The personal touch or the artist’s signature testiﬁes to
this authenticity.
Why are the artist’s personal identity and signature so valuable in our
culture? In the Middle Ages, people didn’t care about an artist’s identity.
In contemporary Thailand as well, the artist’s identity hardly matters.
As was noted earlier however, the West has an insatiable desire for goods
and services produced by unique individuals, by artists. It’s as if artists
have injected their individuality into their artwork. Even though every-
body is probably authentic, it’s only artists who produce public proof of
their individuality.21 If the ceo of Sony dies today, someone will take his
place tomorrow. But if Karel Appel dies no more ‘Appels’ will be pro-
110
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

duced; or if Pavarotti dies, no new Pavarotti recordings will be released.
Unlike other professions, artists are irreplaceable.
People admire artists and envy their ability to prove their distinctive
individuality. And so it’s my hypothesis that the general public wants to
be like the artist; they want to be the artist. Because this is impossible,
people magically connect with the artist through his or her artwork.
People believe the artist is ‘in’ the artwork. For instance, the soul of
Brahms (long dead) or Robbie Williams (still alive) is ‘in’ their music; by
listening to them people connect with these artists. Often there is a
degree of symbiosis involved whereby the ‘fan’ temporarily becomes the
adored artist and shares in his or her individuality.22
Although it may be easier to identify with living artists, I believe that
people also identify with dead artists. Take the case of an Inca mask; its
attraction is not just its rarity but also the assumed individuality of its
creator. In comparison in the world of stamp and coin collectors, rarity is
the primary quality.
Indirect proof of authenticity’s importance in explaining high incomes
comes from professions in which performance is generally not based on
authenticity. If we look at the list of the richest athletes it turns out that
they are not just known for their athletic abilities but also for their TV
appearances and their endorsement of products. They’re not anonymous
athletes who happen to excel in a particular sport, but distinct characters
with distinct circumstances and distinct histories. So it’s not so amazing
that the basketball player, Michael Jordan, not only appears in ads but
also in movies. Even the highest paid lawyers and ceos often become
public ﬁgures. Although their time is extremely valuable, they still
manage to appear in all kinds of, often less than intelligent, television
shows. Whether these are strategic moves or merely stem from vanity,
their contribution to entertainment certainly contributes to their
income.23
In chapter 1, it was stated that art’s authenticity contributes to art’s
sacredness but also depends on it. It follows then, that top incomes in the
arts are exceptionally high, because of art’s sacredness and authenticity,
which the public values and is prepared to pay for (thesis 33).
4
Incomes in the Arts are Exceptionally Low
Just because top incomes in the arts exceed those in other professions
does not mean that the average income of artists is also higher. On the
contrary, evidence indicates that the average income among artists is
lower than in comparable professions.24 Therefore, by going into the
111
INCOMES IN THE ARTS ARE EXCEPTIONALLY LOW

arts, artists endure an income penalty. If they were to choose another
occupation, they would earn more money. According to an early us
census report, only employees of the church faced larger income penal-
ties than artists.25 In the context of this book, this is an interesting result;
it again suggests that there is a parallel between art and religion. Both
invite employees to make sacriﬁces.
In earlier studies, the measured income penalty is somewhere between
7 and 15%.26 The penalty was probably underestimated, because then,
even more than now, many poor artists could not be traced and were
therefore not included. Moreover, artists’ incomes were usually com-
pared with the average income of the work force as a whole. In current
surveys, artists are polled using more sophisticated methods, and they
are compared to people in occupations with similar ‘educational and
professional standings’.27 Consequently, the income penalty for going
into the arts turns out to be considerably higher.28 For instance in 1990,
the average income of a full-time artist in the us was 30% lower than
that of all other full-time managerial and professional employees, ‘a
group broadly comparable with artists in term of educational attain-
ment’.29 Moreover, according to existing standards, us poverty rates for
artists are higher than for any other group in professional or technical
occupations.30
There is evidence that real incomes in the arts have gone down consid-
erably over the last decades. Throsby estimates that in Australia between
1982 and 1993, the real creative incomes of artists have decreased by
approximately 30%.31 According to Pierre-Michel Menger, a similar
trend exists in Europe.32 Even though the amount of work in the arts has
increased this is more than offset by the increase in the number of artists.
The increased competition between artists for the available work contin-
ues the trend toward lower incomes.33
In Europe, creative artists, like visual artists, composers and writers,
earn the least, whereas in the us and Australia it’s performers, like
dancers actors and musicians.34 In the Netherlands, there is relatively a
lot of information on the incomes of visual artists. According to a
detailed survey, 40% of Dutch visual artists earned less than zero from
their profession in 1998.35 Therefore, the income penalty for the average
visual artist in the Netherlands is almost 100%. (If 50% had earned less
than zero, the penalty would have been 100%.)
(So far we discussed annual incomes, while it would have been more
relevant to compare hourly wages in and outside the arts. Suppose artists
with very low annual incomes only work a few hours each week in the
arts. The result would be a large difference in annual incomes between
the arts and elsewhere, while the difference in hourly income will be less
112
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

dramatic.36 Estimating hourly wages instead of annual incomes doesn’t
make much difference in the case of Dutch visual artists however,
because they spend an average of 36 hours per week making art.37 On
average, performers in the Netherlands only spend 18 hours per week
working in the arts, however.38 Because ﬁgures regarding hourly incomes
are still inadequate, for the time being it is necessary to compare annual
incomes.)
It is useful to note that, if average incomes in the arts are low or even
negative, this does not necessarily mean that artists are always poor.
Artists are, in fact, often not poor because they have other sources of
income, usually from second jobs. But as long as still only a few can make
a living from their art, the arts must nevertheless be called a low-income
profession.
Despite some exceptionally high incomes in the arts, the average (and
median) incomes in the arts are consistently lower than in comparable
professions (thesis 34)39. This implies that a highly unequal distribution
of income exists in the arts. It is more skewed than in comparable profes-
sions (thesis 35).
5
Five Explanations for the Low Incomes Earned in the Arts
Why are incomes in the arts so low? As an artist, I surmised that low
incomes in the arts are due to under consumption, people are not inter-
ested enough in art. As an economist, however, I pointed out that the
notion of under consumption is difﬁcult to maintain when increased
consumption ﬁgures are taken into account. It’s not just that real per
capita expenditure on art increases, but also an increasing proportion of
income is devoted to art. The ﬁne arts are no exception.40 Therefore,
what puzzles me as an economist is not that the volume of consumption is
not higher, but that the number of artists does not decrease in response to
demand, so that eventually more normal incomes could be earned.
Instead, there are so many artists wanting to work, that only at the pres-
ent low level of income supply and demand meet.
Therefore, in terms of monetary income, it does not pay to become an
artist. Average incomes are low or extremely low. Nevertheless, the will-
ingness to work for low incomes is high. How can this be explained? A
number of explanations can be offered, which complement one another.
113
FIVE EXPLANATIONS FOR THE LOW INCOMES EARNED IN THE ARTS

table 3 explanations for why incomes are low in the arts
1
The winner-takes-all principle: Winner-takes-all markets are
important in the arts. They attract many competitors.
2
Unﬁtness for non-arts professions: Because artists believe they are
unﬁt for other, non-art professions, they believe they are better off
in the arts despite the prospect of a low income.
3
An orientation towards non-monetary rewards: (a) The average
artist is more interested in non-monetary rewards than other pro-
fessionals, while (b) such rewards are (thought to be) available in
abundance in the arts.
4
An inclination to take risks: (a) the average artist is less risk-aver-
sive than other professionals, while (b) high stakes, in the form of
both non-monetary and monetary income, are (thought to be)
available in abundance in the arts.
5
Overconﬁdence and self-deceit: more than other professionals, the
average artist is inclined to overestimate his or her skills and luck
and at the same time, ignore available information; therefore they
overestimate the rewards available to them in the arts.
6
Wrong information: the average artist is less well informed than
other professionals; therefore they overestimate the rewards avail-
able to them in the arts.
These explanations for low incomes among artists are based on the
assumption discussed in the preceding chapter, that artists are oriented
towards rewards, whether as a means to ‘serve art’ or to serve them-
selves. First, low incomes in the arts can partly be explained from the
winner-takes-all perspective. Even though artists may be just as ill-
informed, overconﬁdent, risk-taking, and interested in money as other
professionals, the winner-takes-all principle should tempt more people
to enter the arts than other occupations with a weaker winner-takes-all
market. Due to the market structure, extreme monetary rewards and
renown lure people into the arts.41 Therefore, many youngsters become
artists and supply many art products. It follows that average incomes are
low.42
But average (and median) incomes in the arts are not just lower than in
comparable normal markets, but also lower than in comparable winner-
takes-all markets. So the question of low incomes also demands other
explanations that are more fundamental than the explanation already
offered by the winner-takes-all perspective and that complement it.43
114
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

6
Artists are Unﬁt for ‘Normal’ Jobs
In choosing a career, people naturally take into account their skills as
well as their deﬁciencies. Consciously or unconsciously, they assess their
chances in various careers. And so it should hardly seem amazing that a
youngster who early on exhibited exceptional talent on the piano and
ended up winning prizes in various competitions decides to go to the con-
servatory. Talented people simply have an above average chance in the
arts. This explains how a small group of gifted youngsters might end up
choosing the arts. But because this group is small, it does not explain why
average incomes are so low.
However, it’s not just proven skills that determine whether someone
becomes an artist; a candidate’s inadequacies can be just as important.
It’s possible that a lot of average artists chose to become artists not
because of their superior talents, but because they believe they are unﬁt
to do anything else on a professional level. In the seventies, many of my
fellow students decried bourgeois society and stressed that they could not
function in ‘normal’ jobs. Either they felt they were too ‘weird’ or society
was ‘deviant’ and ‘sick’. Either way, the arts offered them a sanctuary.
This kind of extreme view is out of fashion nowadays, but many artists
still believe the arts offer a (romantic) alternative to a dull and sometimes
even disgusting existence in an ordinary job.
If someone has the ability to become an artist and considers all other
professions as a recipe for disaster, the choice becomes clear. It is so clear
that there appears to be no choice at all, as Alex dramatically emphasizes
in the illustration where the only alternative to becoming an artist is
death. Less dramatically, many artists just assume they would not per-
form satisfactorily in a non-arts profession. They would be unhappy and
therefore private satisfaction or non-monetary income would be less
than zero. Moreover, if they never learned to deal with standard ofﬁce
conduct, and so their work performance would never be up to industry
standards anyway, their ﬁnancial income would also be low. And so they
just ﬁgure that they’ll either end up unemployed, disabled, or working in
poorly paid non-arts jobs. Considering the prospect of low incomes in
non-art jobs – both in terms of money and satisfaction – it is understand-
able why these people choose art careers. By choosing an art career they
ﬁgure that their lower incomes will at least be compensated by a higher
level of personal satisfaction. Thus they calculate that their net arts
incomes are actually higher than they would be elsewhere.
The important issue in this respect is that prospective artists believe
they lack the ordinary skills to perform effectively at ‘normal’ jobs in a
society where normality is the norm. This is not necessarily always the
115
ARTISTS ARE UNFIT FOR ‘NORMAL’ JOBS

case, but as long as artists believe it is true, it goes a long way toward
explaining their acceptance of low incomes. The low incomes that char-
acterize many arts careers is partly explained by artists’ beliefs that they
lack the ordinary skills necessary for non-arts professions (thesis 36).
It is difﬁcult to gauge precisely how important this thesis will be in the
scheme of things. Many artists would probably have no problem per-
forming well in non-art jobs. This is also revealed by the fact that an
increasing number of artists have second jobs outside the arts. The rela-
tive ease with which many of them adjust to these non-art-related
employment opportunities goes a long way toward proving just how
wrong they are about their non-arts skills. Therefore it is likely that these
misconceptions will be corrected over time. But by then it might be too
late for some of them to change careers. But then again, it could be that
there are other factors still that need to be discussed that are even more
important in choosing art as a career.
7
Artists are Willing to Forsake Monetary Rewards
Considering the preceding explanation of why incomes are low, non-
monetary rewards must be important to most artists. Is it possible that
these kinds of rewards are more important to artists than they are to
average professionals? The reasons why incomes are so low in the arts
could then in part be explained by the fact that artists are less concerned
about money than they are about personal satisfaction and status.44
Status means non-monetary external rewards such as recognition and
fame. (The combination of private satisfaction as a non-monetary inter-
nal reward and status as a non-monetary external reward has also been
called psychic income.45 Because the term ‘psychic income’ has become
somewhat suspicious among economists, I shall use the more neutral
‘non-monetary rewards’ to describe the combination of private satisfac-
tion and status.46)
The previous chapter argued that an orientation towards private satis-
faction is built into the habitus of many artists. Moreover, a strong ori-
entation towards non-monetary rewards generally agrees with the
notion of denying the economy in the arts. By forsaking money, artists
appear to deny the economy.
It should be noted that a particular artist’s inclination to forsake mon-
etary rewards is not ﬁxed.47 It depends on the amount of monetary and
non-monetary rewards the artist is already receiving. It is understand-
able that when artists earn not enough money to make a living, their will-
ingness to exchange money for private satisfaction is almost zero. Only
116
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

after some money becomes available and the aforementioned survival
constraint is satisﬁed, the inclination of artists to exchange money for
immaterial rewards begins to increase.48 It follows that the inclination to
forsake monetary rewards depends on the artists’ individual circum-
stances. It is strongest when non-monetary rewards are readily available.
This is the case in the arts. Compared to monetary rewards, the arts are
believed to offer more status as well as more other non-monetary
rewards. This belief is probably only partially true, but when young
artists believe it to be true it does inﬂuence their decisions.
In my view, the main reason why the arts are so attractive and why
people are willing to forsake monetary income is because of the pre-
sumed sacredness of the arts, the high esteem others have for artists, and
in the personal satisfaction expected. Chapters 1 and 2 pointed out that
the arts are sacred and bestow signiﬁcant amounts of status on the
artists, who as its priests share in the high esteem of the arts. Beginning
artists probably receive a lot of personal satisfaction and, even though
they are just starting out, they share in the general esteem of the arts; they
acquire a mysterious status that other beginning professionals lack. As
mentioned earlier, the arts offer a romantic alternative. Again, there is of
course the question of whether beginning artists over-estimate the non-
monetary rewards, and, consequently, have a rude awakening some
years later. But for the explanation of their behavior this is irrelevant.
Therefore a high inclination to forsake monetary rewards together with
the presence of relatively many non-monetary rewards contributes to the
explanation of low incomes in the arts (thesis 37).
8
Artists are Over-Conﬁdent and Inclined to Take Risks
If average artists would have an above average inclination to take risks,
the big prizes in the winner-takes-all art market make the arts even more
attractive.49 Even more youngsters enter the art world and consequently
the average income is lower than if these same youngsters had had a more
normal inclination to take (or avert) risks. (An above average inclination
to take risks can well go together with the before-mentioned above-aver-
age inclination to exchange monetary for other forms of income. The
artist then seeks high prizes in the form of fame and recognition to
pursue.)
People have different attitudes when it comes to taking risks. Some
spend far more money on insurance than others. They are relatively risk-
aversive, while others prefer to take risks. So considering the art world’s
extremely high prizes it is only natural that youngsters with some artistic
117
ARTISTS ARE OVER-CONFIDENT AND INCLINED TO TAKE RISKS

talent and with an above-average inclination to take risks will be more
likely to enter the arts than other similarly talented candidates who are
more risk-aversive.50
Thus far, there is no empirical research that compares the artist’s incli-
nation to take risks to the inclinations among other professionals.51
However, because I know many artists as well as talented people who
decided not to become artists, I ﬁnd it plausible that an above-average
inclination to take risks helps contribute to someone’s decision to
become an artist. The artists in this chapter’s illustrations all exhibited a
degree of recklessness. Meanwhile, an extremely talented musician (in
the illustration on page 280), who decided not to go into the arts, admit-
ted that he attached too much value to security. (The artist as someone
attracted to risk is a generalization that refers to an average artist. The
arts are not just about adventurous people. There are also many risk-
aversive artists. Moreover, there are also other professions and enter-
prises that attract daring people.) Artists certainly do not consider them-
selves as (irresponsible) gamblers. But they probably would not protest
about being characterized as adventurous, daring, or restless. And the
latter may well imply an above-average inclination to take risks.
As noted earlier, the effect of risk-taking is not independent of the
availability of rewards. High stakes amplify the effect. The same applies
to the absence of stakes outside the arts. People in society who have less
to lose, because they miss the capabilities needed in non-arts jobs as dis-
cussed above in 5.6., a situation that also applies to ex-psychiatric
patients and to the dropouts of the third illustration, sooner take the risk
of turning to the arts.
Most youngsters embarking on a career in the arts have only the
vaguest notion about the stakes, the number of competitors, their own
abilities, etc. And even if they did know, it’s unlikely that they would
assess their odds correctly.52 If that were the case then certainly fewer
people would choose a career in the arts. Over-conﬁdence keeps them
from thinking clearly. Many risk-takers are also over-conﬁdent. Gam-
blers consistently and magically overestimate their ability to pick the
right number. And youngsters are inclined to overestimate their abilities
and luck more than, for instance, seasoned veterans.53 They are often
encouraged to do so in the art world. ‘In order to stand a chance in the
arts one should really believe in oneself.’ As an artist, this is what I was
told, and I notice that this is what I tell my students. It is an appeal to a
magical belief in one’s own abilities, which occasionally turns into a self-
fulﬁlling prophecy, but most of the time turns into a rude awakening.
The available information about the arts is often extremely incom-
plete and this state of affairs only adds to over-conﬁdence. By contrast,
118
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

eighteen-year-old would-be football professionals have a reasonably fair
picture of their abilities. The same cannot be said of the eighteen-year-
old would-be composer and visual artist with an interest in contempo-
rary art. Because they possess far less clear information about the arts
and their own abilities, it is easy to see how they become over-conﬁdent.
And while football players have learned more about their chances after
four years of training, the information that young composers or visual
artists have about their abilities in the same period of time is not much
greater than when they began. So they can go on being over-conﬁdent for
a considerable amount of time.
The difference in the sports world is revealing. Here it’s not so difﬁcult
to make a reasonably rational decision about whether to become a pro-
fessional or not and when to leave the profession. One’s own talents and
development compared to those of competitors can be measured. Sports
markets are just like art markets – extreme winner-takes-all markets with
few winners and many losers. But because there is more available infor-
mation, there is less excess and ultimately the losers pay, on average, a
lower price than someone involved in the arts.
Available information can be incorrectly interpreted, but it can also be
ignored. The latter is a form of self-deceit. Self-deceit, like over-conﬁ-
dence, contributes to overcrowding and low incomes. For instance, if
youngsters are unwilling to turn to available sources of information in
order to check their performance, they will probably just end up deceiv-
ing themselves. If they don’t go to auditions or contact galleries, they do
not assess their abilities to help them decide whether to stay or leave the
market. Often they refuse to go to auditions or interviews because they
fear the outcome will not correspond with their own view of their abili-
ties. Thus they prefer not to know. Because young artists have already
invested so much into their careers, they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to accept that the
game is already over. Thus evasive behavior is relatively strong in the
arts.
Because artists are more inclined to take risks than others while the
stakes in the arts are high, and because artists are more than others
inclined to self-conﬁdence and self-deceit, more people enter the arts
and, consequently, the average income is lower than it would have been
otherwise (thesis 38).
9
Artists are Ill-Informed
Self-deceit often goes hand-in-hand with misinformation. For instance,
it is a popular belief among artists that ‘doing art is a learning process
119
ARTISTS ARE ILL-INFORMED

without end’, meaning that those who persevere will win out in the end.
This kind of ‘information’ encourages them to interpret negative feed-
back as a stimulus to go on learning. And in doing so, they can continue
to deceive themselves till they are eighty. Failed artists give up later than
other professionals.54 On top of that, success late in one’s artistic career
is extremely rare. Therefore, the myth that ‘the loser will eventually win
out’ sends the wrong signals to artists. Nevertheless, this myth explains
“why many artists maintain for so long the hope that they will eventually
become famous, even after their deaths”.55
The decision to enter the arts, to stay in the arts, or to leave the arts is
always based on information, however poor it may be. Given the artists’
orientation on rewards, whether as a means to the end of making art or
for personal advancement, information on possible future rewards –
both monetary and non-monetary – inevitably inﬂuences one’s decision
to enter. If this information presents too rosy a picture regarding money,
status, and private satisfaction, then obviously more people will be com-
pelled to enter the arts than would have otherwise done so. The conse-
quence of this is that the average artist’s income is low, lower than antici-
pated. But why is that kind of misinformation not eventually corrected,
as the economist would predict? If misinformation became corrected
after a while fewer people would enter the art world. And eventually, an
income situation comparable with that of other professions would
emerge.56 There are two reasons why this doesn’t happen.
In the ﬁrst place, newcomers’ expectations can be extremely high,
almost to the point of expecting some kind of salvation. Consequently,
when these neophytes become disappointed, they hide their disappoint-
ments and so the next generation is again misinformed. There is a paral-
lel regarding the situation of immigrants. Immigrants often send a far
too rosy image of the Promised Land back to their homelands and there-
fore the migrations continue. These kinds of images continue to go
uncorrected as long as underwhelmed immigrants continue to send these
positive messages. They do so because they are afraid to admit that their
decisions to emigrate may have been a mistake after all. Many failed
artists show similar kinds of behavior.
In the second place, misinformation in the arts more often refers to
immaterial rather than monetary rewards. Therefore, veriﬁcation is dif-
ﬁcult and beliefs (or delusions) continue to be justiﬁed. In principal,
immigrants can correct false information, while in the arts, there are
fundamental beliefs that resist veriﬁcation. (These fundamental beliefs
or myths were listed in table 1 in section 1.8.) Due to these myths every-
body in our society tends to be ill-informed about the arts (thesis 39).
The main (mis)informing myths that surround the arts are the myth of
120
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

the sacredness of the arts and the related myth of the possibility of relat-
ing to a sacred world through the arts. Most of the other myths or popu-
lar beliefs emanate from the sacredness of art. Five interrelated myths are
particularly misleading when it comes to deciding whether to become an
artist.
1 Making authentic art will be endlessly rewarding. Even when no other
rewards are forthcoming, artists receive ample private satisfaction.
2 Talent in the arts is natural or God-given.
3 Certain talents in the arts will only appear at a later point in someone’s
career.
4 Success in the arts depends exclusively on talent and commitment.
5 Everyone has an equal chance in the arts.
And so the myths and delusions about the kinds of chances artists
have in the arts, chances that are unthinkable in any other ﬁeld with its
diplomas, old-boys-networks etc, continue to beguile the would-be
artists.
These myths promise young artists ample internal rewards. And the
myth that perpetrates the notion that artists could very well be discov-
ered later in their careers, only prolongs the false promises. As noted ear-
lier, this last myth is false not because late-career discoveries never
happen, but because they happen so seldomly.
It is difﬁcult to resist these myths. They have an air of righteousness
about them, which ﬁts in well with the presumed sacredness of art. This
is certainly the case with the equality myth and the myth that a commit-
ment to the arts will eventually pay off. Many artists continue to believe
the latter myth. If my fellow colleagues are unhappy with their careers,
they often blame themselves for not being committed enough. And most
of the time, after some initial grumbling, in the end the success of other
artists is often seen as justiﬁed because these artists deserve their success
because of their total commitment. Therefore, the arts is a righteous
order.
Looking down from the tenth ﬂoor, these myths certainly appear mis-
leading and misinformational because it’s not just talent that matters.
Artists do not step onto the playing ﬁeld with the same talents. Artistic
talent is only partly inherited, and it has more to do with the social and
cultural capital that artists acquire through upbringings and educations.
(Because self-taught artists seem to prove the contrary the art world
often puts them on a pedestal. But in most art forms it’s usually only a
very small percentage of artists who are self-taught.57) Capital is un-
evenly distributed among social groups. The fact that artists, even more
than other professionals, come from the higher strata of society demon-
121
ARTISTS ARE ILL-INFORMED

strates that this type of capital is important in the arts.58 Moreover,
artists believe the arts to be free and open to everyone, while newcomers
face many informal barriers, as I shall demonstrate in chapter 11. If the
newcomers had only known beforehand about these barriers, they might
not have attempted to enter the world of art.
Irrespective of talent, chances among those who choose to become
artists are unequally distributed. The myth that talent is all that counts
prevents the gathering of accurate information about what is required in
this profession in order to stand a chance. Instead, it creates a misleading
image of prospects in the arts.
Society produces and reproduces an image of the arts that is far too
optimistic (thesis 40). Due to misinformation, more people choose the
arts, more artists offer their services in the market, and more art is pro-
duced than would have been the case had this information been more
accurate. Misinformation contributes to the low incomes in the arts
(thesis 41).
10 Conclusion
Why do prospective artists like Alex in this chapter’s illustrations, seem
to be so reckless? Is the art world just some kind of lottery with very slim
chances of winning the grand prize? And is it true that artists ignore
available information about their slim chances in the art world?
Exceptionally grand prizes, both in terms of money and status, can be
won in the arts. These prizes are larger than in comparable professions. It
is also true that the average artist earns less than other professionals.
Many artists earn low incomes. Despite the high stakes, the average
chances are low. In this respect, the arts are like a lottery.
The high incomes of a small number of artists can be explained by the
tendency of consumers to attach much value to small differences in the
relative performance of top artists, while at the same time they can
handle only a limited number of stars. Also the consumers’ desire for
authenticity explains the high incomes in the arts.
It is more difﬁcult to explain why the income of the majority of artists
is so low. This chapter gave six reasons why people continue to want to
become artists, despite the fact that the average income is low.
1 Many people are attracted to the arts because the top incomes are
extremely high.
2 Artists think they are unﬁt for non-arts jobs.
3 Artists are less interested in monetary rewards than other profession-
als and more in private satisfaction and status. Therefore, they are pre-
122
MONEY FOR THE ARTIST

pared to work for low wages.
4 The average artist is relatively more daring or reckless. With its high
prices the arts are attractive to daring people.
5 The suggestion in the illustrations that artists sometimes ignore infor-
mation is plausible. Over-conﬁdence and self-deceit add to art world
overcrowding. And ﬁnally, an important explanation for low incomes
is
6 Misinformation. In this case, the cause of low incomes is not sought in
the artist’s character, but in how society deceives potential artists. Per-
sistent myths continue to lure talented youngsters into the arts. All
these factors make the arts more attractive than they would otherwise
be. Therefore many people enter the arts and income is low.
In the introduction to this chapter, in my capacity as an economist I
could not explain the permanent state of poverty in the arts. I expected
poverty to be more temporary. Due to the prospect of low incomes, I
thought that fewer people would choose to enter the arts, that conse-
quently the sector would shrink and that incomes would adjust to a
normal level. Nevertheless, I noticed that this is not the case. Taking into
account the analysis put forth in this chapter, I now understand that in
the exceptional economy of the arts, income can remain permanently
low.
The six reasons for the low incomes of artists presented in this chapter
contribute to the solution of the recurring quandary of this book ‘why
are incomes so low in the arts’. The relative impact of each of these ﬁve
explanations is important when it comes to interpreting ‘poverty’ in the
arts. If the ﬁrst ﬁve explanations are the most signiﬁcant, then artists, in
fact, do have little money, but because of other rewards they are not
really poor in other respects. To a certain degree, then, poverty is a
choice. However, in the point about misinformation, society is to ‘blame’
and artists are its ‘victims’. More will be said about these two contradic-
tory assessments of the economic situation of artists in the next chapter.
Discussion
1 Can you offer some alternative explanations for the high incomes and
low incomes in the arts from those already presented in this chapter?
2 Which of the six explanations of low incomes in table 3 do you think is
the most important, and least important?
123
CONCLUSION

Chapter 6
Structural Poverty
Do Subsidies and Donations Increase Poverty?
Subsidies Make Artists Lose Interest in Selling
Nicole draws in Alex’s life drawing class. She has recently left art school.
Although she is a good artist, she has yet to ﬁnd a gallery. The following
weekend she is going to join an annual ‘open studios exhibition’ in her
neighborhood and she asks Alex for advice about pricing her work. Alex
asks her what kind of prices she has in mind. Alex thinks they’re much too
high. He asks her if she really wants to sell. Nicole says she’s desperate to
sell. If she doesn’t earn some money soon, she may have to stop making
art. So Alex suggests that Nicole lowers her prices by approximately forty
percent. (Couching his words, he advises her to set prices so as to maxi-
mize sales.) Nicole is shocked and objects, but in the end she lowers her
prices. That weekend she ends up selling some etchings and three draw-
ings.
Alex has come to the realization that after art school, most students tend to
price their work too high. They determine their prices based on the costs it
took to make a particular work including a fair remuneration for their labor.
Gallery owners usually inform them that with these kinds of prices they
won’t sell a thing and in the end recoup none of their costs. Low prices
seem unfair. Nevertheless, gallery owners demand lower prices from start-
ing artists.
Robin is an ex-student of Alex’s. He left art school a year ago. He recently
received a government grant for promising young visual artists. He has
been offered a show in an alternative space. As there is no dealer involved,
he has asked Alex to help select the work for the show. Alex casually asks
about the prices he intends to ask. Predictably, his prices are far too high.
In a long argument, Alex tries to convince Robin to lower his prices, unsuc-
cessfully.
At some stage in their discussion, Alex tells Robin that like other young
artists the prices he is asking are way too high for his work. Robin furiously
objects that he cannot be compared with other novices. To be subsidized
by the government means that he is a ‘promising young artist’. Only then
does Alex begin to realize, that the foolish behavior of Robin has been
124

caused by the government grant. Government grants give young artists
like Robin the freedom to make ‘real’ art that in their eyes ‘deserves’ to
fetch high prices. Moreover, they not only feel superior; they can also afford
not to sell. Since receiving the grant, Robin has quit his second job in a
restaurant because he receives enough money to live off of. And so now he
is insisting on asking ‘fair’ prices, even though he knows there is little
chance that his work will sell. For the time being, Robin and his subsidized
colleagues can feel special.
When Alex visits Robin’s exhibition on the last day, he is amazed to see that
Robin has sold one of the thirty exhibited paintings. It’s one more than Alex
had expected. Later, in talking to Robin, Alex discovers the painting was
sold to his uncle, who is a well-to-do professor.
Alex likes Robin’s work and is sure that, if Robin cut his price by half, he
would have sold at least four paintings, maybe enough to propel him into
the thick of the art market. Of course, Alex believes that talented artists like
Nicole and Robin deserve to sell most of the work they exhibit. Alex realizes
however, that even when they do price their artworks more reasonably, this
still doesn’t happen. There are just far too many Robins and Nicoles
anyway. And all these artists produce far too much art.
Now that Robin is receiving a subsidy, he has enough to live off of and so
has overcome his survival constraint. He quits his second job and concen-
trates on making art, not selling it. In doing so, Robin reveals himself to
be more oriented towards the government than towards the market. This
kind of attitude affects the economy of the arts. This chapter sets out to
investigate the general effects that income decreases and increases via
subsidies, donations, and spending have on the average artist’s income
and on the number of artists in the arts. Do subsidies that are intended to
raise income levels in the arts really increase income, or do they only
increase the numbers of artists? Is it possible that they even lower the
average artist’s income?
Many donations and subsidies rest on the premise of ﬁghting poverty
among artists. Therefore this chapter also attempts to explain the
immensity of the gift sphere in the arts.
Finally, how should one interpret low incomes in the arts? This chap-
ter poses and discusses the question of whether poverty is uncompen-
sated and therefore ‘real’, or whether it is compensated through other
forms of rewards.
As an artist, it is my opinion that low incomes are unjust. They do not
beﬁt a modern and just society. Therefore, as an artist I think that the
government and donors are obliged to raise the income levels in the arts
through subsidies and donations, but also through social security and
125
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

affordable arts training. As an economist, I may go along with the artist’s
moral judgment that low incomes are unjust. But at the same time, I
believe that the remedies proposed will probably only exacerbate the dis-
ease: as an economist I think that the effect of more subsidies, and more
donations, social security and subsidized education, is that more people
will become artists and more people will end up earning low incomes.
1
Artists Have Not Always Been Poor
Were comparable incomes in the arts always as low as they are now?
There are a number of stories in circulation about famous artists who
died extremely poor. People tend to remember these stories, because they
ﬁt the present mythology of the arts. Nevertheless, the biographies of
famous artists from the past are stories of wealth far more frequently
than stories of poverty. Such stories do not need to be representative, but
they offer relevant information as long as they are not used as exemplary
proof, but instead serve as pieces of a puzzle.1
Sometimes information on art prices and the lifestyles of artists from
the past offer insight into the incomes of not only famous artists but also
of average artists. In the seventeenth century for instance, along with the
ﬂuctuations in general economic welfare, the number of Dutch painters
ﬂuctuated as well, but incomes were not lower than in comparable pro-
fessions.2 Also in the nineteenth century, the average painter probably
received higher prices for his work than an average contemporary
painter. Research has shown that at that time, prices in the primary
visual art market, the market where artists sell paintings for the ﬁrst
time, were higher than those in the secondary market, which is devoted
to the reselling of paintings.3 At present, it’s the other way around. It was
common for professional artists in the nineteenth century to hold estab-
lished positions and people were prepared to pay considerable prices for
their most recent paintings. Given primary market prices, the average
income of nineteenth century artists was not particularly low. (Buying
new work was not considered much of a risk. Meanwhile today, the pri-
mary market is overﬂowing with artists selling their work at low prices –
that is apart from newcomers like Robin who ask higher prices and do
not sell at all. Only a few artists’ work ever reaches the secondary
market, where prices rise briskly; there prices are sometimes many times
higher than the artists themselves fetched earlier for these same works in
the primary market. Although reputations were not unimportant in the
nineteenth century, price and income differences were not as pro-
nounced.)
126
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

The general picture I get from discussions with art historians is that
the phenomenon of artists living in poverty found its beginnings in some
corners of the nineteenth-century art world. But poverty as a widespread
phenomenon belongs to the twentieth century, particularly to the second
half of the twentieth century.
Although artists were generally not poor in the nineteenth century, the
type of artist that made poverty in the arts more likely was already
emerging. An increasing number of bohemian artists were entering the
scene at that time. They sold little and when they did sell a piece, they did
not use the customary channels. Most of these artists were technically
not poor because many of them had other sources of income, such as their
families, but their hourly art wages were low.4 Nevertheless, bohemian
artists in the nineteenth century were still decidedly a minority.
The bohemian artist represents two developments that occurred
during the twentieth century. First, art becomes increasingly attractive
because of the sacred status it has garnered. And second, because the
autonomy of the artist is increasingly venerated, established regulations
begin to be rejected and vanish. Prior to the twentieth century, the arts
were not as attractive an alternative, and regulations assured a higher
average income.
Not only were the arts less attractive, there were union-like organiza-
tions that helped regulate the profession and protect artists’ incomes.
They protected quality, drew up strict rules for admission and sometimes
even set prices. This long period in the history of the arts commenced
with the guilds and ended with the prestigious academies. All the while
however, organizations existed that managed to keep incomes reason-
ably high by keeping the numbers of artists to a necessary minimum. In
other words, only people who met certain qualiﬁcations were admitted
into the profession.5
In the course of the nineteenth century however, the academies and
similar organizations gradually lost their omnipotence. In the end most
of them closed down or became unimportant. In today’s world, almost
every profession formally controls the size of their membership in one
way or another – except for the arts. In the late nineteenth and twentieth
century, artists became more or less autonomous. Both artists and the
art world at large regarded artistic autonomy as a step forward. Auton-
omy in the arts was incompatible with membership requirements based
on diplomas or ballot. Anyone could become an artist. The number of
artists increased and income went down. (Chapter 11 discusses the
absence of regulation in the modern arts in more detail.)
Artists are nowadays more willing to accept lower paying jobs. One
important reason that we mentioned in the previous chapter is that as the
127
ARTISTS HAVE NOT ALWAYS BEEN POOR

arts became increasingly perceived as sacred, artists were accorded a spe-
cial status. Therefore, the reason why incomes remain low can be found
in the exceptionally high status of the arts.
The opposite perspective can also be instructive. This implies that
incomes used to be more reasonable in earlier times and that the arts did
not have the level of status then that it has now. And so, while monetary
incomes may have been higher back then, the other rewards were less
attractive. Because the monetary incomes in the arts probably began
decreasing somewhere between one hundred and one hundred ﬁfty years
ago, it is likely that at that time, around the 1850s, the internal structure
of the arts – including its much vaunted beliefs and myths – began to
change drastically. Artists who began to reject the economy became
more and more common in the arts. The worship of authenticity – which
had its roots in the Renaissance and gained momentum during Romanti-
cism – fully appropriated the arts and vice versa. The regulations that
controlled membership and prices became taboo and the arts as a profes-
sion became more and more attractive. The current exceptional econ-
omy of the arts is rooted in the changes that were initiated during the
course of the nineteenth century. This change is most evident in the
reduction of the average incomes of artists (thesis 42).
2
The Desire to Relieve Poverty in the Arts Led to the Emergence of
Large-Scale Subsidization
It is fairly evident that most rich and civilized societies ﬁnd it intolerable
that some of their citizens live below the accepted poverty level. Espe-
cially in Europe governments see it as their ﬁrst responsibility that people
have enough money to lead a decent life. Although in the thirties the us
were the ﬁrst to subsidize the arts for social reasons, it was in Europe that
substantial aid for the arts emerged after the Second World War.6 After
the war, European governments embarked on a general mission of social
justice, which focused on eliminating poverty altogether. Their efforts in
the arts were particularly resolute.
During the ﬁrst post-war decades, arts subsidies in Europe were
mostly based on social arguments. The desire to improve the ﬁnancial
straits of artists was the most important reason for the substantial
increase in the subsidization of the arts. It was only later that other argu-
ments began to come to the fore. The social justice issue however, contin-
ues to complement other subsidization arguments in most of Europe.7
It appears that governments, as well as foundations, corporations, and
private donors are particularly sensitive about poverty in the arts. The
128
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

image of the starving artist appeals to benefactors. Helping a poor artist
is more rewarding than helping other kinds of poor people. Financial
assistance is not only a gift to a needy artist; it can also be seen as a gift to
mankind. After all, there is a small chance that the artist receiving assis-
tance will eventually become a great artist. This kind of romantic notion
is always present when it comes to the various forms of ﬁnancial assis-
tance available to artists.
The following sections address the question of whether subsidies and
donations really raise artists’ low incomes. But regardless of the answer,
the present conclusion is that the desire to raise the low incomes of artists
partly explains the existence of a large gift sphere in the arts (thesis 43).
3
Low Incomes are Inherent to the Arts
Before discussing the question of whether ﬁnancial assistance can effec-
tively increase the low incomes in the arts, it is important to note that low
incomes do not necessarily imply that artists are starving. If we look at
relative hourly incomes, we see poverty in the arts and poor artists. But
artists are not necessarily poor in an absolute sense or when we compare
them with manual laborers from a hundred years ago. Moreover, some
artists hold down lucrative second jobs or have access to other sources of
income, such as trust funds and inheritances. These artists then, are rela-
tively well off, but not as a result of art. If they were to work full-time as
artists with no outside income, they would have a very hard time surviv-
ing. So when artists earn too little in the arts to be able to work full-time
in the arts, they can be labeled as poor. It’s in this sense that poverty
exists in the arts.
Based on the existing income studies mentioned in the previous chap-
ter, there does not appear to be a relationship between developments in
spending on art and the income of artists. The total amount of ﬁnancial
assistance for artists has no effect on artists’ incomes. The same applies
to social beneﬁts. Irrespective of developments in spending, donations,
subsidies and social beneﬁts, the incomes of artists have remained rela-
tively low throughout the West for more than a century now, and most
pronouncedly since the Second World War. If there is a trend in the
second half of the twentieth century, it is a downward one. Countries
become wealthier and more money per capita ends up in the arts, and yet
income in the arts remains about the same or actually decreases.8 In
countries like the Netherlands where there is extensive subsidization of
the arts, the artist’s average income is the same or lower than of artists in
countries like the us and England, where subsidization levels are lower.
129
LOW INCOMES ARE INHERENT TO THE ARTS

It appears then, that the current phenomenon of poverty in the art is
largely a structural issue; poverty is built into the arts.
How can structural poverty be explained? Apparently, it’s because
artists seem to be quite willing to work for low hourly wages. Table 3 in
section 5.5 listed six explanations for the permanent willingness of
artists to work for low hourly wages: Artists are unﬁt for non-art jobs,
artists prefer non-monetary rewards, artists seek risks, artists are over-
conﬁdent and self-deceiving, and artists are ill-informed.9 The bigger the
role any of these explanations plays, the stronger the willingness of
artists to work for low incomes. Because artists must survive, however, a
minimum income constraint exists. Given this constraint and a large
willingness to work for low incomes, an increase in average hourly
income is almost completely nulliﬁed by a corresponding increase in the
number of artists.10
External forces, like increased spending, donations, or subsidies, lead
to more money being pumped into the arts, which fail to effectively
increase average incomes, and instead lead to artists working more hours
at their art. (It leads to more people entering the arts. It also allows artists
with second jobs to start to cut down on these jobs and begin working
longer hours at their art. But because young artists earn the least and
usually work more hours in second jobs, the average number of hours
artists work in the arts is not really affected.) In theory the extra money
leads almost exclusively to more artists. It follows that on average, extra
funding affects employment ﬁgures more than it affects the artist’s aver-
age income.
In theory, then, extra funding will never increase income levels but
merely increase the number of practicing artists. This is true only if the
inclinations discussed in the previous chapter are very strong: artists
want to exchange all extra money for non-monetary rewards (or they
very much want to take risks, are totally over-conﬁdent, or see no possi-
bilities at all outside the arts). However, it is safe to assume that the aver-
age artist who earns more than the minimum income level is mainly
interested in non-monetary rewards, but is not totally immune to extra
ﬁnancial income.11 Therefore, it must be stressed that the notion of struc-
tural poverty applies broadly to large groups of artists.
The main evidence that bolsters this chapter’s theses – structural
poverty and that ﬁnancial assistance for the arts only leads to more
artists – is an indirect corroboration. Because as more money is pumped
into the art world, the artist’s average income does not as a consequence
increase, and because the number of hours average artists spend every
week making art remains the same, there is only one possible outcome:
an increase in the number of artists. This is what happened. The amount
130
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

of art subsidies per inhabitant, and to a lesser degree, the amount of
money spent on the arts per inhabitant, has risen substantially in all of
the western countries during the second half of the twentieth century.
Meanwhile, artists’ incomes have remained relatively low or have even
gone down (in real terms). This means that the total number of artists
must have risen.
This theory implies that increased subsidization and other types of
incomes to the arts have led to a corresponding growth in the number of
artists. As we shall see, measuring the numbers of actual artists over time
is problematic. Nevertheless, researchers generally assume that in the
West the number of artists has risen spectacularly since the Second World
War and that there is currently an ‘oversupply’ of artists.12 The conclu-
sion is that the arts are like a bottomless pit. In general, more money
spent on the arts per capita – whether its from consumers, donors, or
governments – does not raise the average incomes of artists; instead it
just increases the number of artists, including a larger number of poor
artists per hundred thousand inhabitants, and therefore to more poverty
(thesis 44).13 Poverty in the arts is structural (thesis 45).14
4
The Number of Artists Adjusts to Subsidy Levels
It is important to realize that the thesis that more money leads to more
artists and not higher incomes, doesn’t only mean subsidies but all forms
of income. (Take two imaginary countries where the number of artists is
higher than in other countries. This fact can be due to above-average per
capita subsidization in one country and above-average spending on the
arts in the second.) Nevertheless, in the following sections I shall concen-
trate on subsidization (including social welfare), rather than on spending
and donations, because the goal of subsidization is often the raising of
incomes in the arts and because subsidization expenditures are more
easily inﬂuenced by politics than either spending or donations.15
More arts subsidies doesn’t increase artists’ average incomes; it only
leads to more work hours spent on art.16 The main evidence for this
thesis is the indirect proof presented in the previous section. What is the
impact of speciﬁc subsidies in speciﬁc countries?
Refutable hypotheses based on the thesis can either be synchronic or
diachronic. On the one hand, geographical (synchronic) comparisons
could be produced. In the previous section, I produced a rough syn-
chronic comparison by stating that in countries with ample subsidization
artists’ incomes are the same or lower than in countries with less subsi-
dization.17 A more detailed analysis would compare numbers of artists
131
THE NUMBER OF ARTISTS ADJUSTS TO SUBSIDY LEVELS

working in different art forms in, say, the us and one or more European
countries. This would test the prediction that in a country like the
Netherlands with large subsidy levels, the number of artists per hundred
thousand inhabitants is higher than in the us.18
Or one can attempt to produce (diachronic) comparisons over time in
one country. If the level of subsidization (or social welfare or donations
or spending) in a particular country suddenly increased (or decreased)
the total number of artists would have to increase (or decrease), as well,
while income remained largely the same. Because the conclusion regard-
ing the relation between arts, money and numbers of artists refers to
long-term employment, the change had to be drastic, with other circum-
stances remaining unchanged or changing at a steady rate.
This latter situation is rare. The main problem is however, how to
count the artists. This remains extremely difﬁcult because a) diplomas
do not reveal who is a professional artist, b) many professional artists are
self-employed and unafﬁliated, and c) many artists earn most of their
income from second jobs and thus often do not appear in statistics.
Therefore if countries count artists at all, the strategies vary greatly from
country to country.19 So a conclusive test of our thesis remains outside
the realm of possibility. Nevertheless, on the basis of personal observa-
tions and discussions with other observers, it is possible to gather some
initial data, inconclusive as this evidence must remain, but at least it
lends our thesis some plausibility. For instance, in comparing the us and
the Netherlands, few observers would disagree with the observation that
subsidy levels in the us are lower than they are in the Netherlands and so
is the number of artists per hundred thousand inhabitants.
But making a diachronic comparison within one country is almost as
problematic. One could try to study the effects over time of drastic
changes in subsidization on numbers of artists. In this case, one would
need to take consistent counts of artists over a sufﬁciently long period of
time.20 These kinds of ﬁgures are very difﬁcult to come by. Nevertheless,
I will examine a few instances when drastic changes occurred in the
Dutch art-subsidization ‘landscape’ since the Second World War, in rela-
tion to available data on numbers of artists.
5
Subsidies in the Netherlands Have Increased the Number of Artists
Without Reducing Poverty
In order to demonstrate the plausibility of the thesis that more subsidies
leads to more artists and vice versa, I will ﬁrst discuss the effects of the
introduction and growth of a particular Dutch subsidy plan of the visual
132
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

arts, the so-called bkr, which existed from 1949 to 1987. It is a well-
documented case of a major overhaul in the subsidization of visual
artists in the Netherlands.
Gradually between 1949 and 1956, the Dutch government developed
an extremely generous subsidy plan for visual artists, the so-called bkr.
The primary aim of the bkr plan was to offer temporary help to impov-
erished visual artists.21 This was emphasized by the fact that the money
came from the ministry of social welfare and not from the ministry of
culture. Professional visual artists earning less than a certain minimum
income were allowed to sell art to local governments in order to supple-
ment their income. If their work met certain rather low criteria, local
governments were obliged to buy the art offered to them.
According to this book’s theory, this kind of ﬁnancial assistance plan
should encourage more people to remain or become visual arts. Because
no consistent ﬁgures on numbers of Dutch visual artists exist for this
period, it is impossible to appraise whether this is indeed what happened.
The fact however, is that the number of participating artists increased
from 200 in 1960 to 3800 in 1983, which means it is highly likely that
the total number of visual artists increased far more than the demand for
art work in this same period.22 The main evidence is indirect, however:
during the same period ﬁgures of students enrolled in the ﬁne or
‘autonomous’ departments at the Dutch art academies grew strongly. In
fact, the growth rate was 60% higher than the average growth rate for
technical and vocational training enrollments during that same period.23
This implies that the arts became more attractive and this led to increases
in the total number of artists.24 Therefore, even without strong evidence,
almost everybody concerned admits that the bkr plan was (partly)
responsible for the huge increases in the number of visual artists in the
Netherlands during that period of time.
The effect of the termination of the bkr plan represents our second
example. Because the number of artists increased and more and more
artists began to utilize the bkr plan, it eventually became too expensive.
This led to the gradual termination of the plan between 1983 and 1987.
During this period, overall government spending on the visual arts went
down approximately 20%. (Visual artists were partly compensated via
other newer subsidies. Otherwise, the reductions would have been even
larger.25) The change over was relatively abrupt, taking place over a
much shorter period of time than the earlier expansion of the program.
And so, if our thesis is correct, the reductions should have caused, with
some delay, a decrease or at least a deceleration of growth in the total
number of visual artists.
Most signiﬁcantly the strong growth in enrollment ﬁgures to ﬁne arts
133
SUBSIDIES HAVE INCREASED THE NUMBER OF ARTISTS

departments at art schools stopped in the years around the conclusion of
the program. The yearly increase in enrollment ﬁgures began to normal-
ize and resemble those of other technical and vocational training
schools. Moreover, more of the artists who utilized the bkr plan, left the
arts within ten years after the program’s termination than would have
left if the plan had been continued.26 Therefore, the numbers of visual
artists not only increased less rapidly because fewer people were
enrolling in the visual arts, but also because more people departed. (As
one might expect, given the analysis in chapter 4, most of the ex-users of
the wik plan who remained artists found their way to other government
subsidies, while only a small minority among them adopted a new strat-
egy by orienting themselves more towards the market.27)
The third example involves the 1999 introduction of a new program
for all Dutch artists, the so-called wik plan. In the Netherlands as well as
other countries, many artists have managed to continue to work as
artists thanks to social beneﬁts. For a long time the Dutch authorities
closed their eyes to this abuse of social beneﬁts. Nevertheless, the author-
ities felt that this kind of illegal abuse of the welfare system could not
continue forever. Therefore, they made it more difﬁcult for artists to con-
tinue receiving social beneﬁts, while simultaneously offering an attrac-
tive alternative to artists in the form of the wik plan. It applies to all
artists, writers, performers, visual artists, etc. Basically the participants
in the wik plan receive social beneﬁt legally for a limited number of years
without ever having to apply for other jobs. However they must earn at
least a minimum income in the arts. In this manner, artists are encour-
aged to begin to acclimate themselves to the realities of the market. If
after the end of the wik years artists still can’t earn a living from their
art, they are not allowed to re-register for social beneﬁts and have to ﬁnd
employment outside the realm of the arts. (The artists I know who make
use of this program are not particularly concerned about the limited time
period. They assume that by then Parliament will have amended or
extended the program or have come up with something else to keep them
going in the arts.)
Although the new plan is supposed to lead to net savings, the opposite
is more likely to occur. Because of a number of amendments that were
added by the Dutch Parliament, the new plan has become quite attractive
for artists. In the future, a diachronic comparison of money ﬂows and
numbers of artists will hopefully determine whether this program actu-
ally encourages or discourages people from entering the arts. At the time
of writing this book, the only data that exists is for the ﬁrst year of the
program, 1999.28 In that ﬁrst year, some 4000 Dutch artists had already
made use of this program. It turns out that 58% of the applicants had
134
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

previously received social beneﬁts, while 19% were recent graduates of
art schools, while 23% did not ﬁt into either of these categories.
It is too early to reach ﬁrm conclusions based solely on the results of
the ﬁrst year, but in my view, the latter two percentages are exceptionally
high. It is hard to believe that without the wik plan all of those who ﬁn-
ished school would have made their way to the social security ofﬁce.
Some probably would have quit the arts, while others may have been able
to make it without the wik plan. This applies even more emphatically to
the 23% who were already artists but who were not receiving social ben-
eﬁts at the time they applied for the wik. It’s hard to believe that all these
artists had unexpected downturns in earnings and therefore would have
been candidates for social beneﬁts.
In talking to colleagues in the arts who currently receive wik beneﬁts
and had not been receiving social beneﬁts prior to applying for the wik,
it seems that most of them had not suffered any dramatic decreases in
income. Instead they quite strategically applied for this new program
because it was the best choice among their alternatives. To them the wik
is helpful because it enables artists to reduce their hours spent working
second jobs or producing ‘commercial’ artwork. In short, it enables them
to spend their time making ﬁne art. This also applies to certain groups of
artists like writers and cabaret performers in the Netherlands who could
not qualify for this kind of subsidies before. Therefore it seems likely that
the new program will only lead to more overcrowding.
The fourth example rests on a rough synchronic comparison.
Although performing artists in the Netherlands earn the same or less
than in comparable countries, many foreign artists work in the Nether-
lands. Naturally this is most applicable for art forms that do not require
language, such as dance, mime, and instrumental music. In dance – both
at art colleges and in Dutch production companies – the percentage of
foreign performers is often greater than 90%, in mime it can be more
than 50%, while it is relatively high in a number of music areas.
Although foreigners in art schools pay higher tuition fees than Dutch res-
idents, their education is still subsidized. More importantly, art compa-
nies receive generous subsidies in the Netherlands. Therefore, when for-
eign students are good (and most of these students are motivated and
talented, otherwise they wouldn’t have risked coming to the Nether-
lands), upon graduation, they stand more of a chance of ﬁnding paid
employment in the Netherlands than they would in their own countries.
(In Germany, for instance, subsidies are also generous, but foreigners are
not allowed to work in subsidized companies.) Therefore, the unusually
large presence of foreign artists in the Netherlands also adds to the plau-
sibility of the thesis that subsidies only leads to more artists.
135
SUBSIDIES HAVE INCREASED THE NUMBER OF ARTISTS

6
Subsidies Are a Signal that Governments Take Care of Artists
The conclusion of section 6.3 that poverty is built into the arts and that
any extra money for the arts has little effect on income and only leads to
increased numbers of artists refers to the long term and to the sum of all
subsidies, donations, and spending. It does not necessarily apply to any
speciﬁc subsidy or donation. Although it probably applies most strongly
to the Dutch subsidy plans discussed in the previous section, it may not
apply or hardly apply to certain other subsidies. In order to examine the
different short-term effects of changes in speciﬁc subsidies and donations
on the number of artists, it is useful to distinguish between the direct
effects and the indirect signaling effects of subsidization and donation.
First of all, changes have direct effects. For instance, if it is mainly suc-
cessful writers who beneﬁt from a certain type of subsidy or private
grant and if more money is made available for this grant or subsidy, the
direct effect would be that the income distribution among writers
becomes more skewed, while the number of writers hardly increases. It
follows that average incomes must rise, at least a little. If, however,
another subsidy or grant is instituted to relieve poverty, and mainly poor
and unsuccessful writers proﬁt from this program, then the direct effect
is that the number of artists increases, while average incomes remain the
same.
In the second place however, changes that become common knowl-
edge can often have a signaling effect. Such indirect effects of subsidies
and grants can easily outdo the direct effects. When a new award is insti-
tuted that might confer honor, fame and money on recipients, the direct
effect in the form of a raise in average income can be small, while the
indirect effect can be signiﬁcant due to so-called signaling. Because
would-be artists begin to believe that they can win these awards it
encourages more people to enter the arts and so the net effect is that aver-
age incomes decline. This applies to prestigious awards that are won
mostly by internationally successful artists such as the Booker Prize for
literature, as well as to numerous, more modest, and local rewards in all
areas of the arts. The latter awards are less lucrative, but are more
appealing because they seem to be less unattainable. In either case, the
stakes – both in terms of money and recognition – increase, therefore the
arts become more attractive, the number of artists increases and incomes
decline.29 The winner-takes-all principle and the inclination of artists to
take risks, further increase the impact of such awards systems on the
numbers and incomes of artists.
Most subsidies have both direct and signaling effects. As soon as
Robin in the illustration received his government grant, he decided to
136
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

spend more time on his art and quit his restaurant job. This is a direct
effect. But Robin’s grant also indicated that he might be better than other
artists and he mistakenly expected that the government would continue
to reward him. Any interest he may have had in the market receded even
further than would have been the case without the signal. So, because of
the signaling effects of certain subsidies artists’ average incomes can
actually decline.30
As has been previously noted, subsidies can increase levels of poverty
because the numbers of artists increase and thus lead to a condition
where there are more poor artists per hundred thousand inhabitants.
The signaling effect can even further exacerbate the effect of subsidies on
incomes because instead of the situation where there are more people
earning the same low income, incomes may actually decline.
7
Subsidies and Donations Intended to Alleviate Poverty Actually 
Exacerbate Poverty
As was noted earlier, the desire to raise artists’ incomes is the intended
function of many arts subsidies. Even when it isn’t the subsidy’s primary
function, it continues to play a secondary role. Policymakers who want
to eradicate artists’ low incomes usually turn to subsidies that offer
direct help to the target group. This implies that government interven-
tion tends to be supply-oriented; subsidies go to the poorer artists and art
institutions rather than to art consumers. And yet, because of their sig-
naling effects, these types of subsidies are more counterproductive than
other subsidies.
I will ﬁrst take another look at the direct effects. Contrary to the desire
of raising income levels, the direct effect of supply-oriented subsidies for
the average artist is an increase in the number of artists and not an
increase in average income.31 When Robin receives his subsidy and con-
sequently totally stops thinking about selling in the market, newcomers
immediately take his place. Thus the income distribution and average
incomes remain the same, but the number of poor artists increases and so
does poverty.
Supply and demand subsidies are not that different when it comes to
their direct effects. For instance, a tax deduction on art purchases, a
demand subsidy commonly employed in the us, also has the direct effect
of primarily increasing the number of artists, while leaving income distri-
bution and average income untouched.32
In this context, the signaling effect that subsidies have on art students
is important. When education is subsidized, this seems to imply that
137
SUBSIDIES AND DONATIONS EXACERBATE POVERTY

society takes some responsibility for the schools and its students. There-
fore, subsidized education indirectly suggests – at least somewhat – that
would-be students expect to ﬁnd some form of employment in their
chosen ﬁelds after graduation. Or, if there are in fact no employment
opportunities, students expect their government to take care of them
upon graduation. (This expectation is probably not altogether wrong
considering the sums of money governments and government-related
institutions provide for programs that are created to deal with the poor
ﬁnancial prospects of many artists. Some examples of these programs
are: the wik in the Netherlands, the French ‘Intermittent de Spectacle’
and the ‘Künstler Social Kasse’ in Germany.)
Subsidized art education also insinuates that the arts, like other pro-
fessions, are now more ‘democratized’ and that almost anybody can
become an artist and earn a living as an artist. But whereas in other pro-
fessions most of the time the large majority of graduates can make a
living as a professional, in the arts only a small minority of those who
graduate will make it as a professional artist. And so it’s hardly amazing
to note that the arts are still less ‘democratized’ than other professions.
The parents of art students are still wealthier than the parents of stu-
dents in other comparable professions. Because these wealthier parents
can later assist their sons or daughters, the risks of going into a high-risk
occupation like the arts are reduced.
If we observe the signaling effect of supply and demand subsidies they
tend to vary however. Supply subsidies are usually part of well- publi-
cized nation-wide programs that artists can apply for and usually raise
artists’ general expectations. Well-publicized programs aimed directly at
artists broadcast the message that the government offers hope for ﬂedg-
ling artists. Subsidies for agents and brokers also tend to send a message
of hope albeit not as forcefully. The message coming from demand subsi-
dies such as tax deductions is least clear.33 Whereas artists and prospec-
tive artists are hardly aware of tax deductions for art consumers, they are
very aware of the nation-wide generous subsidy programs available to
artists. They include the aforementioned wik plan and other Dutch sub-
sidy programs, the French ‘Intermittent de Spectacle’,34 the heavily sub-
sidized ‘Künstler Social Kasse’ in Germany, the American nea grants
system35 and, to a lesser degree, also the plans of the Regional Arts
Boards in Britain.36
Many artists are aware of these programs, because they personally
take advantage of them. Plus, these subsidy programs are constantly dis-
cussed inside and outside the art world. Regardless of the programs’
intentions, they spread the message that society looks after its artists
whatever their number. Becoming an artist is a risky endeavor, but subsi-
138
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

dies (and social beneﬁts) make it seem less risky. ‘The government will
always be there to come to the artist’s rescue.’
Because subsidization does not boost incomes, this signal is nothing
but misinformation. Moreover, no government is capable or willing to
go on supporting ever-increasing numbers of artists. The signaling effect
of generally known artists’ subsidy programs just adds to the existing
misinformation and in doing so, make the arts seem even more attrac-
tive. Subsidies for artists lead to more artists, lower incomes, and more
poverty. (Thesis 46).
The present analysis leads us to expect that the total government arts
subsidies program in the us with its emphasis on tax deduction leads to
less overcrowding, and higher average incomes for artists than in
Europe, notwithstanding the intentions of European governments to
reduce poverty among artists.
The goals of most subsidies however, is not only to raise artists’
income, but to serve a variety of functions. Thus an analysis of costs and
beneﬁts could help with the selection process of different types of supply
and demand subsidies as well as the over-all package of subsidies. In that
context, an inventory and assessment of possible signaling effects is
essential. (Subsidies can produce many unintended side-effects.37)
Governments can choose from a variety of subsidies. They can also
choose whether to provide more subsidies and less spending on art or less
subsidies and more spending. A cost-beneﬁt analysis could perhaps pro-
vide a more informed choice in this matter. For instance, a government
could begin by purchasing more visual art as an alternative to more sub-
sidies for visual artists. Demand subsidies, such as tax deductions, can
serve as another alternative. (It may turn out that demand subsidies, are
actually less attractive than they appear to be on the basis of the previous
analysis. The effect on demand is probably small, while there are impor-
tant negative effects, most notably on the general distribution of
income.)
Finally, it is doubtful however, whether there is any speciﬁc subsidy
strategy that can have much of an impact on average income in the long
run. In the exceptional economy of the arts, the basic variable is not
income but numbers. If art spending per capita is the same in two coun-
tries but country one provides more in art subsidies, then this country
will also have more artists, and among them, more poor artists. Poverty
is built into the arts. It follows then, that if the sole aim is to reduce
poverty in the arts then the best policy is to reduce overall subsidization
of the arts (thesis 47).
139
SUBSIDIES AND DONATIONS EXACERBATE POVERTY

8
Low-priced Education Signals that it is Safe to Become an Artist
Subsidized education, state employment programs, and social beneﬁts
all have a different effect on income and employment in the arts than sub-
sidies do. That is because these programs serve a broader range of
groups. While subsidies for the arts make the arts more attractive and
therefore other professions slightly less attractive, subsidized higher edu-
cation and social beneﬁts affect all professions. Nevertheless, it appears
that the effects of these broader-based programs on the arts are more
conspicuous.
I will ﬁrst look at higher education. In Europe, due to grants for stu-
dents or subsidies for educational institutions, the relative price of higher
education has dropped considerably in the twentieth century, and most
dramatically in the decades after the Second World War. The ﬁnancial
aspect of a higher education has become less signiﬁcant for parents. And
thus, less afﬂuent social groups began entering the higher education
system and the total number of students increased. In other words,
higher education was ‘democratized’. In the immediate post-war period,
there were plenty of employment opportunities for the increasing num-
bers of graduates. When on occasion, employment opportunities
declined in a certain profession – for instance, the 1970s was a decade of
low employment opportunities for graduating sociologists – enrollment
ﬁgures quickly declined in response. In this sense the market worked
well. And if the system worked less successfully, authorities seldom hesi-
tated to redirect students to other ﬁelds. When giving information had
too little effect, a numerus clausus has been utilized regularly in most
European countries.
The ﬁne arts case was different however. Here enrollments of arts stu-
dents just continued rising. No government tried to deter students from
studying art, even though it was clear that only a few graduates would
ever be able to make a living in the arts.38 There was also no pressure
from professional artists to reduce enrollments to art colleges. Admis-
sions restrictions other than those based on talent were taboo because
these would be contrary to the spirit of autonomy in the arts. Therefore,
in the short run, admissions adjusted to a particular schools’ capacities.
And in the long run, the size and number of schools adapted to the
number of talented youngsters who were willing to pay the (limited)
tuition fees.39
In this context, the signaling effect that subsidies have on art students
is important. When education is subsidized, this seems to imply that
society takes some responsibility for the schools and its students. There-
fore subsidized education indirectly suggests, at least a little, that would-
140
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

be students can expect to ﬁnd employment after graduation in their
chosen ﬁelds. Or, if there are no employment opportunities after all, stu-
dents expect that the government will still take care of them upon gradu-
ation. (This expectation is not altogether wrong given the sums of money
governments and government-related institutions spend on programs
aimed at relieving the bad ﬁnancial situation of artists, like the wik in the
Netherlands, the French ‘Intermittent de Spectacle’ and ‘Künstler Social
Kasse’ in Germany.)
Subsidized art education also suggests that the art profession, like
other professions, is now ‘democratized’ and that anybody can become
an artist and make a living as an artist. But whereas in other professions
most of the time the large majority of graduates can make a living as a
professional, in the arts only a small minority of those who graduate will
make it as a professional artist. And so it’s hardly amazing to note that
the arts are still less ‘democratized’ than other professions. The parents
of art students are still wealthier than the parents of students in compa-
rable professions.40 Because these wealthy parents can later assist their
sons or daughters the risks of going into a high-risk occupation as the
arts is reduced.
The presence of highly subsidized art education regardless of future
employment sends the wrong signals to potential artists. It contributes
to an overcrowded ﬁeld and low incomes for many artists (thesis 48.)
9
Social Beneﬁts Signal that it is Safe to Become an Artist
During this same period, when higher education became affordable and
thus made the arts more attractive, the growth of employment beneﬁts
and social security beneﬁts affected artists more than other profession-
als. This was caused by the inclination of artists to forsake money in
combination with the artist’s survival constraint. Generally speaking,
the social security or unemployment beneﬁt allowance is sufﬁcient to
overcome the survival constraint. These beneﬁts allow artists to work
full time in the arts even without other outside income. That means that
if artists can count on social beneﬁts, art as a profession becomes a much
less risky proposition. More social beneﬁts induces more people to enter
the arts and as a consequence, more people earn lower incomes and
poverty in the arts increases. (Thesis 49)
Many artists use social beneﬁts, unemployment beneﬁts, or related
government money to ﬁnance their activities. The government often
turns a blind eye to these activities or artists manage to mislead adminis-
trators. In the 1980s in the Netherlands, social beneﬁts money was gen-
141
SOCIAL BENEFITS SIGNAL THAT IT IS SAFE TO BECOME AN ARTIST

erous and the rules were ﬂexible. Thousands of artists, from dancers to
poets, could make art thanks to the generous social beneﬁts program.
Presently the beneﬁts program is more restrictive. It is more common
now that artists be required to seek alternative forms of employment.
However, new programs like the aforementioned wik plan have replaced
more conventional social beneﬁts in the Netherlands. Moreover, in the
Netherlands as well as in other countries, many artists continue to ﬁnd
new ways to go on receiving social beneﬁts.41
Unemployment beneﬁts is a form of indirect subsidization that is
widely used by performing artists and performing arts institutions in the
us and a number of European countries. Beneﬁts are given for a limited
period, for instance six months. The use of these beneﬁts is legal. Author-
ities sometimes devise attractive programs (such as the aforementioned
‘Intermittent de Spectacle’ program in France) geared toward perform-
ing artists. These programs have a powerful impact on the behavior of
artists and art companies. For instance, since the institution of the ‘Inter-
mittent de Spectacle’ employment contracts have become much shorter
in France, which means that performers receive unemployment beneﬁts
for a larger part of the year and companies can pay them less.42 This is
not unlike the situation in the us. (Britain approached the situation from
a different angle, which made it more attractive for performing artists to
become self-employed.)
This doesn’t only involve social security beneﬁts. It’s amazing to see
how eventually a disproportionately large share of almost any subsidy or
beneﬁt, aiming to reduce general poverty or unemployment, starts to
pour into the arts. For instance, many countries have developed pro-
grams to use money from beneﬁts to ﬁnance the wages of employees who
were unemployed for a relatively long period. Thanks to subsidization,
they receive low subsidized wages, while employers end up paying little
or nothing. The wages are often so low that the jobs remain unattractive
for unemployed non-artists, who know the prevailing wages for these
kinds of jobs. But in the arts incomes are low anyway and a subsidized
poorly paid job is more attractive than doing the same arts-related job as
a volunteer. And so that’s why art companies and art institutions are the
ﬁrst to apply for these kinds of subsidies and how a relatively large pro-
portion of these subsidies ends up going to the arts.43
In most of the wealthier countries, disproportionately many artists
receive social beneﬁts and unemployment beneﬁts and a disproportion-
ately large share of social assistance ends up going to the arts (thesis 50).
142
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

10 Artists Supplement Incomes with Family Wealth and Second Jobs
Even when artists receive subsidies, they often earn so little that one has
to wonder how they manage to survive. For instance, the average visual
artist in the Netherlands earns (including subsidies!) barely enough to
cover costs, with almost nothing left to live off of. The median income
(including subsidies, after costs) is close to zero.44 More than 40% of
Dutch artists don’t earn enough from their art to cover the cost of
making the art itself. This means that at bottom these artists are actually
paying to be an artist. On top of that, more than 75% do not earn
enough to earn a basic living.45 How can they go on being artists if,
despite donations and subsidies, they cannot make a living? In other
words, how can such poverty continue to exist?
The superﬁcial answer is simple: Poverty among artists is only possible
if they manage to ﬁnd other sources of income to make up the deﬁcit in
their budgets. What other sources exist? Mainly, the ﬁnancial aid comes
from the artists themselves and from families and friends. Artists trans-
fer non-arts income or arts-related earnings into their art production
budgets. This may include savings from previous employment, beneﬁts,
or an inheritance.
Although the role of families funding the arts was probably more per-
vasive in the past, its current role should not be underestimated.46 First of
all, inherited money enables a number of artists to work full-time (or at
least more hours) on their art. And, although family members seldom
supply regular ﬁnancial assistance anymore, they do still come to the
artist’s rescue in emergency situations. Probably the most important
source of ﬁnancial assistance is the artist’s partner, however. Often this
kind of assistance is built right into a couple’s budget. For instance, the
partner who holds down an ‘ordinary’ job, naturally pays most of the
recurring bills.
Inheritances and other types of family assistance make the art profes-
sion a slightly less risky endeavor. This helps explain the fact that at least
40% more arts students have parents with a higher than average educa-
tion than other students do.47 Parents with higher educations earn more
and are more able to assist their sons and daughters in their artistic pur-
suits when they can’t make ends meet.48
But the majority of artists who cannot earn a living off their art and
who have no family wealth to fall back on have to ﬁnd a second job if
they hope to continue making their art. Evidence reveals that the extent
of multiple jobholding in the arts is large and increasing.49 A survey of
American artists in New England reveals that in 1981 76% of all artists
had a non-arts second job.50 In 1993, among Australian performing
143
ARTISTS SUPPLEMENT INCOMES WITH FAMILY WEALTH AND SECOND JOBS

artists, almost 90% had an arts-related or non-arts second job.51 Due to
the comparatively higher level of subsidization, these percentages are
lower in a country like the Netherlands. Nevertheless, in 1998 around
33% of Dutch visual artists had an arts-related second job and spent 10
hours a week doing arts-related work. Moreover 29% of Dutch visual
artists worked at a non-arts job on which they spent an average of 17
hours a week.52 According to another poll, 60% of Dutch visual artists
who were still employed in the arts a year and a half after graduation had
a non-arts second job.53
Artists teaching art has been common practice for a long time, but the
fact that so many artists are now supplementing their art-generated
incomes with second jobs appears to be a phenomenon of the last quarter
century. To some extent, second jobs seem to have replaced family-
related ﬁnancial assistance. Nevertheless, it is even more the present
large number of artists who consequently earn too little from their art
that has forced artists into seeking out second jobs.
The majority of artists have non-arts related second jobs out of neces-
sity; they no doubt would prefer to work more hours on their own art.54
The common types of employment such as restaurant work, cleaning,
and other forms of menial labor neither offer much satisfaction nor pay
very well. As we have already noted, as soon as their income rises and
exceeds their survival constraint, they reduce their hours on these second
jobs in order to work more hours on their art.
Because second jobs are often regular jobs, they offer some security.
Thus, they’re attractive because of the income but also because they
reduce the risks involved in choosing a career in the arts a little. In this
respect, it is worth noting that the risks involved in the arts profession
have increased even more over the past thirty years, because the number
of regular jobs became smaller in the performing arts and artists had
little choice but to become self-employed.55 Many performing artists lost
steady jobs and now ﬁnd themselves working freelance.
11 Artists Reduce Risks by Multiple Jobholding
Arts-related jobs such as teaching art differ in a number of respects from
non-arts jobs. Teaching art usually pays better and offers more satisfac-
tion than, for instance, cleaning.56 Therefore, it is understandable that
when artists start to earn more they sooner give up non-arts jobs than
arts related jobs. The difference is also evidenced by the fact that art stu-
dents sometimes try get a teaching degree as well.57 These students
intend to work as full-time artists if things work out, but if they don’t,
144
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

they are assured of a pleasant second job as an art teacher. Moreover,
part-time artists who hold down teaching positions for a number of years
usually make less of an effort in order to pursue their career in art. This
means that artists do not always cut back their hours on interesting
second jobs when their ﬁnancial prospects suddenly improve. (Whereas
internal subsidization is an unintended by-product of regular teaching
jobs in Europe, at American universities teaching jobs for artists are
designed to enable such cross-ﬁnance.)
By making certain occupational choices artists learn to diversify their
risks.58 They reduce their risks by multiple jobholding outside the arts, as
well as inside the arts. They do so by choosing a certain product-mix or
combination of activities. For instance, a musician maintains a regular
job as a studio musician and earns some extra income by playing in a
band. Because these activities demand different skills, she maintains
these skills and consequently increases her own chances of continuing
her work as an artist. When this band ultimately becomes successful, she
learns some managerial skills. She then gets a job teaching, as well, and
ultimately ends up sitting on a government committee which decides on
grants for young musicians. This is a form of hybridization: artists com-
bine various artistic skills with arts-related skills or perhaps even non-
arts skills.59 Modern artists have grown versatile. Sometimes versatility
is more than just some survival strategy. Some artists, in fact, ﬁnd this
kind of diversity rewarding in and of itself.
The number of arts-related jobs that are government-ﬁnanced or sub-
sidized, has grown. Over the past 25 years, many new jobs emerged in the
world of art-mediation. Meanwhile, the number of teaching positions
has also increased. It’s plausible that the urgency of self-employed artists
seeking more stable forms of employment has contributed to the emer-
gence of a so-called ‘experts regime’ in the arts.60 These developments
may have indirectly exacerbated the already large burgeoning artist pop-
ulation or ‘the self-congesting spiral of oversupply’ as Menger calls it.61
A kind of hybrid artist is now emerging on the scene. These artists
have attractive and well-paid non-arts and arts-related jobs. Sometimes
they have managed to pursue an altogether different profession as well.
These hybrid artists are multiple jobholders by choice. They are deﬁ-
nitely not the self-sacriﬁcing artist of old, who considered a restaurant
job as a necessary evil. Hybrid artists instead choose a sensible portfolio
of activities. This kind of artist is still in the minority, but their numbers
are growing.
Suppose that this new type of artist were to eventually become more
common. Then the hourly income earned from art would decline even
further because these artists would have even less of a need to earn a
145
ARTISTS REDUCE RISKS BY MULTIPLE JOBHOLDING

living from their art. But because these artists earn good wages in attrac-
tive non-arts jobs and, at the same time, don’t reduce the numbers of
hours they spend working in their non-arts jobs as they begin earning
more, the average incomes of artists will begin to look almost normal.62
Modern multiple jobholding artists are relatively well off and can afford
to make art; as artists they can afford to be ‘selﬂess’ and to dedicate
themselves to their art. They usually earn very little directly from their
own art, but because they have well paid second jobs they don’t need to.
If this form of multiple jobholding becomes the trend, then the arts will
again become an occupation for those who can afford it – the wealthy, in
other words.
12 Artists Could be Consumers rather than Producers
Judging from the ﬁgures showing average income, the arts are an unprof-
itable production sector. Many artists grow old without ever having been
able to make a living from their art. Others leave later in their careers
than they would have had they been unsuccessful in another profes-
sion.63 Artists are then, generally speaking, poor. The notion of multiple
jobholding however, suggests an alternative interpretation of low
incomes. It can be argued that the arts are not as unproﬁtable as it may
seem. This is the case if many artists were not tabulated as producers but
as consumers. Such artists are producers in their arts-related and non-
arts ‘second’ jobs, but in making art they are consumers. Part of what
they earn as producers in the other jobs they end up spending on their
‘hobby’, making art. Sometimes they get lucky and they earn a little extra
income from this hobby but on the whole they remain consumers.
In this alternative interpretation of the economy of the arts, failed
artists, or artists who cannot make a living from their art, are ‘happy’
amateurs instead of ‘poor’ and ‘miserable’ professionals. They are in
actuality then, part of the huge army of amateurs – people who spend
their time and money making art.
This interpretation is in line with the way standard economics draws a
boundary between producers and consumers and between professionals
and amateurs. Producers earn money and consumers spend money.64
Artists, who against their better judgment, go on spending money on
their profession, end up being mercilessly categorized as consumers.
(Even when they argue to be investing in future success, economists
would still consider them consumers, as long as their rates of return are
considerable lower than corresponds with normal business practice.)
Therefore a large number of artists would stop being producers and
146
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

could be dismissed from the analysis. The resulting economy of the arts
would be decidedly less unproﬁtable and less exceptional.
However, the existing distinction between professionals and amateurs
in the arts cannot be dismissed this easily. This distinction is socially con-
structed; it has a long history. It certainly does not conform to the theo-
retical division offered by economics. At present, in order for somebody
to be called an artist, one’s professional skills are more important than
the speciﬁcs of one’s education or income. The professionalism of artists
depends primarily on how well they relate to the work of peers and prede-
cessors. When they strive for peer recognition this is seen as a positive
characteristic of being a professional. An artist’s education can also help
inﬂuence one’s professional status, but it is not a sine qua non. Economic
qualiﬁcations are not totally irrelevant, but their importance is relatively
insigniﬁcant. Earning one’s livelihood from one’s art (or having that
intention) adds very little to a particular artist’s professional status. It’s
not uncommon in the profession that colleagues consider commercially
successful artists as amateurs, while conversely they view certain com-
mercially unsuccessful artists as highly honored professionals.
Although the distinction between professionals and amateurs offered
by economists is unsuitable for this study, it does help put other distinc-
tions into perspective and may ultimately lead to a different assessment
of the artist’s situation. Because there are artists who hold down lucra-
tive second jobs and can thus afford to make art without making money,
poverty in the arts is less severe than it appears to be (thesis 51).
13 Is there an Artist ‘Oversupply’ or are Low Incomes Compensated For?
The use of an old accounting trick of turning artists into amateurs will
not solve the ﬁnancial problems that continue to plague the arts. Never-
theless, it’s possible that, despite the fact that poverty literally does exist,
artists are not necessarily worse off than people in other professions.
Artists may be poor in ﬁnancial terms but rich in terms of alternative
income sources. Are there still ‘too many’ artists, when overall income is
taken into account? In this respect, can one still refer to an art and artist
‘oversupply’ or to the notion that the arts are just too attractive for their
own good?
In connection with low income, it is common to point out the ‘over-
supply’ or ‘excess-supply’ of art and artists. This means that if there were
far less artists, producing far less art, hourly wages could attain parity
with other professions.65 But the entire notion of oversupply is probably
a faulty one.
147
IS THERE AN ARTIST ‘OVERSUPPLY’ OR ARE LOW INCOMES COMPENSATED FOR?

As was made clear in previous chapters, professional artists don’t just
earn incomes, but are also compensated via non-monetary rewards, and
they probably receive more of these kinds of rewards than others in com-
parable professions. So, on the one hand, it can be argued that low
incomes are compensated by non-monetary rewards. Through personal
satisfaction, recognition, or status gained from their artwork and
through the ‘kicks’ that one gets from taking chances, artists can be said
to exchange money for other rewards. Artists would then compensate
themselves for their own ‘poverty’. On the other hand, it could be that
artists are less well-informed than other professionals. The mythology of
the arts leads to the proliferations of misinformation. Due to this misin-
formation artists are ‘lured’ into the arts and a life of poverty that goes
uncompensated.
Both of these interpretations of poverty in the arts are undoubtedly
valid. The question is whether one is more relevant. As far as I can see,
there is no way of producing a satisfactorily objective answer. People can
only argue in behalf of the plausibility of their own particular opinion.
Personal attitudes and experiences inevitably color people’s opinions.
For instance, people who idealize artists see only free and happy artists
and tend to overlook the details of actual poverty. The existence of non-
monetary rewards assures that the art world remains a harmonious
world and perpetrates the notion that there is no such thing as an artist
oversupply. Other people however, who are easily impressed by the sight
of artistic frustration and suffering, will probably be more attuned to
actual poverty. Because of misinformation there are too many artists.
The picture people have of the art world also depends on the artists
they happen to know. Successful artists send a general message that they
are in fact totally well-informed about the matters at hand. Their success
can be viewed as the result of their hard work and dedication. They per-
petuate the belief that before their success, it was personal satisfaction
that kept them going as compensation for their low incomes. Failed
artists however send out a different signal, but, strangely enough, they
stick to the same myths. These ‘losers’ cannot avoid exhibiting their bit-
terness, but they seldom blame the art world for their failure. They never
conclude that maybe there are just too many artists. Instead they blame
themselves for a lack of dedication.
Large segments of the poor artist population continue to express
extreme indignation regarding any developments that may possibly
hinder their already pathetic position in the art world. Even genuine con-
cern is often viewed with great suspicion. Many artists’ lives are given
over to a permanent state of indignation. These are the artists who feel
profoundly cheated and continue to work too hard for too little remuner-
148
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

ation. It suggests that misinformation plays a signiﬁcant role in the arts.
For me this phenomenon of permanent indignation based on misinfor-
mation makes the notion of real poverty the more convincing one. There-
fore I attach more importance to the many myths surrounding the arts
and the misinformation they produce. (In the chapters to come I shall
continue to stress how the myths surrounding the arts contribute to its
general attractiveness.)
Nevertheless, even if the poverty of a majority of poor artists is real,
this does not apply to all poor artists. It certainly does not apply to the
new type of hybrid artists whose low hourly income in the arts is supple-
mented by income from attractive other jobs. The hybrid artist chooses
his or her portfolio of job options more or less deliberately and certainly
not from a lack of alternatives. These artists appear to be less prone to the
effects of misinformation. If they ever become a majority of the ‘poor’
artists, the notion of uncompensated poverty would lose its signiﬁcance.
However, for the time being, many artists continue to have a difﬁcult
time supplementing their art income with boring second jobs. As long as
their art income remains too meager to earn a living from, low incomes
are not fully compensated by other rewards.
Whether a low monetary income in the arts implies that artists are
worse off than others, whether there is an oversupply of art and artists
and whether the arts are just too attractive, depends on the notion of
whether poverty is due to misinformation and therefore real, or is com-
pensated for by non-monetary rewards (thesis 52).
14 Conclusion
Because artists are inclined to forsake money and because of the presence
of misinformation, poverty in the sense of low hourly incomes is built
into the arts, at least into the arts as we know them. And so is the over-
supply of art and artists, which the economist in the previous chapter
found difﬁcult to comprehend. To a lesser degree, this also applies to
other arts-related professions. For instance, in many European and
American cities there are so many commercial galleries that average sales
are far too low to provide dealers with a normal income.
Many governments make it a priority to try to reduce poverty in the
arts through a variety of subsidy programs. This leads to the emergence
of a large gift sphere in the arts, and therefore low income in the arts
partly explain the large gift sphere. The economist, however, is correct in
claiming that government ﬁnancial assistance does not solve the problem
of poverty in the arts. On the contrary, subsidies actually attract more
149
CONCLUSION

would-be artists, and as a consequence, average incomes remain low and
the relative number of poor artists increases as does poverty.
Subsidies encourage artists to orient their activities towards the gov-
ernment instead of the market. For instance, Robin received a handsome
grant from the government, which allowed him to quit his second job. He
also decided to curtail his income-generating efforts in the market.
Because younger artists quickly take up whatever position he could have
occupied in the market, the number of poor artists actually increases.
Subsidies also convey the message that governments actually provide
for their artists, and so any increase in subsidies can stimulate a propor-
tionately larger increase in the total numbers of practicing artists as well
as lower their average income and ultimately cause more poverty. This is
more often the case with supply subsidies than with subsidies aimed at
intermediaries or consumers, for instance, in the form of tax deduc-
tions.66
The losses produced by the arts have to be ﬁnanced somehow. Hous-
ing, musical instruments, paint, canvases, and other art supplies all have
to be paid for. These losses are defrayed through gifts from partners, rel-
atives, and friends and through the process of internal subsidization by
artists themselves. Without this kind of support, the arts could not con-
tinue to survive in their current form. Presently the most important form
of internal subsidization or cross-ﬁnancing is derived from income gen-
erated by second jobs.
It could be argued that many artists are more active as consumers than
as producers of art. Their on-going endeavors cannot be interpreted as
sound investments. They are amateurs and consumers because they are
spending time and money on this hobby called art. Although this view
gives the entire notion of artistic activity a new spin, it’s a line of thinking
that is based too much on an unrealistic distinction between professional
and amateur. In practice, the distinction is socially constructed. And
becauseregulatingthenumbersofartistsisanathematothearts,thereare
more people working as professional artists than the market can support.
For artists to actually earn decent hourly wages, the number of artists
would have to go down considerably. This implies a current state of over-
production in the arts and an oversupply of artists. A career in the arts
remains just too attractive for its own good. However, low incomes in the
arts can also be seen from an entirely different angle. The hardships of
ﬁnancial poverty may be compensated by non-monetary rewards – such
as private satisfaction and status. Personally, however, I’m convinced
that a considerable part of poverty is not compensated for, and is exacer-
bated by the presence of misinformation; which, consequently, leads to
an oversupply of both art and artists.
150
STRUCTURAL POVERTY

The economy of the arts as we have portrayed it here does not leave
much room for the inﬂuence of governments and donors. The high status
accorded the arts, which affects both artists’ inclinations and the nature
of the misinformation, prevents change. Whether one emphasizes real
poverty or compensated poverty, the arts are unusually attractive. This
peculiar attribute makes the economy of the arts exceptional.
Discussion
1 What is your opinion: is poverty in the arts largely compensated
through non-monetary rewards or is this poverty real?
2 Where would you draw the line that distinguishes the passionate ama-
teur artist from the professional artist?
3 Do you think that the number of ﬁne artists with second jobs will con-
tinue to increase or will there be a return to a reality of full-time
artists?
4 If the government wants to spend more money to ultimately raise the
average income of artists, how would you advise the government?
151
CONCLUSION

Chapter 7
The Cost Disease
Do Rising Costs in the Arts Make Subsidization 
Necessary?
No Cost is too High When it Comes to High Quality
Ruth Towse told Alex the following story from the opera world. When
Samson and Delilah by Saint Saëns was staged by the Royal Opera House
in London it included a large chorus. All chorus members had expensive
ﬁtted silk dresses. The woman playing Delilah at one point complained that
her silk dress did not stand out enough from the other dresses. So they put
the expensive dresses with the exception of Delilah’s in a washing
machine. The effect of washing silk in a washing machine was as expected.
The point of whether Delilah was unreasonably demanding or right wasn’t
the issue; a small improvement had been bought at great expense. The
expense was unnecessary because, according to Ruth, cheap dresses
could have been made for the chorus members and the silk dresses could
have been saved for a later occasion. The problem could have been solved
for a lot less money. Plus had the designers been more cost-minded, they
would have thought twice about having all the silk dresses looking exactly
alike. What shocked Ruth was the total disregard for costs.
Costs are Irrelevant; Artistic Justiﬁcation is All that Matters
Alex’s friend, Gerald, is a composer of contemporary classical music.
When Gerald graduated from the conservatory, Alex heard the composi-
tion he’d written for his ﬁnal exam, as performed by a large student orches-
tra. Alex enjoyed it a lot. Since then, Gerald has written three more pieces
for a large orchestra. None of them have been performed yet. After that he
has also written eight pieces for small ensembles, of which seven have
been performed; some of them several times. So, compared to other
young composers he is relatively successful. Alex observes that part of the
trick must have been writing compositions that are less costly to perform.
Gerald is furious, and begins a long involved story explaining how his rea-
sons for writing for small ensembles were purely artistic. It was a ‘natural’
step in his artistic development and it had absolutely nothing to do with
lower expenses perhaps increasing the chances of getting his work per-
formed.
152

Alex tries to explain to Gerald about all those visual artists who right after
they graduate start right off painting huge museum-sized canvases only to
later reduce them to more consumable sizes, sizes more appropriate for
the homes of the well-to-do. These artists also deny that there’s any rela-
tionship between expenses and marketability. Is all this just coincidental?
Gerald says he doesn’t know about visual art, but in his case the adjust-
ments have certainly not been coincidental. They are based on his own
deliberate and purely artistic decisions.
Some weeks ago, Alex heard the performance of his latest work, which he
had written especially for a unique concert of contemporary music in the
Queen Elizabeth Hall in London. It was a work for harp, cello, violin, and
celeste. Alex noticed that the celeste was the sole electronically ampliﬁed
instrument among them. Alex asked Gerald about this afterwards. Gerald
felt really embarrassed. During the ﬁnal rehearsal, they discovered that
they were just not getting the right balance. The sound of the celeste was
not loud enough. He said that in writing the piece he had overestimated the
hall’s acoustic qualities. He at ﬁrst wanted to cancel his performance, but
the director convinced him that electronically amplifying the celeste could
provide a makeshift solution to the acoustic problem. The director assured
him the audience would have no problem with it. Gerald reluctantly agreed.
Speaking with Alex Gerald emphasized that he was not against electronic
ampliﬁcation in contemporary music, as long as the decision rests solely on
artistic considerations. In other words, ampliﬁcation should never be used
to cover up compositional defects, or to play in a larger hall with more
people present. Gerald still believes that he should have withdrawn his
contribution. By not doing so, he feels he has failed as an artist.
Why is it so important for artists to insist that cost considerations don’t
inﬂuence their work? Why does Gerald agree to allow his work to be
electronically ampliﬁed when it serves artistic purposes, but opposes its
use if the aim is to serve more people in a larger hall? Come to think of it,
is it possible to make purely artistic decisions independent of cost consid-
erations?
Costs in the arts rise faster than in most other production sectors. Do
rising costs help explain the high level of donations and subsidies, i.e., the
large gift sphere in the arts? And do rising costs also help explain the rela-
tively low average incomes of artists? Many art donations and subsidies
stem from a desire to preserve the high quality of art and the desire to
help poor artists. And so can we argue that because rising costs endanger
artistic quality and further reduce artists’ incomes, rising costs can be
used as an additional argument for subsidization? Or is it more an
excuse than an argument for subsidization? In order to answer these
153
THE COST DISEASE

questions, this chapter will attempt to put the notion of rising costs in the
arts in perspective.
As an artist, I believe that the existence of high quality art is essential,
essential for the well-being of individuals as well as society in general. If
rising costs begins to threaten the integrity and survival of art then subsi-
dies and donations are essential. Moreover, subsidies and donations are
also necessary to assure artistic freedom. As an artist, I insist that artists
must be free, and costs should not impinge on artistic freedoms. As an
economist, I point to the fact that in the past many art and non-art prod-
ucts have disappeared or became largely obsolete because of increased
expenses. Some examples include domestic servants, lady companions or
a shave at the barber. Subsidizing these kinds of activities has never been
seriously proposed. But if it were proposed, it would anyway have been
too expensive. Plus it would have been inefﬁcient to maintain these kinds
of activities through subsidization. I see no reason why the arts should be
any exception. As an economist, I think it’s best to let people decide for
themselves whether they still want to keep buying more expensive art
products or prefer to buy other products. Moreover, with respect to
artistic freedom I believe that all production, including artistic, ulti-
mately takes place within constraints because resources are limited.
There is no freedom without constraints.
1
‘Artistic Quality Should Remain the Aspiration, Regardless of the
Costs’
Many artists are easily insulted and reveal their indignation whenever
anyone suggests they cut their expenses or adjust their artistic choices
because of limited funds. “We’re not business people, we’re artists.” The
lack of concern about expenses is most prevalent in performing art insti-
tutions. The silk dress story occurred some twenty years ago, but it could
just as easily have happened today. The artists at an art institution often
feel superior to the non-artistic personnel. Worrying about expenses and
searching for funding is something let for others to deal with. This atti-
tude is somewhat understandable, as artists in art institutions do not
deal as directly with cost and revenue issues as, say, self-employed artists
do. Producers and ﬁnancial directors are positioned between the artist
and the market or between artists and donors. Instead of blaming them-
selves or the consumers, artists can always blame the administrators for
the lack of funds or for impinging on their artistic aspirations or, even
worse, for ‘killing art’ as if it were the personal fault of the administra-
tors that funds are not inﬁnite.
154
THE COST DISEASE

Although self-employed artists are more familiar with costs, they also
daydream about unlimited funds. They too can get pretty upset about
the ‘enormous injustice’ of not having sufﬁcient funds to make the art
they want to make. (People in the arts expend a lot of ‘artistic’ energy on
being indignant. Actually this is a natural response for people who feel
they work too hard for too little remuneration. In this sense, poverty in
the arts is not compensated but real, as we suggested in Chapter 6.)
Producers, ﬁnancial directors, and consumers are all blamed for the
lack of sufﬁcient funds, but none more so than donors and governments.
In the Netherlands, most of the indignation is naturally aimed at the pri-
mary donor, the government. Despite, or rather because of, the fact that
the Dutch government spends comparatively large sums on the arts, it is
continuously attacked for not giving more. It’s ‘stinginess’ is said to be
impinging on the autonomy of the arts.
To many people, many of them artists, the autonomy of the artist
means that any artwork is worth producing, regardless of expenses or
demand. The artist alone should decide the artwork’s quality. Financial
restraints violate the autonomy of the artist. The attitude that ‘sacred art
has no price, and that costs are therefore irrelevant’ is a prevailing notion
in the art world (thesis 53). This attitude is also exhibited in the above
illustrations. For the composer, even insigniﬁcant compromises in qual-
ity remain taboo, even if they effectively cut costs. And no cost is too high
if it means an increase, however small, in an opera’s quality.
But quality is always relative. In poor countries, the food, housing,
clothing, or household appliances are usually of a lower quality than in
wealthier countries. People there cannot afford high quality goods. And
also in rich countries not everything is available. Many quality products,
from superior blenders to advanced building materials, remain on the
drawing table because they are (still) too expensive to produce.
In art as well, technical restrictions and cost limits are present. Take
the extreme example of an artist who, in the context of an artistically
interesting project, wants to reclaim the Atlantic Ocean. Due to limita-
tions, this kind of project can only exist on the conceptual level and in the
form of sketches. And even in the cases of more modest projects the real-
ization of a work still depends on an examination of beneﬁts in relation
to costs. Usually this examination is left to the market. The ﬁnal decision
then is dependent on market variables. But if it looks like consumers
won’t be able to foot the bill, donors and governments can always step in
and make their own appraisal of costs and beneﬁts. For instance, after
many years of discussion, German ofﬁcials decided that the beneﬁts of
Christo wrapping the Reichstag were worth the costs. (In this case, bene-
ﬁts and costs were clearly interdependent: the initial resistance of
155
‘ARTISTIC QUALITY REGARDLESS OF THE COSTS’

German politicians actually increased the aesthetic value of the project.
This conﬁrms the conclusion of chapter 3 that aesthetic value is a social
value.)
2
‘The Arts are Stricken by a Cost Disease’
Due to a general sustained increase in productivity, people in the West
have far more purchasing power than they had one hundred years ago.
Because people earn more, labor costs are higher. The impact however,
of higher wages in the industrial and agricultural sectors, has been more
than offset by the increase in productivity. Corrected for inﬂation, due to
the savings on labor costs, most products became cheaper. In other
words, labor productivity has risen considerably.
However, as far as labor in the art world goes, this is an entirely differ-
ent story. If developments in the arts were comparable to those in agricul-
ture, we wouldn’t have four musicians perform a Haydn string quartet,
but only one musician playing at twice the speed. This is not what hap-
pened in the world of art. Because Haydn’s instructions and speciﬁca-
tions are respected, still four musicians appear on stage, who take the
same amount of time to play the piece as in the days of Haydn.
It seems that there is just no way to save on labor in the arts and that
labor productivity has not increased. And although the incomes of artists
have not risen as dramatically as elsewhere and are presently relatively
low, they have nevertheless risen considerably. Thus, without the support
of subsidies or other non-market revenues, art products should be con-
siderably more expensive in relation to other consumer goods. Due to
rising costs the arts have gradually lost their competitiveness and they
may not survive without subsidies and donations. Baumol and Bowen,
who ﬁrst used the example of the string quartet, have called this phenom-
enon cost disease.1 It is a disease, because like a cancer it grows and
threatens the infected.
In its pure form, the cost disease is ﬁrst found in relation to a real-time
personal service. Because this service is in real time, it establishes natural
limits to possible technical progress. This is the case when it comes to
performing a Haydn string quartet or Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony, or
Shakespeare’s Hamlet. The real-time service offered by actors, musi-
cians, dancers, etc. is comparable to the services offered by female com-
panions (or prostitutes). If female companions, prostitutes, actors,
dancers, musicians, etc. are not present in person that speciﬁc service
does not exist.
(The same does not necessarily apply to surgeons, nurses, teachers, or
156
THE COST DISEASE

hairdressers. In their cases, it is usually the result that counts and not the
human presence itself. Their activities can be accelerated or even
replaced by technology. Nevertheless, they represent mixed cases, as
their presence and conversation may actually involve an essential addi-
tional service, which involves real time. Thus, we can say that the pure
cost disease also applies to these sectors as well, albeit to varying
degrees.)
There is a tendency to widen the concept of cost disease to more labor-
intensive areas of production where the chances of net savings on labor
costs are small.2 This most commonly applies to the service sector, which
includes retail trade, banking, insurance, and civil service. It also applies
to certain areas in the arts, where the ﬁnal product is not a real-time serv-
ice. For instance, most creative artists do not offer real-time services, but
their products, paintings, manuscripts, scores, etc., involve much per-
sonal labor, which usually offers little opportunity for reductions. After
all, authentic works of art necessarily depend on personal services.
Economists tend to agree that over the past ﬁfty years labor productiv-
ity ﬁgures in much of the arts has risen less than elsewhere. Even though
artists’ incomes have lagged behind, labor costs have risen more than
elsewhere. These ﬁndings conﬁrm the presence of a cost disease in the
arts.3 In smaller areas of the arts such as classical music, where quality
has been largely constant, the rise in relative costs has been the most pro-
nounced. Costs for live pop music concerts have also risen, although less
dramatically because attendance ﬁgures have risen as well. The intensity
of the cost disease therefore varies depending on the art form.
The presence and intensity of the cost disease depends on three cir-
cumstances or assumptions:
1 quality is constant,4
2 there is no technological progress, and
3 labor costs are high.
Moreover, just because the cost disease is found in an area of the arts,
doesn’t necessarily mean it is malicious. Whether it is virulent depends
on two additional assumptions:
4 increasing costs are not compensated by increased revenues and
5 tastes are constant.
I shall examine these assumptions in the following sections. They apply
to speciﬁc cultural ﬁelds in varying degrees. Therefore, the presence and
the particular virulence of the disease is more a matter of degree than an
all-or-nothing affair.
157
‘THE ARTS ARE STRICKEN BY A COST DISEASE’

3
Technical Progress has Always been a Part of the Arts
Is quality constant and isn’t there any technical progress in the arts? The
two assumptions are related: constant quality usually implies the
absence of technical progress, while technical progress implies a change
in quality. Art consumers often demand that quality is constant; this is
especially true in the performing arts. A constant quality must be main-
tained regardless of rising costs. This is in keeping with the general art
world attitude that sacred art has no price, and that expenses must never
interfere with quality. Therefore, its not so amazing that quality is a con-
stant in Baumol and Bowen’s cost disease model developed for the per-
forming arts.5 As art lovers these economists had thoroughly internal-
ized the art world’s dogmas. Nevertheless, it is strange that a basic aspect
of any developing society, that of changing quality, is assumed to be
invalid when it comes to the arts.
Or maybe it is not so strange. For if we limit our attention to the tradi-
tional performing arts of the past one hundred years, one may get the
impression that quality has remained constant and that there have been
no noticeable increases in productivity. Looking at the rest of culture
however, one notices considerable productivity increases. For instance,
over the past ﬁfty years, ‘commercial’ (pop music) performances have
not been hampered by demands for constant quality and has introduced
numerous technological advances that have increased productivity.
Technological change in the arts is nothing new. Art products have
continued to change with the times thanks to technological advances.
This also applies to the predecessors of present-day traditional art forms.
For instance, the works of renowned classical composers were allowed to
change during their times and after. New performance formats and new
musical instruments were consistently being introduced. Generally,
audiences applauded the changes in quality.
The arts not only applied but also initiated and invented new tech-
niques. People we now consider artists introduced notational systems for
music. This led to enormous increases in productivity. The written music
of Bach, for instance, has been performed for literally millions of audi-
ences worldwide. The audiences reached by medieval minstrels during an
entire lifetime were nothing by comparison.6 Sheet music did not just
serve professional musicians; the published scores allowed this music to
enter middle class homes. (Composers like Telemann and Mozart were
all for the dissemination of their music in this manner. This is how they
earned extra money, while their fame grew as well.7) Visual artists,
meanwhile, developed oil paint and the technique of lithography. Oil
paints were the backbone of all manufactured paint for at least three cen-
158
THE COST DISEASE

turies, while the most used present day commercial printing technique is
still based on the principle of lithography.
Although new techniques inevitably led to changes in existing prod-
ucts, these changes did not prevent them from being used. Not only did
new techniques alter existing products, they also opened up new artistic
possibilities which consequently led to new types of artworks being
developed. A more recent example is the computer: word-processing,
musical notation programs (Finale and Cubase), electronic music pro-
grams, drawing programs, photo-manipulation programs (PhotoShop),
etc., not only save time, they change existing products and encourage the
development of new products.
In the performing arts, new sound and visual ampliﬁcation techniques
– through so-called video-walls – have gained widespread use. This tech-
nology allows for smaller ensembles and casts to perform for larger audi-
ences. Using these techniques, existing products necessarily change
while new products are introduced into the scene.
Technological advances also affect the arts indirectly. For instance,
ticket reservations and sales for performances have become far more efﬁ-
cient over the past few decades with the introduction of computerized
systems. Theatre lighting technology has also been vastly improved, and
now requires less labor.
The technical reproduction of art is not only interesting because it
demonstrates the possibility of increases in productivity in the arts, but
also because it’s a good example of the extremely relative nature of the
cost disease. The reproduction of performances on cd, radio, ﬁlm, tele-
vision, videotape, and now dvd, and the reproduction of paintings in art
books, clearly shows how technological advances has allowed the arts to
reach increasingly larger audiences, more so, in fact, than any other
mechanisms or gadgets discussed thus far. One-hour live performed art
is easily more than hundred times as expensive than one-hour of art at
home, on television, listening to a cd or viewing a rented videotape or
dvd at home.8 Due to technical reproduction the technically reproduced
art product moves out of the realm of personal service and into the
domain of cheap industrial good.
Cowen, who presents numerous other examples of technical progress
in the arts, considers increased diversity as an easily ignored form of
increased productivity. Not only are performers more versatile than they
were two hundred years ago, the diversity in musical styles available to
consumers is also larger. Increased diversity suggests more quality and
consequently, a higher output. Productivity in the arts, it is safe to say,
has increased.9
There are many possibilities for the introduction of labor-saving tech-
159
TECHNICAL PROGRESS HAS ALWAYS BEEN PART OF THE ARTS

niques, which lead to productivity increases in the arts. This is not to say
that there is no limit to the labor-saving techniques. The arts and unques-
tionably the live performance sector, need to provide personal services in
one form or another. Because live performances require personal service
in the form of living people on stage, this aspect establishes a ﬁnal limit
on possible changes in existing products and the introduction of new
products. (It should be noted, however, that the processes used for the
production of industrial consumer goods also “rely on some irreducible
quantity of creative labor”.10 Therefore, it’s not just the arts that faces
limits on labor-saving techniques; ultimately every production process
faces this kind of limit.)
When we observe the immense variety of types of technological innova-
tion in the arts we can make some initial comments regarding the cost dis-
ease. Because quality is never constant, the cost disease does not rule out
labor saving and productivity increases in the arts (thesis 54). Moreover,
the notion that the arts in general have not experienced much in the way
of technological advances and productivity increases is false (thesis 55).
4
There is no True Performance 
When costs rise the natural response is to look for ways to cut expenses.
For instance, when the prices of studio spaces go up some painters will
start to work at home. This way they can ‘stay in business’.
In the performing arts as well, simple methods exist to cut expenses
when costs are rising. One of them is performing for larger audiences;
another is having fewer performers on stage. If both are altered simulta-
neously productivity can be considerably increased. For instance, the
music of Jacques Brel can either be performed by a 70-piece orchestra
performing for two hundred people or by a solo artist like Mike Almond
for an audience of three thousand. In the ﬁrst instance, the cost per con-
sumer (or unit of consumption) is approximately three thousand times
higher.11 In other words, in this case the solo performer increases pro-
ductivity by approximately three thousand times. (Because audience size
and the number of performances may vary, it is better to count units of
consumption and not units of production like performances or produc-
tions.12)
If people are not prepared to pay for larger ensembles, the natural
solution would be fewer performers and larger audiences. This is what
can be observed, although less so in the more heavily subsidized tradi-
tional arts. Nevertheless, even in some traditional areas the number of
performers has become smaller. For instance, the average cast size over a
160
THE COST DISEASE

30-year period in American theatres dropped from 16.8 to 9.3, a reduc-
tion of almost 50 percent.13 Contemporary classical music performances
have also reduced their numbers of performing musicians. Even if com-
posers like Gerald claim they base their decisions solely on artistic con-
siderations, it is hard to believe that expenses don’t have some indirect
inﬂuence on decisions. (Baumol, who brought the phenomenon of
reduced cast sizes in the us to light was doing so to inﬂuence increases in
subsidies. He felt that cutbacks had a detrimental effect on the arts.14
Therefore, it’s fairly obvious that Baumol does not believe that these
kinds of decreases stem from artistic decisions.)
When quality is constant reductions in labor are generally impossible.
In the traditional performing arts the true or authentic performance, in
which the artist’s original intent is approximated as accurately as possi-
ble, is a goal that is pursued with almost religious zeal. This is particu-
larly true for classical music. (But because the composer’s intent is not
always obvious, small differences in quality or interpretation do occur
and these interpretations spark endless debates about a particular per-
formance’s ﬁdelity to the original).
But when is a performance an authentic copy of an original? In the the-
oretical approach of Nelson Goodman performances are considered
accurate copies of a work only if all the artist’s directions are carried out.
Wrong notes, altered lines of dialogue, characters or musical instruments
not prescribed in the original, means the performance is not an authentic
copy: but an adaptation.15 (If performers claim they are true to the origi-
nal, the performance is both a falsiﬁcation and an adaptation.) However,
these are formal distinctions. On the one hand, in music, certain ‘adapta-
tions’ can still be considered as genuine performances.16 On the other
hand, theatre performances can be ‘true copies’ although they tell com-
pletely new stories through the use of scenery and the ways of acting.17
What is, in essence, considered true or an adaptation depends on conven-
tions.
Moreover, it’s unlikely that the accuracy of a performance is solely
dependent on what is happening on stage. Chapter 3 argued that modes
of consumption are an integral part of a work of art. Also an alteration in
the way a work is consumed changes that work of art. If one evening there
are only ﬁve people in the audience, while another evening there are ﬁve
thousand, these are essentially two very different aesthetic experiences.
Even if the conditions of the performances of old masterpieces were
copied down to the slightest detail – instruments, the performing space,
clothing, and audience size, all being exactly like they were in the days of
the ﬁrst performances – the works would still never be exactly the same,
simply because we are totally different people now. We feel and perceive
161
THERE IS NO TRUE PERFORMANCE

things differently from the way audiences did in the castles and mansions
of the times. These changes plus those in production techniques affect
the consumption of art and consequently the work of art itself. Constant
quality is an illusion. The truly accurate performance does not exist.
The same goes for art objects. Even though some paintings may have
been hanging in museums since they ﬁrst opened their doors, their ambi-
ence is continually changing. This is evident from lithographs and etch-
ings that depict the halls of museums in the past. A museum’s appearance
changes drastically, it seems, about every ﬁfty years. Thus, today’s
museum visitors cannot possibly have the same aesthetic experience as
spectators from long ago had. Again, a work of art has no independent
existence. Circumstances inﬂuence a work of art.
The obsession with an authentic performance, especially in classical
music, is itself a product of the times. It is related to the aforementioned
romantic 19-century notion, which continues to remain the dominant atti-
tude in the art world. In this view, artists, especially the old masters, are
worshiped as geniuses and their works should be ‘respected’ at any cost.
5
The Taboo on Technical Innovation in Classical Music is a Product of
the Times
The authentic performance is not some objective given; it is based on
conventions. The attitudes towards change and innovation in the arts are
certainly not etched in stone. The notion that change is unacceptable in
some of the arts is steeped in the social attitudes of a particular time and
place. Nevertheless, these attitudes can become a particular period’s
dictum. For instance, for more than a century now consumers and pro-
ducers of classical music continue to insist on a particular constant qual-
ity and continue to resist new products.
Unlike jazz and pop music, there’s an almost universal taboo against
any electronic ampliﬁcation of classical music. It is only quite recently
that this taboo in the case of outdoor concerts at least has lost some of its
bite. For indoor concerts, this restrictive taboo continues to hold. Never-
theless, differences between various countries do exist. In the Royal Fes-
tival Hall in London, the orchestra is allowed to perform before an audi-
ence of three thousand using electronic ampliﬁcation in parts of the hall.
(In the Netherlands, there have been and continue to be electronic ampli-
ﬁcation experiments, but the results are not allowed to be used to lower
the prices of seats; the experiments are strictly focused on improving
sound quality.18)
The change in attitudes over time is striking. Between around 1750 to
162
THE COST DISEASE

1850 new and louder musical instruments began replacing many of the
musical instruments used in the ensembles for which Bach and Mozart
wrote their music. Many new and louder instruments were introduced,
while for instance the violin had its numbers increased. In either case the
timbre changed; the sound of an orchestra changed far more than
presently by electronic ampliﬁcation. This is particularly true regarding
the replacement of the harpsichord by the piano. Louder newer instru-
ments kept replacing the original instruments, a trend that was appreci-
ated by most audiences. The innovations that went into creating the con-
cert hall, with its acoustically sensitive design, added to overall
ampliﬁcation and also dramatically altered timbre.
The developments in louder instruments for symphony orchestra
ceased about halfway through the nineteenth century.19 (Developments
continued however, in brass and jazz orchestras. It can be argued that
already by the nineteenth century the romantic notion of the artist-
genius, whose work must be respected at any price, was already severely
hampering technical innovation in classical music. Nevertheless, it is
more likely that once the halls were built, the demand for live music
could be met for the decades to come. This dampened the spark for tech-
nical innovation.)
In the twentieth century, the classical music audience grew even
though labor costs were starting to rise. But this time there were no new
technical advances to offset the expenses.20 The art world had changed.
The status of the arts had risen and the romantic veneration of the old
masters had established a steadfast performance routine and with it, a
taboo on technical change.
Because a taboo on change did not always exist in classical music, it
must be a product of the age. It’s not just artists, however, but the entire
art world that contributes to the prolongation of the taboo. If the direc-
tors of concert halls had started using electronic ampliﬁcation twenty
years ago, their efforts would not have attracted larger audiences. On the
contrary, many would have actually stayed home because they would
have considered the altered product inferior.
Whether substitutes are considered inferior depends on the type of
consumers being considered. In theory, the gradual losing one type of
audience can be compensated for by attracting a new perhaps, younger,
audience. Until quite recently, this was apparently not an option in clas-
sical music. The taboo on change is so strong that audiences and produc-
ers castigate anyone even contemplating reaching new audiences via the
introduction of new formats or innovations. It is only now that the classi-
cal music world seems to be opening up a little. This is most clearly evi-
dent with the growth of electronically ampliﬁed outdoor concerts and in
163
THE TABOO ON TECHNICAL INNOVATION IN CLASSICAL MUSIC

proposals for changes in the repertoire.
The time bomb that classical music directors have to take into account
is that their audience is dramatically aging and so they need to consider
drastic and risky action. For instance, Simon Rattle of the Berlin Philhar-
monic Orchestra recently announced that he will include the schmaltzy
(‘schlager’) repertoire with singers like Udo Jürgens in his concerts. (One
has to wonder if there aren’t more creative alternatives that would make
for an artistically more interesting event and that in time would also
attract a wider audience.)
The comparative integrity of the performances discussed in the previ-
ous section and the relative nature of attitudes towards cost-saving inno-
vations discussed in this section lead us to another observations regard-
ing cost disease. The cost disease does not simply emerge from intrinsic
qualities in the artwork. Works of art are man-made and so is the cost
disease. The gravity of the cost disease is not ﬁxed. The more reluctant
the art world is in substituting particular art products for less costly
ones, the more severe the cost disease will be and vice versa (thesis 56).
The ﬁrst two rudimentary assumptions of the cost disease, that qual-
ity is constant and that there is no technical progress, are largely untrue.
On the contrary, quality changes are common in the arts and the arts
have always proﬁted and continue to proﬁt from technical progress
(thesis 57).
6
The Cost Disease Contributes to Low Incomes while Internal Subsi-
dization Contains the Cost Disease 
In Chapter 5 we noted that hourly wages in the arts are relatively low.
How can the cost disease be caused by high labor costs, when average
hourly wages are low? First, the labor requirements may be so great that
relative labor costs remain high despite low incomes. Second, incomes
vary in the arts and so does the cost disease.
The ﬁrst point lies at the heart of the cost disease. What matters for the
severity of the cost disease is the total labor costs per unit of consumption
and not hourly incomes. Hourly income affects labor costs but so does
the number of hours required for one hour of consumption. Generally in
the arts, labor requirements per hour of consumption are higher than in
other sectors. In other words, the labor-intensity of production is high.
This means that labor costs can be relatively high, even if the hourly
wages are relatively low. For instance fringe production, which depends
on low wages, usually involves a high level of labor intensity and is thus
also susceptible to the cost disease.
164
THE COST DISEASE

Second, labor costs as a proportion of total costs are higher in the arts
than in other sectors, but they also vary among the various art forms.
Labor costs are often very high in the established and often structurally
subsidized performing arts. Labor costs are lower, but usually still far
above average in those areas of the arts where artists in part subsidize
themselves or assist in a volunteer capacity. Labor costs are normal or
even low, however, in the areas that involve the technical reproduction of
the arts.
This means that the severity of the cost disease varies throughout the
arts. For instance, because most dancers do not work for the established
companies and thus earn very little, the average income of dancers is low.
Nevertheless, a small percentage of dancers who work for structurally
funded companies earns less but not that much less than comparable pro-
fessionals do.21 Therefore, in this respect the cost disease hits established
companies more than the less ofﬁcial companies.
In the opera world as well as some other areas of the arts, the stars earn
many times the average income. Here labor costs can be a much larger
portion of total costs than in other art sectors that don’t have super stars,
and so the effects of the cost disease are particularly intense. Moreover,
the incomes of the stars rise faster than average incomes.22 Because there
is usually only room for a few stars (due to the before mentioned limited
star capacity of consumers) their relative incomes can be extremely high.
Therefore, the proportion of labor costs per unit of consumption rises as
well. This means that the cost disease dramatically affects the traditional
performing arts where there is a star system in place, particularly opera.
In the case of structurally subsidized companies, donations and subsi-
dies, on the one hand, aggravate the disease, but on the other hand,
soften its effects. Because of the extra proceeds that come in from dona-
tions and subsidies, structurally subsidized companies can afford to pay
higher wages, while keeping their prices relatively low. Moreover, gov-
ernments usually only subsidize these kinds of companies on the condi-
tion that they pay ‘decent’ wages. For instance, governments demand
collective bargaining agreements between employers and employees.23
This means that labor costs are usually higher than in comparable ‘com-
mercial’ or alternative companies. Therefore, on the one hand, the cost
disease is more severe in the case of structurally subsidized companies.
On the other hand, however, the government usually compensates the
annual wage increases in the form of higher subsidies. Therefore,
although the disease is unmistakably present its effects are felt less. The
malice of the cost disease is contained by ever-increasing subsidies (thesis
58).
Whereas the income from governments and donors renders the disease
165
THE COST DISEASE CONTRIBUTES TO LOW INCOMES

less malicious, in the case of established companies, low incomes, thanks
to internal subsidization by artists and relatives, helps contain the cost
disease in unofﬁcial and alternative artistic sectors.
If the amount of labor per unit of consumption continues to go down in
the industrial and agricultural sectors while it remains high in the arts,
relative incomes would have to continue to go down year after year in
order to contain the cost disease permanently. And, as noted earlier,
incomes have gone down considerably and continue to do so.24 More-
over, the growing signiﬁcance of second jobs suggests that the limits of
internal subsidization by artists and therefore of a further lowering of
incomes from art have yet to be reached. Because artists are willing to
work for low incomes, the cost disease has less effect on the arts than it
otherwise would have. With normal incomes prices of art products would
be higher and therefore the sector would be smaller. Only because of their
willingness to work for lower wages artists can keep their jobs. It follows
that the cost disease indirectly contributes to low incomes in the arts.25
When average economic productivity rises, certain sectors of the arts
that depend more on volunteers and amateurs are less vulnerable. One
has to wonder whether over time the rise of the amateur sector and
breakdown of barriers that divide amateurs and professionals are going
to emerge as some of society’s answers to the cost disease. For instance,
many professional classical music choirs and professional jazz big bands
have already been replaced by amateur groups where only the director is
paid. The existence of the cost disease has necessitated the slashing of
labor costs, which has enabled these forms of music production to sur-
vive.
The basic remedy against the cost disease is by replacing labor with
capital. This happened in the areas of technical reproduction in the arts.
In the production of literature, of music on cd or the Internet, and of
visual media like video, dvd, and television, relative labor costs are
much lower than elsewhere, sometimes even lower than in the industrial
and agricultural sectors. Therefore at present, there is no cost disease in
these media. (And yet, the Hollywood mega-movie productions with
their elaborate superstar system have experienced an increase in labor
costs. It can be argued that eventually relative labor costs will rise in all
other media as well. However, even if they rise, it doesn’t necessarily rep-
resent an example of the cost disease.26)
The analysis in this section leads to the following observations. On the
one hand, the cost disease contributes to the already low incomes in the
arts (thesis 59). On the other hand, internal subsidization by artists
relieves some of the effects of the cost disease (thesis 60). The star system
among artists only aggravates the disease (thesis 61).
166
THE COST DISEASE

7
There is no Limit to the Demand for Works of Art
Even if the three assumptions on which the existence of a cost disease
rests apply, the disease is not always malicious. It’s only malicious when
revenues grow insufﬁciently to cover rising costs. In other words, if labor
costs rise, but consumers are willing to pay higher prices to offset these
costs, there may be a disease but it’s not malicious. The arts can then
continue to ﬂourish despite rising costs.
The general notion is that consumers are not prepared to pay higher
prices for live performance arts that cover costs. Consumers may instead
prefer to spend their money on industrial consumer goods, which have
become relatively cheaper over the years. Without subsidies, prices
become too high and the live performance arts are threatened with
extinction. It seems that these days real-time services in- and outside the
arts have fewer chances of surviving in the market.
Nevertheless, not all real-time services have become extinct. Although
there may be fewer house servants now than one hundred years ago, the
willingness to pay for a prostitutes services has kept pace with rising
prices. Psychiatrists, among other professions, have also managed to dis-
cover new markets in real-time services. Evidently rising costs do not nec-
essarily lead to a decline in demand.
Available ﬁgures show that with rising income, per capita spending on
the arts per head has steadily increased since the Second World War.27
An increasing percentage of national income and the workforce is
devoted to art.28 This applies to both the ﬁne arts and to art in a broader
sense. Spending on live performances is no exception. For instance in the
us, per capita expenditures on the performing arts as a percentage of dis-
posable income has more than doubled in the period from 1975 to 1997.
In Britain, in the relatively short period of 1980 to 1988 spending both
on live art events and on cultural goods and services more than doubled
in real terms. As a percentage of all consumer expenditure, the two cate-
gories both increased by 30%. In the Netherlands, per capita expendi-
tures on the live performance arts rose faster than expenditures for other
forms of culture, from television equipment to cds. This means that
increasingly prosperous consumers spend increasingly large sums on the
arts.
In most countries, increased expenditures more then compensated for
rising prices. Therefore, on average, the turnout per capita increased as
well, but this doesn’t apply to all forms of art. Whereas consumers
attended pop-concerts more often, they went a little less often to classi-
cal music concerts, and attended the theatre considerably less frequently.
At ﬁrst glance, this is not such an amazing result. When income levels
167
THERE IS NO LIMIT TO THE DEMAND FOR WORKS OF ART

rise, one expects more spending for live performance arts. After all, art is
considered a luxury and so when people have more disposable income
they are likely to spend more on luxury goods. On second thought how-
ever, this does not apply equally to all luxury goods. Most art products –
from performing art to literature – demand a certain amount of time from
consumers.29 And although well-to-do consumers may have more money
to spend, they often have less leisure time to spend it in, because they usu-
ally put in long workdays. Therefore, it is more likely that consumers will
be attracted to expensive luxuries that offer more satisfaction in less time.
If this is true, rising income levels should lead to less rather than more
demand for performing art. (The income effect then is negative.) But thus
far, this has not been the case with the performing arts, although it is
partly true in the case of literature. After all, in Europe the group of
people working extremely long workweeks is relatively small, while
increasingly many average income earners start to work part time and so
exchange income for a shorter working week.30 And even if consumers
attend live performances less often because they have less free time, they
tend to spend more per event and thus total spending can still increase.
The demand for art and other services like health care could well be
inﬁnite. Whereas consumers need only a limited amount of cars or televi-
sion sets, there seems to be no limit to their demands for art and other
entertainment. In terms of employment, this could be beneﬁcial. Even
though lower costs in the industrial and agricultural sectors continue to
make products cheaper and cheaper, increasing public prosperity, they
also offer fewer and fewer employment opportunities. This does not
create unemployment however, because more laborers drift over to the
labor-intensive service sector, which includes the arts. (Less than a quar-
ter of the American workforce is still employed in the industrial and agri-
cultural sectors. Therefore, what has been called a disease could just as
well be considered a healthy development.
But the transition to a service economy does not always proceed
smoothly. Many consumers in the 1950s and 60s must have found the
variety and choice of inexpensive manufactured goods overwhelming if
not downright disorienting. This rapid and sudden shift from service
goods (including live art) to manufactured goods may have been a form
of ‘over-compensation’. Since then it took decades to come to a more bal-
anced choice between services and manufactured goods again. (It can be
argued that arts subsidies were needed to survive this difﬁcult period.)
From this section we can conclude that costs in the arts rise but that
revenues from sales rise as well. In some areas of the arts the cost disease
is not malicious because market revenues rise at a rate that is equal to
costs (thesis 62).
168
THE COST DISEASE

8
Changing Tastes Can Also Cause Financial Problems
People spend more money on art, but not on all art forms. In certain
areas of the arts sales do not increase at the rate as elsewhere. The cost
disease can cause the lower spending – higher costs causing higher prices
and less demand – but changing tastes can also be responsible. In the ﬁrst
case, the cost disease causes a loss in competitiveness. In the second, con-
sumer preferences have changed and so the art products that are no
longer favored generate less revenue. It is only when lost revenues follow
from higher costs and not from changing tastes, that the cost disease is
malicious.
An example can illustrate the not-always-clear distinction between
changing costs and changing tastes. Over the past ﬁfty years, realistic
portrait paintings that necessarily take a long time to ﬁnish have become
far more expensive. Labor costs have risen considerably. During this
same period, high quality professional photographic portraits have
become much cheaper than painted portraits. Presently consumers pur-
chase far more photographic portraits than painted portraits. This can,
ﬁrst of all, be explained by the increasing difference in costs and prices:
photographs are generally cheaper. But it can also be explained in terms
of a change in consumer taste. Consumers gradually began preferring the
new product – photographs. The third explanation is that it is a combina-
tion of the two. In this context, it is important to note that costs and taste
are not independent from one another. For instance, consumers may
have been originally attracted to the lower prices of photographs even
though they may have still preferred the painted portraits. Then with the
ascendancy of photography consumers gradually became accustomed to
the new products and began appreciating its artistic qualities. In the end,
many consumers ended up preferring the photographic portraits. Tastes
had changed. Therefore, changing tastes are probably more responsible
for the present small size of the market for painted portraits than rising
costs.
A change in taste can be interpreted in various ways, as the following
example shows. Suppose people increase their consumption of recorded
music and reduce their consumption of live performances. (1) The
narrow interpretation is that the existing consumers have changed their
tastes with respect to existing products. People gradually began going
out less in the 1970s, and as a consequence attended live concerts less
often while increasing their home consumption of music. In a broader
interpretation, (2) existing consumers change their tastes because of the
introduction of new products. Because cd quality was regarded as much
higher than that of lps, home consumption of cds became more attrac-
169
CHANGING TASTES CAN ALSO CAUSE FINANCIAL PROBLEMS

tive and took the place of attending live concerts. Finally, in an even
broader interpretation, (3) average taste has changed because new con-
sumers with new tastes have entered the market. In this respect, thirty-
year-old consumers, who attended classical music concerts in the 1950s,
clearly had a different taste than today’s thirty-year-olds. Today’s thirty-
year-olds certainly attend classical music concerts less often and pop
concerts more often. Over time, the tastes of young people have changed.
Because total spending is what counts for the success of any particular
art product, it is the last interpretation of changing tastes that concerns
us here.
Although people in the art world might see the cost disease as a natural
disaster, it should be noted that the same technological progress blamed
for the cost disease enabled many of the latest attractive art products. For
many people cds are a continuous source of pleasure. The same applies
to art as seen on television, videotape or dvds. These products have
important qualities, which provoke changes in taste.
Because costs, prices, product quality and tastes change at the same
times, it is impossible to delineate precisely the cost disease effects from
the effects caused by changes in taste. Nevertheless, it is sometimes possi-
ble to arrive at a rough idea of the impact of changing tastes. From 1960
to 1985, most European governments helped maintain competitive
prices for the performing ﬁne arts broadly in line with those of other
forms of live entertainment and the cinema. This was possible because
governments used subsidies to compensate for increasing losses caused
by the cost disease. Nevertheless, despite subsidization spending per
capita on classical music concerts and theatre went down, while spend-
ing on pop concerts and other forms of live entertainment increased.
Therefore, it is plausible that the drop in spending on live classical music
and theatre and their loss of market share is caused by changes in taste
and not by the cost disease (thesis 63).
Because, both arts-sector workers and politicians believe it’s more just
to subsidize the arts because of ﬁnancial problems caused by rising costs
than because of changing tastes, the distinction between ﬁnancial prob-
lems caused by the cost disease and by changing tastes is more than just
academic. In this respect, it should be noted that the presence of the cost
disease itself does not necessarily legitimize subsidization. Even though
house servants, prostitutes, or barbers continue to have to deal with
rising labor costs, nobody would argue for their subsidization. This
implies that only when other reasons for subsidizing the arts are already
in place, the presence of the cost disease adds to these reasons. For
instance, if governments want to raise income in the arts because low
incomes are judged to be unfair, and the cost disease is perceived as the
170
THE COST DISEASE

cause of low incomes, then the need to subsidize artists’ incomes becomes
more convincing. The same applies when art has special merits that
people underestimate and these merits are endangered by rising costs.
Therefore, for politicians the cost disease strengthens equity and pater-
nalistic arguments for subsidization.
On the other hand, if people visibly change their tastes and lose inter-
est in certain art products, politicians are more likely to leave it up to the
market. In this case, they probably consider subsidies as particularly
meddlesome, more so than in the case of rising costs endangering the spe-
cial merits of art. If the producers of traditional art products can’t main-
tain consumer interest then too bad.
Therefore, it is understandable why rising costs are emphasized by the
art world, while changes in taste are often played down. For instance,
people working in classical music often prefer to ignore the fact that
tastes have changed and that most people under ﬁfty nowadays prefer
other styles of music. They beg for assistance and get it because they have
framed themselves as victims of rising costs. Evidently the cost disease
frequently serves as a panacea (thesis 64).
Culture is never ﬁxed and neither is taste. Art changes. Styles come
and go. Therefore, changes in tastes cannot be ignored. Financial prob-
lems in the arts seldom stem exclusively from rising costs; changes in
taste are often more important (thesis 65).
9
Pop Music has Attractive Qualities that Classical Music Lacks
In order for the cost disease to be malicious, tastes must be constant. In
practice however, neither taste nor quality is constant. Moreover, they
depend on one another. Because changes in taste are almost always
accompanied by changing production techniques as well as new products
with different qualities, changing tastes not only cause ﬁnancial prob-
lems in the arts, but they also offer remedies to these problems. When
new art products replace old art products, some art forms may fall into
decline, but the arts as a whole survive.
The false notion of a constant quality in the arts rests on the view that
there is no room for substitution in the arts; if new art products emerge
they only add to the existing stock of art products. This notion is false.
The proportion of total artistic output that society places in its archives is
relatively small. The large majority of artworks, from visual art to pop
music, have a short life span: meaning that it often ends up in the garbage
between ten years and one hundred years after its creation. As shown in
the illustration on page 53, of all the paintings that were displayed in the
171
POP MUSIC HAS ATTRACTIVE QUALITIES THAT CLASSICAL MUSIC LACKS

Netherlands during the Golden Age, less than one percent have survived
to the present day.31 Even art that is relatively easy to archive, such as
manuscripts, scores, plays, etc., has been forgotten or will slowly begin to
fade in relevance. For instance, most of the music dating from the 1930s
is seldom performed anymore. For the majority of art, the demand with-
ers over time; it is replaced by new art with different qualities (thesis 66).
Often artistic areas initially regarded as low art, have gradually
turned out to be innovative and are more competitive than older art
forms. They threaten older art forms, through both artistic innovations
and technical innovations. With new art forms comes new strategies in
tackling the cost disease and thus costs per unit of consumption is lower,
and so is the price. Therefore a lower price accompanies an altered and
more attractive art product. In this respect, technical and artistic innova-
tions are not independent of one another. This becomes particularly clear
when we compare pop and classical music.
The introduction of electronic instruments and ampliﬁcation has
made pop music versatile. Live pop music is not dependent on a certain
design of music hall nor on an audience with a particular taste. Instead, it
can accommodate the tastes of the wealthy through performances in
small venues as well as the average consumer through performances held
in extremely large venues such as stadiums. Electronic ampliﬁcation was
probably introduced in much the same way as louder instruments were in
classical music a few centuries earlier. Classical musicians had to make
themselves heard at noisy gatherings, just as the ﬁrst jazz and pop
combos had to rise above the noise of the patrons of bars. Electronic
ampliﬁcation was the obvious solution. When electronic instruments
were introduced, they inevitably led to new sounds and interesting new
products. Artistic developments and technical developments, which
were introduced to increase productivity, have stimulated one another.
The notion of artistic innovation accompanying technical innovation
is particularly clear in the case of the human voice. Singers in noisy pubs
could not rely on classical training. Ampliﬁcation, however, obviated the
need to develop a booming voice. On the contrary, the softest and most
intimate sounds became part of the new musical styles. Individual styles
of singing based on ‘natural’ voices could be retained and developed not
only in small venues, but also in halls with ever-larger audiences. Thanks
to ampliﬁcation the personal characteristics of each singer’s voice
remained intact and could be appreciated by audiences. In this respect, a
classical singer’s options are far more limited because their voices have
to ﬁll the hall without any aid. A trained listener can certainly hear differ-
ences between Pavarotti’s voice and Placido Domingo’s, but these are
incremental when compared to the differences between for instance Tom
172
THE COST DISEASE

Waits’s voice and Stevie Wonder’s. I believe that the individual voice,
which, because of the innovations of electronic ampliﬁcation, can also be
heard in front of large audiences, is a major artistic innovation. It is prob-
ably the most important attraction of the new and successful musical
styles.
The changes in the use of the human voice are part of a general shift
away from composition-based genres in music to, as Tyler Cowen calls
them, performer-based genres. At present, the most popular musical
genres are all performer-based. “A performer-based genre, like rock and
roll or country and western, transmits musical and aesthetic visions
through speciﬁc music-makers. The speciﬁc interpretation is para-
mount.”32 When different musicians perform the same compositions the
interpretations differ a great deal, much more so than in classical music.
Singers with individual voices as well as musicians, who respond to their
audiences in an original way, inspire their audiences. These kinds of per-
formers best serve the need of consumers when we consider authenticity
(discussed in chapters 2 and 5). These performers often also have a
charismatic stage presence.33
From Romanticism onwards art consumers longed for authenticity.
This makes the success of the new performer-based musical genres
understandable. Even though these new genres are often viewed as ‘com-
mercial’, in emphasizing authenticity they are more closely connected
with the modern romantic notion of art with its belief in the autonomous
artist than the classical genres. Personalities are essential to pop music;
both on the provincial level of countless bohemian artists and on the level
of the stars. Who could be more different than Robbie Williams and
Kurt Cobain or Madonna and Lauryn Hill. (It is not amazing that even
in classical music, although it’s basically composition-based, performers
increasingly become stars. More than before soloists and above all direc-
tors try to ‘steal the show’. This is probably essential if live classical
music is to survive at all.)
In pop music seeing one’s favorite artist perform live contributes to a
sense of being in tune with the artist. Therefore, it often feels like a
unique and ‘priceless’ experience. Because many artists improvise while
performing, their live performances have unique qualities of their own
that often get lost on cd and even on television. Impressive visual effects
add to this feeling. In classical music, on the other hand, the visual qual-
ity of a live performance is even more limited than it was one hundred
years ago. It is not so difﬁcult to understand why so many modern audi-
ences prefer the more vivacious live performances of performers in new
musical genres.
Since classical music not only has to compete with other live perform-
173
POP MUSIC HAS ATTRACTIVE QUALITIES THAT CLASSICAL MUSIC LACKS

ances, but with superb cds of the same classical music, audiences are
increasingly disappointed with the performances, which pale in compar-
ison to the same music on cd they can listen to at home. These cds, in
fact, are often command performances by world-famous orchestras that
the average local orchestra cannot possibly compete with.34
Important people in the established art world often have problems
with new products, new formats, and new tastes. According to them:
‘Music loses complexity’; ‘Watching television is not an aesthetic experi-
ence.’ ‘Culture and cultural tastes are becoming more and more superﬁ-
cial.’ ‘These new cultural products signify the gradual decay of culture.’
For many people in the cultural establishment indulging in cultural pes-
simism appears to be attractive in itself.35 These people also often have
an interest in the status quo. Moreover, a person’s artistic taste usually
doesn’t change very much after the age of twenty-ﬁve; when it becomes
more difﬁcult to get enthusiastic about new cultural trends. This
explains why it sometimes takes a changing of the guards to get estab-
lished aesthetic views replaced.
The arguments for and against cultural pessimism is a subjective
matter. The increased variety of art products may or may not be viewed
as a good thing or even as a manifestation of progress, but for many
people, it is a blow against cultural impoverishment and cultural pes-
simism.36 Less complex art works however, could be a sign of cultural
impoverishment. Nevertheless, it must be noted that the intensity of an
aesthetic experience seldom rests on an artwork’s complexity.37
Quality is not constant in the arts. The natural remedy of the cost dis-
ease in the arts comes from new art products and changing tastes (thesis
67).
10 Subsidies and Donations Exacerbate the Cost Disease
Advocates of subsidies for the ﬁne arts like to pose the rhetorical ques-
tion what will happen when the government stops subsidizing the arts.
The inevitable answer for them is that the arts will simply disappear. No
sensible person could ever want this to happen. Therefore, the govern-
ment must subsidize the arts. The arts, of course, stand for the ﬁne arts,
especially the traditional performing arts.
Fear of decimation or extinction is what contributed to the large-scale
subsidization of the traditional performing arts that commenced shortly
after the Second World War. Apparently rising costs made subsidization
inevitable. Although the cost disease does not legitimize subsidization, it
does strengthen the paternalistic arguments and equity arguments for
the subsidization of art as well as the social justice argument, which
174
THE COST DISEASE

states that artists whose income is endangered by the cost disease need
assistance.38 This implies that rising costs partly explain why the gift
sphere is large in the arts (thesis 68).
If politicians subsidize art because they are convinced that rising costs
lead to low incomes and that rising costs threaten the special merits they
believe art embodies, this does not imply that the underlying logic, that
subsidies remedy the cost disease, is correct. It can be argued that dona-
tions and subsidies do not remedy the cost disease, but actually aggra-
vate it.39
The natural effect of subsidies and donations is the partial replace-
ment of an orientation towards the market by an orientation towards the
government or donors. Whereas cost reductions straightforwardly con-
tribute to one’s market success, they often have little or no effect on being
successful with government committees or funding organizations.
Instead, contributions to ‘quality’ – as deﬁned by government commit-
tees or funding organizations – are more important in assuring success.
As noted before, often, the more opening nights a Dutch theatre produc-
tion has the more successful it is deemed by government committees.
Therefore, subsidization and donations can easily lead to a careless atti-
tude regarding costs and can further hinder the development of new for-
mats and products.
The orientation on government instead of the market is particularly
strong when subsidies as a percentage of total income are very high. In
that case the orientation on the government is simply a matter of sur-
vival. If the government subsidies suddenly stop coming, there are few
alternatives but to give it up. Thus all attention remains focused on the
issue of ‘quality’ because it’s only when organizations manage to keep
their product interesting in the eyes of government committees, that sub-
sidies will continue to help offset rising costs. So there is little impetus to
employ new strategies or develop new products to offset rising expen-
ses.40
In this respect the signaling effect of ﬁnancial assistance, whether it be
in the form of donations or subsidies, cannot be ignored.41 It reinforces
the persistent notion in the art world that the quality of artworks must
never be beholden to market forces and must always be solely based on
aesthetic considerations. Because ‘art is sacred and costs should not be an
inﬂuence’ assistance is demanded and given. In practice, ﬁnancial assis-
tance can be a license to ignore costs.
So, the scenario of an organization having to survive on less assistance
should stimulate innovations that will cut costs, and subsequently
should lead to more energy invested in the development of new products
that might appeal to new audiences.
175
SUBSIDIES AND DONATIONS EXACERBATE THE COST DISEASE

To assess whether this expectation might be accurate and to examine
other long-term effects of subsidization on costs it is possible to compare
countries with moderate levels of subsidization – Britain and the us –
with countries with higher levels of subsidization, such as the countries
of mainland Western Europe. In the Netherlands, Germany, and France,
for instance, structural subsidized traditional performing art companies
such as opera, theatre, music, and dance companies, receive approxi-
mately 85% of their annual income from subsidies. In Britain, compara-
ble companies receive 45% of their income from subsidization while in
the us it’s less than 10%. When one factors in private and corporate
donations the differences are less dramatic, but still substantial. The
ﬁgure for the Netherlands, France, and Germany is still around 85 %
(donations are negligible), for Britain approximately 50% and for the us
approximately 40 %.42
On the basis of this analysis one would expect three types of differ-
ences between the us on the one hand, and mainland Western Europe on
the other. 
1 In the us and Britain lower subsidies, which are only partly compen-
sated by higher donations, means a) higher ticket prices, and thus b)
fewer people go to the traditional performing arts, and that c) the
people that do go are wealthier.
2 There is more impetus to apply new cost-cutting techniques and prod-
uct innovations in the subsidized companies in the us and Britain to
keep them competitive in the market. 
3 Mainland Western Europe’s performing arts generally, including little
and unsubsidized performing art as pop-music, is less competitive and
that cultural imports are high, because unfair competition ultimately
leads to a low level of innovation unsubsidized areas as pop-music.
Let’s ﬁrst look at prices as they relate to attendance levels. Given the rela-
tively low level of subsidies and donations, one would have expected
much higher prices for performances in the us than in Europe. But there
is evidence that prices are not that much higher in the us. Because prices
differ not that much and because in the us, spending per capita on the
live performing arts is approximately 20 percent lower than in Europe,
attendance ﬁgures per capita to the traditional performing arts in the us
and Britain are also lower than in Europe. But this has more to do with
taste than with higher prices. (After all, Americans spend less on the per-
forming arts but also spend correspondingly less on art and culture in
general. Americans prefer to spend more of their disposable income on
other forms of consumption.)
Because the average ticket prices are not that much higher in the us the
176
THE COST DISEASE

average incomes of audiences are also not that much higher. In fact, it is
safe to say that it is basically the same social class that regularly attends
the performing arts in the us, Britain, and Europe. But because prices are
slightly higher in the us and Britain, the same social class is prepared to
pay higher prices. As has been demonstrated again and again, attendance
ﬁgures of the traditional performing arts have little relationship to ticket
prices; if necessary the audience is prepared to pay more. There is evi-
dence that this attitude is not just limited to the us and Britain, but that
so-called price elasticity is relatively low in other European countries as
well.43
Therefore it is probably true that, in the long run, the effect of lower
subsidies on prices, audience sizes, and audience composition is not that
great. These kinds of results send out a caution signal against hasty and
dramatic prophecies about the arts collapsing if governments gradually
decrease their subsidy outlays. The degree of subsidization seems to have
little effect on the demand for art products that are adversely affected by
the cost disease.
The second prediction, that subsidies encourage rising costs by dis-
couraging cost saving and the introduction of cost-saving techniques and
innovations, is at least partly true. Direct subsidization in Europe is
much higher than in the us and Britain. Higher American private and
corporate donations only partly cover the difference.44 Therefore,
market-generated earnings of structurally subsidized companies com-
prise about 50% of total income in the us and Britain and approximately
15% in countries like France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden.45
A large disparity in subsidization incomes coupled with small differences
in total per capita attendance ﬁgures and prices can only be explained by
the fact that costs are higher in Europe. Performing art companies in
Britain and the us are more successful in keeping costs down. Costs per
visitor are lower because the average audience size per performance is
larger and also because, on average, the same program is performed
more often.46 (In mainland Western Europe, performances of a success-
ful opera, musical, play or concert held over for a longer stint are
regarded with suspicion. ‘When they come in droves, quality cannot be
high.’ Moreover, in countries where many performers still have perma-
nent contracts such as the Netherlands and Germany costs due to higher
labor costs are also higher than in the us.)
One would also expect more innovation in staging-techniques and
products in Britain and the us, but this is not borne out by the evidence.
In general, the introduction of new techniques like electronic ampliﬁca-
tion and video screens in the traditional performing arts, is seldom any
more prevalent than it is in Europe. This goes for the introduction of
177
SUBSIDIES AND DONATIONS EXACERBATE THE COST DISEASE

innovative new products as well. To Europeans, the theatre, classical
music and opera repertoire in the us is considered relatively conserva-
tive. American production companies seem to be even more locked into a
clichéd repertoire of reliable fare than they are in Europe. Whether this is
true or not is open to debate, but in general, American innovation is no
greater than it is in Europe.47
Our third prediction proposes that subsidies should inﬂate industry
costs because of unfair competition within the industry. Innovation in
unsubsidized areas is indirectly discouraged. Subsidies cause unfair com-
petition and so increase industry costs. This is because some of the arts
receive high levels of subsidies and thus increase their status, while mon-
etary reward and even more status in the unsubsidized arts remains low,
lower than in countries, for instance with a lot less subsidization. There-
fore the incentive to innovate is also less in the unsubsidized sectors than
in the corresponding sectors in countries with less subsidization. Pop
music in general is more innovative in the Anglo-Saxon countries. Most
of the contemporary innovations come from these countries. As far as
costs and quality are concerned Europe in general cannot compete with
the Anglo-Saxon countries. Europe, for instance, imports far more pop
music than it exports. (More will be said about this subject in section
9.9)
The conclusion of this section is that, contrary to the belief in the art
world that subsidies are the answer to the cost disease, subsidization
exacerbates the cost disease in the long run. Therefore, decreasing subsi-
dies is the best remedy against the cost disease (thesis 69).
11 Conclusion
Labor costs in the arts have increased more dramatically than in the gen-
eral economy. A cost disease exists in the arts. Nevertheless, in most of
the arts the cost disease is relatively unimportant or benign, because
quality is not constant, technical progress is substantial, incomes are rel-
atively low, demand continues to increase, and tastes change.
Among artists and in the art world in general, the notion of artistic
quality being autonomous from cost and demand considerations is
important. Gerald believes that the issue of electronic ampliﬁcation
should remain an artistic consideration and not one of how to increase
your audience size. In other areas of the arts a taboo rests on quality
changes. The space to experiment with new techniques and formats is
limited and costs continue to increase almost without constraint. This
implies that labor cost increases in the arts do not depend on the technical
178
THE COST DISEASE

qualities of art products; they are based on social attitudes that change
over time. For instance, the current taboo on technical innovation in
classical music and the obsession with authentic performance is a prod-
uct of the times. In the past there were no such taboos and obsessions.
These taboos certainly don’t exist in pop music where new techniques
not only produce cheaper live performances, but also performances
attractive to a broader audience. Interesting new art products spawn new
tastes.
Rising costs does not necessarily imply that the cost disease is mali-
cious. With increased prosperity comes a willingness to pay higher prices
for attractive art products. And regardless of whether this is a good or a
bad development, artists are apparently prepared to work for lower
wages, which in turn makes the cost disease less malicious.
At the same time, the growth of subsidization and donations was stim-
ulated by fears that otherwise the cost disease would lead to unaccept-
ably low artists’ incomes. Moreover, if the cost disease were to decimate
the established arts, their special merits, which people presumably
underestimate, would also disappear. The desire to avoid this kind of sce-
nario further fueled the growth of subsidies and donations. It follows
that rising costs are part of the reason why the gift sphere in the arts is so
large.
The art world’s experiences with rising labor costs are not unlike those
experienced by other service sectors, such as education and healthcare.
The latter two sectors demonstrate that increased consumer demand can
effectively render the cost disease benign. Consumers, who have enough
of everything else choose to maintain an interest in education, health-
care, and art. Thanks to the productivity increases in the agricultural
and industrial sectors, consumers have more disposable income to spend
and are evidently prepared to spend it on educational and healthcare
products, as well as on art. Thus, as long as art manages to change along
with prevailing tastes and vice versa, the cost disease does not necessarily
have to be a terminal disease.
Discussion
1 Nowadays outdoors classical concerts for larger audiences are
increasingly electronically ampliﬁed. Can you explain why there are
no electronically ampliﬁed classical concerts in halls that are much
larger than the average traditional concert-hall.
2 This chapter suggested that a higher utilization of amateurs and a
more ﬂexible distinction between amateurs and professionals may in
179
CONCLUSION

the long run be one of society’s answers to the cost disease in the arts.
What is your opinion?
3 In the us, the performing arts receive fewer subsidies. More donations
only partly cover the difference. Therefore market-generated income is
more essential. Nevertheless, the performing arts tend to be just as
conservative in the us as in Europe. Does this necessarily refute the
theory that subsidization hinders innovation?
180
THE COST DISEASE

Chapter 8
The Power and the Duty to Give
Why Give to the Arts?
Serving Art
The other day Alex had a discussion with Robert. Robert makes installa-
tions. As far as their reputation in the art world is concerned, Alex and
Robert are more or less on the same level. But as far as his career goes,
Robert has chosen a different path from the one Alex has chosen. Robert
has chosen a path with fewer ﬁnancial rewards. He operates on the periph-
ery of the ‘avant-garde’ circuit. Every so often an artist from this circuit is
invited into the established avant-garde circuit and gains renown in the
general art world as well. Although this happens only to a select few,
Robert, without ever admitting as much, seems to be waiting for the call.
When they talk, Robert justiﬁes his actions by personifying art. He ‘gives
his time to art’. He ‘serves art’. He sets himself apart from other artists,
whom in his view are ‘betraying art’. ‘Their solutions are superﬁcial and
cheap. They’re not interested in art, so much as pleasing the art world.’ (In
Robert’s circle pleasing the art world is an even bigger sin than pursuing
money.) Alex asks him if art has interests. Robert says it does. Alex believes
he is being sincere. According to Robert the interests stem from the legacy
of art. Robert mentions some famous artists from the past he admires and
who inspire him. At this stage in their discussions Alex always begins to feel
a bit inferior and guilty, because he’s not as familiar with the works of these
famous artists as Robert is. Moreover, Alex has a difﬁcult time seeing the
relationship between these artists’ works and Robert’s work. But Robert
thinks the relationship is evident. (Robert makes installations and sculp-
tures primarily out of mud.) Nevertheless, Alex is impressed by Robert’s
willingness to sacriﬁce himself to art.
Earning Less by Spending More Time Working as an Artist
When Alex is employed as an economist, he earns about four times as
much per hour as he does working as an artist. If he wanted to, he could
easily spend more time working in economics, but he usually doesn’t. And
so it can be said that he gives to art what he could have earned had he
spent more time in economics.
181

Although Alex would love to see himself as a selﬂess donor to the arts, Alex
cannot deceive himself. He knows that if he spent more work hours in eco-
nomics, he’d start feeling forlorn and end up paying up a price that out-
weighs the extra income. Moreover, sometimes Alex notices something
else that shocks him. A reward he seems to get out of earning so little
stems from how he exploits the very fact of his low income in relation to
others. He casually makes people aware of his difﬁcult ﬁnancial situation
and they usually respond with something like ‘Gee, he must be a real artist;
he seems to sacriﬁce everything for his art.’
Alex realizes that his gift to the arts is certainly not a pure selﬂess gift.
Helping the Poor Artist
Alex likes selling his work out of his studio. (Of course, whenever he does
he makes sure to tell his gallery owner about it – well, most of the time,
anyway.) Alex likes doing it even though some buyers seem to need end-
less amounts of time to make a choice, they drink too much tea, discuss
their personal problems, and insult him by wickedly praising his work to the
sky, etc. There is only one kind of situation Alex can’t stand. That’s when
well-meaning friends and family members come to his studio. He usually
does not sell a thing, and afterwards he feels depressed.
Personal feelings not only matter in dealing with family and friends but also
with other buyers. For instance, Mr. R. is gay and he likes certain kinds of
drawings of male nudes that Alex makes. Alex suspects that Mr. R. likes
him as well. Meanwhile, Mrs. V. likes Alex’s photographs, but she likes sup-
porting artists like Alex even more. These types of situations are easy to
handle. Both parties know the unwritten rules. Therefore, it’s not difﬁcult to
close a deal.
With family members and friends it’s quite different. Within Alex’s social
group there are no established rules for combining commerce and sup-
port. The old rules have disappeared and no new ones have taken their
place yet. And this is why they get stuck.
Most of Alex’s friends and relatives think that openly supporting him would
be insulting – and in the back of his mind Alex agrees. Moreover, an open
acknowledgement of the fact that they earn a lot more money than Alex
does would only lead to unpleasant feelings of guilt. Both parties want to
avert this situation at all costs. And so whenever they want to support him,
Alex is not supposed to notice it or he has to pretend not to notice. This puts
Alex and his family and friends in an impossible situation. Family and friends
think that Alex will misinterpret any hesitance about buying an artwork as a
sign that they’re not really interested in his work and more interested in sup-
porting him, which is patronizing and an insult. Therefore, they try to play a
complicated game of charades that almost always goes wrong. In the end,
182
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

no deal is closed and family and friends leave Alex’s studio frustrated, while
Alex is left behind feeling just as miserable.
Why is it that Alex’s family and friends, but also private citizens, corpo-
rations, foundations, and government agencies feel so compelled to sup-
port art and artists? And why do artists like Robert and Alex give so
much to art? Do they make sacriﬁces? Or is it more proper to say that
they pay dues (or duties) and are ultimately sacriﬁced?
In order to answer these questions it might be useful to look at gift-
giving in the arts from the perspective of power and duty. I use the term
‘duty’ to emphasize that many ‘gifts’ are not free, but imposed by the
own conscience, or by conventions. This chapter tries to establish the
notion that donations and subsidies primarily rest on issues of power.
But we will also look into the phenomenon that the obligation to give can
restrict a donor’s power to the point that donors can even begin to be per-
ceived as victims. A continuum exists that extends from pure gift to pure
duty. The gift is freely offered while the latter implies an obligation to
pay, not unlike duties paid at national borders. Because the term ‘duty’
has a number of nuances such as one’s ‘duty to help’, I shall apply this
term to situations where the giving is not totally a matter of free choice.
Chapter 2 already made the point that the art world relies heavily on
gifts. Gifts, including subsidies, are as important in the us as in Europe.1
The present chapter’s analysis of the gift, including an analysis of the
beneﬁts of gift-giving and the obligations to give, goes a long way toward
explaining why there is such a large gift-sphere in the arts.
As an artist I believe that gifts to the arts are selﬂess and spontaneous.
This applies not only to the sacriﬁces made by artists, but also to the gifts
from donors. As a social scientist, however, I emphasize the interests that
are involved in the process of gift-giving. Generally, gifts are not all that
selﬂess. They are a complex transaction characterized by various con-
ventions through which the donors receive various beneﬁts.
1
Donors Receive Respect
There is extensive available literature regarding the gift.2 By formulating
and then answering some questions about gift-giving in the arts, I try to
apply some of this literature’s ﬁndings to the arts. I begin with some pre-
liminary questions.
Who are the main beneﬁciaries of gifts to the arts? It seems apparent
that art consumers and art producers both proﬁt from these gifts. When
an orchestra survives because of certain donations or subsidies, it’s con-
183
DONORS RECEIVE RESPECT

sidered a gift to those who can now continue to enjoy the concerts as well
as to the musicians who can hold on to their jobs. But by calling it ‘gifts
to the arts’ I also suggest that art itself can be a beneﬁciary. Thanks to
particular gifts art can continue to ﬂourish. As noted earlier, art itself
cannot actually receive gifts; only people can. But in line with the way
people think and speak metaphorically, these donations can also be con-
sidered gifts to art.
Who are the benefactors of the gifts? Government agencies, founda-
tions and corporations, private donors, the families and friends of
artists, and last but not least artists themselves give substantially to art.
How important are gifts in the arts? Earlier, in chapter 2, I estimated
that the arts receive approximately half of their income in the form of
gifts, which includes subsidies. The contributions from artists, their
families and their friends was not included in that estimate. When these
gifts are added, the percentage is probably much higher. Gifts are
anyway very important in the arts.
Do gifts replace one another? Gifts from various sources usually sub-
stitute and sometimes complement one another. In the us, government
gifts comprise a much smaller proportion of overall gifts than they do in
Europe. But private gift-giving is much more prevalent. This means that
private gift-giving is a substitute for government gift-giving or vice versa.
This also applies to gift-giving by artists. Artists’ gifts are often a substi-
tute for government subsidies and other donations. The average income
of artists working in alternative sectors that receive little or no subsidies
or donations tends to be much lower than in sectors that receive ample
donations and subsidies.3 By working for low incomes artists subsidize
themselves and so give to art. This implies that government subsidies not
only replace market income and donations, but also so-called ‘self-subsi-
dies’.
Sometimes, however, gifts tend to complement one another. This is the
case, at least in the short term, in the so-called matching schemes. For
instance, the government agrees to give to artistic endeavors by matching
the funds that corporations and private donors agree to give. Or, in cer-
tain countries, subsidies from the central government depend on subsi-
dies pledged by local governments or vice versa.
Is there a sharp line between gifts, market exchange, and forced trans-
fers? These three forms of transfer, which were discussed in chapter 2,
can be said to represent the corners of an imaginary triangle. Many of
these transfers appear somewhere in between the three corners. For
instance, a continuum exists between gifts and forced transfers. Donors
are often compelled to give. When there is a distinct feeling of obligation,
a donation stops being a gift and turns into a duty.4
184
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

A similar continuum exists between gifts and market exchange.
Although gift-giving and trade are both voluntary, they differ in other
aspects. Of the differences mentioned in chapter 2 the following are rele-
vant in the present context.
1 Gift-giving is less of a quid pro quo than commerce.
2 Gifts are not based on a contract.
3 The beneﬁts of gifts often derive from third parties rather than from
the recipient of the gift.
4 There is usually more personal contact between donor and recipient.5
These are relative differences. None of the above characteristics is condi-
tion enough to warrant gift-giving or commerce. Only when the charac-
teristics are combined can a transaction be seen as either closer to the
gift-corner of the triangle or the market-exchange corner.
For instance, the presence of personal contact does not necessarily
convert a transaction into a gift. On the one hand, when merchants make
deals, personal contact sometimes plays a vital role. On the other hand,
when large foundations give small grants to individual artists, it is usu-
ally based on details supplied on an application and there is often no per-
sonal contact involved. The aforementioned foundation grants are nev-
ertheless gifts, because the gift characteristics on the whole are more
evident than the market-exchange characteristics.6
Are gifts selﬂess? The existing literature on gift-giving generally
emphasizes the element of reciprocity.7 Gifts generate returns. In this
respect, it should be noted that gifts do ultimately change the world.
Without the gift the world would be a little bit different. For instance,
when a rich patron donates an important painting to a museum it’s char-
acter is altered. First, the patron usually enjoys the new situation and
thus it represents a return for the gift-giver. Second, because of the gift
people often have more respect for the donor which means another
important return to the donor.
In the existing literature on the gift it is a common assumption that a
gift’s beneﬁts sufﬁciently explain gift-giving. In this sense then, gift-
giving is selﬁsh rather than selﬂess. Therefore, viewed from the tenth
ﬂoor, the behavior of donors can to some purpose be analyzed from the
assumption that they seek rewards. This is the approach taken in this
chapter. (If we look more closely however, many donors do not seem to
be deliberately seeking rewards. Because of the habitus of donors, selﬂess
and selﬁsh behavior cannot be easily separated. According to the conclu-
sions in chapter 4, the same can be said about artists.)
185
DONORS RECEIVE RESPECT

2
Donors Have Inﬂuence and are Necessarily Paternalistic
Do gifts depend on power? Just as everyone’s purchasing power is not
the same, there are also a variety of capacities to give or ‘powers to give’.
Some people simply have more resources and thus effectively wield more
power to inﬂuence the world around them through their buying and
donating patterns than others have. (Because the term ‘power’ is often
associated with the abuse of power, the term probably carries a negative
connotation for some readers. But wherever people differ, in sex, physi-
cal strength, wealth, cultural or social capital, power-differentials nec-
essarily exist as well. This means that the possession of power is not nec-
essarily a good or bad thing, and so the term ‘power’ can also be used in a
neutral sense.)
Trading and giving both presume the possession of the means or
power to trade or give and therefore. Somebody, who has nothing, has
nothing to give and therefore no means to inﬂuence the world. This does
not imply that all donors in the art world are rich. On the contrary, some-
times donors do not need much to be able to give part of it away. For
instance, poor volunteers and poor artists evidently have enough time to
give some of it to art.
Like consumers operating in the marketplace, donors can choose
whether to give or not, how much to give and to whom. What they give to
one, they do not give to another. If Bill Gates had decided to donate large
sums of money to arts training instead of to an IT education program, it
would have had dramatic repercussions for many people. Therefore, the
wealthy donor’s inﬂuence is much larger than a poor donor’s.
Metaphorically speaking, the former has far more votes than the latter.
The same applies to the wealthy consumer who has more inﬂuence in the
market than a poor consumer does.
Nevertheless, the cumulative power of the masses to give can be just as
inﬂuential as the power of the rich to give, not unlike the purchasing
power of the many can be more inﬂuential than the purchasing power of
the rich as discussed in Chapter 3. In the us, the bulk of classical music
and theatre donations comes from a broad cross-section of not particu-
larly wealthy private donors. Similarly, the impact of the cumulative gifts
of many artists with extraordinarily low incomes may well exceed the
total received from other private sources. In other words, large numbers
of small donors add up.
Donors in the arts can be said to have inﬂuence. Among other things,
they inﬂuence the outcome of the various art world disputes. This
becomes particularly obvious in the case of large donors. One example is
how the Dutch government inﬂuenced the outcome of the dispute
186
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

between the traditional and avant-garde branches of the visual arts.8
Meanwhile, in the us, the cia has used its power in the past to promote
American abstract art abroad as a symbol of American freedom.9
Both trade and gifts have an effect on the state of the world. For
instance, in the production of concerts, orchestras manage to ‘change the
world’ by ‘buying’ a certain kind of behavior from their musicians. Or
art consumers can ‘change the world’, by purchasing certain cds and not
others or by purchasing tickets to speciﬁc events. Moreover, conspicuous
consumption also changes the world by evoking respect in onlookers.
Nevertheless, donations often garners more respect than consumption
does. And so when donors enable musicians to go on performing or
enable a local museum to purchase a certain painting, they not only
directly change the world, but they also indirectly change the world by
generating a certain amount of respect for their generous behavior.
Donors receive attention, respect, and distinction.10 The act of gift-
giving makes people behave slightly differently towards the ‘Maecenas’;
they pay a little more attention and show a little more respect toward the
donor. But attention, respect, and distinction are not qualities one can
just buy directly. It is an indirect result of conspicuous consumption and
even more so of conspicuous gift-giving.
Do gifts involve display? Respect for donors is a possible result but not
necessarily a deﬁnite manifestation of gift-giving. In this respect, gift-
giving sometimes resembles advertising. Advertising also supposedly
alters behavior. Someone buys advertising with the hope that consumers
will buy more of the advertised product. The way that advertising inﬂu-
ences the competition between products and ﬁrms is not unlike how
donors compete with one another, albeit in a less obvious and deliberate
manner.
Gift-giving, like advertising, often depends on display. Whether a gift
is displayed intentionally or not, gifts usually gets noticed, by the beneﬁ-
ciary but also by various observers. Therefore, gifts produce so-called
external effects, just like advertising does. Observers cannot ignore the
outward signs of gifts whether they be large or small. Observers respond
to gift-giving like they respond to advertising. I call this a reciprocal
effect because the effect is returned to the producer of the external
effect.11 The response to an advert is most likely increased sales, while
the response to a gift is attention, respect, and distinction.
Both advertising and public gifts involve a certain degree of compul-
sion. People cannot always avoid their effects. (From the observer’s point
of view, some effects of both advertising and gift-giving are involuntary
and thus more like forced transfers than like gifts. They can also be seen
as compulsory collective goods, comparable to a sculpture in a public
187
DONORS HAVE INFLUENCE AND ARE NECESSARILY PATERNALISTIC

space that cannot be ignored by the passersby.)
Are gifts paternalistic? Donors choose the destinations of their dona-
tions. In the arts, donors never spread their donations around evenly over
the full spectrum of artistic endeavors. They pick and choose. Private
donors in the us, for instance, give far more to traditional classical music
and traditional theatre than they do to modern music and modern the-
atre. They have the power to do as they wish and it is in this way that
these donors express their inﬂuence on American culture.
Sometimes the inﬂuence of a single donor has broad implications. The
example of the Dutchman Joop van den Ende demonstrates the inﬂuence
that a single donor can have. After Van den Ende sold off his television
production company in 1999, he started to use the proﬁts to support
both ‘serious’ and ‘popular’ unsubsidized theatre in the Netherlands.
The incomes of the lead actors and directors immediately began to rise,
which consequently meant that the costs of publicly ﬁnanced theatre also
began to rise. Because the funds of public corporations did not rise, it
became more difﬁcult for them to pay lead actors and to continue to
make ﬁne theatre. Naturally, theatre makers began to think in terms of
accommodating Van den Ende’s wishes at the expense of heeding to gov-
ernment inﬂuence. Gift-giving had changed the Dutch theatre world.
Because of their selective inﬂuence, donors are necessarily paternalis-
tic. Sometimes paternalism takes the form of a concern for groups of
people who are thought to be unable to adequately take care of them-
selves.12 For instance, some donors are convinced that certain people
underestimate the beneﬁcial effects of ﬁne art consumption. As such, ﬁne
art is a so-called ‘merit good’, a good whose merits are supposedly
underestimated. By gift-giving art prices are lowered, and so donors
attempt to persuade people to consume more art. If their paternalistic
strategy manages to successfully alter the public’s tastes then this is a
another return for the donors.
Donors receive returns in the form of inﬂuence; they inﬂuence other
people’s artistic taste or their inﬂuence leads to respect and distinction
(thesis 70). Donations and subsidies to the arts are necessarily paternal-
istic (thesis 71). The more powerful donors are the more chance they
have of inﬂuencing other people’s artistic tastes (thesis 72).
3
Art Sublimates Power and Legitimizes the Donor’s Activities
The respect that recipients and onlookers can offer donors is not without
its limits. Therefore, whether donors are aware of it or not, they compete
for a ﬁnite amount of attention, respect, and distinction, not unlike the
188
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

way ﬁrms compete for consumer demand. Sooner or later more distinc-
tion for one donor means less distinction for other donors. Therefore, by
giving, but also by buying and other forms of public behavior, people
with power display their symbols of power hoping to contribute to the
maintenance and improvement of their position on the social ladder.
The sailor shows off his strong arms, the business executive drives a
fast car, and the government parades its army. These are symbols, which
refer to possible uses; the sailor can actually punch out an opponent
while a government can kill its enemies. The messages are easy to com-
prehend. Most of the time however, power is symbolized in more indirect
ways. Apparently, indirect messages are often more effective than direct
messages. This applies particularly to gift-giving. More respect is usually
accorded the more indirectly a gift displays the donor’s power. Usually
the indirect display of power is well served by art.
Art has always been a useful vehicle for the indirect symbolization of
messages. This applies most obviously to the visual arts. The murals in
palaces, churches, and town halls as well as the paintings in the mansions
of the wealthy, which now inhabit our museums, all indirectly convey the
power of the Maecenas who often commissioned them to donate to the
church. These paintings often do so by alluding to situations from the
past, to sagas or to myths. (Our modern art is thought to contain fewer
messages, but I expect that in ﬁfty years time people will have discovered
that our modern art contained far more messages than we are aware of at
present.)
Usually art does not symbolize power directly. Most of the time it sym-
bolizes power in a sublimated form. Power is sublimated and the desire to
wield power is often totally denied. In Christian iconography, a beggar
may well refer to the powerful commissioner who donated the painting.
Moreover, art itself – including modern art – is often an expression of
sublimated power. On the one hand, it reﬂects power, because only
wealthy individuals and institutions can afford to commission this kind
of work and then donate it. On the other hand, art transcends power.
Music, theatre, architecture and visual art will certainly not win any
war, or dominate any stock market. Therefore, it is the ultimate expres-
sion of power, when the high and mighty can afford to say: ‘I do not need
to exhibit my army or my fast car; I have art.’ Through art, patron, spon-
sor, and government can associate themselves with the sacred. Art’s halo
of sacredness shines upon them and, paradoxically, reveals their invinci-
bility. Art merely suggests actual power like military power, taxation
power, or ﬁnancial power.
The fact that art is perceived as superﬂuous and useless serves to
enhance this sublimation of power, which is not only manifested through
189
ART SUBLIMATES POWER AND LEGITIMIZES THE DONOR’S ACTIVITIES

gifts to the arts, but also through art purchases and the conspicuous con-
sumption of art products.13 For instance, banks buy considerable
amounts of visual art. The Dutch government spends almost as much
money on the buying visual art as on subsidies for the visual arts.14
(There appears to be a large difference between buying and donating.
When governments or corporations buy art, capital is not spent, how-
ever, when they donate art they become poorer, at least in the short run.
But the status of art can be so exalted that in the long run gifts may well
contribute more to the prestige of the donor, therefore increasing rather
than decreasing the donor’s capital.)
Chapter 2 argued that the arts, in the form of objects, manuscripts,
scores, etc., function as bearers of some of society’s most important
beliefs and values. Modern people worship the artwork made by their
ancestors, the way other people worship their ancestors. Art stands for
the accumulated past. It stands for the nation and for civilization.15
Through art, donors can associate with the world of art and culture. It
gives them prestige.
Art not only offers prestige; it also legitimizes. Consumers legitimize
ﬁrms and voters legitimize governments, but only to a limited extent. A
true proof of legitimacy often comes from a higher authority. Emperors
and kings needed God’s blessing. Since art has to some extent superseded
religion, monarchies, governments, and corporations increasingly need
art to legitimize their own existence.
Institutions facing little competition derive relatively little legitimiza-
tion from buyers or voters. Therefore, they’re often the ones trying the
hardest to get legitimized by a ‘higher’ institution. The remaining royal
families, state organizations, nationalized corporations, and private
(near) monopoly corporations, all spend a relatively large amount of
money purchasing and supporting art.16 For instance, in 1998 the Dutch
central bank paid an extremely high price for a Mondrian painting that
was to be a gift to the Dutch people.17 The extravagance of this gift corre-
sponds with the notion of a monopolist who is seeking legitimization.
In the search for legitimacy, size and continuity seem to be of some
importance. Older and bigger corporations do relatively more for art
than new and smaller corporations. Usually the latter only recently
gained their right to exist in the market and they therefore have less need
for supplementary legitimization. In this respect, it would not surprise
me if people who inherit money do considerably more for the arts than
people who worked hard to reach their present level of wealth.18 The
ﬁrst, who are born into wealth, need to legitimize their money more.
Also corporations, whose policies are criticized, are continuously
searching for ways to strengthen their integrity. The fact that most major
190
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

tobacco corporations are larger collectors and supporters of art than
other food industry corporations conﬁrms the notion that art can
strengthen legitimacy. Even well established banks, which do not appear
to lack integrity, compensate for their involvement in the ‘vulgar money
business’ by afﬁliating themselves with the ﬁne arts.
Giving to the arts and giving art constitutes a display of power. This
display often appears in a sublimated form (thesis 73.) Moreover, gifts to
the arts legitimize donors (thesis 74).
4
Gifts Turn into Duties
In the preceding sections, I have emphasized the power of donors. Never-
theless, the power of donors can be limited by obligations, as I intend to
show in this and the next section. Donors often feel obliged to give.
When the power of donors becomes limited, beneﬁciaries often gain
some power in exchange. This means that beneﬁciaries can then apply
pressure on the donor. If this pressure is persuasive, then transfers can
evolve into something totally involuntary; they stop being gifts and turn
into forced transfer like duties, taxes, or even bribes. This type of forced
transfer is quite rare in the arts. Nevertheless, gifts that are rooted in obli-
gations are common. These obligations to give can either be weak or
strong. Where gifts appear on the continuum that runs from free gifts to
forced transfers depends on the degree of obligation.
When gifts are exchanged between people of equal power, customs
usually prescribe giving. People have a duty to give. In this context, it is
worth noting that the largest percentage of private giving does not ﬂow
from rich to poor, but occurs between people from the same income
brackets.19 Within these groups, the continuous giving of presents and
assistance is rooted in important conventions that fuse gifts with duties.
The donor, like the beneﬁciary, in this case, is neither powerful nor pow-
erless.
In the arts, individual beneﬁciaries have seldom wielded much power,
especially when compared to that of large donors. Nevertheless, the con-
ventions of giving can be an effective force and the obligation to give can
signiﬁcantly limit a donor’s power.
In the cases of duties and obligations, the threat of retribution always
looms in the background, but actual punishment is rare. If any punish-
ment is meted out, it usually originates with the donors themselves. In
other words, they are self-imposed as shows from the following example.
Often representatives of a local elite may feel personally responsible for
the course of society and thus feel compelled to give to local art institu-
191
GIFTS TURN INTO DUTIES

tions. The beneﬁts they receive in return, like prestige, are usually not
reserved exclusively for the donors, however. A community of donors,
and non-donors among the elite all share in the beneﬁts in the form of
respect. Therefore, at ﬁrst sight, it seems as if individual donors would be
better off if they just stopped supporting the arts, and save their money,
because they could still easily beneﬁt from the continued donations by
others. Nevertheless, considering prevailing social conventions, not
giving can often end up being more expensive than giving. These conven-
tions do not offer much leeway for those who prefer not to donate.
Conventions result from the collective internalization of values and
rules with respect to giving. When conventions are effective, negative
internal rewards – a bad conscience, for instance – are usually enough to
control behavior. It’s only in exceptional situations where social control
and external penalties, such as ostracism from one’s social class, come
into play. This mechanism not only applies to private donors but also to
administrators at corporations and government agencies.
Internalized rules are often passed on within a particular institution.
Because the process of internalization at each organization and institu-
tion acquires its own character, each institution can be said to have a spe-
ciﬁc ‘culture’ or ‘identity’. For instance, the character of a ﬁnancial insti-
tution is quite different from that of a construction company. Unlike
construction companies, banks have developed a predilection of gener-
ous giving to the arts. At the same time however, individual banks have
each developed their own speciﬁc preferences in who they give money to
based on subtle differences in their corporate identities. For instance,
while most banks in the Netherlands collect so-called avant-garde visual
art, the ing Bank (part of the ing Group) has for a long time now pre-
ferred to collect ﬁgurative modern art, even during a period when the
bank received nothing but gripes for the choices it was making. To a
degree, the collection reﬂects the identity of the bank and vice versa.
The situation of private individual and government agency giving in
the us and in Europe is that in the us private individuals give more gener-
ously to the arts than they do in Europe. In Europe, government agencies
‘give’ more in the form of direct subsidies than in the us. The difference is
an enduring one. Thus, we have the existence of different effective con-
ventions and traditions of giving. Recent attempts in Europe to boost pri-
vate and corporate giving have not been very successful at bridging the
difference with the us.
Gifts to the arts can be duties, because failing to give can be punished
(thesis 75). Conventions explain an attitude of giving among private
individuals, corporations and government agencies. Such attitudes can
be contrary to individual interests (thesis 76). Conventions explain the
192
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

differences in giving between corporations as well as between countries
(thesis 77).
5
Donations and Subsidies are Embedded in Rituals
Conventions serve a purpose. Collective experience helps establish the
notion that the beneﬁts of certain conventions outweigh their costs.
Therefore, when behavior stems from such conventions, costs and bene-
ﬁts are taken for granted. They do not need to be pointed out or veriﬁed.
For instance: ‘giving to art is good for banks and not giving is bad’. More-
over, this kind of conviction can turn into a self-fulﬁlling prophecy, pro-
ducing its own beneﬁts and penalties.
Why is it that in the Netherlands all the major banks support art and
maintain substantial collections of modern and contemporary art? Does
a bank undermine its standing in the industry by not collecting art? From
the tenth ﬂoor, a bank’s behavior can be explained in terms of a fear of
appearing contrary, or as particularly uninterested in culture. This could
be detrimental because all banks must compete and try to lure qualiﬁed
higher personnel. An uncultivated identity that comes with not support-
ing the arts might make it an uphill battle to attract the proper personnel.
Costs would certainly rise as a consequence of this image. Government
agencies engage in similar competitive behavior. But it is doubtful
whether bank management and government decision-makers really
think this way. Meaning that it’s much more likely that conventions
regarding simple notions of good and bad are internalized, which basi-
cally compels managers and decision-maker to promote art as a neces-
sity.
When costs and beneﬁts are taken for granted and when it’s consid-
ered taboo to question the rationale of donating to the arts or the ration-
ale of punishing defectors, then donations and subsidies represent a form
of ritual giving, accompanied by ritual punishment of defectors. In prim-
itive societies, rituals almost always govern giving, and our society may
not be that different.
In both primitive and modern society, those who do not abide by the
rituals and conventions face inevitable social ostracism. In modern soci-
ety, offenders are usually punished in a discreet manner within their own
circle. When public ﬁgures ‘go astray’ however, they may face public pil-
lorying and humiliation. In the seventies, there was the case of mr. Drees
Jr., a slightly naïve Dutch economist and politician, who managed to
draw some attention to himself.20 He was an intense and sincere art
lover. He was also a man of integrity with strong principals. He thought
193
DONATIONS AND SUBSIDIES ARE EMBEDDED IN RITUALS

that the poor were paying too much for the cultural consumption of the
rich. When, as a politician he had made it clear that he meant to do some-
thing about this, no open discussion, but a kind of gossip with the
description of him as some kind of ‘cultural barbarian’ arose. This not
only killed his plans for cutting subsidies it also killed his political career.
What is striking here is the power of just one phrase. No arguments were
employed; his opponents used only this one phrase. In rituals, words
often represent or conjure up basic irrational powers. This man was por-
trayed as cultural pariah, an enemy of art, comparable to being against
Christianity in previous centuries.
Nevertheless, donors and governments do not support the arts out of
fear of punishment. Giving comes naturally. Donors feel a sense of
responsibility; gift and duty fuse. Giving is rooted in conventions and
embedded in rituals. Although individual beneﬁciaries do not possess the
power to extract ‘gifts’, they ride the waves of conventions and rituals. In
this sense, the art world is often less defenseless and at the mercy of the
givers than it presents itself. People believe that the sacred world, which
art represents, is extremely vulnerable, that it needs protection and gifts
to survive. But without any deliberate organization a lot of power has
been invested in the conventions and rituals surrounding the arts.
Giving to the arts often follows from conventions and is embedded in
rituals (thesis 78). Because the arts are fostered by the power of conven-
tions and rituals, they are not as vulnerable as they sometimes appear to
be. Society gives to art and art ‘takes’ from society (thesis 79).
6
Artists Give and Pay Tribute
Thus far, I have only treated some general aspects of giving in the arts. I
have thus far ignored the essential differences in giving of the various
types of donors. In the remaining sections, I will look at the distinguish-
ing characteristics of giving to the arts by the various groups such as
artists, family and friends of artists, other private donors, corporations,
and private foundations respectively. I will discuss giving by govern-
ments in chapters 9 and 10.
Artists subsidize the arts. They do so by being prepared to work for
low incomes and by transferring money from savings, inheritances,
social beneﬁts, social insurance payments, or non-arts or arts-related
incomes to their ‘art-business’. This scenario is comparable to a pub-
lisher who shufﬂes money from a proﬁtable science ﬁction imprint into
its unproﬁtable ﬁne literature department.
Self-subsidization or internal subsidization can be substantial ele-
194
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

ments of the total subsidy picture. For example, non-applied visual
artists in the Netherlands earn some 27% of their income from govern-
ment subsidies and 73% from the market.21 Subsidization therefore
appears to be less than in the case of an actor who works in a structurally
subsidized theatre company that receives 85% of its income from the
government. But the picture changes however, if one acknowledges that
Dutch visual artists supplement their (very low) average annual net
incomes of 1200 Euro (in 1998) via self-subsidization.22 If they supple-
mented it to the level earned in comparable professions, the ‘gift’ part of
the income of visual artists could be as much as 95% or more and the
market portion less than 5%.
It is doubtful however, whether all self-subsidies can be considered
‘gifts’. In the common notion of giving, self-subsidies would not be con-
sidered gifts. Gifts involve an exchange between distinct entities,
whether it be individuals or institutions, which basically means that
artists cannot give to themselves, even if it is for the purpose of ‘serving
art’. The concept of the gift, then, needs to be broadened. On the one
hand, this notion of expanding the deﬁnition would seem logical consid-
ering that the motivation of self-employed artists subsidizing themselves
through low hourly incomes is basically identical to the artists who indis-
putably give to art companies through volunteering their time or work-
ing for low wages. On the other hand, because self-subsidies by self-
employed artists are sometimes sound investments in future successes, it
is more logical to treat them like any other business investment.
In order to resolve this issue, I follow the logic previously expressed in
chapter 6 and divide self-subsidies into compensated and uncompensated
categories. The compensated portion is an investment, not a gift. The
portion not immediately compensated by non-monetary rewards and
whose future monetary and non-monetary compensation is more uncer-
tain than is common practice in business investments, I call ‘donations’
and I characterize as gifts. (After all, many undisputed gifts also generate
uncertain future returns.) In my approach, these gifts remain part of the
gift sphere and are added to the already large gift sphere in the arts. At
the same time, it must be acknowledged that the line between donations
and compensated self-subsidization is extremely unclear in the case of
artists. Therefore, it is hard to assess the relative importance of these
artist donations. As I made clear in section 6.13, I believe that an impor-
tant part of internal subsidization, however, is not compensated and can
be treated as gift giving.
When artists give, they inﬂuence the outside world, be it ever so
slightly. As I’ve already noted, even poor artists have some capacity to
give. Their talents, training, and experience enable them to make sacri-
195
ARTISTS GIVE AND PAY TRIBUTE

ﬁces, most essential of which is, of course, the sacriﬁce of becoming an
artist. In this context, ‘being poor’ may in itself represent a form of
power. Their very poverty enables poor artists to make relatively large
sacriﬁces in order to continue their work as artists. Moreover, whether
it’s intentional or not, when they display this gift, as Alex does in the
second illustration, they end up impressing people with their self-sacri-
ﬁcing behavior. As is the case with any gift that is not totally hidden, its
display can lead to respect.
In the case of poor artists who have been unsuccessful for a long time,
however, such returns are limited and often gradually vanish. Pity – a
negative reward to most people – begins complementing and eventually
replacing respect. Successful artists obviously have a greater capacity to
give. And although most successful artists do not sacriﬁce themselves,
they usually continue to give to art. Their gifts, in fact, generate respect
and self-esteem.
It is likely that in making sacriﬁces artists have some vague notion of
future returns in the back of their minds. Meaning that their sacriﬁces
might eventually reap returns in terms of money, fame, recognition and
personal satisfaction. The majority of artists, who possess little chance
of ever being compensated, continue to nurture these expectations.
Future compensation however, is so uncertain that the donations or sac-
riﬁces by the majority of artists cannot possibly be considered normal
business investments. Moreover, because of the prevailing myths about
the arts that continue to operate in our society, artists are for the most
part, ill-informed. Artists give on the basis of misinformation. If this
available information wasn’t so misleading, artists would probably give
less.
Looking at all this from the tenth ﬂoor, misinformation has the effect
of turning donations into duties. By allowing themselves to be misled,
artists do not end up sacriﬁcing themselves, so much as being sacriﬁced
at the altar of art. Nevertheless, given the habitus of artists, it is safe to
say that sacriﬁce and being sacriﬁced amount to about the same thing. In
this respect, the term ‘tribute’ is more ﬁtting than ‘duty’; artists pay trib-
ute. Tribute implies the fusion of donation and duty and is experienced
simultaneously as an homage and an obligation. By giving their time and
money to art, artists pay tribute to art and more speciﬁcally to the accu-
mulated body of work of their predecessors in the arts – the collective cul-
tural capital of their profession. Because of their habitus, paying respect,
as well as donating time and money, represent a ‘gift’ that comes natu-
rally for most artists. (All this does not apply to the occasional rebel,
however. For the rebel paying respect represents a clear duty.)
Most monitoring of donors in the arts occurs extremely indirectly.
196
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

This certainly is the case with artists paying tributes. Formal codes are
unimportant.23 Given their habitus, artists just ‘naturally’ stay in line.
Behavior is based on a mythology that has become part of the habitus.
Because of the myths mentioned in table 1 in section 1.8, behavior takes
on ritualistic characteristics. For instance, the continuous sacriﬁce of the
unsuccessful artist looks a lot like a ritual sacriﬁce. Viewed from the out-
side, it seems to be irrational. The ritual, however, imbues the sacriﬁce
with a ‘natural’ rationale, which does not need to be veriﬁed. Moreover,
when an artist becomes derelict in her duties to art, it seldom leads to
punishment, because defectors are already so effective at punishing
themselves.
This analysis of donating by artists also applies to art entrepreneurs
and what I call semi-artistic personnel. For instance, small art book pub-
lishers are renowned for their internal subsidization; the same can be
said of many of the other art intermediaries such as small impresarios,
dealers, people who run alternative theatres, art spaces, etc. A whole
world of people exists who spend an unreasonable amount of time and
money on the arts, and in doing so, give to art in much the same way as
artists do.
Self-subsidies and gifts by artists, semi-artistic personnel and small art
companies help contribute to the already large gift sphere in the arts
(thesis 80).
7
Family and Friends Subsidize Artists
Although the legal ties between artists and their partners, relatives, and
friends have become less stringent, the presence of a personal union still
matters when it comes to giving, and therefore it is useful to distinguish
them from other private donors.24 When partners, relatives, or friends
give to artists, idiosyncrasy usually plays a role. The returns these people
expect from giving often depend more on the relationship they have with
the artist than on their relationship to art. Meaning that they support
their partner, friend, son or daughter, and probably would not support
another artist whom they didn’t have close personal ties to.
As we observed earlier, a surprising number of artists still come from
well-to-do families.25 Parents, brothers or sisters support them, just like
Theo supported Vincent Van Gogh. In the ﬁrst place, family money can
serve as a form of insurance. Youngsters are more likely to choose art and
the prospect of extreme uncertainty, if they know in the back of their
minds that there will always be someone with the means to rescue them if
things go wrong. Moreover, many artists live off an inheritance. Or they
197
FAMILY AND FRIENDS SUBSIDIZE ARTISTS

have parents who ended up paying far more for their children’s art edu-
cation than they would have paid for another kind of education. And
after their children graduate, they often continue to cover their off-
spring’s losses for many years thereafter.
Nowadays an immense amount of the total subsidies comes from part-
ners. The practice of the well-to-do husband who pays for his wife’s arts
activities, which oscillates somewhere between career and hobby, has
not altogether disappeared, but other arrangements have become even
more important. Breadwinners, both male and female, now often
ﬁnance the serious art careers of their partners. These include not just
artists, but gallery owners, impresarios, and other intermediaries as well.
Because in today’s world direct ﬁnancial assistance is sometimes a
humiliating experience, as seen in the last illustration above, artists’
partners often ﬁnd less conspicuous ways of supporting them. For
instance, they often basically institutionalize their assistance by auto-
matically paying certain shared costs such as rent or holiday costs.
Friends and colleagues, along with family members and partners, also
give to art by buying art and going to performances, which they would
not have done had they not had a personal relationship with the artist in
question. As everyone familiar with the major Western art scenes knows,
there are huge areas of unproﬁtable art activities, which are primarily
frequented by colleagues and prospective artists and even more so by
friends, partners, and families. Of the, say, twenty people present at any
particular contemporary or experimental art performance or opening,
most are certainly personally related to the artist in some way. The social
costs and beneﬁts of this circus of self-fertilization do not concern us in
this chapter, but one way or another the bills do get paid. The deﬁcit,
after ofﬁcial subsidies have been incorporated, is paid by internal
sources. Friends, colleagues, partners, and family members pay a consid-
erable part of it.
The assistance offered by family and friends represents a clear case of
how gifts are based on power as well as on duty. On the one hand, it’s a
matter of power, like in the past when powerful families had the
resources to support artist family members, which, in turn, enhanced the
family’s prestige.26 On the other hand, giving can also be seen as obliga-
tory, because there are conventions in well-to-do families that convert
support into a duty. While donors remain the more powerful party, ben-
eﬁciaries are not powerless.
Although there are no accurate estimates, because of the large number
of people involved it is plausible that giving by families and friends to
artists contributes considerably to the large size of the gift sphere in the
arts (thesis 81).
198
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

8
Private Donors Give to Street Artists as well as to Prestigious Art 
Institutions
Private donors operate on all levels and in all areas of the arts. For
instance, a donor gives a nickel to a street artist as he or she walks by.
Another donor works as a volunteer in a local theater. And a third
donates an entire new wing to a museum. It is a pity that there are no
accurate estimates of how much people give to street artists, but if we
take into account the number of street artists who can make a living from
their art, the total amount must be substantial. The same applies to vol-
unteerism as a gift.27 Even when we omit these two forms of giving, pri-
vate American and European giving is far more important than corpo-
rate and private foundation giving.28 (That is if we ignore corporate
sponsorship, which is more of a market transaction than a gift.) The gift
of private donors to the arts adds substantially to the importance of the
gift sphere in the arts (thesis 82).
For the person who gives to the street artist the main return is probably
the artistic product itself.29 If donors like the product, they appear to give
‘spontaneously’ to support that product. Nevertheless, it is more appro-
priate to say that conventions help dictate that they give naturally.30
Gifts to street artists bring returns but so does any private gift to the arts.
This does not mean that individuals or corporations are deliberately
seeking returns. Just like artists, donors are neither selﬂess nor totally
selﬁshly interested in reaping rewards. (The sections in Chapter 4 that
dealt with ‘selﬂess’ artists and their habitus also apply to ‘selﬂess’
donors.) Nevertheless, to simplify and reiterate a little, the behavior of
donors, like that of artists, is oriented towards returns, which includes
internal rewards.
For rich donors the rationale of giving to the arts is often embedded in
philanthropy as a social institution.31 Philanthropy often plays a role in
more general notions of how society should be organized. In the us, one
notion is that the government should not be overly inﬂuential, which
means that citizens should assume as much responsibility as possible,
which includes the act of giving. Moreover, philanthropy can be a way of
life. It binds group members together and differentiates them from other
social groups.32 Having a group identity leads to distinction.
Anonymous philanthropy remains a rarity. Low proﬁle giving is more
common. The fact of one’s donations to art are sometimes selectively
announced.33 This often adds more to one’s esteem than a messy display
of one’s wealth.
The returns for small donors are usually not limited to themselves.
Small donors share many returns to their gifts with non-donors. But a
199
PRIVATE DONORS GIVE TO STREET ARTISTS

small part of the returns is usually exclusive. As in a market transaction,
donors often ‘buy’ some exclusive rights, like special mentions, free
seats, vip treatment during performances, a journal only for donors, all
beneﬁts that are all especially geared toward ‘The Friends of the opera,
museum etc.’. Therefore the donation plan contains some aspect of
market exchange and the largely symbolic exclusive returns seduce
donors into continuing to give.34
Conventions that make gifts partly obligatory exist on all levels of
assistance relationships. This applies as much to giving to street artists as
to the philanthropy of the wealthy. ‘People should do their share’ is a
convincing argument, in- and outside the arts. Therefore conventions
make gifts fuse with duties.35
9
Corporations and Private Foundations Support Art
The corporate ﬁnancing of the arts receives a lot of publicity, to the point
that it looks like the arts are almost totally beholden to it. In the us, how-
ever, corporations give less than foundations and they in turn give con-
siderably less than private individuals and far less than local, state and
federal governments. In Europe these differences are even more extreme
because corporate philanthropy is negligible.36 In Europe, government
giving as well as private giving are most important. Given the publicity
their generosity receives, corporations and foundations have managed to
spotlight their generosity. This is hardly amazing. Because they are the
most clearly oriented towards returns, they display or advertise their
generosity more than other categories of donors.
As is the case with small private donors, corporate donations are a
combination of market exchange and gift. Market exchange occurs
when the donor receives exclusive returns, as stipulated in a contract.
Sometimes the contractual returns – as in, free tickets or other perks, for
instance, – are so important and so little of the donation remains that
‘donors’ are more consumers than they are gift-givers. This applies to
almost all aspects of today’s corporate sponsorship plans. Sponsorship
means basically trading advertisement rights which makes the gift part
inconsequential.37 In other words, there is no actual philanthropy
involved. Nevertheless, because of the attractive status that is accorded
the gift, such terms as ‘sponsorship’ and ‘donation’ are applied to veil the
true nature of these commercial transactions.38
Corporate philanthropy is common in the us; in Europe it is almost
nonexistent.39 Nevertheless, the motivation of corporations to give to
the arts, to sponsor art or to buy art appears to be largely the same.40 The
200
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

success of the promotion of the name or corporate logo is the most
important return.41 Non-monetary rewards are also signiﬁcant factors
for the various ceos and upper levels of management. Surprisingly, per-
sonal contact with the artists involved is often an important aspect of
these rewards. The face lift of a bad corporate image was mentioned in
an earlier section as a reward. The same applies to the goal of increasing
the legitimacy of one’s organization through its association with the arts.
In the case of private foundations or funding agencies it seems that
imago and prestige cannot be a driving force for ﬁnancial support as the
main benefactors, who could beneﬁt from them are long dead. But, as in
corporations, prestige also goes to the present management and the
higher employees. Moreover, foundations need the legitimization art
donations can offer them, exactly because there are no living heirs (or
shareholders or consumers) who these foundations can report to.
Most donors ﬁnd advertising their generosity an essential ingredient
of gift-giving. The details may be disseminated in a muted or digniﬁed
manner or they can be ostentatiously publicized on television and bill-
boards. Either way corporations, foundations, and government agencies
enhance their identity and increase self-esteem and respect. In other
words, it improves both their internal and the external imago.
The majority of rewards reaped by corporations or foundations do not
come directly from the artist or art company beneﬁciaries but, as was
noted earlier, from an elaborate tangle of vague and indirect sources.
Corporations, foundations, and government agencies, increase their
status and image via their connection with sacred art. Moreover, in capi-
talizing on the ‘higher authority’ aspect of art they also legitimize their
own existence.
At the same time, as we showed in the ﬁrst half of this chapter, corpo-
rations can also feel compelled to give because of existing conventions
and public pressure. It is often difﬁcult to tell where gifts that reap proﬁts
end and costly duties begin.
10 Conclusion
Giving to the arts is an attractive feature for most donors; otherwise they
would not do it. The aura of the arts shines upon them. Donors like cor-
porations and government agencies, get attention and respect and their
association with the arts legitimizes their power.
Although donations usually produce rewards, not-giving can also pro-
duce negative rewards. The giving is then more or less obligatory where
not-giving is a punishable offense. Because obligations are rooted in con-
201
CONCLUSION

ventions, giving usually comes naturally. Otherwise, one’s lack of gen-
erosity is often a matter that is self-punishable through appropriate guilt
tripping and having to deal with a bad conscience. Only very rarely pun-
ishment comes from outside, as has been the case with politicians who
after openly challenging the rationale of art subsidies have been stigma-
tized as philistines. The taboo against publicly challenging the wisdom
of subsidies demonstrates that giving to the arts is embedded in rituals.
Gifts are primarily associated with donations that come from outside
the arts, but a large part of giving in the arts takes the form of internal
subsidization. Artists continuously donate money to their art careers.
The money usually comes from a second job, savings, an inheritance,
social beneﬁts, insurance payments, or just living a Spartan lifestyle.
When artists, like Robert and Alex in the ﬁrst two illustrations of this
chapter, give to art, do they sacriﬁce themselves or are they sacriﬁced at
the altar of art? Robert and Alex do receive certain rewards for their
gifts. At the same time they are obliged to give. Not giving is a punishable
offense. However, given their habitus it is more accurate to note that
artists are inclined to give. Existing myths maintain this status quo. In
the case of artists like Robert and Alex, gift and a sense of duty, sacriﬁce
and being sacriﬁced, all blend together.
The analysis of gift and duty in this chapter plausibly explains why
there is this inclination among various social groups and institutions to
give to the arts, which in turn, helps explain why there is such a substan-
tial gift sphere in the arts. Of these groups, governments certainly have a
very strong inclination to give to the arts. Why however, governments
give so much, is not immediately clear. The next two chapters will
attempt to explain government subsidization from the power-duty per-
spective.
Discussion
1 Could you defend the statement that donors are more selﬂess and less
oriented towards rewards than we have suggested in this chapter?
2 On the one hand, it can be said that the support of art by a bank serves
to enhance the bank’s identity and imago. In this sense, giving is an
expression of power that may eventually lead to a competitive advan-
tage. On the other hand, it can be said that competition forces a bank
to support art. Support is evidently an obligation or a duty. A failure
to support art can result in severe punishments as it may ultimately
endanger the very existence of the bank. How should this apparent
contradiction between power and powerlessness be interpreted?
202
THE POWER AND THE DUTY TO GIVE

Chapter 9
The Government Serves Art
Do Art Subsidies Serve the Public Interest 
or Group Interests?
Opinions on Government Support for the Arts
Alex asked some friends why they think the government supports the arts.
Paul, a composer of contemporary ‘classical’ music, observes “I don’t
think there would be modern music without government aid”. When I
remind him of the existence of pop music he is embarrassed. He probably
wanted to say that pop music is not real music, but he doesn’t. Instead he
talks about the great classical tradition. “I think it is absolutely necessary
that it continues. And consistent renewal is the only way. I strongly believe
that in the long run innovation is in everybody’s interest. But even those who
love classical music do not seem to be that interested. I hate to say this, but
people don’t even know what’s good for them. And so the government has
to take responsibility. And not supporting or not supporting music enough
is not only shortsighted; it’s also extremely unfair. Even with subsidies I earn
very little and so bear a large part of the costs of my own artistic work. With-
out any support, artists like me would carry the full burden of the costs of
the little innovation that still remains. I think it would be very unfair to stop
subsidization.”
Peter is a visual artist who works in the ‘fringe’ avant-garde circuit. He just
manages to eke out a living and continues to make his art because of the
availability of all sorts of small subsidies. As long as he can do his own
thing, he doesn’t consider his low income as unfair. “It is the price I pay. But
I do think society should also pay a price. Art comments on society and has
values that are independent of market value. I think it’s the duty of artists to
offer critical commentaries through their art – also on the inﬂuence of the
market and the role of money in society. But one cannot expect people to
pay for painful comments. Therefore, society should furnish a free haven
for art outside the market.” For Peter this is the raison d’être of subsidiza-
tion. “If subsidization were stopped, art would become overwhelmingly
commercial and lose its sting. In the end, society would emerge as the real
loser.”
Anna is an art administrator. As a civil servant she worked for a government
body that issues subsidies to artists. Now she is running an art festival,
203

which is almost solely funded by the government. “I must stress how disas-
trous stopping subsidization would be for the arts and for society at large.
Entire aspects of culture would just disappear. I think there would be no
serious theatre and music left. This must never happen. It is in the interest
of society that the arts ﬂourish. This applies to traditional art just as much as
to modern art. It is my viewpoint that society’s willingness to let the govern-
ment support the arts reﬂects the degree of it’s civilization. And talking
about civilized people, I must add two things. Firstly, the government has a
duty to help poor artists, and, secondly, it must see to it that art is accessi-
ble to the poorest of its citizens. High prices for performances and muse-
ums are an assault on humanity. I really want to emphasize that subsidies
should keep art affordable for everybody.” Alex objects at this juncture and
points out that low prices do not stimulate the attendance of low-income
groups. “You are absolutely wrong,” she says. “I personally know several
people with little education and very little money, who attend classical the-
atre and music. And above all, it is the principle that counts.’’
Martin owned a number of factories that produced a certain brand of dairy
products. He retired early. Now he collects art and he goes to concerts. He
loves the opera above all. “It’s a pity I did not discover art earlier. I would
loved to have set up a visual art collection owned by my company and bear-
ing the company name. Modern art, of course. But paintings that could be
appreciated by my employees. It is not impossible, you know. About your
question: I’ve changed my mind about subsidies. I’m now on this commit-
tee to recruit donors for the National Opera. Do you know how much a visit
to the opera costs? At ﬁrst I could not believe it myself. It’s about twenty
Euros per ticket. But actual costs would make the price around four hun-
dred Euros.1 It could be even more if you consider the many free tickets – I
get free tickets, of course. So you can work it out; without subsidies, prices
would have to be raised by about two thousand percent. Nobody, well,
hardly anybody could pay those kinds of prices. We are trying to get more
private donations. But it is more difﬁcult than I expected. We will increase
our revenues by about one or two percent, but not more. Without subsi-
dies, the opera would disappear or it would become an extremely elitist
affair.” Alex adds that in his opinion it is already an elitist affair. “Oh no, think
of all the students who come. And you know who I saw there last time?
Auntie Sien from the Jordaan; she cleans my house.” (The Jordaan is a
former working class neighborhood in Amsterdam.) “Well of course, she’s
an exception. In general, people have no idea how much they could beneﬁt
from the arts. People must be educated. Therefore, art should be afford-
able. But I tell you, if I were still in business, I would really hang my Rob
Scholte paintings in the canteen. We can’t leave everything to the govern-
ment. We should all contribute to the good cause.”
204
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

Jonathan – Alex’s personal favorite – works in the bakery around the corner.
Alex happens to know that he occasionally goes to one of those mega-pop
concerts that take place in football stadiums. But other than that, Alex never
noticed that he was much interested in art. “Art? That’s for rich people,” he
says. “Well, not for all rich people, of course. Some go in for different stuff.
But I think the queen and the people around her like art, and the ministers
too. And all those people who live along the canals and in the Concertge-
bouw area, I am sure that most of them fancy art.” (The Concertgebouw
area is an upscale neighborhood in Amsterdam next to the well-known con-
cert hall.) “And I can tell you that those people have their ways. Yeah man,
they know how to get stuff cheap. Well, maybe not cars and horses, but
something like culture; that’s easy for them. All these people know each
other. And they have friends in the government. Actually I can’t blame them.
It’s only natural. Everybody tries to get the best. They happen to get a little
bit more. But I don’t care.”
According to Paul, Peter, Anna, and Martin, the government supports
the arts because it has a duty to do so. Without subsidization, society
would be worse off. Art serves the public interest and therefore the gov-
ernment serves art. This is the public interest explanation of art subsi-
dization. Jonathan, however, has an alternative explanation. He says
that inﬂuential groups who proﬁt from the government support of art
pressure the government to support the arts. The government serves art
because it is forced to do so. This is the rent seeking explanation of art
subsidization. In the following chapter I will add a third explanation: the
government subsidizes the arts because it has an interest in art. Art serves
the government. I call this the government interest explanation of art
subsidization.
These three explanations correspond with different positions on the
gift-duty continuum presented in the previous chapter. It involves three
different views of the government. In the ﬁrst explanation, the govern-
ment is selﬂess, it has an obligation, but it is not under any pressure to
give. Government subsidies are located at intermediate positions on the
gift-duty spectrum. In the second explanation, the government is forced
to pay duties. Such duties are located at the duty-end of the gift-duty con-
tinuum. In the third explanation, the government is a powerful donor; it
gives to the arts and it receives rewards for giving. It has an interest in
these returns, in other words. This explanation is located at the gift-end
of the continuum. In this chapter, I will examine the ﬁrst two explana-
tions. Both fall under the heading ‘the government serves art’.
In Europe, approximately half of the registered gifts to the arts comes
from the government. In the us it’s a quarter, while Britain is somewhere
205
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

in-between.2 (Taking into account tax deductions, government spending
on the arts per capita in the us is about half of that of Europe.) Compared
to other sectors, the size of the government gift to the arts is extraordi-
narily large in Europe as well as in the us. The large government gift
needs some explanation. Because a substantial part of the total gift for
the arts comes from governments, its explanation will also contribute to
the answer to one of the main questions of this book: why is the gift-
sphere so large in the arts?
In this respect, the present analysis treats many more aspects of gov-
ernment involvement in the arts than direct subsidization. For instance,
even though not all of the ﬁgures are known, the analysis also applies to
tax deductions on gifts to the arts, regulations that channel lottery
money towards the arts, and money that ﬂows from public broadcasting
and public universities to the arts.3 These are indirect forms of subsidiza-
tion. It also comprises government purchases of art, regardless of
whether these can be considered gifts or not. For instance, the govern-
ment buys paintings for public museums as well as for government
buildings.
As an artist, I see many reasons why it is in everybody’s interest that
the government supports the arts. I agree with Paul, Peter, Anna, and
Martin that art often contributes to society for free. Without subsidies,
these kinds of contributions would become smaller and ultimately just
disappear. Moreover, I also believe that art is good for people, even
though they might not realize it. Therefore, inexpensive subsidized art is
necessary to persuade people to consume art. And the government must
keep art affordable for everybody, because it would be unfair if poor
people could not consume art. And lastly, the government must subsidize
the arts to prevent artists from starving.
As a social scientist, I have no opinion on the artist’s reasons why the
government should support the arts, but I do not see how they can
explain the current high level of government support. I am inclined to
think that art world pressure applied to governments helps increase sub-
sidies. Moreover, I become increasingly convinced that the government
supports art because it needs art. This view is examined in the next chap-
ter.
1
Art Subsidies Need Reasons
In answering the question of why the government supports the arts, Paul,
Peter, Anna, and Martin, all give reasons as to why the government
should support the arts. They evidently think that reasons referring to
206
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

the public interest explain why the government supports art. They, and
many others, assume that the explanation lies in the legitimization. This
is a fallacy, however. There is an extreme and artiﬁcial example of this.
Even if , with hindsight, one agrees that the construction of the palace of
Versailles served the public interest, it is not public interest but the pri-
vate interest of the Sun King, Louis XIV, that explains why the palace
was built. Without the latter there would have been no palace.
Although explanation is not directly attributable to legitimization, the
two are often related in modern society. Legitimization is irrelevant only
in the cases of two opposite, extreme situations. First, legitimization is
irrelevant when all of a government’s orders are handed down directly by
an absolute ruler like the Sun King or when a single ‘lobbying’ group
completely controls government policy. Legitimization is also irrelevant
in another hypothetical situation: when a particular government works
like a computer and is able to detect and subsequently carry out all of the
populace’s demands and is automatically able to convert them into poli-
cies that serve the public interest. In reality however, these extreme situa-
tions cannot exist. Instead we have situations that fall between the two
extremes and here, argumentation and discussion become increasingly
important.
In a democratic society, lobbying groups can only get subsidies, when
they effectively argue that government subsidies will serve the general
public. This is a prerequisite for subsidization. Nowadays, anybody who
wants something from the government, whether it be the king, ﬁsher-
men, truck drivers, surgeons or artists, argues that their plans are in the
public interest. However disingenuous these arguments may be, if they
are temporarily convincing, they can lead to government support. There-
fore, it is not only the pressure of lobbyists that explains subsidization
but also their reasons.
Government is not a populist mechanism or a blind machine that
automatically serves the general interest. Instead, government ofﬁcials
feel an obligation to serve the public interest and so they listen to the
arguments of various groups who try to convince government ofﬁcials
that their particular plans would better serve the public interest than
other plans. The arguments involved can come from political parties,
social scientists, civil servants, as well as from various lobbying groups.
And so, when speciﬁc arguments are convincing they contribute to art
subsidies, even if these arguments can be proven false. Therefore argu-
ments can, at least partly, explain art subsidization. Nevertheless, in the
long run, the explanatory power of sound arguments is larger than that
of false arguments. Therefore, in the following sections I will examine
some common arguments in favor of art subsidies. If they end up being
207
ART SUBSIDIES NEED REASONS

predominantly false, it is likely that the rent seeking justiﬁcation is more
important than the public interest justiﬁcation for art subsidies.
2
‘Art Subsidies are Necessary to Offset Market Failures’
Because of art’s aura many art lovers feel little need to legitimize art sub-
sidies. A vague legitimization is often enough. Because art is thought to
be sacred and ‘good for mankind’, the government has an obligation to
subsidize the arts. And because of the mystique of art both the beneﬁts of
the arts for society and of art subsidization are obvious.
Since the sixties, however, the art world has been requested to specify
the beneﬁts of art subsidization. The request arose out of the develop-
ment of a more rational approach to government expenditure that was
instituted to control overall budget growth. Since then, a hypocritical
morality exists when it comes to legitimization. On the one hand, the art
world and the government cultural ministries continue to claim that the
beneﬁts of the arts for society are evident and beyond discussion. On the
other hand, because bureaucrats in other agencies require more details,
the art world and government cultural ministries eagerly welcome any
argument that may help justify subsidization.
In response to these art world demands, economists have written
numerous articles on the subject of the legitimization of art subsidies.4
The art world embraced their arguments in favor of art subsidies. Any
argument seemed welcome. This eagerness in the art world can arouse
suspicions, however. Maybe the numerous new arguments help hide a
bad conscience. Maybe Jonathan is right in looking for group interests in
art subsidies.
The arguments in favor of art subsidies that economists and others
have presented all refer to public interest. As noted earlier, a modern gov-
ernment’s expenditure no longer solely serve the interests of a single indi-
vidual like a monarch, or of a single group like the aristocracy; it must
serve the public interest. The notion of public interest represents an
important binding element in and around government institutions and in
general society. Policy documents on the arts often contain the term
‘public interest’. Civil servants and citizens both tend to evaluate govern-
ment actions in terms of their contributions to the public interest. Mean-
while, art consumers, art companies, and artists seeking subsidies all
directly or indirectly refer to the public interest as well.
The meaning of ‘public interest’ is not given and the ‘best’ way the
government can serve public interest is a matter open to political discus-
sion. Frameworks, however, do exist that structure the discussion. The
208
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

framework offered by welfare economics, a specialization within eco-
nomics, makes the effects on welfare visible when it comes to markets
without intervention and with intervention. This framework is appar-
ently inﬂuential.5 So the art world has welcomed arguments in favor of
art subsidies that derive from welfare economics. Consequently, other
arguments for art subsidies are sometimes also worded in welfare-eco-
nomic terms, or otherwise they can be translated into these terms. There-
fore, even though many fundamental objections can be raised against the
welfare-economic approach, I shall use this approach to structure the
discussion in this chapter.6
The fact that subsidies are provided at all implies the assumption that
the government can do a better job than the market. Therefore the
market is supposed to fail and so-called market failures are present. In
the illustration, Paul, Peter, Anna, and Martin implicitly point to market
failures in the arts. Their arguments are not unlike the welfare-economic
notion that the correction of market failures increases welfare and serves
the general interest.
First, the merit argument demands a correction because the market is
indifferent to tastes. The market ignores the collective desire to correct
‘incorrect’ tastes and to educate people. Therefore Paul and Martin want
the government to educate people through art so that people can develop
‘better’ tastes.
Second, the equity argument demands a correction because the
market does not produce a fair distribution of income. Paul and Anna’s
request that the government interferes to raise the low incomes of artists
is an indirect reference to this argument. The same applies to Anna and
Martin’s demand that the government keep the arts accessible for people
of fewer means.
Third, the collective good argument demands a correction because the
market fails to produce goods and effects, like seawalls, that cannot be
sold in the market. (This is market failure par excellence.) Paul, Peter,
and Anna referred to art’s free contributions that would barely exist
without government support. They are indirectly referring to collective
goods (also called public goods) and external effects, like for instance, an
exciting cultural climate. ‘See how much society would lose if the gov-
ernment were to stop subsidizing art.’7
These three types of arguments have – directly and indirectly – played
a role in the political debate on art subsidies. They have often been suc-
cessfully employed to help increase or at least maintain art subsidy levels.
209
‘ART SUBSIDIES ARE NECESSARY TO OFFSET MARKET FAILURES’

3
‘Art has Special Merits and must be Accessible to Everyone’
In the above illustration, Martin and Paul argue that art must be subsi-
dized because people do not necessarily know what is good for them.
People must be educated to become aware of the special merits of art.
Martin is a well-to-do art lover while Paul comes from a traditional and a
cultural family. They believe in the importance of art not only for them-
selves, but for others too. They feel responsible for other people and they
worry about them. ‘Many people don’t buy art because they don’t realize
how good art can be for them. They must be convinced by low prices.’
People who care about other people the way Martin and Paul do often
express their responsibility for other people in terms of gifts. (Martin
gives to the opera.) But the market and private sector fall short when it
comes to some people’s desire to educate others. That’s why the govern-
ment steps in, to correct this market failure.8 (Important donors were
often the ﬁrst ones to petition their governments with requests for art
subsidies.9) People who don’t buy art supposedly underestimate the value
of art and so governments subsidize art to persuade these people to con-
sume art. In this case, art is called a merit good. Merit policies are thought
to serve the general interest because they eradicate market failures. When
merit policies work everybody ends up better off in the long run.10
Art is a merit good par excellence. Sacred objects and activities are
always thought to have special merits. ‘Art has magical powers.’ ‘It can
change people’s lives.’ ‘It turns them into better people.’ ‘It heals.’ These
qualities are attributed to art either implicitly or explicitly. This may
sound exaggerated, but if one listens to average art lovers discuss art, it is
not. These kinds of conversations conﬁrm the mythology of the arts that
was presented in table 1, section 1.8.
In the past people were converted to Christianity under duress and in
this manner became ‘civilized’. Today art is considered a prerequisite for
civilized people. No western government wants to spread the gospel any
more; they all prefer to spread art. Art is a modern form of ‘religion’.
As with religion, a necessarily elite point of view is involved. ‘We know
what is good for the common people better than they do themselves.’
One group is enlightened; the other is in need of enlightenment. Some
people decide for others. If the ﬁrst group donates money to enlighten
others through art, they do not donate randomly, nor do they support all
forms of art. They pick and choose their preferred art forms. As was
noted in the previous chapter, they have the power to choose and thus
have the power to be paternalistic. This also applies to governments.
Subsidies derived from the merit argument are meant to ‘change’
people. Civilized tastes should be replacing uncivilized ones. Art with its
210
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

miraculous powers can do that. The aim of educating through art is
twofold. The ﬁrst aim is enlightenment for its own sake. Because people
don’t know what they’re missing, they must learn to enjoy art. Art brings
enlightenment. In a ﬁgurative sense, people are enriched by their expo-
sure to art. The second aim of education through art is emancipation.
Through education people increase their cultural capital and thus
increase their opportunities. As they reach higher positions in society,
they also literally become richer.
With both aims, the equity argument strengthens the merit argument.
An unequal distribution of income is unfair, but according to Martin and
many others, it is more unfair that poor people cannot afford art than
not being able to afford a holiday in the sun, for instance. They see the
merits of art as more signiﬁcant than the merits of a vacation. Because
they prefer to offer poor people low priced art and not tax deductions,
which they can spend at their own discretion, the desire to change behav-
ior takes precedence. The assumption, that art can improve poor people’s
chances in society and thus contribute to a more equitable distribution of
income in the long run augments the argument.
This view basically states that when art is too expensive and thus
unavailable, poor people are basically being denied their rights to an
education and to an equal chance at bettering their lot. Art subsidies are
both a matter of knowing what’s good for others and are rooted in the
notion of social justice. Unaffordable art is contrary to the notions of
social justice, and so art people like Anna and Martin end up feeling
guilty and indignant about high art prices.
4
The Merit Argument has been Used Successfully
The arguments about the educational qualities of art have been around
for a long time; ﬁrst they helped legitimize donations and later they justi-
ﬁed subsidies. The speciﬁc reasons why people should be educated
through the arts have varied however.11 For instance, at the end of the
nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries, socialists and
liberals promoted the betterment of the working class. They were con-
vinced that avant-garde art and ‘art with a message’ could change the
existing taste of the working class who preferred low forms of entertain-
ment.12 In the period after the Second World War most political parties
in western countries prescribed subsidized art to distract people’s atten-
tion away from the new, successful and supposedly poisonous products
of mass culture. Publicly ﬁnanced broadcasting dedicated to culture was
another outcome of this desire to civilize the common man.
211
THE MERIT ARGUMENT HAS BEEN USED SUCCESSFULLY

After 1968, ‘socially relevant’ art was supposed to educate people.13
Art needed to be ‘diffused’ among common people. These notions gradu-
ally became less important, until recently when socially relevant art
became relevant again. The same applies to the notion of art education
that recently began to reappear in the political debate in many countries
including Britain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands as well as the
us, where, after his inauguration, President Bush jr. proposed a 7%
increase in nea funding, earmarked for education.
The protagonists of art subsidies who think art should educate people
have always been concerned about how accessible art is for the lower
classes. Not unlike health care and public education, they have
demanded that art be accessible for the lower classes. Centuries of collec-
tive action actually did lead to the eventual establishment of ‘social
rights’ to health care, public education and social security.14 In the 1960s
and early 1970s, in a number of European countries, a movement con-
sisting of artists, art administrators, and civil servants demanded a simi-
lar social right to art. These attempts failed however.15
In the discussion of art policies – in government reports and in parlia-
mentary proceedings – the notion of an art policy that educates or ‘civi-
lizes’ people has been a recurring theme for at least the past 150 years.16
Evidently, the notion of art as an educational tool for people who show
little interest in art is a common one. Nevertheless, the fact that the right
to art never was actually instituted as a social right demonstrates that art
is less essential for survival and emancipation than, for instance, health
care and public education. However miraculous art may be, it is not an
effective instrument for educating people.
In the case of the arts, the merit argument is false. It is false in terms of
the argument’s objective, in terms of alternatives, and in terms of the
effectiveness of the proposed means. First, the objective is dubious. There
is little proof that subsidized art enlightens or emancipates anyone who is
not interested in art. The assumed beneﬁts of art subsidies may very well
be insigniﬁcant, nonexistent, or negative. Secondly, there are better alter-
natives. Spending on public education contributes more to education
than art subsidies. Thirdly, subsidies are ineffective in two ways. Lower-
ing prices has a negligible effect in persuading people with limited cul-
tural capital to start to consume ﬁne art.17 The majority of art subsidies
go to people who are already well educated. (So it’s not so amazing that
Anna and Martin can only come up with a few individual cases of a-cul-
tural people who, because of the artiﬁcially low prices, occasionally go to
the opera.) If the argument were to be truly analyzed one would have to
admit that the already educated become even better educated and relative
inequality actually increases; the net effect then is decidedly negative.
212
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

The ﬁne arts advance distinction. They enable people from the higher
classes to distinguish themselves from people lower on the ladder. There-
fore, it is peculiar that the ﬁrst should want to undermine distinction by
desiring to use art to educate people and to promote equality. It could be
used to veil other purposes. Even though education may be a genuine
goal, its eventual failure is often welcomed just as enthusiastically
because it proves that art is not for everybody and thus it reinforces dis-
tinction. This kind of double standard may well have contributed to vari-
ous government art diffusion programs in several European countries in
the 1960s and 1970s.18
Art subsidies based on the merit argument are, on average, ineffective
or counterproductive; they do not serve the public interest (thesis 83).
Therefore it is likely that other interests can hide behind the merit argu-
ment. Nevertheless, the merit argument has enabled subsidization
(thesis 84). The argument has been used successfully to solicit art subsi-
dies. Because of high art’s mystique people look up to it and believe it has
miraculous powers and thus agree that it must be subsidized.
5
‘Government Must Help Poor Artists’
However miraculous art may be, it cannot ﬁll an empty stomach. If the
sole aim of art subsidies is to correct the income distribution among con-
sumers, then they are in fact counterproductive. In general, poorer con-
sumers are far better off when they receive a 10-Euro tax deduction to
spend as they wish, than when through subsidization they – and every-
body else – receive a 10-Euro discount on theatre tickets. After all, a
cheaper theatre ticket doesn’t really do someone who needs food, cloth-
ing, or medicine much good. Moreover, because the average theatergoer
earns a relatively high income, the subsidy skews the distribution of
incomes even more thus exacerbating economic inequity. Therefore,
when Anna and Martin say that it is unfair that people with low incomes
cannot afford to purchase art or buy performance tickets, they cannot
say this just because of inequality, but because they believe art has special
merits. They use the argument treated in the two previous sections rather
than the equity argument. Existing inequality can only strengthen the
merit argument.
Paul, Anna, and many others not only worry about poor people in
general, but also about poor artists. (It is possible that they consider low
incomes among artists less fair than the low incomes among the general
workforce. Artists who make sacred art deserve even less to be poor than
other workers. It’s an attitude that brings up the merit aspect again.)
213
‘GOVERNMENT MUST HELP POOR ARTISTS’

Governments are generally concerned about low incomes and thus some-
times aim a speciﬁc aid package at a particular group of workers or other
social groups. This strategy can be more effective than general measures.
For instance, ﬁshermen who were adversely affected by an unexpectedly
reduced quota have been aided effectively by temporary subsidies in the
past.
After the Second World War, many European governments subsidized
art and artists to help relieve their wretched ﬁnancial situations. They
focused their assistance on artists as a group. In the post-war period, the
costs of art production, especially in the performing arts, rose quickly
and people were worried about artists’ incomes. Therefore, as I argued in
chapters 5 and 6, the argument that the low incomes of artists must be
corrected has played an important role in the growth of art subsidization
after the Second World War.
The recent introduction of new strategies to raise artists’ incomes
shows that the equity argument remains important. Several European
countries developed plans to improve artists’ ﬁnancial situations.19
Sometimes these plans come directly from the ministry of culture. In
other cases, governments prefer to keep their culture and subsidy plans
separate and so the ministry of social welfare administers the subsi-
dies.20 (An example of the latter is the wik plan in the Netherlands, dis-
cussed in chapter 6.)
Whereas the equity argument can be justiﬁed in the case of other
workers, it cannot be in the case of artists. Aid is counterproductive
because it actually increases the number of poor artists, as was shown in
chapter 6. (In theory, distinct types of aid might work, if it was tempo-
rary and the government simultaneously limited the access to the arts
through effective information campaigns and, if necessary, through an
ofﬁcial limit on the number of people who can become artists. At pres-
ent, this is not an option.) There are better alternatives in the struggle to
alleviate poverty in the arts. For instance, a general income policy involv-
ing social security and general tax measures to assist the poor is more
effective. Artists beneﬁt more from these measures than other profes-
sionals do because they generally earn less and receive social beneﬁts
more often than other professionals do.
Art subsidies based on the equity argument that are intended to raise
artists’ incomes, are ineffective or counterproductive (thesis 85).
Because these subsidies don’t really raise incomes other interests proba-
bly hide behind the equity argument. Nevertheless, the equity argument
has enabled subsidization (thesis 86). The argument has been used suc-
cessfully to solicit art subsidies. Because of the mystique of art, people
worry more about the low incomes of artists than of other types of work-
214
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

ers. Therefore, the public is usually easily won over to the idea that subsi-
dies should be used to raise the income of artists.
6
‘Art is Public and the Government Must Intervene to Prevent 
Underproduction’
In the illustration, Paul, Peter, and Anna point out that the arts provide
free contributions to society. Because the arts don’t receive adequate
reimbursement for these contributions in the market, they count on sub-
sidization as a guarantee against the under-production of art. To prove
their case they invite us to imagine a situation without government subsi-
dies. In this scenario, they see the arts as a much smaller sector and they
see all the free contributions that art used to provide as largely drying up.
Therefore, in their view most people would be worse off.
This is a collective good argument. Paul, Peter, and Anna hit at the
core of the welfare approach to public expenditure: markets fail because
the free contributions or beneﬁts of the arts cannot be sold in the market.
Because contributions are free, art products affect not only the well-
being of people who pay for them but also of those who do not pay. Thus
because of the free contributions art will be underproduced. This is
market failure par excellence. (The implicit logic of the market that ‘com-
petition insures survival of the ﬁttest’, breaks down.) An obvious exam-
ple of market failure is that people enjoy public sculpture or the beautiful
facades of the mansions along the canals in Amsterdam for free. There is
no market for these goods.
In many ways, art is public and free. The arts produce so-called collec-
tive goods and external effects.21 If the view of beautiful sculptures or
facades could be somehow marketed, people would be willing to pay for
them. Since people cannot buy these goods, they could eventually
become under-produced. In that case the government steps in and subsi-
dizes art on behalf of its citizens.22 This is the collective good argument.
This argument, furnished by economists trained in welfare economics,
was employed intensively in the 1970s and 1980s to convince politicians
and civil servants about the necessity of subsidies for the arts.23 It is a
‘textbook’ argument that indirectly inﬂuenced policy-making. The col-
lective good argument conﬁrmed existing views on art deriving from the
aura or mystique of the arts. It reinforced the notion of art as having a
general beneﬁcial inﬂuence in society. It also reinforced the idea that the
arts are vulnerable. Without government guardianship the arts would
wither. These are the kinds of ideas that have always played a role in
public discussions on art subsidization.
215
‘THE GOVERNMENT MUST INTERVENE TO PREVENT UNDERPRODUCTION’

Nevertheless, it is questionable whether the collective good argument
is sound in the case of the arts. In this respect, two questions must be
asked:
1 How important are collective goods and external effects in the arts?
2 Are they underproduced when there is no or less subsidization?
In the case of cultural collective goods and external effects that have a
physical presence, like façades, public sculptures, church carillons, and
street artists, there is little reason to doubt their existence. The majority
of possible relevant collective goods and external effects are, however,
not immediately perceivable and hard to pin down. In that case, it’s even
more difﬁcult to determine their signiﬁcance. These intangible collective
goods and external effects are probably ubiquitous in the arts.24 Never-
theless, economists tend to be suspicious of arguments based on intangi-
ble externalities. I don’t agree. After all, the presence and value of these
goods can never be determined ‘objectively’ other than through political
debate.25 Therefore, intangible collective goods in the arts can certainly
be relevant, as the next two examples will reveal.
First, both the inhabitants and visitors of a particular town observe
and enjoy its artistic or cultural climate. This climate is not for sale; it’s a
collective good. In this case the collective good is more than the sum of
numerous external effects produced by various sources. The number of
sources and their effects is so large, that it’s impossible to accurately
describe the collective good in any detail. Nevertheless, the climate it cre-
ates is important for the well-being of many people. It’s free, enjoyable,
and beneﬁcial for such varied sectors as artistic innovation, design, shop-
ping and tourism, and for the overall economic growth.
Second, the artists’ innovations are often free.26 Unlike most indus-
trial innovations they cannot be patented. Therefore, once they are made
public, anybody can use them for free, as long as the artworks are not
copied exactly.27 Both artists and the general society proﬁts from these
cost-free innovations in the arts.28
These kinds of goods clearly matter, they have value and are important
– question 1; but will they necessarily be underproduced – question 2;
when they receive much less or even no subsidization? Even if collective
goods and external effects are important in the arts, is it possible that
without government intervention they might still continue to exist?29
The fact that collective cultural goods and external effects are ubiqui-
tous suggests that they are not being underproduced. Apparently, non-
market rewards exist that contribute to their production. Among others,
gifts and internal subsidies represent rewards that keep the production of
many collective goods and external effects in the arts going. The works of
216
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

street artists are a good example. Although these works are unmistak-
ably collective goods, they are ﬁnanced exclusively by private gifts from
small donors. Moreover, storekeepers’ associations, corporations, and
large donors also subsidize activities that contribute to the cultural cli-
mate in a town. Above all, artists incessantly subsidize their own activi-
ties and thus contribute to the artistic innovation and cultural climate of
a particular urban area.
When art consumers and art producers ‘produce’ external effects they
often also receive indirect reimbursements. Because the façades of their
houses along the canals are so beautiful, many Amsterdam homeowners
receive indirect reimbursement in the form of prestige and are therefore
happy to keep up their façades. In this context, all the returns of the gift
discussed in the previous chapter contribute to the production of collec-
tive goods and external effects.30
Abolishing subsidies will necessarily alter and, to some extent, reduce
the free contributions offered by the arts. But because subsidies are only
one among many factors, that promote free contributions, the cutback
doesn’t have to be all that substantial. The savings may well outweigh
the loss in beneﬁts. For the most part there is little reason to assume col-
lective goods and external effects will just disappear, as Anna and
Martin suggest. Moreover, as has been noted earlier, donations and sub-
sidies often complement one another. When subsidies go down, dona-
tions take up the slack or vice versa.
The dominant situation in the arts is one of overproduction and not
underproduction.31 Above all the willingness of artists to work for low
incomes contributes to a considerable excess supply. In my view, the
causes of overproduction are much stronger than the causes of underpro-
duction. Therefore, although market failure due to the presence of col-
lective goods and external effects undoubtedly exists in the arts, it is
unlikely to cause substantial levels of underproduction.
The collective good argument for art subsidies is usually false (thesis
87). Because subsidies are ineffective, other interests must be involved.
Nevertheless, the collective good argument has sanctioned subsidization
(thesis 88). The argument has been used successfully to solicit art subsi-
dies. Because of art’s mystique, people believe that art has a general bene-
ﬁcial effect on society, which would be forfeited if subsidization was sig-
niﬁcantly decreased. Therefore, society consents to subsidies that are
intended to maintain the free beneﬁts that the arts provide.
There is however, one type of cultural collective good that is occasion-
ally underproduced, especially in poorer countries. A nation’s cultural
heritage is what we hand down from generation to generation.32 The
willingness of future generations to preserve this heritage remains
217
‘THE GOVERNMENT MUST INTERVENE TO PREVENT UNDERPRODUCTION’

unknown, while the present generations in the poorer countries often
have different priorities. Because cultural destruction is irreversible, the
price of ‘underproduction’ can be extremely high. Therefore, it can be
argued that government intervention is often necessary. In wealthier
countries, regulations are often sufﬁcient to insure preservation. While
most owners and consumers are increasingly willing to ﬁnancially sup-
port their heritage, regulations rather than subsidies often effectively
reverse the ‘irresponsibility’ of some owners. This has already been
proved in the case of the mansion owners along Amsterdam’s major
canals.33
In the next two sections, I will examine in greater detail two particu-
larly appealing aspects of the collective good argument.
7
‘Art Contributes to Economic Welfare and so Must be Supported’
The argument most commonly employed in favor of art subsidization is
that the arts are good for the economy. Even though the protagonists of
art subsidies probably try to free ride on the general primacy of economic
goals, the argument could be valid. Usually however it’s not.
If the arts were to suddenly disappear in a particular city or a country,
the economic effects would certainly be substantial. Basically, this is
what most so-called impact studies measure.34 The effects on employ-
ment in the arts and in areas related to the arts would be large, but the
same could be said about any economic sector that suddenly disappears.
Even when a heavily subsidized branch of industry that shows consistent
losses is about to be shut down – like coal mining was in several European
countries – impressive ﬁgures demonstrating their contribution to the
economy can be produced. The arts also consistently show losses and are
heavily subsidized. Proving that their economic impact therefore does
not necessarily justify subsidization.
What needs to be demonstrated is the presence of collective goods and
external effects, i.e., a free contribution to the economy derived from a
market failure that could not survive without subsidization. It is ﬁrst of
all questionable whether there really are no markets for the contributions
in question. For instance, people argue that hotels and restaurants in
Amsterdam beneﬁt without cost from the presence of cultural institu-
tions like the Rijksmuseum and the Concertgebouw. But the opposite –
cultural institutions proﬁting from the presence of attractive hotels and
restaurants – is also true. Therefore this is basically a market relation in
which no external effects are involved.35 (In the case of unique events,
like a festival that is produced every four years, external effects on the
218
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

local economy can be important. In this case, however, the economic
beneﬁts are relatively clear and some of those who proﬁt are often pre-
pared to sponsor the event.)
Sometimes the existence of assumed economic beneﬁts is difﬁcult to
prove. Some decades ago, the expression ‘art as a lubricant for the econ-
omy’ was employed in the Netherlands. All sorts of miraculous national
effects were attributed to the arts, from superior industrial design to
happy factory workers. Again, these effects, if they do exist, don’t need
to be external and when they are external they may also develop without
subsidies. The lubricant argument in relationships that involve other
countries is more convincing. Art can accompany economic diplomacy,
which means that foreigners impressed by a nation’s culture may be more
interested in its non-artistic products as well. In the next chapter, I intend
to show, however, that such cultural diplomacy serves interests that go
beyond the mere economic.
The argument that government must subsidize the arts because the
arts contribute to the economy is usually false (thesis 89). Nevertheless,
the argument that art aids the economy has enabled subsidization (thesis
90). The argument has been successfully employed to solicit art subsi-
dies.
8
‘Society Needs a Reserve Army of Artists and must therefore
Support Art’
In order to support extraordinarily gifted performers and creative
geniuses, society needs a huge pool of artist recruits and a correspond-
ingly large number who will fail. Maintaining a large pond with many
ﬁsh is necessary to catch a few big ones. Or, to invoke another metaphor,
the higher you want the point of the artist pyramid to be, the broader the
base should be. Without a certain high percentage of losers there will be
no artistic geniuses.
The presence of large numbers of artists can be considered a common
interest or common good. Because there appears to be no market for a
large reservoir of unsuccessful artists, the presence of a reservoir is also a
collective good.36 In the view of many people, this collective good is
likely to be underproduced if the government does not step in and subsi-
dize the arts. This view has inﬂuenced many public debates on art subsi-
dization.
This argument, however, is false. Again the presence of a collective
good, in this case a large reserve of artists, does not automatically imply
that without subsidies this collective good will be underproduced, i.e.,
219
‘SOCIETY NEEDS A RESERVE ARMY OF ARTISTS’

that there will be too few artists. Because of forces external to the
market, it is possible that the collective good is sufﬁciently produced
without government intervention. If this book’s claim that the arts are
extremely attractive is correct, then overproduction is a more likely con-
sequence than underproduction. The pond will be big regardless of sub-
sidization.
Frank and Cook have demonstrated that from a welfare point of view,
winner-takes-all markets often attract too many candidates rather than
too few.37 This certainly applies to the arts with its extreme winner-
takes-all markets. Therefore, subsidies only have the effect of increasing
social waste. And so what is really in the interest of society is not a bigger
pond that develops naturally, but a smaller one.
(One could argue that it is unfair that at present poor and unemployed
artists, who endlessly subsidize themselves, bear most of the pond’s
costs, but that has nothing to do with the underproduction of a collective
good, but with equity. As already noted, there is little the government
can do to raise artists’ incomes.)
A secondary argument can be added to Frank and Cook’s argument. It
is possible that the value of a large pond as a major factor in the discovery
of extraordinarily talented artists tends to be overestimated. In this
respect, the notion of whether artists are born with their talent or
whether it is a matter of training becomes more important. If artistic tal-
ents are innate, a larger pond will produce a larger number of talented
artists. For instance, because men continue to grow taller, ﬁnding good
male tenors is becoming increasingly difﬁcult. In this case, a big pond
will probably produce more good tenors than a small pond. Neverthe-
less, there is a limit to the amount society is willing to pay for such tal-
ents.
Moreover, it is likely that the majority of creative talents are primarily
an issue of training, and therefore a bigger pond will usually not produce
a larger number of talented artists. In this context, it is revealing that the
sciences apparently rarely consider creative talent innate. The sciences
are more dependent on training than on a large reserve. Upbringing and
training are probably as essential in the arts as it is in the sciences.
The argument that government should subsidize the arts because soci-
ety needs a large reserve of artists is false (thesis 91). Nevertheless, the
argument of the big pond has helped sanction subsidization (thesis 92).
The mystique of the arts has made this argument appealing.
220
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

9
Government Distorts Competition in the Arts
Government intervention sometimes reduces market failure, but it also
causes market failure. For instance, when governments subsidize the arts
in order to maintain a large reserve of artists, this leads to a waste of
resources. When it comes to subsidies, people often believe that it doesn’t
hurt to try. The fact that art subsidies can actually lead to less welfare is
usually ignored. Ultimately, any government intervention in the market
has beneﬁts as well as costs. And the creation of market failure through
subsidization and the consequent distortion of competition is a cost that
cannot be ignored.
Although the discussion in this section does not augment the subsi-
dization explanation, it is nevertheless important because it puts the
legitimization of art subsidies into another perspective. In chapter 7, I
suggested that the intensive subsidization of certain sectors of the arts in
Europe actually hinders innovation in adjacent unsubsidized art forms.
The government thus causes unfair competition through subsidization.
Subsidies produce artiﬁcially low prices for subsidized art. If subsidies
were abolished, prices would rise and therefore art that had previously
been subsidized would become less attractive and art that had never been
subsidized before would become more attractive.
By only lowering the relative prices of certain artists and art forms and
not of others, subsidization directly causes unfair competition. Subsi-
dization is, however, also an indirect source of unfair competition
because it only provides symbolic advantages to the subsidized parties.
Subsidized art often bears the legitimate art label, art that is sanctioned
by the government, and this gives it another advantage in the market.
At ﬁrst glance, unfair competition in the arts due to subsidization
seems to be a theoretical notion. After all, unsubsidized European pop
music ﬂourishes, while according to this theory it would suffer from the
subsidization of classical music. It seems that the artiﬁcially low-prices of
classical music do not make it more competitive against pop music. (It
can also be argued that these art forms are not really in direct competi-
tion. This is not really true however, at least not in the long run. Competi-
tion can be observed through shifts in consumer behavior. As has already
been noted, classical music has lost much of its market share over time to
pop music. In the years immediately after the Second World War, thirty-
year-olds mostly went to classical music concerts; this same age group
now primarily frequents pop concerts.38 Maybe this shift would have
been even larger had prices of live classical music not been kept artiﬁ-
cially low, but that is not certain.)
The effects of government intervention do not so much come from low
221
GOVERNMENT DISTORTS COMPETITION IN THE ARTS

prices as from indirect advantages for subsidized sectors and indirect dis-
advantages for unsubsidized sectors. The fact that in the Netherlands,
for instance, approximately 70% of all live and recorded pop music
comes from abroad would not be a cause for concern if these large
imports were offset by equally large pop exports. But even taking into
account periodic export hits like presently ‘Netherdance’, exports are
negligible and therefore imports remain much larger than exports.39
Thus, a large trade deﬁcit exists in pop music and other forms of unsubsi-
dized contemporary art. Pop music demand has boomed, but it has been
primarily been answered by imports.
Several explanations can be offered for the fact that local production
in the unsubsidized sectors of mainland Western Europe has lagged
behind. One reason is that English has become the new Lingua Franca
and so Anglo-Saxon countries clearly have competitive advantages. The
advantage is particularly large in the production of technically repro-
duced art that involves language. Here there is an extra advantage
because due to the large English-speaking community, scales of produc-
tion can be larger which reduces costs. But it is questionable if language
is that important. Some of the most inventive pop or new music involves
less and less vocals. Anyway, it is my conviction that in Europe the most
important disadvantage has nothing to do with cost differentials, and
more to do with a lack of incentives at home.
Due to the subsidization of the ﬁne arts in Europe, the unsubsidized
arts have a relatively lower status. The status difference between high
and low art is artiﬁcially large. When subsidization of the ﬁne arts is
high, there is little respect for other forms of art. The difference is smaller
in countries with more moderate rates of subsidization. It is telling that
as early as 1965, the British queen received the Beatles in Buckingham
Palace, handed them a prestigious reward and praised them for their con-
tribution to music. It is unthinkable that the Dutch could have produced
such inventive pop musicians at that time, but if they had, the Dutch
queen would never have received the Dutch equivalents of the Beatles.
(Even now, almost four decades later, there is little chance that the Dutch
queen would be prepared to hand out a reward in pop music.) In main-
land Western European countries the establishment tolerates, but does
not respect new unsubsidized art forms. Subsidies both conﬁrm and rein-
force this attitude.
This is not to say that unsubsidized art does not have its own centers of
reward, but these centers primarily serve those involved. They lack gen-
eral legitimacy and tend to remain provincial or they are primarily media
events, like the Dutch tmf rewards. For instance, pop music in the
Netherlands remains defensive and insular. Subsidies create a wall
222
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

between subsidized and unsubsidized areas. Whereas, the much-
respected prizes awarded in the subsidized areas are for instance gener-
ally recognized and respected, the attention accorded awards and compe-
titions in unsubsidized art forms is limited to the specialty group of
producers and consumers or to the audience of the commercial media.40
Because the unsubsidized arts have relatively little symbolic income to
gain, there is also little incentive to innovate.
Pop music is basically an Anglo-Saxon invention. Currently pop
music is consumed and produced all over the world. Nevertheless, the
bulk of the innovations continues to come from the us and Britain. Ever
since the Second World War, music has continued to be renewed over and
over again, but mainland Western Europe has produced a very small
share of the innovations. If a similar difference were to exist in the visual
arts, it would be less evident. Nevertheless, I think it’s no accident that
since France and other mainland Western European governments started
to seriously subsidize contemporary visual art in the seventies and eight-
ies, London became the center of artistic innovation in the visual arts.
Recently Berlin has become a second center of innovation. Due to the
recession rents are low, but subsidies for artists are also much scarcer
than in, for instance, France.
I do not want to suggest that there is no artistic innovation in unsubsi-
dized areas of the arts in Europe. For instance, Germany is producing
innovative Techno. There is also successful (but hardly innovative)
Dutch Netherdance, while France produces innovative digital video.
Generally these innovative outbursts are short-lived. They do not induce
a consistent ﬂow of innovation. The cultural establishment largely
ignores these outbursts. Due to government-induced unfair competition,
important artistic innovations are left to other countries.
In my opinion, the possibility of government-induced unfair competi-
tion in the arts hindering innovation is a signiﬁcant subject that deserves
further exploration and more documentation. (Apparently not all evi-
dence points in the same direction. For instance, according to New York
artists I know, for the most part New York is not a haven for invention.
On the contrary, the survival of the ﬁttest means conforming to whatever
is hot and trendy.) Nevertheless my provisional thesis is that in countries
where some art forms are highly subsidized and thus gain more status,
there is less innovation in unsubsidized art forms. In countries that
spend the most money on art subsidies, unsubsidized art tends to be
middle of the road (thesis 93).
When the effects of a lack of innovation become evident, there are two
possible solutions: either the status-difference between the subsidized
areas and unsubsidized art forms can be reduced by reducing all subsi-
223
GOVERNMENT DISTORTS COMPETITION IN THE ARTS

dies, or subsidies are also funneled to formerly unsubsidized art forms.
Mainland Western Europe seems to have opted for the second approach.
Increasingly they have begun subsidizing, directly or indirectly, formerly
unsubsidized art forms, such as pop music (including hip-hop), ﬁlm,
comics (bande-dessinée), break dancing, etc.
Finally, it should be acknowledged that, depending on the circum-
stances, subsidization can also harm the subsidized art forms themselves
by making them complacent, resistant to innovation and thus less com-
petitive with other countries. For instance, French state support is
increasingly being blamed for the deplorable state of contemporary
visual art in France as compared to England, the us, and Germany.41
Therefore, these art forms would have been better off with less ﬁnancial
assistance, meaning that subsidization causes market failures.
10 Self-Interest Hides Behind Arguments for Art Subsidies 
So far, it seems that art subsidies by and large don’t serve the general
interest. Therefore, even though false arguments can be inﬂuential, it is
unlikely that these arguments can fully explain art subsidization in the
long run. This brings me to Jonathan’s claim that art subsidies are in part
the result of the pressure inﬂuential parties put on governments. If art
subsidies do not serve the general interest, do they instead serve the inter-
ests of the protagonists who demand these subsidies? And can the pres-
sure of these protagonists explain government involvement in the arts, as
Jonathan has concluded?
If the art world puts organized pressure on a government, it is a matter
of so-called rent seeking. Groups try to acquire beneﬁts or rents. When
the government ‘gives’ rents to the arts under pressure, the government’s
‘gift’ is positioned at the duty-end of the gift-duty continuum. In the most
extreme case, the government is ‘blackmailed’ so that the government
ends up subsidizing the arts as a form of bribe to prevent the repercus-
sions threatened by inﬂuential social groups. The art world is thus using
and exploiting the government. In order to prevent adverse repercus-
sions, the government decides to serve art instead of the general interest.
Art lovers and artists who use the government for their own interests
are obviously not selﬂess. Therefore, by assuming that artists and art
lovers are not necessarily selﬂessly dedicated to art, the present approach
is contrary to the mystique of selﬂess and sacred art. It distrusts the self-
less motives of the art world. There are at least seven reasons why this
suspicion might be justiﬁed.
(1) Art subsidies do not raise artists’ incomes. Subsidies, in fact, are
224
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

more likely to increase poverty. (2) Art subsidies designed to educate
people, largely end up in the hands of people who already have consider-
able cultural capital. And (3) if the recipients have little cultural capital
and thus little chance, art consumption in itself adds little to their cul-
tural capital. General public education is more effective.42
In practice (4) lower prices seldom persuade people to consume (high)
art.43 (Anna and Martin can only point to individual cases.) (5) Lower
prices can even be counterproductive when in the eyes of outsiders they
signal lower quality. And if, for example, a few of those for whom opera
ticket subsidies are intended, actually go to the opera because prices are
artiﬁcially low, then the cost of their ‘conversion’ is high. This is because
the subsidy ends up in the hands of many more people than those for
whom it is intended. Costs are also high because they are contrary to
general income policies. In fact, the average taxpayer pays for the con-
sumption of upper-middle class art consumers and therefore (6) income
is redistributed in an unwelcome direction.44
Suspicion is further raised because the arts employ mainly (7) general
art subsidies. These subsidies do not discriminate between rich and poor
consumers and therefore, income is redistributed in the wrong direction.
Instead, it would have been possible to employ forms of price differentia-
tion or, even more effectively, handed out vouchers. Vouchers can be
designed to discriminate, between rich and poor, among other criteria.
Thus the undesired effect on income distribution is limited and a larger
part of the subsidy’s aim is reached.45
The fact that art subsidies often have little effect or are counterpro-
ductive but are nevertheless maintained, plus the fact that price differen-
tiation measures and vouchers are rarely used, suggests that other inter-
ests must be at stake. Paul, Peter, Anna, and Martin’s motives in
promoting art subsidies may very well be selﬁsh.
Although suspicion seems to be justiﬁed, it does not automatically
imply that art lovers deliberately use selﬂess reasons to cover up self-
interest. If art lovers behave in a self-interested way, a double standard
can be involved, as has been noted above. So, it’s questionable whether
artists and art lovers deliberately and strategically try to put pressure on
the government in order to receive the beneﬁts of art subsidies.
11 The Art world Beneﬁts from Subsidies
Although the majority of economists, who have discussed public expen-
diture on the arts, have only applied the earlier-discussed welfare
approach, some have attempted to also ﬁnd explanations for the subsi-
225
THE ART WORLD BENEFITS FROM SUBSIDIES

dization of the arts that go beyond market failure. These economists
always refer to the possibility of art world rent seeking.46
From the 1960s onwards, social scientists have become more and
more impressed by the inﬂuence of lobbyists or so-called ‘pressure
groups’. At ﬁrst, the idea was that pressure groups could make the
democracy even more democratic. They informed the government on the
public’s needs and desires. Meanwhile opposing inﬂuences would bal-
ance each other out.47 It became clear, however, that there was a consid-
erable difference in various groups’ abilities to inﬂuence governments.
This implies that, when certain groups are relatively inﬂuential, it pays
to put pressure on the government. Inﬂuential groups tend to get more
out of government than other groups do. They proﬁt at the expense of
others. They manage to hoard a larger share of government spending in
the form of subsidies.48 In many countries, it is assumed that farmers and
homeowners are engaged in rent seeking. These groups are organized as
lobbies. They succeed in receiving relatively high levels of subsidization,
either directly or through tax deductions.
The ﬁrst characteristic of rent seeking is that members of pressure
groups beneﬁt considerably more from subsidies than the general public
does. Therefore, it pays for individual members to put their efforts into
rent seeking. A second characteristic is that the memberships of these
groups are relatively small in comparison to the total number of taxpay-
ers. Because the price each taxpayer pays is relatively inconsequential, it
does not pay to protest against certain proposed subsidies. A third char-
acteristic is that these lobbying groups are inﬂuential enough to actually
harm a particular government.49
Art consumers are likely candidates to get involved in rent seeking.
First, they comprise a minority among taxpayers. Second, they stand to
proﬁt considerably. They proﬁt both ﬁnancially and symbolically. The
ﬁnancial proﬁts are clear. Although the arts, especially the performing
arts, become more and more costly to produce, the prices do not rise cor-
respondingly thanks to subsidization. Without subsidies the protago-
nists would have been worse off.
If, for instance, the Dutch government were to stop subsidizing the
arts and costs remained constant, the average ticket price to a symphony
orchestra performance would increase from 14 Euros to 80 Euros. The
ticket price to a formerly subsidized theatre performance would increase
from 8 Euros to 87 Euros.50 While the average ticket price to the opera
would increase from 34 Euros to 226 Euros.51 If consumers maintained
the same attendance patterns with respect to these formerly structurally
subsidized performing arts, this would increase the consumer’s expenses
by an average of ten-fold. And if consumers were to attend less often,
226
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

their average spending would usually still show a considerable increase.
Irrespective of how consumers decide to respond, they would consis-
tently lose in terms of money and or attendance. This means that they
gain considerably from the current levels of subsidization.52
Not only consumers but also arts-related personnel such as art admin-
istrators and intermediaries, proﬁt from subsidies and have a clear inter-
est in subsidies. Subsidies help provide for their employment. Moreover,
comparatively speaking, their directly or indirectly subsidized incomes
are substantially higher than that of artists. Therefore, subsidization has
the effect of raising income levels and increasing the number of well-paid
positions. It follows that art institutions are obvious candidates for rent
seeking.
The position of artists is more complicated. On the one hand, artists
with regular jobs in art institutions are comparable to people in arts-
related occupations and they are also likely to proﬁt from increased sub-
sidization. In the long run, on the other hand, average artists are unlikely
to proﬁt from increased subsidization given the analysis presented in
chapter 6. Nevertheless, because most artists perceive themselves as
having a large interest in subsidies, they may very well be the ﬁrst to man
the barricades to demand more subsidization or to ﬁght against potential
cutbacks.
Besides ﬁnancial gains there are the symbolic gains, which could very
well be far more important. The very fact that the government subsidizes
the art consumption of the elite sets this form of consumption apart. The
subsidy serves as a sign of approval of elite tastes and so existing elite dis-
tinction is either increased or reinforced. The same applies to the phe-
nomenon of asymmetric judgment; the lower classes look up to the subsi-
dized art of the upper classes, meanwhile they look down on the
unsubsidized art forms of the lower classes.
Public declarations of a desire to educate people adds to one’s prestige.
The choice of art of the elite is established as an example to others. When
it eventually turns out that despite lower prices the diffusion of their high
art has had little effect, it is turned around to prove that not everybody is
suited for this level of art. This way, as we have already noted, the emi-
nence of the art lover only increases even further.
12 The Government is under Pressure to Subsidize the Arts 
On the basis of the foregoing analysis, one would expect to ﬁnd consider-
able amounts of organized rent seeking among the arts. Nevertheless,
few cases of this kind of rent seeking actually occur. The economist,
227
THE GOVERNMENT IS UNDER PRESSURE TO SUBSIDIZE THE ARTS

William Grampp, described two cases of organized rent seeking in the
arts. In both cases, rent seeking came from large art institutions.53 Such
institutions are better equipped to put pressure on a government. In the
Netherlands, there have been some rare incidents of public rallies in sup-
port of art subsidies. In these cases, artists’ unions but even more so the
directors of large art institutions played important roles. Other countries
also report some lobbying efforts but no rallies.
So-called art lobbies exist in several countries.54 For instance, Dutch
ministers of culture have been reproached for being unable to change the
existing art policies, because they have often had too many personal art
world ties.55 And it would have been strange, if some of the friends and
acquaintances of a minister in the art world did not periodically meet in
order to discuss strategies that could prevent the minister from making
unwanted decisions.
In the arts these ‘lobbies’ are, however, extremely loosely organized.
They can hardly be accused of deliberately seeking rents. Generally, they
don’t even have a chairperson or an ofﬁce, unlike farmers or homeown-
ers organizations. This means that the large majority of art world partici-
pants are too poorly organized to put any effective pressure on a govern-
ment. On second thought, this insigniﬁcance of organized rent seeking in
the arts is hardly amazing. Too much organization and discipline are con-
trary to the autonomous artist spirit. Organization and discipline are
directly contrary to the internalized rules in the habitus of most artists
and many art consumers as well. The option of organizing in order to put
pressure on a government simply does not arise in the art world.
Most of the people concerned naturally resist organization. Moreover,
if a strong organized lobby were to exist, the lobby’s efforts could very
well end up being counterproductive. If art lobbyists began behaving like
farmer or motorist lobbies do, they would betray the disinterestedness of
the arts, which would lead to a loss of credibility and further damage
their cause. (When occasionally some emotional artists manage to draw
media attention to the ‘desperate situation’ in the arts via some anarchis-
tic, confused and above all boisterous action, almost everybody in the art
world feels embarrassed.) Despite the obvious advantages, actual organ-
ized rent seeking is largely absent in the arts (thesis 94).
This view of art world rent seeking begins to change, however, when
one looks down from the tenth ﬂoor and interprets rent seeking in a
broader sense. Here we see that the government actually appears to be
under considerable pressure from the art world. This pressure stems
from the individual and non-concerted actions of numerous individuals
rather than any one deliberate organized action. Because this kind of
behavior is rooted in internalized shared values, actions do not need to be
228
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

concerted; they are naturally in tune with one another.
The inﬂuence the art world has on the government largely rests on
internalized values. Civil servants in charge of art policy often come
from the same social group as art consumers and producers and have
thus internalized many of the same values. Therefore, if government ofﬁ-
cials were caught even toying with the idea of substantially reducing art
subsidies, they will most likely end up punishing themselves by not being
concerned enough about ‘vulnerable and sacred art’. This means that
most government ofﬁcials never even contemplate these kinds of cuts.
And if they do, a hint of outside pressure is enough to remind ofﬁcials of
the ideals they stand for and the harm they might bring to their own
careers, were they to forsake these ideals.
That outside pressure can lead to actual damage was revealed by the
example in the previous chapter of the economist-politician whose repu-
tation was seriously undermined when he pleaded for lower levels of art
subsidies. Such cases are rare, however. The implicit threat of punish-
ment, the chances of getting a bad reputation, ‘he or she is a-cultural’,
and the possibility of being banished from one’s own social circle are suf-
ﬁcient deterrents.
The most common view people have of the arts is one of an extremely
vulnerable and impotent sector. ‘Everything sacred is vulnerable.’56 At
the same time, however, art has status and the values that underlie this
status are widely shared. Therefore, society has invested a lot of energy in
the arts. The apparent vulnerability of the sector actually ampliﬁes its
inﬂuence. Few people will deny that vulnerable art needs protection.
Given the vulnerability of art, even rich art consumers who might other-
wise be suspect have credibility when they plead for art subsidies.
An unusual relation between lack of organization and ability to inﬂict
damage exists in the arts. There is little visible organization in the arts
and there are almost no rent-seekers who might apply direct pressure on
the government. But because values are internalized, governments can
nevertheless be harmed and thus are continuously under pressure. This
pressure is part of a social ritual. The result is a ritualistic paying of
duties to a far from powerless art sector.
The fact that the government is under indirect pressure from the art
world partly explains art subsidization (thesis 95). This is a provisionary
conclusion. Its assessment must wait until the following chapter, in
which a third and related explanation will be presented.
229
THE GOVERNMENT IS UNDER PRESSURE TO SUBSIDIZE THE ARTS

13 Conclusion
Are Paul, Peter, Anna, and Martin right in remarking that art subsidies
serve the general interest and that this explains why the government sub-
sidizes the arts? Or is Jonathan right when he observes that the govern-
ment subsidizes the arts because the art world puts pressure on the gov-
ernment?
The arguments that state that art subsidies serve the general interest
and those that refer to the special merits of the arts, to equity and to the
collective goods and external effects in the arts, are largely false. In this
respect, subsidization is unnecessary, ineffective, or counterproductive
in the long run. Subsidization is often unnecessary in the case of collec-
tive goods and external effects. It is also ineffective in the case of merit
goods and counterproductive with respect to artists’ incomes. Moreover,
instead of correcting market failures subsidies actually induce market
failures because they cause unfair competition.
Nevertheless, in one form or another, general interest arguments have
been used successfully in public debates to promote subsidies for the arts.
For instance, when after the Second World War the costs of the perform-
ing arts began to rise rapidly, politicians worried about artists’ incomes
and about the accessibility of the arts for people with lower incomes.
Moreover, a strong desire has always existed to educate people through
art. Finally, art subsidies were required to enable a sufﬁcient production
of collective goods and external effects in the arts. Due to the mystique of
art, the effects of subsidization were seldom checked and so false argu-
ments could continue to inﬂuence art policies. Therefore, the arguments
of Paul, Peter, Anna, and Martin in part explain subsidization.
The fact that meager arguments can appear convincing demonstrates
that the mystique of the arts must be strong. Nevertheless, it is unlikely
that the use of weak arguments can fully explain the rapid growth of art
subsidization in the us and Europe since the Second World War and the
current extensive scale of subsidization especially in mainland Western
Europe. Therefore, the phenomenon that groups put indirect pressure on
governments to subsidize the arts, i.e., rent seeking, may well offer a sup-
plementary explanation for the larger part of art subsidization.
The analysis broadly conﬁrms Jonathan’s view that the government
subsidizes the arts because of external pressure, but Jonathan is wrong in
assuming that the higher classes deliberately pressure the government
into subsidizing the arts. Instead, this pressure stems from internalized
values that are shared by people in the art world as well as in the various
government agencies. These values depend on the mystique of art, the
230
THE GOVERNMENT SERVES ART

same mystique that forms the essence of arguments that refer to the gen-
eral interest.
In practice the rent seeking and general interest explanations overlap.
Sometimes the emphasis lies on rent seeking and sometimes on convinc-
ing arguments that refer to the general interest. Depending on an individ-
ual’s personal experience with the arts, one may judge one explanation
as more important than the other.
Because I shall present a third explanation in the following chapter, I
postpone the assessment of these two explanations until the end of chap-
ter 10. In that chapter I will examine the possibility that art subsidization
serves government interests. Instead of being a blind machine or the
victim of the art world, governments can be perceived as an effective
donor that receives numerous beneﬁts from subsidizing the arts. In other
words, art may very well serve the interests of a government.
Discussion
1 Most classical concertgoers have an above-average income. Subsidiza-
tion allows some people with more moderate incomes to attend these
kinds of concerts. If the aim of subsidization is to assure that concerts
remain accessible for people with lower incomes, where would you
draw the line? How many people with lower incomes should be
attracted to outweigh the fact that an income advantage is given to
people with high incomes? 
2 Do you agree that the arts do not need support to maintain a big pond
of artists in order to produce some extraordinarily talented artists?
3 Can art consumption help people with little cultural capital to
increase this very capital?
231
CONCLUSION

Chapter10
Art Serves the Government
How Symbiotic Is the Relationship between Art 
and the State?
How the Veiled Purchase of a Mondrian Painting became 
the Center of Public Debate
In 1998 the Dutch National Bank bought a Mondrian painting for 36 million
Euros and gave it to the Dutch people. Journalists found out that the pur-
chase had been handled behind closed doors using intermediaries and
that a special arrangement had been used because the deal had not been
entirely legal. The ‘gift’ from the bank to the Dutch people came from public
money; therefore, parliament should have been asked for permission to
spend this money on the purchase of the painting. The elected representa-
tives of the Dutch people must be able to decide what the Dutch are going
to give themselves. The Prime Minister, who had known about the deal all
along, admitted that he thought that parliament would have never con-
sented to the deal. Therefore, a ‘minor’ disingenuous procedure and some
concealment had been required. The intention of the government and the
bank director had only been to do something ‘nice’ for the country.
While the gift was meant to be public, the deal had to remain veiled. When it
ﬁnally became public, a row ensued and the public reacted particularly
negatively. The people were not happy with the gift because they did not
like Mondrian’s painting.
Alex remembers that he and his friends had mixed feelings about the affair.
They liked the painting very much, although they thought that it had cost far
too much money. But that wasn’t their main issue. 
Alex’s colleague Rosa had the most extreme opinion. ‘I like this Mondrian,
but I could never accept it as a gift. The president of the bank is a thief; he
gives away what is not his to give. He is more than just a petty criminal. This
so-called gift comes from a theft worth – think of it – eighty million guilders.
For that money a thousand visual artists could paint murals on public build-
ings for the rest of their lives.’ This is what Rosa does when she has paid
work. Then Peter asked her: “How certain are you that those murals are
what the people want?” And Rosa responded, “Of course they’d rather
spend their money on bus trips to the Costa Brava, but at least their local
board representatives like my murals.”
Peter was really disgusted by the sneaky maneuvers of this fraternity of
232

regents. At the same time, he was aware of the fact that as a heavily subsi-
dized artist he was an accomplice; “It is terrible that we can only make art
and have art around us at the expense of others.” This is what he hated
most of all. Apparently, the whole affair depressed him very much.
Alex, like Peter, was not immune to feelings of guilt, but most of all he was
angry with the bank director for such a poor and clumsy cover up job. Alex
was pretty sure that the hatred of the Mondrian painting was not terribly
profound. The hatred for the painting only became acute because it was so
closely associated with highhanded governors who the people resented.
Under normal circumstances, people would have just shrugged it off, and a
few years later they’d probably be proud of this new ‘pearl’ in their national
collection. Moreover, Alex began to understand that the concealment of a
gift serves purposes other than just covering up some semi-illegal affairs.
He realized that such a prestigious institution like the Dutch National Bank
could never bequeath a national gift in an atmosphere of extravagant cele-
bration with food, drink and entertainment for everybody, nor could it have
been the source of an exciting debate in parliament. In order to show their
special inﬂuential positions both the national bank and the Dutch State
needed a ‘veiled’presentation.
How the Dutch Made a Favorable Impression in Berlin
In the summer of 1999, Alex visited his friend Adrian in Berlin where he
presently has a studio. Sitting in a café and reading the newspaper head-
lines, Alex noticed that the Dutch Dance Theatre had given a number of
extremely successful performances in Berlin. That evening he heard from
Gerhard, Adrian’s new boyfriend, that the performances were part of a
combined Dutch political and trade mission to the German capital. It
included several cultural highlights from the Netherlands.
Gerhard does stage lighting and he had been involved in the staging of the
performances of the Dutch Dance Theatre. Gerhard said he and his col-
leagues were very impressed by the innovative and high level of the danc-
ing. The style, although international, still had a Dutch touch to it. They
noticed that the artistic director and the large majority of the dancers were
not even Dutch. But then listening to them speak, they discovered that
everybody in the company spoke Dutch very well.
For these German stagehands it was a strange experience to see so many
foreigners in this Dutch company because in Germany the members of
state-subsidized art companies must be German. Alex noticed that the
newspaper critics had also praised the cultural openness of the Dutch.
Gerhard certainly loved the inspiring international charisma of the Dutch.
He told Alex that he would like to do stage lighting in the Netherlands. And
at this time he is in fact doing so at ‘Het Muziektheater’ in Amsterdam.
233
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

Why do governments bestow art on their citizens? Why did the Dutch
government present a Mondrian painting to the Dutch public, when they
would have preferred another kind of art or a tax deduction instead? And
why did the government not convert the painting deal into a major cele-
bration? How does the Dutch government use art to impress its German
neighbors? Finally, what kind of message is the Dutch government trying
to convey?
The explanations for government involvement in the arts presented in
the previous chapter are probably lacking. They don’t explain the extent
of the government’s involvement. This chapter approaches the subject
from a different angle. It looks at the government as if it has its own
interests. Supporting art, one can say, is in the interest of the govern-
ment.
Unlike the previous chapter, this chapter approaches government gifts
to the arts from the power end of the gift-duty continuum. The govern-
ment is not obliged or forced to support art. Instead – like a large corpo-
ration – the government has the power to support art and does so in order
to proﬁt from it.
As an artist, I am sticking to my earlier opinion: The government sup-
ports art because art is important to society. As a social scientist, I’m
increasingly convinced that the government supports art because it needs
art.
My thinking on this subject is incomplete. Nevertheless, I like to share
what I have.1
1
Governments Have Interests and Tastes 
“The government is no judge of the sciences and arts.” This saying from
the 19-century Dutch politician, Thorbecke, has for a long time inﬂu-
enced Dutch art policy. If one interprets it in the strict sense, it means that
the government should never interfere in the arts. In a broader sense, it
means that the government is ‘allowed’ to support the arts, but must
leave subsidization choices to the art world.2 The idea that a government
could have artistic taste is abhorrent. The autonomy of the arts must be
respected at all costs. Government neutrality when it comes to art is par-
ticularly important in countries like the us, Britain, and the Netherlands.
In Germany and France, for instance, art is more politicized. Neverthe-
less, these countries also have many advocates of government neutrality
with respect to the arts.
This chapter examines a government’s interest in supporting art. It
demonstrates that when government intervenes in the arts it necessarily
234
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

becomes ‘a judge of the arts’. Because governments have interests and
because not all art serves government interests equally, it is natural for a
government to only support certain kinds of art.
My approach to government behavior in this chapter differs from the
common economic approach. I am using this rather abstract introduc-
tory section to justify my approach. This section may be of more interest
to academics than to general readers.
The welfare approach to government expenditure discussed in the
previous chapter treats the government as a neutral clearinghouse.3
What the government gathers from its citizens in the form of taxes, it
redistributes among these citizens in the form of goods and beneﬁts.
(When some get more and others less than what they paid in taxes this
kind of redistribution is supposed to serve income policy.) The govern-
ment itself is neutral; it doesn’t necessarily gain or lose from these trans-
fers. Because the government has no interests of its own, it can be called
selﬂess. When it subsidizes the arts, it selﬂessly serves public interest by
‘serving art’. This view was treated in the public interest explanation in
the previous chapter. (Also in the other explanation in that chapter, the
rent seeking explanation, the government was selﬂess; in fact in that
explanation, it was seen as a victim of rent seekers.)
But the harmonious and highly abstract view of government pursuing
public interest cannot explain the large and persistent involvement of
governments in the arts. General interest arguments turn out to be pre-
dominantly wrong in the case of the arts. The other, the rent seeking
explanation, is in a broader sense more convincing. It nevertheless
remains difﬁcult to comprehend how rent seeking by a badly organized
art world could lead to persistent large-scale support, whereas other,
better-organized pressure groups actually lost much of their earlier sup-
port.
The latter scenario could change, if it is acknowledged that civil ser-
vants and politicians can also be rent seekers, as the public choice theory
in economics assumes. Individual politicians could increase their elec-
toral base, coalition ministers could minimize conﬂicts, while civil ser-
vants could try to maximize their budgets.4 However, if we really want to
explain government behavior in the arts I propose going one step further.
I want to look at government interest and the interests of government
agencies and not just at the interests of speciﬁc government employees.
In order to develop a more satisfactory view of government behavior it
is important to look at the government from a different angle. Instead of
merely redistributing money and goods, it is more fruitful to view the
government give and take as two separate functions. These functions are
not carried out by some anonymous machine, but by various government
235
GOVERNMENTS HAVE INTERESTS AND TASTES

agencies that operate on different levels and in many conﬁgurations. The
relationship between taxation and expenditure is often extremely indi-
rect.
A government or a state is not a totally independent ‘natural’ entity.5
Nor is it merely the indiscriminate executor of the electorate’s desires. In
many ways, governments or government agencies are comparable to
large ﬁrms where a board of directors but also groups of employees have
relative autonomy. They have discretionary space.6 Under constraints,
they pursue their own goals. Constraints come primarily from share-
holders, but also from laws, conventions, trade unions and, in the case of
a department within a ﬁrm, from higher authorities within the company.
Therefore, boards of directors do not indiscriminately carry out share-
holders’ wishes. In the same way that government agencies do not auto-
matically carry out the wishes of citizens or their representatives. Within
constraints, established by higher government agencies, among others,
they also pursue their own goals.
It’s often impossible to distinguish actions that proceed from the use
of discretionary space from those actions that proceed from the impact
of constraints set by ofﬁcial goals and other limiting circumstances. It is
equally difﬁcult, if not impossible, to determine which actions of individ-
ual civil servants and politicians fully utilize discretionary space. There-
fore, it is better to draw the attention to the interests and actions of gov-
ernment agencies instead. Such interests vary from government agency
to agency. Therefore, governments and government agencies can be said
to have lasting identities or, metaphorically speaking, personalities. By
way of metaphor, a government can be said to ‘need’ art or to ‘prefer’ art,
as if the government was a living organism.
In this context, it should be noted that the use of ‘government interest’
often serves as a shortcut. When no detailed information is available on
the inﬂuence of individual persons or groups in and around the govern-
ment, a discussion in terms of government interests serves as a second-
best solution. However, by speaking in terms of government interests I
also emphasize that institutions have relative autonomy. The fact that
government behavior ultimately rests on the private interests and behav-
ior of individual ofﬁcials, voters, delegates, and others does not mean
that government actions can be reduced to those private interests and
behavior patterns. For instance, the satisfaction civil servants and politi-
cians get from supporting art cannot fully explain government support.
In the case of institutions like a government, the total is more than the
sum of the parts. The institution maintains a state of relative autonomy.
Therefore, the parallel with an organism is more than a metaphor.
Within government institutions, a modal habitus is reproduced that
236
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

newcomers tend to adopt. By participating in the administration, civil
servants’ and politicians’ attitudes change. For instance, if before enter-
ing the administration most important bureaucrats and politicians had
little respect for the ﬁne arts, they would quickly learn to respect it.
(In this respect, I depart from the methodological individualism of tra-
ditional economics and the public choice theory and I side instead with
the sociological approach such as the ﬁguration theory of Elias and the
habitus-ﬁeld theory of Bourdieu.7 Because the total is more than the sum
of its parts, it also follows that government interests cannot be equated to
the sum of internal pressures applied by bureaucrats and politicians who
favor the arts. Therefore, the present approach differs from an approach
that only examines magisterial rent seeking, as is the common practice in
public choice theory.8)
In this context, I shall not only speak of government interest, but also
of government taste, as if government was a being with certain tastes in
art. This is a shortcut for complicated phrases like ‘the government
enables certain experts to develop tastes that become expressed in gov-
ernment subsidies and purchases.’ At the same time, it’s more than just a
shortcut; I emphasize the relative autonomy of the government in its pref-
erence for art.
2
Art Appears to be Less Serviceable than it was during 
Monarchical Times
Extensive patronage by the courts, the church, and other patrons pre-
ceded modern state patronage. It seems that in their relation to the arts,
modern governments are the successors of the church and the monarchy.
Thus, it would be strange if the interests that modern governments have
in supporting the arts bore no relation to the interests of the patrons of
earlier periods.
In stylized fashion, a Patron and a Maecenas can be said to have been
interested in art in three respects. Firstly, they enjoyed the immediate
beneﬁts that followed from their private consumption of art. Paintings
hung on the castle walls and music was performed for exclusive circles.
Secondly, they enjoyed the indirect beneﬁts of the internal display to sub-
ordinates, which led to increased respect, obedience, solidarity, etc.
Thirdly, they enjoyed the indirect beneﬁts of external display to competi-
tors in the form of the preservation or improvement of their position in
social space. These three dimensions of art utilization depend on one
another. Solidarity, respect, worship, awe, or fear of others are just as
related to art utilization as enjoyment of the art product itself might be.
237
ART APPEARS TO BE LESS SERVICEABLE

One use cannot be separated from the other, as we made clear in chapter
3.
The Patron and Maecenas of old did not hide the fact that art repre-
sented an attractive consumption good. The possibility of display was an
auxiliary attraction.9 By conspicuously consuming art products, rich
consumers openly fabricated an external effect that gave them returns in
the form of more respect.10 Respect was a reciprocal effect: onlookers
responded to the magniﬁcence and splendor of their art.11 It ‘changed’
them; in general inspiring respect and awe for the Patron or Maecenas.
Not only subordinates or ‘friends’ were impressed, but also enemies. In
the past, the rich used art to mark their position on the social ladder in
order to preserve or improve that position.
In my view, the present use and support of art by modern governments
can still be analyzed from the perspective of the interests governments
have in private consumption and display. Many would argue that this is
impossible because modern governments are purportedly disinterested,
and also because art is increasingly considered as useless to large donors
like governments.
It is true that, unlike modern governments, the Patron and Maecenas
of old openly consumed art. They did not perceive their dealings with art
as gift giving. Because they were interested in art, these ‘benefactors’
made deals with artists in which many rights and obligations were speci-
ﬁed. Although viewed from the outside, these same deals sometimes
looked like gifts the Maecenas basically commissioned artworks, while
the Patron employed artists.12 Even churches were ‘consumers’ of art
rather than donors. Unlike the common people, they could afford the
conspicuous consumption of this ‘luxury’.
Modern governments on the other hand are donors rather than con-
sumers. They often spend more money on subsidies than on purchases.
And because modern governments are supposed to be disinterested, they
prefer to present themselves as donors and not as consumers of art.13
Nevertheless, I shall show that governments have numerous interests in
the arts. First of all, governments seek display. And at present conspicu-
ous gifts serve the need to display better than conspicuous consumption
does.
It is also true that the arts have changed. Art has lost some of its tradi-
tional uses; for instance, art is no longer used as propaganda. Modern
advertising strategies are more effective in conveying speciﬁc messages.
Nevertheless, display through art has not disappeared, but its nature has
changed. The messages of most current art are almost always general.
This is particularly obvious in the visual arts.
More than 200 years ago visual art was attractive to the Maecenas
238
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

because of the artistic symbols that painters employed. People could
easily comprehend the meanings of the artworks and could respond to
them. (In this respect, it resembles the way modern people ‘read’ adver-
tisements.) Therefore, in the competitive struggle between churches,
kingdoms, aristocrats, and the afﬂuent, the arts were often used for a
direct and speciﬁc purpose. Speciﬁc messages, not easily misunderstood,
indoctrinated subordinates to submit to their superiors, be it pope, king,
local aristocrat, priest or magistrate. Or they were enlisted in the strug-
gles that would assure their superiors’ place on the social ladder. Observ-
ing the various scenes depicted in paintings that presently hang on the
walls of our museums, one can see that patrons made extensive use of
art’s capacity to propagate concrete messages in the political strife of the
time.
Current art does not tell buyers and observers what to do or believe, at
least not in a blatant way. The messages modern art conveys are general,
not speciﬁc. When the cia sponsored American abstract painting during
the Cold War, it wasn’t trying to convey a concrete message, like ‘shake
off the chains of communist oppression’. The message was extremely
oblique and general, more like, ‘Look at these paintings and you will see
freedom in America’.14 The cia evidently believed that modern art could
still be used for non-artistic purposes. Right or wrong as they may have
been in this case, it is unlikely that art has lost all of this instrumentality.
It is generally only in retrospect that the instrumentality or lack of
instrumentality of art can be determined. Impressionist painting for
instance, which for a long time stood for a totally disinterested ‘l’art
pour l’art’, can in retrospect, be viewed as having had a message that
served the needs of a new clientele. It effectively marked the newly gained
independence and prosperity of those urbanites who could afford to take
trips to the countryside. It is this countryside as seen through the eyes of
the urban visitor that the Impressionists depicted. By displaying these
kinds of paintings, consumers were able to distinguish themselves and
develop a new identity.
I still believe that the arts are instrumental. They are used for display
and marking someone’s position among others in social space. The same
applies to towns, regions, and countries. The main difference is that the
messages are less literal and more general than before. American abstract
painting did not depict liberty; it is liberty. The fact that this kind of
vague message is short-lived, just as short-lived as most concrete mes-
sages, suggests that art can still be used in an instrumental way. (Today,
American abstract painting would probably not be used to symbolize
American liberty.)
239
ART APPEARS TO BE LESS SERVICEABLE

3
European Governments Carried on the Former Patronage
Art has changed and so has its patronage. The new patronage is one of
democratic governments and private individuals and to a much smaller
degree, of private corporations and private foundations. Most of all
modern governments have replaced the courts, churches, nobility, aris-
tocracy and regents of previous generations. (In the us, government
involvement since the Second World War has its origins elsewhere.15 Nev-
ertheless, as I suggest in the Appendix to Chapter 10, the explanation of
government involvement in the us does not have to be all that different.)
Three interdependent developments commingle in the transition from
old to new patronage. First, the old donors became less relevant in soci-
ety. Secondly, the arts became more independent or autonomous; the arts
were less prepared to serve as conveyors of concrete messages plus they
became less ﬁt to convey these concrete messages. Thirdly, the new
donors, most of all governments, increasingly needed art to convey their
general messages.
At the same time that the former masters of the arts became less
important within the existing social order, the arts gradually became less
serviceable to the former masters. In the nineteenth century, Bohemian
artists entered the scene. Gradually artistic autonomy became an ideal
not only of artists but also of the art world and of general society. There-
fore, it was not so unusual for a Dutch minister to tell parliament that
‘the government is no judge of the arts’. It is a statement that could never
have been made by a king or bishop.
It is possible that the obsession with artistic autonomy has delayed the
transition to the new patronage. In a number of countries, there appears
to have been reluctance on both sides to resume patronage. It is hard to
calculate, but it is likely that in these countries the level of overall support
of the arts showed a relative downhill slide in the second half of the nine-
teenth and the ﬁrst half of the twentieth centuries. This was more likely
the case in a country like the Netherlands than in, for instance, France,
where the authorities maintained a high level of involvement.16 Never-
theless, government support increased rapidly after the Second World
War in all Western countries, including the us. In the Netherlands, it rose
from a very low level to that of a per capita rate equal to that of generous
countries like Germany and France.17
That the restoration of a substantial patronage system was not begun
earlier is probably due to the fact that both the art world and govern-
ments were not ready for it. The art world remained reluctant. After art
gained more autonomy it had to develop a new and stable habitus before
it could once again deal with large donors, who could very well be wolves
240
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

in sheep clothing. Political parties were also reluctant to participate.
They didn’t want modern government to follow in the footsteps of the
old royal system by creating a new type of ofﬁcial or state art.
After the Second World War, this reluctance did not altogether disap-
pear, but it became less signiﬁcant. Gradually the growing advantages of
government support started to outweigh the disadvantages. On the one
hand, the situation in the ﬁne arts appeared to be degenerating. Art world
expenses, most pronounce in the performing arts, were rising quickly
and the relative incomes of artists were declining. Unemployment among
artists was on the increase. There was a sense of urgency; assistance was
called for.
On the other hand, the beneﬁts of involvement in the arts for govern-
ments had also increased. Competition with other nations was increas-
ingly based not only on military and economic might, but on cultural
inﬂuence as well. Moreover, culture was increasingly being seen as essen-
tial for creating solidarity and coherence among the citizenry. The arts
could perhaps play a signiﬁcant role in all this. The government needed
general messages from unimpeachable sources. As far as artistic mes-
sages could be interpreted as expressions of government inﬂuence, this
had to come in the form of sublimated power. Therefore, the government
did not overtly promote its assistance to the arts. Governments often
supported the arts in a surreptitious way. And this beﬁtted the arts.
Despite an initial reluctance by both sides, art and government were
willing to play their newfound roles. After the Second World War, gov-
ernment expenditures on the arts began to rise quickly. In the Nether-
lands, government expenditure on the arts, per capita, corrected for
inﬂation, more than tripled from 1950 to 1980. (After 1980 the amount
stabilized.) It’s impossible to ascertain whether the primary initiative for
the new patronage came from governments or from the art world. Gov-
ernment needs were probably the single most decisive factor.18 Govern-
ments needed art for veiled display both internally for their own people,
and externally for other nations.
Governments need display their power. As we noted in chapter 8, in
‘times of peace’ power only exists as a display of power symbols. These
symbols keep others informed about the power of their ‘superior’ or
‘competitor’ and ultimately make them respect those in power. Modern
governments are extremely powerful. Because they manage enormous
amounts of collective riches and have a monopoly on the authority to
levy taxes and use violence, the power of the state is seen as unrivaled.
Today’s governments with all their wealth and power are the heirs appar-
ent to kingdoms of earlier times.19 Like the monarchies of old, they dis-
play sublimated power through art and direct it at their own citizens or
241
EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS CARRIED ON THE FORMER PATRONAGE

at competitors like other nations (or regions or towns). I will ﬁrst exam-
ine internal display.
4
Veiled Display Serves Social Coherence 
In 1999, as mentioned earlier, the publicly owned Dutch National Bank
spent 36 million Euros on a Mondrian painting. Never before had so
much public money been spent on a single painting. As described above,
the painting was given to the Dutch people, which meant that it was
handed over to ‘Het Mauritshuis’ museum in The Hague. For the bank,
the gift represented a ceremony to mark the eventual transition to the
Euro.
Given the celebration and the enormous size of the gift, one would
have expected the transfer to occasion a grand celebration to be attended
to by ministers, ambassadors, and local magistrates and perhaps marked
by a huge ﬁreworks display for the rest of the nation. No such thing hap-
pened, however. The queen unveiled the painting in the presence of a
small gathering of mostly art world people. If there were any speeches,
they were not broadcasted on radio or television. The unveiling went
almost unnoticed in the news. Why wasn’t this opportunity utilized for a
grand display of cultural values? One would have expected as much.
It was never the intention of those concerned to draw much attention
to this gift. As noted in the illustration, the way the painting was pur-
chased had already received more attention than had been intended. This
may have contributed to the extreme modesty of the ceremony, but the
ceremony probably would have been sober anyway. Currently in the
Netherlands, a sober display beﬁts the government’s cultural efforts.
Display is possible and perhaps even necessary, but it must be kept to a
minimum, especially with respect to the general public.
Veiled display seems to be a contradiction in terms, but it is not. Veiled
display is not overpowering, but nevertheless leaves its traces. In an open
display the extravaganza of single buildings, arches, sculptures, paint-
ings, and performances makes audiences gaze in wonder. In a veiled dis-
play it is usually not a single item but the combination of many somewhat
prestigious ‘events’ that together ‘impress’ people. These events need a
minimum of openness otherwise they might go unnoticed. In impressive
and yet veiled display everybody undergoes the artistic experience and
responds accordingly. Moreover, what is displayed in a veiled manner is
usually not so much immediate power, but sublimated power. The Dutch
government’s possession of works of art like a Mondrian painting repre-
sents – unlike military hardware – a form of sublimated power. This was
242
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

also noted in chapter 8. Veiled display beﬁts the sublimation of power.
Whereas the patrons of old used art in openly majestic ways, in most
western countries pompous art presentations are no longer appropriate
contributions to national solidarity. Instead of paying respect to the
authorities, people would tend to laugh at them. Moreover, nowadays,
veiled display keeps art more exclusive than open display. In the past,
magniﬁcent castles with barred entrances inspired awe. People today are
more aware of the existence of high culture, they are impressed and
maybe even proud of it; in theory they might even come to view it, but
usually the way it’s presented puts them off.
The degree to which governments veil their cultural displays varies
over time and varies according to country and artistic endeavor. Amaz-
ing new architecture, extravagant operas, and museums of modern art
with their cathedral-like exteriors and their collections of precious
modern art, are relatively conspicuous manifestations of cultural power.
Their presence is displayed both to citizens and foreign visitors alike.
France is probably best known for its open display of cultural power (as
well as for the personal interest their presidents take in displaying art
with a certain grandeur). In the Netherlands on the other hand, cultural
power is primarily displayed in a subdued and subtle way. The sober
identity of the Dutch government requires a veiled form of display. (Nev-
ertheless displays can vary. More now than in earlier times, the Muziek-
theater, the Concertgebouw as well as other important art institutions
are inscribed as so-called ‘ﬁgureheads’ of Dutch culture. The use of the
term ‘ﬁgurehead’ reveals the element of display involved.)
The degree of transparency or veiling involved in the display of power
through artistic means also depends on the way government is organ-
ized. Lies the emphasis on relatively centralized bodies and is their little
room for private initiative or is government largely decentralized and do
private organizations have relatively much power? The last situation
fairly accurately describes the us. As we shall see, government display in
the us through artistic means is not only more subdued but also less
important than in Europe.20 Compared to France, the Dutch government
also leaves a relatively large amount of space to local and private organi-
zations.21 No modern government, however, today still displays cultural
power as openly as the kings and emperors of old used to. The art world
would be against this type of display and the general population would
not be impressed. People were certainly not impressed in the former com-
munist countries, where ostentatious architecture and social realist
paintings with precise messages preached the virtues of the administra-
tion.
Whereas in the past, internal display served to propagate a sense of
243
VEILED DISPLAY SERVES SOCIAL COHERENCE

awe or fear for authority to assure obedience of the citizenry, it currently
serves to promote a common feeling of cultural identity and consensus
with national institutions. It serves the notion of social coherence. Edu-
cation through art also contributes to social coherence. (In this respect,
education through art is part of the promotion of social coherence, even
though they are often presented as separate aims of art policy.22 For
instance, immigrants can only begin their compact with state institu-
tions after they have learned about its customs and traditions.)
Only a few decades ago cultural education was still openly employed
to contribute to national cultural identity and social coherence. For
instance, many governments were prepared to spend large amounts of
tax money on public broadcasting. Broadcasting was not used for propa-
ganda purposes as was the case in the communist bloc, but it served
public educational purposes and the promotion of social coherence in a
direct and transparent fashion. National radio and television stations
have lost much of their signiﬁcance and can no longer count on large
sums of public money.23 A complacent and continuous display of a coun-
try’s cultural merits no longer serves social coherence.
Nowadays, a subtle and veiled display is generally thought to serve the
nation better. The nation remains, however, the binding force par excel-
lence. The oneness and solidarity that hold a community together rests
on a cultural identity that differs from the cultural identities of other
nations. In this respect, nations do compete.
5
The Cultural Superiority of the Nation Needs Display
Looking back it’s easy to see that wealthy and powerful institutions, like
churches and kingdoms, competed with one another. The history books
are ﬁlled with tales of domination, war, victories, and defeats through
the centuries. People nowadays tend to think that the competition
between nations (and regions as well as towns) has largely disappeared
and that their world is paciﬁed. There still is competition but it occurs
through trade. This form of competition seems to concern businessmen,
not nations (or regions or towns). People tend to consider commercial
triumphs and defeats as extremely relative and temporal: one year this
company or country wins, next year another. Trade seems to be a gentle-
man’s game, never to be confused with warfare. Appearances, however,
are deceiving. The outcome of the commercial competition between
towns, regions and above all nations can be as extreme as in the case of
warfare. Not just businessmen, but successive generations prosper from
commercials victories or suffer from defeats. For long periods of time,
244
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

this type of competitive struggle can determine a population’s prosperity
and poverty, cultural liberty and cultural dependence.
A country can considerably increase its trade rewards, if it is able to
determine (some of) the rules of international trade. International pres-
tige, including cultural prestige, adds to this capacity. Moreover, inter-
national prestige represents a reward in itself. This reward is especially
augmented when a country has the capacity to set (some of) the rules of
international culture as well. Economic and cultural success abroad
clearly depend on one another, as the much-envied international success
of the us demonstrates. Cultural identity is both source and product of
cultural superiority. In this respect, a nation’s identity differs from that
of another nation. It is distinct and more or less authentic. (It should be
noted that because cultural prestige is rewarding in itself, art is not neces-
sarily subordinate to the economy in the present approach, as it was in
the argument of section 9.7 where the government must subsidize art
because art contributes to the economic welfare of a nation.24)
International cultural prestige, as with trade, is necessarily based on a
comparison, in this case between different cultural capabilities and iden-
tities.25 When the outcome of the comparison is favorable, prestige
increases. Which means that there is a confrontation, either directly or
indirectly, with other nations. This confrontation is largely an automatic
process and takes place in the market, among other places. American cul-
tural products like ﬁlms, television programs and pop music, do well in
markets all over the world and thus contribute to America’s cultural
prestige. Most governments, however, are not satisﬁed with the results
produced by these natural exchanges and thus deliberately display the
high standard and superiority of their own culture to the rest of the
world.
Countries like Germany and France maintain an expensive network of
cultural embassies – ‘Das Goethe Institut’ and ‘Maison Descartes’ – in
many cities around the world. These embassies produce exhibitions,
readings by authors, musical performances, etc. This kind of permanent
cultural presence is too expensive for most other countries. Moreover, ad
hoc bilateral exchanges are currently not only cheaper but probably also
more effective.26
Many countries also take examples of their performing or visual art
abroad on political junkets, trade missions, and cultural exchanges. And
when foreign missions visit another country, the hosts will certainly
offer their guests a variety of cultural happenings. They are not just mat-
ters of hospitality or ceremony. They are occasions to attract as much
publicity for one’s own culture in the other country as possible. (The
reviews of these cultural events in the foreign press are monitored and
245
THE CULTURAL SUPERIORITY OF THE NATION NEEDS DISPLAY

discussed at length in the national newspapers. In this way, these encoun-
ters also offer internal evaluations of the strengths and weaknesses of the
national culture.)
Because of modern communication technologies people know more
about other cultures than they once did. Therefore, the organized cul-
tural activities abroad are above all reminders and catalysts. Periodically
extra attention is drawn to the cultural production of the visiting coun-
try. The existence of a rich culture is merely suggested. Although culture
that is taken abroad on missions sometimes helps to open new markets
for one’s own cultural productions such as books, cds or performances,
it primarily serves to strengthen and, if necessary, correct one’s own cul-
tural identity.
It appears that national cultural identities have become important
again. In Europe, uniﬁcation has led to fears of homogenization with the
disappearance of national currencies and laws. Meanwhile, all over the
world consumer products have become more and more the same. Pre-
sent-day consumer goods are international rather than national in
origin. Culture however, allows a country to maintain a distinct charac-
ter, a cultural identity of its own. And art, with its emphasis on authen-
ticity rather than homogeneity, offers the most important long-term con-
tribution to a unique national cultural identity.27
Sports are also outstanding cultural products and they certainly con-
tribute to national prestige. But countries usually excel in one sport or
another for brief periods of time and thus the relative advantage tends to
be temporal. Moreover, sports products are international products and
involve relatively little local cultural identity. Art products on the other
hand, have long histories of being closely associated with the cultural
identity of a particular country.
Because it is impossible to give a detailed description of the cultural
identity of any one country, the concept of cultural identity could almost
be perceived as an empty concept. It is not impossible however, to
approach a cultural identity in more indirect ways. For instance, one can
observe the kind of identity a government tries to promote in neighbor-
ing countries and how this identity somehow crystallizes in the media.
Dutch culture in the context of a combined political and trade mission to
Berlin described in the above illustration serves as an example.
The Dutch government took a selection of art products to Berlin. The
selection emphasized aspects of Dutch cultural identity that might
impress the neighbors. Although the Netherlands is a small country, the
art chosen was not nationalistic or folkloristic. Among the highlights of
Dutch culture were the Dutch Dance Theatre performances under the
direction of the Czech-born Jiri Kylian, which made a strong impression
246
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

in the German press. Several newspapers remarked that the dance pieces
were modern, international, and Dutch at the same time. The Dutch
managed to combine a national and an international identity. What the
papers found most striking was the cultural openness of the Dutch; the
fact that almost all dancers including the director were not Dutch by
birth added to this impression. On top of all that, the director and most
of the dancers spoke Dutch well; they apparently felt at home in the
Netherlands. (As noted earlier, in Germany only German dancers can
dance in state-subsidized dance companies.)
The ‘typical’ Dutch values exhibited were the values of individual
freedom, tolerance, diversity, and cultural relativism. These values are
rooted in the striving for democracy, equality, and the sharing and diffu-
sion of culture. Such liberal values beﬁt a small country that depends on
free trade. By emphasizing them abroad, they are presented as relative
attributes of the Dutch identity. The implicit message is that ‘the Nether-
lands is not just another small country; the Dutch have a special place in
social space and their cultural values can serve as an example for others;
they deserve to be exported. For instance, other European countries with
immigrant problems or strife between various social groups can proﬁt
from these Dutch values.’
This does not mean that the Dutch only emphasize the modern aspects
of their cultural identity. On other occasions, the Dutch do not hesitate
to show off the solidity and seriousness of their cultural identity as it
established itself over centuries. ‘The Dutch are serious and honorable
trading partners. If they are open to the world and to new things, they
know what they are doing.’ In this setting, the paintings of Rembrandt
and Vermeer might be shown to foreign guests. Attention will likely also
be drawn to old Dutch architecture – the monumental as well as the
everyday. This contributes to the Dutch quality of trustworthiness. Even
Van Gogh appears to augment the seriousness and sincerity of the Dutch
identity. In this respect, the aforementioned Muziektheater, Concertge-
bouw, Rijksmuseum and the Van Gogh Museum serve as ﬁgureheads of
Dutch culture for foreigners.28
The present argument also applies to competitiveness at more local
levels. Identities at local levels tend to differ more subtly, but they are just
as important. The competition between towns is often very visible. Cul-
tural festivals, among other events, play an important role in their
rivalry.29 And in a country like the Netherlands with three major cities
close to one another, the distribution between the three cities of the
major art institutions, which are predominantly ﬁnanced by the central
government, is a continuous source of rivalry.
247
THE CULTURAL SUPERIORITY OF THE NATION NEEDS DISPLAY

6
Government Taste Serves Display
Why did the Dutch National Bank – with government permission –
choose a painting by Mondrian and not a painting by, say, Karel Appel?
The Mondrian painting was not what one would call the people’s choice,
and even many members of parliament would not have consented had
they been asked. The answer lies in the interest the government has in dis-
play. With respect to its own citizenry, this kind of display serves, despite
some initial resistance, education and in due course social coherence.
Moreover, the presence of the painting in the Mauritshuis in The Hague
is bound to impress foreigners and to reconﬁrm Dutch cultural identity.
In this context, the sobriety of Mondrian was preferred to the expres-
sionism of Van Gogh, for instance. The choice was made and it conﬁrms
the notion that governments have a taste.
A particular government’s taste with respect to art is revealed in the
aesthetic choices it actually makes. Central or local governments subsi-
dize and buy art, but not all art. They select art. For instance, the con-
tents of the government’s ‘shopping basket’ of subsidized and purchased
art differs from the contents of the basket of art purchased by the average
private individual. The contents of these baskets differ simply because
selections differ. Therefore, by deﬁnition the government has a taste that
differs from the taste of others. The same way the taste of local govern-
ment differs from the taste of the national government. These differences
are not accidental. Differences in taste are rooted in government inter-
ests.
When a government travels with certain artworks on missions abroad
it also makes a selection. Certain artworks are selected because they
serve the interests of the government better than other artworks. When it
subsidizes the arts domestically, the same applies. A government cannot
remain neutral.30 If governments had to remain neutral and if ‘the gov-
ernment is no judge of the arts’, this ultimately implies that governments
can never subsidize art. The continuous attempts to let governments sub-
sidize neutrally are basically a form of self-deception.31
Governments seem to be neutral because they often leave the actual
choice up to independent experts. Nevertheless, almost all governments
basically decide on the size of the total art budget and on its distribution
over the various art forms. Only the distribution within an art form is
sometimes left to experts. Moreover, these experts are never totally inde-
pendent of government scrutiny. Experts, for instance, decide what art is
so-called ‘quality art’, but as was made clear in chapter 3, quality and
aesthetics are not independent variables. It depends on cultural power or
cultural inﬂuence.
248
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

When a government supports classical music, for instance, it rein-
forces the cultural inﬂuence of experts who might favor classical music
and so the ‘quality’ of classical music remains high. Thus it would be
wrong to say that a government gives money to classical music instead of
to pop music because classical music has more ‘quality’ than pop music.
It is more appropriate to say that currently, classical music better serves
government interests than pop music.32 (If subsidization rested on ‘qual-
ity’, then the ‘quality’ of pop music must have suddenly experienced a
rise in the last decade because in that period some European countries
have actually begun to subsidize pop music, be it in dribs and drabs. Nev-
ertheless, critics do not agree with this sudden rise over the past decade.
It is more plausible that the piecemeal subsidization of pop music
increasingly serves government interests.)
In subsidizing the arts, governments are not neutral. Government has
a taste (thesis 96). In this respect it must be noted that government
involvement in the arts is not only revealed in its purchases and subsidies,
but also in what it promotes and pays attention to. For instance, in many
countries literature does not receive direct subsidies. But at home, the
government still manages to bestow it with distinction by offering presti-
gious ofﬁcial awards. And meanwhile, when abroad, it assists in promot-
ing literature as a manifestation of its culture by subsidizing translations
into foreign languages and by subsidizing the costs of publishers display-
ing the publications of national authors at foreign book fairs.
Can government interests adequately explain its current selections of
art? At ﬁrst glance it’s difﬁcult to comprehend how, for instance, the
large investment in classical music can serve the objectives of social
coherence. Nevertheless, in order to close ranks, people need only be
impressed; they do not necessarily need to participate in (high) art. In
this respect, cultural symbols of superior, remote but not altogether inac-
cessible cultural power often serve a government well. In a case like this,
only a mere hint of meaning may actually reach the general public.
(Common people assume that privileged insiders fully understand the
deeper hidden meanings of the art displayed, while they themselves only
have a vague notion of it.) This implies that governments have a prefer-
ence for art, which is neither altogether accessible nor extremely inacces-
sible (thesis 97).
For instance, on the basis of this analysis, one would expect that if
(some of) the subsidized avant-garde visual art had continued to develop
into esoteric and inaccessible areas, it would have served the government
less well, and the government would have gradually lost interest in it. In a
different situation government could just as easily lose interest if, for
instance, ever more television contests cheapen mainstream subsidized
249
GOVERNMENT TASTE SERVES DISPLAY

classical music, till it totally loses all its mystique.
Because prestige is an important return from the display of art, it is
almost always in the interest of the government to select high and sacred
art and to ignore less prestigious art. This explains why some art forms
dominate government subsidies. In this respect, opera and classical
music ﬁnish ﬁrst, followed by the other traditional performing arts. They
remain the current big winners. Next comes avant-garde visual art. In
terms of attention, literature also does well.
Broadly speaking, governments do not care whether the art they sub-
sidize is classic, traditional, or contemporary as long as it has high status.
Governments prefer prestigious art (thesis 98). Because of differences in
status, governments prefer classical music to contemporary classical,
jazz, or pop music; and they prefer contemporary and old visual art to
traditional visual art.33
Governments do not only select high-status art. They also produce
this status. As noted earlier, the very fact that governments select certain
artworks over others adds to the prestige of the selected art. By display-
ing art, governments enhance the prestige of their selection or prevent its
decline. In this way, governments have some control over the production
of (prestigious) art.
Regarding their behavior governments basically prefer prestigious art.
However, this does not exclude experiments. For instance, the French as
well as the English (London Arts) have started to subsidize exponents of
hip-hop culture, break dancing, rap, comics, etc. and the Dutch support
various forms of so-called transgressive art. The budgets are extremely
small compared with funds that are given to more established varieties of
culture. But as a way of receiving government attention, it cannot be
ignored. Through these new endeavors governments inﬂuence the cul-
tural identity of a country (or region or town) and they stimulate feelings
of oneness and solidarity. (In due time such art may even become presti-
gious. In the future it may turn out that by their present subsidization
these governments contributed to the consecration of these new art
forms.)
7
Governments are Willing to Support the Arts
What is the relation between the rent seeking explanation of government
involvement in the arts, presented in the previous chapter, and the gov-
ernment-interest explanation presented here? Both depart from inter-
ests, but the ﬁrst stresses pressure put on the government because of the
interests of groups outside government, while the second emphasizes
250
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

government power and government interest. Although these approaches
sit at opposite ends of the gift-duty continuum, they could nevertheless
complement one another. Mutual interests could be involved.
After the Second World War, the arts not only knocked on govern-
ment’s door and later on business’s door, but government and business
also pursued the arts. Art needed government to relieve its bad ﬁnancial
situation. This dreadful situation was due to a large supply of artists and
little growth in productivity in the arts. The government, however,
needed the arts to enable it to deploy subtle cultural strategies in its
rivalry with other countries as well as to promote national coherence
among the people, as mentioned earlier.
Given the fact that the arts needed support and that governments
appeared to be willing to offer that support, one would have expected
considerable rent seeking from the art world. But according to the analy-
sis in Chapter 9, the art world never became organized enough to enable
it to put effective pressure on the government. No substantial organized
rent seeking developed.
The arts did not effectively organize because this goes against the
basic notion of artistic freedom. And, because they were afraid of losing
their newfound autonomy, they resisted overbearing government
involvement. In the us, the mistrust of government involvement remains
particularly strong. The fear of business involvement in the arts has been
less pronounced in the us. In Europe, it was the opposite. Because in
Europe the fear of business arose ﬁrst, the arts consented instead to gov-
ernment involvement. Only several decades later would business become
an acceptable partner in the arts and vice versa.
The absence of highly organized rent seeking can also be explained by
the fact that there was little need for it. Even without rent seeking the
annual art budget rose year after year. In other sectors with considerable
organized rent seeking support was less persistent. The attitude of gov-
ernments towards pressure groups, like automobile and homeowners,
gradually turned around in the seventies and subsidies were reduced con-
siderably in the decades that followed. Subsidies for the arts represent a
notable exception.
In most countries, government arts expenditures per capita, corrected
for inﬂation, has risen steadily since the Second World War until around
1980. Since 1980, art expenditures in most European countries have
more or less stabilized.34 (In some countries, like England, there was
actually a slight reduction in spending in the eighties that was corrected
again in the nineties.) Contrary to the popular notion in the art world
that government is withdrawing from the arts, there has been no net
reduction in spending per capita and there are no real signs of a substan-
251
GOVERNMENTS ARE WILLING TO SUPPORT THE ARTS

tial decline in expenditures in the near future. Therefore, given its differ-
ence from other sectors it is unlikely that arts expenditures are just some
response to organized external pressure; it’s far more likely that govern-
ment interests are involved.
Nevertheless, both explanations enhance one another because as we
noted in the previous chapter, external pressure is internalized by gov-
ernment ofﬁcials. But it’s also because a new type of ‘mediator’ has
emerged who harmonizes the sector’s interests and the administration’s
interests, as we will see in the next section.
8
An Arts Experts Regime Harmonizes Government and 
Art World Interests
Since the Second World War, many professionals gradually found
employment in institutions that integrate European governments with
the arts. They form an imaginary semi-political body or an ‘experts
regime’ in the arts, as Abram de Swaan has called similar professional
‘regimes’ in education and health care.35 Some of these professionals are
employed within government agencies, but seem above all committed to
the arts. Others work in subsidized art institutions. Still others work in
the many institutions that operate in that domain located between gov-
ernment and art and are primarily government funded.36
Similar kinds of professional or experts regimes emerged earlier in the
health care, social security, and education sectors. Although the back-
ground of the arts experts regime differs, it shares certain characteristics
with the other three.37 One common characteristic is that in all four sec-
tors, the interests of many people in the sector run largely parallel with
the interests of government agencies. For instance, art’s high status
serves both the government and the art sector employees. The profes-
sional regime in the arts takes care of shared interests. Presently a profes-
sional regime in the arts looks after and harmonizes the interests of the
government with those of the art world (thesis 99).
The experts regime also harmonizes internal interests. Neither the arts
nor the government can be treated as a monolithic entity. They consist of
many parts, whose interests do not always coincide. And so the regime
not only tries to harmonize the interests of the government and the art
world, but also of the various governmental departments as well as of
parts of the art world.
Because not all of the interests can be reconciled, the regime assists the
arts in setting boundaries. In the arts, however, such boundaries cannot
be based on regulations or diplomas. For reasons that will become
252
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

clearer in the next chapter, this kind of control can only be informal.
Instead of deciding on people based on their diplomas, a complicated
system of informal barriers exists that calls for many gatekeepers. The
professional regime supplies most of these gatekeepers. They are organ-
ized by the regime and they often, either directly or indirectly, receive
facilities and payment from the government.
With the help of a professional regime in the arts, the government has
gradually become a co-producer of art.38 By indirectly controlling circles
of recognition in the arts, it helps co-produce the deﬁnition of art. This is
in the government’s interest as it can thus assure that the art it subsidizes
and consumes is deﬁned as the best examples of available art.
At the same time, however, standards of artistic quality are increas-
ingly determined in an international context. Therefore, part of the arts
experts regime is in the process of becoming internationally oriented.
This applies, for instance, to important avant-garde institutions that
exhibit and produce international contemporary visual art. Examples
are White Columns in New York, The Serpentine Gallery in London,
Witte de With in Rotterdam and The Appel in Amsterdam. Although
local and national governments ﬁnance these institutions, their directors
are part of the board of directors of similar institutions in other countries
and vice versa. This way a professional regime acquires an international
dimension. On the one hand, it is able to synchronize local interests to
international developments. On the other hand, it can show national
highlights, not as folklore, but as national innovations within an ongo-
ing international development.
Given the activities of the professional regime the notion of govern-
ment artistic taste has to be put in perspective. Government taste is not
an independent variable that ofﬁcials can supply at will. By supervising
the dialogue between the art world and the government, the regime has
an important stake in government taste. This is how the government and
the arts depend on one another. Because of the impact of this profes-
sional regime in the arts, the relationship has become a complicated knot
that’s not easily untangled.
It turns out that the government and the cultural sector are engaged in
a symbiotic relationship. Art serves the government and the government
serves art. The giving of gifts to the arts by a powerful government who
seeks display and the extraction of duties from a government who sub-
mits to pressure merge into new rituals. On the gift-duty spectrum,
power has met duty.
253
AN ARTS EXPERTS REGIME HARMONIZES GOVERNMENT AND ART WORLD

9
Conclusion
Why did the publicly owned Dutch National Bank in cooperation with
the Dutch government purchase a Mondrian painting to give to the
Dutch people, while the latter did not really want this painting? This
chapter has emphasized government interests. In the case of the Mon-
drian painting, the government wanted to impress people and not neces-
sarily please them. Moreover, by adding an important piece to the Dutch
national collection other countries can now be impressed as well.
At home, art is promoted because it is thought to contribute to educa-
tion and consequently to social coherence. In its relation with other
nations (or regions or towns) art plays a role in the rivalry. That is why
the Dutch government chose to have The Dutch Dance Theatre and other
exponents of Dutch art accompany its combined state and trade mission
to Berlin. Towns, regions, and nations compete with one another. They
no longer advance their standing through warfare. Instead, they compete
through trade and cultural exchanges. Cultural identities play an impor-
tant role in this.
Although art is still useful for governments, it no longer conveys con-
crete messages as it once did in the monarchical past. The newly gained
artistic autonomy of the arts no longer tolerates this. Governments also
prefer art to assist them in a veiled display of power. Therefore, the pur-
chase of the Mondrian could never have been the occasion for a grand
celebration. Nevertheless, art with considerable status is generally most
useful for governments. It explains why classical music receives much
more money than pop music, for instance.
Gradually since the Second World War a professional regime in the
arts emerged which synchronizes government and art world interests.
This shows that last chapter’s rent seeking explanation supplements the
government-interest explanation of this chapter. The third explanation,
the general-interest explanation that was treated in the previous chapter,
also contributes to the overall explanation of art subsidies and of the
large gift sphere in the arts; arguments that are largely false but neverthe-
less convincing add to subsidization.
I am inclined to attach the most value to this chapter’s government-
interest explanation, but this does not imply that the other two explana-
tions are unimportant. Moreover, the three explanations are related
because they all depend on a common determinant: the mystique of art.
However, before I return to the mystique of art in the concluding chapter,
I will ﬁrst take a look at informal monopolization in the arts in the next
chapter.
I claim that the present explanation of government involvement in the
254
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

arts applies to both Europe and the us. Nevertheless, some important
differences exist, which are brieﬂy discussed in the appendix to this
chapter.
Discussion
1 Is the explanation of the subsidization of the arts on the basis of a gov-
ernment need for display implausible in countries like the Netherlands
where a strong court (monarchical) tradition never existed?
2 It could be argued that because of the growing importance of other
forms of display like advertising, television shows, public discussions
in the media, sports, etc., the use of art for display is rapidly losing its
signiﬁcance. What is your opinion?
3 Can you think of other examples of art used by governments for
(veiled) display other than those already presented in this chapter?
Appendix: Differences between Government Involvement 
in the Arts in the US and in Europe
Although I claim that the general explanation of government involve-
ment in the arts as presented in chapter 10 applies to both Europe and the
us, differences exist. This appendix brieﬂy discusses some differences
and correspondences. (In most respects Britain holds an intermediate
position between the us and the countries of mainland Western
Europe.39)
Apart from the support for artists in the thirties through the Work’s
Progress Association (wpa), which was part of Roosevelt’s New Deal,
before 1965 there had been no large-scale and continuous tradition that
was common in Europe of direct support for the arts by the government
in the us.40 Nevertheless, in most European countries there was also very
little subsidization before the Second World War. Therefore, the main
difference is that substantial subsidization in Europe started sooner after
the war and reached higher levels. To a degree however, subsidization
was legitimized in similar ways.
In the us, as in mainland Western Europe, the government has been
sensitive toward the notion of international competition. For instance,
after the war government ofﬁcials in the us successfully argued for more
government expenditure on the arts by emphasizing that the us must not
lag behind the European nations. Apparently, these ofﬁcials thought that
art could play a role in international competition.
255
APPENDIX: GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN THE US

From 1969 to 1977 Nancy Hanks, chair of the National Endowment
for the Arts (nea), managed to increase the budget of the nea from $11
to $114 million by alluding to the symbolic effects of government
involvement. (In 1972, she persuaded President Nixon and the Congress
to double the budget.) The gist of her argument was that more funding
would increase the status of the government in the eyes of the public,
while at the same time having almost no impact on the federal budget.41
These arguments conﬁrm the rationale of Chapter 10. It appears that
in the us and in Europe, governments sought to improve their competi-
tive power and to enhance their status by associating themselves with the
high status of the arts. (At the moment, the nea receives only 7% of the
total cultural budget of the federal government, but symbolically it
remains important. Presently, the nea is primarily stressing the eco-
nomic impact of the arts and the number of jobs the cultural economy
generates. ‘By subsidizing the arts, economic successes are possible at
low costs.’ It is one of the general interest arguments of Chapter 9. As
happens in Europe as well, the art world tries to free ride on the present
dominant belief in the necessity and possibility of economic growth.)
After coming into ofﬁce, Bush jr. proposed a 7% increase in the nea
budget to be spent on educational projects. It is the same educational
argument that has again come into favor in Europe.
The most important difference between the us and Europe does not lie
in the arguments for subsidization, but in the circumstances in which
these arguments are applied. In the us, the distrust among artists and
others of government intervention is greater than in Europe. American
artists, even more than their European colleagues, remain afraid of
losing their autonomy. This mistrust is related to the desire, vested in the
American identity, to have a government that intervenes as little as possi-
ble. As soon as the government does more than necessary, it becomes sus-
pect. While in Europe, the status of governments may increase when they
increase spending on the arts, in the us, when the art budget rises, mis-
trust of the government is likely to get the upper hand. High art budgets
therefore don’t serve government interests.
In the us, there is less distrust of private giving, however. Through tax
deductions of gifts for the arts and of purchases of art the government
supports the arts substantially, but does not intervene in the organization
of culture. “Government is a minority stockholder in the organization of
culture.”42
Another difference is that in Europe the status of the arts is generally
high and undisputed, while in the us the status of the arts is more
ambiguous. Whereas in Europe most people share a vague respect for the
ﬁne arts, including modern art, in the us upper class people are not
256
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

ashamed to admit that modern art means nothing to them. Apparently
modern art contributes little to the general sacredness of the arts. In the
visual arts, this became particularly clear in the so-called culture wars, in
which the sometimes sexually explicit or blasphemous content of
modern visual art, such as in the works of Mapplethorpe and Serrano,
caused clashes between advocates and adversaries of subsidization.
Apparently, art sometimes divides rather than unites. This means that if
central or local government agencies in the us support modern art, it is
not at all certain whether they will advance their prestige. The gain may
very well turn out to be a loss. (As a result of these culture wars the fund-
ing of the nea was cut by almost half again.)
The fact that content is a subject of dispute shows that the status of art
is not beyond discussion in the us. In Europe, artistic form is a matter of
debate, but content is not. In the us however, most discussions about
visual art are not about style, but about content, most of all the permissi-
bility of sexually explicit subject matter. (According to Montias it mat-
ters that the evolution of state support for the arts in the us has been
more democratic; in his view it did not allow art-loving elites as much
opportunity to impose their tastes on the public as in Europe.43)
It is also telling that corporations in the us appear to have more liberty
in their relation with the arts than government agencies have. Many cor-
porations have collections of ‘avant-garde’ visual art.44 And some ﬁrms
that have problems legitimizing their existence, like tobacco companies,
spend huge sums on their support of the arts. They correctly believe that
this improves their imago. The situation of governments in the us is,
however, also different because governments can be controlled by some-
times relatively small but powerful lobbies. (At the time of the above cut
in nea opinion polls showed that 60% of the public vaguely supported
the nea and 20% strongly opposed it. A far more effective lobby in favor
of the cuts, however, managed to push the minority opinion through.)
A professional regime in the arts is present in the us as well. The
people in the regime, however, do not merely (directly or indirectly)
report to the government, but also to other centers of power, most of all,
important foundations, companies, and universities. Well-known foun-
dations like the Getty Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation, cor-
porations as well as music publishing companies, impresarios, dealers,
and even critics hold positions that compete with government agencies
and are to be reckoned with. Nevertheless, the American artistic regime
is less powerful than the European regimes. In the us, no participant is
much stronger than another and no one holds a monopoly position in the
regime like the European governments do.
The fact that fundamental differences exist between the position of
257
APPENDIX: GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN THE US

governments in the us and in Europe is best demonstrated by the way
governments use tax deductions and other tax concessions to support
the arts. In the us, a relatively large portion of government money to the
arts is in the form of tax deductions for foundations, companies and pri-
vate individuals. Approximately 70% of total funding from the central
government comes from tax concessions, mostly as tax deductions on
purchases of art and gifts for the arts. In mainland Western Europe, this
percentage is less than 20% and it comes mainly from reduced VAT pay-
ments for cultural products.45
By allowing tax deductions and other tax concessions the government
subsidizes art. Because the taxman has set broad interpretations of what
art is, the choice of art that gets subsidized is largely left up to the con-
sumer. In practice the recipients consume and support high as well as low
art. Therefore, the government cannot derive much distinction from its
indirect support for the arts. No superior choice can be displayed. The
same applies to the substantial indirect government subsidization of
artists through public, but also private universities. In the case of direct
subsidization, which is the most popular in Europe, the government nar-
rows its margins considerably. Government taste in purchases and com-
missions is even more inﬂuential. Therefore, these forms of support
comply better with a wish to display.
Evidently, and in line with what has been written above, the American
government expects less from display than mainland Western European
governments do. Instead, the government of the us prefers to empower
private institutions and individuals through the indirect mechanism of
tax deductions to address the public purpose.46 This explains its stronger
preference for tax deductions and for indirect subsidization through uni-
versities. On the other hand, the resistance against tax deductions in
Europe, despite some evident advantages, can only be understood, if the
aspect of display is taken into account. European governments do not
want to cut down on display.
258
ART SERVES THE GOVERNMENT

Chapter 11
Informal Barriers Structure the Arts
How Free or Monopolized Are the Arts?
Being Selected by the Government
Shortly after graduating from art school Alex applied for a government
grant for visual artists. Everybody does. It would have been unprofessional
not to. He applied because of the money. There are three different types of
grants.1 Each of them offers the artist an amount of money, which is equal
to a year’s income in a comparable profession. For an artist, however, a
grant of this sort represents an income for many years to come, given the
low average incomes in the visual arts. No wonder these grants are attrac-
tive.
When Alex applied he knew his chances were small. All promising gradu-
ates applied; there were four times as many applications as there were
grants. So, he wasn’t counting on getting one. In this respect, he was not
too disappointed when he was rejected. In another and unexpected way,
the rejection hit him hard. It hit him in a way no statistical calculus could mit-
igate. He felt rejected as an artist. Secretly he had hoped for recognition.
He had hoped that the most signiﬁcant organization in the Dutch art world,
the government, would say: ‘All right Alex, we know that nobody is lining up
to buy your drawings, but we can tell that you’re a real artist. We want you
to stay in the ﬁeld.’
So the grants are not only attractive because of the money. In fact, Alex dis-
covered that the symbolic attractiveness of the grants exceeded their
immediate ﬁnancial attractiveness. Since he did not get the grant, he con-
tinued to doubt his right to be an artist. Was he a fraud? He thought (and
still thinks) that many unsuccessful artists make bad art. Little would be lost
if they just left the arts. Was he one of them? The rejection lowered his self-
esteem. He could not hide the doubts he harbored about his own art and
that made it all the more difﬁcult for him to ﬁnd a good gallery. Had he gotten
the grant it would have given him wings. The grant is also important in an
objective way; for instance, if he could add that to his curriculum vitae it
would certainly help convince Dutch gallery owners and collectors of his
worth.
After that ﬁrst attempt, Alex tried two more times, both unsuccessfully.
259

Then he stopped. He wanted to save himself all the existential doubts asso-
ciated with a rejection. This is how many artists end up going underground;
they often even stop trying to crack the market. Nevertheless, ten years
after leaving art school, Alex felt self-assured enough to start a new round
of applications. He ﬁrst applied for the ‘werkbeurs’ subsidy, which is the
most prestigious and most difﬁcult to get, and he got it. And everything else
he has applied for since has also been accepted.
Looking back at this ﬁrst grant, Alex now realizes that it was actually an
enormous relief. Experts now took his work seriously. He had a right to be
in the ﬁeld. Alex even suspects that since that initial sign of recognition his
artwork has improved – more than it ever did before. He felt more self-
assured and he became more daring. Not all of Alex’s colleagues react as
strongly to this kind of rejection. But all of Alex’s colleagues certainly recog-
nize this scenario. To almost all avant-garde artists in the Netherlands gov-
ernment acceptance is the ﬁrst and most important barrier.
Looking back at the rejections, Alex, now belonging to the group that
receives government grants, wonders why his earlier work was rejected.
The answer he can live with is that his work at that time was not good
enough, but since then his work has improved. In the back of his mind,
however, he knows that it could also be merely changes in government
taste. Back when he applied for his ﬁrst grant, the Dutch government was
not interested in ﬁgurative art. It only developed a taste for ﬁgurative art
again over the past two decades. And Alex has been producing ﬁgurative
art all along. Still, he ﬁnds it difﬁcult to admit that the government is not just
interested in quality, as it claims, but that it has a taste and that it rejects
work that doesn’t ﬁt in with its preferences. This is how it puts up barriers.
Alex prefers not to question the government’s authority; he prefers to see
the government as an institution that protects the autonomy of the artist, not
as one that interferes with it. That is why Alex wants to believe that his work
has improved.
Incorrect Associations in the Arts can be Disastrous
Alex has a studio in the same building where Margaret has hers. Margaret
is quickly becoming a successful international artist. When Margaret and
Alex are working, they might have a cup of tea in Margaret’s studio at the
end of the day. In a corner of her studio hang four artworks by Margaret’s
colleagues. Three are by successful friends about her age; the fourth is a
small painting by Alfred who is much older. Alfred is Alex’s friend and was
once Margaret’s teacher. Looking at this painting, it is clear that Alfred had
a big inﬂuence on Margaret. She told Alex that this particular painting is
precious to her. The painting hangs there as an homage to Alfred.
Gradually Alex noticed that every now and then during their tea-sessions
260
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

this speciﬁc painting was missing, while the three other paintings would
still be there. After a while he worked out that it was missing on days Mar-
garet received important visitors: dealers, people from galleries, journalists
and successful colleagues.
He asked her why she put the painting away. Margaret was extremely
embarrassed and almost in tears. She started to apologize. “You know the
art world. I must be so careful. It is better not to be inﬂuenced by an artist
who is little known. To be honest, it is worse when they know Alfred’s work.
Then they suddenly see my work in a different light. Because of its roots
they can more easily dismiss it. Just now I cannot afford to be associated
with Alfred. Maybe in twenty years, but not now. But, yes, you are right: it is
strange the way I handle this painting. I suppose I should take it home.” This
is what she did. When Alex told this story to his friend Alfred, it evidently
hurt him.
Why does Margaret publicly deny her relationship with an artist-friend
whose work she admires? And why is it so important for artists to be
favored by the government? In order to answer these questions this chap-
ter investigates the barriers that artists encounter in the arts. Because
many of these barriers depend on government involvement, the treat-
ment of this subject was delayed until an analysis of the government’s
involvement in the arts could be completed.
At ﬁrst glance, it seems that, unlike other professions, there are few
barriers in the arts. The arts are unfettered. Anybody can become an
artist. If people couldn’t become artists it would violate the autonomy
that deﬁnes the arts. It would desecrate art. The mythology of the arts
demands that success rests solely on one’s commitment and talent. Thus,
the arts must remain independent sans barriers that might constrain
artists.
As an artist, I strongly believe in the importance of freedom and auton-
omy in the arts. So does the whole art world and therefore as an artist I do
not believe that barriers exist in the arts. If I end up being less successful
than I had hoped, I don’t blame my shortcomings on barriers and
monopolization. I’d rather blame myself or the consumer for being not
committed enough to art. Therefore, as an artist I don’t readily acknowl-
edge forms of monopolization. As an economist, I am better equipped to
perceive organized barriers in the market that are deliberately con-
structed to keep certain competitors out. And because I don’t believe
these barriers exist in the arts, as an economist I ﬁnd the arts to be unusu-
ally open and competitive. Therefore economist and artist agree.
261
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

1
In other Professions Barriers Inform Consumers, Restrain Producers
and Limit Competition
The barriers that mark other non-arts professions do not seem to exist in
the arts. To discover if this is really the case, I will ﬁrst examine barriers
in other professions. Anyone who is interested in pursuing a non-arts
profession faces a number of barriers. First, candidates pay the fees to
their chosen institution of higher education. This gives them access to
the profession’s certiﬁed body of knowledge. Then they have to pass cer-
tain standard exams. They are only allowed to practice their profession
after they have received their certiﬁcations or diplomas. (In some profes-
sions candidates are also required to pay fees to colleagues for the right to
join an already established practice.) Therefore, anyone who is unable or
unwilling to pay or is unable to pass the examinations faces a de jure or
de facto Berufsverbot: in practice he or she is not allowed to work in the
profession.
Professionals who have spent some years pursuing their career face
other barriers as well. For instance, if they want to be successful at their
chosen profession, they must seek admission to one or more select pro-
fessional associations in one’s ﬁeld or seek an extra qualiﬁcation like a
Ph.D. These barriers are not situated at the front door of the profession;
they mark off privileged inner sanctums. If candidates want ‘to move up’
in their chosen professions, they must overcome these barriers as well.
In order to pass through any of these barriers one needs a combination
of monetary, cultural and social capital as well as some luck. Authorities
can limit the membership or number of entrants by increasing entrance
fees or raising the qualiﬁcations standards and so raise the amount of
capital needed. Generally speaking, there is a limit to how high fees can
be raised. Modern democratic societies consider exorbitant entrance fees
as unfair. Requiring inordinate amounts of extra training that bears little
relation to the demands of the profession is not uncommon, however.
This is one way of restricting the number of entrants into a particular
profession and, as a result, the incomes in the profession remain higher
than they would be without the barrier. If the barrier is managed by
members of the profession who proﬁt from limited membership, or if
they can unduly inﬂuence the authority chartered to handle the barrier,
the profession is said to be more or less monopolized.
Not all barriers lead to monopolization, however. If producers who
meet realistic requirements are allowed to pass and if there is no
Berufsverbot, competition is not necessarily impaired. Some barriers
serve primarily as certiﬁcates and information outlets. In this respect, it
is useful to examine the signals that barriers emit. First, they produce a
262
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

warning signal to other producers who might choose to illegally cross
the barrier. Secondly, they produce signals telling customers that the
membership has special qualiﬁcations not available to those outside the
profession. Without signals it is often difﬁcult for consumers to procure
information on the quality the member produces. Take, for instance,
used car dealers. It is difﬁcult for consumers to determine whether the
automobiles being sold are in satisfactory condition or not. They have
less information than the used car dealers themselves have and therefore
a situation of asymmetric information exists. To overcome this situation,
certain used car dealers display certiﬁcates, indicating that they are rec-
ognized by a certifying organization.2
Signaling barriers can be found everywhere. They exist in both
monopolized and non-monopolized situations. They can be related to
products, like biological milk with a seal of approval or hotels rated by
numbers of stars. Or they are related to people, like scholars who have a
Ph.D. degree.
I call the barriers in this section, formal barriers because their exis-
tence depends on authorities who have the power to institute the barrier
and regulate passage through it. This authority is not anonymous; it is in
the hands of known institutions or individuals. The authority informs
consumers and through the process of installing, raising, lowering, or
removing a certain barrier, it often also controls membership ﬁgures.
Sometimes, and not too uncommonly in non-arts professions, formal
barriers may, de jure or de facto, result in a formal control of member-
ship.
2
The Arts Resist a Formal Control of Numbers of Artists
Given the large supply of artworks and artists and their correspondingly
low incomes, one would expect a strong tendency in the arts to reduce
membership rolls via formal controls. Or, if that’s impossible, one would
expect various organized attempts to certify artists and art products to
better inform consumers. This is, however, not the case. The formal bar-
riers and signals, found in other professions, are either absent or rela-
tively unimportant in the arts.
Unlike in other professions in the arts, the separation between profes-
sionals and amateurs does not necessarily have anything to do with
formal education. Although most artists have had some formal training,
many don’t have diplomas and, more importantly, they do not need a
diploma to work as artists. This implies that no formal barrier based on a
diploma requirement characterizes the arts. The entrance to the profes-
263
THE ARTS RESIST A FORMAL CONTROL OF NUMBERS OF ARTISTS

sion is free. Moreover art does not have shielded, certiﬁed bodies of
knowledge.3 In most professions, only initiated professionals and gradu-
ates have access to these certiﬁed bodies of knowledge. In the arts, this
body of knowledge, including knowledge of techniques, styles and his-
tory, is de facto free; anybody can have access to it.4
In general, artists encounter few formal barriers that ofﬁcially limit
who can be a working artist. First, in most countries artists without
diplomas can receive government grants and unemployment beneﬁts.5
The same does not apply to other professions. Second, although certain
modern artists associations represent formally closed inner circles, these
circles have little impact and they are often counterproductive. Success-
ful artists, for the most part, do not take these associations seriously.
Artists associations are basically a thing of the past. Third, although
artists can get a masters degree or a Ph.D. in some countries, they do not
offer easier access to the art world.6 They are basically irrelevant for the
professional success of an artist. Finally, on average artists with some
years of ofﬁcial training or with assorted diplomas do not necessarily
earn more working in the arts than artists with no ofﬁcial training.7
The actual insigniﬁcance of professional education as a barrier is most
evident in literature. In other art forms diplomas do exist, but are not
obligatory. Nevertheless, although professionally educated artists seem
to be no better off than artists with less education, many prospective
artists do pursue ofﬁcial training. And because there are so many, quite a
few are rejected at the gate of the art colleges. Therefore it appears that
academies have a numerus clauses and that the most important formal
barrier in the arts is situated at the entrance to art schools.
It is however questionable if a signiﬁcant formal barrier that keeps
numbers of artists down really exists at the entrance to the schools. It is
true that candidates are selected. Ofﬁcially, admissions are based purely
on talent. (Other criteria remained taboo, as they would contradict arts
autonomy.) In practice however, the teachers’ assessment of talent is nec-
essarily relative and subjective. Teachers have an interest in keeping
enrollment high. Most art teachers are artists who earn little from their
art and therefore, they cannot afford to lose an attractive teaching job.
(Moreover, they are usually eager to help artist friends get teaching jobs
in their schools.) As a result, admissions to particular schools tend to
depend on the capacity of the schools rather than on the number of tal-
ented would-be students. And in the long run, both teachers and arts
administrators have an interest in increasing enrollments and the number
of schools to accommodate the ever-increasing number of art students.
Therefore what seemed to be an artiﬁcial and formal barrier at the gate of
art colleges is primarily a normal price barrier.
264
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

Where numbers of applicants were large in other professions, not only
information campaigns would discourage potential students from enter-
ing, also, especially at the technical and vocational training schools for
those over 18-years old, a numerus clausus has been commonly
employed in most European countries. By and large, the same applies to
the us.8
After the Second World War in the arts however, art student enroll-
ments only continued to rise. Nevertheless, there was no pressure from
professional artists to reduce enrollments, nor did governments try to
deter students from studying art.9 In most European countries, this situ-
ation continues on into the present day. For instance in Britain, where
students currently pay a fee that largely covers costs, the enrollments in
art departments continues to rise at least as fast as in other departments.
After winning the 1981 elections, the socialists in France increased the
subsidization of art education and ignited a spectacular rise in enroll-
ments. (In the year 2000 in the Netherlands, a new system of ﬁnancing
art schools was instituted to indirectly limit enrollment ﬁgures in the ﬁne
arts departments at various colleges. Whether this is a sign of changing
attitudes with respect to control or an inevitable correction of an earlier
excessive growth rate, is at present difﬁcult to tell. There are signs how-
ever, that current enrollment ﬁgures at the autonomous departments
have gone down in the Netherlands.) So far, it is still basically true that
barriers that lead to a formal control of numbers of artists are unaccept-
able because creativity must not be hampered by ofﬁcial regulations.
It is unthinkable that art ‘intruders’ could simply be scared off – as is
the case with other professions – by telling them that, ‘We will call the
cops if you ever promote yourself as a tenor because you do not have the
required qualiﬁcations.’ Or more generally: ‘We will call the cops if you
attempt to work as an uncertiﬁed artist.’ Using coercion to prevent a col-
league from painting or making music would violate people’s deepest
belief with respect to art: that of the autonomy of the arts and artist. The
arts would lose its sacred status if the entrance to the arts was formally
limited. Even the body of knowledge must remain as unrestricted as pos-
sible. The arts resist a formal control of numbers of artists. Barriers that
formally control numbers are taboo (thesis 100).
3
In the Past Numbers of Artists were Controlled
Because formal barriers are not important in the arts, the arts appear to
be relatively open. The entrance fees are low and people with equal
amounts of talent appear to have equal chances. Thus far, the analysis
265
IN THE PAST NUMBERS OF ARTISTS WERE CONTROLLED

conﬁrms most of the popular images people have of the arts. Looking
back at the history of the arts, however, this conclusion could very well
be premature.
Before I argued that in the past, until the second half of the nineteenth
century, a formal control of numbers or occupational control was
common in the arts.10 For instance, in France until the end of the seven-
teenth century, painters’ guilds regulated sales and the types of materials
used, and they also issued licenses to individual painters. Thereafter, the
Académie Royale maintained a monopoly and forced all independent
painters to join its organization. Moreover, it also deﬁned the ‘correct’
style; this style was taught in school.11
In the nineteenth century, the number of artists grew rapidly. An
increasing number of these newcomers were so-called bohemian artists.
They opposed the basic bourgeois mentality. Their romantic alternative
put autonomy and authenticity ﬁrst. This idea countered the notions of
control and regulation. During the second half of the nineteenth century,
a regulated supply came to an end under the pressures imposed by
numerous newcomers, by the deviant mentality of these new bohemian
artists as well as the success of new distribution channels. The Academy
collapsed, along with comparable institutions in other countries and in
other art forms.12 Since that time, both the regulation of supply and the
idea of enforcing a correct style are unthinkable because they are con-
trary to the very essence of art.13
It turns out that both the bohemian ideology of the autonomy of the
artist and the pressure of burgeoning numbers of artists forbid the
formal control of numbers in the arts (thesis 101). In the ﬁrst place,
formal regulation would be futile. If certain artists were excluded from
the profession, new groups of ‘marginal’ artists would continuously ﬁnd
ways around ofﬁcialdom and become more successful than ‘qualiﬁed’
artists. Secondly, given the mystique of the arts, society in general does
not approve of a formal regulation of numbers in the arts. (After all, reg-
ulations might prevent a genius from being discovered.)
In this respect, the artist’s status is ambiguous. On the one hand,
artists regard themselves as professionals in a similar way as, say, doctors
do. Artists evidently have a long professional history. And as artists they
have attained a high level of status. On the other hand, the status of the
arts as profession cannot compete with the status of comparable profes-
sions.14 It has experienced its ups and downs, but over the past one hun-
dred years, art as a profession has never had much status.15 By refusing
to regulate the size of the group one ultimately decreases the status of a
profession. In medicine and other professions with a high level of profes-
sional status, this kind of regulating is an important demonstration of
266
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

the power of a particular profession. It shows who is in charge and it
keeps income within a particular profession relatively high.
4
Granting Certiﬁcates to Commercial Galleries in the Netherlands
(An Example)
Even though the arts have changed and barriers that formally control
numbers are insigniﬁcant in the arts these days, this does not necessarily
mean that barriers don’t exist and that the arts are totally open. On the
contrary, the arts have many barriers, both formal and informal. In order
to explain how informal barriers work, it is useful to look at an example.
In 1992 in the Netherlands, a number of galleries were expelled from
an attractive subsidy program. In that same year, just about the same
group of galleries was excluded from participating in the most presti-
gious commercial art fair in the Netherlands, the KunstRAI. If this was a
coincidence, it was an extraordinary coincidence. If it wasn’t, it makes it
all even more astounding. After all, it was a public institution that issued
the subsidies, while the fair was a private industry event. It’s difﬁcult to
see how the actions in these two sectors were attuned.
Two formal barriers were involved in the expulsions. Applicants had
to meet certain objective criteria, but ultimately admission depended on
the decisions of two selection committees.16 Admission to both the sub-
sidy plan and the trade fair were important for gallery owners because of
the ﬁnancial advantages but even more because of the indirect signaling
effect. Participation in both subsidy plan and fair served as symbols of
‘quality’, which by association means a division between ‘good’ and
‘bad’ galleries. Galleries without these two signs were worse off.
The signs were even more attractive because they were not meant to
signal quality. If galleries had gotten together to create an institute to
certify ‘quality’ galleries, it wouldn’t have worked because it would run
contrary to the liberal autonomous spirit in the arts. The same, however,
does not apply to free riding on existing classiﬁcations. In this case, exist-
ing signs serve as ‘marks of quality by association’, and thus serve as
informal barriers.
Both the subsidy plan and the fair had been under pressure to reduce
the number of participating galleries.17 Therefore, the two parties had
each created a committee to select participating galleries. Both commit-
tees consisted of gallery owners and independent experts. There was no
overlap between the two committees. As noted, the fair was a private
enterprise, while the subsidies were granted by the Dutch government.
Nevertheless, miraculously, the two committees somehow decided on an
267
GRANTING CERTIFICATES TO COMMERCIAL GALLERIES IN THE NETHERLANDS

almost identical division of galleries to be included and excluded.
Let’s examine how this could have happened. In 1992, Dutch govern-
ment-sponsored avant-garde art was high and the fair’s directors were
willing to forsake some ﬁnancial remuneration in return for the prestige
that avant-garde art accorded. Therefore, both committees invited inde-
pendent experts as well as experts from a business organization of gov-
ernment-oriented avant-garde galleries. Although these experts all knew
one another, they later denied that they had discussed a common strategy
for the selection of galleries beforehand. And this is probably true. There
was no need for a conspiracy because the committee-members were
already ‘in tune’. They already spoke the same language. In the discourse
they used all the right words and ‘correctly’ applied their knowledge of
representative galleries and artists to other galleries and artists. Without
any conspiratorial intent, they ‘naturally’ came up with the same selec-
tion of galleries. The members of the two committees were gatekeepers of
the same informal barrier that surrounds ‘quality’ galleries.18
5
Characteristics of Informal Barriers
In the example above, experts used an implicit deﬁnition of ‘good’ and
‘bad’ galleries, and thus deﬁned boundaries and barriers. The ‘good’ gal-
leries that are on the inside belong to a privileged circle; the ‘bad’ galleries
remain on the outside. In the same implicit way, insiders use deﬁnitions
of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ art or ‘good’ and ‘bad’ artists. Below are some styl-
ized characteristics of informal barriers. (Sociology offers an extensive
literature on related subjects like gatekeepers, classiﬁcations, reputa-
tions, networks, and the transfer of capital.19 It’s not my intention in this
chapter to improve on these ﬁndings. I primarily rephrase the ﬁndings to
explain informal barriers and monopolization in the arts from an eco-
nomic point of view.)
a The control of an informal barrier does not rest with appointees or any
ofﬁcial institution. Instead, the authority is an anonymous entity. It
comes from a collective of gatekeepers who may not know one
another. By deﬁning forms of recognition, they produce an informal
barrier.
b Anybody who takes part in the discourse on the recognition of art and
artists and who is able to inﬂuence the discourse is a gatekeeper.
Artists and other experts like critics, gallery owners, dealers, impresa-
rios, civil servants etc., can all be gatekeepers.
c Inarticulate terms are used in discourses on the arts. Their meanings
change rapidly.20 Gatekeepers know the ins and outs of these shifting
268
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

terms. Connotations refer to ‘good’ and ‘bad’ artistic styles, trends,
attitudes, etc.21
d As styles become increasingly difﬁcult to describe, the names of a few
key artists rather than of styles are used to denote a circle of recogni-
tion.22 On the basis of these names gatekeepers can tell which artists
belong or do not belong to a certain circle.
e The deﬁned selections and circles of recognition are versatile. They
change as the process of deﬁning the barrier changes directions. This
kind of versatility is possible through the use of container words, such
as quality, original, authentic, cutting edge, or innovative, and of
names of key artists who represent other related artists as well.
f Gatekeepers have an information advantage that allows them to
monopolize the discourse, which in turn enables them to easily
exclude both artists and experts who do not understand the discourse
well enough.
g For producers and consumers alike, informal barriers are a signal that
artists inside the circle have qualities that artists outside the circle do
not have.
h In practice there are, within any art form, only a limited number of dif-
ferent circles of recognition that effectively signal quality.
i A formal barrier often becomes temporarily attached to an informal
barrier. Its mark stands for the informal barrier. It is a mark of quality
by association.
j Certain formal barriers are interconnected because they stand for the
same informal barrier.
k Because the government, to a large extent, ﬁnances the professional
regime in the arts and thus pays the numerous gatekeepers, these gate-
keepers take care of the government’s interests.
l Informal barriers function as reward systems.23 By passing through a
particular barrier after fulﬁlling its requirements, artists start to share
in the rewards of a privileged circle.
m Informal barriers hinder competition. Memberships within a circle
are limited, which means more monetary and non-monetary income
for insiders and less for outsiders.
The existence of informal barriers in the arts can usually only be made
credible. A ﬁrst clue in the investigation of informal barriers and circles
of recognition can often be found in formal barriers, because these
formal barriers sometimes get temporarily attached to informal barriers.
Formal barriers offer anchorage and a clearly visible sign of quality as
well as an organizational structure for gatekeepers. Formal barriers in
the arts are easily discerned. Admission to advanced training, diplomas,
269
CHARACTERISTICS OF INFORMAL BARRIERS

subsidies, prizes and awards, admission to an artist association, museum
purchases, invitations to arts fairs, having one’s work performed by a
well-known orchestra, and receiving a prestigious teaching job are all
obvious signs of formal barriers. Many of these barriers employ ballots
or forms of cooptation. They are effective however, because they rest on
underlying. The link is temporary, however, because formal barriers
cannot function as signals of quality in the arts in an ofﬁcial and perma-
nent manner. This would be contrary to the autonomy of art and artists.
An example of temporary anchorage was presented in the ﬁrst illustra-
tion. The type of subsidy Alex received (a ‘werkbeurs’), was extremely
important because in the Netherlands it was very visible and functioned
as a sign of passage into an important informal circle of recognition. As a
sign, it was conspicuous. (It is currently less important as a signal.) In the
arts these ‘marks of quality by association’, which were never designed
to certify artists, are less objectionable than permanent formal marks
like diplomas, which are designed to certify artists. Therefore, when
formal barriers gradually becomes rigid and begin to limit artistic free-
dom, the informal barrier becomes attached to other formal marks.
When government subsidizes artists and when people organize, for
instance, a music concourse or an art fair, they create formal barriers and
so, deliberately or not, they enable anchorage to take place with one or
more informal barriers. Without their intervention, the informal barri-
ers would be less effective. To some degree, the government and those
who organize a music concourse or a fair are responsible for the ‘good
art’ versus ‘bad art’ dichotomy produced by the informal barrier. Never-
theless, because an informal barrier connects different formal barriers, it
is sometimes difﬁcult to ﬁgure out exactly who is most responsible. In the
illustration, the impact of government subsidies was stressed. At the
same time however, the aforementioned fair could have been decisive.
(Alex’s work had been exhibited at the fair and the government commit-
tee members could have seen his work there. The phenomenon of the ‘joy
of recognition’ will often mean that committee members will sooner
grant subsidies to artists whose work they have already seen than to
artists whose work they’ve never seen before.) Therefore, government
barriers in part depend on market barriers and vice versa. Nevertheless,
one type of barrier often dominates. In the Netherlands, for instance, the
government barrier is usually the more important barrier, as we saw in
the ﬁrst illustration.
Informal barriers contribute to monopolization in the arts. The degree
to which a circle of recognition is monopolized depends on how success-
ful a group of gatekeepers is in limiting group size and raising income. In
this respect, it does not matter whether or not the monopolization is
270
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

intentional and the actions of the gatekeepers are coordinated.
Informal barriers as opposed to formal controls of numbers exist in
the arts. They limit the number of artists in a circle of recognition and
raise their monetary and non-monetary income. Experts, including
artists, sharing a speciﬁc discourse function as gatekeepers (thesis 102).
6
Informal Barriers Protect Collective Reputations
Because most art forms already have a huge supply of art and artists, art
consumers have plenty of choice. But deciding is not easy. One often
needs to be an expert to know the value of a particular artwork among
the oversupply of, for instance, pop music and contemporary visual art.
Is the work insigniﬁcant or does it represent the beginning of a new and
important trend? With respect to new art, there is a certain amount of
‘uncertainty of taste’.24 Art moves in many different directions, and even
experts ﬁnd it difﬁcult to predict long-term developments. Nevertheless,
experts still have a better idea of what is hot and what is not than the
average consumer does. Because information is asymmetric, like in the
case of used cars, experts assist consumers in distinguishing ‘good’ from
‘bad’ art by granting various marks of quality in the form of repu-
tations.25
Reputations in the arts signal quality. Like the certiﬁcate on the door
of the used car dealership, a reputation promises certain qualities for
consumers, which artists without this reputation cannot offer. Neverthe-
less, a reputation is not a certiﬁcate; it is not a piece of paper conferring
certain rights on the owner, rights that are guaranteed by some ofﬁcial
authority. Instead, a reputation in the arts is part of a discourse in which
many reputations are formed, assessed, changed, brought down, or pro-
tected.
Reputations have (1) an individual component and (2) a collective
component. The individual component is the personal trademark of an
artist. Artists are usually known for certain authentic characteristics in
their work, which they do not share with other artists. This personal
‘trademark’ is an essential part of their reputation. Because experts
including colleagues are continuously assessing the authentic qualities of
artists’ works, the reputation of, for instance, Freud is different in many
aspects from the reputations of Auerbach and Kitaj even though they all
belong to the same group of ﬁgurative painters.
The collective component of a reputation rests on similarities within a
group of related artists. The collective aspect of the reputation plays an
important role as long as artists are not considered the top in their partic-
271
INFORMAL BARRIERS PROTECT COLLECTIVE REPUTATIONS

ular art form. This aspect is an imaginary signal or mark of quality,
which is connected to the informal barrier that surrounds the group of
related artists. (As noted, nowadays these ‘schools’ usually do not have
names, but are known by the names of one or two key artists.) Gatekeep-
ers decide on who to let in (to attain a certain reputation) and those who
are to be kept out. In fact, participants in the discourse occasionally let
artists in by granting them a favorable reputation, while others are
rejected or are stripped of their favorable reputations. This way the
favorable reputation of the insider artists can be protected. Letting
artists in is often a matter of cooptation, but cooptation within the limi-
tations set by the discourse.
Although no legal means exist to protect reputations, punishing
offenders is apparently possible. Taking the favorable reputation away
from offenders is the same as revoking a certiﬁcate. Artists get a negative
reputation and begin to lose income. This is why Margaret in the illustra-
tion is reluctant to show her relationship with Alfred. She is afraid that
people will learn about the connection and begin to see her work in a dif-
ferent light. This could eventually harm her reputation.
7
Innovations in the Arts are Protected and Indirectly Rewarded
The acknowledgment of the importance of reputations helps in under-
standing the extensive presence of innovation in the arts. At ﬁrst glance,
there seems to be little award for innovation in the arts. There are no
laws protecting innovation in the arts. Although copyright laws protect
actual products such as texts, melodies, dance steps or images, copyright
does not protect the innovations in the inherent artistic styles in an art-
work. In theory, patent law could protect some of these innovations, as it
does in industry, but in practice, patent law is not really applicable in the
arts. The law requires unambiguous criteria. In the case of industrial
innovations, these criteria are supplied in the form of speciﬁcations.
Descriptions of styles, however, will always be ambiguous.
For example, anybody can copy Mondrian’s style. Not only artists
working in the style of Mondrian, but also producers of shower curtains
(and Yves Saint Laurent) using Mondrian-like patterns could freely
proﬁt from his innovations, as long as they did not directly copy Mon-
drian’s work. In other words, no legal system of appropriation is in place
with respect to Mondrian’s innovation in style.26
At the same time, the costs of innovations are usually high. Sometimes
many years of ‘research’ by one or, numerous artists precede the innova-
tion inherent in a new style. Therefore, without some other system of
272
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

remuneration the incentive to innovate in the arts might easily disappear.
If governments and other donors didn’t ﬁnance a large portion of scien-
tiﬁc research, the same would happen in the sciences, where patents
sometimes are also an unlikely option. Therefore, by analogy, a case can
be and has already been made for government subsidies to the arts to
help foster innovation.27
The necessity of the subsidization of artistic innovation seems logical.
It is not however because many creative and performing artists are that
eager to innovate. Even though not all art forms value innovation
equally, change and development are typical for both the modern cre-
ative and the performing arts.28 Why are so many artists engaged in
innovation, if it is, in fact, an unproﬁtable endeavor?
Although innovators in the arts do not receive rewards by selling
patents, they nevertheless do receive rewards. The fact that outside the
market gatekeepers give innovative artists a reputation for being innova-
tive contributes to other rewards. Gatekeepers grant a favorable reputa-
tion to innovators, which serves as a signal and gives them status and also
indirectly increases their market income. Imitators on the other hand,
receive an unfavorable reputation and in this way, the reputations of
innovators are protected.
This means that while patents serve as formal barriers in the market,
important informal barriers replace patents in the arts. The law protects
the rights of the patent holders. Only those willing to pay a price are
allowed to use patented ideas. Leslie Singer has suggested that the direc-
tors of important modern art museums run semi-patent ofﬁces because
they offer semi-patents to innovating artists by giving them reputations
for innovation.29 By granting these reputations to some and refusing
them to others, they manage to control an informal barrier. Therefore,
museum directors are experts who play a signiﬁcant role in creating rep-
utations.
Nevertheless, the inﬂuence of museum directors must not be exagger-
ated. Reputations often begin developing long before these directors
become involved. Therefore, the notion of collectives of gatekeepers is
more appropriate. They create and assess reputations for innovation.30
Science, the twin sister of art, also has to deal with the fact that many
innovations cannot be protected by law. The sciences however, have an
extremely institutionalized and formal reward system. The sciences
employs a system of certiﬁed ranks and titles, which is conducted by
peers. The arts has no ofﬁcial ranks and titles. Instead, informal barriers
based on an ongoing discourse structure the arts. These barriers produce
a balance between variety and continuity. The balance shifts over time
and varies between art forms. In some art forms, like classical music,
273
INNOVATIONS IN THE ARTS ARE PROTECTED AND INDIRECTLY REWARDED

continuity comes ﬁrst. In others, like the visual arts and pop music, vari-
ety and change are more important.31
Even though patent laws cannot be applied to most art innovations,
these innovations do not go totally unprotected. Informal barriers con-
trolled by gatekeepers protect reputations for innovation that lead to
recognition and indirectly to monetary income (thesis 103). Since artists
are indirectly rewarded for their innovations, a degree of appropriation
exists.
8
The Arts are Structured and Developments are Controlled
Discourses change and informal barriers are always evolving. Neverthe-
less, these barriers conﬁne the economy of the arts; the economy is less
open than expected. Informal barriers not only conﬁne, but also struc-
ture the economy of the arts (thesis 104). Therefore, the results of
people’s activities in the arts are not altogether unpredictable. In this
context, I will offer a few remarks on the origin and the mechanism of
change in the arts. They may contribute to the understanding of the
economy of the arts. (A detailed discussion of the subject falls, however,
outside the scope of this book.)
When gatekeepers meet, for instance in committees deciding on
grants, they speak the same language because they have been trained in
the same discourse. Therefore, they tend to agree easily, sometimes to
their own astonishment.32 Within the process, the discourse changes.
New insights gradually creep into the discourse and inﬂuence the out-
comes of decisions.
In modern art, different schools or styles come and go. By employing
the inarticulateness of container terms ‘dialects’ develop. When a new
style survives, the dialect starts to inﬂuence the main discourse. And
when it becomes more and more noticed, chief experts and peers start to
assess the new school or style. At this stage, existing gatekeepers ridicule
the new style, ﬁght it, respect it, argue for its recognition, and even start
to ‘produce’ it. This is a give and take between the newcomers and the
established experts and peers. In this way, the central discourse changes
from within. And so barriers also change.
Usually there is only one dominant discourse. Nevertheless, occasion-
ally a ﬁght between two discourses can go on undecided for a long time,
like the ﬁght between avant-garde (contemporary) and traditional
(modern) art in Britain discussed in Chapter 3. In this case, two dis-
courses exist side by side which have their own gatekeepers and chal-
lengers and that largely change from within.
274
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

Although a discourse is ﬂexible, it would be wrong to assume that a
discourse can take any form. An art form has a history. Over time cul-
tural capital has been accumulated, which cannot easily be undone. Even
when groups disagree, they always have some common ground to stand
on. It is above all because of this ﬁxed core that committee members
understand one another.33 By controlling the barriers that new styles
face, gatekeepers indirectly deﬁne art. They check whether new develop-
ments respect the core of the specialization or take it in directions they do
not approve off.34
The authority or power invested in the informal barriers in the arts
rests with groups of insiders, artists, and other experts. In this respect,
not everybody who takes part in the discourse surrounding a barrier has
the same power. For instance, the director of an important museum of
modern art is likely to have a larger say than a critic writing for a local
newspaper. This conﬁrms the conclusion in Chapter 3 that not only the
power of rich people’s money, but also the power of words of those with a
lot of cultural capital inﬂuences the deﬁnition of art, an inﬂuence that
most others do not have. Because the power to deﬁne art is unequally dis-
tributed, the arts are not as open and free as they seem to be.
The inaccessible or open nature of the arts also depends on the way the
power to deﬁne art changes hands. Is it vanquished or is it handed over
voluntarily? Is there an element of heredity involved in the sense that
important artists and experts hand over power to their own kind rather
than to strangers? Viewed from the outside, such a system of cooptation
would imply yet another form of monopolization, which further
abridges artistic freedom.
In the arts, cultural capital and social capital are important sources of
power. They enable experts, including artists, to participate in the rele-
vant discourses. Their capital is found in relationships and a network, in
their knowledge of the history of an art form, of its developments, of the
names of its relevant artists and of the accurate interpretation of perti-
nent terminology. However, their power never goes undisputed. If others
manage to increase their cultural and social power within the discourse,
the value of the cultural and social capital of the ﬁrst diminishes. There-
fore, by controlling the access to circles of recognition, including govern-
ment funds, the experts and artists concerned have an indirect means to
safeguard their cultural capital and pass it on to whomever they choose.
In general, important gatekeepers tend to favor fellow artists or artist
friends who belong to the same artistic schools, even the same colleges
where the gatekeepers studied or worked as teachers. This means that to
be accepted, the cultural capital, as well as the social capital of newcom-
ers, counts. These ‘kinfolk’ or ‘rookies’ are likely to respect the cultural
275
THE ARTS ARE STRUCTURED AND DEVELOPMENTS ARE CONTROLLED

capital of the gatekeepers.35 (Alfred in the illustration is evidently not an
important gatekeeper, but an outsider. Although Alfred may have inﬂu-
enced Margaret, she joined an established circle of recognition with its
own leading artists. Because Margaret doesn’t take risks and goes to
great pains not to offend her colleagues, she is more of a rookie than a
rebel. Nevertheless, occasionally gatekeepers invite a ‘rebel’ in as well.
Sometimes the alliance with a young rebel can slow down the devalua-
tion of the gatekeepers’ capital.)
At the end of their careers, the old guard’s power will necessarily
diminish, but their capital can remain valued and respected. Protégés
choose their own directions but will refrain from ridiculing the outdated
capital of the old guard and continue to pay tribute. In this way the cul-
tural capital of older artists lives on in the work of their younger col-
leagues and becomes part of the core of the specialization. This is how
successful older artists increase their chances of having their art outlive
them.
Because informal barriers protect the beneﬁts of a privileged position,
allow cooptation, help channel the beneﬁts to ‘offspring’, and some-
times safeguard privileges beyond the death of the artists concerned,
they lead to monopolization (thesis 105).
The largely unintentional mechanism described above is also present
in other professions, above all in the sciences. The difference is that new-
comers in the arts unjustiﬁably expect the arts to be open. Therefore,
they arrive in droves, are ill-informed and unaware of the extent of infor-
mal monopolization in the arts.
9
The Risks of Some are Reduced at the Expense of Others
Due to informal barriers the arts are structured and partly monopolized,
but the structuring is informal and difﬁcult to discern. Informal monop-
olization causes a reduction in risks for artists in privileged areas, while
risks are higher for artists outside these areas.36 In the selected areas,
average income, in the form of recognition and usually some money as
well, is higher because many are excluded and numbers are relatively
small. Therefore, competition is less intense. In these areas, there is a
consolidated effort to support the reputations of artists. Artists are also
informally protected against theft of the intellectual property inherent in
their innovations. Moreover, risk is further reduced as gatekeepers par-
tially control the development in the discourse about art. Therefore the
chance that totally unexpected developments will occur is smaller than
elsewhere.
276
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

Informal structures make some areas in the arts slightly more pre-
dictable and therefore less risky for its participants. But it does not turn
these areas into a safe haven. Even in these areas, however, artist’s
careers are in no way comparable with university careers, for instance.
Risks remain relatively high. Nevertheless, once an artist drifts outside
these areas the risks become even greater. Risk reduction in the inner cir-
cles implies increased risks in the unstructured outer zone. In other
words, some proﬁt at the expense of others.
When I envision the arts, I picture a large outer zone in which many
unsuccessful artists dwell and a small inner zone comprised of a small
number of more or less successful artists. In my picture, height stands for
recognition. The large outer zone is a plane and the inner zone is a moun-
tain in the middle of the plane with a few peaks. The beginning of the
mountain range and the contours at different heights indicate three or
four successive circles of recognition. Because newcomers with equal
artistic talents seem to have the same small chance of crossing the plain
to reach the mountain, they all seem to be as bad off in the unfriendly
outer zone. This is not true, however. Due to other differences in social,
cultural, and economic capital, newcomers in the arts face different
risks. On average, those who manage to cross the ﬁrst barrier, the plain,
have more social, cultural, and economic capital than the rest. And after
that, fewer and fewer artists reach the higher mountain peaks, i.e., the
higher circles of recognition. Again and again, more and different capi-
tal is required to keep going. Some has been gathered along the way;
other capital was already there. Most artists, however, never manage to
leave the outer zone.
Chapter 5 argued that artists are ill-informed about the arts; because
of the myths about freedom and autonomy they can’t see the full extent
of the barriers. Therefore, many people enter the art world, who would
not have entered, had they been able to see the barriers clearly. Because
the control of numbers in the arts is informal rather than formal, people
contemplating a career in the arts are usually ill-informed; they think the
arts are more open than they really are and they are unaware of the
extent to which informal monopolization characterizes the arts (thesis
106).
10 Conclusion
Why does Margaret, in the earlier illustration, publicly deny her rela-
tionship with an artist friend whose work she admires? And why is it so
important for artists to be favored by the government? Margaret has
277
CONCLUSION

passed through the informal barrier that surrounds an attractive circle of
young, successful avant-garde artists. She does not want to jeopardize
her position by revealing herself as having too many inappropriate con-
nections. Meanwhile, artists seek government recognition because it
represents the informal barrier that distinguishes ‘good’ from ‘bad’
artists.
On the one hand, the economy of the arts is exceptional because there
is little occupational regulation. No diplomas are required to practice art
or to call oneself an artist. Admission to the existing bodies of knowledge
in the arts is also not controlled. There is a taboo on both forms of con-
trol because the arts need to protect their autonomous imago. The arts
must appear to be open. On the other hand, however, the economy of the
arts is exceptional because of the existence of many informal barriers
that are difﬁcult to ascertain and ultimately reduce the openness of the
arts.
Successful artists and other gatekeepers control informal barriers. As
was the case with Margaret, only limited numbers of artists are admitted
into speciﬁc circles of recognition. Versatile rules develop and are applied
during discourses among insiders, who don’t necessarily know one
another. Using this kind of discourse reputations are built, assessed, or
destroyed.
Reputations resemble property rights in the market because when
experts and peers recognize the style of a particular artist or a group of
artists, another artist or group can no longer lay claim to this style.
Therefore, although artists cannot acquire patents to protect their work
under the law, their innovations are nevertheless informally protected.
It turns out that in the introduction to this chapter both the artist and
the economist were wrong in assuming that few barriers exist in the arts.
There are more barriers in the arts and the arts are more structured than
one would expect in the absence of a formal control of numbers. People
entering the arts are often not aware of the numerous barriers. They
believe that all that matters is talent and hard work. Many artists will
continue to think this way until their dying day. This attitude is part of
the artist’s habitus. Artists are apparently ill-informed. The importance
of barriers is underestimated, and so artists come in droves and their
average incomes are low. This means that another explanation for the
large numbers who enter the arts and their low incomes is the relative
invisibility of barriers in the arts.
The arts appear to be a rough ﬁeld to enter. It seems that everybody is
as bad off as everybody else is. Nevertheless, for reasons nobody quite
understands, some ﬁnd their way while others do not. This chapter has
hopefully made it clear that there are underlying structures, which privi-
278
INFORMAL BARRIERS STRUCTURE THE ARTS

lege some at the expense of others. In practice, areas of reduced risk in the
arts are reserved primarily for those with sufﬁcient amounts of the right
kind capital.
Discussion
1 One view has the arts pictured as an extremely anarchistic sector
where everybody only looks out for themselves. Another view of the
arts is that it’s more like a battleﬁeld where successful artists com-
mand armies of disciples and together with other gatekeepers they
‘organize’ the arts in order to leave their mark on art history. What is
your view?
2 In this chapter, part of the explanation has been shifted to areas,
which are not treated in this book. What is the origin of artistic devel-
opment? How do informal structures and monopolization emerge and
how do they develop? How do differences in capital arise? Can you
elaborate on these subjects?
279
CONCLUSION

Chapter 12
Conclusion: a Cruel Economy
Why Is the Exceptional Economy of the Arts 
so Persistent?
Apologizing for not Going into the Arts
Alex meets Marco at a classical music concert. When Alex tells Marco he’s
a visual artist, Marco conﬁdes in Alex that a few years earlier he had con-
templated about going to a music conservatory to study composition. He
explains that he is a good pianist and that he has won some prizes at con-
courses for young people. During their conversation, he reveals his regrets
about going into information technology instead. But his regrets appear to
be of the romantic kind; the sort of regrets people can indulge in. Alex is
more struck by the fact that Marco is apologetic about his choice not to go
into the arts, as if he has done something wrong and now must apologize.
Maybe he feels the need to apologize because Alex did manage to go into
the arts. In Marco’s opinion, Alex has done the right thing.
This has happened to Alex before: people being apologetic for not choos-
ing the arts. Marco is, however, the ﬁrst who explains why he is apologetic.
He notes that by letting the arts go, he feels that he missed out on some-
thing special. By not becoming an artist, he has harmed himself, like he has
mutilated himself. He could have put himself, his personality, into his com-
positions, which would have allowed his personality to grow. He would
have become a more complete human being. Moreover, he would have
belonged, belonged to the world of art. But it’s not just he who has lost out
– Alex mustn’t think him arrogant – but society also lost out because of this
regrettable decision. If he had become the composer he wanted to be, he
is sure he could have offered something signiﬁcant to society. He would
have joined the group of artists who help shape the history of art, of civiliza-
tion itself. Yes, he is ashamed of his choice and deep down he feels guilty.
Alex tells him that despite his talents, his chances of actually making it as a
professional composer would have been extremely slim. Marco says that
this just makes things worse. It demonstrates that he is a coward, some-
body who wants to play it safe.
Alex has to admit that Marco doesn’t appear to be a very adventurous
person. Moreover, Alex notices that he thinks Marco is ‘bourgeois’, even
though Alex knows he should be congratulating Marco in his decision to
choose a lucrative career.
280

Alex has discovered people like Marco everywhere, even in a poor country
like Brazil. Alex (the alter ego of the author) wrote this chapter in Recife,
Brazil. One day, while he was in an alternative bar in the new part of Recife,
Alex met a woman, Maria, who told him that she had always wanted to
become a dancer but ultimately decided not to. It struck Alex that she
talked about it in exactly the same apologetic tone of voice as Marco. On
another night, Maria introduced Alex to a group of dancers. None of them
were employed at that time. Nevertheless, some had been working for
fringe dance companies in different cities in Brazil, and were hoping to con-
tinue to do so. The amazing thing was that their descriptions of the Brazilian
fringe dance scene sounded a lot like the fringe dance scene in the Nether-
lands: the same kind of dedication, the same hardships, the same large
groups of dancers working only once in a while. The fundamental beliefs
that underlie the arts and the economy of the arts are more international
than Alex had thought.
Marco’s apologetic behavior lies at the heart of the exceptional economy
of the arts. While Marco may have regrettably decided to not pursue art,
many others decide precisely the opposite. They enter the art world
because the arts are extremely attractive, despite the prospects of low
incomes. The arts offer something ‘extra’ that makes Marco apologetic.
I set out to write this book to explain why incomes are so low in the
arts and why the arts remain so attractive as well as the phenomenon of
the large amounts of donations and subsidies the arts receive. During the
process, it turned out that in many respects the economy of the arts is an
exceptional economy. In this concluding chapter, I will list the aspects
which makes the economy of the arts exceptional. I will also summarize
the book’s ﬁndings with respect to low incomes and the large gift sphere.
On top of that, I will try to analyze the results by attempting to answer,
ﬁrst, whether the economy of the arts can be qualiﬁed as a cruel or merci-
less economy, and secondly, whether artists sacriﬁce themselves or are
sacriﬁced within this merciless economy.
As an artist, I am aware that the arts did not bestow the romantic alter-
native upon me I had hoped for. Being an artist is just a lot of hard work
and also badly paid work. Nevertheless, I continue to believe that all my
struggles will ultimately be worth the effort. I am convinced that in the
years to come I will contribute something signiﬁcant to the history of art.
Because the work is hard and badly paid I really need this kind of belief to
keep me going. As a social scientist, I am now aware that the arts are a
tough place for many of those who take the plunge. The economy is mer-
ciless. It is also an exceptional economy. Because of all the myths that
swaddle art, the economy of the arts is persistently exceptional.
281
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

1
The Economy of the Arts is an Exceptional Economy
In the course of this book, I have drawn a picture of the economy of the
arts that shows its exceptional nature. The following table lists several
exceptional aspects as they appeared in the pages of this book. Taken
together they portray an exceptional economy.
table 4 aspects contributing to the exceptional nature
of the economy of the arts
1
The valuation of art products tends to be asymmetric; one group
looks up to the high art of the other group, while the latter looks
down on the low art of the former. (Chapter 1)
2
In the arts: (1) the economy is denied; (2) it is proﬁtable to be non-
commercial; (3) commercial activities are veiled. (Chapter 2)
3
Art and artists have an exceptionally high status. (Chapter 1)
4
Artists overlook or deny their orientation towards rewards.
(Chapter 4)
5
Top incomes in the arts are extremely high; higher than in other
professions. (Chapter 5)
6
The large majority of artists earn less than other professionals do.
Hourly income is low or even negative. In the modern welfare
state, this is truly exceptional. (Chapter 5)
7
Despite these low incomes, an unusually high number of young-
sters still want to become artists. The arts are extremely attractive.
(Chapter 5)
8
Beginning artists face far more uncertainty than the average
beginning professionals. (Chapter 5)
9
Money represents a constraint rather than a goal for many artists.
(Chapter 4)
10
Artists are (more than others) intrinsically motivated. (Chapter 4)
11
Artists are (more than others) oriented towards non-monetary
rewards. (Chapter 5)
12
Artists are (more than others) inclined to taking risks. (Chapter 5)
13
Artists are unusually ill-informed. (Chapter 5)
14
A combination of myths reproduces misinformation about the
arts. (Chapter 5)
15
Artists more often come from well-to-do families than other pro-
fessionals. (This is even more exceptional because usually the par-
ents of ‘poor’ people are also poor.) (Chapter 6)
16
Poverty is built into the arts. Measures to relieve poverty do not
work or are counterproductive. (Chapter 6)
282
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

17
The arts are characterized by an exceptional high degree of inter-
nal subsidization. By using non-artistic income artists make up the
losses they incur in the arts. (Chapter 6)
18
The gift sphere in the arts is large; subsidies and donations com-
prise an unusually large portion of income. (Chapter 2 and 8)
19
Unlike other professions, the arts do not have a protected body of
certiﬁed knowledge. Anybody can access it. (Chapter 11)
20
Unlike other professions, there is no formal control of numbers in
the arts. Anybody can pursue an arts career regardless of their
qualiﬁcations. (Chapter 11)
21
Many informal barriers exist in the arts. (Chapter 11)
The exceptional nature of the economy of the arts, as it emerged in the
chapters of this book, is a relative exceptional phenomenon. The differ-
ence between it and other sectors is a matter of degree. Nevertheless,
given the combination and intensity of exceptions, the phrase ‘excep-
tional economy of the arts’ is justiﬁed.
2
Despite the Many Donations and Subsidies Incomes are Low 
in the Arts
This book has attempted to answer the questions of why income is low in
the arts, why the arts are so attractive and why they receive so many
donations and subsidies. The main answer to the ﬁrst two questions was
sought in the high status of the arts. It leads to overcrowding and there-
fore to low incomes. A number of reasons were given for art’s high
status. The denial of the economy both stems from the high status of the
arts and contributes to this very status. Because the average artist cares
less about money and more about non-monetary rewards than other pro-
fessionals do, the high status of the arts causes overcrowding and low
incomes. Incomes are also low because artists believe they miss the capa-
bilities needed in ‘normal’ professions, and because artists tend to be less
risk-aversive than others. Moreover, prospective artists are structurally
ill-informed, and therefore even more youngsters enter the profession
and incomes end up being even lower. The willingness to work for low
incomes is so great that, when an artist’s art income is too low to earn a
basic living, artists often utilize income from second jobs or money
donated by partners to continue making art. Finally, this book argued
that donations and subsidies designed to relieve poverty in the arts have
the opposite effect; they tend to increase the numbers of artists with low
283
DESPITE THE MANY DONATIONS AND SUBSIDIES INCOMES ARE LOW IN THE ARTS

incomes. Moreover, well-known subsidy programs for artists give the
signal that the government is willing to take care of artists and thus add
to the overall attractiveness of the arts and therefore exacerbates the con-
ditions that produce low incomes.
At ﬁrst glance, the answer to the third question ‘why do the arts
receive so many donations and gifts’ seems to originate with the answer
to the ﬁrst question. Because incomes are low and because people want
to relieve poverty in the arts, private people, corporations, and the gov-
ernment support the arts. To a degree, this book went along with this
explanation. The argument that private and public gifts are necessary to
counteract poverty in the arts has contributed to the large size of dona-
tions and subsidies for the arts, even though the effect has probably been
the opposite, namely more poverty. In the long run however, it can’t be
ignored that donations and subsidies have little or a negative effect.
Therefore, it is unlikely that the poverty argument can explain the total
dimensions of the large gift sphere in the arts.1
Instead, this book has put most emphasis on the explanation of the
large gift sphere in terms of the interests that donors and governments
have in giving to the arts. In other words, donors and governments
receive returns. Both donors and governments use art for display pur-
poses. Therefore they buy art and even more give art. Chapters 8 and 10
analyzed the many purposes this kind of display serves. Donors and gov-
ernments proﬁt from the high status of the arts, while at the same time
they add to this high status. This takes us back to the beginning: the fact
that the high status of the arts contributes to the large numbers of artists
and low incomes. Therefore, many gifts are more likely to contribute to
poverty than to relieve poverty.
3
A Grim Picture has been Drawn
Can the exceptional economy of the arts be characterized as a ‘merciless’
economy? If it is merciless, this can be revealed in two ways. Firstly, in a
subjective sense – the portrait of the arts in this book pretty much debases
art. Secondly, in an objective sense – many participants in the arts econ-
omy are worse off than they would have been had they chosen other
occupations.
People tend to attribute high and admirable qualities to art. In a sub-
jective sense therefore, the economy does not live up to the rosy picture
people have of the arts. It is unpleasant to acknowledge that art has two
faces and that it is proﬁtable for artists to deny the economy. It is annoy-
ing to learn that monetary and aesthetic values often coincide. It is hurt-
284
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

ful to learn that donors and artists are not selﬂess. And it is disappointing
to discover that the arts are not open and independent and that there is no
such thing as an equal chance. Barriers exist everywhere and winners
pass their advantage on to their protégés. Therefore, surviving in the arts
is not just a matter of ‘natural’ talent. The picture remains disappoint-
ing, because it contradicts the myths that surround the arts. The insights
of this book tend to demystify the mythology of the arts and this can be a
painful experience.
When I think in terms of a merciless economy, however, I ﬁrst think of
objective characteristics. The clearest sign of a merciless economy in an
objective sense is low average income and the fact that poverty is struc-
tural. Some people earn extremely high incomes and yet average income
is much lower than in comparable professions. Income is often so low
that it doesn’t even cover the costs of the profession, like instruments,
materials and studio rent. Average incomes are not only low; they are vir-
tually ﬁxed. Higher demand or greater donations and subsidies do not
raise income levels, instead they encourage more people to enter the arts.
With more money funneled into the arts comes ever-increasing numbers
of poor artists per capita and thus rates of poverty increase as well. Built-
in poverty is a clear manifestation of a merciless economy.
Because of the mythology that surrounds the arts, youngsters run to
the Promised Land, thinking they’re going to ﬁnd a pot of gold once they
get there. Many of them leave the profession many years later, disillu-
sioned and too old to start a new career.2 Because of art’s sacredness,
beliefs are persistent and are not subject to correction. Losers blame
themselves for not having been dedicated enough. They never blame the
structure of the arts. Unlike after the gold rush when people start to go
home artists do not realize that there are far too many of them seeking
their fortunes. Moreover, nobody ever asked to see their diplomas or
membership cards. In other sectors, membership is regulated both to the
profession and to the inner circles within the profession. This kind of reg-
ulation also serves as a deterrent. The numerous informal barriers in the
arts, however, remain ambiguous and invisible from a distance. They do
not, needless to say, deter newcomers.
Given the fact of low average incomes, artists only manage to survive
thanks to internal subsidization. Because the sacredness of the arts is
taken for granted, giving to the arts has a ritual aspect and some gifts are
more or less obligatory. Huge amounts of money from second jobs, part-
ners, family, and friends, continue to ﬂow into the arts. With its army of
superﬂuous artists, the arts are insatiable; they scrounge off anyone in
their path. This ability to extract gifts could be a characteristic of a privi-
leged situation. But because few people appear to proﬁt from the gifts
285
A GRIM PICTURE HAS BEEN DRAWN

and most of the money disappears into a bottomless pit of ever more
poorly paid artists, the continuous support of the arts exempliﬁes a grim
rather than a privileged state of affairs.
Thus far, the analysis conﬁrms the cruel nature of the economy of the
arts. And yet, artists are not necessarily as bad off as other low-paid pro-
fessionals. As indicated in Section 6.11, they probably receive more than
the average amount of private satisfaction and other forms of non-mone-
tary income such as status. These forms of remuneration are probably
more available in the arts than elsewhere and artists are more oriented
towards these rewards than others. Artists are inclined to exchange
money for other types of income. When artists appear to sacriﬁce them-
selves and are poor in monetary terms, their poverty is partly compen-
sated. It is however difﬁcult to tell to what degree.
This book has also emphasized that the aura and the mystique of the
arts misinform artists. Because of the mystique, many well-trained
youngsters enter the arts with high expectations. As noted, some stay,
while others leave the arts at a later stage, when it is generally impossible
to start a new attractive career. In either case, the subsequent disappoint-
ment is an existential disappointment because it concerns all aspects of
life. The poverty due to misinformation is not compensated. I therefore
personally think that the word suffering can be applied to poor artists,
even though they receive some compensation.
In certain respects, the economy of the arts resembles a pre-capitalist
economy. The many gift transactions remind us of this. The same applies
to the idiosyncrasies inherent in both market and gift exchanges in the
arts. As was the case in feudal times, the personalities of the two partici-
pants entering into the transaction are essential, as is the notion of
dependence. Personal contact and dependence play a decisive role in the
many transactions that take place in the art world; between artists and
dealers, artists and curators, artists and impresarios, between dealers
and customers, between customers and artists, between artists and
patrons, and between artists and government ofﬁcials.
Other aspects of the economy of the arts, however, remind one of the
heyday of capitalism. Many toil while few proﬁt. The extreme uncer-
tainty that beginning artists face does not jive with the reality of a
modern economy with its general regulation of numbers and regulated
markets with built-in securities.
These similarities only exist in a relative sense. Unlike 19th-century
workers, modern artists don’t starve. There are at least four reasons for
this.
1 Artists don’t starve because of the support offered by families and
partners.
286
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

2 Artists manage by beneﬁt of modern social security. While families
and partners have played a signiﬁcant role in the arts for several cen-
turies, the assistance offered by social security is relatively new.
Although artists still take relatively high risks, these risks are lower
than they would have been in earlier times.
3 However ill informed potential artists may be, they have a choice; they
could choose another profession. The old proletariat of the past had
no choice. The main reason however, why artists don’t starve, is that:
4 Many artists have second jobs. Nonetheless, because these second jobs
are usually unskilled, most of them remain underpaid considering
their levels of education. (If in the distant future the majority of artists
were to have attractive, well-paid second jobs, the economy could no
longer be termed merciless.3)
These four points demonstrate that poverty in the arts and the merciless-
ness of the economy of the arts are relative concepts that exist in compari-
son to other modern sectors.
4
Winners Reproduce the Mystique of the Arts 
After the gold rush, the vast majority of miners end up leaving to try
their luck elsewhere; the gold rush is over. Why has the ‘art rush’ lasted
so long? Why do poor artists stay or leave at a much later point in their
careers than one would expect, and why do so many newcomers arrive to
take their places? Why is poverty structural? First of all, it should be
noted that nothing is permanent. Overcrowding and large-scale poverty
in the arts are relatively recent phenomena, becoming widespread only
after the Second World War and these conditions could very well disap-
pear over the next ﬁfty years. Nevertheless, this book has tried to show
that, for the time being, current conditions help maintain an exceptional
economy of the arts and poverty that remains structural.
In this respect, it should be noted that the fact that the economy of the
arts produces a host of losers and a few winners, is not exceptional. The
same occurs in every other economy as well. For example, the introduc-
tion of the mobile phone spawned many telecom outlets. Three years
later most of these shops had gone out of business. Those who survived
were the apparent winners in the market reward system. Thus, the
notion that contestants compete for a market share and that some will
lose is not exclusively an arts related phenomenon. What is exceptional
however, is that, unlike the cases of the telecom shops or the gold diggers,
art economy losers don’t necessarily leave and others continue to choose
287
WINNERS REPRODUCE THE MYSTIQUE OF THE ARTS

to enter the art world. The sector continues to be just ‘too’ attractive.
This book has tried to describe the mechanisms that keep the sector
attractive and the economy exceptional.
The economy of the arts as depicted in this book represents a relatively
closed system. The key is the high status or aura of the arts. Because of
the mystique of the arts, most players in the game believe they have an
interest in its high status and act in ways that will assure that its high
status is maintained. This applies to governments and other donors, suc-
cessful artists, critics and people working in art institutions, but it also
applies to the majority of unsuccessful artists who earn little or nothing
from their art. Within the conﬁnes of the system, everybody is right
because if the arts were to suddenly lose their high status everybody
would be worse off – at least in the short run.
Nevertheless, observing this all from the tenth ﬂoor, one notices that in
the long run not everybody is well off in the present setting. In the previ-
ous section, I opined that many artists appear to suffer the consequences
of the reality of the economy of the arts. I believe that artists are primarily
sacriﬁced, even though they also sacriﬁce themselves. Or in other words,
artists are exploited. Exploitation implies that there are people who
receive unearned income from unequal forms of exchange.4 Who are the
exploiters? It is natural to seek out the ‘exploiters’ among the winners.
Nevertheless, given the importance of myths in the arts, it is difﬁcult to
discern who is precisely exploiting whom in the arts. Therefore, I do not
concentrate on tracking down those who proﬁt the most from exploita-
tion. Instead, I look for ‘social needs’ or ‘powerful social relations’ that
induce behavior that reproduces the status quo in the arts. The following
needs are particularly important in the process of reproducing the status
quo.
1 Because the art world believes it has an interest in sacred art, it needs
government assistance to help maintain or raise the status of the arts.5
2 Donors, governments, and consumers need art to be sacred for their
own status and legitimization.6
3 Art consumers believe they need a large stock of potential losers to
increase the chances of a few extraordinary talented artists emerging
to sustain the myth that artistic talent is indeed scarce.7
4 The art world, donors, and governments need countless losers to
enhance the high status of the winners. 
5 Society needs a sacred domain. The ﬁrst three items were treated in
earlier chapters; the last two I will brieﬂy discuss now.
A notion that has gone unspoken in this book is that the high status of the
arts, of its successful artists, of its art institutions, and of its important
288
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

donors, is even higher because of the presence of so many failed artists.
‘If so many take the plunge and fail, those who succeed must be special
indeed.’ The more losers, the higher the status of the successful artists
will be. But the real winners at the expense of the failed artists are the art
institutions and the donors. Art institutions and donors need many
people to become artists and many who fail, are disillusioned, but con-
tinue to work as artists or abandon the art world. They thrive on the
romantic notion of the starving artist. (They legitimize their preference
for the large pond by explaining how among all of these struggling artists
there will emerge a few unexpected geniuses.)
The winners – both successful artists and donors – proﬁt, but it is
unlikely that they can be portrayed as active proﬁteers. Because the bene-
ﬁts are based on existing beliefs, there is no insidious plan to lure people
into the arts. In fact, the contrary seems more likely. Many modern gov-
ernments go to great pains to improve the deplorable economic condi-
tions of artists. And although government programs sometimes exacer-
bate the very conditions they are trying to alleviate, there is no indication
that governments deliberately do so or have a secret agenda. Moreover,
successful artists are more often embarrassed about the general
deplorable state of their profession than proud. And so, if the arts go on
producing hordes of losers, it is not because there has been some deliber-
ate strategy instituted to abet their failure. Nevertheless, when one
observes all this from the tenth ﬂoor, it certainly looks like the artist
losers enhance the status of the winners. Whether it’s deliberate or not,
winners reproduce the mystique of art by allowing many losers.
5
Society Needs a Sacred Domain
Marco in our illustration is jealous of artists who dared to pursue their
muse. His decision not to go into the arts goes hand in hand with his feel-
ings of guilt. He says it’s like he has thrown away his only chance of
becoming an authentic human being, a true individual. This means that
artists must have ‘something special’ that other people lack.
Artwork and artists have been accorded a special status for a long
time. Even prior to the Renaissance, artists were already becoming less
and less the anonymous craftsmen; their names and signatures became
more and more signiﬁcant. Since then art has become ‘animated’: the
artist is ‘in’ the work of art. In other words, people believe that the spirit
or soul of the artist has ‘entered’ the art work. The personal creativity
that goes into the work makes it and the artist authentic. Although being
an authentic individual is a general ideal in our civilization, only artists
289
SOCIETY NEEDS A SACRED DOMAIN

offer deﬁnitive proof of their authenticity. Therefore artists are envied
and admired. They offer a romantic alternative to a society of more or
less anonymous and replaceable employees – from managers to street
sweepers.
This alternative is romantic, 1) because it is unrealistic: not everybody
can become an artist, 2) because a false notion of creativity is involved,
as we demonstrated in Chapter 2, and 3) because it offers an escape.
The bohemian artist presented a model for those who had a desire to
escape the bourgeois lifestyle. Currently, it is seen as an escape from the
world of commerce, technology, and science, in which calculation, efﬁ-
ciency, and rationality rule. By belonging to the gift sphere, art stands in
opposition to these worlds.
On the one hand, art offers an alternative. In a technology and con-
sumption-dominated society, it is not so amazing that many people put
the arts on a pedestal as a reminder of another, better world. And it is nat-
ural that countless youngsters would want to become artists to escape
the dominance of the other professions and to creatively display their
individuality. They do so because they hope to share in the mystique of
the high status of art, but also because they expect that making art will
offer them a personal satisfaction that cannot be found in ordinary occu-
pations.
On the other hand, art also serves as a counterforce in a society that is
considered by many as too rational, too commercial and too technologi-
cal. Therefore, art is not some noncommittal alternative to the rational
activities in modern society, but a necessary compensation for these
activities. It has the potential to counterbalance the unhealthy develop-
ments of calculation, rationality, and efﬁciency in society. Although
these opposing spheres of art and rationality are threatening to one
another, they also need each other to survive.
Both art and science ultimately contribute to cognition, but it’s ‘magi-
cal’ art that relies primarily on dense symbol systems as opposed to
‘rational’ science, which employs discrete symbol systems.8 (As noted in
the ﬁrst chapter, in dense systems all variables count: like the color, the
width, the impression and the shade of line in the drawing of an artist. In
a scientiﬁc graph only a limited number of variables matter in a discreet
way.)
To gain true knowledge, both approaches are necessary. Art and sci-
ence are two sides of the same coin. It seems that our society can go a long
way in using one side of the coin, while essentially ignoring the other, but
there are limits. In everyday practice, the discreet approach typical of sci-
ence is omnipresent, while the density typical of art is often suppressed.
Therefore, artistic expressions are extraordinary. This implies that, as
290
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

long as society primarily operates on the rational knowledge of science,
the arts will remain special. This societal imbalance contributes to art’s
sacredness.
The two interests, art as alternative and art as counterforce, merge at a
higher level in a more general interest – the need for a sacred domain.
Durkheim has suggested that all societies need a sacred domain.9 Today,
religion no longer supplies a satisfactory sacred domain for society. Art
has, in this respect, partially replaced religion. If society needs a sacred
domain and art offers this domain, society has an interest in maintaining
the arts in their present state. For the time being art must remain sacred.
All societies have probably had a sacred domain, which usually
involves vital interests. Yet these interests, as they presently exist, do not
need to be universal. Every period probably endows the sacred with
slightly different values. Durkheim associated the sacred domain with
collective and rational values that belong to the soul and that oppose the
individual and egoistic desires of the body. Art as bearer of civilization’s
values in other words.10 Although the conﬂict between spirit and body
has not disappeared, it is less signiﬁcant than in Durkheim’s time. Con-
temporary values that are linked with the seemingly irrational or inexpli-
cable are certainly at the core of what we consider the sacred domain;
they oppose the rationality of our ‘scientiﬁc’ society.11 Whether this is
true or not, our society maintains a sacred domain, which it endows with
signiﬁcant values. For the time being the arts represent this domain. For
this reason, society seems to reproduce the mystique of the arts even
though the precise mechanisms employed are not altogether clear.
6
Future Scenarios with More or Less Subsidization
The market is essential to the arts. Approximately half of the arts’
income derives from the market. But compared to other sectors, the
market remains secondary while the gift sphere continues to be enor-
mous. This gift sphere is both a cause and a result of the exceptional
economy of the arts. The smaller the gift sphere in the arts the less excep-
tional and cruel the economy of the arts is (thesis 107). Lower levels of
subsidies and donations will turn the arts in a sector that is more like
other sectors, which produce fewer victims.
But this doesn’t necessarily mean that the amount of donations and
subsidies can be changed at will. On the contrary, the ﬁndings in this
book suggest that the sizes of the gift sphere and market sphere are pretty
much ﬁxed. Participants are locked into the exceptional economy of the
arts. The epilogue below discusses possible developments that, in due
291
FUTURE SCENARIOS WITH MORE OR LESS SUBSIDIZATION

time, could make the economy less exceptional, but these are not so
easily manipulated either.
Nevertheless right or wrong, people tend to see the government as the
one player in this complicated game whose behavior can most easily be
altered. Therefore, I will brieﬂy try to imagine what the consequences of
more and of less subsidization might be.
Let us ﬁrst envision a situation in which subsidies have been increased.
In this situation, the economy of the arts is likely to become even more
exceptional and cruel. The emphasis is on a selection of established tradi-
tional and modern art that is impressive and has already had its high
status for a long time. This selection is continuously celebrated in all
sorts of ofﬁcial settings. A portion of this art has clear roots in the past
and so it tends to unify the population and to strengthen its cultural iden-
tity. Moreover, due to subsidization, part of the ﬁne arts remains afford-
able for people with lower incomes and is available in towns far from the
cultural center of a country. The ﬁne arts retain much prestige, both at
home and abroad.
At the same time, there will be more artists and more poor artists and
as a consequence a huge oversupply of artists. New art forms will inau-
gurate relatively little innovation. These art forms and their patrons will
receive little respect, while innovators will largely go unheralded. Any
signiﬁcant innovations in these new art forms will most likely come from
other countries.12 Because the barrier between subsidized and unsubsi-
dized art will remain high, younger generations will probably increas-
ingly lose interest in subsidized art.
On the other hand, in a scenario where subsidies have been lowered,
art will lose some of its magic and retain less prestige. Because estab-
lished art will now be considered less sacred, it will be criticized and chal-
lenged more strenuously. This causes a lively and innovative cultural cli-
mate. Moreover, art, which develops outside of the established art forms,
gains more status. There is more praise for innovators. New art forms
are less defensive and insular. In the new art forms, many innovations are
produced that keep art interesting for new and younger audiences. There
is less dependence on foreign countries; the export of new art forms keeps
pace with imports or may even exceed import. But art might become less
helpful in building a nationwide cultural identity. Moreover, a larger
proportion of artistic production will only be affordable for rich people
while fewer art products will reach the far-ﬂung peripheries in a country.
The oversupply of artists is less dramatic and therefore fewer artists will
be impoverished.
Although in the latter scenario there might be fewer artists, average
income does not necessarily need to be higher than in the former situa-
292
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

tion. But if in the long run art becomes less sacred, fewer people will
enlist. In this respect even a moderate formal control on numbers might
be introduced. In this case, average incomes would probably rise.
Other characteristics could be included in either scenario. A charac-
teristic judged as advantageous in one scenario may be considered a
drawback in the other. Whether it is judged advantageous or not is nec-
essarily subjective. It will probably not surprise the reader that I believe
less subsidization has more advantages than more subsidization. Person-
ally, I think that in our current situation, artists and society pay too high
a price for art’s sacredness. I want to stress that my opinion applies to the
arts and not necessarily to other areas of government involvement, like
education, heath-care and social security. (I do not belong to the group of
economists who generally support the free market-ideology.)
Just because someone prefers a situation of less subsidization in main-
land Western Europe, this does not necessarily mean that one wants the
European art world to mirror the American art world. In Europe with its
own long history of support of the arts, the art world that evolved here
has its strong and weak points, but none of it can be changed very easily.
Nevertheless, I personally think that the mainland Western European art
world while maintaining its strong points, stands to gain by govern-
ments, who simultaneously and gradually begin to reduce their art subsi-
dies and involvement in the arts a little, or at least do not further increase
art subsidies.
Presently the opposite is happening in Europe however, where after a
stagnation period in the 1980s and early 1990s, governments have again
begun increasing their involvement. They have also sought to broaden
the types of art they now subsidize, including, for instance, pop music
and other new art forms. The budgets are currently still small and appear
to serve a primarily symbolic function, but once they commence these
kinds of subsidies have a tendency to swell fast. If this trend continues,
the symbolic competition between established art forms and new art
forms will become less unfair. At the same time however, I expect that
subsidization will be disastrous for pop music innovations and innova-
tions in other new art forms that compete in an international arena.
Moreover, I can envision a nightmare scenario if in the end, all artistic
endeavors were dependent on government support and would therefore
orient themselves toward bureaucratic committees that necessarily have
to draw a line between those who receive subsidies and those who do not.
It is doubtful, however, that this scenario will fully develop. After all, the
raison d’être of government involvement in the arts lies in the consecra-
tion of a selection of art and not in making all artistic endeavors equally
valuable by forcing them under one bureaucratic jurisdiction.
293
FUTURE SCENARIOS WITH MORE OR LESS SUBSIDIZATION

Irrespective of one’s wishes, it is unlikely that governments will con-
tribute to a less merciless economy of the arts by reducing its level of
involvement. Therefore, although the exceptional economy of the arts is
certainly not eternal, for the time being many will continue to pay a dear
price for the high status of the arts. And artists will continue to bear the
brunt of it as they continue to sacriﬁce themselves and be sacriﬁced on the
altar of the arts.
Discussion
1 What is your opinion on the use of the word suffering in connection
with artists? Are artists sacriﬁced or do they sacriﬁce themselves?
2 Do you agree that with less government involvement the economy of
the arts will be less cruel?
3 Can you offer arguments that can prove that the version of the excep-
tional and merciless economy of the arts presented in this chapter is
outdated?
294
CONCLUSION: A CRUEL ECONOMY

Epilogue: the Future Economy of the Arts
Is this Book’s Representation of the Economy 
of the Arts Outdated?
In this epilogue, I address the question of whether my representation of
the exceptional economy of the arts is an outdated one, or nearly so.
Given the notions of postmodernism and commercialization, the answer
to this question could well be ‘yes’. Therefore, Section 2 and the sections
thereafter will examine the forces that promote change in the arts and the
economy of the arts. Because a thorough treatment of possible develop-
ments is beyond the scope of this book, the remarks in this epilogue are
sketchy and necessarily speculative.1
1
Signs of a Less Exceptional Economy of the Arts
On the basis of the analysis in this book, one could expect a normaliza-
tion of the economy of the arts to be accompanied by the following signs.
table 5 signs of a less exceptional economy of the arts
Monetary signs
1
There is a downward trend in the incomes of successful artists.
(The contrary is currently the case.)
2
There is a downward trend in the prices of old and contemporary
art by famous artists. (The contrary is currently the case.)
3
There is an upward trend in the average hourly income of artists.
(The contrary is currently the case.)
4
There is an upward trend in the percentage of artists with salaried
employment. (The contrary is currently the case.)
5
There is a downward trend in overall donations and subsidies to
the arts. (This is currently not the case.2)
Other ‘hard’ signs
6
There is a downward trend in enrollment ﬁgures of youngsters
going to art colleges. (This is currently not the case.3)
295

7
There is an increase in formal regulation of numbers of artists.
(This is not currently the case.)
8
Governments favor a different, more varied selection of art. (This
is true in a formal sense, but not in a material sense. Although
other art, like pop-music has come into focus, the money it
receives is almost negligibly – see below in this section.)
9
Governments and other donors have become less interested in the
distribution of the ﬁne arts. (This is true.)
‘Soft’ signs, changing attitudes in society and in the art world
10
Art has become less important in symbolizing people’s position on
the social ladder (This is not true.)
11
High and low in the arts have lost some of their normative conno-
tation of superior and inferior. Instead, they denote different
genres and domains. (This could be true – see Section 5 below.)
12
The line between art and non-art is becoming less clear. (This
could be true – see Section 5 below.)
13
Asymmetric valuation loses its signiﬁcance. The phenomenon that
elites look down on the artistic preferences of the lower classes,
while these classes in turn admire the choice of the elites, becomes
less important. (This could be true – see Section 5 below.)
14
Market orientation increases in the arts. Blatantly commercial
strategies become less exceptional and more acceptable. (This is
partially true – see further down in this section.) 
15
The public and the art world lose interest in original and authentic
art. (This is not true.)
16
The cult of the genius in the arts becomes less important. (This is
not true.)
17
The (relative) autonomy of art and artists is becoming less impor-
tant for both the public and the art world. (In general, this is not
true.)
18
The esteem accorded ‘artists’ in the applied arts (design, advertise-
ment and fashion) increases. (This is true.)
19
The status of doing commissioned work is rising. (This is true for
the upper echelon artists.)
20
Artists have increasingly mixed feelings about art being sacred or
‘special’. (This is probably true.)
21
New artists emerge who favor a more down-to-earth approach to
art. (This is partly true – see Sections 2 and 3 below.)
22
Non-arts jobs become more personal and authentic, making a
romantic alternative less necessary. (This is true in some areas, but
not in others.)
296
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

If these signs are relevant and if my assessment of them is correct, the ‘hard’
signs indicate that the picture of the economy of the arts in this book is not
outdated. It appears that postmodernist forces have not effected the distri-
bution of funds. Nor have important institutions, such as foundations and
governments, lost interest in the arts. The hard signs do not suggest an
imminent change in the exceptional economy of the arts. The ‘softer’ signs,
however, are more ambiguous. They seem to suggest that ‘change is in the
air’. The ‘soft’ sign I believe is the most important however, that ‘art has
become less important as a signiﬁer of social position’, is almost certainly
not true. In order to determine whether change is still likely, I shall discuss
some of these signs in more detail below.
The more openly commercial attitudes, as mentioned in sign 14
above, are not limited just to the arts. There are few social circles left
where discussing money and ﬁnancial gain is still ‘not done’. In this
respect, society’s values appear to have changed over the past thirty
years. But are they only superﬁcial (temporary) values? Or did a more
fundamental attitude towards money and commerce change as well? The
current increasing, sometimes even pathetic, interest in non-money
values among some business people, not only in new-age circles, suggests
that higher order values have not changed much.
It seems that arts attitudes with respect to money and commerce have
changed and it appears that the art world has become more commercial
over the past two decades.4 Particularly performing art companies have
been ﬂirting with more commercial attitudes. It is however difﬁcult to
tell whether the new attitudes are being internalized or are a temporary
answer to the present consumer and donor demands. In Germany, for
instance, the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century saw an increased
interest in theatre marketing, but it did not endure.5 Moreover, the more
commercial attitudes that emerged in the visual arts in the 1980s have by
and large disappeared again.
Sign 8, which refers to the fact that European governments have begun
subsidizing broader areas in the arts, could signal a more fundamental
change, however. As I noted in Section 10.6, these governments have
started subsidizing areas like pop music and related art forms. For
instance, France subsidizes hip-hop and art by immigrants. In monetary
terms, these subsidies are fairly negligible compared to those for the
more traditional recipients of art subsidization, but they are signiﬁcant
symbolically. The question is whether this could be interpreted as a sign
of an inaugural shift in government tastes, for instance away from classi-
cal music and towards pop music, or whether governments are simply
broadening their base of art forms.
Although a government’s selections and tastes are always evolving, I
297
SIGNS OF A LESS EXCEPTIONAL ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

would be inclined to interpret the present development as a broadening
of taste rather than as a shift in taste. Given its goals with respect to edu-
cation and social coherence, this kind of broadening strategy was to be
expected. Moreover, governments are increasingly aware that a taste
that has become too partial and unilateral is bad for general artistic
developments and narrows the public support for their policies. There-
fore, this sign could indicate a signiﬁcant change. If the new subsidies
continue and become substantial, the gap in status between art forms
could be reduced and the economy of the arts could ultimately become
less exceptional. As has been noted however, it is also a natural tendency
of governments to offer distinction and this implies a selection between
art forms, at least in the long run. Therefore, it remains to be seen how
far this development will go.
2
Artists with New Attitudes Enter the Scene (1)
Sign 21 predicts a possible normalization of the economy of the arts via
the emergence of new types of artists with new attitudes. Currently, I
notice that artists’ attitudes are moving in basically four directions. Each
of the four directions has its own type of artist who might be said to
exemplify that direction. I discuss the artist-researcher and the postmod-
ern artist in this section and the artist-craftsman and the artist-enter-
tainer in the next. Most modern creative artists embody traits of all four,
but with a different emphasis.6 (I invite readers to view my ‘ideal-types’
critically and to construct their own.)
Many modern artists have developed an attitude that resembles the
scientist’s attitude. Most of these artist-researchers are not particularly
interested in audiences or buyers. Studios are laboratories, while concert
halls, museums, books, and internet sites are lecture rooms for a select
and well-informed audience. Their attitude is in line with a contempo-
rary art that has become increasingly self-referential. To follow the dis-
course one almost needs to be an expert. Like the world of science the
audience of these artists consists of insider – colleagues, critics, and
trained laymen. John Cage is an example in the world of music. Visual
artists like Donald Judd, Dan Flavin and the Dutchman Peter Struycken
also ﬁt into this group.
The economy of the arts could eventually become less exceptional if
artist-researchers gradually became more important. They are like scien-
tists because they value originality, but not in a romantically hyperbolic
sense. They don’t mind a little demystiﬁcation if it contributes to the
establishment of a strong professional status comparable to that of a sci-
298
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

entist. In Europe, some of them may even be willing to become university
employees with a small teaching obligation, an already common scenario
in the us. On top of that, they might even go so far as to support some
formal regulation of their numbers.
It is doubtful however, whether society is actually prepared to pay
these artists in the long run. Because oftheir research, art is not that
entertaining and contributes very little to the aura of art, their art usually
doesn’t sell well in the market. And without the indispensable aura, it
loses part of its utility for donors as well, which includes the government.
This means that if the artist-researcher were gradually to become the
most common artists, the arts would probably shrink; art could even
develop into some kind of marginal phenomenon. Therefore, it seems
highly likely that it’ll be another type of artist who will be most common
in the future.
While the artist-researcher naturally probes and challenges existing
rules, conventions and boundaries, postmodern artists do not so much
trespass these boundaries of art as ignore them altogether.7 They do not
try to shift the boundaries but prefer to leap over them from one ﬁeld to
another instead. They move freely between art, design, and applied arts,
including advertising. For instance, world music composers, samplers,
and modern DJs are examples who ﬁt this description, as do VJs and
visual artists like Mathew Barney, Pipilotti Rist as well as the Dutch
artists Inez van Lamsweerde and Joep van Lieshout.
Postmodern artists could eventually help make the economy of the arts
less exceptional, if they were to become more signiﬁcant in the arts. They
challenge the prevailing attitudes in the arts, especially the inclination to
deny the economy. Successful postmodern artists jump effortlessly from
art to advertising graphic design, for instance, and from relatively
autonomous to commissioned work. They often establish a business and
might hire a number of employees to assist them. In this sense, they are
more like businessmen and they are not ashamed of it. It is this kind of
natural commercial attitude that could easily herald a less exceptional
economy of the arts for the future.
But exciting as the postmodern artist experiment may seem, in the
long run, the arts cannot exist without borders, as I demonstrate in Sec-
tion 5 below. Therefore, if postmodern ‘artists’ were to become more sig-
niﬁcant, art would either cease to exist in the conventional sense or these
artists would just leave the art world and concentrate on other profes-
sions or, more likely, they would gradually consent to the re-establish-
ment of borders. Anyway, postmodern artists would eventually lose their
edge and thus cannot be seriously regarded as a signiﬁcant force in the
normalization of the economy of the arts.
299
ARTISTS WITH NEW ATTITUDES ENTER THE SCENE (1)

3
Artists with new Attitudes Enter the Scene (2)
The third direction art may take is the one of the artist-craftsman.
Because of the increased importance of self-referential and conceptual
art, craftsmanship has lost much of its high value among artists during
the second half of the twentieth century. The last few decades however,
artists with a keen interest in craftsmanship began to move in front. They
began to reinstitute old techniques and developed new, more positive
attitudes towards craftsmanship. Artists who actually do their own
work with their own hands and who derive their identity and success
partly from their craftsmanship are typical of this new or rather rein-
vented type of artist. It is because of them that paintings, ballets and
musical compositions are again allowed to be admired for their technical
virtuosity and can be considered ‘beautiful’ again according to some crit-
ics. Examples of this type of artist in the visual arts are Alex Katz and
Dutch painters like Constant, Van Koningsbrugge, and Hans van Hoek.
(This type of artist can also be found in the performing arts, but to be
honest, their sort of craftsmanship has hardly ever really fallen into total
disfavor. Nevertheless, movements like punk music were a temporary
deviation from craftsmanship as was most of ‘educational theatre’.)
The renewed passion for craftsmanship could have a sobering inﬂu-
ence on the arts and it could eventually make the economy of the arts less
exceptional. Even though craftsmen need some modest kind of magic to
showoff their tricks, their primary ambition is to be good at what they
do. In general, they have no real desire to be stars. They know the value
of their time and materials and so they ask fair prices for their work.
They have no great need to put art on a pedestal, make it over into some-
thing sacred, or deny the economy.
But the real craftsman is a character from a past when art and artists
as we now know them, did not really exist. Art has changed so much
since then and there is no turning back. Perhaps craftsmanship is more
signiﬁcant again, but it is unlikely that the artist-craftsman will be repre-
sentative for the future artist.
The artist-entertainer is our fourth type of artist. Creative artists, who
set out to entertain the public, are universal and timeless, as the likes of
Shakespeare, Mozart, and Dickens clearly demonstrate. In the course of
the twentieth century, however, entertainers gradually began to be taken
less and less seriously and often found themselves outside the realm of
(high) art. The notion that artists shouldn’t deliberately set out to please
audiences is something that the artist-researcher adheres to.8 Neverthe-
less, over three decades already in part of contemporary art, be it music,
theatre, dance, literature, or visual art, (high) artists can be found who
300
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

are not afraid of entertaining people. The Italians Clemente and Chia are
examples of this trend in the visual arts. Another example is how contem-
porary classical music, after the hegemony of serial music, saw the
return of the triad with composers like Philip Glass and more recently, a
renewed interest in melody.
The growing (ﬁnancial) importance of the mass media-oriented arts
has contributed to this development toward more openly entertaining
formats. In this respect, it’s interesting that the disdain for entertain-
ment has never been very strong in the world of literature, which is
dependent on technical reproduction and large readerships. It is also
revealing that classical musicians and dancers currently can often be seen
performing on television in various concourses that are above all enter-
taining. Most conductors of major symphony orchestras can serve exam-
ples of the artist-entertainer. (The Dutchman, André Rieu, is probably
the foremost example.)
Artist-entertainers seem to undermine the exceptional nature of the
economy of the arts because they consciously set out to please their audi-
ences. They orient themselves toward their audiences and thus, towards
the market. This applies as much to the circus clown performing for a
small audience as to the pop musician, whose hit record can be heard on
radio and television almost any time of the day.
Nevertheless, these artists do not really challenge the exceptional
economy of the arts. Even though they are oriented toward consumers, at
the same time they tend to deny the economy. They resist the seculariza-
tion of art because they evidently proﬁt from the notion of art being
sacred. At the same time, they probably stand a better chance of being the
model for the artist of the future than the other three types.
If this analysis is roughly correct the future artist will probably be
some kind of artist-entertainer. These artists will probably not be out
there promoting change because, in the end, they have an interest in
maintaining the notion of sacred art. And so it won’t be the artist-enter-
tainer who will help dismantle the exceptional economy of the arts. But
perhaps I’ve discarded the other three too readily or maybe I’ve over-
looked other important developments in the artistic attitudes. I therefore
invite readers to revise these sections, based on their own experiences,
knowledge, and evaluations.
4
‘Art Becomes Demystiﬁed as Society Becomes More Rational’
Changes in artists’ attitudes may or may not inﬂuence the course of the
economy of the arts. But societal developments affecting the sacredness
301
‘ART BECOMES DEMYSTIFIED AS SOCIETY BECOMES MORE RATIONAL’

of art are bound to affect the economy. This is based on the book’s funda-
mental thesis that the exceptional nature of the economy of the arts
depends on the high status of the arts. In this context, I see three interre-
lated developments that may contribute to a demystiﬁcation of the arts
and therefore to a less exceptional economy. (Readers are invited to con-
tribute other developments.)
a Rationalization: As society becomes more and more rational, the arts
will gradually go through a process of demystiﬁcation.
b Fading borders: Because the high status of art depends on borders and
because borders in our postmodern society have lost much of their sig-
niﬁcance, the status of art is bound to experience some shrinkage.
c Technical developments: The growing importance of technically
reproduced artwork, of mass-produced artwork, and of media culture
will further contribute to the demystiﬁcation of art.
Rationalization, fading borders, and technological developments are not
autonomous inﬂuences that can be examined divorced from their con-
text. The three are interdependent. Moreover, demystiﬁcation through
rationalization does not have to be a contradiction of chapter 12’s notion
that art is a counterforce to an overly rational society. After quite some
delay and from quite a distance back, art could follow the general trend
towards rationalization and still end up representing a counterforce.
In this context, Norbert Elias’s description of the civilizing process
applies here.9 According to Elias, people become more ‘controlled’ in the
course of a long term civilizing process. Their behavior becomes less and
less colored by impulses and affective fantasies.10 This process is ongoing
because art is part of society, and thus cannot divorce itself from this
development.11 And so in the long run art will probably also become
more regulated and rational. The artist-researcher ﬁts well into such a
development.
Both art and science have a cognitive and an emotional dimension.12
The same applies to the civilizing process.13 Emotions remain important
in a regulated and sublimated way. Art contributes to sublimation and
thus to rationalization as well. Art, regulated and secularized, plays a
vital role in the civilizing process.
But how restrained can art get? On the one hand, it’s difﬁcult to imag-
ine art serving sublimation without maintaining some seductive charm
or magic spell. Magic, on the on the other hand, does not necessarily have
to involve mystiﬁcation and consecration. In the long run, given the civi-
lizing process, there might very well be a place for a magical art form that
is not sacred.
In order to clarify the relation between the magical, the sacred, and the
302
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

rational, I would like to add a few, rather speculative remarks about the
magical aspect of art. (They are based on the analysis found in Section
1.7.) Magic in art is not really magic but a kind of pseudo-magic. Artists
as pseudo-magicians pretend they can perform magic and appear to be
using supernatural powers, but they aren’t. They merely use their imagi-
nations to create illusions.
Artists use illusions to uncover truths about themselves and the world
around them. Through illusions, art exposes reality and discovers
‘truth’. This is the kind of cognition Nelson Goodman talks about. Both
art and science contribute to cognition; they, in fact, compliment one
another. Science also employs illusions – a graph is not what it represents
but it uses illusions in a formal and hardly a ‘magical’ way.14 The sym-
bolic systems that science utilizes tend to be discrete rather than dense,
while with art it’s the other way around. Because art tends to use dense
symbol systems, its interpretations are richer and more undetermined.
As a result, art is more likely to be experienced as magical than science.
This does not mean that all art looks magical. There are huge varia-
tions depending on the art form. Some modern sculptures have totem-
like qualities, while in others any such reference seems to be banned.
Some modern music and poetry can actually resemble magical prayers in
their use of repetition and rhythm, while others totally lack this kind of
‘charm’. Nevertheless, in the end artists inevitably disturb and charm
their audiences. (According to Deirdre McCloskey, scientists also charm
their audiences.15 Given their largely discrete analyses, however, their
offerings are seldom as magical.)
The pseudo-magic that characterizes art exists regardless of whether
art is considered sacred or not. An art form that has become fully secular-
ized can still be magical. But at this time, art’s magic still contributes to it
being perceived as sacred.
The pseudo-magic and density of artistic expressions are not irra-
tional. Therefore, any ongoing process of rationalization does not neces-
sarily mean that art will lose its ‘charm’. In an increasingly rational soci-
ety, there is plenty of room for charming artist-entertainers. They are,
however, likely to keep the arts at least somewhat sacred and hence main-
tain some of the exceptionality of the economy of the arts.
5
‘Borders in and Around the Arts Disappear’
If there were no such thing as high and low in the arts, art would certainly
lose its sacredness and, as a consequence, its economy would become less
exceptional. Ever since the emergence of the avant-garde, borders in and
303
‘BORDERS IN AND AROUND THE ARTS DISAPPEAR’

around the arts have been challenged. At this time, many borders seem to
be vanishing.16 For instance, many people are of the opinion that there
are no recognizable styles in contemporary visual art anymore: anything
is permitted and everything can be done. The cosmopolitan omnivorous
nature of many modern art consumers, who consume both high and low
art, suggests that borders have lost much of their signiﬁcance.17
Without borders, anything can be art and anybody can be an artist. If
there are no more borders that surround art and make art distinguish-
able, art as we know it will stop to exist. – It could be the much-predicted
‘end of art’. – If not, art will certainly lose much of its aura. Therefore,
the postmodern development represents a force that, in the long run,
clearly ends up demystifying art.18 After reaching the right momentum,
this development is bound to end up changing the economy of the arts
dramatically. If, in daily practice, artworks and loafs of bread come to be
perceived as equal, the economy of the arts will certainly cease to be
exceptional.
These conclusions would apply if people were to eventually lose inter-
est in creative and authentic works of art. But as we have noted earlier,
this is not the case. And as long as people appreciate creativity and origi-
nality in art, borders will remain.19 The appreciation of creativity neces-
sarily rests on comparisons, differences, and consequently on borders.
Without borders, one would no longer be able to distinguish between
artworks or discuss issues of their qualities (or aesthetic values) with
friends or experts.
Moreover, in Goodman’s approach to art discussed in Section 1.6,
artists need borders as well. Borders give artists the framework to trans-
gress and trespass and ultimately change the rules. To be original, the
existing borders must be breached, and others must be able to notice it.
Because people expect art to be creative and original, and because artists
want their products to noticed between other poducts, borders are
bound to remain important in the arts. (This is why it’s difﬁcult to imag-
ine that the postmodern artist can truly represent the artist of the future.)
Because people always assume that their own times are dramatically
different from earlier times, they believe that rules and borders have van-
ished from the arts. In my own life as a visual artist however, I am aware
of numerous rules all around me. It’s true that certain rules have become
more elusive and complex; one needs to be pretty much an insider to
understand them. Other rules have shifted to another level and have
become a kind of set of meta-rules. Sometimes these rules apply more to
artists’ attitudes than to actual artworks.20 Other rules describe which
rule violations are acceptable and which are not. (For example, at this
point in time, certain violations can be allowed, but only if they are no
304
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

heartfelt cries but deliberately planned trespasses. – Serrano for instance
carefully designs the extreme sexual content in his art works. – ) Rules
remain important, in any case.
The belief that there are no rules in one’s own time might be a univer-
sal truism. For instance, I’m convinced that twenty-ﬁve years from now,
the art rules and borders of the 1990s will be obvious to almost every-
body. (It’s only now that we can actually distinguish 1970s visual art
because it’s only now that we have learned to discern the rules and bor-
ders those artists respected or played with.)
It’s true that better-educated consumers nowadays are more diversi-
ﬁed and omnivorous in their consumption behavior. One day they might
go to the opera while the next they might applaud a local star singing his
or her schmaltzy pop songs. This behavior does not, however, contradict
the existence of borders because this scenario is basically asymmetrical
because it applies more to elite art consumers than to the average con-
sumer of low art. Moreover, as was noted earlier, even when the same
products are being consumed, the ways in which they are consumed and
the symbolic values they represent, continue to vary. Omnivorous con-
sumption patterns often tend toward camp, which involves an ambigu-
ous standard, whereby elite consumers simultaneously enjoy and mock
the lower class’ culture.
If borders eventually fail to actually wither, their appreciation may
nevertheless change. More importantly however, the character of how
we appreciate high and low art could change. Sign 11 in Table 5 pointed
out the phenomenon that high and low in the arts increasingly refer to
different domains in the arts rather than to an artwork’s superiority or
inferiority. And without some form of superiority, social groups would
no longer have a reason to look up to the high and sacred art of other
groups, whereas the elite would no longer have a reason to look down on
the low art of the lower classes. The ﬁne arts would no longer be distinc-
tive. Because we have observed that cultural inferiority and asymmetric
valuations are the cornerstones of the exceptional economy of the arts,
this economy would be a lot less exceptional, if the importance of a sym-
bolic high and low in the arts were gradually to diminish.
Terms like ‘high’ and ‘low’ would still be employed but without their
former symbolic connotations. They would simply indicate areas or
genres. With respect to distinction, symbolic practices or ways of con-
suming art would emerge as being more important than speciﬁc art-
works.21 These kinds of practices can still be considered superior or infe-
rior, however, even if they are now called something else. But one would
need to be an insider to be able to properly classify these practices. Supe-
rior art and art practices have become extremely ﬂexible categories; their
305
‘BORDERS IN AND AROUND THE ARTS DISAPPEAR’

sphere of reference is constantly mutating. This process was described in
Chapter 11. Insiders continuously redeﬁne the aesthetic borders of high
and low, good and bad, modern and obsolete. Outsiders can only assume
some kind of approximate shifting average.
So far, there is no reason to think that people climbing the social
ladder in the future will suddenly stop signifying their status with art. As
was noted in Section 1.2 this means that valuations will remain basically
asymmetrical. As long as there is social stratiﬁcation and as long as art
serves to symbolize people’s positions in social space, art will maintain
its special status and its economy will remain exceptional.
I think art borders basically don’t fade; some may vanish, but others
will replace them. Moreover, borders will continue to serve distinc-
tion.22 Therefore, it is unlikely that the postmodern project will make the
economy of the arts less exceptional.
6
‘New Techniques, Mass Consumption and Mass Media Help 
Demystify the Arts’
Firstly, new techniques, especially those produced by the digital revolu-
tion, could very well portend a process of demystiﬁcation in the arts.23
Many exciting new art products come into being. Moreover, digitally
produced and digitally distributed music, images and moving images will
be cheaper to produce and to distribute than their predecessors were. At
this time, some of this phenomenon’s products are de facto free, but that
situation may not last much longer. On the one hand mass-produced new
products are reaching larger audiences all over the world. On the other
hand the smallest scale at which products can be proﬁtably produced is
becoming ever smaller. This means that there is more room for larger
varieties of specialized products. Moreover, fragments of older art-
works, be it legally or illegally, are increasingly being incorporated in
newer works, thus rendering authenticity an ever more relative concept.
The same problem we saw with the withering of borders comes up
when we consider technological change since it’s difﬁcult to get a per-
spective on one’s own generation. Is the impact of technological change
more profound today than it was in earlier times, for instance, during the
introduction of the printing press or the introduction of electricity?24
Because new techniques are usually ﬁrst applied in art forms with rela-
tively little status, it seems that new techniques could very well under-
mine the mystique of the arts. But after a while the status of these art
forms often rises or the more established art forms learn to adopt the new
techniques.
306
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

It is true that some current new techniques in new media might lead to
unknown interdisciplinary approaches that undermine existing borders.
Modern, sometimes anonymous, artists sometimes create hybrid art-
works that may temporarily fall outside the experts’ realm of awareness.
But these attempts to circumvent the cult of personality are not the ﬁrst.
And it usually doesn’t take very long before the new artistic endeavors
get absorbed by the established art forms and become visible. Artists
emerge and some become heroes. This has happened before and is cur-
rently happening with DJs and VJs. It appears that the digital revolution
has manufactured its own new heroes and thus its demystifying capaci-
ties are temporary.
Secondly, the current technological evolution continues to aggrandize
the growing body of mass-produced artwork. Apart from the phenome-
non of printing, the large-scale reproduction of high quality art works
only began to take off in the twentieth century. Although the two are
related, the mass production of art is probably more likely to herald a less
exceptional economy of the arts than the digital revolution. As early as
1935, Walter Benjamin predicted that the technical reproduction of art
would lead to a breaking of art’s spell (‘Entzauberung’).25 Art became
less obscure, more accessible and thus less magical because of technical
reproduction. Moreover, as was already evident in ﬁlmmaking, art could
stand to lose its autonomy, which might ultimately contribute to the
demystiﬁcation of art.26
Benjamin’s prediction is not difﬁcult to grasp. Technical (re)produc-
tion enables a massive production of artworks at low prices. It would be
very strange indeed if this didn’t reduce the exclusive and glamorous
allure of art products. People in the Netherlands today can buy a 10-cd
set of Bach recordings performed by one of the world’s top orchestras in a
chain drugstore for little more than the cost of a bottle of massage oil –
little more than a Euro per cd.) And so one would predict that Bach’s
music would become totally ordinary, vulgar even. But thus far, this
hasn’t happened; Bach and his oeuvre maintain their aura. In general,
when one observes the high, if not augmented status and worship of art
since Benjamin’s essay ﬁrst appeared, his prediction was either wrong or
it is going to take longer before his predictions are borne out.
In this context, a common misunderstanding tends to lead to faulty
expectations. Many people still think that originality, uniqueness, and
authenticity means a single unique artwork made by an artist’s own
hands, be it a manuscript, score, or art object. They forget that in the
allographic arts – arts based on a notational system, like writing and
most theatre, music, and even dance – there is seldom one original art
work.27 A hand-written manuscript, score, or choreography is just a col-
307
NEW TECHNIQUES, MASS CONSUMPTION AND MASS MEDIA

lection of directions based on a symbol system. The relevant details do
not change, just because they are printed or performed. Therefore, the
work of art resides in all written or printed specimens of a manuscript or
score and in all performances of them irrespective of their total number.
Each book and each performance is an instance of the particular art-
work. The millionth live performance of the Saint Matthew’s Passion by
Bach or the millionth copy of James Joyce’s Ulysses is as much an authen-
tic and original work of art as the ﬁrst. (First editions and original manu-
scripts are sometimes valuable, but primarily as collectors items and not
as works of art.) The same applies to the numerous technical reproduc-
tions of the Saint Matthew’s Passion on cd. As long as the notes have
been played correctly, all of them can be considered authentic originals.28
To reiterate, most technical (re)productions are instances of an art-
work and are therefore originals. People continue to experience them as
animated and authentic, not unlike a painting. At home, listening to
Verdi or Rod Stewart, listeners can be transported by the ‘genius’ of the
composer or performer regardless of the number of copies in circulation.
Thus far, these reproductions actually seem to enhance rather than
diminish the high status of art.
For centuries, original works of art have been copied. It’s only the
astronomical numbers of reproductions and the speed at which they can
be reproduced that has changed. In a literal sense, many artworks have
become ‘common’. Unprecedented numbers of people reading books, lis-
tening to cds, watching television and surﬁng the Internet end up shar-
ing original artworks. One could argue that when the numbers become
this large, it becomes more and more difﬁcult to associate the consump-
tion of art with exclusivity. Therefore, it just seems to lose its former
status.
It is true that some of the modern mass-produced artworks are no
longer obscure and mysterious. They are consumed as part of a daily rou-
tine, not unlike food or transportation. Many artworks probably live
shorter lives than they did in the past; they are trendy and ultimately dis-
posable. Thus to some degree, mass production and consumption can
actually exacerbate the secularization of the arts and hasten in a less
exceptional economy.
It is not true however, that the general public and the experts treat all
mass-produced art in the same manner. Some works are selected and
placed on a pedestal while others are not, irrespective of their total num-
bers. Some have longer, sometimes much longer lives. They too are sub-
ject to trends, but these are recurrent trends. Whether today’s distin-
guished artworks will survive as long as the works of, say, Bach, is
impossible to predict, but modern artworks and artists – from Prince to
308
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

Spielberg – are just as subject to selection, canonization, consecration,
and mystiﬁcation as earlier artworks and artists were.29
Third, the modern media augment the mass consumption of artworks,
as is the case with ﬁlms broadcast on television. Modern media also add
their own dimension. The increased media attention accorded art and
artists may at ﬁrst sight seem to contribute to the consecration of art and
artists, but in fact it makes success more ordinary and thus demystiﬁes
art. The media can be said to have a leveling effect. Modern newspapers
and television broadcasting are considered transparent media.30 They
give most topics equal signiﬁcance. For instance, most daily newspapers
have, for a considerable time now, been publishing their articles on high
and low art on the same page. Meanwhile, modern television tends to
treat sports heroes, high and low artists, and entertainment stars with
equality. (They often even appear on the same talk shows.)
The media have this leveling effect more than earlier forms of techni-
cal reproduction because they actually show the heroes and so make
them more human. In the long run, this leveling effect could contribute to
the eventual elimination of the distinct status of the arts. Why should
artists be more sacred than sports stars or television’s talking heads, for
instance? In the end, all these ‘entertainers’ can be designated as heroes,
they can have plenty of status and money, but they are not necessarily
sacred. As in the case of mass-produced art products, certain careers in
the modern visual arts and pop music scenes, for instance, can be very
short-lived and temporary. The spectrum of these careers and the way
they develop begins to resemble those of sports or entertainment stars.
And the media contribute to this egalitarian treatment.
Nevertheless, not all artists are public ﬁgures and even when they are,
important differences remain between artists and other celebrities. Art-
works generally maintain an existence independent of television appear-
ances and other public performances. In consuming artworks at home, in
a concert hall or a cinema, people construct their own artists. This way
they maintain an intimate and mysterious contact with authentic but rel-
atively obscure artists. Therefore, I believe the aura and special status of
art and artists will continue to exist for a long time to come.
The ﬁndings in this epilogue are highly inconclusive. Although there are
signs that there is a change in the air, actual change seems to be circum-
scribed. This can be expected as long as social stratiﬁcation remains a
reality and art continues to serve as a symbol of an individual’s or a social
group’s position in social space. Thus, I believe that this book’s analysis
of the economy of the arts is not outdated. Nevertheless, it’s possible that
other signiﬁers may replace art as a marker of social status in the future.
309
NEW TECHNIQUES, MASS CONSUMPTION AND MASS MEDIA

If that becomes the case, the forces that demystify the arts may become
stronger than the forces that keep art sacred. As a result, the economy of
the arts would become less exceptional. Personally however, I would not
be amazed if the exceptional economy of the arts will continue to color
the arts for a long time to come.
Discussion
1 Table 5 lists some signs that might indicate a less exceptional economy
of the arts. Are there signs among them you would have treated differ-
ently? Are there other signs that were ignored that you would add?
2 Do you think attitudes in the arts are becoming more commercial?
3 Do you agree with the notion that art and science supplement each
other in their contribution to cognition?
4 Do you agree with the four directions in which artists’ attitudes move,
or do you see others?
5 Are the three causes that would make the economy of the arts less
exceptional, relevant? Should other or additional causes have been
discussed?
6 Do you expect the economy of the arts to become less exceptional in
the decades to come? And how do you view this development?
7 Can you imagine that the merciless economy of the arts may come to
an end in the near future because most artists will be classiﬁed as ama-
teurs with well-paid jobs outside the arts?
310
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE ECONOMY OF THE ARTS

Notes
Preface
1 ‘Two Cultures and the Scientiﬁc Revolution’ (1950) in C.P. Snow, Public Affairs
(1971).
2 Cf. Lavoye (1990).
1
Sacred Art
1 The term ‘outsider art’ is used for the work of artists who make art without prop-
erly applying important contemporary (grammatical) rules. They may be self-
taught or received their schooling at an older age or in an unusual educational
situation such as a mental institution, for instance.
2 Throsby (1994) 2.
3 The philosopher Laermans (1992) 64 reproaches the economist Grauwe (1990)
for making mistakes by not making his notion of art explicit.
4 Cf. Danto (1964), Dickie (1971), Becker (1982) 34, 148-149 and 153-164 and
Bevers (1993) 16-20.
5 Bourdieu (1979), DiMaggio (1987), Calcar (1984) andLamont and Fournier
(1992). More references and details about differences in ﬁndings in Peterson
(1997) 87.
6 By using the term ‘asymmetry’ I want to stress the asymmetry in the appreciation
of each other’s culture. In another respect however, behavior is symmetric:
groups are the same in the sense that they orient themselves toward the art of
groups above them on the social ladder.
7 See note 5.
8 Of these ﬁve assumptions the assumption regarding social coherence is the most
questionable. Rapid changes in society can cause a reduction in the coherence of
social values. Given all the rapid and radical changes in the media, this could be
the contemporary scenario. In that case this thesis would not be valid, because
coherence today is insufﬁcient to maintain shared notions of high and low in the
arts. If this is the case, the book’s analysis loses its signiﬁcance. However,
although I cannot prove my case, I shall try to make it plausible in the course of
this book that there is sufﬁcient social coherence to support thesis of asymmetric
judgment based on cultural inferiority and superiority.
9 Cf. Peterson and Kern (1996) and Peterson (1997) and the references they pres-
ent.
10 Peterson (1997) 88.
11 Peterson and Kern (1996) 904 also found from their empirical data that “high-
311

brows are more omnivorous than non-highbrows”.
12 Bourdieu (1979) also cited by Peterson and Kern (1996) 904.
13 Peterson and Kern (1996) 904 state: “…omnivorousness does not imply an
indifference to distinctions”.
14 I return to the controversy in the Epilogue. A related argument is brought for-
ward by Eijck (1999). He shows that people moving up the social ladder often
do not adapt the art of people above them on the social ladder. Instead they take
their own art along with them. And so their art rises in status. Nevertheless, sta-
tus differences remain important.
15 Levine (1988) has described the historic process of ‘sacralization’.
16 Hide (1979) defends this view. He quotes many well-known artists.
17 Cf. Uitert (1986).
18 Cf. Smithuijsen (1997).
19 Braembussche (1994) 238, Benjamin (1974). Instead of the term ‘sacred’ I
could have used the term ‘aura’, which Benjamin used in connection with art. It
has less of a religious connotation. However, most of the time I shall use the
terms ‘sacred’ and ‘sacredness’, because the religious connotation of the term
‘sacred’ is ‘telling’ about art. Moreover, the term ‘aura’ has no adjective to re-
place ‘sacred’.
20 The English moralist and aesthetician Arnold (1875) (as Peterson (1997) 81
notes) already successfully propagated the view that the ﬁne arts embody the
highest values of civilization.
21 Bloom (1987) 185, 188, 322 (also cited by Peterson (1997) 82-86). Writing
about the distinction between high and low, Peterson gives other references as
well.
22 Authenticity is a container word. Different uses contribute to an overall mean-
ing. In this book the notion of personal uniqueness expressed in works of art is
emphasized. Linko (1998) uses the term ‘authenticity’ also in the sense of per-
sonal uniqueness. This is one of several uses of the term ‘authenticity’ as ana-
lyzed by Peterson (1997) 205-209.
23 ‘Creativity’ and ‘originality’, terms which are often used in relation to art, im-
ply authenticity, but a work can be authentic without being original or creative.
Amateur ‘art’, children’s ‘art’ and ‘art’ made by deranged people are authentic,
but not always creative or original.
24 In this particular case there were also bits of tape on the canvas, because the
painting was unﬁnished and Mondrian was still experimenting.
25 Janssen (2001) 326.
26 On the one hand by strongly identifying with the artist the art consumer appar-
ently becomes less of an authentic individual. On the other hand, however, tem-
poral identiﬁcation and even symbiosis can contribute to the formation of per-
sonal identities.
27 In 1988, Hans-Onno van den Berg suggested the use of this term to me.
28 Bourdieu (1979) 53-56; Laermans (1993) 88.
29 Laermans (1993) 88.
30 Cf. Laermans (1993).
31 Bourdieu has investigated the notion of distinction with respect to the arts. He
also emphasizes that art is remote from everyday worries. He relates this to a re-
mote aesthetic in modern art and with a corresponding aesthetic disposition, in
which an emphasis on form has replaced expressive and descriptive qualities
and capacities. Bourdieu (1979) 28-32. Cf. Swaan (1986). As far as this special
aesthetic is concerned, I do not agree. I think that in the long run expressive and
312
NOTES OF CHAPTER 1

descriptive qualities will remain just as important as formal qualities. Abbing
(1989) 54-59.
32 Cf. Braembussche (1994) 181-290, Hegel (1986, 1832-1845), Adorno (1970-
1986), Goodman (1954), Barthes (1988), Lyotard (1997, ed princ 1984).
33 Heusden (1996).
34 Unlike Lyotard, recent postmodern philosophers of art like Derrida, Bau-
drillard, and Jameson no longer treat innovation as typical of art. Cf. Braem-
bussche (1994) 292-314.
35 Cf. Doorman (1994) 211-213.
36 Goodman (1954). In the context of this book Goodman’s approach is of special
interest, but the outcomes would not be very different if I had instead elaborat-
ed on any of the other aforementioned philosophers of art.
37 Goodman (1954) does not treat such broad changes. I therefore ‘extrapolate’
his approach.
38 Kellendonck (1977).
39 When this painting was exhibited in the Sensation Show at the Royal Academy
in London in 1997, it caused a scandal. In 1999, the Brooklyn Museum of Mod-
ern Art exhibited almost the same Sensation Show. This time Chris Oﬁli’s ‘The
Holy Virgin Mary’ was the cause of a scandal, which forced New York’s Mayor
Giuliani to eliminate the funding of the museum.
40 Goodman (1954) 248. This contribution to cognition does not imply that art is
formal or intellectual. Goodman ibid. 259 writes: “This subsumption of aes-
thetic under cognitive excellence calls for one more reminder that the cognitive
... does not exclude the sensory or the emotive, that what we know through art
is felt in our bones and nerves and muscles as well as grasped by our minds, that
all the sensitivity and responsiveness of the organism participates in the inven-
tion and interpretation of symbols.”
41 Goodman (1954) 258.
42 Modern audiences, well educated in the languages of the arts, show little
amazement, as if they have already been exposed to these new metaphors. Gen-
erally speaking, the expressions of aesthetic experience have become more con-
trolled and subdued in the high arts. Nevertheless, when art is really new, feel-
ings of wonder can be suppressed but not eliminated.
43 Goodman (1954) discusses the terms ‘dense’ and ‘discrete’ in relation to art and
science.
2
The  Denial of the Economy
1 According to Peterson (1997) 84 this elite view of popular culture has been per-
sistent throughout the twentieth century. Peterson offers many references.
2 In chapter 10, the unusual choice to divide government activity across all three
areas will be clariﬁed in some detail. The choice implies that the area of forced
transfers differs from the area of redistribution as noted in Polanyi (1992, 1957)
and the government sphere as noted in Klamer and Zuidhof (1999).
3 O’Hagan (1998) 133-39 and 157.
4 O’Hagan (1998) 133-39 and 157.
5 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 41.
6 One would expect that the broader the interpretation of art, the more important
the market becomes. This is, however, not necessarily true. In artistic areas that
receive few donations or subsidies, artists often donate their time by working
313
NOTES OF CHAPTER 2

for low incomes or free. But, because there are no reliable ﬁgures on the amount
of gifts that come from the partners and friends of artists and the amount of self-
subsidizing including artists using money earned from second jobs for their art,
I have ignored this type of gift. Moreover, as will be discussed in chapter 6, it is
not immediately clear how much of these subsidies are gifts. Nevertheless subsi-
dizing by oneself, family, and friends is particularly strong in areas where artists
are primarily self-employed, such as pop music, literature, and the visual arts. If
these subsidies were (in part) included in the overall gift, the percentage of gifts
would not necessarily become smaller when literature and pop music are includ-
ed.
7 Lottery revenues are certainly not a gift to the arts from those playing. Govern-
ment regulations impose taxes paid by the lottery players and this money is
passed on to the arts as a gift from the government, even though government
has delegated the distribution of the money to semi-independent institutions.
See also O’Hagan (1998) 152-3.
8 The comparison also applies to teachers, doctors, and scientists. I interpret the
intervention of governmental bodies with the activities of these professionals as
the purchase of services from these groups by the government, which are trans-
ferred to benefactors, or as mediation in the sale of their services to others and
not as gifts. It can be argued that subsidies for education and health care belong
to the gift sphere. In that case, the gift sphere in the arts remains larger than that
of other sectors with the exception of health care and education. Even when we
consider health care and education, the presence of a large gift sphere in the arts
remains exceptional because in the health care and education sectors the gift
follows from a social obligation (cf. Swaan (1988)), while no social obligation
ever developed with respect to art.
9 People or institutions receive gifts. The arts cannot receive gifts. Nevertheless, it
is common practice to speak of gifts to the arts (and subsidies for the arts) and I
shall do the same. In a metaphorical sense these are ‘gifts to the arts’.
10 Often people use the terms ‘Patron’ and ‘Maecenas’ without distinction, or
with meanings that differ from mine. Cf. Kempers (1998).
11 Cf. Bevers (1993) 9-57, Hitters (1996) 71-105 and Pots (2000) 85-248.
12 The term ‘value’ is used in many different ways. Here it sufﬁces to say that in
this chapter I am primarily interested in higher order values. As will be ex-
plained in section 3.3. higher order values relate to general virtues and vices of
different states of the world.
13 Klamer and Zuidhof (1999) and Staveren (1999) discuss certain virtues of the
gift sphere in more detail. McCloskey (1996) treats bourgeois and market
virtues at length.
14 Cf. Hide (1979).
15 At ﬁrst sight, sharing implies what the economist calls non-rivalry, which is an
oft-mentioned attribute of a collective good as opposed to a private good. Cul-
ture appears to be a collective good. Not sharing culture and similar collective
goods, which could be shared without extra costs, is usually deemed as unfair.
But upon closer observation, however, we notice that non-rivalry hardly ever
exists. Most culture exists because there are others who do not have this type of
culture. If it is shared with those outside the own group, it loses value. The con-
sumption by others goes at the cost of the in-group’s consumption. Thus, we ob-
serve that rivalry is very present in most (sub)cultures.
16 With respect to the diffusion of art Swaan (1986) 35-8 has argued that the em-
phasis on superﬁcial forms of diffusion of art and the necessary failure of actual
314
NOTES OF CHAPTER 2

diffusion increase the income of the group of art lovers by demonstrating the
other groups unﬁtness for art.
17 Swaan (1986).
18 Williamson (1986) has drawn attention to large-scale idiosyncrasy within the
market sphere.
19 Simmel (1978 princ. ed. in German 1907). Simmel calls it the reversal of means
and purpose.
20 Klamer (1996) 22-24.
21 In this respect, there is a difference with religious services, where consumers
‘pay’ with voluntary gifts. The same applies to street artists who receive gifts.
22 In discussions, Klamer explains his earlier statement (Klamer (1996) 22-24)
that ‘the arts are beyond measurement’ in that the exact valuation in monetary
terms devalues (or increases) certain values of art. Braembussche (1996) pres-
ents varying points of view in philosophy on this subject. For instance, in social
science Smith (1988) takes the opposite position of Klamer.
23 Bourdieu (1990) 98-134 and Bourdieu (1997, 1996).
24 The latter is my translation of the German title of the play: Bring mir den Kopf
von Adolf Hitler. Another less funny, but better-known example would be the
Jew in Fassbinder’s: Der Müll, die Stadt und der Tod (The Dirt, the Town and
the Death).
25 The high status of the artist does not depend on the artist being a member of a
successful professional. As will be explained in chapter 11 the artistic profes-
sion has little status compared to other professions. In this sense the status of
artists is ambiguous. Anheier and Gerhards (1991) remark that a status indeter-
minacy exists in the arts.
26 Cf. Abbing (1989) 135.
27 The term ‘economy’ is used in a wider sense than the term ‘economic’ is used in,
for instance economic sphere, value, capital and power. Economic in these com-
binations is used in the sense of monetary. For instance, in the economic sphere
assets and transactions can be measured in terms of money. An economy howev-
er, refers to the way people choose and organize means in order to reach certain
ends. Cf. Becker (1976) 3-14. Therefore, not all economies need money.
28 The medical profession is an example. Here the borderline between the two
spheres is permanently in ﬂux as professionals ask which medical services can
and cannot be traded. Different standards apply in both spheres, but the plural
value system is hardly asymmetrical.
29 The denial of the economy refers, above all, to the economy in the market
sphere, but it can also apply to the economy in the gift sphere. For instance,
artists, art companies and donors pretend to be selﬂess, but de facto many
donors seek publicity and artists and art companies do everything possible to
increase their chances in the donations and subsidies system.
30 On the basis of the characteristics that differentiate gift from trade, the majori-
ty of present-day sponsorship activities are closer to market exchange. A quid
pro quo has arisen and exchange rates have also emerged. Firms pay cultural in-
stitutions for the right to advertise their brand name in association with the par-
ticular cultural institution. Some cultural institutions actually publicize the
‘prices’ they charge for different levels of sponsorship, which correspond with
different levels of logo- and name recognition in posters, catalogues, etc. Never-
theless, parties publicly continue to play the game of giving. In this respect spon-
sorship has a special attraction that pure advertising does not have. It enables
the sponsor to associate with the gift sphere. And because the association with
315
NOTES OF CHAPTER 2

the gift sphere impresses the customers of the sponsoring company, this be-
comes attractive in a commercial sense as well.
31 The artist’s character is related to the ‘habitus’, which will be discussed at some
length in chapter 4.
32 Bourdieu (1992) 121-128 uses the expression ‘sense of the game’ (‘sens de
jeux’). From a different point of view, Hütter (1996) also applies the notion of
play to economics.
33 Bourdieu (1977) demonstrates and explains this double standard in more de-
tail.
34 Cf. Kattenburg (1996). Notwithstanding the business instinct of Warhol, Kat-
tenburg draws attention to the religious aspect in Warhol’s work with its em-
phasis on transformation.
35 Velthuis interviewed gallery owners for other purposes; see Velthuis (2002).
36 Bourdieu gives many descriptions of the stiffness of newcomers opposed to the
ease of ‘born nobility’. Cf. Bourdieu (1979).
37 Cf. Laermans (1993).
3
Economic Value Versus Aesthetic Value
1 This is the opinion of Woude (1987) 309. This is not an undisputed opinion.
Nevertheless, even if the real number is much higher – for instance, ﬁve times as
high or 5% – the percentage of surviving paintings is still amazingly low.
2 Cf. Velthuis (2002a).
3 Throsby (2000) 45-50. In his admirable attempt to widen the horizon of econom-
ics, Throsby lets cultural value complement economic value. However, I think
that by introducing a second major concept into economics is too high a price to
pay for a relatively small increase in explanatory capacity. I ﬁnd it more useful
to let the term ‘economic’ stand for an approach rather than a scope. In this re-
spect, I agree with Becker (1976) 3-14. In this chapter however, I shall also use
the term ‘economic’ in the limited sense of monetary or ﬁnancial.
4 Cf. Velthuis (2002).
5 Price is not always an adequate indicator even when it comes to paintings. In par-
ticular, it’s inadequate when market value refers to the value of an oeuvre and is
compared with the aesthetic value or reputation of the oeuvre. For instance, the
average price of a painting by a highly regarded painter, deceased or living, who
produced (produces) many paintings annually, can well be lower than those of a
less-renowned painter who painted very few paintings; nevertheless the sales of
the most renowned painter can still be higher. Moreover, it appears that in a lo-
cal market like the Dutch visual art market, an average artist’s success is more
likely to be revealed by the large number of works sold and not in higher prices.
This is conﬁrmed by the data that Rengers and Velthuis (2002) gathered for
their article.
6 In writing this paragraph, I am indebted to Velthuis (2002), who speaks of two
models of price and value: an independent spheres model and a hostile spheres
model. He mentions Bell, Steiner, Fry, and Fried in association with the ﬁrst,
and Kopytoff, Burn, Hughes, and Klamer in relation with the second.
7 This applies to subsidization in general. It does not apply to all forms of subsi-
dization. For instance, subsidy schemes in which subsidies are linked with per-
formance in the market evidently do not assume a negative relation.
8 Grampp (1989) 37.
316
NOTES OF CHAPTER 3

9 A much weaker proposition, which underlies thesis of correspondence between
aesthetic and market value, is that price signals quality. Price is one of many sig-
nals consumers perceive. A higher price is generally a signal of higher quality.
This line of thinking comes from Veblen (1934) and Leibenstein (1950).
Velthuis (2002) applies it to the visual arts.
10 Grampp (1989) 35.
11 It should be noted that if this chapter were to prove that aesthetic and market
value do not have to correspond, this does not necessarily refute the thesis the
way Grampp (1989) uses it. First, Grampp applied the thesis only to the visual
art market, whereas I shall also try it out on mass markets as the market of liter-
ature. Second and more fundamental, for Grampp, divergence in aesthetic and
market value seems to be impossible almost by deﬁnition. Reading Grampp’s
text carefully, it turns out that the way he implicitly deﬁnes aesthetic value, any-
thing that enters the price also enters aesthetic value. In his deﬁnition of aesthet-
ic value, there doesn’t appear to be a place for selection by experts. However,
Grampp is not consistent, because he still ﬁnds it necessary to conﬁrm his theo-
ry by showing that the judgments of experts broadly correspond with the prices
of art.
12 Cowen (1998). Frank and Cook (1995) 189–211 on the other hand emphasize
circumstances that make it likely that free markets in media and culture harm
quality.
13 This is also the opinion of Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 93. Like Grampp
(1989) and Cowen (1998) they compared auction prices and reputations and
came to the conclusion that price and aesthetic value basically correspond. Ac-
cording to them, taking into account different styles adds to the explanation of
discrepancies.
14 Utility functions are interdependent. (Some economists, like Becker (1996) 7-
18, try to stick to the traditional approach by compromising; they assume that
basic preferences are given, while many day-to-day preferences depend on so-
cial factors.)
15 Cf. Blaug (1980) 49.
16 Bourdieu (1992), Elias (1981, ed princ 1970), Goudsblom (1977), Janssen
(2001) 348 and Luhmann (1995 ed. princip. 1984 in German).
17 In the analysis of government behavior in Chapter 10 I shall, however, depart
from methodological individualism.
18 Extensive literature exists on value concepts. Cf. Smith (1988), Anderson
(1993), Klamer (1996) and Throsby (2000).
19 The economist Sen (1982) in his well-known chapter on Rational Fools used
the related notion of meta-ranking. The notion of values of different orders is
used, among others, by the literary theorist Smith (1988).
20 This example I borrow from Plattner (1996) 18.
21 Experts may argue that the Rembrandt example is of a different order, because
the new techniques only bring forward what was already there. This argument,
however, applies as much to the Monroe portraits, the provenance or corporate
purchases. All of these are social events that make viewers look anew, see things
they hadn’t seen before and thus have a new aesthetic experience.
22 Smith (1988) 32. Speaking about the role of interpretation, the philosopher
Danto (1986) 26-43 comes to a similar conclusion.
23 I ﬁnd this an acceptable approximation. In spite of the uniqueness of art prod-
ucts and in spite of the strong effects of fame, art markets are relatively competi-
tive from top to bottom. However, unlike in neo-classical economics, I do not
317
NOTES OF CHAPTER 3

assume that consumer preferences are independent.
24 Frank and Cook (1995) 26.
25 In a commercial gallery, consumers do not inﬂuence the price in the short run,
because prices are given. The ﬁrst willing to pay the price gets the painting.
However, when many consumers are interested, prices increase over the long
run. On the other hand, when consumers are basically uninterested, prices sel-
dom go down. Cf.Velthuis (2002). Nevertheless, in the latter case, artists sell
fewer paintings and the market value of their oeuvre rather than of single works
of art goes down. It is a matter of quantity not price. (Although Rengers and
Velthuis (2002) use their data for other purposes, as noted before, their data
conﬁrm this ﬁnding.)
26 Frank and Cook (1995) 26.
27 Bourdieu (1977).
28 The work of Bourdieu, for instance Bourdieu (1986) 241-258, contributed to
the narrow use of the term ‘economic’ as in ‘economic capital’.
29 So far, not one deﬁnition exists of cultural and social capital. In economics,
there is a tendency to start all over again and to ignore deﬁnitions developed
earlier in sociology. Cf. Becker (1996) 7-18, Throsby (1999) and Throsby
(2000) 45-50. Whereas Throsby uses the term ‘cultural capital’, Becker uses the
term ‘personal capital’ instead. Both use the term ‘social capital’. Both have evi-
dently been inﬂuenced by Bourdieu who was the ﬁrst to present a differential
capital theory; among others in Bourdieu (1986) 241-258. His theory directly
and indirectly had an enormous impact in sociology as well as economics. For
the purpose of this book, a precise deﬁnition of the various forms of capital is
not necessary. However, in order to prevent too many parallel approaches, I pre-
fer to stay close to the way Bourdieu handles the capital categories. His ap-
proach is subtle and versatile. A large variety of problems can be handled by it.
30 According to Bourdieu (1986) 241-258 cultural capital can also take institu-
tionalized forms like a diploma, or objectiﬁed forms like books and paintings.
31 If social and cultural capital was easy to transfer into monetary capital and vice
versa, there would be no need to distinguish them. It is only because of the con-
version problem that a differential capital theory is necessary. It should be not-
ed that economic, cultural and social capital add to symbolic capital. Bourdieu
(1986) 241-258. Not to complicate matters, I do not treat symbolic capital.
32 For instance Crane (1976), Janssen (1998), Nooy (1993), Peterson (1994),
White and White (1995) and sections in Albrecht, Barnett et al. (1970) and Fos-
ter and Blau (1989).
33 See note 11.
34 Heinich (1998).
35 Some people in the ‘established’ avant-garde or contemporary circle do not use
the term ‘avant-garde’ any more. (‘The avant-garde is dead’, or ‘everything is
avant-garde.’)
36 This estimate and the earlier statement about the lower prices in the top of the
avant-garde is based on interviews with dealers, employees of auction-houses in
Britain and the Netherlands and on my own observations at art fairs in the
Netherlands, Germany and Belgium.
37 The term ‘cultural elite’ stems from Bourdieu (1979). Swaan (1986) introduced
the term in the Netherlands. As in the case of economic capital, the term ‘eco-
nomic’ in combination with elite is used in the limited sense of ‘ﬁnancial’.The
term ‘cultural elite’ stems from introduced the term in the Netherlands. As in
the case of ‘economic capital’, the term ‘economic’ in combination with elite is
318
NOTES OF CHAPTER 3

used in the limited sense of ‘ﬁnancial’.
38 The differences between the two groups in personnel and taste is demonstrated
at length in Bourdieu (1979) 260-317.
39 Bourdieu (1979) 11-63 attaches speciﬁc characteristics of art – not only visual
art – to the different preferences of these elite’s. He states that the members of
the new elite prefer art in which the emphasis is on formal qualities, while the
older elite prefers works of art, which are more descriptive and expressive. This
latter preference can also be found among common people. In a broad sense, the
distinction probably holds some truth. Traditional modern art is often expres-
sive and otherwise its realism is of a story-telling nature, while avant-garde art is
more self-referential. And in its formality, avant-garde art invites to the kind of
intellectual activity that the cultural elite particularly enjoys. Nevertheless, in
my view these preferences are not ﬁxed. It is hard to predict how they will devel-
op. Bourdieu (1979) and Swaan (1986) 30-32 tend to interpret the preference of
the new cultural elite for formality at the cost of description and emotion as a
logical step in a civilizing process. However, it could well be that they misinter-
pret the role of the arts in the civilizing process. In my view, it is not impossible
that, for instance, in the future description and expression will become more im-
portant in elite art, while the ‘common man’ will prefer abstraction. (For in-
stance, popular strips and animation series’ on television are already very ab-
stract.
40 According to Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 41 this percentage is 25%.
Meulenbeek et al. underestimate this percentage, because they attribute the
money that foundations (‘stichtingen’ and ‘instellingen’) spend in the art market
to the private sector (p.10-2), while part of it is public money. Because it is im-
possible to determine how much money comes indirectly from the government
through these institutions, it is safe to say that the government share in the visu-
al art market lies somewhere between a quarter and a third. (However, the pres-
ent growth of the visual art market in the Netherlands comes exclusive on ac-
count of private buyers. Therefore, the large government share is becoming a lit-
tle smaller.)
41 Although government spending on visual art per capita is high in the Nether-
lands, it is not much higher than in most other mainland Western European
countries. Cf. Ernst (1999).
42 An investigation, commissioned by the French Foreign Ministry and reported
on by Charles Bremner in the internet edition of The Times of June 13 2001, em-
phasizes the negative effects of state patronage on contemporary French visual
art. ‘French contemporary artists are being pushed out of the world market be-
cause of stiﬂing state patronage...’, ‘...neglecting the visual for the sake of philo-
sophical texts’.
43 Colleagues and experts I know, who are familiar with the present situation of
the visual arts in both countries, basically agree. Nevertheless this view can be
disputed, and the differences between the countries can also be explained in oth-
er ways.
44 The merit good argument and rent seeking are treated more extensively in
Chapter 9.
45 Among others, this type of rating can be found in the German magazine
Capital.
46 Bourdieu (1977).
47 Symbolic gains can be made by gradually converting the form of capital that is
redundant into forms of capital, which are relatively failing. For instance in
319
NOTES OF CHAPTER 3

families, which have been successful in industry and commerce, their children’s
cultural education is likely to be emphasized. On the other hand, members of
the cultural elite manage, often with the assistance of the government, to ﬁnd
increasingly well-paid jobs for themselves and their offspring and so their mone-
tary capital increases.
4
The Selﬂessly Devoted Artist
1 People by deﬁnition maximize utility under constraints.
2 Private satisfaction is not the same as utility; it is an internal reward that offers
utility.
3 Frey (1997) is not speciﬁc about the line between intrinsic and extrinsic motiva-
tion, but he tends to limit extrinsic motivation primarily to being motivated by
money. Therefore in his view somebody who is motivated by recognition is in-
trinsically motivated. Towse (2001) follows Frey and only refers to extrinsic
motivation in the case of an orientation towards monetary rewards. I think
their distinction is confusing. Almost anybody would say that, for instance, an
actor who tries to please the audience is extrinsically motivated. Therefore to
denote the distinction Frey examines it would have been preferable to use terms
like ‘monetary’ versus ‘non-monetary motivation’ in stead of ‘extrinsic’ versus
‘intrinsic motivation’. The precise distinction, however, is not that important
for Frey (p.14), as he primarily investigates the implications of non-monetary
motivation in the economy generally. The notion of non-monetary motivation
is important for the evaluation of the reward-systems that exist in ﬁrms or that
follow from government subsidy-schemes. Frey (1999) applies his theory to
government involvement in the arts. He demonstrates that monetary motivation
can easily run against non-monetary motivation.
4 Frey (1997) not only speaks of intrinsic motivation but also uses the term ‘intrin-
sic rewards’. I prefer to speak of ‘internal rewards’. As in the case of intrinsic
value treated in the previous chapter rewards can never be altogether intrinsic
because they have a social origin. Moreover the term ‘intrinsic reward’ would
unjustly distract attention away from the actor and point to a rewarding object
or activity. (I see no problem in using the term ‘intrinsic (or extrinsic) motiva-
tion’, because ‘motivation’ clearly points to both an actor and an activity.)
5 In the welfare function of artists, internal rewards have a relatively high elastici-
ty, while external rewards have a relatively low elasticity.
6 The expression ‘serving art’ (or serving money and recognition) is used in a
metaphorical sense here and elsewhere. (Ultimately ‘art’ is not an entity that
artists can serve.)
7 It does not matter whether artists are deliberately ‘selﬂess’ or deliberately try to
better themselves. All that matters is whether it can be observed that artists are
indeed ‘selﬂess’ or that artists are only trying to improve their position. Most
economists assume that people unconsciously pursue rewards in order to be-
come better off. In this approach, asking artists about their intentions serves no
purpose. And when artists are asked about their intentions, the outcomes are
likely to be biased. Because artists deny the importance of the economy, artists
will almost certainly stress their devotion and deny that they are in it for person-
al gain.
8 In the case of average artists, income enters in the welfare function and also as in-
put in the production function.
320
NOTES OF CHAPTER 4

9 Throsby (1994a).
10 Towse (2001) 485, Rengers and Madden (2000) 347, Throsby (1996) 233 and
Throsby (1996a).
11 If artists have an inheritance, this money can be spent on making art without re-
ducing the time available for making art. Therefore, rich artists, whether they
are talented or not, can be seen buying the most expensive paint, the best musi-
cal instruments, etc., things that more talented artists might be jealous of.
12 Throsby (1994a) 74.
13 On average, artists who earn more than the minimum income constraint are
mainly interested in non-monetary rewards, but are not totally immune to extra
ﬁnancial income. Therefore, it should be stressed that the conclusion broadly
applies to large groups of artists and not necessarily to speciﬁc groups. In dis-
cussing the response to money Rengers and Madden (2000) 339 distinguish
various groups of artists. They argue that a group of ‘regular’ artists exists that
is just as responsive to money as other professionals are. These are primarily ap-
plied artists, who therefore fall outside the scope of this book.
Generally the marginal returns of more money is said to diminish quickly. In a
graphic representation, the curve representing the returns corresponding with
increasing income will, at the survival level for artists, show a sudden change in
direction. In cases of other types of rewards such as private satisfaction or
recognition, marginal returns are likely to diminish as well but less abruptly. See
the ﬁgures mentioned in the notes 44 and 48 of Chapter 5.
14 For a general philosophical approach to ‘autonomy’ see for instance Blokland
(1997 ed. princ. in Dutch 1991).
15 A binary ordering replaces a continuous ordering.
16 Cf. Berg (1994). Bevers (1992) 77 emphasizes that autonomy does not exclude
the possibility of a convergence of the cultural, political, and business spheres in
technical and instrumental aspects.
17 Cowen and Grier (1996) 5.
18 These phrases stem from Freidson (1990) and Jeffri and Throsby (1994) respec-
tively. Both are cited by Menger (1999) 554. In analyzing incentives and re-
wards Towse (2001) 477 states that artists are motivated by an intrinsic inner
drive, and that therefore, in her view, incentive and reward diverge. Because in
my approach artists can reward themselves, I do not stress the divergence.
19 Cf. Gogh (1980).
20 Although Frey (1997) 14 uses another distinction between internal and exter-
nal rewards and motivation (see note 3), he also acknowledges interdependence.
21 Cf. Finney (1995).
22 Cf. Janssen (2001) 342.
23 This approach to learning rests on the primacy of rewards: within a stimulus-re-
sponse approach past rewards (and punishments) govern future behavior. Pre-
sent day learning theories are not that simple. Other learning principals like imi-
tation supplement the older approach based on stimulus-response. Cf. Kohlberg
(1984).
24 Cf. Abbing (1996).
25 Klamer, Mignosa et al. (2000)
26 Jenkins (1992) and Jong (1997) present useful introductory texts on the habi-
tus-ﬁeld theory of Bourdieu.
27 Bourdieu uses lengthy descriptions to give meaning to the concept of the habi-
tus. He refuses to develop immanent ‘deﬁnitions’ of the habitus and related con-
cepts. Cf.Bourdieu (1990) 66-69 and Bourdieu (1992).
321
NOTES OF CHAPTER 4

28 Cf. Jong (1997).
29 In my view, the habitus-ﬁeld theory can be of special interest for economists. I
give four examples: (1) this theory reminds the economist that there is more un-
der the sun than just preferences, rewards, and calculation. Human beings are
neither puppets, which can be moved at will by pulling a string or offering them
a reward, nor are they fully independent, rational, and calculating individuals.
In their habitus they are linked to their social surroundings in ways, which go
beyond a simple motivation by rewards. (2) Economics has problems in explain-
ing behavior that apparently goes against its own interests. For instance, a doc-
tor leaves his house in the middle of the night to voluntarily help a patient with-
out anybody noticing. Given the habitus, this is the ‘natural’ way to behave. (3)
Because of the free rider problem, economists expect voluntary groups pursuing
a common cause to be unstable, because it is advantageous to leave the group.
Given the habitus and its dispositions, short-term advantages of leaving are not
even perceived. The ‘culture’ is such, that leaving simply does not come to most
people’s minds. (4) The notion of the habitus contributes to a better under-
standing of informal monopolization – Chapter 11.
30 Bourdieu (1992) 121-128 uses the expression ‘sense of the game’ (‘sens de
jeux’).
31 A sense of the game does not imply that accidents do not occur and that chance
is unimportant. Moreover, some initial choices can predetermine future actions
such as the case of so-called path dependence. See also note 33.
32 I doubt the usefulness of a fully interdisciplinary approach compared to a multi-
disciplinary approach. I think that the latter should precede the former and that
it may not always be wise to aim for interdisciplinarity.
33 Laermans (1996) criticizes Bourdieu’s habitus-ﬁeld theory because it puts too
much emphasis on the assumed strategic behavior of people in the art world. It
follows that this criticism a fortiori applies to the approach of this book. Laer-
mans tries to offer an alternative based on the system-theoretical constructivism
of Luhmann (1995 ed. princip. 1984 in German). According to Laermans,
choices in the arts are not that strategic. Initially there is often plenty of choice
and in that situation, chance is sometimes more important than strategy. More-
over, once the initial choice is made, there is often little left to choose. Because
of what economists call path dependency, future choices are broadly predeter-
mined and can therefore no longer be strategic. Laermans seems to present this
theory or approach both as a substitute for Bourdieu’s habitus-ﬁeld theory and
as a supplement. It certainly is a useful addition, but in my view, especially
when more than just individual artistic decisions are studied, it cannot replace
the habitus-ﬁeld theory. In this context, it should be noted that most theories do
not try to explain individual decisions in detail. They try to explain the average
behavior of small or large groups, and such behavior can very often best be ex-
plained by assuming strategic behavior.
34 Cf. Finney (1995).
35 Cf. Janssen (2001) 342.
36 Bourdieu (1983) 349.
37 Rengers and Plug (2001) 11 discovered that a relatively large proportion of self-
taught ﬁne artists receive no money from the government, and depend solely on
market income, which implies that art colleges form part of the ‘ofﬁcial’, gov-
ernment-oriented art world.
38 Products can be practices. According to Finney (1995) 27 artists are naturally
attracted to that particular style or game judged most likely to lead to success.
322
NOTES OF CHAPTER 4

39 Artists themselves can also be a source of reward, because of internal subsidiza-
tion and because they ‘offer’ personal satisfaction to themselves.
40 Cf. Rengers and Plug (2001) 4. They write “An artist, who is working on a gov-
ernment assignment, cannot produce for the market. Artists now compete for
subsidies, and the requirements for receiving these may very well be different
from the criteria for receiving market recognition.”
41 Bourdieu (1992) rejects any association between his approach and Neoclassical
Economics or the Rational Action Theory. 
42 Only a small portion of these paintings is made in factory-like conditions.
43 Rengers and Plug (2001) 13-5 also found path dependency in the careers of
Dutch visual artists.
44 Rengers and Plug (2001) 14, who examined data on Dutch visual artists, con-
ﬁrm this ﬁnding. On pages 8 and 9 they ask whether it is a specialized market, a
winner-take-all market or an independent market that is typical for the struc-
ture of the visual arts market in the Netherlands. In my view, these are not mutu-
ally exclusive structures. Specialization for younger artists can evolve into a
winner-take-all situation for some older artists.
45 Bourdieu (1977) uses this example.
46 As noted in the previous chapter, if there was an exchange rate and capital could
be exchanged easily, it would not have been necessary to distinguish different
kinds of reward and capital. A conversion problem exists: it is hard to transform
monetary capital into cultural capital or social capital and vice versa. This phe-
nomenon is central in the work of Bourdieu (1992).
47 Presently in some areas in the performing arts, the government tries to stimulate
the underdeveloped orientation towards the market by matching its funding to
market performance. Such schemes are confusing for companies, because in the
short-term, more orientation towards the market can lead to more income from
the government, but this is bound to cause a reduction of income from the gov-
ernment in the long-term.
48 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 15 and 41. Adding social security beneﬁts it
is 55%. Because it was especially true in those days that social security beneﬁts
served as an indirect form of subsidization, the latter percentage is not irrele-
vant.
49 For instance, during this period at the Amsterdam Rietveld Academy, a painter
like Herman Gordijn and many of his less well-known colleagues were in fact
forced to leave.
50 This particular subsidy scheme will be discussed in more detail in section 6.5.
51 Not all of the duped artists left the ﬁeld. Unsurprisingly, some of them found
their way to the new but reduced levels of subsidies. Only a small number of
artists managed to adopt new attitudes and turned successfully to the private
market for their incomes. Dun, Muskens et al. (1997)
5
Money for the Artist
1 In 1999, Lannoye (2000) interviewed mostly ﬁne arts students at a Dutch art
school. Among them ﬁrst-born male students were under-represented. (The fact
that according to Getzels and Czikszentmihalyi (1976) famous artists are often
eldest sons does not necessarily contradict Lannoye’s ﬁnding.)
2 This analysis of the family and of the position of the artist is similar to Bourdieu’s
analyses of class in relation to the position of the artist. Bourdieu (1979).
323
NOTES OF CHAPTER 5

3 See also note 3 of Chapter 4.
4 Forbes (1998-1999) These and the following data stem from the lists ‘Forbes
Celebrity Hundred’, ‘Forbes Top 40 athletes’, ‘Forbes Top 40 Entertainers’,
‘Corporate America’s Most Powerful People’ and ‘Top Executive Incomes Out-
side the us’ published in issues between September 1998 and September 1999.
Updated versions of these lists can be found at: http:// www.forbes.com. Own-
ers and entrepreneurs, who sometimes earn more than top artists and athletes,
are not really professionals. It is debatable whether politicians and administra-
tors are really professionals. Nevertheless, if managers are considered profes-
sionals, the average income among the Top 40 managers in the us is less than
the average income of the Top 40 entertainers including the aforementioned
artists. Forbes excludes politicians in ofﬁce from its annual study, but the ex-
politician, George Bush Sr., appears at the bottom of the Celebrity 100 list, as
does Colin Powell. At that time, both were active on the lecture circuit.
5 Most professionals with extremely high incomes are really also entrepreneurs.
The income earned from their companies’ activities exceeds their income earned
from their professional functions; moreover, they often earn money trading
stocks. This certainly applies to many successful artists like Michael Jackson,
John Irving, and Steven Spielberg. In theory, their income from general entre-
preneurial activities should be subtracted when discussing professional in-
comes, but in practice this is impossible. Because almost every professional with
a high income develops this kind of activities, the effects broadly offset one an-
other and rough comparisons can still be made.
6 Wassall and Alper (1992) show that the incomes of ﬁne artists are more unequal-
ly distributed than usual.
7 Frank and Cook (1995).
8 Frank and Cook (1995) 24. Not to confuse readers I shall use the phrase winner-
takes-all and not winner-take-all as Frank and Cook do.
9 Frank and Cook (1995) 24; Rosen (1981).
10 Rosen (1981). Depending on one’ notion of talent, major income differences
can also arise when there is no difference in talent. This is the thesis of Adler
(1985). MacDonald (1988) again offers a slightly different explanation of the
skewed income distribution in the arts. Towse (1992) 209-217 assesses and
complements the models of Rosen (1981), Adler and MacDonald. Moreover,
Towse (1992) 211 shows that difference in talent matters and is often larger
than the other authors tend to think. Hamlen (1991) also concludes that the
large income differences of pop singers correspond with substantial differences
in voice quality.
11 Relative differences can vary over time. In the case of paintings made by Ver-
meer and ‘Vermeer paintings’ made by Van Meegeren experts have had prob-
lems in the past telling the difference, while nowadays almost anybody can tell
the difference.
12 Frank and Cook (1995) 32.
13 Frank and Cook (1995) 38-39. They mention a total of nine sources for the
emergence of winner-takes-all markets.
14 Abbing (1989) 126.
15 Cf. Towse (1993).
16 Frank and Cook (1995) 200-9.
17 Cowen (1998) 131 challenges Frank and Cook’s thesis of cultural impoverish-
ment. He defends the position that cultural diversity increases.
18 The fact that essential qualities cannot be measured does not exclude that cer-
324
NOTES OF CHAPTER 5

tain qualities, which matter to the consumer, can be measured, like singing, for
instance. Cf. Hamlen (1991) and Towse (1993).
19 In this context Rosen (1981) 846 uses the word ‘charisma’, which has a slightly
different meaning.
20 Authenticity in the arts was treated in chapter 1 in relation to the assumed sa-
credness of art.
21 Everybody is necessarily creative and authentic at times – for instance, in ﬁnd-
ing solutions in a problematic relationship or in solving problems at work.
22 I do not want to suggest that people have no urge to conform. It could well be
argued that both the urge to conform and the need for distinction, i.e., the wish
to be ‘somebody who differs from everybody else’ are powerful impulses in
many people’s lives. In our culture, however, the latter has probably gained
more momentum, and the artist serves as its model. Although it is true that by
strongly identifying with artists or stars people apparently become less of an au-
thentic individual themselves, this kind of identiﬁcation and degree of symbiosis
are usually temporal. In the long run they help in the formation of identities.
These identities naturally exist in relation to the ‘identities’ of the social groups
or subcultures somebody takes part in. After all, distinction can only exist in a
social environment.
23 Frank and Cook (1995) 29, emphasize that, although entities other than per-
sons may compete in winner-takes-all markets, identiﬁable individuals are al-
most always involved, when the stakes are high.
24 Abbing (1989) 124-135, Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 137-164, Jeffri (1989),
Towse (1993), Elstad (1997) and Rengers and Madden (2000). Many other
studies, which conﬁrm low incomes and a skewed distribution of incomes, were
reviewed by Throsby (1994), O’Brien (1997) and Wassall and Alper (1992). A
different opinion comes from Filer (1986), who states that artists earn only a lit-
tle less (not more than 10% less) than comparable professionals, but his use of
census data has been criticized, for instance by Menger (1999) 553. See also
note 213.
25 Baumol and Bowen (1966) 103.
26 Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 152-55.
27 “Surveys (and ofﬁcial statistics) on artists show they are younger, better quali-
ﬁed in the sense of having higher levels of educational achievement, earn less
and work longer hours than other professionals.” Towse (2001) 485.
28 Menger (1999) 545.
29 Throsby (1994) 18.
30 Alper, Wassal et al. (1996).
31 Throsby (1996).
32 Menger (1999) 545. Earlier Peacock, Shoesmith et al. (1982) 39 noted that be-
tween 1970 and 1980 in Britain the real value of performers’ incomes working
in established companies decreased.
33 On the basis of census data, Cowen and Grier (1996) 14-20 discovered that in-
comes and the numbers of artists in the us rose slightly between 1970 and 1990.
However, in the census data, people are categorized by their primary source of
income. Many artists earn most of their incomes outside the arts. Measuring the
income of a group already selected on a ﬁnancial criterion can lead to incorrect
or irrelevant results.
34 Throsby (1996) 228.
35 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 36. Fifty percent earned less than 100 Euros
a month. And more than 75% could not make a living, in the sense that they
325
NOTES OF CHAPTER 5

earned less than the equivalent of social security beneﬁts in the Netherlands.
Unlike in some other surveys, the respondents had no incentive to hide their ille-
gal earnings.
36 Rengers and Madden (2000) 339 discovered that in Australia artists with low
art incomes and artists with high art incomes work long weeks, while artists
with intermediate incomes tend to work shorter weeks in the arts. The latter
group probably consists of predominantly non-ﬁne arts artists.
37 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 24.
38 Struyk and Rengers (2000) 24.
39 Median income implies that 50% of a group earns less and 50% more than this
ﬁgure. Because income distribution is always skewed, the median income is less
than the average income. The top of the median income is not inﬂuenced by co-
incidentally high incomes. Therefore, it is generally more informative than aver-
age income. Nevertheless, average income is often used, because median income
ﬁgures are not always available.
40 Heilbrun and Gray (2001, ed princ 1993) 15, Menger (1999) 542. See also sec-
tion 7.7.
41 Cf. Menger (1999) 607-8.
42 Frank and Cook are not primarily interested in the height of low incomes in
winner-takes-all markets. They are interested in social efﬁciency. They demon-
strate that from a social point of view, there tends to be too many participants in
these markets. Their analysis implies that even when the other causes of low in-
comes in the table do not apply, there would still be a surplus of participants
and therefore, social waste. Frank and Cook (1995) 107-110. Frank and Cook
(1995) 102-103 do not agree with the popular notion that society needs a very
big pond in order to catch a few very talented artists. They evidently disagree
with Adler (1985) who has tried to offer a scientiﬁc basis for the notion of the
big point. In Chapter 9, I will return to this point.
43 Menger (1999) 554 presents related explanations.
44 A ﬁgure can be drawn (ﬁgure 1 presented at: <www.hansabbing.nl>) in which
the y-axis stands for monetary income and the x-axis for non-monetary income.
Ua,b, etc. are the indifference curves of an average artist with respect to both
forms of income and Up,q, etc. are similar indifference curves of a non-arts pro-
fessional. Where the indifference curves of the artist cross the curves of the oth-
er professional, the slope of the ﬁrst is greater.
45 Frey (1997) and Towse (2001) assume that artists who seek status are intrinsi-
cally instead of extrinsically motivated. See note 3 of chapter 4. In my opinion,
the way they distinguish intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is confusing. There-
fore, I use non-monetary versus monetary rewards and motivation.
46 Economists have been reluctant to use the concept of psychic income because
they think it has too often served as an easy way out for the explanation of phe-
nomena, which are otherwise difﬁcult to explain. Cf. Towse (1996b) 310.
47 This shows in the changing slope of the indifference curve in ﬁgure 1 mentioned
in note 44.
48 In a ﬁgure (ﬁgure 2, presented at: <www.hansabbing.nl>) which is a more de-
tailed version of ﬁgure 1 mentioned in note 44, the kink in the indifference
curves of artists, where the survival constraint for artists  is approached, ex-
presses this phenomenon.
49 Not to complicate matters, in this chapter, the term ‘risk’ also covers the notion
of uncertainty.
50 Cf. Singer (1981b), Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 157 and Frank and Cook
326
NOTES OF CHAPTER 5

(1995) 116-118. Singer was probably the ﬁrst to acknowledge the importance
of risk taking in explaining artist behavior. He applied the Friedman-Savage
gambling model to the visual arts.
51 Throsby (1994) 19.
52 Cf. Frank and Cook (1995) 103-105.
53 Frank and Cook (1995) 104.
54 Menger (1999) 553-4. See also note 63 of Chapter 6.
55 Menger (1999) 601.
56 Another outcome can be a so-called pig cycle, which exists in a mild form in
most professions: periods of too much entrance alternate with periods with too
little.
57 In the Netherlands, for instance, the percentage of self-taught artists with no of-
ﬁcial art education is approximately 12%. This percentage for visual artists was
found by Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 21 and the same percentage was
found by Struyk and Rengers (2000) 22 for performing artists. There are indi-
cations that among younger artists this percentage is even lower.
58 The percentage of students at Dutch art schools with more highly educated par-
ents, according to Allen and Ramaekers (1999) 18, is 40% higher than in other
higher education institutions. If ﬁgures were available for the ﬁne arts depart-
ments at arts colleges this ﬁgure could be even higher.
6
Structural Poverty
1 Cf. Frey and Pommerehne (1989).
2 Cf. Montias (1987).
3 Cf. Hoogenboom (1993) and Stolwijk (1998).
4 Different types of bohemian artists can be distinguished – cf. Kreuzer (1971).
The social backgrounds of various bohemian artists varies considerably. Never-
theless, a majority of bohemian artists probably come from families with above-
average incomes.
5 The effect of more stringent restrictions of numbers can be shown in a ﬁgure (ﬁg-
ure 3 presented on <www.hansabbing.nl>). With average hourly income on the
y-axis and the total number of hours that all artists spend making art on the x-
axis, the relevant part of the supply curve of artistic hours S moves to S’, which
appears above and to the left of S. S’ is also steeper than S. With more control
applied, the intersection with the demand curve also moves up and income rises
as well. Cf. Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 160.
6 In the us there was support for artists in the 1930s through the Work’s Progress
Association, which was part of Roosevelt’s New Deal.
7 Chapter 9 discusses other arguments for subsidization.
8 For increased spending, see note 28 of Chapter 7 and for low incomes note 24 of
Chapter 5.
9 Presently I prefer to ignore the sixth explanation, the winner-takes-all explana-
tion, because artists are not exceptional in that respect.
10 In ﬁgure 3 described in note 5 (and presented on: <www.hansabbing.nl>) the
relevant part of the curve that represents total number of hours worked in the
arts at different income levels runs almost horizontal. The three inclinations in
combination with the survival constraint for artists cause a high income-elastic-
ity in the relevant part of the curve. According to Towse (2001) 485 this is con-
ﬁrmed by empirical evidence. The effect of misinformation, on the other hand,
327
NOTES OF CHAPTER 6

is that a persistent overestimation of expected returns shifts the ‘supply’ curve
to the right and thus increases the total number of hours worked in the arts and
therefore, also the number of artists.
11 See also note 13 of Chapter 4.
12 The notion of an oversupply of artists can be found, among others, in Menger
(1999) and Towse (2001). The use of terms like ‘oversupply’ and ‘overproduc-
tion’ is not unproblematic. I return to the subject in sections 9.6 and 9.8.
13 Even when artists on average do not become poorer, poverty can be said to ‘in-
crease’ because extra available money leads to more poor artists per hundred
thousand inhabitants.
14 The model I present in this section leads to largely the same result as Throsby
(1994a), ‘A work-preference model of artist behavior’. In Throsby’s model,
artists tend to forsake consumer goods in order to make art. Passionate artists
want to maximize their time doing art at the expense of monetary gain and the
leisure time that comes with working less. My approach is more general and
more in line with neo-classical thinking in the sense that artwork is not a goal in
itself but a means for gaining non-monetary income like private satisfaction and
recognition. Therefore, artists are inclined to forsake earned income for non-
monetary income. In both approaches there is a survival constraint for artists.
Although the approaches differ, the results can be the same. Moreover, it should
be noted that my model refers to ﬁne artists and not necessarily to all artists,
i.e., including applied artists. For other comments on Throsby’s model see
Rengers and Madden (2000).
15 In theory it’s possible that more subsidization does not by itself lead to more
artists, but that, instead, more artists and more subsidies have a common cause.
For instance, the Netherlands is a relatively prosperous country. On the one
hand, because the Dutch are prosperous and have enough money to do some-
thing about the economic plight of artists, they are perhaps more likely to be
concerned about the low incomes in the arts and may decide to increase subsi-
dies for artists. On the other hand, because of the prosperity in the Netherlands,
people may be more tempted to seek out a romantic alternative in the arts.
Therefore, it is possible that higher subsidies do not necessarily create more
artists, but that both have a common cause. Although it is not impossible that
there are also general causes that contribute to both subsidization and high
numbers, I nevertheless argue that subsidization primarily causes the large
numbers of artists and overcrowding.
16 Throsby (1994a) in his work preference model for artists, presents indirect evi-
dence for this thesis. Cf. Towse (2001) 485.
17 An international comparison of income ﬁgures is tricky, as will be pointed out
below. Nevertheless, in most areas, evidence more likely points in the direction
of lower than higher incomes. (As noted before, visual artists in the Netherlands
earn close to zero.)
18 Higher subsidies in mainland Western Europe are only partly offset by lower
donation and spending levels. Therefore, I claim that subsidies result in a net-in-
crease in numbers.
19 Cf. Ernst (1999). Measuring methods are almost always indirect; they often de-
pend on a form of registration that only exists in a speciﬁc country, like registra-
tions based on unique tax measure, for instance. The relativity of measures is
also evident because of the fact that in one country there can be two ways of
counting artists whose outcomes deviate by more than 100%. And, even though
the registration of subsidies appears to be less complicated, the way in which
328
NOTES OF CHAPTER 6

subsidy levels are measured in different countries, especially subsidies by local
governments, also differs too much to enable a comparison that makes sense.
Cf. ibid. Ernst.
20 Even then, some reservation in the interpretation of results would be required
because of the necessary limitation inherent in the deﬁnition of who is counted
as an artist and who is not.
21 Dun, Muskens et al. (1997) 9.
22 Dun, Muskens et al. (1997).
23 Haanstra (1987) 22-5.
24 Dun, Muskens et al. (1997) 51 also point to the increase in the number of stu-
dents but I see this as an independent variable that contributed to the attraction
of the program instead of the other way around.
25 Although 40% of the money spent on the program continued to pour into the
visual arts through other subsidies, overall spending by the ministries of social
welfare and culture on visual art went down by more than 40%. Because spend-
ing on the visual arts by local governments remained largely the same, the total
reduction was approximately 20%. 
26 Dun, Muskens et al. (1997).
27 Dun, Muskens et al. (1997) 46-8.
28 IJdens and Vet (2001) 31.
29 Cf. section 5.7.
30 In their direct effects, increased spending, donations, and subsidies tend to in-
crease the number of artists, and they sometimes inﬂuence the income distribu-
tion and average income ﬁgures as well, while the willingness to work for a low
income and therefore the inclination to become an artist remains the same. In
the case of signals that are interpreted positively by artists, numbers increase
and average income can decrease because artists become more willing to work
for low incomes. The inclination of people to become artists increases. (The
supply curve shifts to the right and starts to run more horizontally.)
31 This is also the opinion of Grampp (1989a) 114.
32 When it’s mainly highly successful artists who are proﬁting, average incomes
are likely to show a slight increase.
33 See also O’Hagan (1998) 148-151.
34 Through the ‘Intermittent de Spectacle’, income is transferred from the average
employee to the average performing artist. Because ofﬁcially there is no govern-
ment involvement, it is seen as more of a collective donation than a subsidy. The
effect is the same, however.
35 Although the amount of money the nea gives in the form of grants is relatively
small, the grants are well-known and ﬁne arts graduates usually ﬁrst turn to the
nea.
36 Because they are scattered, the signaling effect of the Regional Boards is weak-
er. The same does not apply to the Arts Council, but at the moment it does not
give grants to artists. This situation is likely to change in the near future.
37 IJdens (1999) gives other examples. Nooy (1996) also points to the unintended
effects of subsidization. He argues that unwanted effects can be reduced by a pe-
riodic change in the system of subsidization. Another interesting example is pre-
sented by Benhamou (2000) who discusses the effects of different public poli-
cies on the temporary and self-employment situations among performing artists
in France and England.
38 It is only recently (in 2000) that the Dutch government changed its policy. Using
ﬁnancial means, it installed an indirect numerus clausus by discouraging
329
NOTES OF CHAPTER 6

schools from accepting too many students. In France, England, and Germany
meanwhile, the population of ﬁne arts students continues to grow unabated.
39 It seems possible that the pressure of the art lobby encourages colleges to in-
crease their numbers even more in order to offer teaching jobs to the growing
number of artists who cannot ﬁnd proper employment elsewhere. In this re-
spect, Menger (1999) 607 suggests that the training method both adapts and
contributes to the ‘oversupply’ of artists. Towse (1996b) 318-19 mentions the
existence of a ‘training lobby’ in the uk, which is engaged in ‘rent seeking’, the
seeking of proﬁts for the own group. It has a ﬁnancial incentive to supply more
training positions to students.
40 Among others, Towse (2001) and Linden and Rengers (1999) point to the fact
that the parents of art students are better educated than those of other students
in higher education. In the Netherlands, there are at least 40% more students at
arts colleges with higher educated parents than in other schools for higher edu-
cation. See Allen and Ramaekers (1999) 18. These ﬁgure apply to all depart-
ments in art colleges, including the relatively large applied apartments. If ﬁgures
were known for the students in only the ﬁne arts departments in comparison to
other students the difference is likely to be even larger. This is conﬁrmed by re-
search done by Lannoye. She questioned a group of art students, a majority of
whom were ﬁne arts students. According to her data, almost 70% more art stu-
dents than other students had parents with a higher than average education.
Lannoye (2000) 37.
41 Authorities are often aware of the fact that professional artists use allowances
to continue working but administrators often turn a blind eye to it. In the
Netherlands, this became quite clear when it took several years to agree on the
wik-program, a new subsidy program whose aim was to stop artists from de-
pending on social beneﬁts. In that period of time authorities were instructed to
postpone a strict application of the ofﬁcial rules for social beneﬁts in the case of
artists who made illegal use of social beneﬁts. When illegal was no longer ‘ille-
gal’, it revealed just how widespread the illegal but tolerated utilization of bene-
ﬁts had always been.
42 Benhamou (2000).
43 Presently in the Netherlands the so-called Melkert-baan plan is a good example.
44 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 34. (The median yearly income in 1998 was
1200 Euro as one of the authors of the report, Natasha Brouwer informed me.)
45 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 34. These artists earn less than the level of
social security beneﬁts in the Netherlands.
46 According to Janssen (2001) 342, who presents other references, in the nine-
teenth century, most artists came from the middle class (in most cases from a
professional family) and most had also gone to public school or a university.
Therefore, family ﬁnancial assistance was possible and likely, but as far as I
know, no empirical ﬁndings exist regarding the extent of family patronage. The
same applies to the present family patronage. See also note 40. 
47 See note 40. 
48 Another explanation for the different social background of art students is that
these students have more cultural capital and therefore more chances to succeed
in the arts.
49 Throsby (1996) 232-4, Menger (1999) 602.
50 Wassall and Alper (1992).
51 Throsby (1996) 235.
52 These ﬁgures are derived from Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 25-6.
330
NOTES OF CHAPTER 6

53 Linden and Rengers (1999).
54 Wassall and Alper (1992) 191.
55 This is a trend not only in Britain as Benhamou (2000) demonstrates, but in sev-
eral European countries. In France, however, due to the incentives of a speciﬁc
system of social beneﬁts, the trend has been most strongly towards shorter con-
tracts rather than to situations of self-employment. See Benhamou (2000). In
countries like the Netherlands and Germany, both developments occurred.
56 Throsby (1996) 232-4 presents evidence of better payment.
57 According to Throsby (1996) 233 and Throsby (1996a) the relationship be-
tween arts training and income from art is weak, while the relationship between
training and income from arts-related activities as teaching is relatively strong.
58 Menger (1999) 602-606.
59 Menger (1999) 604.
60 The professional bureaucracy in the arts is discussed in chapter 10.
61 Menger (1999) 607.
62 This implies that the survival constraint for artists loses signiﬁcance.
63 According to O’Brien and Feist (1997) only half of those with cultural occupa-
tions in Britain in 1981 were still employed in these occupations ten years later.
According to Menger (1999) 553-554 however, fewer artists withdraw from
artistic careers than one might expect. The Dutch ﬁgures in Linden and Rengers
(1999) show that comparatively speaking, more artists leave the profession
within the ﬁrst year and a half after graduation, but after that they tend to stay
for a comparatively long period. (Those who leave almost immediately after col-
lege could be people for whom education is basically a form of consumption
rather than a preparation for professional activities.)
64 The criterion is spending as opposed to earning. Therefore satisfaction is not
relevant. A producer who enjoys a lot of satisfaction while at work, as many
artists probably do, can still be a producer.
65 Towse (1996b) 316-320 and Menger (1999) 606-609 speak of oversupply.
Blaug (2001) uses the more cautious term ‘excess supply’. The terms ‘oversup-
ply’ and ‘overproduction’ can also be used in a welfare economic sense. See sec-
tion 9.8.
66 See also O’Hagan (1998) 148-151.
7
The Cost Disease
1 Baumol and Bowen (1965) and Baumol and Bowen (1966) 161-176. More recent
writings on the subject by Baumol and colleagues can be found in Towse (1997).
A small collection of sometimes-critical writings by other authors was pub-
lished in a special issue of the Journal of Cultural Economics 20, 3 (1996).
2 Baumol (1996) and Towse (1997) 438-522.
3 Towse (1997) 103-244 and Throsby (1996). Peacock, Shoesmith et al. (1982) 39
demonstrate that there would have been a cost disease in the performing arts in
Britain if they had not lowered wages in the performing arts. The existence of a
cost disease is disputed by Cowen and Grier (1996). However, as Towse (1996a)
245 notes, their results are dubious because they used census data for artists’
ﬁgures and incomes. Many artists are not included in this data.
4 Because quality is never constant, Blaug (1996) argues that the notion of the cost
disease has little relevance. Nevertheless, I believe that the notion of the cost dis-
ease is useful. As a theoretical concept it can inﬂuence one’s perspective. More-
331
NOTES OF CHAPTER 7

over, if the assumptions are not interpreted in an all-or-nothing sense, the cost
disease can be applied to the real world to varying degrees.
5 Baumol and Bowen (1965) and Baumol and Bowen (1966).
6 Using the terminology of Goodman (1954) 113-123 by using notational systems,
allographic art replaced autographic art. I discussed the implications this has
for productivity in Abbing (1989) 89-91.
7 Cowen (1998) 136-137.
8 In 1985 in the Netherlands attending an average (subsidized!) live concert cost
some 50 times more than enjoying a concert at home on television. Abbing
(1989) 119. For a concert by a well-known ensemble the difference would be
much larger.
9 Cowen and Grier (1996) 10-12.
10 Cowen (1996).
11 If the soloist earns more than other members of an orchestra, the difference is
still large but not as large.
12 The costs per ‘unit of consumption’ – like attendance, or hours of consumption,
or purchases – matter when it comes to the severity of the cost disease and not
the costs per production or performance. Two performances can have the same
production costs, but if one production is performed only twice and the other
two hundred times the ticket prices of the latter can be much lower. This allows
the latter to compete more effectively with alternatives such as cinemas. Costs
of production can only be used when the attendance of a production remains
constant. This is what Baumol assumes. However, other than in classical music
and the theatre, attendance is seldom constant. Baumol and Baumol (1984), in
discussing technical reproduction, sometimes also, but not consistently, used
costs per unit of consumption. Nevertheless, it is understandable, that costs per
production are sometimes used because costs per unit of consumption can be
difﬁcult to measure. It is often the case that there isn’t even a unit of consump-
tion to measure. For instance, for a live performance that is rebroadcast on tele-
vision a different unit of consumption is needed to count home viewers. The
question is how to divide total costs.
13 Baumol (1997).
14 Baumol (1997).
15 Cf. Goodman (1954).
16 Most conductors do not follow Stravinsky’s directions of a very strict tempo be
kept with a metronome. This is often simply too difﬁcult for the performers;
moreover a less strict tempo is thought to sound better. Stravinsky himself did-
n’t even stick to his own prescription. Nevertheless, these performances are, in a
formal sense adaptations.
17 Stage sets for Macbeth exist that can be considered authentic copies because all
of the directions have been followed, and still be so different that the author
might as well have been someone completely different. Or people who see the
ﬁlm version of Romeo and Juliet with Leonardo DiCaprio are watching a true
copy, even though it takes a while before viewers realize that the text is the origi-
nal Shakespearean text. Despite the totally modern setting and characters, no
lines or directions have been altered.
18 In the Anton Philips Hall in Eindhoven, the Netherlands, experiments with
electronic ampliﬁcation were stopped, because the audience resisted ampliﬁed
performances. However, nowadays, the Muziek Theater audiences in Amster-
dam seem to appreciate similar experiments, because they improve the hall’s
terrible acoustics.
332
NOTES OF CHAPTER 7

19 Cf. Smithuijsen (2001).
20 Sometimes the opposite occurred. This was the case when musicians began re-
turning to older and quieter instruments. It may not be mere coincidence that
this movement has been particularly strong in Austria, Switzerland, and the
Netherlands. In these countries the classical music subsidies have been relatively
generous, enabling orchestras to ignore the effects of the cost disease.
21 Because of the pressure of a host of under-employed performers, one would ex-
pect the average income of performers in established companies to be not much
higher than of performers generally. However, due to barriers, considerable in-
come differences can exist.
22 Frank and Cook (1995) 61-84.
23 Cf. Langenberg (1999).
24 Evidence was previously presented in 5.4.
25 It can be argued that the cost disease must be added to the explanations of low
income presented in chapter 5. That would be incorrect. The cost disease does
not explain poverty; it only exacerbates poverty. Cowen and Grier (1996) 8 tell
a similar story, but their criteria differ: because of general prosperity and be-
cause of the joy of creating art, artists are prepared to work for low incomes and
thus the cost disease is contained.
26 Baumol and Baumol (1984), Baumol, Blackman et al. (1985) and Baumol,
Blackman et al. (1989) 131-5 have argued that the cost disease also applies to
most of the technically reproduced art products such as literature, ﬁlms, and
cds. Even a large increase in productivity related to technical production will
sooner or later be offset by the rising cost of the indispensable, often real time,
personal service that is essential to the production of art products. For instance,
there is an audience size limit in the case of ﬁlms, even when the limit might be
the population of the entire planet. Baumol et al. however overlook the possibil-
ity that new cost-saving techniques will be developed in future reproduction and
diffusion techniques. Moreover, Cowen and Grier (1996) 209 present a more
fundamental criticism. They have pointed out that any production process in-
volves an irreducible amount of labor. In the agricultural sector, for instance,
the share of total costs of an irreducible amount of labor will also increase in the
long run, if no new savings occur elsewhere in the production process.
27 In their original discussion of the cost disease Baumol and Bowen (1965) and
Baumol and Bowen (1966) neglected the effects of rising income among the
population as an antidote to the effects of the cost disease. This has been noted,
among others, by Heilbrun and Gray (2001, ed princ 1993) 146-47.
28 Menger (1999) 542 and Benhamou (2000) 303. For the performing arts, see for
the us Heilbrun and Gray (2001, ed princ 1993) 15, see for Britain Feist and
Hutchison (1990) 2, and for the Netherlands Statistiek (2000) 11, as well as
earlier editions of Statistiek (1996).
29 Linder (1970).
30 Cf. Baumol (1973).
31 As noted, this is the opinion of Woude (1987) 309. This opinion does not go
undisputed. Nevertheless, even if the real number is much higher, for instance
ﬁve times higher – i.e., 5% – the percentage of surviving paintings is still amaz-
ingly low.
32 Cowen (1996) 145.
33 Cowen (1996) 176 predicts that with more and more music created in the stu-
dio – dance and techno – music will become more composition-based again. He
could be right in the long run, but the emergence of the popular DJ as an authen-
333
NOTES OF CHAPTER 7

tic and charismatic artist demonstrates that the need for performer-based au-
thenticity is still strong.
34 Because the visual aspect in traditional theatre, opera, and dance is stronger,
these art forms do not compete with cds, but with video, ﬁlm, and above all tel-
evision. Although both live performances and technical (re)productions have
important qualities of their own, the latter have gained an ever-increasing share
of the market. Therefore it would not amaze me, if in these areas as well in new
forms of live performances we will see the emergence of new techniques and of-
fer new formats and products comparable to successful live pop music perform-
ances.
35 Cowen (1996) analyzes cultural pessimism.
36 Cf. Doorman (1994).
37 Cowen (1996) 182 notes that Indian classical music is more complex than West-
ern classical music. He also states that there is considerable complexity in some
of our new musical genres.
38 Ploeg (1998) 412 stresses the choice the government necessarily makes when it
assists one victim of the disease and not another.
39 Because donations and subsidies are additional sources of income, they neces-
sarily relieve the cost disease, i.e., in a literal sense. When the directors of art
companies succeed in attracting more donations and subsidies, their organiza-
tions become ‘healthier’, at least in the short run and from their own point of
view. From the point of view of governments they probably seem less healthy,
however, because governments generally see their assistance as temporary – the
aim of assistance is to make art companies less dependent on assistance over
time.
40 In the case where a government is consistently subsidizing the deﬁcits of partic-
ular companies, they will actually be punished for introducing successful inno-
vations. Cf. Pommerehne and Frey (1990), Frey (1999).
41 See section 6.6.
42 Schuster (1985), O’Hagan (1998) 135-138. In the present context, the higher
tax deduction in the us can be ignored.
43 Throsby (1994) 7-9 presents a number of references. For the Netherlands, see
Goudriaan (1990).
44 As noted, higher indirect subsidization through tax deductions in the us re-
duces the difference to almost zero, but in the present context this is irrelevant.
45 O’Hagan (1998) 135-9.
46 For instance, in the case of theatre, the average audience size for performances
by regular theatre companies was in 1992 in the us 50% higher than in the
Netherlands; see Hoogerwerf (1993) 100 and 109. When the same performance
is repeated for years the performers are often replaced.
47 Even though the share of donations in the us is no larger than the share of mar-
ket-generated income, the inﬂuence of donors is relatively large in the us. This is
not so amazing because in practice many personal ties exist between paid em-
ployees at art companies and private donors and their representatives in donor
organizations. The latter often hold key positions on the boards of directors of
the various art companies. The inﬂuence of donors is often (but not always)
conservative. The reasoning that applies to governments largely applies to
donors as well. On the other hand, European governments, with their connec-
tions to the new cultural elite, sometimes have a more progressive ‘taste’. This is
most evident in the visual arts.
334
NOTES OF CHAPTER 7

8
The Power and the Duty to Give
1 O’Hagan (1998) 157.
2 Cf. Komter (1996).
3 Sometimes regulations just exacerbate the situation. For instance in the Nether-
lands, structurally subsidized performing arts companies receive approximately
85% of their income in the form of subsidies on the condition that they pay rea-
sonable wages.
4 In the short term, government subsidies beholden to national laws are forced
transfers. If the government refuses to ‘give’ to the applicants, applicants can
appeal in court. Nevertheless, most arts subsidies must be seen as gifts, because
in the long run government can simply change the laws.
5 Schwartz (1967) emphasizes the importance of ‘identity’ for both giver and re-
cipient.
6 On the basis of the characteristics of the gift, not only private individuals but
also corporations, large foundations, and government agencies give to the arts.
If however, ‘symmetrical groupings’ became a requirement for gift-giving, as in
the approach of Polanyi (1992, 1957) 35, most donations from corporations,
foundations, and government agencies could no longer be considered gifts.
7 Cf. Mauss (1990 ed.princ. in French: 1923), Malinofsky (1970 ed.princ. 1922)
39-45, Levi-Strauss (1957 ed. princ. in French 1949) 84-94, Sahlins (1978) 185-
205 and Gouldner (1960). According to Oliner and Oliner (1988), however,
reciprocity can be absent under extreme circumstances. (With the exception of
Mauss, these texts are reprinted in Komter (1996)).
8 This struggle was discussed in 3.8.
9 Epstein (1967) and Lash (1968) 63-113. More references in: Guilbaut (1983)
237-8.
10 Klamer, Mignosa et al. (2000).
11 Cf. Abbing (1992).
12 This also applies to the Dutch foundations, the ‘Nationaal Instituut’ and the
‘Prins Bernhard Fonds’, which were originally primarily privately funded. Cf.
Pots (2000) 274-5.
13 Cf. Veblen (1934).
14 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000).
15 As mentioned earlier, the English moralist and aesthetician Arnold (1875) has
already successfully promoted the view that the ﬁne arts embody the highest
values of civilization.
16 In this respect, the Dutch royal family paled by comparison with other royal
families in Europe. It did not have a strong court tradition to rely on. The pres-
ent monarch, however, Queen Beatrix, has assumed the more traditional role.
She is a fervent collector of visual art.
17 See the ﬁrst illustration of Chapter 10.
18 The nouveau riche, like pop stars, athletes and IT experts, usually prefer to give
to charities rather than to art. Pop stars veil their commercial background by
giving, but they have no real need to legitimize their wealth.
19 Cf. Komter (1996) 118.
20 Drees Jr. founded a new social democratic party in the Netherlands called
ds70. His father, Drees sr., is better known. After the Second World War he
presided over a number of cabinets.
21 Meulenbeek, Brouwer et al. (2000) 41.
22 For the incomes of visual artists in the Netherlands see Meulenbeek, Brouwer et
al. (2000) 34. (The amount of 1200 Euro is a speciﬁcation that was presented to
335
8NOTES OF CHAPTER 8

me by one of the authors of the report, Natasha Brouwer.) In 1998, in the
Netherlands the annual net income, i.e., after taxes, of the average forty-year-
old employee with a higher education was 25,000 Euros.
23 An obligation to give plays an important role in almost every profession, not
just in the arts. What appears to be exceptional is that in the arts this kind of ob-
ligation is vested in a loosely organized art world.
24 If partners, family and friends would form a so-called economic household
with the artist, their support of the artist would also be a form of internal subsi-
dization. However, presently relatives are most of the time ﬁnancially independ-
ent and therefore the term ‘donation’ is more ﬁtting.
25 Cf. Allen and Ramaekers (1999) 18.
26 The power to help a partner, son or daughter or close friend also brings at least
some rewards in highlighting the power difference between donor and artist.
Nevertheless, in modern families the difference in power must be veiled and
overtly ‘helping the artist’ can be problematic. It can lead to all sorts of hilarious
misunderstandings as in the last illustration.
27 Volunteer-labor from private donors is likely to be substantial. Klamer and
Zuidhof (1999) 52 found that museums in the Netherlands save 27% on their
labor costs by the use of volunteer labor. In the case of other art-organizations
no estimates exist, but this type of donation is bound to contribute substantially
to the large gift-sphere in the arts.
28 For the history of private giving in relation to government giving in the Nether-
lands, see Bevers (1993) 38-109 and Pots (2000).
29 In this context it is worth noting that Kushner and Brooks (2000) 65-77 argue
that street performances have certain efﬁciency advantages in comparison with
indoor performances with tickets-sale.
30 Donors may however be aware of the costs and beneﬁts of giving. For instance,
donors realize that although in the short run it is possible to consume street art
without giving, street artists only return when they earn enough money. Never-
theless, conventions are likely to over-shadow calculation. Therefore, for many
donors free riding, enjoying the performance without paying, stops being an al-
ternative.
31 Ostrower (1995) 132.
32 Ostrower (1995) 133.
33 In some circles veiling the gift is regarded chic. However, to earn the reputation
of ‘somebody who inconspicuously gives’ gifts must be noticed by at least a few
people, who then spread the news.
34 Because donors can sometimes ask for their money back, when they don’t re-
ceive the agreed upon exclusive perks, these transactions can also be considered
as commerce with prices that are artiﬁcially high, i.e., prices that don’t conform
to the market. The surcharge then represents the net gift.
35 See note 30.
36 Cf. Boogaarts and Hitters (1993) 165-6, Council (2000) and Feist and Hutchi-
son (1990) 24. For theatre in the us, see Janowitz (1993) 7. According to Wijn-
gaarden (1995) 43 the total sum of corporate sponsorship in the Netherlands
amounts to less than 5% of the ministry of culture’s budget. See also Bevers
(1993) 64-8. Moreover as noted, sponsoring cannot be considered giving.
Therefore, according to O’Hagan and Harvey (2000) corporate philanthropy is
almost absent in Europe.
37 Wijngaarden (1995) 43 states that the requirements art-sponsoring must meet
are increasingly the same as other forms of communication must meet.
336
NOTES OF CHAPTER 8

38 In this respect, it is noteworthy that a particularly sincere Dutch intermediary,
who brings ﬁrms and art institutions together, only uses the term ‘patronage’ –
or ‘partnership’ as they call it – if the value of contracted returns does not ex-
ceed 30% of the total donation.
39 O’Hagan and Harvey (2000). In the Netherlands as well, philanthropy is unim-
portant but not altogether absent as Wijngaarden (1995) shows.
40 Cf. O’Hagan and Harvey (2000).
41 O’Hagan and Harvey (2000) 222. According to O’Hagan and Harvey, cohesion
in the supply chain is another important return. As a form of goodwill it can be
attributed to the imago of the ﬁrm.
9
The Government Serves Art
1 See section 9.11.
2 Artists’ gifts and those received from artists’ families are not included. In main-
land Western Europe about twice as much money as in the us ﬂows from gov-
ernment agencies to the arts, while Britain appears somewhere in between these
two extremes. O’Hagan (1998) 139. The large ‘subsidies’ in the form of tax de-
ductions in the us has been taken into account. The considerable indirect subsi-
dization of the arts by American private and state universities is not included
however. If these ﬁgures were to become available and were added to public ex-
penditures the difference between the us and mainland Western Europe would
probably be much smaller.
3 On lottery money as a form of subsidy, see note 7 of Chapter 2. Not all govern-
ment conduct with consequences for the arts is included, however. This applies
for instance to legislation that guarantees artistic freedom or enforces copyright
laws. Although countries vary, the general aims of the legislation are based on
notions of justice. Therefore, such legislation is usually not an instrument of art
policy. The same applies to numerous general tax measures, which have an im-
pact on the arts. Only when such measures apply speciﬁcally to the arts and are
an exception to existing regulation, like a special tax deduction or a lowered
vat tariff, does this need any explanation in the context of this chapter. Because
the vat measures cost public money, they will be treated as subsidies to the arts.
O’Hagan (1998) 73-129 addresses all these subjects; he presents a general trea-
tise on the impact of all sorts of regulations and taxes on the arts.
4 Abbing (1978), Abbing (1980), Austen-Smith (1980), Cwi (1980), Fullerton
(1991), Peacock (1969), Robbins (1963), Scitovsky (1983). O’Hagan (1998)
21-47 presents a useful survey including recent references. Other Dutch refer-
ences can be found in Puffelen (2000) 14-36.
5 The relative success of welfare economics can in part be explained by the fact
that its notions are close to common wisdom. Welfare economics describes a hy-
pothetical situation of a free market economy where there is ‘maximum wel-
fare’. In the real world, activities that survive in the market also appear to serve
the general interest. In other words, ‘free markets serve the general interest’.
This is most notably evident in the fact that obsolete businesses tend to go out of
business while other necessary businesses emerge to take their place. ‘Only
those activities, which can sustain themselves, because people are prepared to
pay for them, have a right to exist.’ This is the ‘logic’ of the market that every-
body understands. Welfare economics departs from this logic.
6 Social philosophers, like Blokland (1992) and Laermans (1992) reject the wel-
337
NOTES OF CHAPTER 9

fare economic interpretation of the general interest. Rushton (1999) rejects the
outcomes of welfare economics because it is based on methodological individu-
alism.
7 Although all three arguments can be seen as referring to forms of market failure,
the term ‘market failure’ is sometimes reserved for the third argument because
the inability to sell certain goods appears to be the most direct failure of mar-
kets.
8 I ignore the difﬁculties welfare economics has in the case of meddling prefer-
ences. Cf. Sen (1970).
9 Pots (2000) 272-78.
10 There are economists who argue against the merit argument. Because of their
preoccupation with free markets and consumer sovereignty these economists
prefer to see as little interference with the consumer preferences as possible and
therefore they warn against the development of merit goods. Nevertheless, it is a
matter of political choice, whether general interest is served best by safeguard-
ing consumer sovereignty or by allowing interference on the basis of responsi-
bility. Economics has little to say about that. Personally, I would ﬁnd it strange
if people with better educations and more money didn’t ‘care’ or feel responsible
for others. Individuals express their sense of responsibility with all kinds of ac-
tions, including gifts, and collectively they employ the government to further
these ends. Responsibility does not stop with the family nor does education stop
at the age of eighteen. Therefore, merit policies exist in every responsible socie-
ty. What concerns me in this chapter, however, is this question of whether subsi-
dies are effective and whether selﬁsh motives are hiding behind the merit argu-
ment.
11 Cf. Pots (2000).
12 For the Netherlands see Pots (2000) 177-82.
13 For the Netherlands see Pots (2000) 295-326.
14 Swaan (1988).
15 Abbing (1992) treats the comparison between art and the other sectors more
extensively.
16 Levine (1988) and Peterson (1997). Pots (2000) describes the importance of the
phenomenon in the Netherlands.
17 See note 43 of Chapter 7.
18 Cf. Swaan (1986).
19 Different forms of direct and indirect assistance in various countries are de-
scribed in O’Hagan (1998). IJdens (1999) presents examples from the Nether-
lands.
20 The Dutch government, which has been particularly generous to poor artists,
nevertheless has always tried to keep social subsidies for artists separate from
art subsidies. Pots (2000) 262 and 319.
21 People who do not pay cannot be excluded from these goods and effects. This
approach is based on the so-called non-excludability criterion for collective
goods and external effects as formulated by, among others, Musgrave (1959).
Samuelson (1954) (who speaks of public goods rather than collective goods) de-
veloped another well-known criterion for collective goods and external effects
based on non-rivalry: one person’s consumption does not necessarily diminish
the amount of a collective good or external effect left for another. Theoretically,
the latter deﬁnition is the only relevant deﬁnition within the welfare economic
approach. For the explanation of public expenditure, however, the use of the ex-
cludability deﬁnition is the only relevant deﬁnition. (Combining the two serves
338
NOTES OF CHAPTER 9

no purpose.)
22 Because this book treats the explanation of art subsidies rather than their legit-
imization, I only touch upon the subject of collective goods and external effects
in the arts. Readers interested in the effects of economic legitimization of subsi-
dies for the arts on welfare arguments can consult many articles and books that
treat collective goods and external effects in the arts. Abbing (1978), Abbing
(1980), Abbing (1989), Austen-Smith (1980), Cwi (1980), Fullerton (1991),
Grampp (1989), Peacock (1969), Robbins (1963), Scitovsky (1983) and Thros-
by (2000). A useful survey including recent references is presented by O’Hagan
(1998) 21-47.
23 See references in note 4.
24 Cf. Throsby (2000).
25 Attempts have been made to measure the willingness to pay for intangible col-
lective goods in the arts by, among others, Throsby and Withers (1986). The
outcomes of such analyses should be treated with care. Because valuations are
not part of a continuing valuation process, they can be shots in the dark. Abbing
(1989) 21-22. Therefore, the ‘measurement’ of the preferences for collective
goods and external effects is a matter of political debate.
26 Cf. Throsby (2000). In his chapter on artistic innovation, Throsby speaks of
quasi-public goods.
27 In the latter case copyright applies.
28 This subject is treated more extensively in the sections 9.9 and 11.7.
29 The situations with and without intervention are not completely the same, be-
cause subsidization changes collective goods and effects, but this does not imply
that by taking into account the cost of the intervention the situation with inter-
vention is necessarily superior to the situation without intervention or vice ver-
sa.
30 As indicated in the previous chapter, the free-rider problem is a less important
obstacle for collective actions than economists used to think.
31 In a welfare economic sense there is a waste of human resources. Cf . Frank and
Cook (1995) 102-3 and 107-10.
32 Cf. Klamer and Zuidhof (1999).
33 I do not agree with Hütter (1997) 171 who states that in the classical cultural
heritage ‘we ﬁnd the typical conditions of underinvestment’.
34 I refer to the common impact study that is based on consumer spending. Cf.
Seaman (1987) and Abbing (1989) 218. Puffelen (1992) and Puffelen (2000)
64-71 present a more extensive discussion of impact studies.
35 If the price of petrol goes down, more cars are sold. Similarly, if hotel accommo-
dations become cheaper or more attractive, more people will go to the Rijks
Museum. On the other hand, if the Rijks Museum lowers its prices or becomes
otherwise more attractive, more people will stay in the aforementioned hotels.
Therefore, these are price effects instead of external effects. (Abbing (1989) 218
presents a few exceptions.)
36 Although the term ‘collective good’ is sometimes reserved for consumer prod-
ucts, in this case I prefer collective good rather than externalities or a ‘common
good’ so as not to complicate matters. The term ‘collective good’ can be used
because excludability is limited in the sphere of production.
37 Frank and Cook (1995) 102-3 and 107-10 demonstrate that from a social point
of view there tend to be too many participants in these markets. They evidently
disagree with Adler (1985) who has tried to provide a scientiﬁc basis for the ne-
cessity of the big pond in the arts. Towse (2001) 484 speaks of an expensive efﬁ-
339
NOTES OF CHAPTER 9

ciency beneﬁt. (The normative conclusions of Frank and Cook rest on so-called
Pareto-optimality.)
38 Average tastes have changed. This does not mean that the taste of individuals
has necessarily changed as well. Cf. section 7.8.
39 This information was supplied by Bas de Koning at the Dutch nvpi.
40 The Dutch musical award, ‘the Edison’, was an early entry among awards, but
it never became really prestigious.
41 As noted before, an investigation, commissioned by the French Foreign Min-
istry and reported on by Charles Bremner in the internet edition of The Times of
June 13 2001, emphasizes the negative effects of state patronage on contempo-
rary French visual art. ‘French contemporary artists are being pushed out of the
world market because of stiﬂing state patronage.’
42 In this respect it is not amazing that a social right to art never developed as not-
ed in section 9.4. A right to art just can’t be compared with the aforementioned
basic social rights to education and health care as analyzed by Swaan (1988).
43 Goudriaan (1990).
44 See section 9.11.
45 Frey and Pommerehne (1989) 184-5 and Goudriaan (1990). Experiments with
vouchers are rare. Price discrimination is not unusual. For instance, students or
young people often pay lower prices. But they also pay lower admission prices at
unsubsidized art institutions. Moreover, the quality offered is often lower. (For
instance, the reduction may only apply in last minute purchases of tickets.)
Therefore, existing price discrimination is largely a commercial instrument.
The only plan that might serve merit policies is much stronger price discrimina-
tion or vouchers.
46 Grampp (1989), Grampp (1989a), Frey and Pommerehne (1989), Abbing
(1992) and Cordes and Goldfarb (1996). Rent seeking is emphasized in the pub-
lic choice approach in economics.
47 Among others Lindblom (1959) toyed with the idea that the inﬂuence of the
various groups is largely offset by one another. Therefore, the actions of these
groups primarily informed governments and so could potentially improve a
democracy. Later Lindblom and others revised their opinion. The notion how-
ever, that pressure groups also inform the government is still essential to public
choice theory.
48 Cf. Buchanan (1962).
49 Grampp (1989a) presents a thorough discussion of the rent seeking theory as
applied to the arts. Grampp adds two conditions I do not mention, because they
are too technical in the context of this chapter. In Grampp (1989) 205-31 a less
technical treatment of rent seeking in the arts is given.
50 The average price of theatre with subsidization mentioned in the text is proba-
bly lower than one may have expected. The large number of free tickets is the
cause of this.
51 Visitors not only receive subsidies because art companies are subsidized, but
also because accommodations are subsidized. Therefore, in calculating these
price increases, I assume that it’s not just art companies but also accommoda-
tions that lose their subsidies. The price rise irrespective of accommodations is
derived from ocw (1999) Appendix 2, table B. I increased the subsidies per visi-
tor by 60% to cover the subsidy per visitor that comes in via accommodations. I
derived this percentage from the table in section 3 of Schouwburg- en Concert-
gebouw Directies (2001).
52 Given subsidization performing arts patrons enjoy an income advantage that
340
NOTES OF CHAPTER 9

they receive from the average taxpayer. In the Netherlands, the upper-income
half of the population receives 73% of the performing arts subsidies. The upper
10% income bracket receives 29%. Pommer and Ruitenberg (1994) 167. These
ﬁgures in theory show that it pays for current consumers of the subsidized per-
forming arts to put pressure on the government to support subsidies for the per-
forming arts. They are candidates for rent seeking. (Incomes are secondary in-
comes. These are 1991 ﬁgures. More recent ﬁgures are unavailable. Compared
with earlier ﬁgures, the advantage upper-income brackets gain from performing
art subsidies increases over time. Also, when the differences in tax rates are tak-
en into account, the advantage of the richest 10% is considerable and it is much
larger than in the case of other forms of subsidization.)
53 Grampp (1989a).
54 Art lobbies in one form or another probably exist in most countries with consid-
erable levels of arts subsidization. With respect to arts training Towse (1996b)
319 points to rent seeking by the ‘training lobby’.
55 The Dutch minister Hedy D’Ancona and to a lesser extent, Aad Nuis were re-
proached for their connections with and indebtedness to the art world.
56 A saying by the Dutch poet and visual artist, Lucebert. (‘Alles van waarde is
weerloos’.)
10 Art Serves the Government
1 The next step could be linking this chapter’s approach to a political theory. Cf.
Lindblom (1990), Dahl (1956), Dahl (1985).
2 Thorbecke gave cause to these different interpretations, which at times confused
the political debate in the Netherlands. Cf. Pots (2000).
3 The approach of a neutral government is present in many textbooks on public ﬁ-
nance, for instance Musgrave (1959). In modern textbooks, like Wolfson
(1988) 308-13, some attention is paid to the possibility of a non-neutral govern-
ment, but it is not emphasized.
4 Mueller (1997), Koopmans, Wellink et al. (1999) 49-58.
5 The concept of the State having an independent existence is eschewed by libertar-
ian individualism, which is central to modern economics, as Throsby (2000) 2
remarks.
6 Since the acknowledgement of satisfying behavior (Simon (1982)) the notion of
discretionary space makes sense. With respect to the arts, The Financial Times
(special survey, February 2000) Business and the Arts (www.ft.com, down-
loaded July 7, 2000) reports many cases of business involvement in the arts that
seem to rest on the use of discretionary space.
7 See note 16 of chapter 3.
8 Among many others Buchanan (1962) and Wilson (1989) have emphasized rent
seeking by magistrates.
9 Cf. Kempers (1994 ed.princ. in Dutch: 1987) and Pots (2000).
10 The term ‘conspicuous consumption’ was introduced by Veblen (1934).
11 Abbing (1992).
12 See note 10 of chapter 2.
13 Abbing (1989) 221-7.
14 Epstein (1967) and Lash (1968) 63-113. More references in: Guilbaut (1983)
237-8.
15 O’Hagan (1998) 8-11. The assistance offered artists in the thirties through the
341
NOTES OF CHAPTER 10

Work’s Progress Association, part of Roosevelt’s New Deal is interesting.
16 For the Netherlands, see Pots (2000). He presents few ﬁgures, but the tenure of
his analysis conﬁrms the low level of support.
17 Although in the Netherlands, the initiative to support music and museums usu-
ally came from private people, the government usually joined forces at an early
stage and soon began paying the larger share of the assistance. (Theatre was an
exception.) Cf. Bevers (1993) 40-5. Nevertheless, until 1945 spending per capi-
ta was small compared with for instance France at that time as well as with the
Netherlands ﬁfty years later.
18 A different but related opinion is presented by Bevers (1992). Bevers empha-
sizes internal forces that promoted a degree of integration of the cultural, busi-
ness, and political spheres.
19 The existence of national debts diminishes collective wealth, but because of the
monopolies of the state, its power is still extraordinary.
20 Although it must be said that in general government display in the us, as in os-
tentatious ceremonies, an election or an inauguration, pomp and circumstance
are very present.
21 The origin of present cultural policies and the organization of government pow-
er can be traced back to developments that took place many centuries ago, as
Staay (1999) shows with respect to the Netherlands.
22 According to Pots (2000), who analyzed the history of government involvement
in the arts in the Netherlands, Dutch art policy can be explained by noting two
objectives: the wish to promote social coherence and the wish to educate or civi-
lize people.
23 Some public broadcasting organizations like the bbc still receive considerable
amounts, but less than they did in the past.
24 Bevers (1995) 422 also distinguishes cultural as an interest in and of itself or
culture serving foreign policy.
25 Weil (1991) writes: “Not only do (the arts) provide a kind of social ‘glue’, but
they also furnish a means by which society can identify and distinguish itself
from others.” In Weil’s view however the second function becomes less impor-
tant. (Also cited by O’Hagan (1998)).
26 Inez Boogaarts in (the Dutch paper) de Volkskrant 14-2-01.
27 Cf. Bevers (1995) 424.
28 Boogaarts (1999) discusses the actual ins and outs of Dutch cultural policy
abroad since World War II. See also Bevers (1995).
29 Cf. Boogaarts (1991).
30 Janssen (2001) writes: “...it is clear that funding bodies are no more neutral
than any social organization, and that the success of some artists in gaining
sponsorship and the failure of others is likely to be related to the type of work
they do.” See also Pearson (1980).
31 At present, Dutch government ofﬁcials are more aware of the limitations of gov-
ernment choice. They admit that the government cannot be neutral, as well as
that the government does not necessarily make better choices. At a conference
at the Erasmus University in December 1999, the highest civil servant in charge
of Dutch art-policy cited Commandeur (1999) who presented three lists of
names of visual artists: one of artists favored by the government, another of
artists favored by the market, and a third of artists favored by both. His posi-
tion was amazingly modest. He emphasized that by having a taste of its own,
the government could complement the market.
32 Quality judgments within an art form are sometimes changeable. For instance
342
NOTES OF CHAPTER 10

in the ﬁrst illustration to Chapter 11 shows that in the eighties Dutch govern-
ment bodies rather abruptly started to subsidize artists, who made ﬁgurative
work, and who could not get subsidies a few years earlier. Only the notion that
a government has a taste and is not neutral can explain these phenomena.
33 Various histories contribute to differences in status. By generalizing greatly, the
following can be noted. On the one hand, jazz and pop music developed outside
the music establishment and so could not easily usurp the high status owned by
classical music. The chances of contemporary musicians were better, but they
basically stayed submissive with respect to their predecessors. On the other
hand, avant-garde visual artists developed their art from within the establish-
ment and at the same time challenged their predecessors and so managed to take
over their high status relatively easily.
34 Council (2000).
35 Swaan (1988) 230.
36 The arts experts regime covers approximately the same area as what Bevers
(1993) 191 calls ‘the specialists of organized culture’.
37 The latter regimes ensure the fulﬁllment of established social rights to health
care, social security, and education. After centuries of collective actions, these
regimes represent the most recent stage in the development of these social rights.
Cf. Swaan (1988). According to Abbing (1992) the arts have no history of sub-
stantial collective action and therefore no social right to art ever became estab-
lished.
38 In this sense, governments joined the larger group of mediators who Bourdieu
(1977) had already called ‘co-producers’ of the work of art.
39 Cf. O’Hagan (1998) 3-13 who presents a short historic account of the evolution
of state involvement in Western Europe and the us.
40 Mulcahy (2000) 173.
41 Benedict (1991) 54.
42 Mulcahy (2000) 171.
43 Montias (1983). (Also cited by O’Hagan (1998)).
44 These companies also sponsor music, but this is less exceptional as they almost
exclusively sponsor risk-free old music.
45 O’Hagan (1998) 139 and 156. O’Hagan, 104-30, presents an illuminating sur-
vey of the many forms of tax concessions.
46 Mulcahy (2000) 178. In other words, the government indirectly increases the
power of money and the power to deﬁne art – Chapter 3 – of mainly the wealthy
and the corporations. The us government sides with the power of money, while
European governments sides with the ‘power of the words’ of experts.
11 Informal Barriers Structure the Arts
1 In the Netherlands, the most prestigious grants are the ‘werkbeurs’ and the ‘start-
stipendium’. The ﬁrst is for artists with a body of outstanding and innovative
work, who have been working professionally for more then two years. The lat-
ter is for beginning artists who are particularly promising. The third, the ‘basis-
stipendium’, is somewhat less prestigious and a bit easier to get, as its aim is not
only to promote quality, but also to improve the economic situation of artists.
2 Without the sign, both consumers and the higher quality producers would be
worse off. Akerlof (1970) analyzed asymmetric information. Spence (1974) in-
troduced a model of signaling. Explanations of either phenomenon can be found
343
NOTES OF CHAPTER 11

in any recent textbook on microeconomics, for instance Varian (1999) 641-53.
3 Cf. Janssen (2001) 333-5. Janssen presents a number of references.
4 I shall show that insider-discourses exist in the arts as well, which sometimes ef-
fectively exclude intruders. Nevertheless, the implicit barriers are not dependent
on an ofﬁcial authority, and therefore they are informal rather than formal bar-
riers.
5 Moreover, the push for unemployed self-taught artists receiving social beneﬁts to
ﬁnd non-arts employment is no greater than it is on trained artists in the Nether-
lands.
6 Cf. Towse (1996b) 317 and 322. For artists seeking an attractive second job in art
teaching these degrees are not irrelevant because unlike in the arts, degrees mat-
ter in the teaching profession.
7 Filer (1986), Towse (1992), Throsby (1992) and Throsby (1996a). Throsby how-
ever, also concluded that the trained artist is better of in arts-related jobs, like
teaching. Diplomas are required for a number of teaching jobs, but in the
Netherlands these are not diplomas issued by art schools but by schools that
teach people to become art teachers. The only situation that contradicts the no-
tion of the absence of formal control in the arts is the one of artists connected to
American universities, who work as artists-in-residence or who have a small
teaching assignment in exchange for a good salary and the use of working facili-
ties. These artists usually need diplomas, but not always.
In this context it is worth mentioning that Filer (1987) argues that arts educa-
tion is a form of general education, and that those who leave the arts ﬁnd rela-
tively well-paid jobs outside the arts.
Towse (1996b) (and Towse (2001) 483-4) argues that because self-taught artists
do as well as trained artists, the choice to go to art school cannot be explained
by the educational beneﬁts, as one might expect from the human capital ap-
proach or from a winner-take-all perspective. Instead, it can be explained in the
process of signaling, screening, and learning about one’s own abilities. Students
have more chance of being selected by the various arts intermediaries. In my
view however, increased capabilities also matter. Towse remarks that self-
taught artists are as successful as trained artists, but it should be noted that it’s
mostly successful self-taught artists who get noticed. Therefore, for every suc-
cessful self-taught artist there may well be an army of failed self-taught artists
much larger than the numbers of failed trained artists that disappear behind
each successful trained artist. See also Rengers and Plug (2001) note 9.
8 At the university level however, a numerus clausus generally only existed when
professions were unusually powerful, as in the medical ﬁelds in Europe.
9 On the contrary, as already noted in 6.5, it is likely that the pressures applied by
the art lobbies helped increased enrollments even more in order to offer teaching
jobs to the growing number of artists with not enough work as artists. In this re-
spect, Menger (1999) 607 suggests that the training system both adapts and
contributes to the ‘oversupply’ of artists. Towse (1996b) 318-19 mentions the
existence of a ‘training lobby’ in the UK, which is engaged in rent seeking. It has
a ﬁnancial incentive to supply more training positions to students.
10 Cf. Janssen (2001) 335.
11 Cf. Frey and Pommerehne (1989), Moulin (1987, ed princ in French 1967) and
White and White (1995).
12 Even by increasing its membership and by organizing a ‘Salon des Refugés’ the
French Academy could not control the large number of newcomers. The Impres-
sionists, for instance, became generally known and successfully sold paintings
344
NOTES OF CHAPTER 11

that did not conform to the style of the Academy. Unlike before, newcomers
could now become successful without being accepted by the Academy. Cf.
Jensen (1994) and White and White (1995).
13 Unlike other European countries, the Netherlands has never had strong formal
control in the visual arts. In the seventeenth century, the market for visual art
was larger and guilds were less active and restrictive than in other countries.
Since then and up until the second half of the nineteenth century the art market
was relatively weak in the Netherlands due to the economic stagnation. In the
second half of the nineteenth century, the economic situation in the Netherlands
began to improve and gradually the income and status of artists began to rise.
Cf. Stolwijk (1998). At this time associations of artists with limited member-
ships indirectly helped to keep the total numbers of artists down. Large num-
bers began to emerge in the twentieth century and they put an end to the little
control there had been.
14 Anheier and Gerhards (1991) remark that a status indeterminacy exists in the
arts.
15 IJdens (1999) 221-231 remarks that the arts as a profession is self-made and not
institutionalized. Kempers (1987) examined the ups and downs in the process of
professionalization in the arts. He speaks of de- and reprofessionalization.
16 In the case of the fair, the barrier was more than just a price barrier. Even con-
sidering the high entrance fees, many more galleries applied to be in the fair
than were admitted.
17 Gubbels (1995) 152-66.
18 The new regime involved in the fair and the subsidy plan did not last long. For a
number of reasons, both the plan and the fair became more accessible again a
few years later. Gubbels (1995) 152-66.
19 For instance on gatekeepers, see the section on Patrons, Gatekeepers and Critics
in Albrecht, Barnett et al. (1970) and in Foster and Blau (1989) and White and
White (1995). On classiﬁcations and reputations, see Janssen (1998) and Nooy
(1993), on networks Crane (1976), Nooy (1993) and Peterson (1994) and on
the mentor protege relationship Bourdieu (1979).
20 Instead of discourse, I could have used the term ‘rhetoric’. Due to the work of
McCloskey (1986) and Klamer and McCloskey (1988) the term ‘rhetoric’
sounds more familiar to economists than the term ‘discourse’. In the present
context the term ‘discourse’ is better, as ‘rhetoric’ is outward oriented – it wants
to convince – while discourse is primarily a group affair.
21 Peterson and White (1989) gives an example of trumpet players. It reveals how
important ‘correct’ attitudes can be for joining a group of studio musicians.
22 Cf. Rosengren (1985).
23 Zolberg (1990) uses the term ‘support structure’ instead of ‘reward system’.
24 The expression ‘uncertainty of taste’ stems from Oosterbaan Martinius (1990).
25 In the arts, price as well can signal quality. For many consumers high and very
high prices signal that a painting must be good. Cf. Velthuis (2002). However,
this does not mean that any young painter can earn a lot of money simply by de-
manding high prices. Price only signals quality when combined with other sig-
nals.
26 The term ‘appropriability’ is used by Weinberg and Gemser (2000).
27 Abbing (1980).
28 Goodman’s approach to art, presented in Chapter one, also emphasizes renew-
al, the renewal of symbol systems. Cf. Goodman (1954).
29 Singer (1981a).
345
NOTES OF CHAPTER 11

30 This phenomenon is part of the production of belief in the arts as described by
Bourdieu (1977).
31 Using variety and continuity as criteria Crane (1976) has evaluated the reward
systems in art, science, and religion. Zolberg (1990) also treats this subject. As
noted, she uses the term ‘support structure’ instead of ‘reward system’.
32 If committee members are ignorant of the discourse, they will keep this hidden.
In this case, one or two committee members can end up decisively inﬂuencing
decisions. Cf. Hekkert and Wieringen (1993). This is one way that newcomers
learn the discourse.
33 In his approach to art Goodman (1954) emphasizes that, although new art vio-
lates rules, it leaves the grammatical system largely intact. In this respect it is il-
lustrative that ‘revolutionaries’ often stress that their approach is more true to
the core, to the achievements of the great predecessors, than the present ap-
proach is, which they are challenging. Cf. Bourdieu (1977).
34 Parallels exist with the way paradigms change in science, as discussed by Kuhn
(1962), and with respect to the way science is also thought to develop around
more or less ﬁxed cores, as suggested by Lakatos and Alan (1978).
35 Cf. Bourdieu (1977). Heilbron (1993), Strauss (1970) and Tas (1990) treat the
mentor-protege relationship. Peterson and White (1989) used the terms ‘rook-
ies’ and ‘rebels’ in their analysis of the market for the services of trumpet players.
36 As before the term ‘risk’ also covers uncertainty.
12 Conclusion: a Cruel Economy
1 Chapter 9 argues that the same applies to merit and market-failure arguments.
2 Menger (1999). To be precise, according to Linden and Rengers (1999) more
artists leave the arts within a year and a half after graduating from college than
other professionals do, but after the ﬁrst two years they tend to remain longer,
even if they continue to earn low incomes. When they leave at a later point in
their careers, they are particularly prone to income penalties; ﬁnancially they
are worse off than if they had not become artists. (Those students who leave al-
most immediately after college could be among those for whom education is a
form of consumption rather than a preparation for professional activities.) Ac-
cording to Filer (1987) however, the penalty is not that large.
3 As noted in Section 6.10, in that case a larger part of artistic activity would be
transformed into leisure activities. Serious amateurs would become the main
producers of art. They would have satisfying non-artistic jobs commensurate to
their education levels. There would still be a few full time professional artists.
The latter would have little extra status or maybe even less status than the ama-
teurs. Art would turn into a truly privileged occupation again.
Irrespective of whether this kind of scenario is attractive or not, a number of
reasons make it unlikely that this situation will occur any time soon. One rea-
son is that most art forms currently demand considerable amounts of training.
Therefore, potential artists need all their time for artistic training and thus have
no time left over to be trained for attractive second jobs. Therefore, with the ex-
ception of teaching art, second jobs will remain largely unskilled labor. They
continue to represent a necessary evil. Nevertheless, letting one’s fantasies run
wild, there could be a day in late-capitalism when Marx’s ideal becomes true;
people are free to go ﬁshing or hunting, or, in the present context, to make mu-
sic, poems, plays, and paintings. The economy of the arts would no longer be
346
NOTES OF CHAPTER 12

merciless.
4 Gouldner (1960).
5 See Chapters 8, 9 and 10.
6 See Chapters 8 and 10.
7 See Section 9.8.
8 Goodman (1954) 225-65.
9 Durkheim (1964, ed princ 1914) 325-340 and Giddens (1978) 80-100.
10 See note 20 of chapter 1.
11 More will be said about the magic in art and science in the epilogue.
12 This point was discussed in Section 9.9.
Epilogue: the Future Economy of the Arts
1 Laermans (1996) would probably argue that not only my view of the economy of
the arts is outdated, but also my analysis, which relies heavily on the habitus-
ﬁeld theory of Bourdieu. I address this notion in note 33 of Chapter 4.
2 This applies to overall donations and subsidies. In the us however, private indi-
viduals have been decreasing the amounts they donate to the arts over the past
few decades. Humanities (1997) 19.
3 This is not true in most European countries. In the Netherlands however, where a
new and more restrictive government ﬁnance system for art schools was imple-
mented in 2000, according to information from the ministry of OCW, the ﬁrst
signs indicate that at present fewer students are being admitted to the ﬁne arts
departments of Dutch art schools.
4 Laermans (1993).
5 This was reﬂected in an increase in literature on theatre management in Ger-
many. Noordman (1989) 180.
6 These four types simultaneously differ from and are related to the integrated pro-
fessionals of Becker (1982) Chapter 8.
7 For lack of a better alternative, I use ‘postmodern artist’ as a provisional expres-
sion. Given the everyday connotation of ‘postmodern’ this adjective is the best I
could come up with. However, these postmodern artists do not need to be con-
nected with the postmodernist movement. Other adjectives like hybrid, bound-
less, limitless, pluralist or unruly would be too speciﬁc in their connotations.
8 Personally, I think that this kind of ban is contrary to the very nature of art. I
strongly believe that all great art both shocks and pleases.
9 Elias (1994, ed.princ. in German 1939).
10 Elias (1994, ed.princ. in German 1939) 488.
11 After the Second World War, a decline in control or a process of informalization
may have set in, however. Whether this (1) applies to a sub-sector, (2) is tempo-
rary, (3) plays a (sublimating) role within the overall process or (4) contradicts
the civilizing process, is difﬁcult to surmise. Cf. Wouters (1977). Art itself can
be said to have become more informal. This is particularly evident in music with
its shift from composition-based music to performer-based music – cf. Cowen
(1998).
12 Goodman (1954) 225-65.
13 Elias (1994, ed.princ. in German 1939) 475-492.
14 Goodman (1954).
15 Deirdre McCloskey suggested the use of the term ‘charm’ to me. It ﬁts well into
her and Klamer’s approach to the rhetoric of economics. Cf. Klamer and Mc-
347
NOTES  EPILOGUE

Closkey (1988).
16 Doorman analyzes seven types of borders, which are affected by erosion. Door-
man (1997) 8-18. See also Braembussche (1994) 278-308 and Jameson (1991).
17 Cf. Peterson and Kern (1996) and Peterson (1997). They present more refer-
ences.
18 Cf. Braembussche (1994) and Jameson (1991).
19 Doorman (1997) 28.
20 Cf. Heilbron (1993).
21 Bourdieu (1979).
22 Peterson and Kern (1996) also state that ‘omnivorousness does not imply an in-
difference to distinctions’.
23 Given my limited intentions in this chapter, I treat technological change as a
given. Technological ‘progress’ is, however, not a force of nature, but a cultural
product. Cf. Schwarz (1999).
24 Cf. Standage (1999).
25 Benjamin (1974).
26 Cf. Braembussche (1994) 239-240. Whereas Benjamin applauded these devel-
opments, Adorno (Adorno and Bernstein (1991, 1949-1968)) feared above all
the consequential loss of autonomy.
27 Goodman (1954) 113-123.
28 Painting as an autographic art form is a different matter. In the case of painting,
in general there is only one original; reproductions are not originals but copies.
Cf. Goodman (1954) 113-123. Copies often do not have certain aspects that the
originals have, which may be essential to the work of art – in this they are of a
different order than copies of a book or a cd. Nevertheless, given the high qual-
ity of modern reproduction techniques, this fundamental difference has become
a difference of degree. High quality reproductions of photographs, for instance,
are not originals, but it can be argued that as copies they are almost perfect and
that therefore the creativity and authenticity of the original is still largely pres-
ent in these copies. Moreover, in the autographic arts there has been a tremen-
dous increase in artists making multiples or editions. All of these works of art
are considered originals. In graphics and photography, the numbers of editions
remain relatively small. In ﬁlm and video, they can be quite large. And with digi-
tally created sounds and images, editions can be almost limitless; often their
number is beyond the control of the artists and their publishers.
29 Adorno, contrary to Benjamin, emphasizes that reproduced works of art can
become mystiﬁed as well; they are ‘more’ than the things themselves. Adorno
(1970) 73 cited by Braembussche (1994) 244.
30 Cf. Hilhorst (1999).
348
NOTES  EPILOGUE

Literature
Abbing, H. (1978). Economie En Cultuur. ‘s-Gravenhage: Staatsuitgeverij
Abbing, H. (1980). On the Rationale of Public Support to the Arts: Externalities in
the Arts Revisited. Economic Policy for the Arts. W.S. Hendon. Cambridge
(Mass.)
Abbing, H. (1989). Een Economie Van De Kunsten. Groningen: Historische Uit-
geverij Groningen
Abbing, H. (1992). Externe Effecten Van Kunst. Verklaring En Legitimering Van
De Overheidsbemoeienis Met Kunst Op Lange Termijn. Schoonheid, Smaak En
Welbehagen. Over Kunst En Culturele Politiek. D. Diels. Antwerpen: Dedalus:
171-212
Abbing, H. (1996). The Economics of the Artistic Conscience. A Veiled Economy.
The Value of Culture. A. Klamer. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press
Adler, M. (1985). ‘Stardom and Talent.’ American Economic Review 75 (I): 208-
12
Adorno, T. W. (1970). Uber Walter Benjamin. Frankfurt am Main, Tiedemann
Adorno, T. W. (1970-1986). Gesammelte Werke. Frankfurt am Main, Tiedemann
Adorno, T. W. and J. M. Bernstein (1991, 1949-1968). The Culture Industry. Se-
lected Essays on Mass Culture. London, Routledge
Akerlof, G. (1970). ‘The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84: 488-500
Albrecht, M. C., J. H. Barnett, et al., Eds. (1970). The Sociology of Art and Litera-
ture. A Reader. London, Duckworth
Allen, J. P. and G. W. M. Ramaekers (1999). Hbo-Monitor 1998, De Arbeids-
markt Van Afgestudeerden Van Het Hogerberoepsonderwijs. Den Haag, hbo-
raad
Alper, N., G. Wassal, et al., Eds. (1996). Artists in the Work Force: Employment
and Earnings 1970-1990. Santa Anna, National Endowment for the Arts; Seven
Locks Press
Anderson, E. (1993). Value in Ethics and Economics. Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press
Anheier, H. K. and J. Gerhards (1991). ‘Literary Myths and Social Structure.’ So-
cial Forces 69: 811-30
Arnold, M. (1875). Culture and Anarchy. New York, Smith, Elder
Austen-Smith, D. (1980). On Justifying Subsidies to the Performing Arts. Eco-
nomic Policy for the Arts. W.S. Hendon. Cambridge (Mass.)
Barthes, R. (1988). The Semiotic Challenge. New York, Hill and Wang
Baumol, H. and W. D. Baumol (1984). The Mass Media and the Cost Disease. The
Economics of Cultural Industries. W.S. Hendon. Akron, The association for
349

cultural economics
Baumol, W. J. (1973). ‘Income and Substitution Effects in the Lindner Theorem.’
Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (4): 629-33
Baumol, W. J. (1996). ‘Children of Performing Arts, the Economic Dilemma: The
Climbing Costs of Health Care and Education.’ Journal of Cultural Economics
20 (3): 183-206
Baumol, W. J. (1997). Public Support for the Arts: Why and Wherefore. Washing-
ton, President’s Committeee on the Arts and the Humanities
Baumol, W. J., S. A. W. Blackman, et al. (1985). ‘Unbalanced Growth Revisited:
Asymptotic Stagnancy and New Evidence.’ American Economic Review 75:
806-17
Baumol, W. J., S. A. W. Blackman, et al. (1989). Productivity and American Lead-
ership: The Long View. Cambridge, ma, mit Press
Baumol, W. J. and W. G. Bowen (1965). ‘On the Performing Arts: The Anatomy of
Their Economic Problems.’ American Economic Review, 57 (3): 495-502
Baumol, W. J. and W. G. Bowen (1966). Performing Arts. The Economic
Dilemma. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund
Becker, G. S. (1976). The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press
Becker, G. S. (1996). Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge, Massachusetts etc., Har-
vard University Press
Becker, H. S. (1982). Art Worlds. Berkeley, University of California Press
Benedict, S. (1991). Public Money and the Muse. New York, Norton
Benhamou, F. (2000). ‘The Opposition between Two Models of Labour Market
Adjustment: The Case of Audiovisual and Performing Arts Activities in France
and Great Britain over a Ten Year Period.’ Journal of Cultural Economics 24:
301-19
Benjamin, W. (1974). Das Kunstwerk Im Zeitalter Seiner Technischen Repro-
duzierbarkeit (1935). Gesammelte Schriften. W. Benjamin. R. Tiedeman & H.
Schweppenhuser, ed. 6 dln. I Frankfurt
Berg, H. O. v. d. (1994). ‘Autonomie in De Kunsten: Een Hardnekkige Illusie.’
Boekmancahier 6 (19): 50-3
Bevers, T. (1992). De Georganiseerde Cultuur: De Rol Van Overheid En Markt in
De Kunstwereld. Antwerpen, Dedalus
Bevers, T. (1993). Georganiseerde Cultuur. De Rol Van Overheid En Markt in De
Kunstwereld. Bussum, Coutinho
Bevers, T. (1995). ‘Het Nederlands Internationaal Cultuurbeleid.’ Boekmancahier
7 (26): 422-7
Blaug, M. (1980). The Methodology of Economics. Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press
Blaug, M. (1996). ‘Final Comments on the Plenary Session on Baumol and
Bowen.’ Journal of Culural Economics 20 (3): 249-50
Blaug, M. (2001). ‘Where Are We Now in Cultural Economics.’ Journal of Eco-
nomic Surveys 15: 123-43
Blokland, H. (1992). Een Politieke Theorie over Kunst En Economie. Schoonheid,
Smaak En Welbehagen. D. Diels. Antwerpen, Dedalus: 13-54
Blokland, H. (1997 ed. princ. in Dutch 1991). Freedom and Culture in Western So-
ciety. London, Routledge
Bloom, A. (1987). The Closing of the American Mind. New York, Simon and
Schuster
Boogaarts, I. (1991). ‘Stad, Kunst En Cultuur: De Nieuwe Rol Van De Kunst in De
350
LITERATURE

Stad.’ Boekmancahier 3 (7): 26-36
Boogaarts, I. (1999). ‘From Holland Promotion to International Cultural Policy.’
Boekmancahier 11 (42): 368-79
Boogaarts, I. and K. Hitters (1993). ‘Financiering Van De Kunst in De Vs.’ Boek-
mancahier 5 (16): 162-77
Bourdieu, P. (1977). The Production of Belief: Contribution to an Economy of
Symbolic Goods. The Field of Cultural Production. Essays on Art and Litera-
ture. Edited by Randall Johnson. Oxford: Polity Press, 1992
Bourdieu, P. (1979). Distinction. A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Lon-
don, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986
Bourdieu, P. (1983). ‘The Field of Cultural Production, Or : The Economic World
Reversed.’ Poetics (12): 311-56
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. Handbook of Theory and Research for
the Sociology of Education. J. G. Richardson. New York, Greenwood Press
Bourdieu, P. (1990). The Logic of Practice. Cambridge: Polity Press
Bourdieu, P. (1992). An Invitation to Reﬂexive Sociology. Cambridge: Polity press
Bourdieu, P. (1997, 1996). Marginalia - Some Additional Notes on the Gift. The
Logic of the Gift, toward an Ethic of Generosity. A. D. Schrift. New York,
Routledge
Braembussche, A. A. v. d. (1994). Denken over Kunst. Een Kennismaking Met De
Kunstﬁlosoﬁe. Bussum, Coutinho
Braembussche, A. v. d. (1996). The Value of Art. A Philosophical Perspective. The
Value of Culture. On the Relationship between Economics and Art. A. Klamer.
Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press: 31-43
Buchanan, J. M. G. T. (1962). The Calculus of Consent. Logical Foundations of
Constitutional Democracy. Michigan: The University of Michigan Press
Calcar, C. v. and J.K. Koppen (1984). Cultureel Kapitaal: Op Weg Naar Een In-
strument. Amsterdam: Stichting Kohnstam Fonds
Commandeur, I. (1999). ‘Het Gelijk En Ongelijk Van Riki Simons.’ Boekmancahi-
er 11 (Juni 1999): 117-30
Cordes, J. J. and R. S. Goldfarb (1996). The Value of Public Art as Public Culture.
The Value of Culture. A. Klamer. Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press: 77-
95
Council, T. A. (2000). A Comparative Study of Levels of Arts Expenditure in Se-
lected Countries and Regions. Dublin, The Arts Council
Cowen, T. (1996). ‘Why I Do Not Believe in the Cost-Disease. Comment on Bau-
mol.’ Journal of Culural Economics 20: 207-14
Cowen, T. (1998). In Praise of Commercial Culture. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press
Cowen, T. and R. Grier (1996). ‘Do Artists Suffer from a Cost-Disease.’ Rationali-
ty and Society 8 (1): 5-24
Crane, D. (1976). ‘Reward Systems in Art, Science, and Religion.’ American Be-
havioral Scientist 19: 719-34
Cwi, D. (1980). ‘Public Support of the Arts: Three Arguments Examined.’ Journal
of Cultural Economics,: 455 p.
Dahl, R. A. (1956). A Preface to Democratic Theory. Chicago, University of
Chicago Press
Dahl, R. A. (1985). A Preface to Economic Democracy. Berkeley: University of
California Press
351
LITERATURE

Danto, A.C. (1964). ‘The Artworld.’ The Journal of Philosophy 61
Danto, A.C. (1986). The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Works of Art. New
York, Colombia University Press
Dickie, G. (1971). Aesthetics: An Introduction. Indianapolis, Pegasus
DiMaggio, P. J. (1987). ‘Classiﬁcation in Art.’ American Sociological Review 52:
440-55
Doorman, M. (1994). Steeds Mooier. Over Vooruitgang in De Kunst. Amsterdam,
Bert Bakker
Doorman, M. (1997). Grensvervaging in De Kunst. Amsterdam, Stichting Fonds
voor Beeldende Kunsten, Vormgeving en Bouwkunst
Dun, L. v., G. Muskens, et al. (1997). Ex-Bkr-Kunstenaars in Het Rijkscircuit.
Een Vergelijkend Onderzoek Naar Erkenning En Inkomstenvorming. Zoeter-
meer, Ministerie van ocenw
Durkheim, E. (1964, ed princ 1914). The Dualism of Human Nature and Its Social
Conditions. Emile Durkheim [Et All] Essays on Sociology and Philosophy. K.
H. Wolff. New York, The Academy Library: 325-40
Eijck, K. v. (1999). ‘Socialization, Education and Lyfestyle: How Social Mobility
Increases the Cultural Heterogeneity of Status Groups.’ Poetics 26: 309-28
Elias, N. (1981, ed princ 1970). Was Ist Soziologie. München, Juventa
Elias, N. (1994, ed.princ. in German 1939). The Civilizing Process. Oxford,
Blackwell, 1993
Elstad, J. I. (1997). ‘Collective Reproduction through Individual Efforts: The Lo-
cation of Norwegian Artists in the Income Herarchy.’ European Journal of Cul-
turral Policy (June 1997)
Epstein, J. (1967). ‘The C.I.A. And the Intellectuals.’ New York Review of Books
(April 20): 16-21
Ernst, K. (1999). Variations on a Theme. From Cultural Policy to Subsidies for Vi-
sual Artists. Rotterdam, The Erasmus Center for Art and Culture
Feist, A. and R. Hutchison (1990). Cultural Trends 1990. London, Policy Studies
Institute
Filer, R.K. (1986). ‘The “Starving Artist” - Myth or Reality? Earnings of Artists
in the United States.’ Journal of Political Economy 94 (1 (feb)): 56-75
Filer, R. K. (1987). The Price of Failure: Earnings of Former Artists. Artists and
Cultural Consumers, Akron, Association for Cultural Economics
Finney, H. C. (1995). ‘The Stilistic Games That Visual Artists Play.’ Boekmanc-
ahier 7 (23): 23-34
Forbes (1998-1999). Forbes Global Business and Finance
Foster, A. W. and J. R. Blau, Eds. (1989). Art and Society. Readings in the Sociolo-
gy of the Arts. Albany ny, State University of New York Press
Frank, R. H. and P. J. Cook (1995). The Winner-Take-All Society. New York etc.,
The Free Press
Freidson, E. (1990). Labor of Love: A Prospectus. The Nature of Work: Sociologi-
cal Perspectives. K. Erikson and S. P. Vallas. New Haven, Yale University Press:
149-61
Frey, B. S. (1997). Not Just for the Money. An Economic Theory of Human Behav-
iour. Cheltenham, U.K. and Brookﬁeld, U.S.A., Edward Elgar
Frey, B. S. (1999). ‘State Support and Creativity in the Arts: Some New Considera-
tions.’ Journal of Cultural Econonomics 23: 71-85
Frey, B. S. and W. Pommerehne (1989). Muses and Markets. Explorations in the
352
LITERATURE

Economics of the Arts. Oxford, Basil Blackwell
Fullerton, D. (1991). ‘On Public Justiﬁcation for Public Support of the Arts.’ Jour-
nal of Cultural Economics: 67-82
Getzels, J. W. and M. Czikszentmihalyi (1976). The Creative Vision. A Longitudi-
nal Study of Problem Finding in Art. New York, Wiley
Giddens, A. (1978). Durkheim. Hassocks, Sussex, The Harvestor Press
Gogh, V. v. (1980). Een Leven in Brieven. Amsterdam: Meulenhoff
Goodman, N. (1954). Languages of Art, an Approach to a Theory of Symbols.
Londen: Oxford University Press, 1968
Goudriaan, R. (1990). ‘Kunst En Consumentengunst. Een Economische Benader-
ing.’ Boekmancahier 2: 245-62
Goudsblom, J. (1977). Sociology in the Balance: A Critical Essay. Oxford, Black-
well
Gouldner, A. (1960). ‘The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement.’ Amer-
ican Sociological Review 25 (2): 161-78 (Also in: Komter, 1996)
Grampp, W. D. (1989). Pricing the Priceless. Art, Artists and Economics. New
York, Basic Books
Grampp, W. D. (1989a). ‘Rentseeking in Arts Policy.’ Public Choice (60): 113-21
Grauwe, P. d. (1990). De Nachtwacht in Het Donker. Tielt: Lanno
Gubbels, T. (1995). ‘Korting En Krediet Voor Beeldende Kunst. De Rente Subsi-
dieregeling.’ Boekmancahier 7 (24): 193-204
Guilbaut, S. (1983). How New York Stole the Idea of Modern Art. Chicago, The
University of Chicago Press
Haanstra, F., Koppen, J.K. & Oostwoud Wijdenes, J. (1987). Samenhang Onder-
wijs Beroepspraktijk in De Sector Van De Beeldende Kunsten. Zoetermeer/’s-
Gravenhage: Distributiecentrum Overheidspublicaties
Hamlen, W. A. (1991). ‘Superstardom in Popular Music: Empirical Evidence.’ Re-
view of Economics and Statistics (4): 729-33
Hegel, G. W. F. (1986, 1832-1845). Vorlesungen Ueber Die Aesthetik. Frankfurt
am Main, Suhrkamp
Heilbron, J. (1993). Leerprocessen in De Beeldende Kunst. Produktie, Distributie
En Receptie in De Wereld Van Kunst En Cultuur. T. Bevers. Hilversum, Ver-
loren: 102-18
Heilbrun, J. and C. M. Gray (2001, ed princ 1993). The Economics of Art and
Culture. An American Perspective. Cambridge usa, Cambridge University
Press
Heinich, N. (1998). Le Triple Jeu D’art Contemporain Sociologie Des Art Plas-
tiques. Paris, Edition de Minuit, Collection Paradoxe
Hekkert, P. and P. v. Wieringen (1993). Oordeel over Kunst. Kwaliteitsbeoordelin-
gen in De Beeldende Kunst. Rijswijk, Ministerie van Welzijn, Volksgezondheid
en Cultuur
Heusden, B. v. (1996). The Value of Culture: A Dialogue. The Value of Culture. A.
Klamer. Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press: 31-43
Hide, L. (1979). The Gift. Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property. New York,
Vintage Books
Hilhorst, P. (1999). ‘Het Onzichtbare Venster.’ De Groene Amsterdammer 1999
(36)
Hitters, E. (1996). Patronen Van Patronage. Mecenaat, Protectoraat En Markt in
De Kunstwereld. Utrecht, Uitgeverij Jan van Arkel
353
LITERATURE

Hoogenboom, A. (1993). De Stand Des Kunstenaars. De Positie Van Kunst-
schilders in Nederland in De Eerste Helft Van De Negentiende Eeuw. Leiden,
Primavera Pers
Hoogerwerf, P. F. (1993). Spelen Met Geld. Vakgroep Theaterwetenschap.
Utrecht, Universiteit Utrecht
Humanities (1997). President’s Committee on the Arts and the Humanities: Cre-
ative America. A Report to the President. Washington, D.C.
Hütter, M. (1996). The Value of Play. The Value of Culture. A. Klamer. Amster-
dam, Amsterdam University Press: 122-37
Hütter, M. (1997). ‘From Public to Private Rights in the Arts Sector.’ Boekman-
cahier 9: 170-83
IJdens, T. (1999). Schots En Scheef. Artistiek Werk Tussen Markt En Organisatie.
Rotterdam, Proefschrift Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
IJdens, T. and O. v. d. Vet (2001). Het Flankerend Beleid Bij De Wik. Monitor
1999-2000. Rotterdam, Erasmus Centrum voor Kunst- en Cultuurwetenschap-
pen
Jameson, F. (1991). Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
Durham, Duke University Press
Janowitz, B. B. (1993). ‘Theatre Facts 92. Annual Survey of the Finances and Pro-
ductivity of the American Nonproft Theatre.’ Theatre Facts (April 1993): 2-15
Janssen, S. (1998). ‘Art Journalism and Cultural Change: The Coverage of the Arts
in Dutch Newspapers 1965-1990.’ Poetics 25: 265-80
Janssen, S. (2001). The Empirical Study of Careers in Literature and the Arts. The
Psychology and Sociology of Literature. D. Schram and G. Steen. Philadelphia,
John Benjamins: 323-57
Jeffri, J. (1989). Information on Artists. New York, Colombia University, Re-
search Center for Art and Culture
Jeffri, J. and D. Throsby (1994). ‘Professionalim and the Visual Artist.’ European
Journal of Cultural Policy I: 99-108
Jenkins, R. (1992). Pierre Bourdieu: Key Sociologists. London, Routledge
Jensen, R. (1994). Marketing Modernism in Fin-De-Siecle Europe. Princeton,
Princeton University Press
Jong, M.-J. d. (1997). Grootmeesters Van De Sociologie. Amsterdam Meppel,
Boom
Kattenburg, P. (1996). The Value of Warhol. The Value of Culture. A. Klamer.
Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press: 205-13
Kellendonck, F. (1977). Bouwval. Amsterdam
Kempers, B. (1987). ‘Symboliek, Monumentaliteit En Abstractie.’ Sociologisch
Tijdschrift,: 3-61
Kempers, B. (1994 ed.princ. in Dutch: 1987). Painting, Power and Patronage.
London, Pinguin Books
Kempers, B. (1998). ‘Van Maecenas Naar Modern Mecenaat: Twee Millenia In-
houd En Illusie.’ Tijdschrift voor Literatuurwetenschappen 4: 258-72
Klamer, A. (1996). The Value of Culture. The Value of Culture. A. Klamer. Ams-
terdam: Amsterdam University Press
Klamer, A. and D. N. McCloskey (1988). The Consequences of Economic
Rhetoric. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
Klamer, A., A. Mignosa, et al. (2000). ‘The Economics of Attention.’ Cultural
354
LITERATURE

Economics (Japan Association for Cultural Economics) 2 (March)
Klamer, A. and P. W. Zuidhof (1999). The Values of Cultural Heritage Conserva-
tion: A Discussion. Economics and Heritage Conservation, Los Angeles, The
Getti Conservation Institute
Kohlberg, L. (1984). The Psychology of Moral Development. San Francisco,
Harper and Row
Komter, A. E. (1996). The Gift. An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press
Koopmans, L., A. H. E. M. Wellink, et al. (1999). Overheidsﬁnanciën. Houten,
EPN
Kreuzer, H. (1971). Die Boheme. Analyse Und Dokumentation Der Intellek-
tuellen Subkultur Vom 19 Jahrhundert Bis Zur Gegenwart. Stuttgart, J.B.Met-
zlersche Verlagbuchhandlung
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago, 1972
Kushner, R. J. and A. C. Brooks (2000). ‘The One-Man Band by the Quick Lunch
Stand.’ Journal of Culural Economics 24 (1): 65-77
Laermans, R. (1992). De Vergeten Openbaarheid Van Cultuur. Schoonheid,
Smaak En Welbehagen. D. Diels. Brussel, Dedalus
Laermans, R. (1993). Splitting the Difference: Over Kunst, Massacultuur en Cul-
tuurbeleid. Sociaal-Democratie, Kunst, Politiek. H. van Dulken and P. Kalma.
Amsterdam, Boekmanstichting
Laermans, R. (1996). ‘Complexiteit Als Opgave: Bourdieus Veldanalyse in Sys-
teemtheoretisch Perspectief.’ Boekmancahier 8 (30): 435-47
Lakatos, I. and M. Alan (1978). Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. London,
Cambridge University Press
Lamont, M. and M. Fournier, Eds. (1992). Cultivating Differencies. Chicago, The
University of Chicago Press
Langenberg, B. J. (1999). Collectief Arbeidsvoorwaardenoverleg in De Culturele
Sector. Het Ontstaan Van Een Institutie. Amsterdam, Boekmanstichting
Lannoye, M. C. (2000). Attitude. Faculty of Culture and the Arts. Rotterdam,
Erasmus University
Lash, C. (1968). The Agony of the American Left. New York, Random House
Lavoye, D. (1990). Economics and Hermeneutics. London, Routledge
Leibenstein, H. (1950). ‘Bandwagon, Snob and Veblen Effects in the Theory of
Consumers’ Demand.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics: 200-20
Levine, L. W. (1988). Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy
in America. Cambridge , M.A., Harvard University Press
Levi-Strauss, C. (1957 ed. princ. in French 1949). Sociological Reason: A Book of
Readings. New York, Macmillan (The chapter `The Principle of Reciprocity’
has been reprinted in Komter 1996)
Lindblom, C. E. (1959). The ‘Science of “Muddling through”. Public Administra-
tion Review. xix
Lindblom, C. E. (1990). Inquiry and Change. The Troubled Event to Understand
and Shape Society. New Haven, Yale University Press
Linden, A. S. R. v. d. and M. Rengers (1999). Kunstenmonitor. De Arbeidsmarkt-
positie Van Afgestudeerden Van Het Kunstonderwijs 1997. Maastricht, Re-
searchcentrum voor Onderwijs en Arbeidsmarkt
Linder, S. B. (1970). The Harried Leisure Class. New York, Colombia University
Press
Linko, M. (1998). Aitojen Elamysten Kaipuu [the Longing for Authentic Experi-
355
LITERATURE

ences]. Jyvaskyla, Finland, Research Unit for Contemporary Culture, publica-
tion no. 57. (Summary in English.)
Luhmann, N. (1995 ed. princip. 1984 in German). Social Systems. Stanford, Stan-
ford University Press
Lyotard, J.-F. (1997, ed princ 1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge. Manchester, Manchester University Press
MacDonald, G. W. (1988). ‘The Economics of Rising Stars.’ American Economic
Review 78 (I): 155-66
Malinofsky, B. (1970 ed.princ. 1922). Crime and Custom in Savage Society. Lon-
don, Routledge and Kegan Paul (The chapter: The Principle of Give and Take, is
reprinted in: Komter 1996)
Mauss, M. (1990 ed.princ. in French: 1923). The Gift. The Form and Reason for
Exchange in Archaic Societies. London, Routledge
McCloskey, D. N. (1986). The Rhetoric of Economics. Brighton, Wheatsheaf
Books
McCloskey, D. N. (1996). The Vices of Economics. The Virtues of the Bour-
geoisie. Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press
Menger, P.-M. (1999). ‘Artists Labor Markets and Careers.’ Annual Reviews 25:
541-74
Meulenbeek, H., N. Brouwer, et al. (2000). De Markt Voor Beeldende Kunst. De
Markt En De Financiele Positie Van Beeldend Kunstenaars 1998. Zoetermeer,
Instituut voor Economisch Onderzoek der Universiteit van Amsterdam in op-
dracht van het Ministerie van Onderwijs, Cultuur en Wetenschappen
Montias, J. (1983). Public Support for the Performing Arts in Europe and the Unit-
ed States. Comparative Development Perspectives. G. Ranis and R. West. Boul-
der Colorado, Westview Press
Montias, J. M. (1987). ‘Cost and Value in Seventeenth-Century Dutch Art.’ Art
History 10 (4 (December)): 455-66
Moulin, R. (1987, ed princ in French 1967). The French Art Market: A Sociologi-
cal View. New Brunswick, Rutger University Press
Mueller, D. C. (1997). Perspectives on Public Choice: A Handbook. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press
Mulcahy, K. V. (2000). ‘The Abused Patron of Culture. Public Culture and Cul-
tural Patronage in the United States.’ Boekmancahier 12 (44): 169-81
Musgrave, R. A. (1959). The Theory of Public Finance. New York
Noordman, D. (1989). Kunstmanagement, Hoe Bestaat Het!? Amsterdam:
Bioton, 183 p.
Nooy, W. d. (1993). Richtingen En Lichtingen. Literaire Classiﬁcaties,
Netwerken, Instituties, Proefschrift Katholieke Universiteit Brabant
Nooy, W. d. (1996). ‘De Kracht Van Verandering: Onvoorziene Effecten Van Het
Nieuwe Beeldende-Kunstbeleid.’ Boekmancahier 8 (29): 321-8
O’Brien, J. (1997). Professional Status as a Means of Improving Visual Artists’ In-
come. London, Arts Council of England
O’Brien, J. and A. Feist (1997). Employment in the Arts and Cultural Industries:
An Analysis of the 1991 Census. London, The Arts Council of England
OCW, Ministerie van (1999). Cultuur Als Confrontatie. Uitgangspunten Voor
Het Cultuurbeleid 2001-2004. Zoetermeer, Ministerie van ocw
O’Hagan, J. (1998). The State and the Arts. An Analysis of Key Economic Policy
356
LITERATURE

Issues in Europe and the United States. Cheltenham, Edward Elgar
O’Hagan, J. and D. Harvey (2000). ‘Why Do Companies Sponsor Art Events?
Some Evidence and a Proposed Classiﬁcation.’ Journal of Culural Economics
24: 205-24
Oliner, S. P. and P. M. Oliner (1988). The Altruistic Personality: Rescuers of Jews
in Nazi Europe. New York, The Free Press, 1-13 and 249-216 (Reprinted in
Komter, 1996)
Oosterbaan Martinius, W. (1990). Schoonheid, Welzijn, Kwaliteit. Kunstbeleid
En Verantwoording Na 1945. Den Haag: Gary Schwartz sdu
Ostrower, F. (1995). Why the Wealthy Give. The Culture of Elite Philanthropy.
Princeton, Princeton University Press
Peacock, A., E. Shoesmith, et al. (1982). Inﬂation and the Performed Arts. Lon-
don, Arts Council of Great Britain
Peacock, A. T. (1969). Welfare Economics and Public Subsidies to the Arts. The
Economics of the Arts. M. Blaug. Londen, 1976: 18: 151-61, 1994.)
Pearson, N. M. (1980). The State and the Visual Arts: State Intervention in the Vi-
sual Arts since 1760. London, Macmillan
Peterson, R. A. (1994). Cultural Studies through the Production Perspective.
Progress and Prospects. The Sociology of Culture: Emerging Theoretical Per-
spectives. D. Crane. Cambridge, MA, Basil Blackwell
Peterson, R. A. (1997). Creating Country Music. Fabricating Authenticity. Chica-
go etc., The University of Chigago Press
Peterson, R. A. (1997). ‘The Rise and Fall of Highbrow Snobbery as a Status
Marker.’ Poetics 25: 75-92
Peterson, R. A. and R. M. Kern (1996). ‘Changing Highbrow Taste: From Snob to
Omnivore.’ American Sociological Rewview 61: 900-7
Peterson, R. A. and H. G. White (1989). The Simplex Located in Art Worlds. Art
and Society. Readings in the Sociology of the Arts. A. W. Foster and J. R. Blau.
Albany, N.Y., State University of New York Press: 243-59
Plattner, S. (1996). High Art Down Home, an Economic Ethnogrphy of a Local
Art Market. Chicago & London, The University of Chicago Press
Ploeg, R. v. d. (1998). ‘Is De Kostenziekte Te Genezen?’ Boekmancahier 10 (38):
410-2
Polanyi, K. (1992, 1957). The Economy as Instituted Process. The Sociology of
Economic Life. M. Grannovetter and R. Swedberg. Boulder etc., Westview
Press
Pommer, E. and L. Ruitenberg (1994). Proﬁjt Van De Overheid III. De Verdeling
Van Gebonden Inkomensoverdrachten. Den Haag, Sociaal en Cultureel Plan-
bureau
Pommerehne, W. W. and B. S. Frey (1990). ‘Public Promotion of the Arts: A Survey
of Means.’ Journal of Cultural Economics 14: 73-92
Pots, R. (2000). Cultuur, Koningen En Democraten. Overheid En Cultuur in Ned-
erland. Nijmegen, Sun
Puffelen, F. v. (1992). De Betekenis Van Impactstudies. Boekmancahier. 12: 181-
91
Puffelen, F. v. (2000). Culturele Economie in De Lage Landen. De Bijdrage Van
Nederlandse Economen Aan Kunstbeleid En Kunstmanagement. Literatu-
urstudie. Amsterdam, Boekmanstudies
Rengers, M. and C. Madden (2000). ‘Living Art: Artists between Making Art and
357
LITERATURE

Making a Living.’ Australian Bulletin of Labour 26: 325-54
Rengers, M. and E. Plug (2001). ‘Private or Public? How Dutch Visual Artists
Choose between Working for the Market and the Government.’ Journal of Cul-
tural Economics 25: 1-20
Rengers, M. and O. Velthuis (2002). ‘Seizing Price or Pricing Size.’ Journal of Cul-
tural Economics 26
Robbins, L. (1963). Art and the State. Politics and Economics. L.Robbins. Lon-
den, MacMillan
Rosen, S. (1981). ‘The Economics of Superstars.’ American Economic Review 71:
845-58
Rosengren, K. E. (1985). ‘Time and Literary Fame.’ Poetics 14: 157-72
Rushton, M. (1999). ‘Methodological Individualism and Cultural Economics.’
Journal of Cultural Economics 23: 137-47
Sahlins, M. D. (1978). Stone Age Economics. London, Routledge (An abridged
version of the chapter ‘On the Sociology of Primitive Exchange’ has been
reprinted in Komker 1996)
Samuelson, P. A. (1954). The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure. Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics. xxxvi: 221 p.
Schouwburg- en Concertgebouw Directies, v. v. (2001). Theaters 1996 -1999. To-
taalcijfers En Kengetallen Op Basis Van Het Theater Analyse Systeem. Amster-
dam, Vereniging van Schouwburg- en Concertgebouw Directies
Schuster, M. D. (1985). Supporting the Arts: An International Comparative
Study. Washington D.C., National Endownment for the Arts
Schwartz, B. (1967). ‘The Social Psychology of the Gift.’ American Journal of Psy-
chology 73 (1): 1-11 (Also in Komter, 1996)
Schwarz, M. (1999). Digitale Media in De Technologische Cultuur. Zoetermeer,
Ministerie van ocw
Scitovsky, T. (1983). Subsidies for the Arts: The Economic Argument. Economic
Support for the Arts. J.L. Shanahan et al. Akron (Ohio): 69
Seaman, B. A. (1987). Arts Impact Studies: A Fashionable Excess. Economic Im-
pact of the Arts: A Source Book. A. J. Radich and S. Schwach. Denver (Colo.),
National Conference of State Legislatures
Sen, A. K. (1970). Collective Choice and Social Welfare. San Francisco, Holden-Day
Sen, A. K. (1982). Choice, Welfare and Measurement. Oxford, Basil Blackwell
Simmel, G. (1978 princ. ed. in German 1907). The Philosophy of Money. London,
Routledge and Kegan Paul
Simon, H. (1982). Models of Bounded Rationality. Cambridge ma, mit Press
Singer, L. P. (1981a). ‘Rivalry and Externalities in Secondary Art Markets.’ Jour-
nal of Cultural Economics, 5 (2): 39-57
Singer, L. P. (1981b). ‘Supply Decisions of Professional Artists.’ American Eco-
nomic Review 71: 341-6
Smith, B. H. (1988). Contingencies of Value. Alternative Perspectives for Critical
Theory. Cambridge, M.A.
Smithuijsen, C. (1997). ‘Puriteins Kunstbeleid. Het Nederland Cultuurbestel Na
De Religieuze Omslag.’ Boekmancahier 9: 8-17
Smithuijsen, C. (2001). Een Verbazende Stilte. Klassieke Muziek Gedragsregels
En Sociale Controle in De Concertzaal. Amsterdam, Boekmanstudies
Spence, M. (1974). Market Signaling. Cambridge, Mass, Harvard University Press
Staay, A. v. d. (1999). ‘De Voorgeschiedenis Van De Nederlandse Cultuurpolitiek.’
Boekmancahier 11 (42): 383-94
358
LITERATURE

Standage, T. (1999). The Victorian Internet. London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Statistiek, C. B. v. d. (1996). Jaarboek Cultuur 1996. Voorburg Heerlen, Centraal
Bureau voor de Statistiek
Statistiek, C. B. v. d. (2000). Budgetonderzoek 1998. Voorburg/Heerlen, Centraal
Bureau voor de statistiek
Staveren, I. v. (1999). Caring for Economics. An Aristotelian Perspective. Delft,
Oberon
Stolwijk, C. (1998). Uit De Schilderswereld. Nederlandse Kunstschilders in De
Tweede Helft Van De Negentiede Eeuw. Leiden, Primavera Pers
Strauss, A. (1970). The Artschool and its Students: A Study and an Interpretation.
The Sociology of Art and Literature. A Reader. M.C. Albrecht et al. London,
Duckworth
Struyk, I. and M. Rengers (2000). Rollen En Rolpatronen. Loopbanen Van Man-
nen En Vrouwen in De Podiumkunsten. Amsterdam, Theater Instituut Neder-
land
Swaan, A. d. (1986). Kwaliteit Is Klasse. De Sociale Wording En Werking Van Het
Cultureel Smaakverschil. Amsterdam, Bert Bakker
Swaan, A. d. (1988). In Care of the State: Health Care, Education and Welfare in
Europe and the Usa in the Modern Era. Cambridge, Polity Press
Tas, J. v. d. (1990). Kunst als Beroep en Roeping. Zeist, Kerckebosch
Throsby, D. (1992). Artists as Workers. Cultural Economics. R. Towse and A.
Khakee. Berlin, Springer Verlag: 201-8
Throsby, D. (1994). ‘The Production and Consumption of the Arts: A View of Cul-
tural Economics.’ Journal of Economic Literature 32 (March 1994): 1-29
Throsby, D. (1994a). A Work-Preference Model of Artist Behaviour. Cultural Eco-
nomics and Cultural Policies. A. Peacock and I. Rizzo. Dordrecht etc., Kluwer
Academic Publishers
Throsby, D. (1996). ‘Economic Circumstances of the Performing Artist: Baumol
and Bowen Thirty Years On.’ Journal of Culural Economics 20 (3): 225-40
Throsby, D. (1996a). Disaggregated Earnings Functions for Artists. Economics of
the Arts – Selected Essays. V. A. Ginsburgh and P. M. Menger. Amsterdam, El-
sevier
Throsby, D. (1999). ‘Cultural Capital.’ Journal of Cultural Economics 23: 3-12
Throsby, D. (2000). Economics and Culture. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press
Throsby, D. and G. Withers (1986). ‘Strategic Bias and Demand for Public Goods:
Theory and an Application to the Arts.’ Journal of Public Economics 31
Towse, R. (1992). The Earnings of Singers: An Economic Analysis. Cultural Eco-
nomics. R. Towse and A. Khakee. Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag: 209-17
Towse, R. (1992). The Economic and Social Characteristics of Artists in Wales.
Cardiff, Welsh Arts Council
Towse, R. (1993). Singers in the Marketplace. The Economics of the Singing Pro-
fession. Oxford, UK, Clarendon Press
Towse, R. (1996a). ‘Comment’s on David Throsby’s Paper.’ Journal of Cultural
Economics 20: 245-7
Towse, R. (1996b). Economics of Training Artists. Economics of the Arts. V. A.
Ginsburugh and P.-M. Menger. Amsterdam etc., Elsevier Science B.V.: 303-30
Towse, R., Ed. (1997). Baumol’s Cost Disease. The Arts and Other Victims. Chel-
tenham, etc., Edward Elgar
Towse, R. (2001). ‘Partly for the Money: Rewards and Incentives to Artists.’ Kyk-
359
LITERATURE

los 54: 473-90
Uitert, E. v. (1986). Het Geloof in De Moderne Kunst. Amsterdam,
Meulenhof/Landshoff
Varian, H.R. (1999). Intermediate Microeconomics. New York, Norton
Veblen, T. (1934). The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Modern Library
Velthuis, O. (2002). ‘Cultural Meanings of Prices. Constructing the Value of Con-
temporary Art in Amsterdam and New York Galleries.’ Theory & Society 31
(forthcoming)
Velthuis, O. (2002a). Talking Prices. Contemporary Art on the Market in Amster-
dam and New York. Unpublished Dissertation, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Wassall, G. H. and N. O. Alper (1992). Towards a Uniﬁed Theory of the Determi-
nants of the Earnings of Artists. Cultural Economics. R. Towse and A. Khakee.
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag
Weil, S. (1991). Tax Policy and Private Giving. Public Money and the Muse: Essays
on Government Money for the Arts. S. Benedict. New York, Norton
Weinberg, N. and G. Gemser (2000). ‘Adding Value to Innovation: Impressionism
and the Transformation of the Selection System in the Visual Arts.’ Organisa-
tion Science 11: 323-9
White, H. C. and C. A. White (1995). Canvases and Careers. New York, Wiley
Wijngaarden, G. J. v. (1995). ‘Het Succes van Kunstsponsoring in Nederland.’
Boekmancahier 7: 35-47
Williamson, O. E. (1986). Economic Organisation: Firms, Markets and Policy
Control. New York, New York University Press
Wilson, J. Q. (1989). Bureaucracy. New York, Basic Books
Wolfson (1988). Publieke Sector En Economische Orde. Groningen, Wolters-No-
ordhoff
Woude, v. d. (1987). The Volume and Value of Painting in Holland at the Time of
the Dutch Republic. Art in History, History in Art. D. Freedberg and J. d. Vries.
Chicago, The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities
Wouters, C. (1977). Informalisation and the Civilising Process. Human Figura-
tions. Essays for Norbert Elias. P. R. Gleichmann, J. Goudsblom and H. d.
Korte. Amsterdam: 557 p.
Zolberg, V. L. (1990). Constructing a Sociology of the Arts. Cambridge, Cam-
bridge University Press
360
LITERATURE

Abbing, H. 315, 321, 324-325, 332,
335, 337-341, 343, 345
Adler, M. 324, 326, 339
Adorno, T.W. 28, 348
Akerlof, G. 343
Alan, M. 346
Albrecht, M.C. 318, 345
Allen, J.P. 327, 330, 336
Almond, Mike 160
Alper, N.O. 324-325, 330-331
Ancona, Hedy D’ 341
Anderson, E. 317
Anheier, H.K. 315, 345
Arnold, M. 312
Auerbach, Frank 68
Austen-Smith, D. 337, 339
Bach, Johann Sebastian 44, 107, 158,
163, 307-308
Barnett, J.H. 318, 345
Barney, Mathew 299
Barthes, R. 28
Baudrillard, J. 313
Baumol, H. 333
Baumol, W.J. 156, 158, 161, 325, 331-
333
Becker, G.S. 315-318
Becker, H.S. 311, 347
Beethoven, Ludwig von 107
Bell, A. 316
Benedict, S. 343
Benhamou, F. 330
Benjamin, W. 24, 307, 348
Berg, H-O. 312, 321
Bernstein, M. 348
Bevers, T. 311, 314, 321, 336, 342-343
Blackman, S.A.W. 333
Blau, J.R. 318, 345
Blaug, M. 317, 331
Blokland, H. 321, 337
Bloom, A. 25
Boogaarts, I. 336, 342
Bourdieu, P. 64, 75, 237, 311-312,
315-319, 322-323, 343, 345-346, 348
Bowen, W.G. 156, 158, 325, 331-332
Braembussche, A.A. van den 312-313,
315, 348
Bremner, C. 319, 340
Brooks, A.C. 336
Brouwer, N. 313, 319, 323, 325-327,
330, 335
Buchanan, J.M.G.T. 340-341
Burn, A. 316
Bush, George jr. 256
Bush, George sr. 324
Cage, John 298
Calcar, C. van 311
Chia, Sandro 64, 74, 301
Christo 155
Clemente, Francesco 301
Cobain, Kurt 173
Commandeur, I. 342
Constant 300
Cook, P.J. 107, 220, 317-318, 324-
327, 333, 339
Cordes, J.J. 340
Cowen, T. 58, 173, 317, 321, 324-325,
331-334
Crane, D. 318, 345-346
Cwi, D. 337, 339
Czikszentmihalyi, M. 323
Danto, A.C. 311, 317
Derrida, J. 313
DiCaprio, Leonardo 106
Dickens, Charles 300
Dickie, G. 311
361
Index of names

DiMaggio, P.J. 311
Dion, Celine 106
Domingo, Placido 172
Doorman, M. 313, 334, 348
Dostoyevski, Dimitri 107
Drees, W. jr. 193
Duchamp, Marcel 49
Dun, L. 323, 329
Durkheim, E. 347
Eijck, K. van 312
Elias, N. 237, 302, 317, 347
Elstad, J.I. 325
Epstein, J. 335, 341
Ernst, K. 319, 328-329
Eyck, Jan van 61
Fassbinder, Rainer Werner 315
Feist, A. 331, 333, 336
Filer, R.K. 325, 344, 346
Finney, H.C. 321-322
Flavin, Dan 298
Ford, Harrison 106
Foster, A.W. 318, 345
Fournier, M. 311
Frank, R.H. 107, 220, 317-318, 324-
327, 333, 339
Freidson, E. 321
Freud, Lucian 68
Frey, B.S. 82, 317, 320-321, 325-327,
334, 340, 344
Fry, R. 316
Fuchs, Rudi 78
Fullerton, D. 337, 339
Gemser, G. 345
Gerhards, J. 315, 345
Getzels, J.W. 323
Giddens, A. 347
Glass, Philip 301
Gogh, Vincent van 107, 197, 247
Goldfarb, R.S. 340
Golding, William 66
Goodman, N. 28, 161, 303, 313, 332,
345-348
Gordijn, Herman 323
Goudriaan, R. 334, 340
Goudsblom, J. 317
Gouldner, A. 335, 347
Graf, Stefﬁ108
Grampp, W.D. 57, 228, 316-317, 329,
339-341
Grauwe, P. de 311
Gray, C.M. 326, 333
Grier, R. 321, 325, 331-333
Gubbels, T. 345
Guilbaut, S. 335, 341
Guiliani, R. 313
Haanstra, F. 329
Hamlen, W.A. 324-325
Hanks, Nancy 256
Harvey, D. 336
Haydn, Joseph 156
Hegel, G.W.F. 28
Heilbron, J. 346, 348
Heilbrun, J. 326, 333
Heinich, N. 68
Hekkert, P. 346
Herzog, Werner 66, 75
Heusden, B. van 313
Hide, L. 312, 314
Hilhorst, P. 348
Hill, Lauryn 173
Hirst, Damian 68, 74
Hitters, E. 314, 336
Hoek, Hans van 300
Hoogenboom, A. 327
Hoogerwerf, P.F. 334
Hughes, R. 316
Hutchison, R. 333, 336
Hütter, M. 316, 339
IJdens, T. 329, 338, 345
Irving, John 107, 324
Jackson, Michael 324
Jameson, F. 313, 348
Janowitz, B.B. 336
Janssen, S. 312, 317-318, 321-322,
330, 342, 344
Jeffri, J.
321, 325
Jenkins, R. 321
Jensen, R. 345
Jong, M.-J. 321-322
Jordan, Michael 106
Joyce, James 308
Judd, Donald 298
Jürgens, Udo 164
Kattenburg, P. 316
Katz, Alex 300
362
INDEX OF NAMES

Kellendonck, Frans 313
Kempers, B. 314, 341
Kern R.M. 311-312, 348
Kitai, R.B. 68
Klamer, A. 15, 35, 44, 313-317, 321,
335-336, 339, 345, 347
Kohlberg, L. 321
Komter, A.E. 335
Koning, B. de 340
Koningsbrugge, van 300
Koons, Jeff 49
Koopmans, L. 341
Kopytoff, I. 316
Kreuzer, H. 327
Kuhn, T.S. 346
Kushner, R.J. 336
Kylian, Jiri 246
Laermans, R. 311-312, 316, 322, 337,
347
Lakatos, I. 346
Lamont, M. 311
Lamsweerde, Inez van 299
Langenberg, B.J. 333
Lannoye, M.C. 323, 330
Lash, C. 335
Lavoye, D. 311
Leibenstein, H. 317
Levine L.W. 312, 338
Levi-Strauss, C. 335
Lieshout, Joep van 299
Lindblom, C.E. 340
Linden, A.S.R. 330-331, 346
Linder, S.B. 333
Linko, M. 312
Lucebert 341
Luhmann, N. 317, 322
Lyotard, J-F. 28
MacDonald, G.W. 324
Madden, C. 321, 325-326, 328
Madonna 173
Malinofsky, B. 335
Mapplethorpe, Robert 257
Mauss, M. 335
McClean, Allister 66
McCloskey 12, 303, 314, 345, 347-
348
Meegeren, Han van 324
Menger, P.-M. 321, 325-328, 330-
331, 344, 346
Meulenbeek, H. 313, 319, 323, 325-
327, 330, 335
Mignosa, A. 321, 335
Molière 46
Mondrian, Piet 25, 232, 242, 272
Montias, J.M. 327, 343
Moulin, R. 344
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 107, 158,
163, 300
Mueller, D.C. 341
Mulcahy, K.V. 343
Musgrave, R.A. 338
Muskens, G. 323, 329
Nixon, Richard 256
Noordman, D. 347
Nooy, W. de 318, 329, 345
Nuis, Aad 341
O’Brien, J. 325, 331
O’Hagan, J. 313-314, 329, 331, 334-
339, 341-343
Oﬁli, Chris 313
Oliner, P.M. 335
Oliner, S.P. 335
Oosterbaan Martinius, W. 345
Ostrower, F. 336
Pavarotti, Luciano 107, 172
Peacock, A.T. 325, 331, 337, 339
Peterson, R.A. 311-313, 318, 338,
345-346, 348
Plattner, S. 317
Ploeg, R. van der 334
Plug, E. 322-323
Polanyi, K. 313, 335
Pommer, E. 341
Pommerehne, W. 317, 325-327, 334,
340, 344
Pots, R. 314, 335-336, 338, 341-342
Prince 308
Puffelen, F. van 337, 339
Ramaekers, G.W.M. 327, 330, 336
Rattle, Simon 164
Rembrandt (van Rijn) 25, 58, 108, 247
Rengers, M. 316, 321-323, 325-328,
330-331, 346
Rieu, André 301
Rist, Pipilotti 299
Robbins, L. 337, 339
363
INDEX OF NAMES

Rolling Stones 106
Roosevelt, Theodore 342
Rosen, S. 108, 324
Rosengren, K.E. 345
Ruitenberg, L. 341
Sahlins, M.D. 335
Samuelson, P.A. 338
Schlingensief 46
Scholte, Rob 204
Schuster, M.D. 334
Schwartz, B. 335, 348
Scitovsky, T. 337, 339
Seaman, B.A. 339
Seles, Monica 107
Sen, A.K. 317, 338
Serrano, Andres 257, 305
Shakespeare, William 46, 107, 300,
332
Shoesmith, E. 325, 331
Simmel, G. 315
Simon, H. 341
Singer, L.P.  317, 326, 345
Smith, B. H. 315, 317
Smithuijsen, C. 312, 333
Snow, C.P. 13
Spence, M. 343
Spice Girls 106
Spielberg, Steven 66, 75, 106, 309, 324
Staay, A. van der 342
Standage, T. 348
Staveren, I. van 314
Steiner, R. 316
Stolwijk, C. 327, 345
Strauss, A. 346
Stravinsky, Igor 332
Struycken, Peter 298
Struyk, I. 326-327
Swaan, A. de 252, 312, 314-315, 318-
319, 338, 340, 343
Tanja, Sacha 34
Tas, J. van der 346
Telemann, Georg Philipp 158
Thorbecke, J.R. 234
Throsby, C.D. 18, 316-318, 321, 325,
327-328, 330-331, 334, 339, 341
Towse, R. 321, 324-328, 330-331,
339, 344
Uitert, E. van 312
Varian, H.R. 344
Veblen, T. 317, 335, 341
Velthuis, O. 15, 49, 316-318, 345
Vermeer, Johannes 247, 324
Vet, O. van der 329
Waits, Tom 173
Warhol, Andy 49, 316
Wassall, G.H. 324-325, 330-331
Weil, S.
342
Weinberg, N. 345
Wellink, A.H.E.M. 341
White, C.A. 318, 344-345
White, H.C. 318, 344-345
White, H.G. 346
Wieringen, P. van 346
Wijngaarden, G.J. van 337
Williams, Robbie 106, 173
Williamson, O.E. 315
Wilson, J.Q. 341
Winfrey, Oprah 106
Withers, G. 339
Wonder, Stevie 173
Woude, A.M. van der 316, 333
Wouters, C. 347
Zolberg, V.L. 345-346
Zuidhof, P.W. 313-314, 336, 339
364
INDEX OF NAMES

art
authentic – 25, 110
avant-garde – 68
contemporary – 68
deﬁning – 19
– education 140, 264
high – 21
-lobby 228
low – 21
magical – 29, 303
modern – 68
mythology of – 30
sacred – 23, 111, 285
street – 199
traditional – 68
artist 
authentic – 25, 110
autonomous – 87
bohemian – 127
commercial – 82-102
-craftsman 300
-entertainer 300
number of –  131
postmodern –  299
-researcher 298
reward-oriented – 94-123
selﬂess – 82-102
street – 199
asymmetry, cultural 21
authenticity 25, 110
autonomy 87
avant-garde 68
barrier(s)
formal – 262-297
informal – 262-279
BKR plan 133
borders in the arts 302-306
capital
cultural – 64, 262
economic – 64, 262
monetary – 64, 262
social – 64, 262
capitalism 286
pre- 286
certiﬁcate 267
classical music 162, 171-174
cognition 28
coherence, social 243
collective good 209, 215-220
commerce 39
commercial attitude 82-102, 279
compensation of poverty 147, 195
competition
– between nations 244
distorted – 176, 221
limiting – 262-279
unfair – 176, 221
constraint, survival 85
consumption, conspicuous 238
control
occupational – 266
– of numbers in the arts 263-266
convention(s) 192
cooptation 276
copyright 272
corporation(s) 190, 200
cost(s)
-disease 152-179
labor – 157-179
cultural climate 216
demand for art 167
demystiﬁcation 302-309
diploma(s) 264
display
– of art 187, 237-249
365
Index of subjects

– of power 187
veiled – 242
distribution of income in the arts 113
domain, sacred 289-291
donations 41
– and poverty 126-151
duty 191
economics, welfare 215
economy, economic 315
education, art 140, 264
effect(s)
external – 215-220
reciprocal – 187, 238
signalling – 136, 175
elite
cultural – 69
economic – 69
equity argument 209, 113
expert(s) 55, 252
external effects 215-220
family and friends 197
ﬁeld 90
foundations 200
gatekeeper 253, 268-279
gift(s)
conspicuous – 238
-duty continuum 205
-giving 181-202
– sphere 39
good
collective – 209, 215-220
merit – 74, 171, 188
public: see collective
government
– interests 234-258
– involvement in the arts 203-258
neutral – 234, 248
selﬂess – 234
– taste 235, 248
habitus 90
identity
– of corporation 192
cultural – 245-247
– of nation 245-251
– of town 245-251
idiosyncrasy 42
ill-information 120, 196, 277-279
income(s)
distribution of – 113
high – 106-111
low – 111-151, 164, 283-294
non-monetary – 114-151
individualism, methodological 58, 237
inequity 209, 113
innovation in the arts 176, 216, 222,
272-274
interest(s)
general – 235
government – 235-258
public – 205-224, 235
internalization 88-102
job(s)
multiple -holding 144-151
second – 142-151
judgment, asymmetric 21
legitimization
– of power 188
– of subsidies 207-223
lobbies in the arts 228
Maecenas 41, 237
magical art 29, 303
market(s)
deep-pocket – 62
– exchange 184
– failure 208-223
mass – 63
– sphere 39
– transaction 39
– value 55-77
winner-takes-all – 107
media, mass 309
merit (good) 74, 171, 188, 209-213
methodological individualism 58, 237
misinformation 120, 196, 277-179
monopolization 262-279
motivation
extrinsic – 82-102
intrinsic – 82-102
multiple jobholding 144-151
music
classical – 162, 171-174
pop – 171-174, 223
mythology of the arts 30, 285
myths concerning art 30, 121
366
INDEX OF SUBJECTS

numerus clausus 264
obligation 191
omnivorous consumption 305
overconﬁdence 117
overproduction of art 147, 217
oversupply of art 147, 217
partners of artists 197
patent law 272
paternalism 188, 210
path dependency 96
Patron 41, 185, 190, 237
patronage 214
performance, true 160
philanthropy, corporate 200
pop music 171-174, 223
postmodernism 297-309
poverty in the arts 106-151, 284-294
– compensated 147, 195, 286
power 55-76, 186
display of – 187
legitimization of – 188
sublimation of – 188, 243
price 56
profession, the arts as 266
public
-good: see collective good
-interest 205-224
qualiﬁcation(s) 262
quality 55-77
constant – 157
quid pro quo 42
rationalization 302
real-time personal service 156
reciprocity 42, 185
recognition 82, 97, 268-279
government – 99
circle of – 253, 269-279
regime, arts experts, professional 145,
252, 269
rent seeking 224-229
reputation(s) 171-274
reserve army of artists 219,
return(s) 185-201
revenues from sales 56
reward(s)
external 82-102
internal 82-102
non-monetary 114-151
-orientation 94-123
risk(s) 117, 276, 326
ritual 193
rules in the arts 28
sacredness of art 23, 111
sales 56, 66
satisfaction, private 88
selﬂessness 82-102, 185
self-subsidies 195
signal(ling) 136, 175, 262-279
sphere(s)
gift – 39
hostile – 56
independent – 56
market – 39
non-reciprocal – 56
sponsor(ship) 48, 200
star capacity, limited 109
sublimation of power 189, 243
subsidies, subsidization 41, 291-294
internal – 86, 145, 164
– and the cost disease 175
– and poverty 126-151
self- 195
survival constraint 85
taste, changing 169
technical reproduction 108, 306-308
technological developments 158, 302,
306
transaction, market 39
transfer, forced 39, 184
tribute 194
trust 42
uncertainty 326
underproduction of art 215, 217
value
aesthetic – 55-77
economic – 55
intrinsic – 61
market – 57-77
non-monetary – 42
welfare economics 215
WIK plan 134
willingness to pay 42
winner-takes-all 107
367
INDEX OF SUBJECTS