ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 30, 2002 
The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
 
32 
The use of conjoint analysis to determine  
consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
Ernest North and Retha de Vos 
OPSOMMING 
 
Akademiese navorsers en praktisyns verskil wan-
neer dit by die klassifikasie, waarde en gebruike 
van eksperimente as ‘n bron van primêre data kom. 
‘n Eksperimentele ontwerp word as een van vier 
voorwaardes vir ‘n kousale navorsingsontwerp be-
skou. Die eksperiment kan verskeie vorme aan-
neem, en in die veld of in ‘n laboratorium uitgevoer 
word. Sommige navorsers beskou voorkeurkeuse 
ontleding (conjoint analysis) as ‘n spesiale tipe eks-
periment wat normaalweg in ‘n laboratorium 
plaasvind.  
 
As ‘n navorsingsmetode behels voorkeurkeuse ont-
leding in wese dat die utiliteitswaarde wat ver-
bruikers aan sekere vlakke of kombinasies van die 
eienskappe van produkte en dienste toeken, afgelei 
word. Navorsers en bemarkers kan deur middel van 
so ‘n voorkeurkeuse studie byvoorbeeld ‘n beter be-
grip ontwikkel van die werklike waarde wat ver-
bruikers aan produkeienskappe heg  wanneer aan-
koopbesluite geneem moet word. 
 
Die primêre doel van die artikel is om ‘n teoretiese 
oorsig van die aard van voorkeurkeuse ontleding as 
‘n navorsingsmetode  te gee, en die waarde wat dit 
vir navorsers in die bemarkings – en verbruikerswe-
tenskapvelde inhou, toe te lig. Onlangse studies sal 
vermeld word, en die proses om ‘n voorkeurkeuse 
ontleding te onderneem, sal aandag geniet.   
 
 
 
—  Prof EJ North 
Department of Marketing and Communication 
Management, University of Pretoria  
 
—  Ms R de Vos 
Commercial Methods & Training Manager 
Peugeot Motors South Africa 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A review of the marketing research literature indicates 
that academic researchers and practitioners have 
different viewpoints with respect to the classification, 
value, and use of experiments as a source of primary 
data (Cooper & Schindler, 1998:381; Dane, 1990:88; 
Peter & Donnelly, 2001:37; and Bearden et al, 
2001:127). Cooper and Schindler (1998:130), for ex-
ample, use eight different descriptors to classify a 
research design. One of these is the power of the re-
searcher to manipulate the variables, in which case 
two kinds of design can be used, namely experimental 
and post facto. Burns and Bush (1998:111, 119-128) 
refer to an experimental design as one of four formal 
conditions for a causal research design. These au-
thors state that causality “…may be thought of as un-
derstanding a phenomenon in terms of conditional 
statements of the form ‘If x, then y ‘” (Burns & Bush, 
1998:119). Churchill and Iacobucci (2002:91) also 
describe a causal research design as one that is con-
cerned with cause-and-effect relationships. Studies of 
this kind normally take the form of experiments, be-
cause they are best suited to determining cause and 
effect. Sudman and Blair (1998:207) group experi-
ments as one of the three major sources of primary 
data (the other two being surveys, and focus groups 
and depth interviews). 
 
According to Sudman and Blair (1998:207), there are 
no standard rules when a researcher decides to con-
duct an experiment. The experiment can take many 
different forms and can be conducted in a laboratory 
or in the field. In a field study any phenomenon of in-
terest or any research topic is studied in a natural set-
ting. The laboratory experiment, on the other hand, 
studies the phenomenon outside the natural setting. 
The term “laboratory” refers to any context other than 
the natural setting (such as supermarkets, malls and 
retail stores). In a laboratory experiment the re-
searcher creates a desired condition where one or 
more causal variables are manipulated, and the effect 
of this manipulation on one or more dependent vari-
ables is measured. For example, a magazine com-
pany printed various cover designs and asked the 
employees in its offices to indicate the design they 
liked best (Sudman & Blair, 1998:206). Considered by 
Sudman and Blair (1998:229) to be a special type of 
experiment, conjoint analysis is mostly applied in a 
laboratory situation. 
 
 
AIM OF THE ARTICLE 
 
Conjoint analysis has been used in research for many 
years (Green & Sprinivasan, 1978). Hair et al 

The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 30, 2002 
 
retail settings. By using a conjoint study researchers 
could gain a better understanding of the real value 
consumers attach to certain attributes when making 
purchasing decisions in a retail situation.  
  
The concept conjoint analysis is described by Hair et 
al (1998:392) as follows: “Conjoint analysis is a multi-
variate technique used specifically to understand how 
respondents develop preferences for products or ser-
vices.  It is based on the simple premise that consum-
ers evaluate the value of a product or service by com-
bining the separate amounts of value provided by 
each attribute.”  Sudman and Blair (1998:229-230) 
warn that it is not a data analysis procedure like factor 
analysis or cluster analysis. It must be regarded as a 
type of “thought experiment” designed to show how 
various elements of products or services (price, 
brand, style) predict customer preferences for a prod-
uct or service. Kotler (2000:339) defines conjoint 
analysis as ”…a method for deriving the utility values 
that consumers attach to varying levels of a product’s 
attributes.” Churchill and Iacobucci (2002:748) refer to 
conjoint analysis as “…conjoint measurement, which 
relies on the ability of respondents to make judgments 
about stimuli.” These stimuli represent some predeter-
mined combinations of attributes, and during a labora-
tory experiment, respondents are asked to make judg-
ments about their preferences for various attribute 
combinations. The basic aim, therefore, is to deter-
mine the features they most prefer. From the defini-
tions given above it is clear that conjoint studies cen-
tre around certain attributes of products or services 
and also various levels within each attribute. Table 1 
below summarises a hypothetical situation in relation 
to prospective female apparel buyers, indicating some 
attributes and the levels that might be considered 
during the process of deciding to purchase a white 
shirt for everyday wear.  
 
In a real-life situation respondents may find it difficult 
to indicate which attributes they considered and also 
how they combined them to form their overall opinion. 
The value of conjoint analysis lies in the fact that it 
estimates how much each of these attributes is val-
ued, and as Churchill and Iacobucci (2002:748) state, 
“…the word conjoint has to do with the notion that the 
relative values of things considered jointly can be 
measured when they might not be measurable if 
taken one at a time.”  From the information given in 
33 
(1998:388) state that the application of conjoint analy-
sis in the United States has been paralleled in other 
parts of the world as well as in Europe. However, it 
appears to have only recently attracted the attention of 
local researchers and it is not clear why local aca-
demic researchers in particular do not make more use 
of conjoint analysis.  
 
The main aim of this article is to provide an overview 
of the nature and use of conjoint analysis as a re-
search tool, and to indicate its value when, for exam-
ple, a researcher wishes to analyse female consum-
ers’ apparel purchasing decisions based on the value 
they attach to certain attributes when making a pur-
chasing decision. Although the apparel industry has 
reached maturity and growth is very slow, fashion 
trend cycles are accelerating. The presence of more 
and more brands has created a competitive environ-
ment unheard-of in the past (Rutter & Edwards, 
1999:31).  
  
Past research mostly used survey methods that di-
rectly measure consumers’ attitudes towards products 
and their attributes. According to Lang and Crown 
(1993), the possibility of interaction effects among 
attributes is usually overlooked. The preferences of 
female consumers for apparel items may depend on 
the joint influence of product attributes such as quality, 
style and price. Thus, the joint effect of several prod-
uct attributes on the final decision to purchase a spe-
cific item of clothing should be taken into considera-
tion when researching consumer purchasing deci-
sions.  
 
De Vos (2002) therefore lists the following reasons 
why researchers, and local apparel manufacturers and 
retailers, for example, could use the information from 
a conjoint study:  
♦ to gain a better understanding of consumers’ se-
lection criteria when purchasing apparel 
♦ to plan their apparel merchandise mixes more effi-
ciently 
♦ to plan their promotional messages and strategies 
more effectively, 
♦ to refine their  training strategies for sales consult-
ants.  
 
The article will also refer to recent South African stud-
ies that have been done in this field, and special atten-
tion will be given to the process of designing a conjoint 
analysis experiment. 
 
 
THE NATURE OF CONJOINT ANALYSIS  
 
Description 
 
Attempts to construct consumer typologies are an 
enduring feature of retailing research and frequently 
centre on economic and demographic characteristics.  
Such research highlights the relatively poor under-
standing of real-life consumer behaviour and, in par-
ticular, the need to develop more appropriate methods 
of examining the behaviour of consumers in real-life 
ATTRIBUTES 
LEVELS 
Price 
R90 
R170 
R350 
Brand 
Designer 
Private label 
Unbranded 
Style 
High fashion 
Classical 
Comfortable 
TABLE 1:   ATTRIBUTES CONSIDERED BY PRO-
SPECTIVE APPAREL BUYERS  

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 30, 2002 
The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
 
Table 1 a reasonable assumption would be that many 
buyers would probably prefer the cheaper to medium-
priced private label shirt that is comfortable. This may, 
however, not necessarily always be the case because 
the premium priced shirt might be more comfortable 
owing to excellent design and craftsmanship. Pro-
spective buyers may therefore find it necessary to 
trade off some of one feature to secure more of an-
other. The key question then, is to determine how the 
buyers value these specific attributes. For example, is 
low price valued more highly, or are the consumers 
willing to pay a higher price to secure some of the 
other features. In the shirt example, the respondents 
are asked to rank the descriptions or attributes in or-
der of preference. Thus, the shirt description can be 
constructed by using all 27 possible combinations of 
the attributes as follows: three dimensions, with three 
levels each (3x3x3=27). Each combination is then 
written on a separate card. The following are some 
examples of such cards:  
  
 
 
Another card can look as follows: 
 
 
 
 
The 27 cards are then arranged in random order, and 
the respondents are asked to rearrange and rank the 
cards from least preferred to most preferred. The 
mean rankings for the various levels (for example 
Price: R90 vs R170 vs R350) are determined and the 
respondents’ utilities for the attributes are then calcu-
lated with the aid of sophisticated computer programs 
such as Conjoint Value Analysis (CVA) Version 2.0. A 
summary outlining the nature and use of conjoint 
analysis is given in Table 2.  
 
The value of conjoint analysis in research  
 
 In conjoint analysis respondents indicate their prefer-
ence for a series of hypothetical multi-attribute alter-
natives, which are typically displayed as profiles of 
Price R170 
Designer brand 
Classical style 
Private label  
Comfortable style 
Price R350  
attributes.  The responses to these profiles are ana-
lysed to yield estimates of the relative importance of 
the attributes and to build predictive models of con-
sumer choice for new alternatives (Oppewal & Vriens, 
2000). Conjoint analysis is a dependence technique 
that has brought new sophistication to the evaluation 
of objects, such as new products, services or ideas 
(Hair et al, 1998:15).  The theory and methods of con-
joint analysis deal with complex decision-making, or 
the process of assessment, comparison, and/or 
evaluation.  In this process consumers decide which 
aspects of products or services are important, com-
pare the products or services on each of the important 
aspects, and decide which one to choose (Louviere, 
1988:9).  
 
Schutte (1999:90-92) lists the following to indicate the 
value of conjoint analysis in assisting marketers to pro-
vide answers when strategic marketing and selling deci-
sions have to be made: 
 
Understanding market preferences 
When a 
product has, say five key attributes: price, quality, style, 
brand and packaging, these attributes and their associ-
ated levels represent the factors that materially affect 
consumer preferences. 
 
Predicting market choices 
Conjoint analysis 
offers the researcher opportunities to apply certain 
simulations. The simulation capability of conjoint analy-
sis enables the analyst to explore alternative market 
scenarios. The impact on market share or changes in 
the product can be assessed and the impact of competi-
tive moves can then be anticipated (Wyner, 1995). 
 
Developing market strategies 
It can aid market-
ers to identify product concepts that are extremely at-
tractive from the consumer's perspective. Concepts that 
are not technically or financially feasible can be elimi-
nated. The best of the remaining products must be se-
lected, and then the attributes of this product must be 
fine-tuned to achieve the stated objective. A series of 
simulation tests must be run to identify the point at 
which the product performs best  (Wyner, 1995).  
 
Segmenting the market 
     Conjoint 
results 
are 
very useful for segmentation purposes. Consumers 
may be segmented on the basis of utility values or 
attribute important scores. Thus simulations can be 
viewed as segmentation analyses that group people 
together according to their most preferred product 
among other substitutes or competitive products 
(Wyner, 1995).  
34 
Technique 
What it does 
What it is used for 
Conjoint Analysis 
Allows consumer preferences for a 
product or service to be broken down 
into trade-offs among its individual at-
tributes, without separating those attrib-
utes from the context in which overall 
judgments are made. 
Optimising product configurations; 
studying price elasticities of de-
mand; simulating market response 
to new or modified offerings; diag-
nosing competitive strengths and 
weaknesses 
TABLE 2: 
SUMMARY OF CONJOINT ANALYSIS  
(Adapted from Market Decisions Corporation, 1996.) 

The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 30, 2002 
 
The information gained from a conjoint study could 
also be used for the development of a theoretical 
model towards understanding consumer apparel pur-
chasing decisions. There seems to be a lack in mar-
keting theory when it comes to explaining what is im-
portant to consumers concerning apparel purchasing 
decisions, as well as how they make trade-offs be-
tween various product attributes when purchasing 
apparel.  According to Sheth and Sisodia (1999) mar-
ket-centric concepts are essential and have been fun-
damental in devising marketing strategies. However, it 
is no longer sufficient to segment a market based on 
demographics, socio-economic class, and other seg-
mentation variables only. Today, the marketplace is 
characterised by higher levels of diversity. Therefore, 
it would be more appropriate to use a construct such 
as attribute importance as a basis for segmentation. 
The results of a scientific conjoint study could there-
fore be used as a basis for segmenting the women’s 
everyday wear apparel market. A few recent conjoint 
studies undertaken in South Africa are described be-
low.  
 
Application of conjoint measurement studies in 
South Africa 
 
Schutte (1999) carried out research in the latter half of 
the previous decade to determine the role of price 
sensitivity in the demand for accommodation by local 
visitors to the Kruger National Park. The research 
problem stemmed from the fact that the Kruger Na-
tional Park had experienced a decline in the demand for 
accommodation by local visitors after 1995. Prior to this 
period the demand for accommodation exceeded the 
supply. This was especially true for the December, April, 
July and October school holidays. During the July holi-
day period, for example, the demand was 5 times 
greater than the supply. It was hypothesised that costs 
or pricing factors may be one of the reasons for the de-
cline in the demand for accommodation. After discus-
sions with senior members of the Park’s management 
team, the need to conduct a price sensitivity study be-
came apparent. During the quantitative research 
phase a survey was conducted with the aid of a ques-
tionnaire (Afrikaans and English) in which respon-
dents were requested to participate in a pair-wise 
trade-off conjoint analysis in which a real purchase 
situation was simulated.  This was done because con-
joint analysis is generally regarded as the most used 
category of price sensitivity measurement methods. The 
Conjoint Value Analysis (CVA), Version 2.0 computer 
programme was used for this study. One of the primary 
objectives of the study was to measure the consumer 
preferences of tourists by making trade-offs between 
attributes at various levels, enabling them to make com-
plex decisions not only on one factor but on several 
factors “jointly”.  
 
The conjoint experiment was designed according to 
the guidelines offered by Hair et al (1998: 564-581). 
The survey was conducted in six camps of the Kruger 
National Park among 428 respondents in the late 
nineties. The respondents were requested to indicate 
their preferences by ranking a number of different 
combinations of attribute levels on a nine-point Likert 
scale. The following were some of the findings of the 
study: 
♦ Overall, the respondents were satisfied with the 
quality of accommodation in the Park. 
♦ They were not satisfied with the general price level 
for accommodation, and specifically the prices of 
meals in restaurants and goods sold in the shops. 
♦ As expected, the majority of the respondents pre-
ferred the more luxurious type of accommodation 
(cottage, hut with private ablution) to the less luxuri-
ous type of accommodation. 
 
Burger and Herbst (2002) used a conjoint approach to 
determine the importance of certain clothing attributes, 
such as style, price, brand and outlet choice during 
the decision-making process of teenagers when pur-
chasing denims. Teachers from two Afrikaans and two 
English schools in the Pretoria region acted as inter-
viewers, and presented 213 (13-16 years) secondary 
school pupils with 25 hypothetical paired-wise product 
profiles. The results indicated, inter alia, that the brand 
name (for example Levi or Diesel) is the most impor-
tant attribute teenagers consider before making a pur-
chase. Diesel was the most popular brand, followed 
by Calvin Klein. 
  
South Africa has never been a major player in the 
pearl industry. For many years now South African 
pearl distributors have travelled to the East to pur-
chase oyster pearls and mabès, which they import to 
South Africa. Many consumers might also have a per-
ception that quality pearls come from the East 
(Hamman & Kotze, 2001). Pearl dealers need to de-
termine whether consumers would prefer to purchase 
the raw product or a pearl that has been set in pre-
cious metal.  These and other questions prompted the 
management of Hermanus Abalone (Pty) Ltd and 
other pearl dealers to test local consumers’ percep-
tions with respect to these and other relevant issues 
(Hamman & Kotze, 2001).  A conjoint study was exe-
cuted to determine, inter alia, the following: the trade-
offs consumers make between factors such as colour 
and size while considering purchasing abalone mabè 
pearls, the extent to which the country of origin has an 
influence on consumers’ perception of quality, con-
sumers' preferred place of purchase, and whether 
consumers would prefer mabès in settings to the raw 
product. Using the method of non-probability sam-
pling, the researcher took a convenience sample by 
questioning 100 female respondents (18-65 years 
old). The attributes and levels used in the study in-
cluded the following: type of mabè, colour, country of 
origin and price. The results of the study indicated, 
inter alia, the following: 
 
♦ The respondents preferred the Oyster Mabè to the 
Abalone Mabè. 
♦ They preferred white to blue or pink as a colour. 
♦ As could be expected, South Africa ranked first 
when asked to nominate the country of preference.  
♦ Overall, the colour attribute was ranked the highest 
with the country of origin in second place. 
 
35 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 30, 2002 
The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
 
Conjoint analysis is closely related to traditional ex-
perimentation. The conjoint technique developed from 
the need to analyse the effects of the factors we con-
trol that are often qualitatively specified or weakly 
measured. Conjoint analysis is actually a family of 
techniques and methods, all theoretically based on 
the models of information integration and functional 
measurement (Hair et al, 1998:388). Utility is a sub-
jective judgement of preference unique to each indi-
vidual. It is the conceptual basis for measuring value 
in conjoint analysis.  It is a measure of overall prefer-
ence because it encompasses all product or service 
features, both tangible and intangible. Utility is as-
sumed to be based on the value placed on each of 
the levels of the attributes and expressed in a rela-
tionship reflecting the manner in which the utility is 
formulated for any combination of attributes (Hair et 
al, 1998:392).  
 
 
KEY DECISIONS OR STEPS WHEN DESIGNING A 
CONJOINT VALUE ANALYSIS 
 
There are many different conjoint methods.  The re-
searcher should weigh each research situation and 
pick the right combination of tools for the project.  
Sudman and Blair (1998:235) distinguish between an 
arrangement that uses all possible combinations of 
features (”full factorial design”) and one that uses only 
some of the combinations (“fractional design”). A gen-
eral rule of thumb, according to these authors, is to 
limit the descriptions to no more than 30. Full-profile 
conjoint value analysis (CVA) is useful for measuring 
up to about six attributes (Hair et al, 1998:401).  CVA 
is designed for paper and pencil study, but can be 
computerised by means of the Ci3 System for com-
puter interviewing.  CVA calculates a set of utilities for 
each individual, using traditional full-profile card-sort 
(either rating or ranked) or pair-wise ratings. CVA can 
attach prices to each attribute level to measure price 
sensitivities for individual features. This is realistic for 
modelling categories in which buyers actually see the 
prices for each component of the product, such as 
with restaurant meals, cellular phones and packages 
(Omre, 2000:4). If the full-profile approach is used, it 
is important to limit the number of attributes and lev-
els, increase the number of profiles, or use more par-
simonious models (such as the vector or ideal point 
models) so as to increase the degrees of freedom for 
conjoint estimation (Green & Srinivasan, 1990). 
 
Hair et al (1998:400-436) provide a comprehensive 
description of the design of a conjoint analysis experi-
ment (see Figure 2). The Hair model consists of 
seven phases, which include 14 steps.  Figure 1 high-
lights the more critical decision points in a conjoint 
experiment, according to Churchill and Iacobucci 
(2002:753). 
 
For the purposes of this article, a brief summary of 
each of the above-mentioned steps follows. 
 
Select attributes  
The attributes used will 
stem primarily from the objectives of the study. The 
researcher should be guided by the principle that the 
attributes should be both capable of being acted on 
and important to consumers. These attributes are 
those that the company can do something about; “… 
that is, it has the technology to make changes that 
might 
be 
indicated 
by 
consumer 
preferences” 
(Churchill & Iacobucci, 2002:754). 
 
Determine attribute levels 
The 
number 
of 
levels for each attribute has a direct bearing on the 
number of stimuli respondents will be asked to judge. 
The more there are, the heavier the burden that is 
placed on the consumer. Churchill and Iacobucci 
(2002:754) suggest that the researcher make the 
range for the various attributes somewhat larger than 
the range normally found but not so large as to make 
the options unbelievable. 
 
Determine attribute combinations       This will de-
termine what the full set of stimuli will look like. One 
cannot expect a respondent to provide meaningful 
judgments if there are five attributes and three levels 
(3x3x3x3x3=243) each of  rank-order judgments. 
  
Select form of presentation of stimuli and nature 
of judgments 
    Basically, three approaches can 
be used, namely: verbal description, paragraph de-
scription, and pictorial representation. When visual 
aids are used they are normally used in combination 
with verbal descriptions. The nature of the judgments 
that must be secured from the respondents is related 
to the form of presentation. One method is to ask 
them to rank the alternatives according to preference 
or intention to buy. Rating scales have recently be-
come more popular, however.  
 
Decide on aggregation of judgments     This step 
basically involves the decision whether the responses 
from consumers or groups of consumers will be ag-
gregated and, if so, how this will be done? If groups 
are formed, operationally this means estimating the 
utilities for the individual-level models and then clus-
tering them into homogeneous groups. According to 
Churchill and Iacobucci (2002:759), this highlights an 
attractive feature of conjoint analysis because it allows 
market share predictions for selected product alterna-
tives. 
 
Select analysis technique 
The final step in 
the design of a conjoint analysis project is to select the 
technique that will be used to analyse the data. The 
choice depends largely on the method that was used 
to secure the input judgments by the respondents. For 
example, when rank-order data have been obtained, 
the assumption of a linear relationship may be dubi-
ous, so a non-metric regression model may be substi-
tuted to estimate the utilities (Churchill & Iacobucci, 
2002:759).  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Multiple discriminant analysis helps to understand and 
explain research problems that involve a single cate-
36 

The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 30, 2002 
 
 
Determine attribute levels  
 
Select attributes 
 
Determine attribute  
combinations  
 
Decide how judgments will be 
aggregated  
Select form of presentation  
of stimuli and nature  
of judgments to secure from 
respondents  
 
Select analysis technique  
Figure 1:  Designing a conjoint analysis experi-
ment:  Stages of the conjoint analysis decision 
diagram (Adapted from Churchill & Iacobucci, 
2002 753)  
gorical dependent variable and several metric inde-
pendent variables. A mixed data set is also possible 
for the independent variables if the non-metric vari-
ables are coded (Hair et al, 1998:321).  According to 
Hair et al (1998:436) conjoint analysis places more 
emphasis on the ability of the researcher or manager 
to theorise about the behaviour of choice than it does 
on analytical techniques. Thus it should be viewed 
primarily as exploratory, because many of its results 
are directly attributable to basic assumptions made 
during the course of the design and the execution of 
the study. The critical interplay between the assumed 
conceptual model of decision-making and the appro-
priate elements of the conjoint analysis makes this a 
unique multivariate method (Hair et al, 1998:436). 
   
It is of critical importance for the researcher to be 
comfortable with the various research techniques, for 
it is only once he or she fully comprehends the re-
search method that the research can be expanded to 
become meaningful. As we are in a period of far-
reaching change, where information abounds, organi-
sations recognise the increasing value of making stra-
tegic and tactical decisions based on solid research. 
By conducting a conjoint study the researcher could 
determine consumer preferences and also expand her 
or his knowledge to gain an understanding of new 
emerging techniques as well as older foundational 
ones. This will ensure solid usable research.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BEARDEN, W, INGRAM, T & LaFORGE, R. 2001.  
Marketing Principles and Perspectives.  3rd Ed.  Bos-
ton.  McGraw Hill. 
BURNS, A & BUSH, R.  1998.  Marketing Research.  
2nd Ed.  London.  Prentice-Hall. 
COOPER, D & SCHINDLER, P.  1998.  Business Re-
search Methods.  6th Ed.  Boston.  McGraw Hill. 
BURGER, C & HERBST, F.  2002.  Research Paper.  
University of Pretoria. 
CHURCHILL, G & IACOBUCCI, D.  2002.  Marketing 
Research, Methodoligal Foundations.  8th Ed.  Lon-
don.  Harcourt Publishing.  
DANE, F.  1990.  Research Methods.  Pacific Grove.  
Wadsworth. 
DE VOS, R.  2002.  Research Paper.  University of 
Pretoria. 
GREEN, PE & SRINIVASAN, V.  1990.  Conjoint 
Analysis in Marketing: New Developments with Impli-
cations for Research and Practice.  Journal of Market-
ing 54 (October):3-19. 
GREEN, PE & SRINIVASAN, V.  1978.  Conjoint 
Analysis in Consumer Research: Issues and Outlook.  
Journal of Marketing 55 (September):103-123.   
HAIR, JF, ANDERSON, RE, TATHAM, RL & BLACK, 
WC.  1998.  Multivariate Data Analysis.  5th Ed.  Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey.  Prentice-Hall International. 
HAMMAN, M & KOTZE, T.  2001  Paper.  University 
of Pretoria. 
KOTLER, P.  2000.  Marketing Management. The 
Millennium Edition.  London.  Prentice-Hall. 
LANG, J & CROWN, E.  1993.  Country-of-origin ef-
37 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 30, 2002 
The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
 
Research Problem
Select objectives:
Determine contribution of independent variables
Establish model of consumer judgements
Define the total elements of total utility
Identify the key decision criteria
Choosing a Conjoint Methodology
How many attributes are to be used?
Choice-based 
Conjoint
Traditional Conjoint
Adaptive Conjoint
6 or fewer
10 or more
Less then 10
Designing Stimuli:
Selecting and Defining Factors and Levels
General characteristics
Specification issues of factors
Specification issues of levels
Communicable
Number of factors
Balanced number
Actionable
Factors multicollinearity
Ranger
Designing Stimuli:
Specifying the Basic Model Form
The composition rule: additive vs. interactive
The part-worth relationship: linear, quadratic, or separate part-worths
Trade-off Matrix
Full Profile
Pairwise Comparison
Data Collection
Choosing a Presentation Method
What type of stimuli will be used?
Data Collection:
Creating Stimuli
Develop trade-off Matrix
Data Collection
Creating the Stimuli
Will the respondent evaluate all stimuli or 
only a subset of stimuli?
Data Collection
Selecting a Preference Measure
Metric (rating) vs. nonmetric (rank order)
All Stimuli
Factorial Design
Subset of Stimuli
Fractional factorial design 
Orthogonality
Balance
Data Collection
Form of Survey Administration
Personal Interviews
Mail surveys
Phone surveys
Assumptions
Appropriateness of model form
Representatives of sample
Selecting an Estimation Technique
Metric method for ratings
Nonmetric method for rank orders
Evaluating Model Goodness of Fit
Aggregate vs. individual assessment
Assessing reliability
Assessing predictive accuracy
Applying the Conjoint Results
Segmentation
Profitability analysis
Choice simulator
Validating the Results
Internal validity
External validity
Interpreting the Results
Aggregate vs. disaggregate results
Relative importance of attributes
Research Problem
Select objectives:
Determine contribution of independent variables
Establish model of consumer judgements
Define the total elements of total utility
Identify the key decision criteria
Choosing a Conjoint Methodology
How many attributes are to be used?
Choice-based 
Conjoint
Traditional Conjoint
Adaptive Conjoint
6 or fewer
10 or more
Less then 10
Designing Stimuli:
Selecting and Defining Factors and Levels
General characteristics
Specification issues of factors
Specification issues of levels
Communicable
Number of factors
Balanced number
Actionable
Factors multicollinearity
Ranger
Designing Stimuli:
Specifying the Basic Model Form
The composition rule: additive vs. interactive
The part-worth relationship: linear, quadratic, or separate part-worths
Trade-off Matrix
Full Profile
Pairwise Comparison
Data Collection
Choosing a Presentation Method
What type of stimuli will be used?
Data Collection:
Creating Stimuli
Develop trade-off Matrix
Data Collection
Creating the Stimuli
Will the respondent evaluate all stimuli or 
only a subset of stimuli?
Data Collection
Selecting a Preference Measure
Metric (rating) vs. nonmetric (rank order)
All Stimuli
Factorial Design
Subset of Stimuli
Fractional factorial design 
Orthogonality
Balance
Data Collection
Form of Survey Administration
Personal Interviews
Mail surveys
Phone surveys
Assumptions
Appropriateness of model form
Representatives of sample
Selecting an Estimation Technique
Metric method for ratings
Nonmetric method for rank orders
Evaluating Model Goodness of Fit
Aggregate vs. individual assessment
Assessing reliability
Assessing predictive accuracy
Applying the Conjoint Results
Segmentation
Profitability analysis
Choice simulator
Validating the Results
Internal validity
External validity
Interpreting the Results
Aggregate vs. disaggregate results
Relative importance of attributes
Figure 2: 
 
Key decisions when conducting a conjoint analysis (Hair et al, 1998:401-419)  
38 

The use of conjoint analysis to determine consumer buying preferences:  A literature review 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 30, 2002 
 
fect in apparel choices: A conjoint analysis.  Journal 
of Consumer Studies and Home Economics 17(6):87-
98. 
LOUVIERE, JJ.  1988.  Analyzing Decision Making.  
Metric Conjoint Analysis.  London.  Sage Publishers.   
MARKET DECISIONS CORPORATION.  1996.  Con-
joint Analysis.  http://sba.cerf.net/mdc. 
OMRE, B.  2000.  Which Conjoint Method should I 
use?  Sawtooths Software.   
OPPEWAL, H & VRIENS, M.  2000.  Measuring per-
ceived service quality using integrated conjoint experi-
ments.  The International Journal of Bank Marketing 
18(4):154-169. 
PETER, J & DONNELLY, J.  2001.  Marketing Man-
agement.  6th Ed.  Boston.  McGraw Hill. 
RUTTER, N & EDWARDS, O.  1999.  Ready to ware.  
Forbes 163(7): 30-33. 
SUDMAN, S & BLAIR, E.  1998.  Marketing Re-
search.  Boston.  McGraw Hill. 
SCHUTTE, I.  1999.  The role of price sensitivity and 
pricing in the demand for accommodation of local 
visitors to the Kruger National Park.  Unpublished 
MCom Thesis.  University of Pretoria. 
SHETH, JN, & SISODIA, R.  1999.  Revisiting Market-
ing’s Lawlike Generalizations.  Journal of the Acad-
emy of Marketing Science 27(1): 71-87. 
WYNER, G.  1995.  Trade-off techniques and market-
ing issues.   
Marketing Research: A Magazine of Management 
and Applications 7(4): 32-43. 
39 
