Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
A hermeneutical reflection on the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ in question and answer 45 of the 
Heidelberg Catechism
Author:
Kobus Labuschagne1
Affiliation:
1Department of Church 
History and Church Polity, 
University of Pretoria, 
South Africa
Correspondence to:
Kobus Labuschagne
Email:
kobus.labuschagne@
telkomsa.net
Postal address:
Private Bag X20, Hatfield 
0028, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 15 Mar. 2013
Accepted: 28 June 2013
Published: 03 Oct. 2013
How to cite this article:
Labuschagne, K., 2013, ‘A 
hermeneutical reflection 
on the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ in question and 
answer 45 of the Heidelberg 
Catechism’, In die Skriflig/In 
Luce Verbi 47(2), Art. #709, 
10 pages. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
Note:
Dr Kobus (J.P.) Labuschagne 
is participating as research 
fellow of Prof. Dr Graham 
Duncan, Department of 
Church History and Church 
Polity, Faculty of Theology, 
University of Pretoria, 
South Africa.
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
This article is an attempt to elaborate hermeneutically on the different historical contexts, 
related the one to the other and to the centre point of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, in question 
and answer 45 of the Heidelberg Catechism. The aim is not only to find the true meaning that 
the Heidelberg Catechism intends to convey in the mentioned question and answer, but also 
to explain the underlying hermeneutical thinking as well as to bring to the surface and explain 
alternative assumptions that ordinary church-going Christians experience as the unusual 
outcome of an unknown and different kind of approach. Different hermeneutical processes 
lead to different outcomes of understanding − sometimes worlds apart.
Introduction
Arguably, for a considerable number of church-going Christians there are tendencies within and 
surrounding the church nowadays that, to them, reflect a negative kind of theology and that 
they feel that it is more likely to harm the church than unite people and build the church in the 
service of the Lord. In its search for answers within man’s reach, pointing hopefully at least in the 
direction of truth and reality, this article has been conducted in close conjunction with specific 
hermeneutical processes of understanding. Different hermeneutical processes lead to different 
outcomes of understanding − sometimes worlds apart. In our search for answers, history presents 
us with ample and indispensable evidence that ought to be taken into account.
Different theological approaches seem to be an inevitable part of reality (cf. 1 Cor 1:22–24 − two 
groups want man to be in easy control, and the third accept God’s control of revealing himself). 
Whilst theological integrity needs to be required and respected, it is certainly worthwhile to take 
Karl Barth’s (1972) comment into consideration:
The theology of any period must be strong and free enough to give a calm, attentive and open hearing not 
only to the voices of the Church Fathers, not only to favourite voices, not only to the voices of the classical 
past, but to all the voices of the past […] It may always be that we have especial need of quite unsuspected 
(and among these, of quite unwelcome) voices in one sense or another. (p. 17)
In 2013 we have the privilege of celebrating the major contribution of the Heidelberg Catechism 
(HC) in the 450 years since its first publication in 1563. The HC is widely accepted as part of 
the reformed confessional basis, and has proven itself to remain as a significant force in the 
intellectual development of Protestantism. Kevin L. DeYoung (2010:16) claims: ‘Besides the Bible, 
John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress, and Thomas à Kempis’ Imitation of Christ, the HC is the most 
widely circulated book in the world.’ 
The HC was in some ways the result of the fatherly initiative of Frederick III, ‘who commissioned 
the HC, directed its production, secured its approval by a Heidelberg synod in January 1563, and 
defended it before the imperial diet three years later’ (Bierma 2005a:52). What Frederick had in 
mind, was the goal of uniting Protestant groups in the Palatinate (Bierma ibid:49). The consensus 
Page 1 of 10
’n Hermeneutiese besinning oor die opstanding van Jesus Christus in vraag en antwoord 
45 van die Heidelbergse Kategismus. Vanuit die sentrale punt van die opstanding van Jesus 
Christus in vraag en antwoord 45 van die Heidelbergse Kategismus, wil hierdie artikel in ’n 
hermeneutiese besinning oor die verskillende verbandhoudende historiese kontekste uitbrei. 
Die doel is nie slegs om die ware betekenis te vind van wat die Heidelbergse Kategismus 
in genoemde vraag en antwoord poog om weer te gee nie, maar ook om die onderliggende 
hermeneutiese denke te verduidelik en alternatiewe aannames, wat gewone Christen-
kerkgangers as ’n vreemde en verskillende benaderings ervaar, na die oppervlakte te bring 
en te verduidelik. Verskillende hermeneutiese prosesse lei tot verskillende uitkomste van 
verstaan – soms wêrelde van mekaar verwyderd. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
amongst researchers today is that, although the HC was to 
some extent a team effort of the leading theologians and church 
officials of the Palatinate, Zacharias Ursinus (1534–1583) was 
in all likelihood the primary author and final editor of the 
HC, and he became its chief expositor and apologist since its 
publication in 1563 (cf. Bierma ibid:71–74). The intent of the 
HC was indeed from the beginning to overcome the divisions 
amongst the Protestant groups (Bierma 2005b): 
The focus is nearly always on common theological ground among 
the followers of Melanchthon, Calvin, and Bullinger. In this 
limited respect, at least, we may speak of the ecumenical spirit 
of the HC. (p. 102) 
This article is an attempt to elaborate hermeneutically on the 
contribution of the different historical contexts (related to 
the centre point of the resurrection of Jesus Christ) towards 
a better understanding of the true meaning of question and 
answer 45 of the HC. The aim is, however, not only to find the 
real meaning of what the HC says in the mentioned question 
and answer, and to explain its underlying hermeneutical 
thinking, but also to bring alternative views to the surface and 
to explain those assumptions, which ordinary church-going 
Christians experience as, to them, the unusual outcome of an 
unknown and different kind of approach.
Question 45 of the HC reads: ‘What benefit do we receive 
from “the resurrection” of Christ?’, with the answer reading 
(Barth 1964): 
First, by his resurrection he has overcome death that he might 
make us share in the righteousness which he has obtained for us 
through his death. Second, we too are now raised by his power 
to a new life. Third, the resurrection of Christ is a sure pledge to 
us of our blessed resurrection. (p. 73)
Methodological consideration and 
accountability
With words we express meaning and understanding. Words 
are, however, always related to a background or context. 
Then there is also the ripple effect created by multiple 
interdependent contexts to contend with. Context operates 
through both word and event. Context is the originating factor, 
resulting in our words through which we give meaning. 
Context cannot be downplayed, nor underestimated. Jacques 
Derrida’s sentence is well-known: ‘[T]here is nothing but 
context, and therefore: there is no outside-the-text’ (cf. 
Maley 2011:1). By taking the various related contexts into 
consideration, the scope of our existing understanding 
widens. Referring to the ‘contextual action’ that leads to a 
change of meaning in a word, Paul Ricoeur (2009:166) says 
that a ‘word is always the bearer of the “emergent meaning” 
which specific contexts confer upon it’. Specific contexts, 
which emerge through both words and real events, play a 
decisive role in the content we express in words. And through 
content, we communicate meaning and understanding. Relation 
to contexts implies that the interpretation of ‘metaphors 
is illuminated by the interpretation of the text as a whole 
and by the clarification of the kind of world which the work 
projects’ (Ricoeur ibid:180–181). Therefore, fragmentation 
of the text and losing sight of various related contexts lead 
to evidence and meaning being destroyed. Not losing sight 
of the backgrounds that metaphors have in real events, 
Jürgen Moltmann (2000:166) adds that ‘a metaphor begins to 
illuminate only if not everything is metaphorical’.
Elaborating on context, Martin Kähler (1835–1912) became 
aware of the effect that the Lord Jesus had on people, especially 
the apostles and their associates. Kähler worked backwards 
− from effects to the causes of the effects, the context, namely 
the Christ-event and the person of the Lord Jesus (cf. Kähler 
1964:62–71). In his introduction to Kähler’s book, The so-
called historical Jesus and the historic, biblical Christ, Carl E. 
Braaten notes that it was important to Kähler to break 
through Schleiermacher’s ‘monistic immanentalism’ and to 
‘escape the limitations of subjectivism’, to recover ‘historical 
revelation’, to object when ‘a measure of productivity is 
conceded to the religious consciousness as such’, and to 
object to ‘a faith which begins by relying upon itself, upon 
the fact of its own existence’, which would mean the loss of 
the ‘immediate relation to the historic, biblical Christ’ (Kähler 
ibid:13). Working backwards from the effect to the cause, 
Kähler (ibid) refers to:
[T]he Jesus whom the eyes of faith behold at every step he takes 
and through every syllable he utters − the Jesus whose image 
we impress upon our minds because we both would and do 
commune with him, our risen, living Lord. The person of our 
living Savior, the person of the Word incarnate, of God revealed, 
gazes upon us from the features of that image which has deeply 
impressed itself on the memory of his followers […] which was 
finally disclosed and perfected through the illumination of his 
Spirit. (pp. 66–67)
Gadamer identifies effect with understanding in his exposition of 
how historically effected consciousness (wirkungsgeschichtliches 
Bewuβtsein) operates: ‘Understanding proves to be a kind 
of effect and knows itself as such’ (Gadamer 2006:336). He 
(Gadamer ibid) also states: 
When a naïve faith in scientific method denies the existence 
of effective history, there can be an actual deformation of 
knowledge […] Consciousness of being affected by history 
(wirkungsgeschichtliches Bewuβtsein) is primarily consciousness of 
the hermeneutical situation. (pp. 300–301) 
Furthermore, what needs to take place when studying texts 
and related contexts, is what Gadamer (2006) calls a ‘fusion 
of horizons’:
[U]nderstanding is certainly not concerned with […] reconstructing 
the way the text came into being. Rather, one intends to 
understand the text itself. But this means that the interpreter’s own 
thoughts too have gone into re-awakening the text’s meaning. 
In this the interpreter’s own horizon is decisive, yet not as a 
personal standpoint that he maintains or enforces, but more as 
an opinion and a possibility that one brings into play and puts 
at risk, and that helps one truly to make one’s own what the text 
says. I have described this above as a ‘fusion of horizons’. (p. 390)
There should be guarded against the reflection of the researcher 
obscuring the text. Reflection is then merely the projection of 
the researcher’s contemporary predetermined convictions, 
neutralising the influence of the text (or the past). Instead, 
a consciousness is required in which history, as object of 
the research, is allowed to approach the researcher and 
Page 2 of 10

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 10
express itself (cf. Gadamer 2006:336–341). Richard E. Palmer 
(1969) adds:
The idea of freeing understanding and interpretation from the 
prejudices of the prevailing opinion of the time is quite common 
to us. It would be ridiculous, we commonly say, to judge the 
achievements of a past age by the standards of today. The 
objective of historical knowledge, then, can only be fulfilled 
through freedom from personal ideas and values on a subject 
and a perfectly ‘open mind’ to the world of ideas and values of 
the past. (p. 181)
Yet, in referring to the so-called New Hermeneutic, William 
W. Klein, Craig L. Blomberg and Robert L. Hubbard (1993) 
observe:
Instead of employing a methodology or process for determining 
the meaning of texts (i.e., what they historically intended to 
communicate) [… ] They studied the text through the lenses of 
today, rather than seeking to understand life today through the 
interpretation of the text. (p. 105)
We cannot change what happened in the past; we cannot 
invent history (cf. Young 2007:xiv).
This article is committed to the search for meaning and 
understanding by disclosing specific historical contexts 
imperative to understanding the HC: the contexts of the 
Reformation as well as the New Testament (NT) and Early 
Church. The destiny of the Early Church was entwined with 
the period of the NT, with both their contexts becoming very 
important in the understanding of the other.
The hermeneutical point of 
departure
There are theologians who explain question and answer 45 of 
the HC, and the Easter message as such, in a purely spiritual 
way. In such cases, we are presented with only the challenge 
and idea of a new and better way of living. Metaphorically, a 
resurrection to a new life of faith is suggested. For this kind 
of faith there is accordingly no need for a background in a 
real event of a real and bodily resurrection of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976) refrains from referring 
to ‘tangible demonstrations’ and cannot see in the Easter 
stories ‘more than they are able to be: signs and pictures of 
the Easter faith’ (Bultmann 1993:57). Bultmann (1989) stresses 
the human consciousness as man’s last resort: 
[W]e can talk about God’s act only if we at the same time talk 
about our own existence, so that God’s act cannot be established 
outside our own being affected by it. (p. 113) 
He (Bultmann 1989) furthermore states that: 
[…] in the existential openness of my person […] I already 
understand what friendship, love, and fidelity are, […] because 
my existence has need of them [… ] So, too, I can understand 
what God’s grace means. (p. 105) 
The starting point and determining factor is human existence 
with its needs and, exclusively, the reasoning of the human 
mind.
In commenting on question and answer 45, Eberhard Busch 
(2010) emphatically states that if the cross and resurrection of 
Christ was only an idea, we do not need a real Christ and we 
are then entirely on our own, stepping into emptiness:
The truth of Easter […] is not a general truth that holds just as 
well independently of Christ […] at most a parable. As soon as 
his exaltation is only an example of an idea […] it is a matter that 
functions completely without him. Then in truth he is no longer 
to be found, and so the meaning of his exaltation is also no longer 
to be found by us. We humans then remain by ourselves and in 
a world that according to the Easter message ‘has passed away’ 
(2 Cor 5:17). God’s stepping in for us on the cross then points into 
emptiness […] Then it would be as though ‘Christ has not been 
raised’. (cf. 1 Cor 15:14; p. 196) 
Karl Barth (1886–1968), in his response to question and answer 
45, also decisively rejects a purely spiritualised understanding 
of the resurrection. The presupposition of the human mind’s 
inherent understanding of human existence and faith, 
without the determining impact and driving force of an 
external reality and event, is unacceptable to Barth (1964):
The ‘resurrection of Jesus Christ’ means the resurrection of this 
one person distinguished from all others, and thus an event in 
time and space just like the event of Golgotha. If it does not mean 
that, this event is reduced to a new determination of human 
existence, to the awakening of faith in the first disciples. Then 
there is no Christ for us and over us to substantiate the existence 
of Christ in us. Then the Easter message as such is subverted and 
nullified. (pp. 75–76)
On the basis of his important distinction (cf. Barth 1955:160) 
between Historie [history as scientific research] and Geschichte 
[real events as experienced and witnessed by ordinary people], 
Barth (1964) continues with his explanation:
[T]he Easter message does in fact not have the character of 
Historie […] The historian will speak here of saga and legend. If 
Bultmann wanted only to say that we are concerned here with 
history (not myth!) in the form of saga and legend, there could 
be no objection to him […] But it is not possible to deny the really 
historical character of the account because it has this form […] 
The Bible contains innumerable sagas and legends. But it would 
be false to conclude from this fact that they are not the expression 
of real happenings. In no case does the Bible intend to present 
timeless truths or myths. And so also in this case, it intends to be 
genuine history (Geschichte), but history in a form inaccessible to 
Historie. (p. 76)
Significantly, to Barth the real and only order of the Easter 
faith is as follows: Easter event, Easter message, and then Easter 
faith. He does not accept Bultmann’s subjective point of 
departure: first Easter faith, and then Easter message, and no 
preceding event (Barth 1964:76). Barth (ibid) elaborates:
Whoever begins with the Easter faith in order to make it the 
content of the Easter message and finally indulgently to let the 
Easter event fall away – his talk on this subject is boring and 
certainly not legitimate. (p. 76)
In Barth’s thinking God can never be portrayed as the 
immanent (inherent) possibility of human reasoning. 
Clearly, the crux of the matter is the two different points 
of departure in the hermeneutical process. However, 
hermeneutically the goal remains to understand. That means 
that you either start with man’s utter lack of capability to reach 
God and then have to respond to God’s self-revelation in Jesus 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 10
Christ, like Luther, Barth, Moltmann and Pannenberg, or you 
have to fall back upon the conviction of the human mind as 
your last and only resort like Bultmann and Schleiermacher, 
for instance, who went back to Immanuel Kant’s philosophy 
of the autonomous human mind and practical reason. For 
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) the spiritual world (of religion 
and faith, following from the basis of morality) is inaccessible 
to historical and scientific research. The autonomous human 
mind as sole source of the moral law, without accepting any 
heteronomy, lets subjectivity reign in the spiritual world. 
No outside power is needed for human decisions − no real 
and historical Jesus is needed. With that Kant separates 
literal understanding (in his theoretical reason, referring to 
objective scientific research) from spiritual and symbolic 
understanding (in his practical reason). 
Kant works with a concept of a ‘Supreme Being’ without 
‘limitations or admixture of empirical elements’. He indeed 
works with an understanding of two worlds (Kant 1974:371). 
This concept’s ‘validity’ (Kant ibid:372), however, is rooted 
in morality:
Now I maintain that all attempts of reason to establish a theology 
by the aid of speculation alone are fruitless, that the principles of 
reason as applied to nature do not conduct us to any theological 
truths, and, consequently, that a rational theology can have no 
existence, unless it is founded upon the laws of morality. (p. 370)
The question of which hermeneutical path was followed by 
the Heidelberg Catechism in question and answer 45 remains 
to be answered.
The explanation of question and 
answer 45 in the commentary 
of Zacharias Ursinus − The 
hermeneutical point of departure 
and the bodily resurrection 
The similarity of a broader reformation context
Two things that stand out in the Reformation’s doctrinal 
documentation: 
1.	 The Easter faith has its background in the real event of 
Christ’s resurrection. 
2.	 The resurrection is understood as a bodily resurrection, 
meaning man in unity of body and spirit.
In his study of the latest research on the two catechisms 
written by Ursinus, the Catechesis minor [Smaller Catechism 
– SC], and Catechesis maior [Larger Catechism – LC], Lyle D. 
Bierma states that ‘it is safe to conclude that the SC, a lay 
catechism that did serve as a draft for the HC, was penned 
sometime before the LC’ (Bierma 2005c:138). The SC was 
drawn up in late 1561 or early 1562, and the LC in late 
1562. The LC was intended for university students (Bierma 
ibid:138). Inevitably, both the SC and LC formed a context for 
the development of the HC. 
Christ is depicted as truly human and true God in question 
and answer 24 and 25 of the SC (Ursinus 2005a:145) and in 
question and answer 65 of the LC (Ursinus 2005b:174). In the 
HC, in his commentary on question and answer 36, Ursinus 
offers a detailed explanation of the full humanity and the full 
divinity in the one person of Christ, and then in its relation 
to man’s redemption (Ursinus 2012:207–211). Question and 
answer 33 of the SC addresses the bodily resurrection of 
Christ, stating (Ursinus 2005a):
That by his divine power he called his body back to life and 
adorned it with eternal glory, so that the human Jesus Christ, at 
the appointed time, might raise from the dead also me and all 
who believe in him. (p. 146) 
Question and answer 90 to 92 of the LC deals with the meaning 
of the bodily resurrection of Christ, and inter alia stating firmly 
and clearly: ‘That the divinity of Christ by its own almighty 
power called back to life his body [...] and adorned it with 
immortality and heavenly glory’. For those who believe in 
Christ, this means ‘death has been overcome by Christ’ and 
that ‘they have already received from him the beginnings of 
righteousness and eternal life’ (Ursinus 2005b:179).
Shifting the focus to further contexts found in the catechisms 
of Luther and Calvin as well as the Augsburg Confession, 
yields the same results. In the second article of Luther’s 
Small Catechism (May 1529), the Christology is explained by 
way of its relation to Christ being true God and true man, 
and in the third article the resurrection of the body and the 
life everlasting is expounded in the details of sanctification 
(Luther 2005a:355–356). In the third article of his Large 
Catechism (April 1529), Luther gives an exposition of the 
meaning of Christ’s ‘suffering, death, resurrection’ within the 
sphere of Ecclesiology and Pneumatology, and how it affects 
the ‘forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and 
the life everlasting’ (Luther 2005b:428–432). The Augsburg 
Confession (1530) confesses in the third article: ‘There is one 
Christ, true God and true man’ who ‘truly rose again on the 
third day’ (Augsburg Confession 2005:58). The significance 
of bodily resurrection is more than clear in, for instance 
question and answer 80 and 109 of Calvin’s Catechism (1545), 
with answer 109 going into some detail of the future human 
body (Calvyn 1981:18, 22).
The Heidelberg Catechism
As primary author, final editor, chief expositor and 
apologist of the HC, the explanations of Zacharias Ursinus 
(1534–1583) in his Commentary on the Heidelberg Catechism 
is obviously crucial and decisive. Hermeneutically, the 
context of the indispensable contribution of Ursinus becomes 
overwhelmingly important. In his interpretation of question 
and answer 45 of the HC, Ursinus gives an exposition of the 
meaning of the ‘resurrection of Christ’ in its relation to us ‘too 
[...] now raised by his power to a new life’. But his exposition 
is explicitly not a purely subjective portrayal of a new life, 
an idea, without any connection to real events. It is really the 
opposite. Hermeneutically, his point of departure is truly a 
real event − the bodily resurrection of our Lord, Jesus Christ, 
which is similar to the understanding of the NT and the Early 
Church (Ursinus 2012):
That Christ, however, did rise from the dead is proven by the 
testimony of angels, women, evangelists, apostles, and other 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 10
saints, who saw him, felt him, and conversed with him after his 
resurrection. (p. 233) 
Hermeneutically, the sequence followed by Ursinus is 
decisive: first the real event of God’s revelation in Christ, then 
afterwards the message and faith. Thus, the point of departure 
is definitely not the contemplations of the subjective and 
autonomous human mind. 
Ursinus’ explanation of the resurrection necessarily becomes 
more clear when understood in light of his exposition of 
question and answer 25, which addresses the concept of the 
holy Trinity, question and answer 33, concerning the divinity 
of Christ, and question and answer 35 and 36, pertaining to 
the two natures of the divinity and the humanity in the one 
person of Christ (Ursinus 2012:119–139, 181–202, 205–211).
According to Ursinus (2012), and similar to the testimony 
of the NT and the Early Church, the resurrection of Christ 
was a bodily resurrection (Lk 24:39) within the unity of body 
and spirit:
Yea, had not the flesh of Christ risen, ours could not rise […] He 
rose by his own power, that is […] quickened his dead body, 
reunited it with his soul, and restored to himself a blessed, 
heavenly, and glorious life, and that by his own divine virtue 
and power […] The Father raised the Son through the Son 
himself, not as through an instrument, but as through another 
person of the same essence with himself, and of infinite power 
[…] he himself raised himself by his Spirit (p.234)
[A]nd that by his Father’s, as well as by his own peculiar strength 
and power, we mean, the power not of his humanity, but of his 
Divinity. (p. 233)
He rose the same person, the same Jesus Christ, very God 
and very man, which had died; he rose according to the same 
nature in which he had suffered, which was his human nature, 
his true human nature, the very same which it was in essence 
and properties, not deified, but glorified, having laid aside all 
the infirmities to which it was subject […] The very same body, 
therefore, which had fallen a victim to death rose again; and it is 
this which affords us such great comfort. (p. 234) 
Ursinus referred to John 2:19, 5:21 and 10:18 as well as Romans 
8:11. The general correspondence with the understanding of 
the Early Church is noticeable in the words of Ursinus. The 
Early Church’s understanding of salvation as restoration is 
conspicuous in Ursinus’ words ‘restored to himself a blessed, 
heavenly, and glorious life’ (Ursinus 2012:234).
With many Scripture references, Ursinus links the resurrection 
of Christ for man’s salvation to three main purposes (cf. 
Ursinus 2012:235–237):
1.	 For our justification − the benefits of justification gained 
for man through the death of Christ for our sins, could 
only be realised once death was conquered. There is no 
real victory over sin (and death caused by it) without 
resurrection. 
2.	 For our regeneration − remission of sin becomes sufficient 
only through the new life in Christ, that is, through 
regeneration. 
3.	 To secure our resurrection and glorification − Christ has 
risen for the preservation of our new life.
In the conclusion of question and answer 45, Ursinus refers 
back to its connections with the church through the centuries 
and across the world, and also specifically to that article of 
the Apostles’ Creed in which the church and every member 
confess: ‘I believe in Christ, who rose from the dead on the 
third day’ (Ursinus 2012:241). He (Ursinus ibid) then goes on 
to explain the meaning of the article:
It means that I believe: (1) That Christ did truly recall his soul to 
his body which was dead, and quickened it. (2) That he retained 
a true soul and body; and that both are now glorified, and free 
from all infirmity. (3) That he rose by his own divine virtue and 
power. (4) That he rose for the purpose of making us partakers 
of righteousness, holiness, and glorification, which he had 
purchased for us. (p. 241) 
The Heidelberg Catechism and the Apostolic 
Tradition
When it is taken into account that a substantial part of the HC 
is concerned with the Apostles’ Creed (q & a 22–58), and that 
more than 200 pages of Ursinus’ commentary on the HC deals 
with the content and meaning of the Apostles’ Creed, it is quite 
clear that the HC has its roots in the apostolic tradition. The 
apostolic tradition is also evident when Ursinus, for instance 
refers to other Early Church creeds, ‘formed and received in 
the church’: the Nicene, the Athanasian, the Ephesian, and 
Chalcedonian (cf. Ursinus 2012:117–118).
Ursinus explains faith in terms of an encounter with the Lord 
(the Word), of becoming existentially aware of being in the 
grip of faith and experiencing the confidence in the Lord, that 
the Holy Spirit ignites in our hearts (cf. Ursinus 2012:109–116). 
In essence (Ursinus ibid): 
[F]aith cannot rely upon anything but the Word of God, as an 
immoveable foundation […] God alone is true, and his word is 
truth […] Christians must receive and believe the gospel alone 
[…] The sum and substance of the gospel, or of those things 
which are to be believed, is the Apostles’ Creed. (p. 116) 
Correspondence of Ursinus’ understanding with that which 
the Early Church understood in terms of truth, the apostolic 
tradition and apostolic succession is strikingly obvious: 
[The Creed is called apostolic] because it contains the substance 
of the doctrine of the Apostles [and] the Apostles delivered this 
sum of Christian doctrine to their disciples, and the church 
afterwards received it from them. It is called Catholic, because 
it is the one faith of all Christians. [Also] these articles constitute 
a certain form or rule with which the faith of all orthodox 
Christians should agree and conform. (Ursinus 2012:117) 
The truth of the creeds of the church (Ursinus 2012): 
[D]oes not consist in the authority or in the decrees of men […] 
but in […] perpetual agreement with the holy Scriptures, and 
with the teachings of the whole church from the time of the 
Apostles, retaining and holding fast to the doctrine which they 
delivered, and at the same time giving testimony to posterity 
that they have received this doctrine from the Apostles and those 
that heard them. (p. 118)
The determining context that the Reformation has in the Early 
Church is really indispensable for our understanding of the 
HC. The continuation of the same sort of understanding 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 10
throughout the periods of the NT, the Early Church and the 
Reformation becomes increasingly clear to the researcher. 
Alister E. McGrath expressed the significance of a theological 
background in the Early Church when he stated that it was 
unlikely for a theologian of today to understand the NT 
better than the Christians of the 1st centuries (cf. Van de Beek 
2006:248–249). 
The separation of literal and 
symbolic meaning − Creating a 
dualism
Conspicuously, since the 19th century some scholars in the 
field of research and scientific endeavour, with spurious 
assertions, have been avoiding the understanding of belief 
and doctrine in terms of the bodily and of occurrence in the 
public domain. In doing so, they are indeed pursuing a 
direction clearly different to the statements of the NT and 
the Early Church. In order to reach their own hermeneutical 
goals, these scholars end up separating the literal and 
symbolic meaning of texts. For them, separation is considered 
necessary to render an exclusively spiritual meaning to the 
text. This path of an assumed exclusively spiritual meaning 
is followed even when so much more is evident from the 
texts and at risk of being lost. At risk of being bypassed is 
the apostolic tradition’s manifestation of literal and symbolic 
meaning interacting and complementing one another (cf. 
Young 2007:xv–xvi), indeed in referring to real events and 
embodied deeds and words in life (cf. Thiselton 2007:50–55). 
The separation of the literal and the symbolic, when 
emphasising a preferred outcome of spiritual meaning, has 
its origins in the separation of the spiritual and the bodily 
or material world since the days of Plato (427–347 BC). The 
separation of the spiritual and the bodily or material world is 
often referred to as the Platonist dualism. Plato had always, in 
some way or another, considered the human body and the 
material world as inferior to the world of spirit and the ideas, 
of which the bodily and material were merely imperfect copies. 
Plato (1962:126) says that ‘our souls had a previous existence 
[…] and they possessed of intelligence’. Nature teaches the 
soul ‘to rule and govern’ and in this the soul ‘resembles the 
divine’. Nature teaches the body ‘to serve and be subject’ and 
in this the body resembles ‘the mortal part’ (Plato ibid:131). 
Regarding the eternal future of the soul, Plato (ibid) adds:
The soul is most like that which is divine, immortal, intelligible 
[…] whereas body is most like that which is human, mortal […] 
unintelligible […] (p. 132)
But no soul which has not practiced philosophy, and is not 
absolutely pure when it leaves the body, may attain to the divine 
nature […] (p. 135)
Every seeker after wisdom knows that up to the time when 
philosophy takes it over his soul is a helpless prisoner, chained 
hand and foot in the body, compelled to view reality not directly 
but only through its prison bars […] (p. 135)
A philosopher’s soul will take the view which I have described 
[…] because such a soul believes […] that after death it reaches a 
place which is kindred and similar to its own nature, and there 
is rid for ever of human ills… the soul can have no grounds for 
fearing that on its separation from the body it will be blown 
away […] and cease to exist altogether. (p. 137)
Platonism (in its subjective approach) always retained a 
very optimistic view of the capabilities of the human mind, 
in terms of knowledge, somehow connecting to the divine 
world. ‘[K]inship between the soul and the divine was the 
basis of Platonic idealism’ (Young 2007:xvi). 
The dualism continues in Neo-Platonism. Neo-Platonism 
was widely expressed on the cultural scene during the time 
of the NT and the Early Church − dividing the spiritual and 
bodily worlds, and dividing literal and symbolic meaning.
Dividing the spiritual and bodily worlds, and 
dividing literal and symbolic meaning in Gnostic 
thinking 
The influence of Neo-Platonism is apparent in the views of 
Gnosticism. Anthony Thiselton’s observation that Gnostic 
writings of the 2nd and 3rd centuries were even more hostile 
towards the bodily and the earthly is significant:
Gnostic writers held a more radical and far-reaching dualism. 
No gnostic could have written that the divine Word became 
flesh (John 1:14), nor could any have urged, ‘Glorify God in your 
body’ (1 Cor. 6:20). The gnostic texts of the second and early third 
centuries witness to a radical disjunction between a transcendent 
realm of light or spirit […] and the realm of the bodily or material 
[…] The human self as an embodied being cannot be saved in 
gnosticism. Only the spirit can be saved by gnosis. (Thiselton 
2007:51) 
The Gnostics held the conviction of gnosis as a secret 
knowledge of the initiated, and that only the spirit could be 
saved by gnosis. The Gnostics were not like the Early Church, 
explaining their testimony in ‘a narrative of occurrences in 
the public domain’. For the Gnostics, their gnosis took form 
in ‘aphorisms, abstract systems, or myths’, and they would 
therefore even explain the narratives of the Christian Gospels 
in wholly spiritual terms (Thiselton 2007:51).
The apostolic tradition − 
Superseding the Platonist dualism
The apostolic tradition was entirely different from the 
Gnostic view; it superseded the Platonist dualism of splitting 
literal and symbolic meaning − the bodily and the spiritual. 
Firmly grounded in the apostolic tradition, the message of the 
Early Church maintained the unity of body and mind and was 
quite the opposite of subjective philosophical speculation: in 
contrast to the spiritualised and docetic religious views of the 
Gnostics. Therefore, when the unexpected howler appears in 
Martin Heidegger’s approval (‘Nietzsche was right in saying 
that Christianity is Platonism for the people’; Thiselton 
2007:52), Thiselton (2007:52–53) immediately, and correctly, 
responds: ‘All the same, this is not the Christianity of the 
NT and of the early Fathers who guarded and transmitted 
apostolic tradition.’ Subscribing to the philosophical views of 
Neo-Platonism, the Gnostics, thinking entirely subjectively, 
had their point of departure firmly in the human mind. In 
following the apostolic tradition, the faith of the early fathers 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 10
and the Early Church found its point of departure outside of 
the human mind, in the reality in and surrounding the person 
of the Lord, Jesus Christ. Karl Barth (1886–1968) incisively 
describes this when he refers to the experience and response 
of the Early Church to the events (Ereignisse) of Christ’s 
resurrection and ascension (Barth 2000):
It is an event which involves a definite seeing with the eyes and 
hearing with the ears and handling with the hands […] then 
believing […] and later attested by them. […] an event within the 
world, in time and space. It, too, was experienced and attested, 
not only inwardly but outwardly, by certain men. (p. 143)
With reference to the testimony to the resurrection of Christ, 
Barth’s words (1955:160) ‘mit Augen gesehen, mit Ohren 
gehört, mit den Händen betastet’ remind us of the exposition 
of Ursinus on question and answer 45 of the HC, connecting 
the proclaiming of the message to ‘saw him, felt him, and 
conversed with him after his resurrection’ (Ursinus 2012:233).
The apostles and their associates were the people closest to 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and their testimony was received by 
the Early Church as truth. From there onwards, the Early 
Church (true to the meaning of the Latin verb trado, which 
means to hand on) found their mission in the tradition of 
the apostles − the tradition of handing on the truth of the 
Lord Jesus Christ from generation to generation. Apostolic 
succession (the succession of bishops from the apostles Peter 
and Paul and onwards) was part of the apostolic tradition. 
In terms of apostolic succession, the perpetual authority and 
responsibility of the bishops were focused on one mission: 
the handing on of the truth (cf. Irenaeus 2010a:278–280). 
To illustrate in the case of Irenaeus: from Irenaeus bishop of 
Lyons (pre-177 to pre-200) the line of succession and handing 
on of the truth can be traced back to Polycarp bishop of 
Smirna (c.69–155), and through him to the apostles (Irenaeus 
2010a:280). Irenaeus (ibid) explains his connections through 
Polycarp, ‘whom I also saw in my early youth’:
But Polycarp also was not only instructed by apostles, and 
conversed with many who had seen Christ […] gloriously and 
most nobly suffering martyrdom, departed this life, having 
always taught the things which he had learned from the apostles, 
and which the Church has handed down, and which alone are 
true. (p. 280)
In the mind of Irenaeus (2010a) apostolic tradition and apostolic 
succession had no connection with the much later claims to 
ecclesiastical power politics, but it was primarily concerned 
with the truth:
[T]he apostolic tradition has been preserved continuously by 
those [faithful men] who exist everywhere. (p. 279)
[A]nd we are in a position to reckon up those who were by the 
apostles instituted bishops of the Churches, and [to demonstrate] 
the succession of these men to our own times; those who neither 
taught nor knew of anything like what these [heretics] rave about. 
(p. 278)
[A]nd by this succession, the ecclesiastical tradition from the 
apostles, and the preaching of the truth, have come down to us. 
And this is most abundant proof that there is one and the same 
vivifying faith, which has been preserved in the Church from the 
apostles until now, and handed down in truth. (p. 280)
It is therefore no surprise to read much later about handing 
down the truth in the Confession of Chalcedon (in 451): 
[J]ust as the prophets taught from the beginning about him, and 
as the Lord Jesus Christ himself instructed us, and as the creed of 
the fathers handed it down to us. (Drobner 2007:448) 
Everyday life and faith in the Early Church stood in direct 
opposition to the Gnostics and their views. This can be 
illustrated from Irenaeus’ recollection of a meeting between 
Polycarp and Marcion, who had affinities with certain gnostic 
ideas (Lohse 1985:28):
And Polycarp himself replied to Marcion, who met him on one 
occasion, and said, ‘Dost thou know me?’ ‘I do know thee, the 
first-born of Satan.’ Such was the horror which the apostles and 
their disciples had against holding even verbal communication 
with any corrupters of the truth. (Irenaeus 2010a:281)
The Early Church succeeded in overcoming and rejecting 
the Platonist dualism by retaining the understanding of the 
whole human person (body and mind) and the embodied Christ, 
and not by separating the interaction of literal and symbolic 
meaning.
The embodied Christ and the 
whole human person in the New 
Testament and the Early Church’s 
understanding of restoration and 
salvation
The NT and the Early Church fathers see and understand 
man in the unity of body and mind. Anthony Thiselton (2007) 
points out that the NT portrays both the words and the deeds 
of Christ as related to a physical and human body:
The New Testament […] at times prefers to focus on Christ as the 
‘place’ of meeting rather than on an earthly place as such. Even 
so, Christ enters the scene as the ‘enfleshed Word’ (John 1:14), and 
as the embodied Christ. His ‘flesh’ is the entire embodied medium 
of his deeds and words in life (Heb. 5:7). (p. 55) 
The NT, however, does not give any detail on the mystery 
of the resurrected body and glorification. In referring to the 
apostle Paul’s arguments in 1 Corinthians 15, John Macquarrie 
(2003) mentions:
Paul’s arguments, make it clear that what is resurrected is not 
the dead body that has been laid in the grave […] So resurrection 
cannot be anything so simple as the resuscitation of a corpse […] 
It would be quite different from the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 
who the New Testament claims, has conquered death and is 
alive for ever. To go back to Paul’s argument, a natural body of 
flesh and blood could not be the bearer of a death-transcending 
existence. (p. 408)
Jürgen Moltmann (2010) emphasises the whole man in the 
bodily resurrection:
Ideas about a resurrection from the dead presuppose death, and 
what is being thought of is quite clearly a bodily resurrection. 
Instead of ‘raising’ Paul can also say zoopoiesis, meaning the 
giving life to mortal bodies through the spirit of life which 
‘dwells’ in them (Rom. 8:11). Paul also shows awareness of 
the special nature of the woman’s body, with its ability to give 
birth, when he writes: ‘The whole creation has been groaning 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 10
in travail till now’ (Rom. 8:22). In 1 Cor. 15 he calls the same 
process ‘changing’, transformation, and in Phil 3:21 he looks to 
the ‘glorious (transfigured) body of Christ’. If we take the word 
zoopoiesis, we mean the lived life; transformation presupposes 
life as ‘minted form which takes shape as it lives’, as Goethe 
wrote. Transfiguration, finally, anticipates the transmutation 
into the beauty of the divine life. According to all these ideas, 
what comes into being after death in the place of mortal life is 
not a different life. It is this mortal, this lived, and this loved life 
which will be raised, healed, reconciled, completed, and thus 
find its divine destiny. (pp. 61–62) 
Robert H. Gundry (1994) rejects the view that the NT ‘presents 
conflicting versions of Jesus’ resurrection’ − one being a 
bodily version and the other a spiritual version:
My position is threefold: (1) the NT presents a unified view of 
the nature of Jesus’ resurrection; (2) according to that view, he 
rose from the dead in a physical body; and (3) the physicality of 
that body forms an essential element of his risen being. (p. 206)
Wolfhart Pannenberg (1976) states quite clearly that 
resurrection does not imply a disembodied spirituality:
Paul made it unequivocally clear that for him ‘resurrection 
from the dead’ did not mean the return to earthly life, but a 
transformation into the new life of a new body. In 1 Cor. 15:35–56 
Paul expressly deals with the question how we ought to think 
of the physical reality of the person raised from the dead. Here 
it counts for him as being a settled thing that the future body 
will be a different body from the present one; it will not be a 
physical body but − as Paul expresses it − a ‘spiritual body’ 
(1 Cor. 15:43f.). What he means by this is not a disembodied 
spirituality, in the sense of some Platonic tradition or other … 
Paul describes the relation of the immortal, spiritual body to the 
present mortal, physical body as a radical transformation […] 
On the other hand, however, it is this present earthly body which 
will experience the transformation; so that the transformation 
stands in a relationship to our present existence. What is to be 
created in place of the present body is not something totally 
different from it.
What Paul has to say here does not apply in the first place to 
the resurrection of Jesus especially; his subject is the resurrection 
which Christians have to expect. For Paul, however, the two 
belong together. In his view, the resurrection of Jesus justifies 
Christians in hoping for their own resurrection. It is of the 
greatest importance for him that Christians should participate 
in that particular reality which has already appeared in Christ. 
(pp. 98–99)
An important document of the World Council of Churches 
(1996) stresses the reality of the risen Christ and the future 
new humanity:
The mystery of the resurrection has always provoked different 
interpretations. These should, however, not divide Christians as 
long as they together confess the reality of the resurrected Jesus 
[…] The life that is based on the resurrection of Jesus seeks […] 
the renewal of the whole human community since it knows that 
Jesus rose again to be the head and Lord of the new humanity. 
(pp. 67–68)
From the consensus of the ecumenical world, it is clear that 
there is really no way of getting away from the determining 
context of ‘the language of the fathers and the councils of the 
early church’ (Agreed Statement on Christology 2000:289). 
From generation to generation, the apostolic tradition has been 
carrying its message of man’s salvation and the restoration of 
creation, as understood on the basis of God’s acts in the real 
events of the cross and resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Lord. 
Furthermore, this message knows and accepts no argument 
for diminishing the status and importance of the unity of 
the full divinity and the full humanity in the one person of 
Christ − in order to favour an independent portrayal of a new 
human existence according to man’s own design. To discard 
the ecumenical consensus of the Early Church would, in 
effect, mean discontinuing being part of the Christian Church 
(cf. Macquarrie 2003:383). 
On the ecumenical front in 1991, through the initiative of the 
World Alliance of Reformed Churches (WARC), five Oriental 
Orthodox churches (Coptic, Syrian, Armenian, Ethiopian 
and Malankara [Indian]) showed their openness to enter into 
a bilateral dialogue. The highlights of this dialogue to date 
have been the 1994 Agreed Statement on Christology and the 
1998 Draft Common Statement, summarising the elements of 
the discussion to that date (Agreed Statement on Christology 
2000:291). Merely a few sentences from the Agreed Statement 
on the Christology (ibid) already underline the relevance for 
our study:
[The] incarnate Son is the manifestation of the Holy Trinity in the 
sphere of earthly human history […] God assumes the human 
condition and nature in all their aspects and dimensions. All this 
takes place for us human beings and for our salvation [The] Son 
[…] became fully human in body and soul so that through it he 
might unite himself with the entire creation. (pp. 288–289)
Furthermore, in referring to the full divinity and full 
humanity of Christ (Agreed Statement on Christology 2000):
What can be said is that through the perchoresis or interpenetration 
of the two natures in the unity of Christ’s person the human 
nature is restored, sustained and glorified as the new and perfect 
humanity of the last Adam […] (p. 289)
Frances Young points out that, in identifying the link 
between man’s salvation and God’s creation and recreation 
in Christ, recent scholarship in Early Church and Patristic 
studies persistently affirmed the physical character of the 
resurrection (Young 2007:xv). Reading the work of the early 
Church Fathers confirms this. Irenaeus (pre-177 to pre-200) 
understands man’s salvation in terms of restoration and 
recreation, and obviously refers to ‘salvation of the complete 
man, that is, of the soul and body’ (Irenaeus 2010b:606–607). 
In explaining man’s salvation, Origenes (c.185–254) refers to 
the whole human person of Christ, but without losing sight 
of both the humanity and the divinity in the one person of 
Christ: ‘The humanity of the Word, of “the immortal God”, 
involves “a mortal body and a human soul”, whilst still 
remaining “essentially the Word”’ (Origenes 2007:503). 
When referring to God’s intervention in Christ for the sake 
of man’s salvation, Tertullian (c.160–c.220) emphasises the 
whole person of man (Tertullian 2007):
[T]he restoration of flesh and blood, in order the more emphatically 
to express the resurrection of such bodies as have even been 
devoured […] Since, however, things which belong to the soul 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 9 of 10
have nothing allegorical in them, neither therefore have those 
which belong to the body. For man is as much body as he is soul 
[…] (p. 568)
[T]hings which are destined for the body should be carefully 
understood in a bodily sense, − not in a spiritual sense [The] 
bodily character of the flesh is indicated by our Lord whenever He 
mentions the resurrection, at the same time without disparagement 
to the corporeal nature of the soul […] (p. 569)
For Tertullian (cf. 2007:584–588), the entire person of the 
resurrected Christ, at the right hand of God in heaven, is the 
guarantee for the resurrection of our flesh:
[I]n Christ you have acquired both heaven and the kingdom of 
God; Jesus is still sitting there at the right hand of the Father, 
man, yet God − the last Adam, yet the primary Word − flesh and 
blood, yet purer than ours − who ’shall descend in like manner 
as He ascended into heaven‘ the same both in substance and in 
form. (p. 584)
For the Early Church fathers, indeed significantly, man’s 
salvation is necessarily expressed in terms of a bodily 
resurrection and the restoration of the entire human person, and 
then specifically related to the cross and resurrection of the 
embodied Christ. In the Early Church’s understanding, ‘some 
inherent immortality of the soul as the Platonists assumed’ 
is pure conjecture (cf. Young 2007:85). Frances Young (2010) 
elaborates:
It is important to emphasise the physicality of the Church’s 
teaching. In the face of heretics who turned resurrection into 
immortality of the soul, the Church linked it with creation out of 
nothing. If God can create once, he can create again, and what it 
is all about is the restoration of what we might call full-bodied 
life […] Christ’s resurrection was the first-fruits which confirmed 
the message for those who became his disciples, and prepared 
themselves for his coming kingdom. (p. 57)
Conclusion
The contexts of the NT, the Early Church and the Reformation, 
impacting on the faith and meaning finally expressed in 
the text of the HC and manifesting a united horizon of 
understanding with the text of the Catechism, clearly and 
solely allow for an interpretation based upon a point of 
departure in the objective reality of the bodily resurrection of 
Christ, signifying proleptically man’s future salvation. The 
bodily resurrection reflected in this fusion of understanding 
in effect means understanding man in terms of the unity 
of body and mind. In answer 45, the HC explained man’s 
redemption, salvation, new life and especially man’s future − 
on the basis of Christ’s resurrection. Even today, theologians 
of reformed orientation can indeed build upon the sound 
theological basis of the HC. Understood in conjunction with 
Wolfhart Pannenberg’s concept of prolepsis, the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ is representing and actualising man’s future in 
an event that has already happened, i.e. realising something 
of the future in the present. Pannenberg stresses the 
significance of the event of the resurrection of Jesus Christ in 
terms of its unity with the future and, indeed, as a proleptic 
understanding of the future: ‘[W]ith Jesus the end is not 
only […] seen in advance, but it has happened in advance’ 
(Pannenberg 1973:61; cf. pp. 108–114, 157, 185, 186).
Merely offering a spiritual or symbolic expression, without 
the background of a real event, as interpretation for question 
and answer 45, does not correspond with the original 
intention of the HC, as written and explained by Ursinus in 
his commentary. Both the HC and the commentary of Ursinus 
were based on the ecumenical understanding of Ursinus’ time, 
and were surely intended as an understanding true to the NT 
and the Early Church. When the hermeneutical understanding 
of the HC originates from the actual event of the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ, clearly following the understanding of the 
NT and the apostolic tradition, God’s revelation in Christ 
comes to the fore − meaning that God in his encounter with 
man is in control. When taking revelation into account, it is 
avoided that God could be considered the product of the 
human mind.
When the testimony of the real and impacting environment 
of the NT and the Early Church becomes hidden behind the 
contemporary convictions and perceptions of the autonomous 
human mind, then the original message of salvation and 
hope simply fades away.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced him 
in writing this article.
References
Agreed Statement on Christology, 2000, ‘A statement of the Reformed-Orthodox 
dialogue, Limassol, Cyprus 1994’, in J. Gros, H. Meyer & W.G. Rusch (eds.) Growth 
in Agreement II − Reports and agreed statements of ecumenical conversations on 
a world level: 1982−1998, WCC/Eerdmans, Geneva/Grand Rapids.
Augsburg Confession, 2005, ‘Which was submitted to His Imperial Majesty Charles V 
at the Imperial meeting of Augsburg in the year 1530’, in P.T. McCain, R.C. Baker, 
G.E. Veith & E.A. Engelbrecht, CONCORDIA −The Lutheran confessions (A reader’s 
edition of the book of Concord), transl. W. Hermann, T. Dau & G.F. Bente, pp. 45–89, 
Concordia Publishing House, Saint Louis.
Barth, K., 1955, Die Kirchliche Dogmatik IV, 2 – Die Lehre von der Versöhnung, 
Evangelischer Verlag, Zürich.
Barth, K., 1964, The Heidelberg Catechism for today, transl. S.C. Guthrie, Epworth Press, 
London. 
Barth, K., 1972, Protestant theology in the nineteenth century, transl. B. Cozens & J. 
Bowden, SCM Press, London. PMCid:PMC1786127
Barth, K., 2000, Church Dogmatics IV, 2 − The doctrine of reconciliation, transl. G.W. 
Bromiley, T&T Clark, Edinburgh.
Bierma, L.D., 2005a, ‘The purpose and the authorship of the Heidelberg Catechism’, in 
L.D. Bierma (ed.), An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism − Sources, history 
and theology, pp. 49–74, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids.
Bierma, L.D., 2005b, ‘The sources and the theological orientation of the Heidelberg 
Catechism’, in L.D. Bierma (ed.), An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism – 
Sources, history and theology, pp. 75–102, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids.
Bierma, L.D. (ed.), 2005c, An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism – Sources, history 
and theology, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids. 
Bultmann, R., 1989, New Testament and mythology – and other basic writings, transl. 
S.M Ogden, Fortress Press, Philadelphia.
Bultmann, R., 1993, Theology of the New Testament, vol. 1, transl. K. Grobel, SCM Press, 
London. 
Busch, E., 2010, Drawn to freedom − Christian faith today in conversation with the 
Heidelberg Catechism, transl. W.H. Rader, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Calvyn, J., 1981, Calvyn se Kategismus, transl. H.W. Simpson, Potchefstroomse Teologiese 
Publikasies, Potchefstroom. 
DeYoung, K.L., 2010, The good news we almost forgot − Rediscovering the gospel in a 
16th century Catechism, Moody Publishers, Chicago.
Drobner, H.R., 2007, The fathers of the church − A comprehensive introduction, transl. 
S.S. Schatzmann, Hendrickson Publishers, Massachusetts.
Gadamer, H-G., 2006, Truth and method, transl. J. Weinsheimer & D.G. Marshall, 
Continuum, London.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.709
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 10 of 10
Gundry, R.H., 1994, ‘The essential physicality of Jesus’ resurrection according to the 
New Testament’, in J.B. Green & M. Turner (eds.), Jesus of Nazareth: Lord and 
Christ. Essays on the historical Jesus and New Testament Christology, pp. 204–219, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Irenaeus, 2010a, ‘Against Heresies (Book III),’ in A. Roberts, J. Donaldson & A. Cleveland 
Coxe (eds.), Saint Irenaeus of Lyons − Against Heresies, pp. 275–391, Ex Fontibus, 
USA. 
Irenaeus, 2010b, ‘Against Heresies (Book V)’, in A. Roberts, J. Donaldson & A. Cleveland 
Coxe (eds.), Saint Irenaeus of Lyons − Against Heresies, pp. 553–655, Ex Fontibus, 
USA. 
Kähler, M., 1964, The so-called historical Jesus and the historic, biblical Christ, transl. 
C.E. Braaten, Fortress Press, Philadelphia. 
Kant, I., 1974, Critique of pure reason, transl. J.M.D. Meiklejohn, J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd., 
London.
Klein, W.W., Blomberg, C.L. & Hubbard, R.L., 1993, Introduction to Biblical interpretation, 
Word Publishing, Dallas/London/Vancouver/Melbourne. 
Lohse, B., 1985, A short history of Christian doctrine, transl. F.E. Stoeffler, Fortress Press, 
Philadelphia.
Luther, M., 2005a, ‘Small Catechism’, in P.T. McCain, R.C. Baker, G.E. Veith & E.A. 
Engelbrecht (eds.), CONCORDIA − The Lutheran confessions (A reader’s edition 
of the book of Concord), transl. W. Hermann, T. Dau & G.F. Bente, pp. 333–374, 
Concordia Publishing House, Saint Louis.
Luther, M., 2005b, ‘Large Catechism’, in P.T. McCain, R.C. Baker, G.E. Veith & E.A. 
Engelbrecht (eds.), CONCORDIA −The Lutheran confessions (A reader’s edition 
of the book of Concord), transl. W. Hermann, T. Dau & G.F. Bente, pp. 375–470, 
Concordia Publishing House, Saint Louis.
Macquarrie, J., 2003, Jesus Christ in modern thought, SCM Press, London.
Maley, W.T., 2011, 10 ways of thinking about deconstruction, viewed 02 November 
2011, from http://www.alansondheim.org/old/DECON
Moltmann, J., 2000, Experiences in theology: Ways and forms of Christian Theology, 
transl. M. Kohl, Fortress Press, Minneapolis.
Moltmann, J., 2010, Sun of righteousness, arise! − God’s future for humanity and the 
earth, transl. M. Kohl, Fortress Press, Minneapolis.
Origenes, 2007, ‘Against Celsus’, in A. Roberts, J. Donaldson & A. Cleveland Coxe (eds.), 
The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 4., pp. 395–669, Cosimo Classics, New York. 
Palmer, R.E., 1969, Hermeneutics − Interpretation theory in Schleiermacher, Dilthey, 
Heidegger, and Gadamer, Northwestern University Press, Evanston. 
Pannenberg, W., 1973, Jesus − God and Man, transl. L.L. Wilkins & D.A. Priebe, SCM Press, 
London. 
Pannenberg, W., 1976, The Apostles’ Creed − In the light of today’s questions, transl. 
M. Kohl, SCM Press, London. 
Plato, 1962, ‘Phaedo’, in The last days of Socrates, pp. 99–183, transl. & introd. H. 
Tredennick, Penguin Books, London.
Ricoeur, P., 2009, Hermeneutics and the human sciences, transl. J.B. Thompson (ed.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tertullian, 2007, ‘On the resurrection of the flesh’, in A. Roberts, J. Donaldson & A. 
Cleveland Coxe (eds.), The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 3, pp. 545–596, Cosimo Classics, 
New York. 
Thiselton, A.C., 2007, The hermeneutics of doctrine, Eerdmans, Cambridge. PMCid: 
PMC2441648
Ursinus, Z., 2005a, ‘The smaller Catechism’, transl. F. Klooster, J. Medendorp & L.D. 
Bierma, in L.D. Bierma (ed.), An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism – Sources, 
history and theology, pp. 135–162, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids, MI.
Ursinus, Z., 2005b, ‘The larger Catechism’ transl. F. Klooster, J. Medendorp & L.D. 
Bierma, in L.D. Bierma (ed.), An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism – Sources, 
history and theology, pp. 163–223, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids, MI.
Ursinus, Z., 2012, The commentary of Zacharias Ursinus on the Heidelberg Catechism, 
transl. G.W. Williard, Hardpress, Miami/Florida. 
Van de Beek, A., 2006, Van Kant tot Kuitert −De belangrijkste theologen uit de 19e en 
20e eeuw, Uitgeverij Kok, Kampen.
World Council of Churches, 1996, ‘Faith and order paper no. 153’, in Confessing the 
one faith − An ecumenical explication of the Apostolic faith as it is confessed in the 
Nicene-Constantinopolitan creed 381, WCC Publications, Geneva.
Young, F.M., 2007, The making of the creeds, SCM Press, London.
Young, F.M., 2010, Holiness and mission − Learning from the Early church about mission 
in the city, SCM Press, London.
