Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
82 
Consumer decision-making models within the  
discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
Alet C Erasmus, Elizabeth Boshoff and GG Rousseau 
OPSOMMING 
 
Verbruikersbesluitnemingsmodelle word algemeen 
in verbruikersgedragnavorsing gebruik om die na-
vorsing te struktureer en te konseptualiseer. Ver-
skeie van die tradisionele modelle – wat in die laat 
sestiger en sewentigerjare saamgestel is - is in 
handboeke beskikbaar wat terselfdertyd die teorie 
ter ondersteuning bied en die stappe van die ver-
bruikersbesluitnemingsproses 
definieer 
en 
be-
spreek.  Verbruikersbesluitneming word meestal in 
terme van vyf stadia voorgehou.  Die modelle ver-
skil grootliks ten opsigte van die klem en konteks 
sowel as detail wat ingesluit word.   
 
In die tagtigerjare het navorsers begin besef dat die 
tradisionele modelle van verbruikersbesluitneming 
nie noodwendig die korrekte beeld van die verbrui-
kersbesluitnemingsproses weergee nie,  Verskeie 
navorsers het resultate van studies gepubliseer om 
aan te toon dat alternatiewe tot die tradisionele ver-
bruikersbesluitnemingsmodelle gevind moes word.  
Feitlik sonder uitsondering toon besware ‘n oorbe-
klemtoning van eksterne en omgewingsfaktore op 
verbruikersbesluitneming sowel as ‘n wanvoorstel-
ling dat aktiewe beplanning en rasionele denke 
komplekse besluitneming rig.  Verbruikersbesluit-
neming het oor jare baie meer kompleks geraak as 
gevolg van ‘n groter verskeidenheid produkte wat 
beskikbaar is, ontwikkeling op die gebied van teg-
nologie, wêreldinvloede, groter bedingingsmag van 
werkende vroue wat ook op besluitnemingstrate-
gieë in gesinsverband ‘n invloed het.  Veralgemen-
ing van verbruikersbesluitnemingsprosesse in ter-
me daarvan om tradisionele besluitnemingsmodelle 
te gebruik om bepaalde prosesse voor te stel, is nie 
meer haalbaar nie.   
 
Die positivisme wat algemeen as perspektief vir die 
beskouiing van verbruikersbesluitneming  beskou is 
(en nog steeds deur sommge beskou word) blyk 
nie al die moontlikhede te bied om die fenomeen te 
beskryf nie.  Sterk steun vir die implimentering van 
subjektivistiese benadering en veral kwalitatiewe 
navorsingstegnieke in navorsing waar die verbrui-
ker toegelaat word om gedagtes en idees spontaan 
te ontvou, word bepleit.  In ooreenstemming met ‘n 
voorstel van Sheth (1981) word navorsers op die 
gebied van verbruikersgedrag in die verbruikerswe-
tenskap gemotiveer om kreatief te dink binne min-
der rigiede teoretiese raamwerke sodat daar deur 
middel van navorsingsmetodes en tegnieke wat 
groter ruimte vir die ontdek van die onverwagte, 
meer omtrent verbruikergedrag aan die lig kan 
kom.  Indien bestaande teorie van verbruikers-
gedrag gekombineer word met produkspesifieke 
(byvoorbeeld behuising, kleding, huishoudelike toe-
rusting) teorie kan nuwe insigte bekom word wat 
waardevol en rigtinggewend kan wees in verbrui-
INTRODUCTION 
 
Consumer behaviour1 and consumer decision-making2 
have become prominent research topics in the various 
fields of consumer science in recent years.  Consumer 
science includes the former discipline of home eco-
nomics and refers to a discipline that evolves around 
consumer behaviour and decision making concerning 
foods and nutrition, clothing and textiles, housing and 
interior merchandise in everyday living in order to 
meet basic and higher order needs for physical, psy-
chological, socio-psychological and financial satisfac-
tion in a complex micro and macro environment.  Of 
specific importance is that buying and consumer deci-
sion-making are complicated as a result of external 
influences that have to be handled within an internal 
frame of reference that has come about through con-
sumer socialization (that may be/have been re-
stricted). Consumer behaviour within the discipline of 
consumer science focuses on consumption behav-
iour3 where the humane aspect of decision making 
and purchasing is of major importance as opposed to 
buyer behaviour - the domain of the marketing and 
business professionals who wish to understand buyer 
behaviour (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:5).  
 
Consumer decision-making models are widely used in 
consumer behaviour research and study areas to 
structure theory and research.  In a discussion of the 
consumer decision-making process, Engel, Blackwell 
& Miniard (1995:143) state that “a model is nothing 
—  Mrs AC Erasmus 
—  Prof E Boshoff 
Department of Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria, 
—  Prof GG Rousseau 
Department of Industrial Psychology 
University of Port Elizabeth 
1 Consumer behaviour: those actions directly involved in ob-
taining, consuming, and disposing of products and services, 
including the decision processes that precede and follow 
these actions (Engel et al, 1995:G3) 
 
2 Consumer decision-making: the behaviour patterns of con-
sumers, that precede, determine and follow on the decision 
process for the acquisition of need satisfying products, ideas 
or services (Du Plessis et al, 1991:11).  
 
3 Consumption behaviour: the style and process of consum-
ing and possessing, collecting and disposing of consumer 
products and services including the resultant change of feel-
ings, moods and attitudes toward the products and services 
(Schiffman  & Kanuk, 2000:G3). 

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
83 
more than a replica of the phenomena it is designed 
to present.  It specifies the building blocks (variables) 
and the ways in which they are interrelated.”  Models 
are also described as flow charts of behavioural proc-
esses (Du Plessis, Rousseau & Blem, 1991:18). 
 
Advantages offered by models include the possibility 
to grasp visually what happens as variables and cir-
cumstances change, that models provide conceptual 
frames of reference that logically indicate the interre-
lationship of variables for research purposes, that 
models provide the possibility to understand different 
consumer decision processes and marketing strate-
gies and that models play an important part in the es-
tablishment of theory (Engel et al, 1995:143; Du 
Plessis et al, 1991:18).  Walters (1978:43) even pro-
claimed consumer decision-making models to “specify 
exact cause and effect that relate to consumer behav-
iour”. 
 
 
TRADITIONAL MODELS OF CONSUMER 
DECISION-MAKING  
 
Background  
 
Some of the best-known consumer decision-making 
models were developed in the 1960’s and 1970’s dur-
ing a time characterized by limited theory on con-
sumer behaviour and when theories from other disci-
plines were used.  Until then, marketers rather than 
academics undertook research. This was all part of a 
developing discipline of consumer behaviour.  Howard 
developed the first consumer decision-model in 1963 
(Du Plessis et al, 1991:10).  Others include the Nico-
sia-model (1966), Howard - Sheth- (1969), Engel, Kol-
lat & Blackwell- (1968), Andreason- (1965), Hansen- 
(1972) and Markin-models (1968/1974).  A concern 
was that consumer behaviour research did not grow 
from a pure theoretical basis and it is within this con-
text that several theoretical models of consumer deci-
sion-making were developed (Du Plessis et al, 
1991:9).  These models, labelled the “grand models” 
of consumer decision-making (Kassarjian, 1982:20), 
tend to portray the process of proceeding through a 
major purchase decision4 as a logical problem solving 
approach (Cherian & Harris, 1990:747).  Furthermore, 
consumer decision-making is depicted as multi-staged 
and complex with several factors triggering problem 
recognition before initiating a sequence of actions to 
reach an outcome of satisfaction or dissatisfaction 
(Harrel, 1990:740; Cox, Granbois & Summers, 
1983:394).  Differences between models lie primarily 
in their emphasis on particular variables and the man-
ner of presentation (Du Plessis et al, 1991:32; Wal-
ters, 1978:42).  The popularity of model building 
seemed to decrease after 1978 – especially in the 
case of comprehensive models (Van der Walt in Du 
Plessis et al, 1991:39).  The consumer decision-
models that are still used today thus reflect the con-
sumer decision process in terms of the interrelation-
ship of concepts and flow of activities as understood 
within the limited theoretical background that inspired 
model building at the time. 
 
Most of the consumer behaviour textbooks used as 
sources of consumer behaviour models for study and 
research purposes, refer to the elements (Cox et al, 
1983:394; Harrel, 1990:740) of the consumer decision 
process in terms of the traditional five step classifica-
tion, i.e. the cognitive decision sequence of problem 
recognition / pre-search stage, information search, 
alternative evaluation, choice, outcome evaluation 
(Schiffman 
& 
Kanuk, 
1994:566-580; 
Solomon, 
1996:268; Du Plessis et al, 1991:27; Foxall, 1983:75).  
Some prefer to add one or more additional stages to 
place importance on certain phenomena/activities 
such as the inclusion of blocking mechanisms, the 
disposal of the unconsumed product or its remains 
(Du Plessis & Rousseau, 1999:83; Engel et al, 
1995:142, 143; Du Plessis, et al, 1991:38).   
 
The classification in terms of various stages of con-
sumer decision-making is typical of the rational ap-
proach to consumer decision-making (Punj & Sriniva-
san, 1992:493-495; D’Astous, Bensouda & Guindon, 
1989:433).  A rational approach to consumer deci-
sion-making refers to the careful weighing and evalua-
tion of utilization or functional product attributes to ar-
rive at a satisfactory decision (Solomon, 1996:268; 
Engel et al, 1995:G12). Rational goals are based on 
economic or objective criteria such as price, size and/
or capacity (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:G11). 
 
Engel et al (1995:4), in their discussion of “what con-
sumer behavior is all about,” identify the dominant 
research perspective in consumer behaviour as logi-
cal positivism.  Positivism implies a research ap-
proach in which rigorous empirical techniques are 
used to discover generalized explanations and laws 
(Engel et al, 1995:G11).  It is within this perspective 
that the ”grand models” of consumer decision-making 
have been produced. When traditional models were 
later revised (1982 Engel, Kollat & Blackwell-model, 
versus the 1978 model), more emphasis was placed 
on cognitive aspects of buying behaviour than before.  
These were called the contemporary models, but al-
though they include aspects of mental activity, it is still 
difficult to ascertain whether these models are accu-
rate and whether they have predictive value (Du 
Plessis et al, 1991:18, 19). 
 
 
CONSUMER DECISION-MAKING MODELS 
CRITICIZED 
 
Objections against the indiscriminate use of consumer 
decision-making models have been voiced since their 
introduction.  Apart from the limited theoretical back-
ground within which traditional consumer decision-
making models were developed and revised, the dif-
ferent forms of criticism can broadly be categorized in 
terms of: an assumption of rational consumer deci-
4 Purchase decision: the process of weighing the conse-
quences of product alternatives to come to a final product 
decision. 

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
84 
sion-making behaviour; a generalization of the deci-
sion-making process; concern about the detail in-
cluded in consumer decision-making models as well 
as limitations as a result of a positivistic approach to 
the development of consumer decision-making mod-
els. 
 
Rational consumer decision-making criticized 
 
In the 1980’s, theorists began to question the rational 
approach to consumer decision-making because stud-
ies showed that for many products, consumers spend 
very little time or do not even engage in some of the 
sequential activities suggested as being important 
during consumer-decision making.  It was found (as 
discussed by Bozinoff, 1982:481 based on work by 
Lachman et al, 1979) that consumers are frequently 
engaged in non-conscious behaviour during consumer 
decision-making.  This implies that consumer decision 
models in fact attempt to explain highly subconscious 
matter in a consciously-oriented information paradigm.  
 
Actual consumer decision-making processes might 
also, in some cases, appear to be haphazard and dis-
orderly when in fact, they are functional and highly 
adaptive, although opportunistic (Hayes-Roth, 1982: 
132).  An opportunistic approach does not coincide 
with structured and rigid traditional decision-making 
models.  Some researchers concluded that many con-
sumers undertake little or no prepurchase information-
search and undertake limited planning prior to enter-
ing retail stores (Solomon, 1996:269; D’ Astous et al, 
1989:433).  It became clear that consumers possess 
and implement a repertoire of consumer decision-
making strategies depending on the product, situation, 
context and previous experience (Solomon, 1996: 
269).  Some researchers even added that consumers 
do not typically apply analytical decision rules to opti-
mize decisions but relied on heuristics that would lead 
to satisfying decisions instead (e.g. an “acceptable” 
price or “trusted” brand name) (Solomon, 1996:287).   
 
The so-called “rational” consumer became the subject 
for several critical analyses which postulated that con-
sumers engage in both cognitive and emotional infor-
mation processing prior to a purchase (Schiffman & 
Kanuk, 2000:461; Zajonc & Markus in Lofman, 
1991:729; D’ Astous et al, 1989:433).  Cognitive infor-
mation processing refers to active, effortful planning 
and goal directed consumer behaviour that involves 
meditated intellectual activity, while emotional proc-
essing refers to the evaluation of product alternatives 
within more abstract parameters. 
 
Ratchford and Vaughn (1989:298) suggested that ego 
gratification, social acceptance as well as sensory de-
sires might imply different decision-making activities to 
those traditionally accepted and reflected in consumer 
decision-making models.  Their concern was that one 
could easily, from the design of traditional consumer 
decision-making models, overemphasize the role and 
importance of external factors during consumer deci-
sion-making while neglecting or minimizing emotional 
aspects.  
Bettman (1993:8) accentuates that an understanding 
of consumers’ decision-making behaviour not only has 
to focus on what products do (functional and perform-
ance attributes), but also has to consider what prod-
ucts mean to consumers.  Driven by emotional needs/
concerns, consumers are limited in the options they 
are willing to consider during the decision-making 
process and consequently adapt the decision-making 
strategy (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:461; Bettman, 
1993:8).   
 
Schiffman and Kanuk (2000:439, 440) describe a ra-
tional consumer decision as one where the consumer 
is aware of all the product alternatives, where the con-
sumer has the capability to correctly rank product al-
ternatives in terms of benefits and disadvantages and 
is able to identify the best alternative.  Arguments 
against rational consumer behaviour include the fact 
that consumers operate in an imperfect world, that 
they  possess limited knowledge and skills and that 
certain values might dominate their goals and deci-
sions.  Rational consumer behaviour thus seems too 
idealistic and simplistic. 
 
A generalization of the consumer decision-making 
process  
 
Consumer decision-making models provide broad, 
organized structures that reflect the basic process of 
consumer decision-making from certain viewpoints 
and within certain contexts (Walters, 1978:42).  These 
models are often used to structure and interpret con-
sumer behaviour research - even for product specific 
research.  This inevitably means that the research ap-
proach, when implementing a specific decision-making 
model, has to coincide with certain assumptions made 
by the original authors.  Generalizing the decision-
making process to such an extent for any consumer 
product might imply a biased view of, and approach to, 
the consumer decision-making process right from the 
start (Burns & Gentry, 1990:522).   
 
Sirgy (1983:16-18), studying the progress of consumer 
behaviour research within the theory of social cogni-
tion, criticized the traditional interpretation of con-
sumer behaviour and proposed a level of analysis di-
mension: classifying some consumer decision proc-
esses at a microlevel (e.g. based purely on sensation, 
perception) some at the micro-macrolevel (including 
the five steps of decision-making, namely problem rec-
ognition, information search, alternative evaluation, 
outcome evaluation) and others at a macrolevel 
(referring to repeat purchase behaviour and diffusion 
of innovation).  Sirgy suggested a categorization of 
consumer decisions for discussion and research pur-
poses rather than a generalization of the decision-
making process over the spectrum.  
 
D’ Astous et al (1989:433, 434) carried on with the 
work of Hoyer (1984) who concluded that consumer 
decision-making should be viewed considering the 
relevant dimensions of a purchase, i.e. frequency of 
purchase and importance of the purchase.  Although it 
is not a hard-and-fast rule, it is generally accepted that 

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
85 
the more important a product, the more complex the 
decision-making process, for example, when higher 
social, personal and financial risks are implicated, 
consumers usually engage in external information 
search and a more deliberative decision process (Du 
Plessis & Rousseau, 1999:94-94; Du Plessis et al, 
1991:27; Assael, 1989:31, 534).  Consumers there-
fore devote more cognitive effort to the purchase of a 
product that is considered to be important.    
 
Consumer decision-making models are also criticized 
as being somewhat idealized (Cox et al, 1983:394).  
Because extraordinary short planning periods for the 
purchasing of complex products are reported in some 
instances, a need for research to bring about a closer 
fit between theory and practice is suggested.  Con-
sumer decision-making models – due to their com-
plexity and the detail included - give the impression 
that extended buying behaviour is the norm.  
 
Within the constructivist framework it is argued that 
consumer attitudes and preferences - based upon 
previous experiences - are not revealed, but elicited 
during decision-making.  Consumer goals are often 
imprecise - especially in situations of less frequent 
purchases - and are in fact constructed in a given 
situation within the boundaries of personal experi-
ences.  The assumption made in hierarchical models 
of consumer decision-making, namely that the deci-
sion to choose is independent of which alternative to 
choose, and that the decision-making process neces-
sarily proceeds through the various stages to come to 
a final decision, may not always be valid.  Consumers 
often decide to choose or not to choose depending on 
the existing situation (Dhar, 1992:735-737).   This im-
plies a more definite impact of in store search activi-
ties during consumer decision-making rather than 
preparedness before entering the store.  Traditional 
consumer decision-making models do not portray this 
possibility clearly.  
 
Traditional models of consumer decision-making as-
sume that the decision-making process occurs in a 
serial or sequential fashion (Martin & Kiecker, 
1990:443).  The English logician Alan Turing intro-
duced the first of these in 1936.  The basic assump-
tion of most of these serial processing models, as de-
lineated by Newell and Simon’s theory of problem 
solving, requires that only one information process 
occurs at a time (Martin & Kiecker, 1990:443).  New 
models in the field of cognitive science depict infor-
mation processing in a more parallel way to make 
provision for the fact that some stages of the deci-
sion-making process occur simultaneously.  All tradi-
tional consumer decision-making models are of serial 
nature and since model building has declined after 
1978 (Van der Walt, 1978 in Du Plessis et al, 
1991:39), one may well wonder whether further re-
search in this regard should not be pursued. 
 
In a commentary on new theoretical perspectives in 
consumer behaviour, Stewart  (1990:751-753) argues 
that although a lot has been done in the field of con-
sumer decision-making, the focus has only been on a 
narrow range of phenomena.  He proposes a simple 
model of consumer decision-making and emphasizes 
that a general assumption, namely that the end point 
of the consumer decision is the purchase, may be 
overly simplistic.  He provides an alternative model 
with no obvious beginning or ending.   Stewart recom-
mends studies where the starting point of the deci-
sion-making process is deliberately changed (for ex-
ample confronting consumers with different situations, 
such as entering the store) and to explore what actu-
ally happens before and after that specific situation.  
He further states that consumers often do not know 
the reasons for their actions and behaviour because 
decisions become automated. He concludes by stat-
ing that much has still to be learnt about consumer 
decision-making. 
 
Comments on the detail included in consumer deci-
sion-models  
 
Olshavsky and Granbois (1979:93) are of the opinion 
that “the most pervasive and influential assumption in 
consumer behavior research is that purchases are 
preceded by a decision process”.  These consumer 
behaviouralists asserted that information processing 
was often performed with previously acquired and 
stored information.  This implies that consumers 
probably proceed through the decision-making proc-
ess much quicker than is suggested/proposed by tra-
ditional consumer decision-making models (John & 
Whitney, 1982:75).  Some researchers are therefore 
of the opinion that consumer decision-making models 
often complicate a situation that is fairly straightfor-
ward.   This argument supports the fact that consumer 
decision-making models tend to generalize conditions 
that are specialized, product and situation specific.  
Although the Engel Blackwell-model that was de-
signed in 1982 (after the original Engel, Kollat & 
Blackwell-model of 1968) (Du Plessis et al, 1991:25) 
approaches decision-making in terms of high and low 
involvement, it still seems very detailed and complex.  
Little has changed since the introduction of these 
models in the early years to accommodate the fore-
mentioned arguments. 
 
Srinivasan’s view (1993:290) seems to contradict the 
previous arguments when he states that consumers 
may, in the course of the decision-making process, be 
educated and inspired to upgrade their decision-
making behaviour through implementing extensive 
information search.  Unfortunately too much and too 
difficult information - due to an information overload – 
often has the opposite effect.  The information may 
then be rejected because it becomes a threat to a 
consumer’s self-concept and confidence.  The genera-
tion of information could also be very time-consuming 
and information search might even have financial im-
plications.  Consumers might find it less threatening, 
easier, quicker and cheaper to rely/draw upon a prior 
information base.  In Srinivasan’s view, even exten-
sive product search might not always be as elaborate 
as is suggested in traditional consumer decision mod-
els. 
 

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
86 
Consumers’ choice processes vary according to the 
type of product involved, the timing and the people 
involved (Burns & Gentry, 1990:520).  No one con-
sumer decision-making model could fully reflect all 
purchase decisions or all complex consumer deci-
sions. Using consumer decision-making models to 
discuss or interpret consumer decision-making in gen-
eral, is therefore an oversimplification of the true 
situation.  Although Walters (1978:42) emphasizes 
that consumer decision-making models are an over-
simplification of the reality, traditional consumer deci-
sion-making models - as a result of the detail in-
cluded - might still be perceived as complex and 
elaborate to the inexperienced researcher and might 
give the impression that they have been designed to 
accommodate most aspects of decision-making. 
 
Other concerns mentioned by Harrel (1990:739, 740), 
is that the multi-attribute models so frequently used to 
study and explain consumer decision-making, are 
founded on the assumption that attributes are impor-
tant and that many of these models have a strong or 
even overemphasis on brand choice (e.g. the Howard 
Sheth-model as well as the Engel, Kollat  & Blackwell-
model) (Sheth & Garrett in Harrel, 1990:739).  Al-
though brand decision-making represents a fair 
amount of deliberation during consumer decision-
making, it does not represent the whole consumer 
decision-making process (Harrel, 1990:739).   
 
Presumed decision-making strategies 
 
In real world situations consumers are often faced 
with incomplete information and in most consumer 
decision situations, explicit, well-defined probabilities 
rarely exist and/or are difficult to formulate.  This 
makes elaborate, rational decision-making as sug-
gested by traditional consumer decision-making mod-
els almost impossible (Burke, 1990:250).  Under such 
less than ideal conditions, decision shortcuts become 
the alternative.  It is also suggested that even under 
ideal conditions, consumers actually “gamble” product 
alternatives as if they are forming statistical expecta-
tions based on probability-weighted outcomes of gam-
bles which imply the use of a compensatory choice 
process.  Much of the descriptive research on how 
consumers make decisions under uncertainty shows 
that consumers are highly concerned with negative 
information or losses.  Consumers seem to think in 
terms of losses and gains relative to some neutral 
point and presume that losses tend to be stronger 
than gains.  As a result, consumers eventually opt for 
the alternative with the smallest potential loss.  This is 
a non-compensatory strategy that only focuses on 
losses and might be ascribed to consumers’ inability 
to consider concepts/features of importance that 
would result in a satisfactory outcome (Hansen, 
1992:175).  Such decision-making behaviour deviates 
from the route of rational decision-making and cannot 
be described within a traditional consumer decision-
making model. 
 
Sharing the same views as Chhabra and Olshavsky 
(1986:12) who reported that alternative choice rules 
have been uncovered by researchers and that the 
evaluation of products is done holistically, based on 
preferences retrieved from memory, Burke (1990:250) 
recognizes the possibility of the use of alternative de-
cision-making strategies (to those suggested in de-
tailed consumer decision-making models) in situations 
where consumers are confronted with a lack of infor-
mation.  According to Burke, “missing information” 
forces consumers to opt for an alternative approach to 
consumer decision-making.  This is probable in the 
case of complex decision-making that requires higher 
levels of understanding (as would be the case with 
technologically complex products) and where prod-
ucts are purchased less frequently so that consumers 
lack the relevant experience to proceed through the 
decision-making process as is portrayed in traditional 
models.  When confused or overwhelmed, consumers 
tend to take alternative decision-making routes 
(Burke, 1990:251; Solomon, 1996:297).   
 
In Chhabra and Olshavsky’s opinion (1986:12), a con-
sumer’s retrieval of experience from memory strongly 
refers to so-called scripts and previous experience in 
decision-making activities.  It is further proposed that 
consumers can even  “decide not to decide”, thus 
subcontracting a choice to another person such as the 
spouse.  Alternatively, hybrid strategies could be used 
where consumers combine personal information with 
recommendations from sources such as friends.  All 
these possibilities are difficult to detect from consumer 
decision-making models. 
 
Bettman (1993:8) states that two major goals of deci-
sion-makers are to make a good decision and to con-
serve cognitive effort. Consumers generally trade-off 
the accuracy a given strategy might attain in a particu-
lar choice environment and the cognitive efforts re-
quired and as a result choose a strategy that repre-
sents a reasonable accuracy/effort trade-off for that 
task.  This is a constructive view of choice where indi-
viduals change their processing to exploit what they 
have learnt (Bettman, 1993:8).  Consumers use differ-
ent decision-making strategies in different situations 
and this is not reflected in traditional consumer deci-
sion-making models.   
 
Logical positivism used as theoretical approach to 
develop traditional consumer decision-making models 
Traditional models of consumer decision-making pre-
dominantly reflect the philosophy of classical econom-
ics (with the emphasis on ways and mechanisms to 
influence consumers) with evidence that the economic 
rationale has been enriched with especially psycho-
logical rationales (especially in the contemporary deci-
sion-making models) (Du Plessis et al, 1991:5; Firat, 
1985:3).  The theoretical approach, however, remains 
one of logical positivism. 
 
In consumer decision-making models, predictions of 
consumer behaviour to help business best exploit and 
gain from trends in these behaviours, gain prece-
dence over the understanding and explanation of con-
sumer decision behaviour.  Traditional models reflect 
a technological-managerial orientation with the em-

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
87 
phasis on influencing, controlling and managing cer-
tain phenomena (Firat, 1985:4). From the way these 
models have been developed, they have little concern 
about why certain actions occur despite a proclama-
tion in this regard (as reported in Engel et al, 
1995:143; Walters, 1978:42).   
 
Both the disciplines of marketing and consumer be-
haviour have tended to investigate buyer behaviour 
rather than consumption behaviour.  Apart from the 
fact that a study of buyer behaviour is of particular im-
portance in business and marketing, a study of buyer 
behaviour requires more easily applicable and com-
prehensible measurements and scales.  Engel, Kollat 
and Blackwell as well as Nicosia have admitted this 
(Firat, 1985:5).  A study of consumption behaviour on 
the other hand may contribute to suggestions for bet-
ter satisfaction of consumer needs – an aspect that is 
of major concern to consumer scientists, while buyer 
behaviour is more conducive to a marketing approach. 
 
Concluding remark 
 
Almost two decades ago Firat (1985:5) pointed out 
that traditional consumer decision-making models and 
theories were developed within certain contexts, time 
frames and social situations.  He explicitly warned that 
when the same models were applied in other contexts 
and with other product categories, they become forced 
and cause imbalances.  Although consumer behaviour 
theory has since grown considerably, the popularity of 
model building has decreased after 1978 (Du Plessis 
et al, 1991:39) – almost as if the initial efforts are gen-
erally being accepted as “acceptable / the ultimate/ 
flawless”.  Continued research is proposed to address 
concerns to eventually gain an improved understand-
ing of the consumer decision-making process.  Within 
the discipline of consumer science, this would provide 
more focused guidelines for efforts aimed at educat-
ing, assisting and facilitating consumers. 
 
  
IMPLICATIONS OF CRITICISM FOR CONSUMER 
DECISION-MAKING RESEARCH 
 
Introduction 
 
Coinciding with Sheth’s proposals for future research 
within the discipline of consumer behaviour (Sheth, 
1981:667), arguments in favour of a reconsideration of 
a rational approach to consumer decision-making 
have been summarized above.  Consumer behaviour 
as a scientific discipline was originally closely tied to 
the marketing concept  (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:6; 
Du Plessis et al, 1991:4; Sirgy, 1983:8).  Sheth’s 
ideal - later supported by Olson (1982:v) as well as 
Harrel (1990:737) - was that researchers in the field of 
consumer behaviour should ultimately attempt to con-
tribute to concept formation and theory within the dis-
cipline itself, rather than to blindly borrow from disci-
plines such as marketing or social psychology.  They 
also proposed that researchers explore alternatives to 
the logical positivistic research paradigm so that other 
theories and conceptual frameworks could be used 
instead of reliance upon traditional consumer deci-
sion-making models. This is in contrast with the view 
of Engel et al (1995:4, G11) who still believe the domi-
nant research perspective in consumer behaviour to 
be logical positivism.  
 
Suggestions for research based on the criticism 
of traditional consumer decision-making models 
 
Reconsidering a rational approach to consumer 
decision-making      Many of the objections against 
traditional consumer decision-making models refer to 
the fact that consumers do not necessarily embark 
upon extensive, active, cognitive laden, realistic and 
goal directed decision-making behaviour when pur-
chasing 
complex, 
high-risk 
consumer 
products 
(Lofman, 1991:729).   Consumer decision-making 
models should be more representative of what hap-
pens in real life situations without building on precon-
ceived assumptions of what happens during the deci-
sion-making process and what is (supposed to be) 
important.  Rassuli and Harrel  (1990:737) inter alia 
suggest allowance for non-rational consumer behav-
iour and warn against the assumption that product 
attributes (functional aspects) as well as external fac-
tors are considered important in the decision out-
come.  
 
Scripts (event schemata) as cognitive structures in 
memory that have been stored through experience, 
have been found to be used by individuals in situ-
ational context to automatically direct behaviour (at 
any stage) when activated (Sutherland, 1995:413; 
Stratton & Hayes, 1993:173; Whitney & John, 
1983:662; Bozinoff, 1982:481). The particular useful-
ness of a script is that a consumer primarily wants to 
conserve effort in buying behaviour and a script en-
ables an individual to act in stead of relearning the 
steps of appropriate buying behaviour with every pur-
chase (Martin, 1991: 225). Turning to consumers who 
have experienced purchasing situations and have 
them share their experiences as well as including 
qualitative research techniques to prompt them to re-
call their decision-making activities might provide 
valuable information on consumer decision-making 
within the context of consumer science.  Such an ap-
proach will simultaneously conform to proposals made 
by researchers such as Bettman (1993:7,8), Lofman 
(1991:729), D’Astous et al (1989:433-435, 436), Boz-
inoff (1982:481), Sheth (1981:667-668), and others. 
 
Context and product specific consumer decisions      
Rather than generalizing complex consumer decision-
making, it is suggested that a study of consumer deci-
sion-making behaviour should be context specific and 
product specific to provide new insights and to con-
tribute to theory building in the domain of consumer 
science.  As early as 1956, Koch concluded that con-
sumer behaviour might either be extrinsically or intrin-
sically motivated and that the objective usefulness of 
a product only partially explains a specific purchase 
(Lofman, 1991:729).   Ahtola (1984) and Hirschman & 
Holbrook (1982) (in Lofman, 1991:730; Hudson & 
Murray, 1986:34) emphasized that emotional desire 

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
88 
5 S: stimulus; R: response; O: cognitive interpretation 
often overrides utilitarian motives even for highly func-
tional commodities such as household appliances.   
 
Scripts as an alternative to consumer decision models 
have certain structural characteristics that offer poten-
tial in this regard (Puto, 1985:404).    
 
Simplifying consumer decision-models     Consum-
ers often have to cope with complex, high-risk deci-
sions that involve a sizable outlay of money, within a 
short period of time and without extensive information 
seeking. Traditional decision-making models imply the 
opposite (Ozanne, 1988:574).  It is therefore sug-
gested that a subjectivist approach be used to focus 
on consumption behaviour  rather than purchase- / 
decision-making- / buyer  behaviour (Holbrook & 
Hirschman, 1982 in Lofman, 1991:730) (Hudson & 
Murray, 1986:345) in order to accommodate the influ-
ence of emotional and non-rational aspects on con-
sumer behaviour.   
 
One of the prominent characteristics of a script is that 
it contains only the generic details of an event and 
does not include details of an event (Whitney & John, 
1983:662; Abelson, 1981:723). This could result in 
concept formation and theory building specifically 
within the domain of consumer behaviour and con-
sumer science while at the same time reducing the 
possibility of too much and irrelevant detail . 
 
Allowing for alternative decision-making strate-
gies     Traditional consumer decision-making models 
are based on the premise that for complex, high-risk 
products, extensive decision-making takes place.  
Various researchers have reported quite the opposite.  
Reasons given, inter alia, include situations where 
information is either incomplete (Burke, 1990: 250, 
251) or confusing because it is irrelevant, too difficult, 
or there is too much information to interpret (Hansen, 
1992:175).  It has also been found that consumers 
follow alternative decision-making strategies to con-
serve cognitive effort (Bettman, 1993:8, 10).  Chhabra 
and Olshavsky (1986:12-13, 16) attributed this to pre-
conceived scripts in memory that direct the decision-
making experience, resulting in proceeding much 
faster through the decision-making process. 
 
The suggestion that a script is elicited from memory 
when an individual is confronted with a specific deci-
sion-making experience and that the individual then 
reacts on previous experiences captured in memory, 
might provide more realistic avenues for describing 
consumer decision-making (Abelson, 1981:723). 
 
Implementing an alternative theoretical approach       
A positivistic tradition presumes consumers to be pas-
sive entities who respond to the push and pull of past 
impressed forces and current situational stimuli (S→R; 
S→O→R)5 with a causal type of explanation for ac-
tions (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:462).  A positivistic 
approach does not allow for intentional action medi-
ated by meaning, deliberation of consequences of 
various alternatives and formation of intentions (Du 
Plessis et al, 1991:21; O’ Shaughnessy, 1985:305).  
Theorists began to question the assumption of the 
rational consumer in the early 1980’s and postulated 
that consumers engage in both cognitive and emo-
tional processing during consumer decision-making 
(Zajonk & Markus, 1982 in Lofman, 1991:729).  The 
revised Engel Kollat Blackwell-model is an example of 
an attempt to include this phenomenon (Du Plessis et 
al, 1991:25).  The hedonic consumption paradigm 
was suggested as an alternative for the study of con-
sumer behaviour.  This is based on psychological 
theories and is more concerned with those aspects of 
consumption that relate to the multisensory images, 
fantasies and emotive aspects of product usage 
(Lofman, 1991:729).   
 
Due to the abundance of work done on rational con-
sumer decision-making models, more research that 
acknowledges behaviour that may have underlying 
cognitive structure is suggested (Sheth, 1981:667).  
Harrel (1990:737) confirms Sheth’s proposals and 
suggests considering a subjectivist approach for con-
sumer behaviour research: thus a change from logical 
positivism to humanism and recommending the use or 
incorporation of qualitative research techniques to 
allow for more than the obvious.  Qualitative research 
methods and techniques allow for the true views of 
consumers to unfold and allow for the unexpected - 
an important prerequisite for theory building and con-
cept formation (Schiffman & Kanuk, 2000:14, 15).   
 
A subjectivist approach does not view the discovery of 
causal laws, but rather examines the meaning of hu-
man action with the goal of attaining understanding.  
From the subjectivist perspective, credible knowledge 
is generated through making anti-positivist and ideo-
graphic assumptions. The world is thus considered to 
be essentially perceptual and is understood or studied 
from the point of view of individuals who are directly 
involved in the activities which are to be studied 
(Burrell & Morgan, 1979 in Hudson & Murray, 
1986:344).    
 
An advantage of implementing a subjectivist approach 
is that there is no initial reduction of variables.  Re-
search techniques allow and encourage participants 
to spontaneously unfold their experiences and pur-
chase-related behaviour and fantasies (Hudson & 
Murray, 1986:345).  Script elicitation procedures meet 
these recommendations. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Consumer behaviour as a discipline originated in the 
mid- to late 1960’s.  Many of the early theories were 
based on the economics theory presuming that con-
sumers act rationally to maximize satisfaction in their 
purchase of goods and services (Schiffman & Kanuk, 
2000:6).  The consumer decision models and theories 
developed in the early years are still being used to 
structure research in the field of consumer behaviour 
and consumer sciences despite evidence that con-

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
89 
sumer decision-making is a more complex phenome-
non and that it can not be generalized over the wider 
spectrum of consumer goods.   
 
Consumer facilitation, however, assumes an under-
standing of the consumer as a prerequisite.  Re-
searchers within the field of consumer science with an 
interest to contribute to the theory and understanding 
of consumer behaviour will have to focus on consump-
tion behaviour that includes the intricacies of emo-
tions, situational factors as well as personal influences 
under specific circumstances rather than buyer behav-
iour per se.  Although widely published and used, tra-
ditional models of consumer behaviour should not be 
regarded the norm for organizing research and the 
interpretation of research findings.  An exploratory ap-
proach with the intention to unfold the “truth” might 
provide exciting, inspiring opportunities for the under-
standing of the complexity of specific decision making 
circumstances such as first-time home purchasing, 
purchasing of household appliances, regular food 
purchasing activities, personal and family clothing se-
lection. 
 
The potential of scripts to “provide behavioral guid-
ance” (Searleman & Herrmann, 1994:126; Stoltman, 
Tapp & Lapidus, 1989:385; Weisberg, 1980:56) and to 
reflect on the interaction of individuals and information 
in 
decision-making 
(Taylor, 
Cronin 
& 
Hansen, 
1991:17) seems promising.  Unfortunately, since the 
introduction of scripts within the area of consumer be-
haviour in the late 1970’s, and the first script elicitation 
studies done by Whitney and John (shopping script, 
1983) and Stoltman and co workers (examination of 
shopping scripts in 1989) within this area, little has 
been done to extend and implement the script concept 
in practice. Consumer decision-making and relating 
theory provide exciting opportunities for future re-
search by professionals in the consumer science dis-
cipline.  Adding to what has been done in the field of 
marketing sciences, consumer scientists could con-
tribute their product specific knowledge and experi-
ence towards a more holistic understanding of con-
sumer behaviour to ultimately contribute to theory 
building to the benefit of all.  
 
 
REFERENCE LIST 
 
ABELSON, RP.  1981.  Psychological status of the script 
concept.  American Psychologist 36 (7): 715–729. 
ASSAEL, H. 1989. Consumer behavior and marketing action.  
3 rd ed.  Boston.  Kent. 
BETTMAN, JR.  1993.  The decision maker who came in 
from the cold. Advances in Consumer Research X: 7-11.  
Twenty third Annual Conference. [sl].  Association for Con-
sumer Research.  
BOZINOFF, L.  1982.  A script theoretic approach to informa-
tion processing: an energy conservation application.  Ad-
vances in Consumer Research IX: 481-486.  Twelfth Annual 
Conference. Missouri.  Association for Consumer Research.  
BURKE, SJ.  1990.   The effects of missing information on 
decision strategy selection. Advances in Consumer Research 
XVII: 250-256.  Seventeenth Annual Conference.  New Or-
leans.  Association for Consumer Research.   
BURNS, AC & GENTRY, JW.  1990.   Toward improving 
household consumption behavior research: avoidance of 
pitfalls in using alternative household data collection proce-
dures. Advances in Consumer Research XVII: 518-523.  
Seventeenth Annual Conference.  New Orleans.  Association 
for Consumer Research.   
CHERIAN, J & HARRIS, B.  1990.  Capricious consumption 
and the social brain theory: why consumers seem purposive 
even in the absence of purpose. Advances in Consumer 
Research XVII:745-749.   Seventeenth Annual Conference.  
New Orleans.  Association for Consumer Research.  
CHHABRA, S & OLSHAVSKY, RW.  1986.  Some evidence 
for additional types of choice strategies. Advances in Con-
sumer Research XIII:12- 17.  Sixteenth Annual Conference. 
Missouri.  Association for Consumer Research.  
COX, A, GRANBOIS, DH & SUMMERS, J.  1983.  Planning, 
search, certainty and satisfaction among durables buyers: a 
longitudinal study.  Advances in Consumer Research X:394-
399.  Thirteenth Annual Conference. San Francisco.  Asso-
ciation for Consumer Research.   
D’ASTOUS, A, BENSOUDA, I & GUINDON, J. 1989.  A re-
examination of consumer decision-making for a repeat pur-
chase product: variations in product importance and pur-
chase frequency. Advances in Consumer Research XVI:433-
438.  Nineteenth Annual Conference.  [sl]. Association for 
Consumer Research.  
DHAR, R.  1992.  To choose or not to choose: this is the 
question. Advances in Consumer Research XIX:735-738.  
Twenty second Annual Conference. [sl]. Association for Con-
sumer Research.  
DU PLESSIS, PJ & ROUSSEAU, GG. 1999.  Buyer behav-
iour.  A multi cultural approach.  Halfway House. Interna-
tional Thomson.  Sigma. 
DU PLESSIS, PJ & ROUSSEAU, GG & BLEM, NH. 1991.  
Consumer behaviour.  A South African perspective.  Preto-
ria.  Sigma. 
ENGEL, JF, BLACKWELL, RD & MINIARD, PW.  1995.  
Consumer behavior.  International ed.  Florida.  Dryden. 
FIRAT, AF.  1985.   A critique of the orientations in theory 
development in consumer behavior: suggestions for the fu-
ture.  Advances in Consumer Research XXII:3-6.   Fifteenth 
Annual Conference. New Orleans.  Association for Con-
sumer Research.  
FOXALL, GR.  1983.  Consumer choice.  London.  MacMil-
lan. 
HANSEN, DE.  1992.  Issues in consumer choice with uncer-
tain product outcomes. Advances in Consumer Research 
XIX:175 – 176. Twenty Second Annual Conference. [sl].  
Association for Consumer Research.  
HARREL, GD.  1990.   A new perspective on choice.  Ad-
vances in Consumer Research XVII:737- 745.  Twentieth 
Annual Conference.  New Orleans.  Association for Con-
sumer Research.  
HAYES – ROTH, B.  1982.   Opportunism in consumer re-
search. Advances in Consumer Research IX:132–135. 
Twelfth Annual Conference. Missouri.  Association for Con-
sumer Research.    
HUDSON, LA & MURRAY, JB.  1986.  Methodological limita-
tions of the hedonic consumption paradigm and possible 
alternative: a subjectivist approach.  Advances in Consumer 
Research XIII:343–348.   Sixteenth Annual Conference.  
Missouri.  Association for Consumer Research.  
JOHN, G & WHITNEY, JC.  1982.   An empirical investiga-
tion of the serial nature of scripts. Advances in Consumer 
Research I X:75-79.  Twelfth Annual Conference. Missouri.  
Association for Consumer Research.  
KASSARJIAN, HH.  1982.   The development of consumer 
behavior theory. Advances in Consumer Research IX:20-22.  
Twelfth Annual Conference. San Francisco.  Association for 
Consumer Research. 
LOFMAN, B.  1991.  Elements of experiential consumption: 
an exploratory study. Advances in Consumer Research 
XVIII:729 – 735.  Twenty First Annual Conference. New Or-

Consumer decision-making models within the discipline of consumer science: a critical approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
90 
leans.  Association for Consumer Research. 
MARTIN, D & KIECKER, P.  1990.  Parallel processing mod-
els of consumer information processing: their impact on con-
sumer research methods. Advances in Consumer Research 
XVII:443-448. Twentieth Annual Conference.  New Orleans.  
Association for Consumer Research.   
MARTIN, I. 1991. Expert novice differences in complaint 
scripts.  Advances in Consumer Research XVIII:225-231. 
Twenty first Annual Conference.  Association for Consumer 
Research.   
OLSHAVSKY, RW & GRANBOIS, DH.  1979.  Consumer 
decision-making – fact or fiction.  Journal of Consumer Re-
search (6):93-100. 
OLSON, JC.  1982.   Presidential address: toward a science 
of consumer behavior.  Advances in Consumer Research IX:
v – x.  Twelfth Annual Conference.   San Francisco.  Associa-
tion for Consumer Research.   
OZANNE, JL.  1988.  Keyword recognition: A new methodol-
ogy for the study of information seeking behaviour.  Ad-
vances in Consumer Research XV:574- 579.  Eighteenth 
Annual Conference.  [sl]. Association for Consumer Re-
search.  
PUNJ, G & SRINIVASAN, N.  1992.  Influence of problem 
recognition on search and other decision process variables: a 
framework for analysis. Advances in Consumer Research 
XIX:491-497.  Twenty Second Annual Conference.  [sl]. As-
sociation for Consumer Research.  
PUTO, CP.  1985.  Memory for scripts in advertisements.  
Advances in Consumer Research XI1:404-409.  Fifteenth 
Annual Conference.  [sl].  Association for Consumer Re-
search.  
RASSULI, KM  & HARREL, GD. 1990.  A new perspective on 
choice.  Advances in Consumer Research XVII:737-744.  
Twentieth Annual Conference. [sl]. Association for Consumer 
Research.   
RATCHFORD, BT  & VAUGHN, R.  1989.  On the relation-
ship between motives and purchase decisions: some empiri-
cal approaches. Advances in Consumer Research XVI:293-
299.  Nineteenth Annual Conference. [sl]. Association for 
Consumer Research.   
SCHIFFMAN, LG & KANUK, LL. 1994.  Consumer behavior.  
5th  ed.  London.  Prentice Hall. 
SCHIFFMAN, LG & KANUK, LL. 2000.   Consumer behavior.  
7th ed. London.  Prentice Hall. 
SEARLEMAN, A & HERRMANN, D. 1994.  Memory from a 
broader perspective.  New York.  McGraw Hill.  
SHETH, JN.  1981.   Consumer behaviour: surpluses and 
short comings. Advances in Consumer Research IX:667-
678.  Twelfth Annual Conference.  Missouri.  Association for 
Consumer Research.  . 
SIRGY, MJ.  1983.   Social cognition and consumer behav-
ior.  New York.  Praeger Scientific. 
SOLOMON, MR. 1996.   Consumer behavior.  Buying, hav-
ing and being.  3 rd ed.  London.  Prentice Hall. 
SRINIVASAN, N.  1993.   Consumer judgments, decisions 
and framing dynamics: An informational viewpoint.  Ad-
vances in Consumer Research XX: 288-290. Twenty Third 
Annual Conference.  [sl]. Association for Consumer Re-
search 
STEWART, DW.  1990.   A commentary on new theoretical 
perspectives on consumer behavior.  Advances in Consumer 
Research XVII:750.  Twentieth Annual Conference. New 
Orleans.  Association for Consumer Research.   
STOLTMAN, JJ, TAPP, SR & LAPIDUS, RS.  1989.  An ex-
amination of shopping scripts. Advances in Consumer Re-
search XVI:384-391.  Nineteenth Annual Conference.  [sl]. 
Association for Consumer Research.  
SUTHERLAND, S.  1995.  The Macmillan dictionary of psy-
chology.  New York.  Macmillan 
TAYLOR, SA, CRONIN, JJ jr & HANSEN, RS.  1991. 
Schema and script theory in channels research.  Marketing 
theory and applications. American Marketing Association 
Winter’s Conference (2):15-24. [sl]. 
WALTERS, CG.  1978.  Consumer behavior.  Theory and 
practice.  Ontario.  Richard D Irwin. 
WEISBERG, RW. 1980. Memory, thought and behavior.  
New York.  Oxford University Press.  
WHITNEY, JC & JOHN, G. 1983.  An experimental investi-
gation of intrusion errors in memory for script narratives.  
Advances in Consumer Research X:661-666.  Thirteenth 
Annual Conference.  San Francisco.  Association for Con-
sumer Research.   
 
