One of the critical elements in ensuring outstanding
organisational performance, is the selection and development
of excellent staff. International as well as local research 
has demonstrated the role that psychometric assessment 
can play in significantly improving the selection process 
for both new entrants and internal promotions. Effective
psychometric assessment can also play a key role in staff
development processes – an important challenge presently
facing South Africa.
Psychometric tests are commonly employed as aids in
occupational 
decisions, 
including 
the 
selection 
and
classification of human resources. From the assembly-
line operator or filing clerk, to top management, there 
is scarcely a type of job for which some kind of psycho-
metric test has not proved helpful in such matters as hiring,
job assignment, transfer, promotion, or termination (Anastasi
& Urbina, 1997).
According to Owen and Taljaard (1996), it appears that
psychometric tests can contribute to the efficiency of selection
and placement in industry, if used carefully and responsibly.
Friedenberg (1995) referred to research which compared
different selection procedures (application forms, letters of
reference, interviews, testing) and confirmed that although each
technique has its own merits, standardised tests are the most
psychometrically sound.   
Moerdyk, in an article by Mittner (1998), also mentioned that if
psychometric tests are handled with insight and sensitivity, they
remain the most effective way of predicting behaviour. Kemp
(1999) said that tests are an aid in the selection process and if
used properly, supply invaluable information which is not easily
gleaned in interviews. According to Van der Walt (1998),
experience has proved that tests are generally much more
reliable and more valid than other techniques. Van der Walt
(1998) also mentioned that studies in trade and industry have
indicated that psychometric tests are about four times more
effective than screening interviews.
Given the high costs of staff turnover and the heightened
importance of identifying key staff from previously disadvantaged
groups, psychometric assessment can make a major contribution
to human resource management in South Africa. In the light of
the abovementioned information, it was decided to investigate the
use of psychometric tests in human resource management. This
study is the final, cumulative report on the findings of various
such exploratory research (Van der Merwe, 1999, 2000) that was
undertaken to establish which psychometric tests are used, and for
what purposes, in industry today.
Latest legislation
To protect the public against abuses, the use of psychometric
tests is legally specified (Medical, Dental and Supplementary
Health Service Professions Act, 1974). Specialised training is
required to determine which tests will give the best results in the
particular circumstances and to interpret the results responsibly.
Tests may only be used by registered psychologists or other
suitably qualified and registered persons under the supervision
of psychologists.
Recent and ongoing developments in the South African labour
legislation, emphasise once again the need for the responsible
use of psychometric tests and other psychological assessment
procedures. According to Eckstein (1998), the Employment
Equity Act highlights the importance of the validation of any
instruments to be used for assessment and selection purposes.
This is a definite move towards making selection decisions more
scientific. Kriek (1998) also welcomes this legislation which,
according to him, can only help to improve current assessment
practices in South Africa. According to Roodt (1998), one of the
purposes of the Act is to ensure that psychometric tests are used
in an unbaised manner, resulting in fairness.
The Employment Equity Act (1998, p.8) inter alia determines the
following:
R P VAN DER MERWE
Department of Industrial and Organisational Psychology
University of Port Elizabeth
ABSTRACT
This is a cumulative report on the findings of various exploratory research that were done with regard to the practice
of psychometric testing in the Eastern Cape. Recent and ongoing developments in the South African labour
legislation, and especially the implications of the Employment Equity Act, highlight once again the importance of
the validation of all instruments to be used for human assessment and selection purposes.
Information was gathered to establish which psychometric tests are used, and for what purposes, in industry
today. Biographical information on each organisation is supplied, including the number of employees. The role of
psychometric testing in the selection procedure is discussed. The different tests used, as well as the test users, are
also indicated. The findings of other, related research, as well as comments, recommendations and shortcomings,
are discussed.
OPSOMMING
Hierdie is ‘n kumulatiewe verslag wat die resultate verstrek van verskeie verkennende ondersoeke wat gedoen is na
die aanwending van psigometriese toetsing in die Oos-Kaap. Onlangse en voortdurende ontwikkelinge in die Suid-
Afrikaanse arbeidswetgewing, en veral die implikasies van die Wet op Gelyke Indiensneming, beklemtoon weer eens
die belangrikheid van die validering van enige instrumente wat gebruik word vir evaluerings- en keuringsdoeleindes
van individue. 
Inligting is ingewin om te bepaal watter psigometriese toetse, sowel as vir watter doel, vandag in die bedryf
gebruik word. Biografiese inligting oor die onderskeie organisasies, insluitende hul aantal werknemers, word
verstrek. Die rol van psigometriese toetsing in die keuringsproses word bespreek. Die verskillende toetse wat deur die
organisasies gebruik word, sowel as die toetsgebruikers, word ook aangedui. Die bevindinge van ander, relevante
navorsing, sowel as opmerkings, aanbevelings en tekortkominge word bespreek.
PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING AND HUMAN 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Requests for copies should be addressed to: RP van der Merwe, Department of
Industrial and Organisational Psychology, University of Port Elizabeth, PO Box
1600, Port Elizabeth, 6000
77
SA Journal of Industrial Psychology, 2002, 28(2), 77-86
SA Tydskrif vir Bedryfsielkunde, 2002, 28 (2), 77-86

“Psychological testing and other similar assessments of an
employee are prohibited unless the test or assessment being 
used –
a) has been scientifically shown to be valid and reliable;  
b) can be applied fairly to all employees; and 
c) is not biased against any employee or group”                       
To deal with this in practice, one will first of all need a good and
accurate method of job analysis – breaking down the job into
dimensions or competencies. Next one would need simple and
verifiable tests for these job related competencies – such as work
sample tests or assessment centres. One would of course also
have to keep statistics of applicants at all stages of the selection
process, so as to defend oneself against any allegations of
differential impact.
The selection process
There is no fixed, generally accepted, standard selection
procedure that is at present used by everybody.  A selection
procedure may be fairly simple or very complex, depending on
the nature of the organisation, the task for which individuals are
being selected, and the philosophy of human resource
management (Aiken, 1994). 
The vast majority of employee selection programs are based
upon the successive-hurdle technique. This means that to be
hired, applicants must successfully pass various screening steps.
At each step or hurdle some candidates get rejected.
Psychometric tests can be of great value in employee selection
because of their objectivity and validity (Schultz & Schultz,
1998). It must however be regarded as only one possible step in
the selection process – merely an aid, never to be used on its
own, or to replace the whole selection procedure. The general
nature of the selection process is set out in Figure 1.
FIGURE 1: THE SELECTION PROCESS
METHOD
Sample
A non-probability convenience sample of organisations was
drawn from the Port Elizabeth and Uitenhage areas of the
Eastern Cape Province. This was initial, exploratory research that
should be regarded as a qualitative investigation. Background
information on the various organisations that were selected, are
supplied in Table 1.
TABLE 1
PARTICIPATING ORGANISATIONS
Organi-
Type of business
Employees
sation
A
Branch of large insurance company (nation wide ± 
600
13 000 employees)
B
Branch of large banking group (nation wide ± 
37 000 employees)
1 300
C
Government department responsible for security, 
law and order
19 000
D
Branch of large beverage company (nation wide ± 
8 000 employees)
1 000
E
Motor manufacturing company
6 500
F
Regional office of telecommunications company 
(nation wide ± 57 000 employees)
4 500
G
Motor manufacturing company
4 000
H
Technical and network services business unit of 
telecommunications company (nation wide ± 
57 000 employees)
2 000
I
Tyre manufacturing company
2 000
J
Company manufacturing lights
440
K
Textile company
1 595
L
Company manufacturing pharmaceuticals
860
M
Provincial office of large banking group
200
N
Company manufacturing vehicle accessories
453
O
Branch of large beverage company (nation 
wide ± 3 000 employees)
700
P
Local government department
7 000
Q
Company involved in processing of wheat and 
maize products
600
R
Company manufacturing vehicle accessories
200
S
Branch of banking group (nation wide ± 706 
employees)
70
T
Company manufacturing vehicle accessories
500
From Table 1 it appears that the participating organisations
cover a wide range of different economic activities.
Procedure
Postgraduate students in Industrial and Organisational
Psychology acted as field workers in this study. They were
thoroughly briefed by the researcher on the interviewing
procedure to be used for this research. The data was collected by
means of individual interviews that these students conducted
with a designated representative from the human resource
department of each organisation that was involved.
Mostly these representatives were personally responsible for
testing in their organisations. Where this was not the case, the
VAN DER MERWE
78
RECRUITMENT OF CANDIDATES
APPLICATION FORMS
PRELIMINARY SCREENING
REFERENCE CHECKING
PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING
INTERVIEW: HUMAN RESOURCE DEPT
INTERVIEW: LINE MANAGEMENT
MEDICAL EXAMINATION
R
E
J
E
C 
T
I
O
N
SUCCESSFUL
CANDIDATES
UNSUCCESSFUL
CANDIDATES

representative was the person locally involved with the
arrangements and administration regarding testing in that
organisation. These people provided the information that was
used in this research, by discussing the testing policy of their
organisation with the interviewers.
Data analysis
All the data gathered by means of these interviews, was analysed
by means of content analysis. Inferences were made on
inspection of the data gathered.
RESULTS
The results of this research are presented in the following format:
Brief testing policy of the organisation
Tests used in the organisation
Test users (administrators) in the organisation
Comments by organisational representatives
Based on the questions asked during the interviews, the
following information on each organisation, was made available.
Brief testing policy
Whether an organisation has a clearly defined selection
procedure or not, as well as which steps are included in it, are
indicated in Table 2. 
TABLE 2
SELECTION PROCEDURE IN ORGANISATIONS
Organi-
Clear
Application
Interviews
Psychometric
Referemce
sation
procedure
blank/CV
testing
checking
A
X
X
X
X
X
B
X
X
X
X
C
X
X
X
X
X
D
X
X
X
X
X
E
X
X
X
F
X
X
X
X
X
G
X
X
X
X
X
H
X
X
X
X
I
X
X
X
X
X
J
X
X
X
K
X
X
X
X
X
L
X
X
X
X
M
X
X
X
N
X
X
X
O
X
X
X
P
X
X
X
X
X
Q
X
X
X
X
X
R
X
X
X
X
S
X
X
X
T
X
X
With reference to Table 2, the role of psychometric testing 
in the selection procedure, as well as the levels at which 
tests are applied in each of the organisations, are now
discussed. 
Organisation A
In the case of organisation A, psychometric tests are merely
used as an additional aid in the selection process and are
required 
to 
be 
culture-fair 
and 
non-discriminatory.
Employment equity enjoys a high priority in this organisation.
Tests are used for selection and management information, and
are used more at the lower levels of employment. At
management level assessment centres are used for selection and
promotion purposes.
Organisation B
This organisation uses a clearly defined selection procedure
which was recently revised to comply with the latest labour
legislation. Their approach is that it is not always equally
important to use psychometric tests in the selection process. The
specific job one is selecting for, will indicate whether it is
necessary to do testing or not. Tests are never used on their own
– always together with an interview and other input. Tests are
used at all levels in this organisation, for selection, placement,
promotion and strategic restructuring. They do not make use of
assessment centres because they regard them as too expensive
and time consuming.
Organisation C
In organisation C tests are never chosen at random – a
thorough job analysis is first conducted to determine the skills
that are needed to perform the job successfully. Tests are used
at all levels in this organisation: for selection, placement,
training and transfers, but not for promotions. Although 
they previously made use of assessment centres, these are no
longer in use.
Organisation D
Psychometric tests are regarded as important in this
organisation’s selection process. The purpose of psychometric
tests is to provide specialist information in support of
managerial decision-making, by increasing the accuracy of
decisions 
regarding 
the 
selection, 
promotion 
and
development of employees. The assessments are also aimed at
assisting individual employees in gaining insight into
themselves, for the purpose of their own self-development.
Tests are used in this organisation for all positions from
shopfloor level to higher positions. They are however 
also used for certain positions where specific psychometric
and psychological make-up is deemed necessary (i.e.
apprentices and bursars).
Organisation E
In this organisation all information gathered during the
selection process is used to make a final appointment decision.
Tests are mainly used for selection purposes – mostly at
managerial level, although in some cases they are also used at a
few entry grade levels.
Organisation F
In organisation F the approach is not to use tests in isolation,
but rather as a means of verifying the information obtained
from the other selection devices. Tests are used to facilitate
selection, placement and promotion decisions. They are also
used for development and training purposes. Tests are
administered at all levels, from auxillary, lower-level positions
to management positions.
Organisation G
This organisation sometimes uses assessment centers, but 
they are doing it less and less. The primary reasons being 
that it is very expensive, extremely time consuming and that
there has to be fairly intensive training of the raters involved.
They employ psychometric tests for selection, placement,
promotions, as well as to establish training needs. Tests 
are used at the lower levels of the organisation, as well as 
when selecting candidates for supervisory positions or
management level.
PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING
79

Organisation H
In this organisation the results of the tests are evaluated along
with the outcomes of the other procedures that are used. Tests
are mainly used for selection purposes, although they are also
considering using it for development purposes. When dealing
with higher level positions, exercises including case studies and
simulations, are occasionally also implemented.
Organisation I
In organisation I pychometric testing is also used for promotion
purposes, to determine training needs, and for counselling. It is
however regarded as an additional tool to be used, to try and
inject some objectivity into what could otherwise be a very
subjective process. It is used extensively at labourer entrance
level, as well as for recruitment at management level. 
Organisation J
In the case of organisation J, they only started using
psychometric testing recently and it will only be used on
supervisory and managerial positions. Because it is a relatively
small company, assessment centres are not used – it is too costly. 
Organisation K
This organisation also uses psychometric tests for promotion
purposes – especially for supervisory and managerial positions.  
Organisation L
In this organisation psychometric testing is also used for career
development, identification of training needs and counselling. It
appears that tests are used at all different levels (from
operational to managerial) in this company.
Organisation M
In organisation M psychometric tests are also used for
performance appraisals, career guidance and in assessing
managerial potential. Tests are used at all different levels in this
organisation. 
Organisation N
In this organisation psychometric testing does not only play an
important role in their selection procedure, but is also used for
the promotion of present employees. Different tests are used for
the different levels of employment in the organisation.  
Organisation O
In this organisation it is part of their policy to use
psychometric tests to provide additional information about
candidates when making selection or human resource
development decisions. In no instances is this information to
be used in isolation. Testing is conducted from supervisory
level up to management level. 
Organisation P
In this organisation psychometric testing is used only for the
selection of apprentices – and nothing else, because they are
concerned about the culture-fairness of the tests. 
Organisation Q
In organisation Q psychometric testing is only used in situations
where uncertainty exists with regard to candidates. It is however
also used for promotion purposes and for development of
employees – at most levels in the company. They also make
extensive use of an assessment centre – only for senior
management level and higher positions. 
Organisation R
This organisation extensively makes use of employment agencies
to recruit people for them. Testing is mainly used with upper-
management, for selection, promotion as well as identifying
leadership potential.
Organisation S
This organisation does not regard psychometric testing 
as essential in the selection of employees. They do however
make use of graphology for senior positions to determine
leadership potential. They also make use of competency-
based assessment.
Organisation T
In this organisation psychometric tests are used mainly 
for selection purposes, as well as performance counselling
and identifying people with potential for development. 
They have decided to outsource most of their human
resource functions, including the administration of
psychometric tests.
Tests used
In Table 3 the various tests used by the different organisations
are indicated. Note that quite a few tests are used by only one or
two organisations. Some tests are used by three or more
organisations, and the most widely used test is the 16 PF, which
is used by fifteen of these organisations. For greater clarity, a
brief description of the abbreviations used to indicate the
different tests, follows.
Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF): It measures 16
primary personality traits and is used inter alia in industry and
business in selection, placement and promotion of employees
by predicting important job related criteria such as work
efficiency, tolerance of routine etc (Huysamen, 1996;
Spangenberg, 1990).
South African Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (SAWAIS): This
test is a verbally administered individual scale that was designed
to evaluate the intellectual functioning of the older child and
adult (Huysamen, 1996; Spangenberg, 1990).
Intermediate Battery (INT Bat): This battery was designed to
measure certain mental abilities, including mental alertness,
arithmetical ability, some aspects of language, and clerical skills.
It can be used in vocational guidance as well as for the selection
of persons who have received not more than 12 years of
schooling (Huysamen, 1996; Owen & Taljaard, 1996;
Spangenberg, 1990).
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI): It is a
broad-band test designed to assess a number of the major
patterns of personality and emotional disorders. To a certain
extent it highlights signs of pathology in people being tested
(Aiken, 1994; Anastasi & Urbina, 1997).
Senior Aptitude Tests (SAT): This test was designed to measure a
number of aptitudes and the results can be used for vocational
guidance and selection purposes (Huysamen, 1996; Owen &
Taljaard, 1996).
Career Path Appreciation (CPA): This is based on a stratified
systems theory and assesses a manager’s ability to deal with
challenges of varying complexity. Judgement in making
decisions under a variety of conditions of uncertainty is
assessed, along with the ability to adopt long-term and short-
term thinking. This evaluation works on a semi-structured
interview system.
Dover/Vienna Test System (DOVER): This is a machine with
lights of different colours and the testee is expected to
coordinate the hand switches with the different lights of the
machine as they come on and go off. The performance of the
candidate is scored automatically. Performance under stress,
orientation ability, levels of productivity, and learning ability,
are some of the aspects evaluated by this system.
High Level Figure Classification Test (HL FCT): This is a non-
verbal pencil and paper test which measures abstract
reasoning ability. It is intended for use in selecting staff for
positions which require a moderate to high level of abstract
conceptual functioning – more than mere routine activities
(Spangenberg, 1990).
VAN DER MERWE
80

SHL Occupational Personality Questionnaire (OPQ): This
questionnaire is applied to assess a comprehensive range of
personality characteristics, including: relationships with people;
thinking and problem-solving style; emotions, motivation and
drives; team working styles; leadership or subordinate styles;
selling and influencing styles (SHL, 1996).
SHL Customer Contact Styles Questionnaire (CCSQ): This
questionnaire has been designed to measure sixteen dimensions
of personality relevant for non-supervisory staff working in sales
or customer service roles (SHL, 1996).
Thomas Personal Profile Analysis (PPA): This is a questionnaire
in which the person being evaluated has to select the words
which most and least describe him/her. By charting these
choices scientifically, insight is obtained into how this person
will behave in the work situation. It can provide helpful
understanding as to how this person copes with his/her
environment and what his/her present attitudes are likely to
be. It also provides insight into possible performance in a
particular function (Thomas International, undated).
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI): This test was designed to
implement Jung’s theory of type, as understood by the author
(Isabel Myers). More specifically the aim is to identify the basic
preferences of people with regard to perception and judgement.
These preferences are: Extraversion-Introversion, Sensing-
Intuition, 
Thinking-Feeling, 
and 
Judgement-Perception
(Spangenberg, 1990).
Group Interaction Exercise (GI Exerc): This can be regarded 
as a group problem solving exercise. The group of candidates
is given a problem to discuss and within fifteen minutes 
they must come to a solution. Afterwards, each member of 
the group’s contribution is evaluated and considered, to
determine if it contributed to the final outcome reached by
the group.
Presentation: This exercise is similar to the previous (group
interaction exercise) except that the candidate works as an
individual. The candidate is given a problem and allowed five
minutes to think about a way of solving it. Then the candidate
has to make an oral presentation, debating and demonstrating
how the problem can best be solved.
In-basket Exercise: This exercise consists of samples of typical
items or activities found in the department in which the
vacancy exists. Candidates are asked to indicate what action
should be taken with regard to each item or activity. In other
words, it is a type of simulation exercise in which the person
must deal with a pile of paperwork – letters, reports, phone
messages, and so on – typical of what might be found in a
manager’s in-basket.
Structured-Objective Rorschach Test (SORT): The SORT is based
on the traditional Rorschach Test and its aim is to obtain
psychologically meaningful data by means of which a broad
overall picture of the individual can be obtained
(Spangenberg, 1990). Together with data from other tests, this
can then be used for counselling, selection and the prediction
of job success.
Nineteen Field Interest Inventory (19 FII): This inventory
measures occupational interests with respect to 19 broad fields
PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING
81
TABLE 3
TESTS USED BY DIFFEENT ORGANISATIONS
ORGANISATION:
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
TESTS:
16 PF
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SAWAIS
X
X
X
X
X
X
INT Bat
X
X
X
X
X
MMPI
X
X
X
X
SAT
X
X
X
X
CPA
X
X
X
X
DOVER
X
X
X
X
HL FCT
X
X
X
X
OPQ/CCSQ
X
X
X
X
PPA
X
X
X
X
MBTI
X
X
X
GI Exerc
X
X
X
PRESENTATION
X
X
X
IN-BASKET
X
X
X
SORT
X
X
19 FII
X
X
HL Bat
X
X
SDS
X
X
PTB/TTB
X
X
TAT
X
NORM Bat
X
AAT
X
PAB
X
MGIB/CRTB/CCAS
X
BLOX
X
RAVEN’S
X
MECHANICAL
X

of activity. It also measures the extent to which a person is
actively or passively interested in the 19 fields, as well as the
extent to which the interests are work- or hobby-related (Owen
& Taljaard, 1996).
High Level Battery (HL Bat): This battery provides a
measurement of general intelligence, arithmetical ability and
certain language abilities. It can be used for vocational guidance
as well as the selection and classification of high level
employees, and is suitable for testees with matric or higher
qualifications (Huysamen, 1996; Owen & Taljaard, 1996;
Spangenberg, 1990).
Self-Directed Search Questionnaire (SDS): The rationale 
of this questionnaire is to measure interest. The question-
naire fits into the broad context of career planning, since 
it provides important information relating to an indivi-
dual’s occupational interests, and facilitates the link 
between personal and occupational information (Owen &
Taljaard, 1996).
SHL Personnel Test Battery (PTB): This is a battery consisting of
various tests, used to select clerical and administrative staff.
Emphasis is on practical skills and the needs of the modern
workplace – including equal opportunity issues (SHL, 1996).
SHL Technical Test Battery (TTB): This is a battery consisting of
various tests. It is used in the selection of a wide range of
technical staff, including school leavers and work-experienced
candidates (SHL, 1996).
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT): This is a projective
personality test which is regarded as especially suited to
assessing motivation, such as the need for achievement or
affiliation (Huysamen, 1996).
Normal Battery (NORM Bat): This battery was designed to
measure a number of mental abilities, including mental
alertness, computation and certain language skills. It can be
used in vocational guidance as well as in the selection of persons
with 9 to 10 years of schooling (Huysamen, 1996; Owen &
Taljaard, 1996; Spangenberg, 1990).
Academic Aptitude Test (AAT): The aim of this test is to serve as
an aid in the guidance of senior pupils with regard to subject and
career choice. More specifically, it provides an assessment of
general intellectual ability, verbal ability, mathematical ability
and spatial ability. It may also be of value in selection and
placement decisions (Spangenberg, 1990).
Programmer Aptitude Battery (PAB): This battery measures
aptitude for computer programming. It is intended to be used
on individuals who have little or no experience in computer
programming, although it might be useful in selecting existing
programmers. It should not be used on persons who have not
passed matric (Owen & Taljaard, 1996).
SHL Management and Graduate Item Bank (MGIB): These are
verbal and numerical tests designed to assess high level critical
reasoning abilities (SHL, 1996).
SHL Critical Reasoning Test Battery (CRTB): These are three tests
used to assess verbal, numerical and diagrammatic reasoning
skill (SHL, 1996).   
SHL Customer Contact Aptitude Series (CCAS): This is a series of
tests that assess the verbal and numerical skills required of
customer contact staff (SHL, 1996). 
Perceptual Battery (Blox): This is a test of spatial relations
involving the ability to recognise three-dimensional objects
which have been rotated in space and which are represented
two-dimensionally as in technical drawings. It predicts success
in skilled, technical jobs. 
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (Raven’s): This test consists of
designs or matrices from each of which a part is omitted. The
subject is required to choose the missing part from six to eight
given figures (Huysamen, 1996).
Mechanical Comprehension (Mechanical): This test measures
knowledge of mechanical and physical principles. It predicts
success in a technically oriented course, particularly the
theoretical aspects of such studies, eg engineering technicians
and technical apprentices (Owen & Taljaard, 1996).   
Test users (Administrators)
In Table 4 the various persons responsible for testing in the
different organisations, are indicated. Note that these are the test
users of the organisations and that they are not necessarily the
same people as the representatives who provided the information
on each organisation.
TABLE 4
TEST USERS IN DIFFERENT ORGANISATIONS
Organi-
Test user
sation
A
Psychometrists or psychologists. Special manager at head office 
overall responsible for testing in company and sees to correct 
procedures and standards of testing.
B
Psychometrists or psychologist.
C
Psychometrists or psychologists.
D
Use external consulting psychologists. Consulting psychologist 
available at head office.
E
No qualified test user. Interpretation done by external consulting
psychologists.
F
Psychometrists or psychologists.
G
Psychometrists. Use is also made of external consulting 
psychologists.
H
Psychometrists or psychologist.
I
Use external psychologist and other consultants.
J
Use external consulting psychologist. 
K
Use external consulting psychologist. 
L 
Psychometrist or psychologist.
M
Psychometrists. Psychologists available at head office.
N
Use external consulting psychologist.
O
Psychometrists. Use is also made of external consulting 
psychologists.
P
Use external consulting psychologists.
Q
Use external consulting psychologists.
R
No qualified test user. Users trained by test suppliers.
S
No qualified test user. Users trained by test suppliers.
T
Use external consulting psychologist.
From Table 4 it appears that most of the organisations have their
own psychometrists or psychologists. The others make use of
trianed test users or external consulting psychologists.
Comments by organisational representatives
In organisation A they are satisfied with the tests they are using
in some areas, and in other areas they are less satisfied. Tests are
however useful for the identification of potential in individuals
whose scholastic background is not up to standard. Presently
VAN DER MERWE
82

they are looking at the validity of the tests used and they are
attempting to implement more culture-fair tests in future.
According to the feedback from organisation B, the training and
qualifications of the person using the test, are very important. The
feeling in this organisation is that tests must be used correctly and
that although culture-fair tests are the ideal, one has to be realistic
– bearing in mind the difficulties in creating them.  
In general, organisation C is satisfied with the tests that are
being used by them. As long as the tests are used for the purpose
for which they were intended, they are seen to be a useful aid.
Many of the tests used are however outdated in some places, and
should be updated. Because they question the culture-fairness of
the tests used, industrial psychologists at their head office have
standardized most of the tests on the organisation’s population,
with resulting norms for different culture groups. Because of the
problems relating to culture-fairness, they no longer make use of
psychometric tests for the promotion of employees (to evaluate
leadership potential). They now make use of a method called
Targeted Selection (also known as the assessment interview).
In the case of organisation D there is the perception that they
may put too much emphasis on test results. To improve the level
of interpretation of results, test results and work performance
results are frequently correlated at their head office. Because
they are very committed to culture-fairness in their testing, the
16 PF was recently removed from their batteries of tests.
Organisation E seemed generally satisfied with the tests they are
using because these proved to test what they purport to test.
They however question the culture-fairness of the 16 PF.
Overall, in organisation F they are satisfied with the tests being
used. They feel that some of the tests are possibly outdated,
especially regarding the norms being used. To an extent the
unions are questioning their use of psychometric testing and
until tests can undisputedly be proven to be culture-fair, the
role of testing will decline in this organisation. There is a
feeling that many uncertainties surround the use of tests in the
new South Africa. This is one of the reasons why they started
using the tests from SHL (which SHL maintains to be culture-
fair) in this organisation.
In organisation G the general feeling is that the tests used are
culture-fair, but the accompanying norm tables are very
outdated. To an extent they also question the reliability and
validity of the tests. They want to employ tests that are even
more culture-fair and are therefore presently reconsidering their
various selection instruments very carefully. They recently
bought a test program known as “Potential Index Batteries”
(developed by dr P F Erasmus) which is envisaged to solve many
of their problems.
According to organisation H, the lack of culture-fairness is a
major problem in psychometric testing. This organisation feels
very strongly about culture-fair tests because of their
multicultural work force.
It appears that organisation I is satisfied with the psychometric
testing they employ – they actually intend using these tests even
more in future to establish individual potential. They however
emphasize that it is only an additional tool used to try and
inject some objectivity into what could otherwise be a very
subjective process.
The overall impressions from organisation J is that they are
satisfied with the psychometric tests they are using. They also
intend using it more often in future. They are of the opinion
that there definitely is a need for psychometric tests in the
selection procedure. They however feel that it cannot be used on
its own – it is part of the whole procedure; it must meet all legal
requirements; and the process should be totally transparent.  
In organisation K there seems to be satisfaction with the tests
they use for selection purposes, because the tests confirm their
selection of candidates who demonstrate good performance.
They however also question the issue of the cultural fairness of
the tests, and would in future like to see tests developed that will
respect cultural diversity.
Also in organisation L there is concern about the culture-fairness
of the tests they are using. It is important to them that tests
should not be used in isolation, that one should adhere to the
latest legislation and that the tests be standardised for South
African conditions. Because they find it so difficult to ensure
that tests are culturally fair and non-discriminatory, they are
moving more and more towards competency-based assessment.  
In organisation M they are continually evaluating the tests they
use and if biased items or tests are found, they are removed,
revised, changed or replaced by better ones – if available. There
seems to be satisfaction with their testing programs. Their
biggest concern presently is to accommodate the new
competency-based approach to employment and promotion.
According to them, existing tests will need to be reviewed to
assess their relevance in terms of competencies. 
In organisation N they are generally satisfied with the tests that
they use. There is however a concern that more general
education and awareness of the uses and benefits of
psychometric testing should occur – for human resource
practitioners, management and the general public. They also
make use of the “Predictive Index”, a checklist with stimuli,
which, when responded to, provides measurement of human
behaviour and motivation.  This index is distributed by Praendex
in Johannesburg.
Organisation O is satisfied with the tests they are using and
because they are administered and validated around the world,
they believe them to be culture-fair. Their test supplier
company is continually researching and updating their test
material and data. 
Organisation P appears to be satisfied with the tests they are
using. It is their belief that the use of psychometric tests as an
aid, contributes to the success of their selection process.
In organisation Q there is concern about the culture-fairness of
the tests being used. This is the main reason why they are
seriously questioning the use of the 16 PF.
Organisation R seems to be satisfied with the tests they are using
because it helps them in the selection and promotion process.
They feel strongly that tests should never be used on their own. 
In organisation S they are satisfied with the methods being used,
because they believe they have been helpful in identifying
successful candidates. 
It is felt by organisation T that psychometric tests add value to the
organisation in terms of competent employees being selected.
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
From these investigations into applying psychometric tests in
human resource management, it appears that psychometric
tests are not used in isolation in practice (see Table 2). As an
additional aid used in decision making, the tests normally form
part of a defined procedure which includes different,
interrelated, specific steps, as well as other tools. It also
appears that psychometric tests are not only used for selection
purposes, but also for placement, promotion, transfers,
training and development. Furthermore, it appears that these
tests are often used at different levels in the organisations that
participated in this study.
PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING
83

The tests that are used by these organisations (see Table 3), are
mainly South African specific and validated material,
distributed by the Human Sciences Research Council, as well as
a few other organisations. Most of the organisations included in
this survey have test administrators that are trained and
qualified test users (see Table 4) who are well aware of the laws
and rules that govern psychometric testing in South Africa. To
conform to these, the organisations that haven’t got trained or
qualified test users employed, make use of the services of
external consulting psychologists. Adhering to these rules and
regulations seems to be a great concern to the majority of these
organisations. The researcher therefore concludes that
psychometric testing is conducted at a professional level in the
organisations surveyed.
This is contrary to a recent world-wide survey into testing and
the use of tests (Bartram & Coyne, 1998) which found that there
is a lack of psychologists’s involvement in testing. According to
them a lack of appropriate training in testing and test use was
seen world-wide and almost 60% of test users were not
specifically trained in the use of psychological tests. It was
however indicated that the training of testers in inter alia
organisational context, was considered to be “fairly adequate”.
They also found that there is a perception that test mis-use is a
problem world-wide and that the best way to counter it is
through training and increasing public understanding. 
Cook (1997) is also of the opinion that psychometric tests are
still sometimes used by people who are not well informed about
the issues of measurement and bias. He refers to the fact that the
task of the profession is made more difficult by a lack of
sophistication among users in the field. According to him,
contrary to what was found in the present study, it is clear that
tests are still used by some people without a deep
understanding of the nature of assessment and the problems
associated with it. Under these conditions, information and
general education in terms of testing, seem to be the most
efficient way of action. Gregoire (1999) mentioned that
academic education, continuing education, as well as more
publications on test and assessment methods, will raise the
competency level on testing and will improve the quality of
actions in the professional field – undoubtedly a very important
goal in this regard.
From 
comments 
by 
the 
organisation 
representatives
interviewed in the present study, it generally appears as if they
are relatively satisfied with the tests they are using. They also
stressed the point that test users must be well trained and tests
must be used for the purpose for which they were intended.
With her research Rademeyer (1995) also found that although a
variety of measuring instruments and alternative assessment
techniques are currently being applied in South African
organisations, test users display a positive attitude towards
psychometric testing and that conventional psychometric tests
still play a significant role in the selection process. According to
her, it seems as if the use of other assessment techniques, such
as simulation exercises, competency-based tests and trainability
tests, are considered important, but are not yet really utilized in
most organisations.
In his study Cook (1997) found that the majority of
respondents were of the opinion that there still is an important
role for psychometric testing in the future. The alternatives
either lack reliability, or are expensive (eg assessment centres).
According to him, provided the issue of bias can be dealt with,
psychometric tests offer an inexpensive and time-efficient
solution. However, work will have to be done with regard to
test construction, validation research and norm collection, the
training of test users, and marketing the concept of testing –
especially with unions. If employers are not to lose the utility
which ability testing provides, they will have to support
research efforts to validate the newer testing products and
promote an extensive education campaign to convince opinion
makers that testing is not unfairly discriminatory. Whilst bias
can be addressed in research, the issue of fairness remains a
political issue which can only be addressed at the political
level (Cook, 1997).  
According to Huysamen (1996), one of the major stumbling
blocks regarding the use of psychometric tests in South Africa,
stems from the complexity of creating tests which may be
used across a diversity of linguistic and cultural backgrounds.
Of major concern are the implications of possible
discrimination and therefore many of the organisations in the
present study are presently working towards the validation of
tests in their own work environments. Based on the frequently
expressed needs for culture-fair tests by the representatives of
these organisations, it appears that they are aware of the
importance to try and implement fair and equal treatment to
all individuals.
Cook (1997) also found in his research that considerable
awareness of changes in the sociopolitical and economic
context of testing, especially in relation to the new labour
legislation, was evident. Some companies even dropped
testing altogether, however, the general trend seems to be to
re-evaluate test batteries carefully and to prepare for possible
legal challenges. He found that there is a trend towards
dropping the older personality and aptitude tests, but that
this is not consistent: some companies are considering
beginning to use tests which others are discarding. There also
is no clear articulated set of criteria for making these
decisions, except for the broad issues of bias and fairness, and
the availability of local norms. According to Cook (1997), a
trend towards assessment centres and competency-based
assessment is also evident.
In this regard it is interesting to note that the 16 PF is by far the
most commonly used test by most of the organisations in this
study. It is used by 15 of them and the second most commonly
used test (SAWAIS) is used by only 6 organisations. Also in her
research, Rademeyer (1995) found that by far the most
commonly used instrument was the 16 PF. It was used by 45% of
the organisations surveyed in her research. The next most
popular instrument was the SORT, used by 23% of the
organisations surveyed in her research. 
In the present study the 16 PF is therefore used by all
organisations except for five (organisations D,H,O,R and S).
Organisation D recently removed it from their batteries of tests
because they found it not to be culture-fair. Another two
organisations (organisation E and Q) are still using it, but also
question the culture-fairness of specifically the 16 PF. Related to
this, Abrahams and Mauer (1999) found in a recent South
African study that their results did not support the notion of
comparability of the constructs of the 16 PF across the four race
groups that were included in their investigation. They
emphasized the importance to scientifically evaluate all
instrumentation used for psychological assessment in South
Africa. They then concluded by saying that we simply cannot
carry on using assessment instrumentation for which adequate
empirical evidence on all applicable psychometric concepts
does not exist.
Muniz, Prieto, Almeida and Bartram (1999) studied the
situation of test construction and test use in Spanish-speaking
and 
Portuguese-speaking 
countries. 
They 
found 
the
translation and adaptation of tests to be an especially relevant
problem. According to them, the commonest problems in 
the practice of tests were: failure to respect the copyright 
of the test, use of tests inappropriate to the case, use of
out-of-date tests, and failure to check interpretations of tests
with other colleagues. The five most commonly used tests 
in the countries they studied, were (in order of frequency 
of use): Wechsler Scales, MMPI, Rorschach, Raven’s and 
16 PF. These tests were all used in this present study as 
VAN DER MERWE
84

well – although in this study not the Rorschach, but the 
SORT was used. 
In evaluating the findings of the present study, one has to bear
in mind that this was initial, superficial, exploratory research,
which involved a relatively small sample. Nevertheless, the
findings are indicative of the typical issues that South African
organisations are faced with when implementing psycho-
metric testing in human resource management today, and
therefore cannot be disregarded. Muniz et al (1999) referred to
the fact that tests constitute an excellent tool at the
disposition of psychologists. When used correctly and in
conjunction with other data, they are invaluable for the
practice of the discipline and of great benefit to society.
However, when used incorrectly, they can do the discipline
great disservice and cause harm to those members of the
public whose interests we should seek to protect.   
Ultimately psychometric testing and development is
undergoing an unstable period in the history of its use. It
therefore comes as no shock that some companies are
concerned, uncertain and worried about the latest legislation
and the use of psychometric tests. Despite this, it however
appears that organisations are attempting to adapt to the
instability and uncertainty while continuing to identify and
develop the human resource potential of South Africa. It is a
known fact that well developed psychometric tests are much
more valid and fair than many other selection methods, eg
unstructured screening interviews. The right kinds of tests that
are culture-fair and administered by qualified people, can
therefore be of great help to organisations in meeting their
human resource objectives. 
Given the critical demands which are likely to be placed on the
profession in the next few years, there is a need for
collaboration between test users to establish policies and to
support research directed at providing industry with usable
instruments to identify talent fairly and efficiently (Cook,
1997). In the present study mention was frequently made by the
organisation representatives that certain of the tests and test
material being used, were vastly outdated – a serious accusation
against psychometric material. It therefore seems to be a
sensible suggestion that test manuals and other test material
(also norms) should be updated more frequently by the
distributor of a test. 
Chan, Drasgow and Sawin (1999) found with their research
that time has an effect on the effectiveness of psychological
items and tests. They found that certain types of cognitive-
ability measures are more susceptible to the effects of time
than others. They also warned that test developers and test
users should pay attention to the shelf life of their tests –
especially large scale and well-established non-cognitive
measures, such as inter alia the 16 PF. According to them, it is
possible that over time such measures may be less stable than
cognitive measures. Although this regular updating of test
material might be regarded by some as very idealistic, the
negative implications of not adhering to these guidelines,
must not be underestimated. 
Consideration should also be given to the development of new
tests, with urgent special emphasis on culture-fairness – which
could possibly be enhanced by implementing competency-
based assessment, as it is job-related rather than norm-based.
Here it must be born in mind that competency-based
assessment measures current ability or achieved competence,
while psychometric testing attempts to assess potential for
development.
With regard to personality tests, Cook (1997) is of the opinion
that the difficulty of designing a questionnaire which is
applicable across the cultural and linguistic range of
candidates in South Africa, appears to be insurmountable. He
suggested that what could work well and would be defensible
in court, would be to identify specific attributes that are
demonstrably job-related, then use an instrument which can
be shown to measure that specific attribute with reasonable
validity across groups. This, he said, would be easier to
establish than validating a personality test as a whole. He
therefore recommended that personality tests should only be
used for selection purposes where the job requirements clearly
indicate specific traits measured by the test, and then only in
conjunction with other information. According to him, the
use of clinically-oriented tests in a cross-cultural South
African context does not seem to be justified by the current
state of knowledge.  
Presently it is very important that tests be validated for the
different organisations in which they are used. This also implies
that in each organisation, for each specific job, the validity of the
test battery being used, must be ensured. Once again this is
something which could possibly be enhanced by also making
use of competency-based assessment, which is directly linked to
job content and inherent job requirements. One must however
once again bear in mind that there are psychological factors
which competency measures cannot provide, such as that of
learning or developmental potential.
Although this study was a qualitative investigation, it was not
always possible to obtain all the detailed information normally
required in this type of study. One possible reason for this is
that organisations often regard some psychometric information
as confidential. With regard to follow-up research, an expansion
of the sample can be considered. This would also lead to a more
in-depth study of the entire field of psychometric testing in
human resource management.
Lastly, the cooperation of everybody involved in this study, as
well as all participating organisations, is greatly appreciated.
REFERENCES
Abrahams, F. & Mauer, K.F. (1999). The comparability of the
constructs of the 16 PF in the South African context. Journal
of Industrial Psychology, 25(1), 53-59.
Aiken, L.R. (1994). Psychological testing and assessment. (8th Ed).
Massachusetts: Allyn & Bacon.
Anastasi, A. & Urbina, S. (1997). Psychological testing. (7th Ed).
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Bartram, D. & Coyne, I. (1998). The ITC/EFPPA survey of testing
and test use in countries world-wide: narrative report. Paper
presented at workshop of International Test Commission,
Dublin.
Chan, K., Drasgow, F. & Sawin, L.L. (1999). What is the shelf life
of a test? The effect of time on the psychometrics of a
cognitive ability test battery. Journal of Applied Psychology,
84(4), 610-619.
Cook, J. (1997). Report on a survey of psychometric testing in South
African companies. Unpublished report done for South
African Breweries Beer Division.
Eckstein, S. (1998). Testing Times. People Dynamics, 17(6), 54-55.
Employment Equity Act. (1998). No.55. Republic of South Africa. 
Friedenberg, L. (1995). Psychological testing: Design, analysis, and
use. Massachusetts: Allyn & Bacon.
Gregoire, J. (1999). Emerging standards for test applications in
the French-speaking countries of Europe. European Journal of
Psychological Assessment, 15(2), 158-164. 
Huysamen, G.K. (1996). Psychological measurement. An
introduction with South African examples. Pretoria: J.L. van
Schaik.
Kemp, N. (1999). Psychometric testing is not dead. People
Dynamics, 17(3), 14-17.
Kriek, H. (1998). Fairness and equity: New legislation will help to
increase the best practice of occupational testing. Jul/Aug
Newsline, SHL South Africa.
PSYCHOMETRIC TESTING
85

Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act.
(1974). No.56 as amended. Republic of South Africa.
Mittner, M. (1998). Psychometric tests under fire. F & T Weekly,
26 June, 56.
Muniz, J., Prieto, G., Almeida, L. & Bartram, D. (1999). Test use
in Spain, Portugal and Latin American countries. European
Journal of Psychological Assessment, 15(2), 151-157. 
Owen, K. & Taljaard, J.J. (1996). Handbook for the use of
psychological and scholastic tests of the HSRC. Pretoria: HSRC.
Rademeyer, A. (1995). The application of psychometrics in South
African organisations within a changing labour market.
Unpublished masters dissertation, University of Pretoria.    
Roodt, G. (1998). Challenges in psychological assessment. People
Dynamics, 16(11), 30-34.
Schultz, D.P. & Schultz, S.E. (1998). Psychology and work today.
(7th Ed). New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc.
SHL (1996). Assessment materials. Saville & Holdsworth Ltd.
Occupational Psychologists.
Spangenberg, H. (1990). Assessing managerial competence. Cape
Town: Juta.
Thomas International (undated). Increasing people effectiveness.
Proceedings of a two day workshop presented by Thomas
International Management Systems.
Van der Merwe, R.P. (1999). Psychological assessment in industry.
Journal of Industrial Psychology, 25(3), 8-11.
Van der Merwe, R.P. (2000). The application of psychometric
tests in human resource management. South African Journal
of Economic and Management Sciences, 3(2), 290-307.
Van der Walt, H.S. (1998). Psychological tests: Refined
instruments for reliable information to decision-makers. In
Focus Forum, 5(4), 16-17.
VAN DER MERWE
86
