South Africa is indeed blessed with abundant natural resources. 
Those resources are harvested to trade on world markets and to earn 
money to support the nation. This is essential, both in the short and 
long term. However, in the long term money per se has its 
shortcomings. After all money talks, but it doesn’t think. Machines 
work efficiently, but they do not invent. Only people think and 
invent, and this is why people are the most valuable resource of all.
Whether one is talking about a company or a nation, there is really 
only one, long-term, sustainable source of competitive advantage: 
the intellectual capital that resides in the minds of people. And what 
is intellectual capital?  It is the knowledge, skills, and abilities of 
employees to develop solutions to problems that customers think 
are important. Whether the customer is internal or external, if one’s 
people can develop solutions to problems that those customers are 
facing, whether the problems involve production, sales, marketing, 
management, or technology, then you will create wealth.  
Consider for a moment about what creates competitive advantage 
for a company or a nation. Is it technology, access to capital, access 
to information, machinery? While those factors may create 
temporary advantages, in the long term, every one of them can be 
imitated and duplicated by competitors. Virtually all developed 
countries share instant access to information, to sources of financial 
capital, to the same machines, and technology. Yet to create 
sustainable competitive advantage, any such source must pass two 
tests: (1) it must add value, and (2) it can not be duplicated easily by 
competitors. When it comes to factors of production, they are all 
fungible, all except for one, and that is people. People are the only 
truly sustainable source of competitive advantage for a firm or a 
nation over the long term.  
This is why it is so essential to view one’s people as assets to be 
developed, rather than as costs to be cut as soon as economic 
conditions turn down. The ongoing development of people as 
strategic assets is essential, because no matter what country a 
person lives in, he or she cannot escape three defining forces of our 
time: globalization, the information revolution, and the speed of 
change. Each of these forces will be examined, in turn, but let one 
begin by considering some important changes in the psychological 
contract, the unwritten rules that bind workers and employers. 
CHANGES IN THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACT
Downsizing and other forms of restructuring have altered this 
contract. To put the changes into perspective, consider some features 
of the old contract, and how they have changed to reflect the 
realities of today’s workplaces.
Old Psychological Contract	
New Psychological Contract
Stability, predictability	
Change, uncertainty
Permanence	
Temporariness
Standard work patterns	
Flexible work
Valuing loyalty	
Valuing performance and skills
Paternalism	
Self-reliance
Job security	
Employment security
Linear career growth	
Multiple careers
One-time learning	
Life-long learning
Stability and predictability characterized the old psychological 
contract. In the 1970s, for example, workers held an average of 3-4 
jobs during their working lives. Change and uncertainty, however, 
are hallmarks of the new psychological contract. Soon workers will 
hold 7-10 jobs during their working lives. Job-hopping no longer 
holds the same stigma as it once did. Thus interviewers use to regard 
with skepticism a job candidate who held more than two jobs in 
three years. Today, workers in high-technology jobs often tout the 
fact that they have held two jobs in the past three years as a badge 
of honor, an indication that they are on the “cutting edge” of their 
fields! Beyond that, the massive downsizing of employees in countries 
everywhere has made job mobility the norm, rather than the 
exception. This has led workers operating under the new psychological 
contract to expect temporary employment relationships.	
 
Permanent employment relationships, with few exceptions, such as 
tenured college professors, no longer exist.
Another major change in the psychological contract has been the 
shift from standard work patterns to flexible work patterns. For all of 
the emphasis on the “New Economy,” however, most jobs are still 
modeled on the clock-punching culture of the industrial past. Time is 
employees’ most precious commodity. They want the flexibility to 
control their own time – where, when, and how they work. They want 
balance in their lives between work and leisure. Flexibility in schedules 
WAYNE F CASCIO
Graduate School of Business
University of Colorado, Denver
Abstract
Only one, long-term sustainable source of competitive advantage exist: the intellectual capital that resides in the minds of 
people. The ongoing development of people as strategic assets is essential because of three defining forces of our time: 
globalisation, the information revolution, and the speed of change. Each of these forces is examined in the article against 
the backdrop of some important changes in the psychological contract. The challenge is to create knowledge for practical 
solutions, appropriate to a changing world of work.
opsomming
Slegs een, lang termyn, standhoudende bron van mededingendheid bestaan: die intellektuele kapitaal wat in mense 
weggelê is. Die deurlopende ontwikkeling van mense as strategiese bate is noodsaaklik as gevolg van drie deurslaggewende, 
teenswoordige kragte: globalisering, die inligtingsrevolusie, en die spoed van verandering. Elk van hierdie kragte word 
bespreek in die artikel teen die agtergrond van beduidende verskuiwings in die sielkundige kontrak. Die uitdaging is om 
kennis vir praktiese oplossings te skep wat op ’n veranderende wêreld van werk van toepassing sal wees.
Knowledge Creation for Practical Solutions appropriate to 
a Changing World of Work1
Requests for copies should be addressed to: WF Cascio, Graduate School of Business, 
University of Colorado, Denver, PO Box 173364, Denver, Colorado, 80217-3364
1   Edited version of the keynote address at the launch of the Centre for Work 
Performance, Department of Human Resource Management, Rand Afrikaans 
University on 30 March 2001. Printed with the kind approval of Wayne
14
Journal of Industrial Psychology, 2001, 27(4), 14-16
Tydskrif vir Bedryfsielkunde, 2001, 27 (4), 14-16

A changing world of work
15
is the key, as organizations strive to retain talented workers in a hot 
job market. Small business owners in particular are finding that 
flexibility on hours is a cheap benefit that allows them to compete 
with large companies whose schedules may be more rigid.
Despite the fact that only 53% of U. S. employers offer flextime to 
their employees, a recent poll found 56% of managers reporting that 
employees with flexible schedules are more productive per hour. 
That kind of positive buzz is what is driving work redesign processes 
to enhance flexibility at companies such as Ernst & Young, Hewlett-
Packard, Bank of America, and Lucent Technologies.
In years past, employers strove mightily to instill loyalty to the 
company among their employees. Downsizing and restructuring 
have changed all of that, at least for the foreseeable future. According 
to a recent survey, employees are less loyal to their companies, and 
they tend to put their own needs and interests above those of their 
employers. 
More often they are willing to trade off higher wages and benefits 
for flexibility and autonomy, job characteristics that allow them to 
balance their lives on and off the job. In the United States, almost 9 
out of every 10 workers live with family members, and nearly half 
care for dependents, including children, elderly parents, or ailing 
spouses. Among employees who switched jobs in the last 5 years, 
pay and benefits rated in the bottom half of 20 possible reasons why 
they did so. Factors rated highest were “nature of work,” “open 
communication,” and “effect on personal/family life.” When it comes 
to loyalty, each employee is behaving as if he or she is the CEO of 
“Me, Inc.” In some cases, tightly knit groups of employees (co-workers, 
former colleagues, classmates, or friends) decide to stay or leave en 
masse, behaving as if they are the CEOs of “We, Inc.” That phenomenon 
has been termed the “Pied Piper Effect,” as top performers at the 
heart of these networks convince others to follow them. Paternalism 
on the part of the company has given way to self-reliance on the 
part of the employee or a group of employees.
Another change in the psychological contract is the shift from job 
security, the knowledge that one would always have a job with a 
given employer, to employment security, having skills that some 
employer in the labor market is willing to pay for. This is why the 
concepts of lifelong learning and multiple careers are so important 
to employees. Obsolescence is the enemy. As we shall see, 
opportunities for workplace training and continual professional 
development are prized commodities as employees strive to keep 
themselves marketable.
GLOBALIZATION
The global village is getting smaller every day. Markets in every 
country have become fierce battlegrounds where both domestic and 
foreign competitors fight for market share, and foreign competitors 
can be formidable. For example, Coca-Cola, an American multinational 
firm, earns more than 80 percent of its revenues from outside the 
United States! The 500 largest firms in the world employ almost 44 
million people, they gross almost $13 trillion in revenues, $554 billion 
in profits, and the total value of their assets exceeds $44 billion.
These few examples suggest that cross-cultural exposure, if not actual 
interaction, 
has 
become 
the 
norm. 
In 
the 
world 
of business, globalization is a defining characteristic of our time. 
Globalization refers to commerce without borders, along with the 
interdependence of business operations in different locations: 
	 A single marketplace has been created by factors such as the 
following Satellite dishes in the world’s most remote areas beam 
live television feeds from CNN and MTV. Internet booksellers like 
Amazon.com provide 24-hour-a-day supermarkets for consumers 
everywhere.
	 Global telecommunications enhanced by fiber optics, satellites, 
and computer technology
	 Giant multinational corporations such as Gillette, Unilever, and 
Nestlé, which have begun to lose their national identities as they 
integrate and coordinate product design, manufacturing, sales, 
and services on a worldwide basis
	 Growing free trade among nations
	 Financial markets’ being open 24 hours a day around the world
	 The emergence of global standards and regulations for trade, 
commerce, finance, products, and services.
THE INFORMATION REVOLUTION
It is no exaggeration to state that modern technology is changing 
the ways we live and work. The information revolution will transform 
everything it touches – and it will touch everything. Information and 
ideas are key to the new creative economy, because every country, 
every company, and every individual depends increasingly on 
knowledge.
In the information economy, the most important intellectual property 
is not software or music. It is the intellectual capital that resides in 
people. And when the most vital assets are people, there can be no 
true ownership. The best that corporations can do is to impart 
knowledge and information that will be useful in developing 
solutions to problems that customers care about. As a broker of new 
knowledge, RAU’s Centre for Work Performance will play a key role in 
that process. 
What is the impact of the new technology on work, workers and 
organisations? Where we work, when we work, and how we 
communicate are being revolutionized, as a “seamless” web of 
electronic communications media – e-mail, voice mail, cellular 
telephones, laptops with modems, hand-held organizers, video 
conferencing, and interactive pagers – makes teamwork and mobility 
a reality.
Technology facilitates the rapid diffusion of information and 
knowledge. Indeed, any organisation can draw on resources and 
information from all over the world – for the benefit of the 
organizations it serves.
SPEED OF CHANGE
If the rest of the industry had kept pace with developments in the 
speed of computers, and in the drop in the costs of computer chips 
as firms became more efficient, the typical car would cost about 
$25, and it would travel about 4,000 miles on a thimble of gas! 
Regardless of what field one is in, given the pace of change that is 
happening all around one, each one really has only two choices: 
either one manages change or surely change will manage one. This 
is why fast-changing environments require continuous learning and 
training to keep up. 
In fact, the principle of obsolescence is neatly captured in what is 
known as the “Paul Principle”: Over time, people become uneducated, 
and therefore incompetent to perform at a level that they once 
performed at adequately. Consider this for a moment. Organizations 
often lose people because they fail to provide training opportunities 
to retain them. Commenting on this, the General Manager of Marks 
& Spencer, London, had this to say: “Train people to the point where 
you may lose them, and then you won’t lose them.” Why? Because 
they can’t go anywhere else to get the same kind of opportunities for 
continuous training and learning.
Institutions doing action research, like the Centre for Work 
Performance at Rand Afrikaans Univesity, that offers the promise of 
making work less onerous and more rewarding for millions of people, 
and of improving management practice, not only in South Africa, but 
also in the region, and in the world. As the famous anthropologist, 
Margaret Mead once remarked, “Never doubt that a small group of 
thoughtful, committed people can change the world. Indeed, it is the 
only thing that ever has.”

CAscio
16
IN CONCLUSION: THE POWER OF 
SHARING AND CARING
In closing a story that has touched the author, and which is hoped 
will touch the readers as well. A few years ago, at the Seattle Special 
Olympics, nine contestants, all with physical or mental disabilities, 
assembled at the starting line for the 100-meter dash. 
At the gun, they all started out, not exactly in a dash, but with a 
relish to run the race and win. All that is, except for one little boy, 
who stumbled on the asphalt, tumbled over a couple of times, 
and began to cry. The other eight contestants heard the boy cry. 
They slowed down and looked back. Then they all turned around 
and went back…every one of them. One little girl with Down’s 
Syndrome bent down and kissed the little boy and said, “This will 
make it better.” Then all nine linked arms and walked together to 
the finish line. Everyone in the stadium stood, and the cheering 
went on for several minutes. 
People who were there still tell the story. Why? Because deep 
down we know this one thing. What matters in this life is more 
than winning for ourselves. What matters in this life is helping 
others win, even if it means slowing down and changing our 
course. “A candle loses nothing by lighting another candle.”
REFERENCES
Cappelli, P. (2000, Jan./Feb.). A market-driven approach to retaining 
talent. Harvard Business Review, 103-111.
Cascio, W. F. (2000, Aug.). Managing a virtual workplace.   Academy of 
Management Executive, 13(3), 81-90.
Cascio, W. F. (2001). The virtual organization. In C. L. Cooper & R. 
Burke (Eds.), The New World of Work. London: Blackwell
Erez, M. (1997). A culture-based model of work motivation. In P. C. 
Earley & M. erez (Eds.), New perspecitves on international 
industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 193-242). San 
Francisco: The New Lexington Press.
National Research Council. (1999). The changing nature of work: 
Implications for occupational analysis. Washington, D. C.: National 
Academy Press.
Rousseau, D. M. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations: 
Written and unwritten agreements. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rousseau, D. M. (1996). Changing the deal while keeping the people.  
Academy of Management Executive, 10(1), 50-59.
Rousseau, D. M., & Wade-Benzoni, K. A. (1995). Changing individual-
organizational attachments. In A. Howard (Ed.), The changing 
nature of work (pp. 290-332). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sommer, R. (2000). Retaining intellectual capital in the 21st century. 
Alexandria, VA: Society for Human Resource Management.
