 
 
 
                         
 
 
RIVM report 250911006/2005       
 
Risk assessment of Campylobacter in the 
Netherlands via broiler meat and other routes 
 
M.J. Nauta1, W.F. Jacobs-Reitsma2, E.G. Evers1, 
W. van Pelt1, A.H. Havelaar1* 
 
1National Institute for Public Health and the Environment 
(RIVM), P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven 
2 Wageningen UR, Animal Sciences Group (ASG),  
P.O. Box 65, 8200 AB Lelystad 
 
     
 
 
* corresponding author 
Microbiological Laboratory for Health Protection 
e-mail: Arie.Havelaar@rivm.nl 
 
 
 
This investigation has been performed by order and for the account of the Ministry of Public 
Health, Welfare and Sports, the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, and the 
Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority, within the framework of project V/250911, 
CARMA: Campylobacter Risk Management and Assessment. 
RIVM, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA  Bilthoven, telephone: 31 - 30 - 274 91 11; telefax: 31 - 30 - 274 29 71 

page 2 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Het rapport in het kort  
Risicoschatting van Campylobacter in Nederland via kippenvlees en andere routes 
 
Elk jaar worden mensen ziek door de Campylobacter bacterie. Omdat de overheid wil weten 
wat zij hier het best tegen kan doen, is dit in het CARMA project onderzocht. Dit rapport 
beschrijft om te beginnen wat de oorzaken van campylobacterbesmetting zouden kunnen zijn. 
Direct contact met (huis-)dieren en de consumptie van onverhit voedsel komen naast 
kippenvlees als belangrijke bronnen naar voren. Kippenvlees zou een aanzienlijk deel van de 
ziektegevallen kunnen veroorzaken. Er is een wiskundig model gebouwd om meer inzicht te 
krijgen in het vóórkomen en de verspreiding van campylobacter in de productieketen van 
kippenvlees, van de boerderij tot en met de bereiding van het vlees in de keuken thuis. Met 
het model is ingeschat waar en hoe het best ingegrepen kan worden om campylobacter te 
bestrijden met als doel het aantal zieken dat erdoor veroorzaakt wordt effectief te 
verminderen. Een goede optie lijkt te zijn om zowel het aantal besmette kippen, als de 
hoeveelheid campylobacters in de kippenmest en op het kippenvlees aan te pakken. Dat kan 
door extra aandacht te geven aan de hygiëne op de boerderij, door tijdens de slacht het lekken 
van besmette mest uit de karkassen te verminderen en door het kippenvlees met bijvoorbeeld 
melkzuur te wassen. Er valt dan een aanzienlijke gezondheidswinst te behalen. Gegarandeerd 
vers campylobactervrij vlees is alleen mogelijk als al het vlees doorstraald zou worden. De 
meest doelmatige maatregelen zijn echter alleen vast te stellen als ook economische en 
maatschappelijke aspecten worden meegenomen. Hiervoor wordt verwezen naar andere 
rapporten die in het kader van dit CARMA project zijn verschenen. 
 
Trefwoorden: Kwantitatieve microbiologische risicoschatting; ketenmodel; 
Beheersingsmaatregelen; Blootsstellingsschatting; Epidemiologie 
 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 3 of 128 
 
Abstract 
Risk assessment of Campylobacter in the Netherlands via broiler meat and other routes 
 
Each year numerous people get ill due to the Campylobacter bacterium. Research within the 
CARMA project aims to advise the Dutch government on dealing with this problem. This 
report first describes the possible sources of human exposure to campylobacter in the 
Netherlands. Next to poultry meat, direct contact with (pet and farm) animals and the 
consumption of raw and undercooked food are identified as important sources. Broiler meat 
may be the source of many cases of campylobacteriosis. A mathematical model is built to 
gain insight in the presence and transmission of campylobacter through the broiler meat 
production chain, from farm to fork. The model is used to assess the effects of interventions 
to control campylobacter and to reduce the incidence of campylobacteriosis. It shows that a 
combined approach is promising: reduction of the prevalence of colonised birds and lowering 
of the numbers of campylobacters in the faeces and on the broiler meat. This may be 
achieved by further improvement of farm hygiene, reducing faecal leakage during processing 
and decontamination of the carcasses with lactate. Implementation of these interventions may 
result in a considerable public health profit. It is not possible to guarantee fresh 
campylobacter free broiler meat, unless the meat is irradiated. To select the most effective 
interventions, economic and social aspects are included in the analysis. This is described in 
other reports written within the CARMA project. 
 
Keywords: Quantitative Microbiological Risk Assessment; Farm to fork risk model; Control 
measures; Exposure assessment; Epidemiology

page 4 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
Contents 
Summary 6 
1. 
Introduction 7 
2. 
Campylobacter transmission via routes other than broiler meat 11 
2.1 
Estimation of the relative importance of Campylobacter transmission routes and risk factors based 
on a laboratory driven case-control study 11 
2.1.1 
Introduction and objective 11 
2.1.2 
Study design 11 
2.1.3 
Results 13 
2.2 
Estimation of the relative importance of Campylobacter transmission routes based on exposure 
assessment 15 
2.2.1 
Introduction and objective 15 
2.2.2 
Method 16 
2.2.3 
Data 18 
2.2.4 
Results 18 
2.3 
Exposure assessment versus epidemiology 22 
2.3.1 
Number of predicted campylobacter cases 22 
2.3.2 
Relative importance of transmission routes 24 
3. 
Risk Model 29 
3.1 
Methodology 29 
3.1.1 
Principle 29 
3.1.2 
Uncertainty and variabilities 29 
3.1.3 
Interventions 30 
3.1.4 
Data sources 31 
3.1.5 
Model implementation 31 
3.1.6 
Extrapolation: from model objective to project scope 32 
3.2 
Model description 32 
3.2.1 
Overview 32 
3.2.2 
Processing 34 
3.2.3 
Cutting 38 
3.2.4 
Storage 41 
3.2.5 
Consumer preparation 42 
3.2.6 
Exposure 45 
3.2.7 
Ingestion and Dose-response 47 
3.2.8 
Overview of the risk model 50 
3.3 
Parameter estimates baseline model 50 
3.3.1 
Flock and animal prevalence 51 
3.3.2 
Concentration in the faeces 51 
3.3.3 
Carcass exterior 53 
3.4 
Interventions 58 
3.4.1 
Selection of interventions 58 
3.4.2 
Evaluated interventions 61 
3.4.3 
Effects of interventions 62 
3.4.4 
Alternative scenarios 72 
4. 
Results 75 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 5 of 128 
4.1 
Baseline 75 
4.2 
Interventions 83 
4.2.1 
Farm 83 
4.2.2 
Scheduled treatment 85 
4.2.3 
Processing 86 
4.2.4 
Consumer 87 
4.2.5 
Comparison of response measures 88 
4.3 
Alternative scenarios 90 
4.3.1 
Input Next and Cfec 90 
4.3.2 
Variability between birds and flocks 92 
4.3.3 
Processing model and expert study uncertainty 92 
4.3.4 
Cutting and storage 96 
4.3.5 
Consumer food handling 96 
4.3.6 
Dose-response 97 
5. 
Discussion 99 
5.1 
Chicken meat as a source of campylobacteriosis 99 
5.2 
Baseline 100 
5.3 
Interventions 101 
5.4 
Alternative scenarios 103 
5.5 
Uncertainties 105 
5.5.1 
Expert judgement as data source 105 
5.5.2 
Extrapolation 108 
5.5.3 
Relative Risk 108 
5.6 
Model Validation 111 
5.6.1 
Processing model 111 
5.6.2 
Monitoring results 114 
5.6.3 
Fillet counts 114 
5.6.4 
Epidemiology 114 
5.7 
Gaps in knowledge 115 
5.8 
Model and Methodology 116 
5.9 
Conclusions 117 
References 119 
Acknowledgements 125 
Appendix 127 
 

page 6 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Summary 
Research performed within the CARMA project aims to advise the Dutch government on 
dealing with the public health burden due to campylobacteriosis. This report first describes 
the possible sources of human exposure to campylobacter in the Netherlands. For this 
purpose, results of a laboratory driven case control study is combined with an exposure 
assessment study. Comparison of these approaches shows a discrepancy in the predicted 
incidence. Despite some differences in the ranking of sources, not only poultry meat, but also 
direct contact with (pet and farm) animals and the consumption of raw and undercooked food 
are identified as important sources by both studies.  
Broiler meat may be the source of many cases of campylobacteriosis. A mathematical model 
is built to gain insight in the presence and transmission of campylobacter through the broiler 
meat production chain, from farm to fork, including a dose-response relationship. This 
quantitative microbiological risk assessment model is constructed using the Modular Process 
Risk Modelling (MPRM) methodology. First, a baseline model describes the 'present' 
situation in the Netherlands, for chicken breast fillet and a cross-contaminated salad. 
Parameter estimates of this model are based on the scientific literature and, when data were 
lacking, on expert judgement. The model includes some novel aspects compared to 
previously published risk assessments of campylobacter in broiler meat. It explicitly includes 
variability between flocks and between birds and differentiates between numbers of 
campylobacters in the faeces and on the carcass. The model dynamics include the basic non-
linear dynamics of cross-contamination.  
Next, the risk model is used to assess the effects of interventions to control campylobacter 
and reduce the incidence of campylobacteriosis. A set of interventions is proposed by the risk 
management in the CARMA project, ranging from the farm to industrial processing and the 
consumer stage. The effects of these interventions are translated to modified parameter 
values. Comparison of model outputs (the number of predicted cases) then allows evaluation 
of the effects of the interventions. It shows that it is not possible to guarantee fresh 
campylobacter free broiler meat, unless the meat is irradiated. However, some interventions 
may yield a considerable lower human incidence of campylobacteriosis. A combined 
approach is most promising: reduction of the prevalence of (flocks of) colonised birds and a 
decrease of the numbers of campylobacters in the faeces and on the broiler meat. This may be 
achieved by further improvement of farm hygiene, reducing faecal leakage during processing 
and decontamination of the carcasses with lactate. An important finding is that interventions 
aimed at lowering the concentration of campylobacter may be quite effective, despite the fact 
that campylobacter is not eliminated. To select the most effective interventions, economic 
and social aspects are included in the analysis. This is described in other reports written 
within the CARMA project. 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 7 of 128 
 
1. 
Introduction 
This report is part of the CARMA (Campylobacter Risk Management and Assessment) 
project, a collaborative project of several Dutch research institutes which aims to advise the 
Dutch government on possible interventions to reduce the number of cases of 
campylobacteriosis in the Netherlands. It is a predominantly technical report on the 
quantitative ‘farm to fork’ risk model of the broiler chicken production chain as constructed 
within CARMA, including an analysis of the importance of chicken meat as a route of 
transmission in comparison with other routes. For details on Campylobacter, 
campylobacteriosis and the CARMA project we refer to Havelaar (2001) and Havelaar et al. 
(2005). 
 
Scope 
Broiler chickens are generally regarded as one of the main sources of campylobacteriosis. 
Campylobacter is frequently found in broiler chickens and on broiler chicken meat. Humans 
can thus be exposed to campylobacter by the consumption of improperly heated chicken meat 
or other foods which are cross-contaminated with campylobacter during food preparation of 
an (accompanying) meal with chicken meat.   
The relevance of chicken meat as source of Campylobacter infections is explored first. Next, 
the scope of the ‘farm to fork’ risk model described in this report is to assess and compare the 
effects of interventions, aiming to reduce this exposure, all over the broiler chicken meat 
production chain. Hence, the scope of the model is all Dutch cases of campylobacteriosis 
originating from the consumption of food contaminated with campylobacter in the 
Netherlands, originating from broiler chickens. The model excludes human campylobacter 
infections of Dutch people acquired abroad. In assessing the number of cases without 
interventions, consumption of broiler chicken meat of non-Dutch origin is included in the 
analysis, with the assumption that all the meat can be treated alike, independent of country of 
origin. However, the interventions will be directed at Dutch broilers and broiler meat only. 
The impact of this complication is discussed elsewhere (Mangen et al. 2005a). 
 
Model demarcation  
Due to restrictions in research time and resources, and additional restrictions in knowledge 
and data availability, the broiler meat risk model has been restricted to one route of exposure 
only. A detailed analysis of one route only allows the inclusion of details that may have an 
important impact on the (non-linear) dynamics of the transmission of campylobacter through 
the ‘farm to fork’ chain. Finally, the conclusions of this single route are extrapolated to the 
broader scope as defined above. 
Therefore the broiler meat risk model described in chapters 3 and 4 of this report deals with 
Dutch private home consumers of a salad which is cross-contaminated with campylobacter 
from chicken breast fillet. It is restricted to meat originating from Dutch processing plants 
and animals reared in the Netherlands. The food product is chosen because chicken breast 

page 8 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
fillet is a raw chicken product which is frequently prepared in Dutch private homes. The 
presumed route of exposure from chicken breast fillet is cross-contamination, because the 
fillets are usually cut and cooked. The campylobacters on the fillet are inactivated, but there 
is a potential for cross-contamination via hands and kitchen equipment. If the cross-
contaminated food is consumed raw (like a salad) the risk of exposure is largest. 
The model described in this paper starts at the point where broilers enter the processing plant. 
A preceding model on the dynamics of Campylobacter on the farm is constructed by partners 
in the CARMA project (Katsma et al. 2005). Their model provides input to our model on 
flock prevalence and animal prevalence. Also, results from the farm model are taken into 
account that are associated with the effects of several risk reducing interventions at the farm. 
The endpoint of the baseline model is the number of cases of campylobacteriosis in a year in 
the Netherlands, acquired by salad consumption by the route described above. 
 
General approach  
Effects of possible interventions are evaluated by first describing the present situation in the 
Netherlands (defined as the situation in the year 2000 at the start of the project). Next, the 
effects of separate interventions on this present situation are evaluated. Here, interventions 
are incorporated as changes in some model parameter values, and effects are generated as 
model outputs at the end of the chain model. This allows comparison at the same end point of 
different types of interventions at different points in the farm to fork chain. Also, the effects 
of combinations of interventions can be studied. 
As the aim of the CARMA project is to advise the governmental risk management by the end 
of the project, the model uses the best knowledge as available at the moment. We apply a 
scientific methodology and use the available data and knowledge generated by scientific 
research. However, if the scientific information is insufficient, ambiguous or absent, we use 
the opinion of available experts as a best estimate. This implies that the result of our 
assessment reflects the best available knowledge at the time, to serve risk management. 
Although quantitative, the purpose of the model is not to predict correct numbers expressing 
levels of exposure to campylobacter and illness rates. The primary objective is to compare the 
effects of (sets of) interventions, based on the available knowledge.     
Additionally, modelling is a good tool to structure the available information and to identify 
important gaps in data and knowledge. Thus it also generate prioritised research questions 
that need answers to best improve the advice for risk management. 
 
Context 
This report is not the first publication on quantitative risk assessment of Campylobacter in 
broilers. The model builds further on risk assessments performed in Canada (Fazil et al. 
1999), the United Kingdom (Hartnett et al. 2002) and Denmark (Rosenquist et al. 2003) and 
for WHO/FAO (Anonymous  2001, Anderson et al. 2003). In general, the modelling 
approach that we apply is more mechanistic than before, and more precisely deals with 
variability and uncertainty. Also, the model presented in this report is embedded in the 
CARMA project. It uses input generated elsewhere in the project (Katsma et al. 2005), and 
gives input to other parts. The final advice to the risk management combines the results 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 9 of 128 
presented here within the results of an analysis of costs (Mangen et al. 2005a) and an analysis 
of social acceptance of interventions by different groups of stakeholders (Bogaardt 2005). 
Other routes of exposure, next to chicken meat, are studied by Evers et al. (2004) and 
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a), as summarized in chapter 2 of this report. 
 
Outline 
The main focus of this report is the risk model on campylobacter in broiler meat. In chapter 2 
the importance of chicken meat as a source of campylobacteriosis is explored in comparison 
with other sources, using both an epidemiological approach and a comparative exposure 
assessment approach. Chapter 3 first describes the methodology applied for the chicken meat 
risk model. It presents the models constructed for the consecutive stages of the farm to fork 
chain and the parameter estimates of the baseline model, which represents the present 
situation in the Netherlands. Then, it describes the baseline scenario and the effects of the 
selected interventions and a series of alternative scenarios developed to explore the impact of 
some assumptions and uncertainties in the model. In chapters 4 and 5 modelling results are 
presented and discussed. Section 5.5 of the discussion particularly deals with uncertainties 
like those related with the extrapolation of the results to the broader scope of the model. It 
also gives a list of the ten key simplifying assumptions of the risk assessment, of which the 
risk management should be aware. 

page 10 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 11 of 128 
2. 
Campylobacter transmission via routes other than 
broiler meat 
In this chapter attention will be given to all possible transmission routes for Campylobacter. 
First, a summary of the setup and results of the epidemiological (so called CaSa) study will 
be given. Second, the same will be done for the comparative exposure assessment. Finally, 
the two studies will be compared, discussing similarities and differences. 
 
2.1 
Estimation of the relative importance of Campylobacter 
transmission routes and risk factors based on a laboratory 
driven case-control study   
 
This chapter is based mainly on two draft papers on risk factors for endemic gastro-intestinal 
illness due to Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli, respectively (Doorduyn et al. in 
prep a, Doorduyn et al. in prep b) and a report to the ministry of Public Health on risk factors 
for endemic C. jejuni, congress presentations and workshop proceedings. 
 
2.1.1 Introduction and objective 
In the Netherlands, hardly any epidemiological data on risk factors for campylobacteriosis are 
available. Therefore a large case-control study was conducted to investigate risk factors for 
endemic human campylobacteriosis (and salmonellosis) in the Netherlands, the so-called 
CaSa-study. The CaSa-study aimed to quantify the contribution of different risk factors in 
order to provide quantitative data as input for the risk assessment study CARMA. By doing 
so, it will be possible to predict the efficiency of control and intervention measures and to 
identify possible new leads for control strategies. In this chapter we present the results of 
analyses of risk factors associated with endemic campylobacteriosis due to C. jejuni and 
preliminary results for C. coli infection. 
 
2.1.2 Study design 
Cases 
This study was designed as a case-control study and was conducted from April 2002 to April 
2003. Cases were culture-confirmed patients with Campylobacter (or Salmonella) infection, 
identified by the examination of faecal samples submitted to all Regional Public Health 
Laboratories (RPHL) in the Netherlands. Isolates were sent to the Animal Sciences Group 
(Lelystad) for confirmation of the species identification by the RPHL. 
 
Controls 
Controls (aiming at two per case) were selected from the population registries of 25 
municipalities within the service area of the RPHL by frequency matching for age, sex, 
degree of urbanization and season of the expected numbers of cases. 

page 12 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
For the risk factor analysis, only cases and controls that did not travel to foreign countries in 
the 7 days prior to symptom onset (cases) or completion of the questionnaire (controls) were 
included. 
 
Questionnaire 
The questionnaires for cases and controls included questions regarding food consumption, 
kitchen hygiene and food processing, contact with animals, occupational exposure, travelling, 
water recreation activities, recent use of medication (during the previous four weeks) and 
contact with persons with diarrhoea or vomiting. Cases were questioned about the 7 days 
prior to symptom onset and controls about the 7 days prior to completion of the 
questionnaire. Parents were asked to complete questionnaires for young children. 
 
Population covered 
The incidence of culture-confirmed campylobacteriosis was calculated using the total number 
of cases identified from the RPHL divided by the population covered by these laboratories. 
The routine surveillance of salmonella, based on a long tradition of sending in all first isolates 
by all RPHL, has repeatedly shown a coverage of about 64% of the Dutch population. 
Campylobacter surveillance since 1995 has been based on weekly enumeration by all RPHL 
except one, covering 62% of the regular salmonella surveillance. The CaSa-study allowed for 
adjustment for underreporting and the time each laboratory participated in the study and 
estimated that the population coverage for campylobacter was 48%. 
 
Statistical analysis 
Standard univariate and multivariate logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) 
and their respective statistical significance and confidence intervals. Because of the design of 
the study, age, sex and urbanization cannot be studied as risk factors in the univariate and 
multivariate models and are added to the models as adjusting variables only. Age-stratified 
analyses are necessary to study age-specific risk factors. Missing values were handled using 
multiple imputation. This method is recommended to avoid bias in analyses of 
epidemiological data with missing covariates. The logistic regression results (OR and 
confidence interval) from five imputed data sets were pooled to obtain a single final result.  
The population attributable risk (PAR) of each risk factor was calculated based on the 
multivariate odds ratios as the number of cases attributable to the risk factor divided by the 
total number of cases. The number of cases attributable to the risk factor was calculated as 
the total number of cases minus the estimated number of cases if the risk factor was absent, 
which was estimated by weighing the cases according to their exposure status. Exposed cases 
were weighed as 1/OR of exposure, non-exposed cases as one. Although each OR is an 
independent risk in the final multivariate model, going back to the original cases to compute 
the corresponding PAR causes this PAR to pick up some attributive risk from related 
covariates. Therefore, summing-up PAR’s corresponding to individual independent OR’s 
sums up to a higher value than computed directly for the whole set of risk factors. 
 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 13 of 128 
2.1.3 Results 
Incidence 
The overall incidence of laboratory confirmed campylobacteriosis, including travel-related 
cases, estimated from the CaSa-study was 40.1 per 100,000 person years (table 2.1). For the 
whole of the Netherlands this means about 6500 cases. This takes estimated coverage and 
underreporting into account as mentioned in the study design-section. About 10% was 
admitted to a hospital; 22% was travel-related. With 7% of controls travelling within 7 days 
of completion of their questionnaire this means a population attributable risk (PAR) of 16% 
for C. jejuni (CI95: 15-17%) and 29% for C. coli (26-30%). 
Among cases with a job or attending school, about 75% had been absent. The majority of 
cases, about 89%, concerned infections by C. jejuni, about 8% C. coli and 2.5% others or 
unknown species (C. other spp. in table 2.1). 
 
Table 2.1 Campylobacter cases and controls enrolled in the CaSa-study and those 
responding by returning the questionnaire. 
 
Controls
C. jejuni 
C. coli 
C. other 
spp. 
C. spp. 
Questionnaires sent 
10,250 
2833 
(89.4%) 
256 
(8.1%) 
80 
(2.5%) 
3169 
(100%) 
Incidence / 100,000 person 
years 
 
35.8 
3.2 
1.0 
40.1 
Laboratory confirmed cases 
 
5805 
525 
164 
6494 
Questionnaires received: 
 
 
 
 
 
including travel 
3409 
1292 
121 
33 
1446 
excluding travel-related cases 
3165 
1013 
82 
28 
1123 
Percentage travelling cases 
7% 
22% 
32% 
15% 
22% 
 
Non-response analysis 
Non-response analysis was based on data on age, sex and urbanization, available for each 
case and control approached to fill in the questionnaire. No significant differences were found 
between those who did and did not fill in the questionnaire. This makes it plausible that a 
selective response did not play a major confounding role in the epidemiological risk analysis. 
 
Risk factor analysis 
The results of the risk factor analysis in table 2.2 refers to that performed for endemic 
infections with C. jejuni, 1013/1123, i.e. 90% of the Dutch laboratory-confirmed cases. Most 
risk factors that were significant in the final multivariate model have been previously found. 
It must be noted that the PAR values in table 2.2 and 2.4 are preliminary. In total, the PAR of 
the risk factors combined in the final model for C. jejuni, add up to 51%. Chicken 
consumption was shown to be the main identified route of transmission (PAR=23%), but a 
considerable portion was transmitted by pets. Note however that the 95% confidence interval 

page 14 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
for chicken consumption is wide, i.e. 10% - 33%. Quite a large risk was related to the use of 
anti acid-secretory drugs (9%).  
Clearly, next to chicken consumption a range of other risk factors were important with a 
surprising role of undercooked seafood (PAR=4%). However, traditional risk factors like 
contact with farm animals, raw milk consumption, water recreation and kitchen hygiene 
could not be shown to have a significant independent contribution to the risk of infection with 
C. jejuni. Moreover, supposed risk factors as contact with animal faeces and visiting pets 
were more common in controls than in cases (significant OR<1). The consumption of a 
whole range of foods was (statistically significant) more common in controls than in cases: 
meat in paste (croquette, sausage roll), fish (especially regular), hard-boiled egg, dairy 
products (not raw), salad, fruit, chocolate and nuts. Instead of talking about ‘protective’ foods 
it might be worthwhile to analyse the food data by distinguishing a one-sided diet from a 
varied diet and compute the PAR of this hypothetical life-style related risk factor.  
 
Table 2.2 Risk factors for endemic infections with Campylobacter jejuni in the final 
multivariate model (preliminary results from Doorduyn et al. (in prep a)). 
Risk factors for endemic infections 
with Campylobacter jejuni 
Cases 
N (%) 
Controls 
N (%) 
OR final 
model 
(95 % CI) 
PAR (%) 
(95% CI) 
Chicken 
773 (77) 
2196 (70) 
1.4 (1.1-1.8) 
23 (10-33) 
Undercooked meat 
188 (19) 
316 (10) 
2.1 (1.7-2.7) 
10 (8-12) 
Meat prepared at 
bbq/grill/microwave 
292 (29) 
626 (20) 
1.7 (1.4-2.1) 
12 (8-15) 
Undercooked seafood 
83 (8) 
202 (6) 
1.7 (1.2-2.4) 
4 (2-5) 
Eating in a restaurant 
459 (46) 
1257 (40) 
1.3 (1.1-1.6) 
11 (4-16) 
Ownership of dogs 
 
 
 
6 (0-11) 
 
1 dog < 1 yr old 
29 (3) 
40 (1) 
2.3 (1.3-4.0) 
 
 
1 dog >= 1 yr old 
183 (18) 
532 (17) 
1.1 (0.9-1.4) 
 
 
Several dogs, all >= 1 yr old 
49 (5) 
85 (3) 
1.7 (1.1-2.6) 
 
 
Several dogs, at least 1 < 1 yr old 
16 (2) 
17 (0.6) 
2.7 (1.2-5.9) 
 
Ownership of cats 
268 (27) 
698 (22) 
1.3 (1.1-1.6) 
7 (3-10) 
Occupational exposure to raw meat 
 
 
 
2 (0-2) 
 
Cook / catering industry 
20 (2) 
23 (1) 
2.2 (1.1-4.4) 
 
 
Butcher / meat-packing industry 
12 (1) 
14 (0.5) 
2.3 (1.0-5.4) 
 
 
Other 
9 (1) 
23 (1) 
1.1 (0.4-2.9) 
 
Contact persons with symptoms 
outside the household 
120 (12) 
328 (11) 
1.5 (1.1-2.0) 
4 (1-6) 
Use of proton pump inhibitors 
101 (10) 
69 (2) 
4.5 (3.1-6.5) 
8 (7-9) 
Use of H2-antagonists 
16 (2) 
23 (1) 
2.6 (1.3-5.3) 
1 (0.4-1) 
Total risk factors 
 
 
 
51 
 
Preliminary results of the risk analysis of Campylobacter coli show some similarities and 
differences with that of C. jejuni. One important difference is the absence of a significant role 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 15 of 128 
of chicken. Remarkable, because both C. coli and C. jejuni occur in poultry in a proportion of 
about 30%/70%, respectively. If survival in food and pathogenicity would be the same, a 
significant PAR should have been found for chicken for C. coli. The low number of C. coli 
cases may have caused the OR for chicken consumption to be statistically not significant. 
However, the role of undercooked meat was significantly higher (PAR= 25%; CI95: 18-29) 
and that of meat prepared at barbeque, grill or microwave oven seems slightly higher as well 
(20%). The role of anti acid-secretory drugs is even larger for getting an infection with C. coli 
as for C. jejuni (PAR=19%, respectively 9%) Other risk factors for infection with C. coli are 
food bought at a stall (10%); swimming (17%) and game (5%) and tripe (4%). Ownership of 
cat or dog or a small kitchen dresser, were significant in the univariate analysis only. A ‘one-
sided diet’ comes out as an important risk factor as well for illness due to a C. coli infection. 
Except for the consumption of chicken, it seems as if potential risk factors for C. coli 
appeared more clearly and larger as for C. jejuni. Note, that this is true notwithstanding the 
fact that the number of C. coli cases is 1/12 that of C. jejuni. This might support the notion of 
the role of immunity. Exposure to C. coli is assumed to be considerably less frequent than for 
C.  jejuni, and acquired immunity consequently lower. This may explain why swimming 
water comes out so clearly as a risk factor for C. coli and not for C. jejuni. Less immunity to 
infections with C. coli might also explain why anti acid-secretory drugs contributed 
significantly more to C. coli than to C. jejuni infections.  
 
2.2 
Estimation of the relative importance of Campylobacter 
transmission routes based on exposure assessment 
 
This chapter is based for the main part on a previous report in Dutch, which was written for 
the CARMA project (Evers et al. 2004). 
 
2.2.1 Introduction and objective 
To attribute human campylobacteriosis to different sources and transmission routes, 
epidemiological methods have mainly been used (See 2.1). Worldwide, a number of case-
control studies have been carried out, and many sources have been identified. However, the 
sources and attributable fractions identified in these studies may differ or may even be 
conflicting. Some studies, for example, have identified the consumption of chicken meat as a 
risk factor, whereas other studies have identified this as a protective factor. In case of 
Campylobacter the epidemiological approach suffers from low numbers of observations and 
the absence of one dominant risk factor. Due to a lack of cases in studies addressing the 
general population the larger case-control studies are laboratory-driven. These enrolled cases 
are strongly selected with respect to severity or duration of the disease, which in turn is 
related to age. Selection may also be involved with respect to genetic susceptibility, general 
health status, medication (anti acid-secretory drugs) and life style. 
An alternative method for source attribution is based on risk assessment techniques. With this 
method, the relative importance of transmission routes is determined by estimating the human 

page 16 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
exposure via each of these routes. This new approach is explored here. By using human 
exposure to Campylobacter as an endpoint, we assume implicitly that the effect of exposure 
(described by the dose-response relationship) is independent of the route. This alternative 
method may improve insight as obtained by the traditional epidemiological approach, and 
will show gaps of knowledge. 
 
2.2.2 Method 
Transmission routes 
We considered three categories of transmission routes: consumption of food; direct contact 
with animals; and water. In more detail: 
− Consumption of food (raw or prepared): chicken fillet, chicken other, turkey, pig, cattle, 
milk, sheep, fish from aquaculture, fish from fisheries, shellfish, crustaceans, vegetables, 
soft fruit, and firm fruit (19 routes in total); 
− Direct contact with animals: pet animals (cat, dog, rabbit and small rodents), farm animals 
(cattle, pig, poultry, goat and sheep) and city farm (also called petting zoo) animals          
(9 routes in total); 
− Water: swimming in indoor pools, swimming in recreational water, consumption of 
drinking water (3 routes in total). 
Foreign travel was not incorporated. It was known that travelling is associated with increased 
risk of campylobacteriosis. However, calculations of the exposure due to travelling is not 
feasible due to the large variation in the contamination of possible reservoirs and in the 
hygiene behaviour of travellers. 
 
Calculation scheme and output 
The output of the calculations is the exposure which is expressed as the mean number of 
campylobacters ingested per person per day, averaged over the whole Dutch human 
population. This is calculated per transmission route. The exposure is thus considered at the 
population level and not per exposure event. 
The calculation schemes differ somewhat between categories and transmission routes. One 
example per transmission route is given below. 
For transmission via food consumption, multiply: 
- 
gram food consumed per person per day (population mean); 
- 
fraction contaminated products in retail; 
- 
Campylobacter concentration (number/g) in contaminated products in retail; 
- 
fraction cross-contamination, in case of preparation. 
 
Raw products are consumed raw, i.e. the product is not heated at any point in time between 
slaughter and consumption. For raw products, all campylobacters are assumed to survive. 
Prepared products are heated sometime between slaughter and consumption. If prepared, it is 
assumed that 0% of the campylobacters survive and transmission is then entirely assigned to 
cross-contamination prior to preparation. So it is assumed that undercooking can be 
neglected, while we are aware that this is a somewhat uncertain assumption. 

RIVM report 250911006 
page 17 of 128 
 
For city farms, an example for the direct contact category, multiply: 
- 
number of visitors per day; 
- 
1/(number of inhabitants in the Netherlands); 
- 
fraction of contaminated animals; 
- 
number of contacts with animals per person per day in these farms; 
- 
probability of contact with faeces given contact with animals; 
- 
gram faeces ingested per faeces-contact; 
- 
Campylobacter concentration (number/g) in contaminated faeces. 
We account for the different animal species in city farms by using weighted (according to 
fraction of total animal population per species) mean values for prevalence and concentration. 
 
For recreational water, an example for the water category, we distinguished two age 
categories (≤ 12 years and >12 years of age) that differ in visiting frequency and water intake. 
Multiply: 
− fraction of the population in the age category; 
− visiting frequency (number of visits per person per day); 
− water intake (litre per visit); 
− Campylobacter concentration in the water (number per litre). 
The result of this multiplication is added for both age categories to arrive at the mean 
exposure for the whole Dutch population. 
 
Uncertainty 
The calculations are done with point estimates for the parameters: estimates of mean values 
for a whole year for the whole of the Netherlands. In this study we only consider the 
uncertainty in these point estimates. This excludes variability between persons, time and 
place (e.g. in amounts consumed and prevalences). In the base scenario, we used PERT 
distributions (see Vose (2000)) for the uncertainty of the point estimates, described by the 
most likely, minimum and maximum values. In this study, the most likely value is always 
taken halfway the minimum and maximum value, which implies it is also the mean and the 
median value. Data are interpreted as the median value of the mean. The uncertainty of the 
mean is described on absolute or log scale depending on the specific parameter. This is 
determined by the nature of the measurements, the research field and the size of the 
uncertainty. Further, in general the uncertainty is taken larger when less data are available 
and the size of the uncertainty is taken analogous between categories for a specific parameter. 
To investigate the effect of the chosen base scenario, two alternative scenarios were evaluated 
also. These are, first, increased uncertainty ranges (doubled for absolute ranges, multiplied by 
ten for log ranges) and second, use a uniform distribution instead of a PERT distribution. 
 
Calculations 
The calculations were done with Monte Carlo simulation: multiply samples from probability 
density functions that represent the uncertainty of the mean values of the parameters, 
according to the calculation schemes above. The calculations were done in @Risk (an Add-

page 18 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
inn of Excel), using 10,000 iterations per simulation. This proved to give satisfactory 
convergence. 
 
2.2.3 Data 
Obtaining data proved to be difficult: much information is lacking. When available, literature 
or other data were used, but for a part of the parameters, rough estimates not based on data 
had to be used. The estimated uncertainty, especially of the last mentioned category of 
parameters, is large. The situation is relatively good for the water transmission routes. Below, 
the most uncertain parameters are given. Main bottlenecks are, for food routes: 
- 
Campylobacter concentration in food (few studies are available on counts); 
- 
probability of cross-contamination (based on only two modelling studies on 
Campylobacter and Salmonella on chicken); 
- 
consumption of raw food (the National Food Consumption Surveys are large studies, but 
in these studies the information on preparation of food is poor); 
and, for direct contact with animals: 
- 
contact frequency with animals (rough estimate); 
- 
probability of contact with faeces given contact (rough estimate); 
- 
amount of ingested faeces (rough estimate); 
- 
concentration of Campylobacter in faeces (limited data availability of counts); 
The parameters that especially determine the estimated exposure, as found by simple 
regression analysis of model output as a function of each parameter separately, are the 
probability of cross-contamination, the consumption of raw food, the probability of contact 
with faeces given contact and the amount of ingested faeces. 
 
2.2.4 Results 
The results for the base scenario are shown in table 2.3 and fig 2.1. The width of the resulting 
95% confidence intervals for the endpoint is usually a factor 100 to 1000. This large 
uncertainty implies that in most cases it is not possible to draw conclusions on differences in 
exposure between transmission routes. Fig 2.1 shows that this analysis did not yield a limited 
set of dominant transmission routes. 
The top 5 of transmission routes is formed by city farm, chicken other (=non-fillet chicken) 
raw, milk raw, farm animal – goat and sheep and farm animal - poultry. The direct contact 
routes show a relatively high exposure, especially city farm and farm animals. Pet animals 
show a moderate score compared to all other routes. For water routes, only recreational water 
shows a rather high exposure. Within the food routes, raw products usually show higher 
exposure than prepared products. The four foods with highest exposure are all raw. Then 
going further down the exposure list, raw and prepared products alternate, but the six foods 
with lowest exposure are all prepared products. The two prepared foods with highest 
exposure are chicken-other and chicken fillet. 
The routes with highest exposure are all raw foods and direct contact routes. Only after that 
we find other types: recreational water and prepared food (chicken-other). The three 
categories of transmission routes can be compared by summing up the means per category  

RIVM report 250911006 
page 19 of 128 
1.E-10
1.E-08
1.E-06
1.E-04
1.E-02
1.E+00
indoor pool
fish aquaculture prepared
sheep prepared
cattle prepared
vegetables prepared
pig prepared
crustacean prepared
shellfish raw
drinking water
p.a. small rodent
fish fisheries prepared
turkey prepared
p.a. rabbit
shellfish prepared
cattle raw
p.a. cat
firm fruit raw
f.a. pig
chicken filet prepared
soft fruit raw
chicken other prepared
p.a. dog
recreational water
vegetables raw
f.a. cattle
fish fisheries raw
f.a. poultry
f.a. goat&sheep
milk raw
chicken other raw
city farm
Transmission route
Mean Campylobacter ingestion, cells per person per day
 
Figure 2.1. Mean ingestion (median and 95% confidence interval) as a function of transmission route, with parameter uncertainties according to 
the base scenario.  
P.a. = pet animal; f.a. = farm animal. 

page 20 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 (table 2.3). The result of this will be determined mainly by the routes with highest exposure. 
This results in the following (campylobacters pppd): 
water:  
1.48 x 10-3 (= recreational water) 
food:  
4.96 x 10-2 
direct contact: 8.37 x 10-2 
 
Table 2.3 Calculated mean ingestion of Campylobacter for the various transmission routes 
using point estimates for the parameter values. 
Transmission route 
Mean ingestion 
(number pppd)
Indoor swimming pool 
1.03E-08
Fish aquaculture prepared 
9.26E-08
Sheep prepared 
1.98E-07
Cattle prepared 
2.98E-06
Vegetables prepared 
3.03E-06
Pig prepared 
3.86E-06
Crustacean prepared 
4.97E-06
Shellfish raw 
5.16E-06
Drinking water 
5.26E-06
Pet animal small rodent 
8.70E-06
Fish fisheries prepared 
1.08E-05
Pet animal rabbit 
1.74E-05
Turkey prepared 
1.76E-05
Shellfish prepared 
2.53E-05
Cattle raw 
1.90E-04
Pet animal cat 
2.18E-04
Firm fruit raw 
2.53E-04
Farm animal pig 
9.16E-04
Chicken fillet prepared 
9.45E-04
Soft fruit raw 
1.05E-03
Chicken other prepared 
1.39E-03
Recreational water 
1.48E-03
Pet animal dog 
1.50E-03
Vegetables raw 
2.82E-03
Farm animal cattle 
7.56E-03
Fish fisheries raw 
8.86E-03
Farm animal poultry 
1.24E-02
Farm animal goat + sheep 
1.30E-02
Milk raw 
1.67E-02
Chicken other raw 
1.73E-02
City farm 
4.80E-02
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 21 of 128 
        
0.0015
0.050
0.084
water
food
direct
contact
 
Figure 2.2. Accumulated mean ingestion (no. of campylobacters ingested per person per day) 
per category of transmission routes. 
 
So exposure by water plays a minor role and exposure by direct contact (approximately 2/3 of 
total exposure) is more important than by food (about 1/3) (fig 2.2). The sum of all means 
equals an exposure of 0.135 campylobacters pppd. 
The alternative scenarios give little change in what was concluded above. The medians of the 
mean exposure values are theoretically equal, however the numeric simulation procedure 
gives minor deviations. The larger uncertainty of the parameters in the alternative scenarios 
result in even larger confidence intervals for the exposure than found for the base scenario. 
To illustrate this, in the base scenario 14 routes have confidence intervals that do not overlap 
with the city farm confidence interval. For the scenarios with increased uncertainty ranges 
and uniform distributions these numbers are 7 and 5, respectively. So with the alternative 
scenarios even less can be concluded on differences in exposure between transmission routes. 
In order to determine which parameters determine most the model output (the exposure), we 
performed a simple linear regression analysis of model output as a function of each of the 
parameters. The coefficient of determination (r2) was used as measure. This shows that for 
food routes, survival is the most important parameter which implies it is important to know 
whether a product is consumed raw or prepared. For direct contact routes, the amount of 
faeces ingested per faeces-contact and somewhat less the probability of contact with faeces 
given contact and the fraction of the human population that is at risk, are the important 
parameters. For water routes, the effect of treatment is the most important parameter. 
 
Although the present model is an exposure model, one is tempted to make a simple 
calculation of the number of human cases of infection based on the estimated exposure, using 
a dose-response relationship. For this, the Beta-Poisson model was used: 
 
Pinf, day = 1-(1+µ/β)-α 
with Pinf,day the probability of infection per day, µ the dose and α en β parameters. Teunis and 
Havelaar (2000) give α = 0.145 en β = 7.589. Inserting the value above of 0.135 for µ results 

page 22 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
in a value for Pinf, day of 2.55 x 10-3 pppd. The probability of 1 or more infections per person 
per year equals: 
 
Pinf, year = 1 - (1 - Pinf, day)365 
 
This gives Pinf, year = 0.606. The estimated number of cases of infection with Campylobacter 
per year for the whole Dutch population according to the exposure model in combination 
with the dose-response relationship then equals 0.606 * 16 x 106 = 9.70 x 106. A reasonable 
estimate is that the number of cases of disease is about equal to 1/3, i.e. 3.2 x 106, of the 
number of cases of infection (Havelaar et al. (2000), footnote page 15). Based on 
epidemiological data the estimated number of gastro-enteritis cases in the Netherlands per 
year by Campylobacter is equal to 107,000 (De Wit et al. 2001). So the risk assessment 
model appears to give a severe overestimation of the number of cases of campylobacteriosis, 
although it must be kept in mind that the exposure model, the dose-response relationship and 
the epidemiological estimate are all uncertain. This observation is discussed in 2.3.1. 
 
2.3 
Exposure assessment versus epidemiology 
 
Both the exposure assessment and the case-control study have estimated the number of 
campylobacter cases in the Dutch general population and the relative importance of different 
transmission routes. It is interesting to discuss the discrepancies of the two approaches on these 
points. First, the number of campylobacter cases predicted by exposure assessment is much 
higher than estimated in epidemiological studies in the general population. In fact at the 
selection level that case-control studies are performed (positive cases from routine laboratory 
practices) the number of campylobacter cases in the Netherlands is another 17-19 times lower 
as estimated in the general population. Second, given the difference in estimated cases, it still 
is interesting to compare the relative importance of transmission routes as estimated by 
epidemiological analysis (2.1) and exposure estimates (2.2) and attempt to explain the 
differences. 
 
2.3.1 Number of predicted campylobacter cases 
A number of explanations can be given for the difference between the estimated number of 
symptomatic cases by exposure assessment (3.2 million) and in epidemiological studies in the 
general population (107,000), see 2.2.4. 
 
Clustering 
Exposure is clustered for a part of the transmission routes. For example, contact with farm 
animals is typical for farmers, abattoir personnel etc., but not for the general population. 
Also, some people will tend to drink raw milk regularly, whereas others may never do so. If 
we would take this into account, the non-linear shape of the dose-response relationship, 
especially the levelling off at high doses, might result in a lower estimate of the total number 
of cases of infection and illness. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 23 of 128 
 
Immunity 
Exposure, especially clustering of exposure, may lead to some degree of immunity. This may 
significantly influence the effect of exposure: (partly) immune persons may have a much 
lower probability to become infected or ill. Preliminary modelling work on immunity shows 
that the calculated incidence is much lower when immunity protects against re-infection or 
illness for a number of years. It also was found that case control research can be strongly 
disturbed by the occurrence of immunity as well. 
Immunity might e.g. play a role in the transmission routes pet animals and farm animals, 
chicken other raw and raw milk. The last two routes combine a high mean exposure for the 
whole population with a limited number of consumers. When these ‘immunity’-routes are 
subtracted from the total exposure, then the mean exposure left over is 6.51 x 10-2 
campylobacters pppd. The number of campylobacter infection cases in the Netherlands per 
year according to the model and the dose-response relationship then becomes 5.82 x 106,  
40 % lower than the previous estimate. 
 
It must be noted that if the first time of an exposure leads to disease severe enough to be 
enrolled in a laboratory-driven case-control study, the risk factor involved should have been 
found in such a study. In a general population study that catches only a few cases they may 
easily be missed. But if the first clustered exposure is more probable to occur in young 
healthy persons with a high resistance (although not yet immune) it may not lead to disease 
severe enough to appear as a case in a laboratory-driven case-control study but at the same 
time would cause some degree of immunity protecting at an older age. 
 
Variable dose instead of mean dose 
The output of the exposure model is the mean ingested number of campylobacters per person 
per day, for the whole Dutch population. This number was used as input for the dose-
response relationship. In a more proper way, attention should be given to the variability of the 
size of the dose that is ingested by people: variability between days, people, place. This 
variability should in general be described by probability density functions, and samples from 
these distributions are each by each input for the dose-response relationship. The clustering 
mentioned above is one aspect of this variability. It is not immediately clear what is the effect 
of including this variability of the dose on the estimated number of cases of infection. 
 
The dose-response relationship 
Dose-response models may overestimate the risk of infection and illness if based on data 
from outbreaks or from volunteer experiments with a proven pathogenic strain (which is the 
case in the exposure study of Black et al. (1988). It might well be that a substantial proportion 
of naturally circulating strains is not or much less pathogenic. Moreover, theoretically, 
differences in effects of the matrix in which the campylobacters reside, or even genetic host 
differences may play a role as well. Theoretically this may have a huge influence on the risk 
estimates. 
 

page 24 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Exposure estimates 
The exposure estimates are generally very uncertain, due to limited data availability. In 
addition there is no objective theoretical framework to describe this uncertainty. Therefore an 
overestimation of exposure is possible. 
 
Epidemiological incidence estimate 
The epidemiological derived estimate of the incidence of campylobacteriosis in the general 
population is highly uncertain (20.000-160.000 cases per year in the whole of the 
Netherlands). Uncertain, but still the upper limit is much smaller than computed 
straightforward from the exposure estimates. Case definition, focused on acute 
gastroenteritis, sample storage and culturing may add to an underestimation of the real 
incidence of all symptomatic cases, including those with mild symptoms or chronic sequelae. 
An important part of clinical cases of GBS and reactive arthritis caused by campylobacter 
would not have been identified by the standard case definitions used for a symptomatic 
(acute) gastro-enteritis and is even often asymptomatic directly after infection. 
 
2.3.2 Relative importance of transmission routes 
In this section the relative importance of transmission routes as indicated by the CaSa study 
and the exposure study will be compared. Attention will be given to differences in the setup 
of the studies and to similarities and differences in the estimated importance of transmission 
routes. In the comparison we will mainly concentrate on the C. jejuni PARs. In table 2.4 
results from both studies are brought into one table. In this table, the group ranking from top 
to bottom is determined in the first instance by the epidemiological categories with 
significant PARs and the remaining groups are ranked according to the exposure study. 
 
Aspects that make a comparison difficult 
When comparing the results of the epidemiological CaSa study with the exposure model, a 
number of differences are found between these studies that make a comparison difficult. In 
general, typical differences in the epidemiological study with the factors considered in the 
exposure estimation are questions related to food preparation, storing and kitchen hygiene; 
place of consumption (at home or elsewhere); living conditions; age of pets; profession-
related contact with animals, food or infected people; family composition; living conditions 
and proxies of behaviour and susceptibility as age, sex and socio-economic status. Some 
aspects in more detail: 
- 
One starting point in the exposure model is that undercooking of food plays a 
negligible role in transmission. When prepared (heated), all transmission takes place 
by cross-contamination before preparation. The raw food that is consumed, is food 
that is left unheated on purpose (e.g. chicken liver, steak tartare). In CaSa, there are 
categories like ‘undercooked meat’, ‘meat prepared at barbeque, grill, microwave’, 
and ‘undercooked seafood’. This makes a comparison difficult. 
- 
In the exposure model, some foods are divided in more categories than were found 
statistically significant in the CaSa model: e.g. on the one hand ‘sheep’, ‘cattle’, 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 25 of 128 
‘turkey’ and ‘pig’ in the exposure model and on the other hand ‘meat’ in the final 
CaSa model; ‘chicken fillet prepared’, ‘chicken other raw’ and ‘chicken other 
prepared’ in the exposure model versus ‘chicken’ in the final CaSa model. 
- 
There are a number of categories that are investigated in the CaSa study and not in the 
exposure model: game, tripe, eating in a restaurant, food bought at stall, contact with 
persons with symptoms outside the household, occupational exposure to raw meat (as 
a cook or as a butcher) and anti-acid secretory drugs (proton pump inhibitors and H2-
antagonists). 
- 
The exposure model considers C. spp. As a whole, while in CaSa C. jejuni and C. coli 
are distinguished. 
 
Comparing major categories 
In the exposure model the categories food, direct contact and water were accumulated and 
compared as a whole. The conclusion was that only food and direct contact are important; 
direct contact is more important than food (fig 2.2). The role of water is not clear as well in 
the CaSa study (C. jejuni vs. C. coli), but obviously food is more important than direct 
contact. 
 
Chicken 
Chicken is in the CaSa study by far the route with the highest PAR. In the exposure study 
chicken (or any route) is not much higher than the other routes. It is in second place in this 
study in the form of ‘chicken other raw’ and it is also noticeable that ‘chicken other prepared’ 
is the prepared food with the highest exposure. If we suggest immunity to play a role, the 
‘regular’ exposure to chicken is not expected to be as high in the CaSa study as it is. In fact 
several other case-control studies show chicken eating at home even to be ‘protective’. It is 
relevant to note that chicken is not a statistically significant risk factor for a C. coli infection 
although C. coli and C. jejuni occur in a proportion of 30/70 in chicken. It may be that C. coli 
does not survive as well as C. jejuni. Moreover, we suggested above that the lower exposition 
in general to C. coli would make the role of immunity for C. coli less important than for  
C. jejuni. One suggestion might be that imported chicken meat poses a higher risk for 
infection, e.g. as no ‘regular’ strains are involved. However we should realise that almost 
everybody eats chicken, so that with a low OR of 1.4 the PAR is still considerable, but with a 
large confidence interval. One reason that an OR of 1.4 was found significant is that the CaSa 
study is one of the largest case-control studies ever on campylobacter. 
 
Non chicken meat 
The consumption of meat excluding chicken (i.e. cattle, sheep, turkey, pig) plays a minor role 
according to the exposure model. This agrees with the not significant PAR for ‘meat, not 
chicken’. The high PAR values found for barbecue/grill/microwave and undercooked meat 
contradict the assumption of the exposure study that transmission through undercooking can 
be neglected and/or the implicit assumption (as no separate route barbecue is distinguished) 
that the probability of cross-contamination with barbecuing is not higher than with other food 
preparation methods. 

page 26 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
Direct contact 
The importance of direct contact with dogs and cats and the minor importance of direct 
contact with other pets (e.g. rabbits, small rodents) was found in both studies. However, 
although in the exposure study direct contact via city farms and farm animals (goat & sheep, 
poultry, cattle and to a lesser extent pig) are among the most important routes, these routes 
are not significant in the final multivariate model in the CaSa study. In the multivariate model 
risk factors are combined that have an independent contribution to the risk of infection. For 
example, 80% of the enrolled infected farmers (and those among the controls) had cats and/or 
dogs. As ownership of cats and dogs is also a risk factor for non-farmers, the unique risk of 
farmers with respect to farm animals resolves in the multivariate model, but is univariately 
significant. Hence the epidemiological association with ownership of cats and dogs may very 
well be an overestimation of the direct causal relationship. It may be a proxy of a behaviour 
that involves a more frequent environmental contact as well. Indeed within the CaSa study in 
90 instances Campylobacter was found in both the patient and in the faeces of their pet but in 
only 1 case the strains were genetically (AFLP) identical (preliminary results CaSa-study). 
To clarify this point it is necessary to do specific stratified analyses. Contact on city farms, 
were not asked for specifically in CaSa but were part of a question on ‘contact with animals 
outside the household’. Here also, ownership of cats and dogs may be a disturbing factor and 
further stratified analysis might be necessary. 
 
Seafood 
In the exposure model, ‘fish, fisheries raw’ (= herring) was important, whereas other fish 
categories were unimportant. In the CaSa study, the (partly similar) category ‘undercooked 
seafood (fish, shellfish/crustacean)’ was important, and regular fish consumption was 
‘protective’. 
 
Raw milk 
In the exposure study, raw milk is no. 3 on the list, whereas it is not significant in the CaSa 
study. Raw milk outbreaks are especially related to young children. This clearly indicates that 
it is an important factor, but age-related development of immunity may play a role. Being 
focused on sporadic infections, the CaSa study does not indicate a significant contribution. 
Both immunity and lifestyle factors related to regular raw milk consumption might play a 
role. But then it must be assumed that a large part of these people developed immunity 
without first becoming a symptomatic case severe enough to end up in the laboratory 
surveillance. 
 
Vegetables and fruit 
In the exposure study, raw vegetables were among the higher exposures and soft and firm 
fruit showed a moderate exposure. These routes are protective in the CaSa study. A 
‘protective’ role is also found for nuts, chocolate, dairy products, and fish. It must be noted 
that this large group of food products with a negative PAR can also be interpreted as a varied 
‘healthy’ diet, as opposed to a one-sided diet hypothetically being a risk factor as a life-style 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 27 of 128 
factor. Prepared vegetables play a minor role in the exposure study and are not included in 
the CaSa study. 
 
Water 
In the exposure study, swimming in recreational water was a moderately important 
transmission route. It was not significant for C. jejuni in the CaSa study, but a clear 
contribution was found for C. coli. In this case immunity might play a role. The exposure to 
C. coli can be considered as rare compared to C. jejuni and immunity might consequently be 
higher for the latter microorganism. A moderate exposure may then lead to an infection with 
C. coli but not with C. jejuni. The other transmission routes related to water (indoor pools, 
drinking water) play a minor role in both studies. 
 
Concluding remarks 
It is known (especially from food consumption surveys) that the poor reproducibility in 
filling in questionnaires may strongly influence PAR estimates. If this bias is random, the 
relationship of the risk factors questioned with the outcome (disease) is weakened and OR 
values change to 1 and hence in an absolute sense, lowers the corresponding PAR. It also 
may influence the ranking and statistical significance of risk factors, especially if differences 
in accuracy of reporting between risk factors are considerable. 
Due to the considerable uncertainties and the confounding effects of e.g. clustering of 
exposure and immunity, the use of exposure modelling for source attribution of 
campylobacteriosis is limited. The results of case-control studies are likewise confounded. 
Crucial is the notion that exposure modelling works at the bottom of the surveillance 
pyramid, whereas case-control studies focus on a subgroup of infected cases that in the case 
of CaSa are strongly selected with respect to severity. In this selection genetic susceptibility, 
general health, medication (anti acid-secretory drugs) and life-style are probably not similar 
to that for the average case in the general population. They may be more at risk to become 
symptomatically infected even at a low level of exposure. On the other end, mild or 
asymptomatic infection in response to a high level of exposure (without being partly 
immune) may occur in some professions that at the beginning of the career select young 
healthy persons that become (partly) immune afterwards. In the general population regular 
low exposure may lead to asymptomatic infection and the development of (partial) immunity 
protective for incidents of high exposure. Serology studies in the general population in 
Wisconsin (Belongia et al. 2003) and preliminary results of a similar study on Campylobacter 
jejuni-IgG in the Netherlands suggest that 2-3 million people are infected in such a way that 
an IgG response is induced. This estimate is much closer to the 5.8-9.7 million cases with the 
exposure model and emphasizes the role of immunity in explaining the gap between exposure 
and epidemiological estimates.  
Further understanding of the impact of these phenomena on risks of illness and infection is of 
critical importance for reliable attribution of risks to various sources. The results do 
underline, however, that campylobacteriosis is a multi-source problem, and that preventive 
measures must be directed to all relevant sources. 

page 28 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Table 2.4 Calculated mean ingestion of Campylobacter spp. (Left) and epidemiologically 
measured significant population attributable risks (PARs) of C. jejuni and C. coli (Right: 
preliminary results), for the Netherlands.  
A negative PAR would be protective. Rk = original ranking in exposure study; ns = not 
significant. 
Transmission Route Ingestion 
(no. pppd) 
Rk 
Category 
PAR(%) 
C. jejuni 
PAR(%) 
C. coli 
Chicken other raw 1.73E-02 
2 
Chicken other prep. 1.39E-03 
11 
Chicken fillet prep. 9.45E-04 
13 
Chicken 
23% 
ns 
Cattle raw 
1.90E-04 
17 
Meat: bbq/grill/microwave
12% 
20% 
Turkey prepared 
1.76E-05 
19 
Undercooked meat 
10% 
25% 
Pig prepared 
3.86E-06 
26 
‘Meat’, not chicken 
ns 
ns 
Cattle prepared 
2.98E-06 
28 
Tripe 
ns 
4% 
Sheep prepared 
1.98E-07 
29 
Pork/sausages, at home 
ns 
(-%?) 
 
 
 
Game 
Ns 
5% 
 
 
 
Eating in a restaurant 
11% 
ns 
 
 
 
Food bought at stall 
Ns 
10% 
 
 
 
Use of anti acid-secretory 
drugs 
9% 
19% 
Pet animal: dog 
1.50E-03 
9 
Ownership cat(s) 
7% 
ns 
P.a. cat 
2.18E-04 
16 
Ownership dog(s) 
6% 
ns 
P.a. rabbit 
1.74E-05 
20 
Ownership rabbit/ rodent 
ns 
ns 
P.a. small rodent 
8.70E-06 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact symptomatic 
persons (outside household)
4% 
ns 
 
 
 
Occupat. exposure raw meat
2% 
ns 
Fish fisheries raw 8.86E-03 
6 
Shellfish prep. 
2.53E-05 
18 
Fish fisheries prep. 1.08E-05 
21 
Undercooked seafood (fish, 
shellfish/crustacean) 
4% 
ns 
Shellfish raw 
5.16E-06 
24 
Crustacean prep. 
4.97E-06 
25 
Fish aqua prep. 
9.26E-08 
30 
‘Fish’ 
(-%?) 
(-%?) 
City farm 
4.80E-02 
1 
City farms 
ns 
ns 
Milk raw 
1.67E-02 
3 
Raw milk 
ns 
(-%?) 
F.a. goat + sheep 
1.30E-02 
4 
F.a. poultry 
1.24E-02 
5 
F.a. cattle 
7.56E-03 
7 
Farm animal: pig 
9.16E-04 
14 
Contact farm animals 
ns 
ns 
Vegetables raw 
2.82E-03 
8 
Vegetables prep. 
3.03E-06 
27 
Raw vegetables 
(-%?) 
(-%?) 
Recreational water 1.48E-03 
10 
Indoor pool 
1.03E-08 
31 
Recreational water 
Ns 
17% 
Soft fruit raw 
1.05E-03 
12 
Firm fruit raw 
2.53E-04 
15 
Fruit 
(-%?) 
ns 
Drinking water 
5.26E-06 
23 
Drinking water 
----- 
ns 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 29 of 128 
 
3. 
Risk Model 
3.1 
Methodology 
3.1.1 Principle 
The risk model for Campylobacter in broiler chicken meat constructed for the CARMA 
project simulates the transmission of Campylobacter through the ‘farm to fork’ chain and 
assesses the consequences of human exposure. It follows the changes in the prevalence 
(frequency of units contaminated with campylobacter) and numbers of campylobacter in 
contaminated units from stage to stage over the chain. Here, the ‘unit’ is the potentially 
contaminated animal or food item, for example the carcass, the fillet or the bird exterior. 
At the stage of the ‘fork’, the model describes exposure as the prevalence of ingestion of a 
contaminated meal and the variability distribution of ingested numbers of campylobacters 
(doses). A dose-response model then predicts the frequency of infection and illness in the 
Dutch population in a year.   
For the ‘farm to fork’ exposure modelling we apply the ‘Modular Process Risk Modelling’ 
methodology (MPRM) (Nauta 2001, Nauta 2002, Lindqvist et al. 2002, Nauta 2005). In this 
methodology, all relevant processes are described in terms of basic processes (bacterial 
processes growth and inactivation; food handling processes partitioning, mixing, cross-
contamination and removal). This approach gives a clear structure of the food chain, and 
allows us to include the basic dynamics of the processes. The level of detail of these models 
depends on the relevance of the process step for the dynamics, the availability of data, and the 
specific risk management questions regarding this process step as considered in the analysis. 
In MPRM the first step is to consider the basic processes to model, and then to obtain the 
appropriate data. Within the basic process models non-linear effects that are considered 
important in the transmission dynamics are incorporated. Such effects can usually not be 
found from studying the data alone, but may be crucial when the effects of risk mitigation 
strategies are analysed with the model.  
 
3.1.2 Uncertainty and variabilities 
The constructed ‘farm to fork’ risk model is a stochastic quantitative microbiological risk 
assessment model. We use Monte Carlo simulation to incorporate the effects of uncertainty 
and variability in the analysis. For extensive discussion on this issue we refer to for example 
Vose (2000) and Nauta (2000). In the context of this report it is important to explain the 
various levels of uncertainty and variability that are dealt with in this study. 
First, there is variability between birds within a flock. Quite often not the whole flock of birds 
is colonized, and the animal prevalence (the percentage of colonized birds) in a flock has a 
value between 0 and 100% (see also Katsma et al. (2005)). Moreover, also the level of 
campylobacter contamination on the birds’ exteriors and the concentration of campylobacter 

page 30 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
in the gut will vary between birds in the flock. Such variability can be described by a 
probability distribution with one or a few parameters (e.g. a lognormal distribution). 
Next, there is a variability between flocks reared and slaughtered in the Netherlands. Not only 
will some flocks contain colonized birds and some flocks none (i.e. the between-flock 
prevalence lies between 0 and 100%), also the animal prevalence and the distribution of 
levels of campylobacter between birds in a flock will vary. Hence, to describe this variability, 
we need additional probability distributions of for example the animal prevalence and  the 
means of the distributions describing the variability between birds. 
Third, there is uncertainty. This uncertainty represents our lack of knowledge due to scarcity 
of data, imprecise methods of measurement, inadequate representativity of data, etc. Like 
variability, this uncertainty is often represented by probability distributions. A probability 
distribution may describe the uncertainty about the true value of a parameter, and also the 
uncertainty about the mean of a distribution describing variability.  
As mixing uncertainty and variability may strongly affect the outcome of a risk assessment 
(see for an example Nauta (2000)), separation of these is important. For every distribution 
used in the risk model it should therefore be explicitly clear what it represents. This is not 
only the case for variability and uncertainty, but also for variability at different levels, like 
per bird or per flock.  
It is not always possible to adequately describe the uncertainty in a probability distribution. If 
no or hardly any data are available, and even experts find it difficult to make an estimate, one 
may only have a ‘best guess’ or a ‘wild guess’ on hand. In such a case one can decide that the 
uncertainty is too indeterminate to be described with a probability distribution. An alternative 
is then to explore the impact of the uncertainty about this parameter by doing separate 
alternative simulation runs with different values of this parameter in so called 'what-if' 
scenarios and compare the model outputs. The same procedure can be applied to simplifying 
assumptions in the risk model. 
With variability at two levels and additional uncertainty, a ‘farm to fork’ risk model can 
easily become extremely complex. This was the case for the model developed for this study. 
Instead of a second order Monte Carlo, our analysis became third order and almost 
intractable. In the final analysis we therefore choose to leave out the uncertainty as a 
quantitative factor. Our approach was to first define a baseline model with most likely values 
for all parameters, including those describing the probability distributions for variability 
between birds in a flocks and variability between flocks. Next, in a set of alternative 
scenarios, we evaluate the impact of the uncertainties in the model parameters and the model 
input. 
 
3.1.3 Interventions 
The objective of the model is to evaluate and compare the effects of interventions to reduce 
the public health risks associated with campylobacter in broiler meat. This is done by 
comparing the baseline model results with results of model runs where the interventions are 
implemented in the model. For that purpose, the interventions proposed for evaluation by the 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 31 of 128 
risk management represented in the steering committee of the CARMA project have been 
translated to an effect on model parameters, based on literature and/or expert opinion.  
Each separate intervention has been evaluated for its effect on the baseline result. 
Additionally, uncertainty bounds have been defined for (some of the) intervention effects on 
model parameters, to explore the uncertainty about the effect on the change in the incidence 
of campylobacteriosis predicted by the model with 'what-if' scenarios.  
 
3.1.4 Data sources  
In the selection of data used in the risk model, we gave priority to data published in the 
scientific peer reviewed international literature, describing the year round situation in  the 
Netherlands in the base year 2000. As these data were hardly ever available, we compromised 
on this by either taking data from other (recent) years, taking data from other (European, 
Western, industrialized) countries, or taking Dutch data that were not published in the peer 
reviewed literature. In case of absence of any data from a reliable source, we based our 
parameter estimates on expert opinion. For industrial processing a formal expert judgement 
study was performed (Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2005), for other parts parameter estimates 
were based on less formal expert estimates of parameter values.  
Note that the choice for using expert judgement as a data source was not only governed by 
availability of poultry processing data, but also by the suitability of these data to be used in 
the mechanistic non-linear model applied here. In our modelling approach, applying the 
proper mechanistics in the risk model is considered to be a crucial factor in predicting the 
effects of interventions. If published data are inadequate to fulfil the data needs of the 
mechanistic model, (formal) expert judgement is preferred above processing data. The latter 
can then be used for model validation.      
 
3.1.5 Model implementation 
The risk model is constructed using @Risk 4.5 (Palisade, Newfield), an add on on Microsoft 
Excel. For practical reasons the model is split up in two spreadsheet models, one for 
processing (including deboning and cutting) and one for storage, consumer food handling and 
dose-response (infection and illness) .  
In the processing model, one iteration simulates the fate of 500 birds from one flock 
processed in line. This group of 500 is large enough to represent a broiler flock, and small 
enough to allow spreadsheet model calculations. Model input informs about the animal 
prevalence in that flock, and the distribution of numbers of campylobacters on the exterior of 
the birds and distribution of the concentration of campylobacter in the faeces of the birds. The 
result gives information on within-flock variability. At the endpoint it yields the number of 
campylobacters on 500 chicken breast fillets from that flock. To get a representative sample, 
a set of 5000 iterations then simulates 5000 flocks. If the differences in input and parameter 
values of these 5000 iterations describe between-flock variability only, the results should be 
interpreted as such too. Likewise, if the differences in input and parameter values of these 
5000 iterations describe uncertainty only, the results should also be interpreted in terms of 
uncertainty (about one typical flock). If the differences in input and parameter values of these 

page 32 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
5000 iterations describe both, this should be taken into account in the interpretation of the 
results. 
The consumer model starts with 5000 distributions of numbers of campylobacter per fillet, 
from 5000 flocks. It samples fillets from these distributions, which are independently stored, 
handled, and prepared together with salad. Dose- response predicts the number of cases from 
the resulting doses. Here, data on consumption frequencies and meal sizes in the Netherlands 
are taken into account. As a standard, the consumer model is run for 100.000 iterations, 
sampling 20 fillets from the distribution of each flock, for 5000 flocks. 
 
3.1.6 Extrapolation: from model objective to project scope 
The risk model calculates the expected number of cases of campylobacteriosis resulting from 
the consumption of salad prepared after handling raw chicken breast fillet. The exact numeric 
result is not as important as the relative effects of interventions, as we are aware of the many 
uncertainties and model simplifications that were necessary for the risk assessment. This 
implies that for the final conclusions we make a linear extrapolation to all chicken related 
food consumption leading to campylobacteriosis in the Netherlands. To us, this was the 
preferable approach, given a lack of simple alternative approaches and the constraints in data 
and research time. Thus, it is assumed that the effects of proposed intervention are relatively 
the same in our restricted model and for the whole scope of the project. These effects are used 
in the economic analyses (Mangen et al. 2005a). 
 
3.2 
Model description 
 
3.2.1 Overview 
 
Table 3.1.  Overview of units modelled in the stages of the risk model.  
‘broiler flock’ (with quotation marks) refers to groups of products derived from one broiler flock. 
 
input unit 
output unit 
Farm 
broiler flock  
broiler flock  
Processing 
broiler flock 
carcass 
‘broiler flock’ 
carcass 
Cutting  
‘broiler flock’ 
carcass 
‘broiler flock’ 
fillet 
Storage 
 
fillet 
fillet 
Consumer preparation 
 
fillet 
salad 
Ingestion / Dose-response 
salad 
probability of 
illness 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 33 of 128 
The food pathway described by the risk model extends from the entrance of a flock of live 
broilers into the processing plant, to consumption of salad in a meal prepared together with 
raw chicken breast fillet. The pathway is split up in some major consecutive stages: (1) 
Processing (slaughter and industrial processing of the carcass); (2) Cutting (of the carcass to a 
skinned chicken breast fillet); (3) Storage (before and at retail, and by the consumer); (4) 
Consumer handling (of the fillet, and the salad prepared along with it) and (5) Ingestion 
(potentially of a dose of Campylobacter. A dose-response relation is used to predict the 
consequential probability of illness).  
 It is important to realize how the units modelled changes over the food pathway. This is 
summarized in table 3.1. As in the MPRM framework, prevalences are defined as the 
percentage (fraction) of contaminated units and numbers of campylobacter are numbers 
(integers) per unit.  
 
                                                 
Farm
Processing
Cutting
Storage
Consumer 
preparation
Ingestion /  
Dose response
  scalding
  evisceration
  defeathering
  washing
  chilling
  breast cap
  double filet
  filet
  
 
Figure 3.1 Food pathway of the risk model. 

page 34 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
3.2.2 Processing 
In the fully automated poultry processing plant it has become impossible to isolate individual 
carcasses from other carcasses or from equipment, employees and other materials essential 
for processing, resulting in possible cross-contamination at all stages of the process (Hafez 
1999). Scalding, defeathering and evisceration, in which faeces contaminated with 
campylobacter may leak from the carcasses, are supposed to be the most critical points for 
cross-contamination during processing (Anderson et al. 2003, Hafez 1999, Kist 2002). At the 
scalding stage a proportion of campylobacters is washed off the carcass, resulting in 
contaminated scald water and subsequent cross-contamination to the next carcasses in line 
(Anderson et al. 2003, Hafez 1999). During defeathering a proportion of organisms is washed 
off or removed with the feathers, but a number of organisms is added via cross-contamination 
(Anderson et al. 2003, Kist 2002). According to Anderson et al. (2003) and Kist (2002) 
evisceration leads to contamination of a carcass via cross-contamination, but might also result 
in a proportional reduction. During washing and chilling the bacterial counts on carcasses 
decrease. The final number of organisms that are on any carcass is a result of the initial 
contamination and the effect of all stages of processing (Anderson et al. 2003). 
As a processing model we apply the model of Nauta et al. (2005). The consecutive processing 
stages scalding, defeathering, evisceration, washing and chilling are each described by 
applying the same basic processing model. In the Netherlands low scalding (with water 
temperatures 50-52°C) and air chilling are applied for the production of fresh meat like 
chicken breast fillets. In MPRM terminology, this basic model combines the basic processes 
inactivation, removal and cross-contamination, and thus incorporates the basic mechanisms 
that may be relevant during processing. The model formulation is given below. For details 
and discussion on the process and the model dynamics, we refer to Nauta et al. (2005). 
Consider a line of broiler chickens processed. At each of the consecutive processing stages, a 
carcass i entering stage S is contaminated with Next,S-1(i) cfu (colony forming units) 
campylobacter on the exterior (skin and, if present, feathers). Here, if S is the scalding stage, 
S-1 refers to the entrance of the processing plant, if S is defeathering, S-1 refers to the values 
after scalding, etc. Next, at stage S, Nfec,S (i) cfu leak from carcass i with the faeces (interior), 
where Nfec,S (i) is the product of wfec,S (i), the mass of leaking faeces (in grams) and Cfec (i), 
the concentration in cfu campylobacter per gram faeces. There is a direct environment of the 
carcass that gets contaminated, either by campylobacter from the exterior, or by 
campylobacter in faeces leaking from the carcass. This environment can be anything that gets 
contaminated by contact with the passing animals and from which campylobacter  may be 
transferred back to the carcass, e.g., water, equipment, hands, air. It holds Nenv,S(i) cfu 
campylobacter after the passage of carcass i (which, with this conceptual definition, cannot 
be measured). 
In every processing stage S cross-contamination, inactivation and removal (per carcass) may 
occur as presented in fig 3.2, be it that faecal leakage is no longer relevant after removal of 
the intestines during evisceration. 
The parameters and variables of the poultry processing model are listed in tables 3.2 and 3.3. 
This yields the following model equations per stage S and carcass i: 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 35 of 128 



+
−
−
−
+
=
−
+
−
+
−
−
=
−
−
)
(
)1
(
)
1
)(
1(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1(
)1
(
)
(
)
1
)(
1(
)
(
,
,
,
,
,
1
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
1
,
,
,
,
i
N
a
i
N
c
b
i
N
a
i
N
i
N
a
i
N
b
i
N
c
a
i
N
S
fec
S
fec
S
env
S
env
S
env
S
ext
S
ext
S
env
S
fec
S
fec
S
env
S
env
S
ext
S
ext
S
ext
S
ext
             (1) 
 
With Next,S (i) the number of campylobacters on carcass i at the end of stage S (and thus at the 
start of stage S+1), Nenv,S (i) the number of campylobacters in the environment after passage 
of carcass i (and thus prior to the entering carcass i+1) in stage S, and Nfec,S (i) the number of 
campylobacters in the leaking faeces of carcass i at stage S, that is the product the 
concentration of campylobacter in the faeces and the mass of leaking faeces, wfec,S (i)×Cfec(i). 
Processing stages are linked as the output of stage S-1, Next,S-1(i), is the input of stage S. 
As model input we need a value for the initial number of campylobacters in the environment 
per processing stage, Nenv,S (0) and (variability) distributions of Next, input  and Cfec per carcass 
entering the processing plant. In applying the distribution of Cfec the animal prevalence panim, 
the percentage of animals in a flock colonized by campylobacter, is incorporated. We assume 
 
            
Nenv
Next
cenv
aext
b
cext
Nfec
afec
1-afec
inactivation
and removal
ENVIRONMENT
LINE OF
CARCASSES
inactivation
and removal
env
 
 
Figure 3.2. Diagram of the basic poultry processing model. 
 At any stage during processing, consecutive carcasses (at the right) pass an environment (at the left), 
as indicated by dashed arrows. The passing carcass holds Next campylobacters on its exterior and Nfec = 
Cfec × wfec campylobacters leak from its intestines. Cross-contamination may occur when 
campylobacters from the exterior and (if appropriate) in the leaking faeces are transferred to this 
environment and backwards from the environment to the exterior of passing carcasses. Next, 
campylobacters on the carcass and in the environment may be inactivated or removed. See main text 
for explanation of the parameters. 
 

page 36 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Table 3.2 Model parameters.  
Subscript S indicates that the parameter values differ per processing stage S. Per processing stage all 
parameters have fixed values.  
aext,S 
 
probability per cfu campylobacter on the exterior (skin and feathers) to move 
from the carcass exterior to the environment.  
benv,S       
probability per cfu campylobacter  in the environment to move from the 
environment to the carcass exterior.  
afec,S        
probability per cfu campylobacter in the leaking faeces to move to the 
environment. (With corresponding probability 1-afec,S per cfu to move from the 
interior to the exterior of the carcass directly.) 
cenv,S      
probability of inactivation or removal per cfu campylobacter in the environment 
which is not transferred to the carcass exterior.  
cext,,S      
probability of inactivation or removal per cfu campylobacter on the carcass 
exterior which is not transferred to the environment. 
pfec,S        
probability of faecal leakage per carcass. 
panim      
fraction of the animals in a flock colonized by campylobacter. 
 
Table 3.3 Model variables.  
Variables have different values per carcass and are sampled in Monte Carlo simulation or calculated with 
eq. (1). Subscript S indicates processing stage S.  
mS(i) 
amount of faeces (gram) that leaks from carcass i, given faecal leakage; sampled 
from a lognormal distribution with mean µm,S and standard deviation σm,S. 
wfec,S(i) 
amount of faeces (gram) that leaks from carcass i:  
with probability pfec,S  wfec,S(i) = 0, else wfec,S(i)= mS(i) 
Cfec(i)    
campylobacter concentration in the faeces of carcass i, identical per carcass i for 
all stages (cfu/g faeces). Model input, by default sampled from a lognormal 
distribution defined as 10^Normal(µC, σC) 
Nfec,S(i) 
number of campylobacters in the leaking faeces from carcass i:  
Nfec,S(i) = wfec,S(i) × Cfec(i).  
Next,S(i) 
number of campylobacters on the exterior after processing of carcass i. 
Next,input(i) is model input, by default sampled from a lognormal distribution 
defined as 10^Normal(µN, σN), rounded to integer. 
For the other stages Next,S(i) is calculated with eq. (1) and rounded to integer. 
Nenv,S(i) 
number of campylobacters in the environment after processing of carcass i. 
Calculated with eq. (1). By default, Nenv,S(0) is set to the expected value (see 
Nauta et al (2005)). 
 
that all carcasses are contaminated on their exterior due to cross-contamination during rearing 
and transport, be it that the level is lower with lower animal prevalence. Next, it is assumed 
here that the input distributions of Next,input and Cfec (per contaminated animal) are lognormal. 
As the value of Next,input  (cfu) should be an integer, samples of the lognormal distribution for 
this variable are rounded to integer. 
Faeces may leak from the carcass intestines at the stages scalding, defeathering and 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 37 of 128 
evisceration. One of the variables for this faecal leakage is the mass of faeces leaking, wfec,S 
(i). It does not seem realistic to assume a fixed value for this variable as leakage will differ 
substantially per processed carcass, and this variability can be taken into account. First, there 
may be no leakage at all: wfec,S(i)= 0 with probability 1-pfec,S. With probability pfec,S, leakage 
occurs with a variable amount wfec,S(i)=mS(i) per carcass i. This mS(i) is described by a 
lognormal distribution with mean µm and standard deviation σm. pfec,S has a fixed value. The 
expected value of wfec is E(wfec) = pfec µm. 
This chicken processing model is implemented as a Monte Carlo simulation model. In this 
model, levels on individual carcasses are followed throughout the process as numbers (cfu) 
per carcass. Input values for Next,input, Cfec and wfec,S are sampled per simulated carcass, from 
the given distributions. Values of Next,S(i) and Nenv,S(i) are calculated with eq. (1) and rounded 
to integers. The output of the poultry processing model includes the distribution of numbers 
of campylobacters on the exterior of carcasses from the processed flock (Next,chilling).  
 
Processing model parameter estimates 
The processing model requires parameter estimates that could not be based on data reported 
in the scientific literature. Although some data on changes in levels of Campylobacter in 
chicken processing lines are available (e.g. Oosterom et al. 1983, Izat et al. 1988, Berrang 
and Dickens 2000), these data could not be transformed in a format applicable in this study. 
Also, the representativity of these data for the Netherlands in 2000 is uncertain. The data are 
however used in other published international campylobacter risk assessments (Hartnett et al. 
2002, Rosenquist et al. 2003, Anonymous  2001, Anderson et al. 2003 ), as discussed in 
section 5.6.1.  
We therefore performed a formal expert judgement study, as published by Cooke et al. (2004) 
and Van der Fels-Klerx et al. (2005). In this study, twelve Dutch and one British expert(s) 
were consulted and weighted on the basis of their scores on a set of query variables. The 
study resulted in a set of interdependent uncertainty distributions of the model parameters for 
each stage of processing. An overview of these uncertainty distributions is given in the 
Appendix. 
In our baseline risk model we apply the median values of these distributions as default 
estimates of all model parameters. These medians, as presented in table 3.14, are considered 
to best represent the central values of the distributions due to the skewness of many of the 
distributions. Note that the values given are the result of the structured analysis of the expert 
judgement data (Cooke et al. 2004, Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2005). By this analysis, the 
parameter combinations found yield the best fit with the expert estimates and their attending 
uncertainty, and hence the results offer the best reflection of the expert opinion. Comparison 
of the values of individual parameter at different processing stages may give counterintuitive 
results, e.g. for aext at evisceration (aext=0.46)  and washing (aext=0.31). This should however 
be regarded in combination with the estimates of the other parameters estimates and the 
resulting prediction for the total effect of the processing stages considered. These predictions 
agree with the expert opinions. 
The estimates for the leaking faeces parameters pfec and msµ  followed directly from answers 
of the experts to queries regarding the probability of faecal leakage and the amounts leaking, 

page 38 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
and are not integrated in the probablistic inversion. As we were not able to estimate ms σ from 
the expert data, and its values appears to be largely irrelevant, it is set at a low value, 0.001. 
 
3.2.3 Cutting 
At the cutting stage chilled carcasses are deboned and portioned. First, breast caps are cut 
from the carcass, and then the (double) fillets are cut from these, and skins are removed. Most 
of this is done by equipment, but people's handwork may be involved too. Here we define a 
fillet as a single fillet, i.e. half the fillet originating from one carcass. 
Count data on the effects of cutting on the numbers of Campylobacter on the chicken 
products are scarce. Berrang et al. (2001) counted campylobacters and other bacteria on 
broilers after defeathering, after evisceration and at retail in the USA. They studied the effect 
of skin removal by looking at products with and without skin. Whereas no campylobacters 
were found on the naked meat after defeathering, they could be recovered after evisceration. 
The level on the meat was only about 1 log lower  than on the skin, which suggests 
substantial cross-contamination due to damaged skins. At retail there was no difference 
between the level of contamination on the naked meat and on the skin. They concluded that 
‘broiler parts purchased at retail outlets are not microbiologically different because of 
presence or absence of skin. However, removal of skin from a partially processed broiler 
carcass may be useful in lowering the level of contamination carried forward in the plant.’ 
An important difference in chicken processing between the United States and the Netherlands 
is the application of water chilling instead of air chilling. This may for a large part explain the 
cross-contamination leading to the equal levels found on and below the skin. The water 
applied at chilling may leak through the (damaged) skin, carrying along the bacteria.  
In a Belgian study Uyttendaele et al. (1999) found campylobacter in 71 out of 183 samples 
with skin (38.8%) and in 45 out of 180 (25%) in samples without skin (detection limit >  
1 cfu/100 cm2 or 25 g), which is a significant difference (P<0.05). This contradicts the 
finding of Berrang et al. that levels on and beneath the skin are the same. A difference that 
may be explained by the difference in chilling methodology. 
As these literature data can be assumed to be not representative for the Dutch situation 
(Berrang et al.), or are insufficiently detailed (Uyttendaele et al.) we base our parameter 
estimates on expert opinion. As research time was limited at this stage of the project, we were 
not able to perform a formal expert study on this topic, as we did for the processing stage. 
Only one expert (J. Obdam, head Research and Development, Plukon Poultry, Wezep, the 
Netherlands) was interviewed. (His estimates are to be considered as rough guesses, kindly 
provided at our request. The authors of this report are responsible for applying these 
estimates in this study.) 
The available information on the dynamics of transmission of campylobacter during this 
process is limited. We therefore apply a simple model, based on the insights gained from 
modelling the previous stages. 
The relevant basic MPRM processes are partitioning (the fillet is cut from the carcass) and 
cross-contamination/removal (from skin to fillet, from equipment to fillet, etc.). For these, we 
apply two separate models:  

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 39 of 128 
Partitioning 
Cutting the breast cap from the carcass is a partitioning process, as described in Nauta (2005). 
The number of campylobacter from the breast cap i,  Next,bc(i), will depend on the number on 
the carcass after chilling Next,chill (i) and the probability for each campylobacter on the carcass 
to reside on the breast cap, pcut. So: 
 
Next, bc(i) ~ Bin(Next, chill(i),pcut),  
 
or with variable, beta distributed  pcut: 
 
Next,bc(i) ~ BetaBin(Next, chill (i), α1 , α2) 
 
(where ~ indicates ‘is a sample from’.) The value or the distribution of pcut will depend on the 
relative weight of the breast cap or the (double) fillet, but also on the relative surface (as 
campylobacters are situated on the surface) and the clustering of campylobacters on this 
surface.   
The relative weight of a double fillet compared to a carcass after chilling, is on average 24% 
(J. Obdam (pers. comm.), see also the Dutch ‘Handboek voor pluimveehouderij’, in press.) 
However, this is not the relative surface. If a carcass is considered to be a sphere, and the 
breast cap a slice from this sphere, some basic mathematics shows that the relative surface is 
about 32%. However, incorporating the fact that a carcass is not a sphere (but has legs etc.) 
this percentage will probably be lower again.  
We therefore assume that a distribution with a mean value 24% is not a bad choice, assuming 
it may lay somewhere between 10% (a guess) and 32%. The variability between breast caps 
may be very large, certainly if the probable contagious distribution of campylobacters over 
the carcass is taken into account. 
As a best guess we apply a Beta(1, 3.15) distribution for pcut, as illustrated in fig 3.3 . As 
alternatives in the uncertainty analysis we take different values of α1 (default α1 = 1) and the 
mean µ = 24%.  
                                 
Beta(1, 3.15)
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
5.0%
90.0%
0.0162
0.6137
 
Figure 3.3 Variability distribution Beta (1, 3.15) applied for the probability for each cfu 
campylobacter to end up on the breast cap.  
The mean of this distribution is µ = 24%. 90% of the samples from this distribution falls within the 
range of 2% and 61%.  

page 40 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
Cross-contamination / removal 
The fillet is cut from the breast cap and the skin is removed. As campylobacters are supposed 
to be absent or rare on the skinless meat prior to slaughter, they are tranferred to the meat by 
cross-contamination. This can either be by passing through tears in the skin, along with water 
leaking under the skin during processing, or during the cutting process. Here, based on 
discussions with experts, we assume the latter to be the dominant route. 
Ideally, we would like to apply the same methdology as for the processing model. However, 
as data are very limited we choose to use a simplified version of this  model.  
The number on a double fillet is Next,df(i). It is a function of the number on the breast cap and 
the expected number in the environment (equipment, hands, etc, as in the processing model) 
E(Nenv,df ). As discussed by Nauta et al. (2005), eq. (1) can be simplified for Next, assuming 
that the model dynamics approach an equilibrium state in which the number of 
campylobacters in the environment is unaltered, so that ∆ Nenv = 0: 
 
Next,df(i) =  a Next,bc + β E(Nenv,df) 
 
Here, a and β are parameters. Parameter a = (1-aext,df)/(1-cext,df) describes the effect of 
inactivation and removal and β = benv,df describes the effect of cross-contamination. Nauta et 
al. (2005) have shown that from the processing model (eq. (1).) it can be derived that, by the 
lack of faecal contamination, E(Nenv) is a function of the expected value of Next, as:  
 
env
env
env
env
S
ext
ext
S
env
c
b
c
b
N
E
a
N
E
−
+
=
−)
(
)
(
1
,
,
 
 
so with ϕ = β aext/(benv+cenv-benvcenv) 
 
Next, df(i) =  a Next,bc + ϕ E(Next,bc) 
 
and   
 
E(Next, df(i)) =  (a + ϕ) E(Next, bc). 
 
Here, a + ϕ is the expected fraction of campylobacters transmitted from breast cap to double 
fillet. Furthermore, a is the contribution of the breast cap i that the double fillet is cut from, 
and ϕ is the contribution of the environment in the total number of campylobacters on the 
fillet after cutting. By a lack of data, these parameters can be estimated based on expert 
opinion.  
Finally, to get the number on the single fillet we get: 
 
Next, f(i) =  0.5  Next,df (i)   
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 41 of 128 
The expected fraction transmitted from breast cap to double fillet, a + ϕ is estimated to be 
about 0.01 to 0.02, based on unpublished data on other bacteria (J. Obdam, pers. comm.) 
According to Berrang et al. (2001) it lies close to 1, but as explained above we do not 
consider this representative for the Dutch situation. Furthermore, a is the relative contribution 
of breast cap i itself , and  ϕ the relative contribution of the environment to the total 
campylobacter contamination of the fillet after cutting. The expert guesses that about 17% of  
the contamination originated from the carcass itself , so a/(a+ϕ) =0.17.  
Defining π = a+ϕ =0.0158 (i.e. 10-1.8, an intermediate value between 0.01 and 0.02) and   
z = a/(a+ϕ) = 0.17, applying  a = πz en ϕ = π (1-z), estimates for a and ϕ can be calculated as 
a=0.0027 and ϕ = 0.0132 
The uncertainty in these parameter estimates is large and is explored in the section of 
alternative scenarios. For log π we assume that the uncertainty ranges from about -1.3 to -2.3, 
that is 0.5 log above and below the most likely estimate. For z we consider a range from  
0.1 to 0.25.  Variability in the estimates is not included in the model. 
 
3.2.4 Storage 
After cutting the fillets are stored and transported. In modelling terms that means that for 
some time they experience a variable temperature profile. Typically, the potential inactivation 
of Campylobacter during this process should be modelled by a secondary survival model. 
However, information and data are lacking to apply such a model here.  
During storage and transport, the temperature is kept constant somewhere between 1 and 7°C, 
but this may vary between cutting plant, transport, retail, consumer transport, and consumer 
refrigerator. The storage time may vary, especially due to the variability in consumer 
behaviour. The variety of time temperature profiles encountered is presumably large and 
unknown.  
The survival dynamics of Campylobacter on chicken meat is not well known either. There is 
however clear information that survival is not 100%. In a study on Campylobacter survival, 
Curtis et al. (1995) found that on raw chicken breast 106 cfu/g Campylobacter can not be 
recovered after 24, 13 and 6 days at resp. 2, 10 en 20°C, with a ‘detection limit’ of 50 cfu/g, 
i.e. a decrease by  0.18, 0.33 en 0.72 log10 units per day. Chan et al. (2001) tested strains from 
poultry and clinical human strains at 4°C. In broth, fitting their data shows that variability in 
inactivation between strains is best described by an Exponential(0.25) log10 units/day 
distribution, for clinical strains exponential(0.17), for poultry exponential(0.34). These are 
results comparable with Curtis et al. (1995). For the impact of refrigeration Hartnett (2001) 
applies a D-value of 2.88 days as found by Koidis and Doyle (1983) brucella broth without 
sodium bisulphite at 4°C. That is 0.35 log units per day. With decreased oxygen levels (as in 
prepacked fillets), inactivation slows down. However, we have little information on the 
oxygen levels during storage and transport. 
For the CARMA risk model we apply information from data gathered for the CARMA 
project (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). Fillets from six different flocks processed in the 
summer of 2004 in the Netherlands were sampled and Campylobacters were counted directly 
after cutting. Fillets of the same flock were individually stored in plastic bags for a week at  

page 42 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
4 °C, and then counted. Lognormal distributions were fitted through the count data applying 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) methodology. With this method count data yielding 
information of upper and lower limits only can be included in the analysis, and estimates of 
both the mean and the variance of the numbers counted are obtained. Results are shown table 
3.4. There is a decrease between 0.1 and 1.9 logs in counts due to storage, with a mean value 
of 0.9. This is not in contrast with the inactivation data from literature, if some tailing effect 
of inactivation is taken into account.  
In the risk model we apply a simple inactivation model  
log (Next, fs(i)) =log (Next, f (i)) - rstorage . 
 
For this model we need an estimate of decrease in survival after storage, rstorage.  This is 
assumed to be variable, described by a BetaPert distribution incorporating the variability in 
survival during storage as found in the experiments of Jacobs-Reitsma mentioned above: 
 
r storage ~BetaPert(0.1, 0.9, 2.1) 
 
(Here the maximum value is taken somewhat larger to account for the small sample size) 
 
Table 3.4 Results of campylobacter counts on chicken breast fillets (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in 
prep.) for six flocks processed in the summer of 2004 in the Netherlands.  
Presented are the mean and sd (between brackets) of the normal distribution fitted through the log 
counts. Stored fillets are stored for one week at 4°C. Count data for flock 6 were not obtained. 
flock 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7 
sample size 
20 
20 
10 
20 
20 
20 
fillet 
3.53 (0.29) 
4.01 (0.48) 
2.96 (0.26) 3.23 (0.35) 
3.23 (0.48) 
2.92 (0.68) 
stored fillet 
3.42 (0.39) 
2.75 (0.44) 
2.19 (0.31) 2.47 (0.33) 
1.33 (0.55) 
2.55 (0.49) 
 
 
3.2.5 Consumer preparation 
For consumer preparation we apply the model for cross-contamination during food 
preparation as developed by Mylius et al. (submitted). It describes cross-contamination from 
raw chicken meat to hands, cutting board, water tap and salad, based on several studies on 
cross-contamination of bacteria in a kitchen environment. It is assumed that the chicken meat 
is well cooked, and consequently all campylobacter on the meat is killed off. Cross-
contamination to the salad, which is consumed raw, is therefore considered to be the only 
relevant route of  cross-contamination. This can be either from raw chicken meat via the hand 
to the salad or from raw meat via the cutting board to the salad. 
The model holds transfer coefficients tX,Y, expressing the probability for each cfu 
Campylobacter to be transferred from X to Y during the handling X and Y. Transfer from and 
to Chicken meat (C), Hands (H), Cutting Board (B) and Salad (S) are considered. Transfer 
coefficients tH,H,  tB,B and tS,S express the probability of survival per cfu Campylobacter 
during hand washing, board washing and salad washing. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 43 of 128 
The number of campylobacters ending up in the salad for meal of table-companions i 
(Nsalad(i)) will then be: 
 
Nsalad(i) = (tC,H × tH,H  × tH,S  + tC,B × tB,B  × tB,S ) tS,S  Next, fs (i). 
 
Next to transfer probabilities of campylobacters, it is important to take frequencies of type of 
handling into account. That is: the effect of hand washing, board washing or salad washing is 
only relevant if they are actually washed. If not, the transfer coefficient will have value 1. 
Also, the chicken fillet should be cut before the salad for cross-contamination to occur and it 
should be done on the same (side of the) cutting board for cross-contamination via the cutting 
board to occur. 
Data on the frequencies of these handlings are collected from the literature (Mylius et al. 
submitted). We also applied data derived from statements of the controls in the case control 
study on Campylobacter and Salmonella conducted in the Netherlands during 2002-2003, as 
given in table 3.5. (Doorduyn et al. (in prep a), see chapter 2.1).  As these statements may 
suffer some optimistic bias as found when statements and actual observations are compared 
(see Redmond and Griffith (2003)), the data indicating proper behaviour are interpreted as 
somewhat too optimistic. The frequency of hand washing is rounded off to 80%: for hand 
washing between cutting meat and vegetables the sum of ‘always’ and 0.5 × ‘usually’ is 86%, 
but other studies give lower estimates (Worsfold and Griffith 1997, Redmond and Griffith 
2003). For board handling the 3% using the same board side is rounded up to 5%. (For 
comparison: for this value Kusumaningrum et al. (2004) take the average of five international 
data sources, 26%, so rounding up seems appropriate.) The effect of turning around the board 
is assessed to be the same as washing, as the probability of transfer may be larger than when 
a different board is used. Estimates for the frequencies of each type of food handling are 
given in table 3.6. 
 
Table 3.5. Statements on food handling behaviour of n = 3409 Dutch controls of the case 
control study performed by Doorduyn et al. (in prep a). 
Hand washing between 
cutting meat and 
vegetables 
Hand washing before 
cooking 
Board handling 
 
n 
%  
n
%
 
n 
%
always 
2624 
77 always 
2088
61
use different  board 
1081 
34
usually 
519 
15 usually 
992
29
turn around board 
218 
7
sometimes 
137 
4 sometimes 
232
7
use same board side 
103 
3
rarely  
41 
1 rarely  
41
1
wash board 
1809 
56
never 
25 
1 never 
21
1
 
 
 
no answer 
63 
2 no answer 
35
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

page 44 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
The values of the transfer coefficients are given in table 3.7. The variability in the transfer 
coefficients is incorporated in the model. For this purpose, we apply probability distributions 
reported in the literature (Kusumaningrum et al. 2004), or Beta distributions fitted through 
the raw data presented in the literature (Montville et al. 2001, Chen et al. 2001) or Pert 
distributions with minimum, most likely and maximum values reported (Cogan et al. 2002, 
Smith et al. 2003). For each model iteration in the consumer model (see 3.1.5) values of 
transfer coefficients are sampled from these distributions (see table 3.7). For washing transfer 
coefficients, the frequencies listed in table 3.6 have to be taken into account. 
- For hand washing, with probability fhw : tH,H ~ Beta(0.24, 6.67), else tH,H =1; 
- For cutting board washing there are three scenarios as illustrated in fig 3.4. With probability 
fnsb × fbw the board is washed (or turned around):  tB,B ~ BetaPert(1,4.5,7), and with 
probability fnsb × (1-fbw) another board is used so tB,B =0. (see fig 3.4). With probability 1-
fnsb the same cutting board is used and not washed, so  tB,B =1;  
- For salad washing, with probability fsw : tS,S ~ BetaPert(0,0.4,1), else tS,S =1.  
 
Table 3.6. Frequencies in which food handling activities are assumed to be performed in the 
risk model. 
action 
 
frequency
reference
Hand washing 
fhw 
80%
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a) 
Cutting board washing 
fbw 
65%
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a)
Salad washing 
fsw 
60%
Worsfold and Griffith (1997)
Not same board side used 
fnsb 
95%
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a)
Chicken cut before salad 
fcf 
50%
guess, no data
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.4 Frequencies of board handling as used in the model. 
 
same 
board 
side 
board 
washed / 
turned
other 
board
fnsb × fbw
fnsb ×(1- fbw)
1- fnsb

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 45 of 128 
Table 3.7. The mean transfer probabilities per cfu campylobacter and wash-off effects 
associated with different food handling activities. 
In the risk models variability of these probabilities is sampled from the indicated distributions. 
transfer / wash off 
 
mean 
value 
variability distribution 
reference 
Chicken to hand 
tC,H 
0.0415
Beta(1.78, 41.1) 
Montville et al. 
(2001) 
Chicken to cutting 
board 
tC,B 
0.0125
10^Normal(0.098,0.606) % Kusumaningrum et 
al. (2004) 
Hand to salad 
tH,S 
0.207
Beta(0.6,2.3) 
Montville et al. 
(2001) 
Cutting board to 
salad 
tB,S 
0.343
10^Normal(1,535, 0.32) % 
Kusumaningrum et 
al. (2004) 
Hand washing 
tH,H 
0.0347
Beta(0.24, 6.67) 
Chen et al. (2001) 
Cutting board 
washing 
tB,B 
0.0000464
BetaPert(1,4.5,7) log 
reduction 
Cogan et al. 
(2002) 
Salad washing 
tS,S 
0.367
BetaPert(0,0.4,1) log 
reduction 
Smith et al. (2003) 
 
 
3.2.6 Exposure 
So far, the risk model assesses the number of Campylobacter in a salad prepared together 
with chicken breast fillet from a chicken from a contaminated flock, in a private kitchen. This 
salad will quite often not be consumed by one person, but will be eaten by table-companions 
joining the meal.  
To estimate the distribution of exposures (that is the numbers of campylobacters expressed as 
cfu ingested), we need data on the consumption of chicken breast fillet together with a salad 
in the Netherlands. Relevant data are the amounts of chicken meat and salad eaten, the 
frequency of chicken breast fillet with salad meals and the number of table-companions per 
meal. For this purpose we apply data from the third Dutch National Food Consumption 
Surveillance (VCP) (Kistemaker et al. 1998). As one of the dose-response models applied 
(see section 3.2.7) differentiates between young (14 years and younger) and adults (15 and 
older), we treat these categories separately.  
The data used are presented in tables 3.8 and 3.9. In 2000 the Dutch population size was 
15.86 million people, of whom 2.74 million between 1 and 14 years of age. (We exclude 0 
years of age due to their presumed deviant consumption pattern). Using the data in table 3.8, 
it is easy to see that this implies that it is expected that in a year about 9 million meals with 
chicken breast fillet and salad are eaten by the Dutch population of 14 years and younger, and 
about 76 million by the 15+ group. 
 
 
 

page 46 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
Table 3.8 The number of persons eating one (or more) meals with chicken breast fillet and 
salad in a two day period, in a sample of 6250 persons in the Netherlands (1178 14- and 
5072 15+).  
In total 92 joined meals were consumed by 174 people. The corrected numbers kj,ν
* are used for 
sampling as explained in the main text. 
 
table-
companions 
young (14-) adult (15+)
all ages 
corrected for number of 
fillets 
ν 
ky,ν 
ka,ν 
ktot,ν 
ky,ν
* 
ka,ν
* 
1 
0 
41
41
0
41 
2 
3 
63
66
3
95.29 
3 
6 
18
24
8.55
40.84 
4 
11 
17
28
20.9
51.43 
5 
2 
13
15
4.75
49.16 
total 
22 
152
174
 
 
Table 3.9. Consumed quantities of fillet and salad by the Dutch consumers (Kistemaker et al. 
1998.) 
consumed quantities (g) 
percentiles 
 
mean 
sd 
5%
50%
95% n 
14- fillet       (wcon,y) 
75.7 
38.5
31.5
68.5
148.5 
22 
14- salad 
84.0 
65.6
29.4
75.0
178.6 
22 
15+ fillet      (wcon,a) 
121.5 
55.9
38.0
105.0
225.0 161 
15+ salad 
121.0 
96.9
15.0
100.0
312.0 161 
 
With more table-companions, more fillets will be prepared along with a larger salad. This 
complicates calculations. With an average weight of fillets of about 160 g., it can be seen 
from table 3.9 (and a more robust analysis of the data, not shown) that there is no simple 
relationship between the number of fillets and the number of table-companions. Also, the 
contamination status of different fillets applied in one meal (i.e. whether they are 
contaminated or not) may be different, and the level of contamination may be different too. 
This problem is solved by a simplified approach, justified by a lack of adequate data and the 
fact that it is impossible to account for all the variability in which meals consisting of chicken 
breast fillet and salad can be accomplished. 
Assuming the salad is split up equally between the table-companions, the number of 
campylobacters ingested will be a sample from a binomial distribution with parameters Nsalad 
and  probability 1/ ν, and ν the number of table-companions, for both the young and the 
adults. 
In principle, the number of table-companions is a sample from the frequency distribution 
given in table 3.8. However, this distribution has to be adapted for the number of fillets 
prepared along with the salad. This number is estimated to be: 
 
nfillets(ν, j) = MAX(1, ν × wcon, j / wfillet)  

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 47 of 128 
 
for age class j, and number of table-companions ν. (Note that nfillet is a number ≥ 1 and need 
not be an integer.) Parameter wcon is the mean in table 3.9 and wfillet is the estimated average 
weight of a chicken breast fillet, 160 g. 
We simply regard the consequence of one contaminated fillet per salad only, assuming that 
the contamination of a salad after cutting x fillets is x times as large as with a fillet. We then 
have to adjust the frequency of the number of table-companions as applied in sampling by 
this factor:  
 
kj,ν
*=  nfillets(ν, j) × kj,ν 
 
Then for each age class j: 
 
ν ~ Discrete(ν, kj,ν
*) 
 
and 
 
Nconsumed, j ~ Binomial( Nsalad, 1/ ν) 
 
which yields the ingested dose.  
Here Discrete is a so-called discrete distribution as applied in @Risk and for example 
described by Vose (2000). Here it means that each ν is sampled with probability kj,ν
*. 
 
3.2.7 Ingestion and Dose-response 
In the final stage, we aim to predict the probability of illness as a consequence of the 
consumption of a salad prepared together with a chicken breast fillet. For this purpose, we 
have to combine the exposure assessment, resulting from the risk model so far, with a dose-
response relationship and information on consumption patterns in the Netherlands. 
The most frequently used dose-response relationship for Campylobacter is the Beta Poisson 
model for probability of infection (Medema et al. 1996, Teunis et al. 1999) based on the data 
of a volunteer study of Black et al. (1988). This Beta Poisson model is a good approximation 
of the hypergeometric dose-response model (Teunis and Havelaar 2000).  
This model states that p1, the probability of infection by one ingested Campylobacter is 
variable, as described by a Beta Distribution: 
 
p1 ~ Beta (α,β) 
 
The probability of infection due to the ingestion of n Campylobacters is then: 
 
Pinf (n) = 1-(1-p1)n 
 

page 48 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
According to Teunis and Havelaar (2000) α = 0.145 and β = 7.59. Hence, the expected value 
of p1 is 0.019 implying a 2% probability of being infected after ingestion of a single living 
Campylobacter cell. 
The data of Black et al. (1988) also include information on the probability of illness given 
infection, for the volunteers in their study. The implications of this information are 
disputable. Teunis et al. (1999) derive a dose dependent hazard function for this probability: 
 
Pill| inf (D) = 1-(1+η/D)-r 
 
with D the mean dose and η and r shape parameters. Best fitting values for η and r are η = 
0.048, r = 4.40 . 107 . Surprisingly, the resulting dose-response relationship for illness is 
decreasing for higher doses. (Teunis et al. 1999). Physiologically, this decrease is not well 
understood, reason to assume it may be an artefact of the data set and the statistical analysis. 
As a simpler, equally valid model for the probability of illness given infection, it is therefore 
assumed that  
 
 Pill| inf = 0.33 
 
based on the fact that, in the study of Black et al (1988) a total of 29 people got sick out of  
89 individuals that were infected. (Havelaar et al. 2000, Anonymous  2001). 
The dose-response model for illness now becomes: 
 
Pill (n) = Pinf (n) × Pill| inf (n)  
 
Recently, Teunis et al. (2005) published a reconsideration of this dose-response model, based 
on two (remarkably similar) outbreaks (one in the UK (Evans et al. 1996) and one in the 
Netherlands (Van den Brandhof et al. 2003)) of campylobacteriosis in groups of school 
children who drank raw milk at a farm visit. Although the ingested doses of Campylobacter 
were not known in these outbreaks, the relative amounts of milk consumed could be 
retrieved. The combination of these data with the data of Black et al. (1988) yielded new 
estimates for the parameters of the dose-response model of Campylobacter, and different 
estimates for a ‘sensitive’ population (like young school children) and others (like healthy 
volunteers) .  
In the CARMA project we translate these two populations to ‘children aged below 15’ 
(sensitive) and ‘adults (15+)’ (others). The resulting most likely estimates for the model 
parameters according to Teunis et al. (2005) are: 
 
adults: αa = 0.024, βa = 0.011                (Teunis et al. 2005) 
            η a = 0.048, ra = 4.40 . 107          (Teunis et al. 1999) 
children: αc = 0.024, βc = 0.011             (Teunis et al. 2005) 
η c = 3.63 10-9, rc =2.44 . 108      (Teunis et al. 2005) 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 49 of 128 
Here, the parameters for the probability of infection are identical for adults and children, now 
with an expected value for  p1 of 0.67, that is 67% probability of infection after ingestion of 
one living Campylobacter cell. The difference in the probability of illness results from a 
difference in the hazard functions describing the probability of illness given infection. 
As illustrated in fig 3.5, with these new most likely values, the probability of illness as a 
consequence of low doses increases dramatically. This is a consequence of the steep 
inclination of the response curves resulting from the two outbreaks. At the moment, the 
acceptability of this updated model within the scientific community is not yet clear.    
In the CARMA risk model we apply the 'Classic' model, based on Black et al. (1988), with 
Pill|inf = 0.33, as the default model. The main reason for this is that this model is now 
generally accepted by the scientific community. The updated model for children and adults, 
based on Teunis et al. (2005), (the pink line and the brown line in fig 3.5) are explored as 
alternatives. Furthermore, the dose-response model is linked with the exposure model by 
putting n = Nconsumed. 
 
 
               
Campy DR models
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1
100
10000
1000000
100000000
discrete dose
P(ill)
old model with 33% illness
new model children with hazard function
new model adults, hazard function
new model adults, 33%
 
Figure 3.5. Comparison of most likely dose-response curves as currently considered.  
The probability of illness is plotted as a function of the discrete ingested dose, n (so the line should be 
regarded as a series of connected dots). Note the difference in shapes of the curves.  
Blue line: ‘Classic’ model of Teunis and Havelaar (2000) with Pill| inf = 0.33. Pink line: Model for 
sensitives (children), with a hazard function for the probability of illness given infection. Red line: 
Model for adults, with a hazard function for the probability of illness given infection. Brown line: 
Model for adults with Pill| inf = 0.33. This model more or less implies that Pill = 0.25, irrespective of the 
dose (given, of course, a dose of at least 1). As a baseline we apply the ‘Classic’ represented by the 
blue line.  
 

page 50 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
3.2.8 Overview of the risk model 
For overview of the risk model, table 3.10 summarizes the chain of models applied that link 
the number of campylobacters on the exterior of the carcass and the meat product at each 
stage. For a complete description of the models, see the sections above. 
As explained in section 3.1.5. the model is programmed as two spreadsheets using @Risk 
software as an add on to Microsoft Excel. The first spreadsheet covers the processing model 
including the cutting stage. The second spreadsheet uses the output of the first: the 
distributions of Next, cutting per flock, for 5000 flocks. The model covers storage, consumer 
food handling and dose-response. 
 
Table 3.10. Overview of the models applied for each of the stages of the risk model.  
For explanations see the main text. 
stage 
output 
equation 
unit 
scalding 
Next, scald 
eq. (1) 
carcass 
defeathering 
Next, def 
eq. (1) 
carcass 
evisceration 
Next, evis 
eq. (1) 
carcass 
washing  
Next, wash 
eq. (1) 
carcass 
chilling 
Next, chill 
eq. (1) 
carcass 
cutting  (1) 
Next, bc 
~ BetaBin(Next, chill (i),α, β) 
breast cap 
cutting  (2) 
Next, f 
= 0.5( a Next,bc(i) + ϕ E(Next,bc)) 
(single) fillet 
storage 
Next, fs 
=10-r_storage Next, f (i). 
(single) fillet 
consumer prep Nsalad 
= (tC,H × tH,H  × tH,S  + tC,B × tB,B  × tB,S ) 
tS,S  Next, fs (i) 
salad (table-
companions) 
exposure 
Nconsumed 
~ Binomial( Nsalad, 1/ ν) 
meal 
response 
Pill 
Pill (n) = 1-(1-p0) N_consumed   ×  
                                   Pill| inf (Nconsumed)  
meal 
 
3.3 
Parameter estimates baseline model 
 
The baseline model describes the most likely situation for chicken processing by a large 
industrial processing plant in the Netherlands in the year 2000.  It includes variability 
between flocks and between birds, carcasses and fillets. Uncertainties are evaluated with the 
analysis of alternative scenarios. 
As model input for the basic model we first need a value for the flock prevalence and  a 
distribution describing the animal prevalences in flocks. These are provided by the farm 
model (Katsma et al. 2005). Next, we need distributions for the concentration of 
campylobacter in the faeces Cfec, input and the numbers of campylobacter on the carcass 
exteriors Next,input. For the last two we need two types of distributions: the distributions in the 
flocks and the distribution between flocks. These distributions are to be derived from data.   
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 51 of 128 
3.3.1 Flock and animal prevalence 
The flock prevalence and animal prevalences at slaughter are provided by the CARMA farm 
model (Katsma et al. 2005). It is found that the flock prevalence is 44.4%. This is larger than 
the prevalence found in surveillance studies (Van Pelt and Valkenburg (2001), see also 
Bouwknegt et al. (2004)), because in these studies flocks with low animal prevalence may not 
be found positive when the sample sizes are too small. The distribution of animal prevalences 
is illustrated in fig 3.6. It shows that, as an outcome of the farm model, the animal prevalence 
is always <1. Of the 44.4% infected flocks, 21% has an animal prevalence <5% and 49% has 
a prevalence >98%. The large percentage of low prevalent flocks is the consequence of the 
dynamics of the infection of the flocks (Katsma et al. 2005). 
  
                          
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
animal prevalence
cum. frequency
 
Figure 3.6.  Animal prevalence reflects the percentage of birds colonized with 
Campylobacter in an infected flock, that is with a value of Cfec > 0.  
It is assumed that all birds in a flock are always contaminated at their exterior, due to the frequent 
contacts between birds and their droppings at the farm and during transport.  
 
3.3.2 Concentration in the faeces 
An overview of the data collected is given in table 3.11. 
Stern et al. (1995) present the mean log cfu campylobacter/gram caecal contents post 
transport per farm of nine positive broiler chicken farms in the USA. The mean of these 
means is  
6.8 log cfu/g. Mead et al. (1995) found a mean value of 6.4 log cfu/g for animals at 11 
positive farms, in a total sample of 155 animals. Fazil et al. (1999) used data of Stern et al. 
(1995 and unpublished) and from that, including data below the lower count limit, they derive 
a Normal distribution with a lower mean 4.95 log cfu/g and standard deviation 1.38. 
Additionally we obtained unpublished data from Denmark and the Netherlands. 
H. Rosenquist et al (unpubl) analysed the caecal contents of five flocks that were tested 
positive in samples collected one week prior to slaughter in Denmark. We fitted their raw 
data using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) methodology. The mean from their data 
was 6.2 log cfu/g. Surprisingly, they found one flock with 27% positive count values  

page 52 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
(>3 log cfu/g), yielding a mean of only 1.46 log cfu/g.  
 
Table 3.11. Overview of literature data on concentrations of Campylobacter in the intestines 
or the faeces of broiler chicken in log cfu per gram.  
The data of Enthoven are used as input of the risk model. 
 
 
 
mean sd 
 
Stern et al (1995) 
9 farms 
6.83
0.58
sd between means of farms 
Mead et al (1995) 
11 of 15 farms 
6.4
0.7
sd between means of farms 
 
 
155 animals 
 
1.2
mean sd within-flock 
Fazil et al (1999) 
Stern data 
4.95
1.38
within-flock sd 
Enthoven (unpubl) 
190 samples 
5.35
2.35
all samples 
 
 
176 samples 
5.58
1.82
positive samples 
 
 
38 flocks 
5.54
1.64
distr. of means per flock 
 
 
29 flocks  
6.00
1.52
distr. of means of flocks with 5 pos. 
samples 
 
 
 
 
0.73
mean sd within-flock 
6.22
2.72
sd between means per flock 
Rosenquist et al 
(unpubl) 
5 flocks 
(n=30) 
 
1.39
mean sd within-flock 
Jacobs-Reitsma et 
al. (in prep).  
5 flocks 
(n=10) 
7.94
0.87
sd between means per flock 
 
Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in prep.) analysed the caecal contents of five flocks in the Netherlands 
in 2004. Results are presented in table 3.12  
 
Table 3.12  Count data of caecal contents, collected in 2004 by Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in 
prep). 
10 birds are sampled per flock. (Flock numbers are indicators). 
flock nr.  
1 
3
4
5
6 
mean 
9.20 
7.77
7.18
7.15
8.38 
sd 
0.46 
0.40
0.74
0.52
0.45 
 
P. Enthoven (unpublished) provided us with a data set sampled in the Netherlands 1991 - 
1994. Five faecal samples prior to hanging at the processing plant were taken per flock of 38 
flocks and campylobacter concentrations were determined. This data set was very well suited 
for our purpose, as these are Dutch data from which we can derive both within-flock and 
between-flock variability. Per flock raw data (i.e. the measured log cfu/g) were fitted to 
normal distributions, again using MLE methodology. This methodology allows incorporation 
of data for threshold values: counts smaller than 2 log cfu per gram were below the detection 
limit, and other counts were too large for the dilutions applied (yielding >5 or >6 log cfu/g 
values) (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). Additional information from enrichment tests 
performed on the same samples were included in the analysis, as this implies that 
campylobacter is present, be it at low concentration when counting methods yield no results. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 53 of 128 
Of the total of 190 samples of 38 positive flocks, 176 were positive for campylobacter (by 
enrichment). 29 of the 38 flocks were positive for all 5 samples taken per flock. Fig 3.7 
shows an overview of the count data of  the 176 positive samples.  
The results of the analysis of the data of Enthoven are used as input for the baseline model. 
This is a complete Dutch data set of faecal samples. Data of caecal samples are not used, 
because the concentration of campylobacter in the caecum is generally considered to be 
higher than the concentration in faeces leaking from the cloaca during processing. 
 
                                        
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
< 2
2-3
3-4
4-5
5-6
6-7
7-8
>5
>6
 
Figure 3.7 The distribution of concentrations of Campylobacter in broiler chicken faeces as 
found by Enthoven (unpublished results) (n=176).  
Bars indicate frequency of classes of concentrations, given in log cfu per gram faeces. Yellow bars are 
data for which only upper and lower limits are known.  
 
This means we assume a normal distribution of the means per flocks N(6.00, 1.52) log cfu/g. 
The within-flock variability of infected birds is represented by a standard deviation of 0.73. 
In the Monte Carlo the upper tail of the distribution is truncated at 10 log cfu/g, to prevent 
unrealistically high values that may have large impact on the final risk. 
 
3.3.3 Carcass exterior 
The contamination of the carcass exterior with campylobacter at the entrance of the 
processing plant is studied quantitatively by several researchers. Stern et al. (1995) report a 
(geometric) mean of  7.04 log cfu/carcass.  A closer look at their data shows that, when 
regarding the flocks for which 'normal' transport was simulated only, the mean was  
6.4. log cfu per carcass, with a between-flock standard deviation 1.4. Between birds 
variability cannot be retrieved. 
Berrang and Dickens (2000) found 4.7 (sd 0.5) log cfu/ml rinsing water, before scalding, in 
300 ml per carcass for 25 carcasses. That yields a mean value of 7.2 log cfu per carcass. From 
the published 95% confidence interval of the mean the standard deviation between flocks can 
be assessed at 1.25. Rosenquist et al. (2003) used neck skin data published by Mead et al. 
(1995). It is not straightforward how to relate these data to numbers per carcass. 
For the CARMA project four flocks were sampled at the entrance of a Dutch processing 
plant, which were previously tested positively at the farm (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). 
Twenty carcasses were taken from the processing line, just after bleeding and just before 

page 54 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
entering the scalding-tank. Each carcass was placed into a plastic bag, 100 ml or 1000 ml of 
Peptone saline was added, and carcasses were washed by hand massage for 30 seconds each. 
During this washing, special attention was given to the prevention of faecal leakage, by 
plugging or otherwise. Campylobacter numbers were determined in the rinse water. Normal 
distributions were fitted through the logs of the counts per flock, using Maximum Likelihood 
Estimation methods. These distributions thus represent the variability within the flocks. For 
one small flock, which may be considered not representative for flocks used for chicken meat 
consumption as it was reared in an experimental setting at a research institute, the best fitting 
distribution was Normal (5.58, 1.07) in a sample of 15 birds. Results for the other three 
(representative) flocks are given in table 3.13. The overall mean is 7.27 log cfu/carcass, close 
to the data of Berrang et al. (2000) and Stern et al. (1995). The mean standard deviation 
within a flock is 0.56, the standard deviation of the mean is 0.83, but based on a sample of 
three flocks only. 
 
Table 3.13  Mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution fitting through the log 
count data of campylobacters on the carcass exteriors of three Dutch flocks in the summer of 
2004 (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). For each flock, n=20. 
flocks 
1 
2 
3 
mean 
8.03 
7.39 
6.39 
sd 
0.50 
0.50 
0.69 
 
In the CARMA risk model we apply these distributions. Samples are truncated at 4.5 at the 
lower tail and 10 at the upper tail, as the standard deviation between flocks is based on a 
sample of 3 only, and to prevent too extreme values. 
As stated in the section on animal prevalence we assume that all birds are contaminated at 
their exterior when they enter the processing plant, irrespective of intestinal colonization. 
Samples of the distribution of Next are adjusted for animal prevalence < 100%, as smaller 
amounts of Campylobacter from chicken faeces will be spread through the flock if animal 
prevalence is lower. The (within-flock) mean of the normal distribution for log Next,input, 
sampled from the between-flock distribution Normal (7.27, 0.83), is lowered by the log of the 
animal prevalence, log (Panim), to obtain the mean applied as within-flock mean.       
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 55 of 128 
Table 3.14  Parameter table of the baseline model.  
A list with all parameters used in the risk model. Bold parameters are variable and sampled from distributions. Default values are those applied in the baseline 
model.  
stage 
parameter 
description 
unit 
default value 
reference / source 
comment 
entrance 
processing plant 
Pflock 
flock prevalence 
 
44.4 % 
Katsma et al. (2005) 
 
 
Panim 
animal prevalence in infected 
flock 
 
see fig 3.6 
Katsma et al. (2005) 
 
 
Cfec µ 
concentration in faeces 
log cfu/g 
6 
P. Enthoven (pers. comm.) 
max = 10 
 
Cfec σ 
sd between birds within a flock  
0.73 
P. Enthoven (pers. comm.) 
 
 
 
sd of µ between flocks 
 
1.52 
P. Enthoven (pers. comm.) 
 
 
Next,input µ 
number campy on exterior 
log cfu/ 
broiler 
7.27 
Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in 
prep.) 
max =10, min 
= 4.5 
 
Next_input σ 
sd between birds within a flock  
0.56 
Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in 
prep.) 
 
 
 
sd of µ between flocks 
 
0.83 
Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in 
prep.) 
 
 (low) scalding 
aext 
transmission ext -> env 
 
0.86 
expert study 
median 
 
1-afec 
transmission int -> ext 
 
1.40E-06 
expert study 
median 
 
benv 
transmission env -> ext 
 
6.80E-06 
expert study 
median 
 
cext 
removal ext 
 
0.71 
expert study 
median 
 
cenv 
removal env 
 
0.036 
expert study 
median 
 
pfec 
prob. leaking faeces 
 
0.48 
expert study 
median 
 
ms µ 
leaking faeces (given leakage) 
g 
1.84 
expert study 
median 
 
ms σ 
sd (lognormal) 
 
0.001 
guess 
 
defeathering 
aext 
transmission ext -> env 
 
0.91 
expert study 
median 
 
1-afec 
transmission int -> ext 
 
1.03E-05 
expert study 
median 
 
benv 
transmission env -> ext 
 
9.85E-04 
expert study 
median 
 
cext 
removal ext 
 
0.049 
expert study 
median 
 
cenv 
removal env 
 
0.11 
expert study 
median 
 
pfec 
prob. leaking faeces 
 
0.70 
expert study 
median 
 
ms µ 
leaking faeces (given leakage) 
g 
1.72 
expert study 
median 

page 56 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
ms σ 
sd (lognormal) 
 
0.001 
guess 
 
evisceration 
aext 
transmission ext -> env 
 
0.46 
expert study 
median 
 
1-afec 
transmission int -> ext 
 
2.75E-03 
expert study 
median 
 
benv 
transmission env -> ext 
 
1.07E-05 
expert study 
median 
 
cext 
removal ext 
 
0.042 
expert study 
median 
 
cenv 
removal env 
 
0.085 
expert study 
median 
 
pfec 
prob. leaking faeces 
 
0.68 
expert study 
median 
 
ms µ 
leaking faeces (given leakage) 
g 
1.94 
expert study 
median 
 
ms σ 
sd (lognormal) 
 
0.001 
guess 
 
washing 
aext 
transmission ext -> env 
 
0.31 
expert study 
median 
 
benv 
transmission env -> ext 
 
2.75E-03 
expert study 
median 
 
cext 
removal ext 
 
0.245 
expert study 
median 
 
cenv 
removal env 
 
0.062 
expert study 
median 
(air) chilling 
aext 
transmission ext -> env 
 
0.061 
expert study 
median 
 
benv 
transmission env -> ext 
 
3.75E-03 
expert study 
median 
 
cext 
removal ext 
 
0.035 
expert study 
median 
 
cenv 
removal env 
 
0.015 
expert study 
median 
cutting 
α 
parameter beta distribution 
partitioning 
 
1 
guess 
 
 
frac µ 
mean rel. proportion of campy 
on breast cap 
 
24% 
J.Obdam (pers. comm.) 
 
 
z 
relative contribution of carcass 
i to contamination of fillet i 
 
0.17 
J.Obdam (pers. comm.) 
guess 
 
log π 
fraction of carcass 
contamination on fillet 
 
-1.8 
J.Obdam (pers. comm.) 
based on 
other bacteria 
(cool) storage 
rstorage 
reduction by storage 
log red. 
BetaPert 
(0.1,0.9,2.1) 
Jacobs-Reitsma et al. (in 
prep.) 
 
consumer prep. 
tC,H 
transfer chicken to hand 
 
0.0415 
Montville et al. (2001) 
refitted raw 
data. 
 
tC,B 
chicken to board 
 
0.0125 
Kusumaningrum et al. 
(2004) 
 
 
tH,S 
hand to salad 
 
0.207 
Montville et al. (2001) 
id 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 57 of 128 
 
tB,S 
board to salad 
 
0.343 
Kusumaningrum et al. 
(2004) 
 
 
tH,H 
hand wash effect 
 
0.0347 
Chen et al. (2001) 
id 
 
tB,B 
board wash effect 
 
0.0000464 
Cogan et al. (2002) 
 
 
tS,S 
salad wash effect 
 
0.367 
Smith et al. (2003) 
 
 
fcf 
frequency chicken cut before 
salad on same board 
 
50% 
guess 
 
 
fhw 
hand washing frequency 
 
80% 
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a) 
rough average 
 
fnsb 
frequency not using same 
boardside unwashed 
 
95% 
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a) 
rough average 
 
fbw 
frequency board washing 
 
65% 
Doorduyn et al. (in prep a) 
rough average  
 
fsw 
salad washing frequency 
 
60% 
Worsfold and Griffith 
(1997) 
rough average 
 
 
various consumption data 
 
see table 3.8 
and 3.9 
Kistemaker et al. (1998) 
 
Dose-response 
α 
Beta distr. dose-infection  
 
0.145 
Teunis and Havelaar (2000) classic model 
 
β 
Beta distr. dose-infection  
 
7.59 
Teunis and Havelaar (2000) classic model 
 
Pill | inf 
prob. of illness given infection 
for adults 
 
33% 
Havelaar et al. (2000) 
classic model  
and new 
model adults 
 
α 
Beta distr. dose-infection  
 
0.024 
Teunis et al. (2005) 
new model 
 
β 
Beta distr. dose-infection  
 
0.011 
Teunis et al. (2005) 
new model 
 
νy 
hazard function illness (young) 
 
3.63E-09 
Teunis et al. (2005) 
new model 
 
ry 
hazard function illness (young) 
 
244,000,000 
Teunis et al. (2005) 
new model 
 
young 
meals 
number of chicken fillet with 
salad meals 14- 
 
9,000,000 
CBS 
 
 
adult 
meals 
number of chicken fillet with 
salad meals 15+ 
 
76,000,000 
CBS 
 
 

page 58 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
3.4 
Interventions 
 
3.4.1 Selection of interventions 
One of the main interests of risk management in the CARMA project is the evaluation of the 
effects of potential interventions in the poultry meat chain. Here we study these effects in 
terms of decrease in the assessed number of cases. The relative risk of an intervention is the 
assessed number of cases after intervention divided by the assessed number in the baseline 
scenario.  The risk reduction is one minus the relative risk. 
The evaluated interventions are selected in close collaboration with the risk managers in the 
CARMA steering committee (with representatives of the ministries of Public Health and 
Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality). There are some interventions at the farm stage, some 
at the processing stage and some at the consumer stage, which allows comparison of 
interventions at different stages. Some interventions are considered on the basis of 
international experience (like freezing of poultry meat, (Stern et al. 2003)), others because 
experts expect they will have considerable effect. In the model, we can also evaluate 
interventions which are currently illegal (like decontamination of processed meat) or the topic 
of public debate (like irradiation). By evaluation we can add information to the public debate 
about these issues, without making any statement about social acceptability. The latter is 
analyzed elsewhere in the CARMA project (Bogaardt 2005). 
The selected interventions are summarized below and listed in table 3.15. For a more detailed 
description of these interventions see Mangen et al. (2005b) and Katsma et al. (2005). 
 
I Thinning  
During rearing at the farm, in about 44% of the flocks a small part of the flock is taken away 
for slaughter and processing about a week before the rest of the flock (thinning). As a 
consequence catchers have to enter the farm house, which may introduce Campylobacter into 
the flock. As an intervention, thinning could be forbidden to prevent this potential 
introduction of Campylobacter. 
 
II Mono-species farms 
According to Bouwknegt et al. (2004) 190 of 457 (42%) farms keep at least one other farm 
animal species. The odds ratio of Campylobacter contamination at these farms was 1.88 times 
larger than on farms with only broilers. Hence, it was suggested that restricting the presence 
of other farm animals (or requiring the absence of other farm animals) may be a potentially 
effective intervention 
 
III Improved hygiene at the farm 
Campylobacter enters the poultry meat production chain at the farm. Although good hygiene 
already gets considerable attention at poultry farms, improved hygiene seems an obvious 
intervention to prevent the introduction of Campylobacter into broiler chicken flocks.  
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 59 of 128 
 
           
Farm
Processing
Consumer
 Logistic slaughter
 Scheduled treatment
 Reduction of faecal leakage
 Decontamination of scalding tank
 
 Treatment of carcasses:  
decontamination, crust freezing, irradiation
 Freezing of products
 Channeling to meat processing
 Freezing at home
 Improved kitchen hygiene
 Monospecies farms
 Improved hygiene
 No thinning
Phage therapy
 Information 
campaign
 
Figure 3.8 An overview of the evaluated interventions in the broiler meat production chain. 
 
IV Phage therapy 
Phage therapy, administered at the broiler chickens before slaughter, may reduce the 
Campylobacter concentration in the gut by 2-3 log units (Wagenaar et al. 2001). As a 
consequence it may lower the amount of Campylobacter introduced into the poultry meat 
production chain. 
 
V Logistic slaughter 
By rescheduling the processing of the flocks processed at the plant on a day, cross-
contamination between flocks tested positively and flocks tested negatively for 
Campylobacter can be prevented. Minimizing cross-contamination between flocks may 
prevent an increase in the prevalence of birds contaminated with Campylobacter. 
 
VI Reduction of faecal leakage 
During the first stages of chicken processing faeces containing Campylobacter may leak from 
the intestines and contaminate the carcass exterior. Industry could try to reduce this faecal 
leakage. Additional processing equipment may for example press faeces close to the cloaca 

page 60 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
out of the carcass and wash it away before the carcasses enter the scalding tank. Like phage 
therapy this will lower the amount of Campylobacter brought into the processing system, and 
thus lower the levels finally found on the meat. Optimizing the fasting of the birds before 
slaughter can possibly be considered as another method to achieve the same goal.  
 
VII Decontamination in the scalding tank. 
In the scalding tank dirt from carcasses containing Campylobacter may accumulate. Adding a 
chemical (lactate or TSP (trisodium phosphate) to the scalding water may inactivate 
Campylobacter and thus lower the amount of Campylobacter brought forward into the 
processing system. 
 
VIII Decontamination of the carcasses 
Decontamination with chemicals like lactate and TSP can also be applied at later stages in the 
processing plant. Adding it to the washing water, spraying it directly on the carcasses 
between processing stages or adding an extra scalding tank will lower the level of 
Campylobacter on the carcasses 
 
IX Carcass surface heat treatment 
By applying an extra heat treatment after evisceration such as steam pasteurization  
(12-24 seconds), hot water (80°C for 20 seconds) or dry heat (15 minutes), levels of 
Campylobacter on the chicken skin may be reduced (Whyte et al. 2003, Corry et al. 2003). 
 
X Crust freezing 
Cold air (at about -30ºC) can be blown over the carcasses during chilling. This will freeze the 
chicken surface and inactivate Campylobacter on the skin (Corry et al. 2003). 
 
XI Irradiation 
Chicken meat products can be irradiated to kill off all Campylobacter and Salmonella.  
 
XII Freezing of chicken meat 
Freezing chicken meat will inactivate Campylobacter. If chicken meat is frozen (e.g. for two 
weeks at -30 ºC), the levels on this meat will be lowered.  
 
XIII Prepared meat 
A similar intervention as the previous one is to inactivate Campylobacter by heat treatment of 
the chicken meat, producing ‘precooked’ or ‘prepared’ chicken meat.  
 
XIV Kitchen hygiene. 
If the consumer cooks the meat well and acts hygienically in the domestic kitchen by washing 
hands and equipment and preventing cross-contamination between raw chicken meat and 
other foods, Campylobacter originating from chicken meat will not be ingested. To achieve 
this, consumer hygiene education should be improved, for example by launching an 
information campaign in the mass media. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 61 of 128 
 
XV Home freezing of chicken meat by the consumer 
Voluntarily freezing the meat in the home freezer by the consumer may be another method to 
reduce the level of Campylobacter on the broiler chicken meat. This can also be achieved by 
an information campaign. 
 
An intervention that may be applied in combination with some of those listed above is 
scheduled treatment. Here, flocks are tested for Campylobacter some days before slaughter. 
Negative flocks are treated without any further intervention and can be sold as fresh meat. 
Positive flocks will be treated differently, by additionally applying one of the interventions 
mentioned. The interventions considered for evaluation in combination with scheduled 
treatment are indicated in table 3.15. 
 
Table 3.15  List of interventions to control Campylobacter as initially proposed for 
evaluation. 
nr. 
intervention 
with scheduled 
treatment? 
stage 
I 
no thinning  
 
farm 
II 
mono species farms 
 
farm 
III 
improved farm hygiene 
 
farm 
IV 
phage therapy 
yes 
farm 
V 
logistic slaughter 
yes, by definition 
processing plant 
VI 
reduction of faecal leakage 
 
processing plant 
VII 
decontamination in the scalding tank 
 
processing plant 
VIII decontamination of carcasses  
yes 
processing plant 
IX 
carcass surface heat treatment 
yes 
processing plant 
X 
crust freezing 
yes 
processing plant 
XI 
irradiation 
yes 
processing plant 
XII 
freezing of chicken meat  
yes 
after processing 
XIII prepared meat 
yes 
after processing 
XIV kitchen hygiene  
 
consumer 
XV 
home freezing of chicken meat 
 
consumer 
 
3.4.2 Evaluated interventions 
The interventions evaluated with the risk model are not identical to those selected as 
discussed in section 3.4.1. During the project some interventions were not evaluated further 
for the reasons given below: 
 
II. Mono species farms 
In practice it will be very difficult to prevent or forbid the presence of other farm animals on 
a chicken farm. Farms with other farm animals are usually the smaller farms, which are 
expected to have a lower flock prevalence of Campylobacter than larger farms (Katsma et al. 

page 62 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
2005). Hence the positive effect of eliminating other animals may be counterbalanced by an 
increase in the number of broiler flocks. See Mangen et al. (2005b) for a detailed discussion. 
 
V. Logistic slaughter 
In other publications of the CARMA project we have studied this intervention and found it is 
not expected to have much impact on the human health burden of Campylobacter (Evers 
2004, Havelaar et al. 2004) Negative flocks cross-contaminated by preceding positive flocks 
will always show a lower proportion of positive carcasses and much lower levels of 
campylobacter on the carcass surfaces.  
 
IX Carcass surface heat treatment  
According to some Dutch experts consulted for the CARMA project, the quality of the meat 
is too much affected by this intervention, so the end product cannot be sold. (See also James 
(2004), Mangen et al. (2005b), Havelaar et al. (2005).) 
 
XIII Prepared meat without channeling 
This intervention implies that no fresh or frozen meat will be on the market anymore. This 
not a realistic option.  
For intervention VIII, carcass decontamination, it was decided to evaluate both (a) 
decontamination at three stages: with an extra warm water tank after defeathering, during 
washing and by spraying during chilling (Snijders et al. 2004) and (b) by submersion between 
washing and chilling only (Stekelenburg and Logtenberg 2004). The effect of two chemicals 
will be evaluated for interventions VII and VIII: lactate and TSP (trisodium phosphate). 
These are found to be among the most suitable chemicals for this purpose (Stekelenburg and 
Logtenberg 2004). 
Scheduled treatment will be evaluated with three different tests (see Katsma et al. (2005) for 
details): (1) the ‘classical’ test by culture method, (2) a test using PCR and (3) a test using a 
novel method with a dipstick.  
The evaluated interventions are listed in table 3.16 
 
3.4.3 Effects of interventions 
The effects of the interventions in terms of risk reduction are evaluated by translating the 
effects of individual interventions into modified model parameter values. As the model is 
partially a mechanistic model, the effects would ideally be defined in terms of these 
mechanistics. However, data on the effects of the individual interventions on the mechanistics 
are limited. Data on changes in levels of campylobacter due to chemicals or temperature 
stress are usually only given in terms of changes in model outputs such as the levels on the 
chicken skin or chicken meat. Therefore, the effects of most interventions are expressed in 
terms of effects on the number of Campylobacter on the exterior of the carcass or the meat, 
Next. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 63 of 128 
For each intervention we define a best estimate as the most likely value. Next, to explore the 
uncertainty of the estimated effects, we define pessimistic and optimistic values for the effect, 
yielding a lower resp. higher risk reduction. 
 
Table 3.16  List of interventions evaluated with the risk model.   
nr. 
intervention 
with scheduled 
treatment? 
stage 
I 
no thinning  
 
farm 
III 
improved farm hygiene 
 
farm 
IV 
phage therapy 
yes 
farm 
VI 
reduction of faecal leakage 
 
processing plant 
VII 
decontamination in the scalding tank 
 
processing plant 
VIIIa carcass decontamination at three 
stages 
yes 
processing plant 
VIIIb carcass decontamination before 
chilling 
yes 
processing plant 
X 
crust freezing 
yes 
processing plant 
XI 
irradiation 
yes 
processing plant 
XII 
freezing of chicken meat  
yes 
after processing 
XIII 
prepared meat  
only 
after processing 
XIV 
kitchen hygiene  
 
consumer 
XV 
home freezing  
 
consumer 
 
In the search for data to estimate the effects of interventions preference is given to data on 
interventions on whole carcasses (or parts of it further down the processing line) under more 
or less realistic conditions (= practice) over data not complying to this (= lab). 
The following protocol is applied: 
 A point estimate is determined per experiment; 
 When data from more than one author are available, then the lowest and highest value 
found are taken as pessimistic and optimistic value (obvious outliers excluded); 
 When data from more than one experiment from one author are available, then the 
range found by this author is increased on both sides by 0.5 log to obtain the 
pessimistic and optimistic value; 
 When only data from one experiment are available, then the range is the value found 
plus and minus 1 log; 
 When (almost) no data are available, then the range is the proposed best value plus 
and minus 2 log. 
 
I No thinning  
The effect of a ban on thinning could not be evaluated directly with the farm model (Katsma 
et al. (2005); see also Mangen et al. (2005b)). As thinning is not explicitly incorporated in 
this model, it could not be banned either. As a solution, the opposite was evaluated. The farm 
model was run assuming that one colonized broiler enters the farm house five days before 

page 64 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
slaughter. The resulting flock prevalence is 88%. This finding and the distribution of within-
flock animal prevalences was used as input of the processing model to evaluate the effect of 
thinning in all farms on the relative risk. The effect of a ban on thinning will be comparable 
with the opposite of this result, that is a decrease of the relative risk comparable to the 
increase in relative risk as found in the analysis. 
 
III  Improved farm hygiene 
This scenario is evaluated with the farm model of  Katsma et al. (2005). Results in terms of a 
change in the distribution of within-flock animal prevalences and flock prevalence are 
evaluated by the processing model. 
 
IV  Phage therapy 
With this intervention broiler chickens are treated with phages to reduce the level of 
Campylobacter in the intestines. Wagenaar et al. (2001) have shown that administering 
phages has an effect of about 2 logs reduction. As this is the result of just one study, it should 
be considered as rather uncertain. 
Lowering the concentration of campylobacter in the faeces may also have an effect on the 
number of campylobacter on the exterior of the birds. This effect, however, has never been 
measured. 
As an effect of phage therapy in the risk model we take: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of log Cfec µ by 1 log 
Best:  
reduction of log Cfec µ by 2 log  
Optimistic: 
reduction of log Cfec µ by 2 log  and of the mean log Next, input µ  by 1 log. 
 
VI  Reduction of faecal leakage  
Here we assume that equipment for reduction of faecal leakage is placed just before the 
scalding tank. The equipment may for example press the faeces out of the carcass and wash 
off the dirt, thereby decreasing the faecal leakage during processing. Other equipment with a 
similar effect can be considered too. 
The effect of this intervention is brought in to the model mechanistically. The equipment 
lowers the amount of leaking faeces and thus lowers Nfec, the product of the concentration of 
Campylobacter, Cfec, and the mass of leaking faeces, wfec, at all stages of the processing chain. 
Although the effect is actually aimed at wfec , the intervention is implemented as a reduction 
in log Cfec, which appeared to be the simplest way to implement the desired effect on Nfec in 
the risk model. Preliminary calculations have shown that a reduction in leakage of 
campylobacters with faeces with a factor 10 and 106 gives a reduction of log Next of resp. 0.5 
and 0.9 (unpublished). The latter reduction resembles a value found by pilot industrial trials 
with a prototype of equipment as meant for this intervention (data not shown). However, the 
variability in the effects measured is large. 
Therefore we taken: 
Pessimistic: 
Cfecµ  is unaltered 
Best:  
reduction of the mean value of Cfecµ  by 6 logs 
Optimistic: 
Cfecµ  gets zero 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 65 of 128 
 
VII/VIII  Decontamination with lactate 
See table 3.17. Data on the reduction of C. jejuni on broiler carcasses through lactate are 
scarce. Van Netten et al. (1994a) and Van Netten et al. (1994b) present good data, describing 
the effect of pH, temperature and exposure time, however these data are on pork skin 
suspensions and pork bellies. 
 
Table 3.17  Data collected on the decontamination effects of lactate on chicken carcasses.   
 P = practice, L = lab 
Processing details 
species 
effect 
 
Reference 
Immersion in warm water 
(< 50 °C ) with 0.3 % lactic 
acid 
C. spp 
0.8-1.2 log 
P 
Van de 
Nieuwelaar, 
(pers. comm.) 
Immersion in 0.25 and 0.5 
% lactic acid at 50 °C for 
90 s 
C. jejuni 
0.25 %: 0.80 
0.5 %: 0.77 
P 
Stern et al. 
(1985) 
Spraying with 2 % lactic 
acid, 24 h at 4 °C 
C. jejuni 
Naturally contaminated: 
≥ 1.6 log; artificially: 
1.0 log 
P/L 
Cudjoe and 
Kapperud 
(1991) 
Spraying with 1 % lactic 
acid, 24 h at 4 °C 
C. jejuni 
Naturally contaminated: 
≥ 1.2 log; artificially: 
0.25 log 
P/L 
Cudjoe and 
Kapperud 
(1991) 
Moisten the product with 
lactic acid during chilling 
C. spp 
0.8 - 1 log 
P 
Van de 
Nieuwelaar, 
(pers. comm.) 
2 % lactic acid solution, in 
pork skin suspension or on 
pork belly, 30 s at 21 °C 
C. jejuni 
2.5-2.6 log 
L 
Van Netten et 
al. (1994a) 
1% or 2% Lactic acid 
solution in pork skin 
suspension, variation in 
exposure time, temperature 
and pH 
C. jejuni 
0.3->5.3* 
L 
Van Netten et 
al. (1994b) 
10% lactic acid 
C. jejuni 
1 log 
? 
VVDO (1998) 
*The immediate death for C. jejuni decreased from 2.6 log to >5.3 log at pH 2.6 to 0.3-1.0 log at pH 
4.0. The decrease in bactericidal effect with increasing pH could be countered by an increase in the 
temperature. Estimated effect in realistic situation: such treatment would suffice to kill up to about 3 
log10 cfu in the lactic acid film and up to 0.3 log 10 cfu protected by meat buffering at pH 4.0. 
 
VIIL  Decontamination of the scalding tank with lactate 
As best estimate, we use the data from Stern et al. (1985). The concentrations used were 
much lower than 2.5 %, but in their experiment an increase from 0.25 to 0.5 % had no effect 
on the inactivation of C. jejuni, so concentration seems to play a minor role here at 50°C and 

page 66 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
an effect of 0.8 log seems reasonable. For the minimum we choose the value of 0.3 log 
mentioned by Van Netten et al. (1994b) and for the maximum we use the value of 1.2 as 
mentioned by Van de Nieuwelaar (pers. comm.). So: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.3 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 0.8 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.2 log 
 
VIIILb Submersion in lactate between washing and chilling 
We use the data from Cudjoe and Kapperud (1991) which includes the range given by Van de 
Nieuwelaar (pers. comm.) for chilling. For the minimum we rounded 0.25 to 0.3, the best 
estimate is an intermediate value at 2% lactic acid  and the maximum of 2 was chosen given 
the ≥ 1.6 log reduction found by them. The estimates of VIIL and VIIILb are thus similar, 
which is not unreasonable as on the one hand temperature is lower in VIIILb but on the other 
hand exposure time is longer. 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.3 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.3 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 2 log 
 
VIIIL Decontamination of carcasses with lactate 
With this intervention inactivation by lactate is implemented by an extra warm water tank 
after defeathering, during washing and during chilling. Effectively, compared to VIIILb, the 
intervention is extended with exposure time to lactate at room temperature. We very roughly 
estimate that this will increase inactivation by 0.5 log. 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.8 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.8 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 2.5 log 
 
VII/VIII  Decontamination with TSP 
See table 3.18. We exclude the experiments with lab-type or unknown setup (Anonymous 
2003, Keener et al. 2004). The results from Slavik et al. (1994), where the TSP remains on 
the carcasses after 15 s, indicate that at low temperatures, i.e. storage at 4 °C or 15 s dip at 10 
°C, TSP has little effect. This implies that results from Slavik et al. (1994) and Federighi et 
al. (1996) can be compared and that the effect at 16-20°C and 50°C is similar. It also implies 
that all data available are effectively on 15 s exposure (plus some cooling down time). We 
have no data on the relationship between TSP exposure time and inactivating effect. 
 
VIIT  Decontamination of the scalding tank with TSP 
We exclude the experiment done at 10°C (part of Slavik et al. (1994)). So the best estimate is 
equal to the mean of (1.5, 1.2, 1.3, 1.03, 1.16) = 1.24. The range is 1.03–1.5. So: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.03 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.24 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.5 log 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 67 of 128 
 
VIIITb Submersion in TSP between washing and chilling 
As stated above, we assume that the temperature effect in the range of 16–50°C is small. As 
there is no large difference in exposure time (limited in VIIT by further processing, especially 
washing and in VIIITb by cooling to 10°C), the values are the same as for VIIT: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.03 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.24 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.5 log 
 
Table 3.18  Data collected on the decontamination effects of TSP on chicken carcasses. 
Processing details species 
Effect 
Practice or lab 
Reference 
15 s dip into 10 
% Trisodium 
phosphate, 
storage at 4°C 
(no showering) 
C. jejuni 
50 °C, 1 day storage: 
1.5 log reduction; 
50 °C, 6 day storage: 
1.2 log reduction; 
10 °C, 1 day storage: 
0.16 log reduction 
Practice, post-chill 
carcasses 
Slavik et al. 
(1994) 
15 s dip into 10 
% TSP at 16-20 
°C, showering 
and store at 4°C 
C. spp 
1.3 log reduction 
Practice, Naturally 
contaminated 
carcasses from local 
processing plant, 
whole carcass rinse 
Federighi et 
al. (1996) 
15 s 12% TSP-
solution 
C. spp 
1.03 log reduction 
Practice; whole 
carcass rinse samples 
from large broiler 
processing plants 
Bashor et al. 
(2004) 
15 s dip in 10 % 
TSPat 20°C, 
storage at 4°C 
C. spp 
Dip in potable water 
gives 0.55 log 
reduction; dip in 
water with TSP gives 
1.71 log reduction, so 
reduction due to TSP 
is 1.16 log 
Practice; TSP 
treatment on whole 
carcasses, analysis of 
neck skins 
Whyte et al. 
(2001) 
TSP 
C. 
jejuni/coli 
5 log 
Lab (Artificial 
biofilms or suspension 
of cells) 
Keener et al. 
(2004) 
Trisodium 
phosphate 
C spp 
4 log, 
reduction prevalence 
from ca. 100 to 30 % 
? 
Anonymous 
(2003) 
 
 
 

page 68 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
VIIIT Decontamination of carcasses with TSP 
In this intervention inactivation by TSP is implemented by an extra warm water tank after 
defeathering, during washing and during chilling. This gives a longer exposure time than for 
VIIT and VIIITb, which we roughly estimate as an increase effect of 0.5 log. So: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.53 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.74 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 2.0 log 
 
X  Crust freezing  
See table 3.19. As best estimate the mean of (1) and (2) is taken, not including the 
experiments on freezing of pieces of skin and also not including the value of 0.4 from Mead, 
which is rather different although based on personal communication by Corry. The mean is 
(0.9 + 1.2) / 2 = 2.1 / 2 = 1.1. The range is 0.9 to 1.2. As all data are from the same author, 
0.5 log is added to the uncertainty on both sides, so a pessimistic and optimistic value of 0.4 
and 1.7: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.4 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.1 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.7 log 
 
Table 3.19  Overview of data on the effects of crust freezing 
Nr 
Method 
species 
Effect 
Practice or lab 
Reference 
1 
Rapid surface 
freezing (‘crust 
freezing’) 
C. jejuni 
0.9 log 
Practice (carcasses). 
From chicken 
processing plant, 
inoculated 
Corry et al. 
(2003) 
2 
Crust freezing 
C. jejuni 
about 1.2 
log 
Practice (Whole 
naturally contaminated 
carcass rinse) 
Corry (pers. 
comm.) 
3 
Rapid freezing 
C. jejuni 
1-1.5 log 
Lab (piece of skin). 
From chicken 
processing plant, 
inoculated 
Corry et al. 
(2003) 
4 
Crust freezing 
C. jejuni 
about 1 
log 
Lab (Breast skin). From 
inoculated carcasses 
Corry (pers. 
comm.) 
5 
Crust freezing 
C. spp 
0.4 
carcasses 
Mead (2004) 
 
XI  Decontamination by irradiation. 
Food irradiation can be done with ionizing radiation and this can be electron radiation, X-rays 
or gamma rays. The SI unit of absorbed dose is the gray (Gy). It is defined as the mean 
energy imparted by ionizing radiation to matter per unit mass. One Gy is equal to one joule 
per kilogram (WHO/FAO 1988). Penetrating depth of Gamma and X-ray is 80-100 cm, of E-

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 69 of 128 
beam 8-10 cm (Puridec 2004). D10 values are radiation doses needed to reduce the number of 
specific micro-organisms in specific foods by a factor of 10. 
As for legal obligations in The Netherlands, in 1983 the Dutch parliament conformed to the 
WHO vision that 10 kGy can be applied without adverse consequences (Neijssen 1988a). In 
1988, the maximum dose for decontamination of poultry by irradiation was 3 kGy 
(WHO/FAO, 1988). In 1992, the maximum permitted dose for microbial control of poultry 
by ionizing radiation was 10.5 kGy (Farkas 1998). At present, the maximum permitted dose 
for poultry meat in the Netherlands is 7 kGy (Rietveld 2002). In the United States, FDA and 
USDA have approved irradiation of chicken at a maximum dose of 3 kGy to control 
foodborne pathogens such as Salmonella and Campylobacter (Keener et al. 2004) 
As a strategy for choosing the best D10 estimate (table 3.20), considerations were that on the 
one hand (1) and (3) are based on a number of references and (2) and (4) on only one and that 
on the other hand (1) and (3) are not specifically on poultry, whereas (2) and (4) are on 
poultry. Therefore the midrange values of (1)-(4) were given equal weight. Apart from this, 
the midrange values are not very different, so different strategies will not influence the 
outcome much. So as the best estimate the mean of the midrange values for chilled meat, 
0.17, 0.185, 0.22, 0.175 is taken, which is 0.19 kGy. For the range simply the largest reported 
range is taken, which is 0.12-0.32 kGy. 
 
Table 3.20   Overview of data on the effects of irradiation. 
No. 
Method 
Species 
Effect 
Reference 
1 
Ionising radiation, 
Summarizing range of D10 
values (kGy) of many labs 
in meat and poultry 
C. jejuni 
Non-frozen: 0.14-
0.20; frozen: 0.21-
0.32. 
Farkas J 
(1996) 
2 
Ionising radiation in 
poultry meat, D10 values 
(kGy) 
C. jejuni, C. 
coli, C. fetus 
0.12 to 0.25 kGy, 
more sensitive than 
Salmonella and L. 
monocytogenes 
Keener et al. 
(2004) 
3 
Irradiation D10-values 
C. spp 
0.12-0.32 kGy in 
chilled meat 
Corry and 
Atabay 
(2001) 
4 
Ionizing radiation D10 
values 
C. jejuni in 
ground turkey 
Non-frozen = 0.16-
0.19; frozen = 0.293  
Farkas 
(1998) 
 
As for recommended doses, an FAO/IAEA/WHO Expert committee advised in 1976 a dose 
of 2-7 kGy for decontamination of chicken. A joint WHO committee stated in 1980 in 
Geneva that irradiation of any food commodity up to an overall average dose of 10 kGy 
presents no toxicological hazard and that it introduces no special nutritional or 
microbiological problems (WHO/FAO 1988). The Dutch Health Council stated in 1988, 
conforming to WHO, that doses that are effective in eliminating pathogens such as 
Campylobacter (2-4 kGy) are no threat to public health (Gezondheidsraad 1988). According 
to Neijssen 1988b organoleptic changes to food products can occur at doses of 1-10 kGy. 

page 70 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
These effects are strongly reduced by freezing prior to irradiation. In 1997, WHO stated that 
food exposed to doses greater than 10 kGy are nutritionally adequate and safe from a 
toxicological and microbiological point of view (WHO 1997). 
We comply to the more careful approach of Farkas (1996, 1998) who gives as recommended 
doses for organoleptic acceptability of radiation processing 1.5-2.5 kGy for chilled poultry 
and 3-5 kGy for frozen poultry. Using the D10 values derived above, this leads to the 
following estimates for reduction of C. jejuni by irradiation: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 1.5/0.32 = 4.7 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 2.0/0.19 = 10.5 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 2.5/0.12 = 20.8 log 
 
XII  Freezing of chicken meat  
Sandberg et al. (submitted) investigated half chicken carcasses that were put into the freezer 
(at -18°C) for different time periods. Quantitative culturing was conducted from a  
10 g sample. The log reduction was about 1 after 10 days and 2 after 21 days. Assuming a 
linear relationship this implies a reduction of log 1.36 after 14 days. 
Ritz-Bricaud et al. (2003) investigated the effect of freezing at -20°C with two methods 
(counting and MPN), on the skin, below the skin and on the muscle, analyzing samples of  
5 cm2 of surface. She found 0.9-3.2 log decline in two weeks (Ritz, unpublished data). 
Freezing for more than two weeks yielded no additional effect of freezing, in agreement with 
similar findings of Moorhead and Dykes (2002) and Bhaduri and Cottrell (2004). Hence, two 
weeks is considered to be the optimum freezing time with regards to the effects on 
Campylobacter. 
As best estimate the mean is taken of 1.36 and ((0.9+3.2)/2)= 2.05; this is 1.7. The range is 
0.9 -3.2, which includes the value from Sandberg. As we have data from more than one 
author, the range is not increased further. 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.9 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 1.7 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 3.2 log 
 
XIII Prepared meat of chicken from positively tested flocks, with scheduled treatment 
It is assumed that this intervention fully inactivates Campylobacter. 
 
XIV  Information campaign on kitchen hygiene  
Here we aim at performing an information campaign through the mass media aimed at 
change of behaviour during preparation of raw chicken breast fillet such that cross-
contamination in the kitchen is reduced. 
In a previous report (Nauta et al. 2001) research was done on the effect of an information 
campaign. It appeared that the effect on behaviour as a result from an information campaign 
to the general public is poorly known and depends on several factors, including for example 
the specificity of the campaign (target group, subject), properties of the target group and how 
well the campaign is prepared by proper research. It is doubtful whether television is a 
suitable medium to achieve a change in behaviour. Interventions on a specific target group in 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 71 of 128 
a frequently visited setting (for example a supermarket or a school) and with a more personal 
approach could make an important contribution additional to an information campaign. 
The limited amount of quantitative data that was obtained, points to a maximum of 7 % of the 
people changing their behaviour in reaction to any kind of information. As intervention XIV 
is a mass media campaign and given the doubts above, a value of 3 % is taken as a rough best 
estimate. No effect of a campaign is taken as pessimistic estimate. So: 
Pessimistic: 
0 % of the people change their behaviour 
Best:  
3 % of the people change their behaviour 
Optimistic: 
7 % of the people change their behaviour 
 
These values are implemented by assuming that the frequency of people performing non-
hygienic behaviour changes with the percentages mentioned above. 
As non-hygienic behaviours we selected ‘not washing hands’ and ‘using the same cutting 
board for meat and salad’. Thus, the frequency of hand washing fhw and the frequency of not 
using the same board side fnsb change due to the information campaign. In the evaluation of 
alternative scenarios it was found that these parameters have the highest impact on  risk 
reduction (see also Mylius et al. (submitted)). 
 
XV  Freezing of chicken meat products by the consumer 
Here we aim at performing an information campaign through the mass media aimed at 
stimulating the consumer to put their chicken meat in the freezer for at least a day prior to 
consumption. The effect of this intervention is the combination of the effect on human 
behaviour and of freezing. 
The effect of an information campaign through the mass media is taken from intervention 
XIV: 
Pessimistic: 
0 % of the people change their behaviour 
Best:  
3 % of the people change their behaviour 
Optimistic: 
7 % of the people change their behaviour 
 
For the effect of freezing, we make use of the estimates from intervention XII, which are for 
a freezing time of 14 days. We assume that the mean storage time of the chicken fillet in the 
freezer in intervention XV is 2 days. This based on the assumption that most Dutch 
consumers will not buy fresh meat for long term frozen storage, but merely put it in the 
freezer for a few days by habit. The values for intervention XV are obtained by dividing the 
estimates from intervention XII by 7. So: 
Pessimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.13 log 
Best:  
reduction of Next by 0.24 log 
Optimistic: 
reduction of Next by 0.46 log 
 
This intervention is implemented by combining the changes in parameter values for the 
pessimistic, best and optimistic effects. So pessimistic there is no change, best 0.24 log 
reduction of Next for 3% of the meals and optimistic best 0.46 log reduction of Next for 7% of 
the meals 

page 72 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Table 3.21 Overview of the effects of the interventions on the model parameters as 
implemented in the risk model.  
Best estimates are given in bold.   
nr. 
Intervention 
target parameter 
pess / best / opt 
         effect 
I 
thinning  
III 
improved farm hygiene 
Farm Model (Katsma et al. 2005)  
Farm Model (Katsma et al. 2005) 
IV 
phage therapy 
log Cfec 
(log Ninput)  
-1 (0)/ -2 (0)/ -2 (-1) 
VI 
reduction of faecal leakage 
log Cfec 
-0 / -6 / - ∞ 
VII L 
decontamination in the scalding tank 
log Next, scald 
-0.3 / -0.8 / -2 
VII T 
decontamination in the scalding tank 
log Next, scald 
-1.03 / -1.24 / -1.5  
VIIIL 
 decontamination at three stages 
(lactate) 
 
log Next, def   ;  
log Next, wash ; 
log Next, chill 
-0.27 / -0.60 / -0.83  
-0.27 / -0.60 / -0.83 
-0.27 / -0.60 / -0.83 
VIII Lb 
decontamination before chilling 
(lactate) 
log Next, wash 
-0.3 / -1.3 / -2 
VIII T 
decontamination at three stages 
(TSP) 
log Next, def   ;  
log Next, wash ; 
log Next, chill 
-0.51 / -0.58 / -0.67  
-0.51 / -0.58 / -0.67 
-0.51 / -0.58 / -0.67 
VIII Tb 
decontamination before chilling 
(TSP) 
log Next, wash 
-1.03 / -1.24 / -1.5 
X 
crust freezing 
log Next, wash 
-0.4 / -1.1 / -1.7  
XI 
Irradiation 
log Next, chill 
-4.7 / -10.5 / -20.8  
XII 
freezing of chicken meat  
log Next, f 
-0.9 / -1.7 / -3.2  
XIII 
prepared meat  
Next, def 
 = 0  (all inactivated) 
XIV 
kitchen hygiene  
fhw  ; 
fnsb 
 0 /+ 0.01 / + 0.03 
 0 / + 0.002 / + 0.004 
XV 
home freezing  
log Next, fs  ; 
Probability of 
effect on log Next, fs 
-0.13 / -0.24 / -0.46 
 
 0% / 3% / 7% 
 
3.4.4 Alternative scenarios  
A set of alternative scenarios is analysed to explore the sensitivity and uncertainty of the risk 
model. Parameters at all stages are chosen to compare sensitivity all along the chain.  
(1) The sensitivity for the mean values of Next and Cfec is studied, to explore the sensitivity of 
the model output (relative risk) for both of these rather uncertain input parameters. 
(2) As quite some effort has been made to incorporate variability between flocks and birds 
into the model, the impact of taking variability into account is analyzed. 
(3) In the risk model analysis the uncertainty in parameter estimates for the processing model, 
resulting from the expert study (Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2005), is omitted. Only the median 
of the expert estimates are taken into account. Therefore the impact of this uncertainty is 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 73 of 128 
studied separately by excluding between-flock variability and adding uncertainty. Also, 
uncertainty as a result of choices made during the expert study is studied. 
(4) The modelled effects of carcass cutting and storage are very uncertain, based on expert 
opinion and a few data only. The impact of this uncertainty is analysed. 
(5) The estimated parameters values for frequencies of consumer food handling are quite 
uncertain, based on few data and some assumptions. The impact of this uncertainty is 
analyzed too. 
(6) Finally, the effect of the choosing alternative dose-response models is studied. 
  

page 74 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 75 of 128 
4. 
Results 
4.1 
Baseline 
As a baseline, the risk model is run with the baseline values as given in table 3.14. These 
values aim to represent the best estimates of the parameter values as currently available. The 
model represents the situation of broiler chickens processed in the Netherlands in the year 
2000. (The year 2000 is chosen at the start of the project, as this was a recent year without 
any crisis in animal agriculture in the Netherlands.) In the baseline variability between birds 
in a flock and variability between flocks is included, uncertainty in parameter values is not 
taken into account.  
First, for a better understanding of the dynamics, the processing model is run without 
incorporation of between-flock variability and with animal prevalence Panim = 100%, and 
mean and within-flock standard deviation of log (Next, input) and log (Cfec) as given in  
table 3.14. This represents the effect of industrial processing on an average flock with all 
animals colonised with Campylobacter. The mean result of 3000 runs of this model  
(with 500 carcasses of this average flock), is illustrated in fig 4.1. To get an impression of the 
variability between carcasses within flocks, the mean values are taken of the percentiles of 
the within-flock variability distribution of 500 carcasses, as generated by each of the  
3000 model iterations. This variability between carcasses decreases due to the effects of 
cross-contamination. After chilling, 90% of the carcasses have a value of log (Next, chill) 
between 4.17 and 5.22. There is a continuous decrease in log (Next) over the stages, a total 
mean decrease of 2.65 logs from input to chilling, from 7.27 to 4.62. The variability between 
the runs is small, and solely the effect of stochasticity (the 90% CI of log (Next, chill) is <4.58, 
4.67>). After cutting, the mean value of log (Next, f) is 2.04 (90% CI <1.99, 2.10> ).  
 
                
mean carcass variability
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
input
scalding
defeathering
evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
mean
0.5
0.05
0.95
 
Figure 4.1 The effects of processing on log (Next) for an average flock with Panim = 100%.  
The mean values of 3000 iterations of the baseline model are shown without between-flock 
variability. The variability as represented by the percentiles is the mean within-flock (between 
carcass) variability. 

page 76 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
The results of the baseline model including between-flock variability (and thus representing 
the population of flocks in the Netherlands) are presented in table 4.1 and illustrated in figs 
4.2 - 4.7. One model run consists of 5000 iterations and simulates 5000 independent flocks, 
with varying animal prevalence and varying mean values of log (Next, input) and log (Cfec), as 
indicated in table 3.14. Due to the presence of flocks with lower animal prevalence, the mean 
value of log Next,input (6.71) is lower then 7.27, as explained in section 3.3.3. With inclusion of 
between-flock variability the mean value of log (Next) after chilling is 4.36 and the mean 
effect of processing is a reduction of 2.35 logs. Hence, both the level after processing and the 
effects of processing are lower as in the case of a single average flock. 
Now, due to between-flock variability, the variability between carcasses within flocks varies 
itself. To get an impression of the within-flock variability, the mean values are taken of the 
percentiles of the within-flock variability distribution of 500 carcasses, as generated by each 
of the 5000 model iterations. (So, for example, the value given in table 4.1 for the 5%-ile is 
the mean of 5000 5%-iles of the within-flock distribution of 5000 flocks.) Again, this 
variability between carcasses decreases due to the effects of cross-contamination. (see  
figs 4.2 and 4.3). After chilling on average 90% of the carcasses have a value of log (Next, chill) 
between 3.82 and 5.02.  
The variability between flocks is expressed by taking the variability of the means of each 
iteration. This variability is large and increases with processing (see fig 4.4 and 4.5). Its 
distribution is further illustrated by fig 4.6, by comparing the means of 5000 flocks at the 
input and after chilling and cutting. To compare the effects of the between-flock variability in 
input values of Panim, log (Cfec) and log (Next, input), a sensitivity analysis is performed, 
correlating the input distributions with the output (log Next, f). The results are shown in  
fig. 4.7, indicating that for all three input distributions the variability in the input values is 
correlated with the variability of the output, so all have considerable impact. 
For a better understanding of the effects of variability in input between flocks,  
figs 4.8 and 4.9 show the mean results for the change in log (Next) if the model is run with 
slightly modified input. If the animal prevalence does not vary between flocks, but is fixed 
for different values of the animal prevalence (fig 4.8), the curvature of the effect of 
processing is similar, but the position changes. With Panim = 1% the mean value of log (Next, 
chill) = 2.57,  with Panim = 10% the mean value of log (Next, chill) = 3.86 and with Panim = 100% 
the mean value of log (Next, chill) = 5.03. (Note that the latter is larger than the value 4.62 for 
the ‘average flock’ shown in fig 4.1, for which variability in Next and Cfec is excluded.) If the 
mean values of log(Next, input) and log (Cfec) are lowered by two log units, the curvature of the 
effect of processing changes (see fig 4.9). With lower log(Next, input) the initial level is lower, 
but log(Next) increases during defeathering due to faecal leakage. With lower log(Cfec) the 
initial value of log(Next) is unaltered, but decreases faster, due to a smaller effect of faecal 
leakage.  
  
 
    

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 77 of 128 
 
        
mean carcass variability
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
input
scalding
defeathering
evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
mean
0.5
0.05
0.95
 
Figure 4.2. The effect of processing on the within-flock variability of log(Next) over the 
processing stages.  
The graph shows the mean of the within-flock distribution, and the mean 5%, 50% and 95%-iles. Next 
decreases and the variability decreases too. 
 
 
         
mean variability
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
log cfu
percentile
input
scalding
defeathering
evisceration
w ashing
chilling
cutting
  
Figure 4.3  The distributions of the mean within-flock variability represented as cumulative 
distributions for the consecutive stages of processing until cutting.  
Scalding and cutting have the largest effect in decreasing the number of cfu per unit. After cutting the 
variability is much lower, due to cross-contamination during cutting. 

page 78 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Table 4.1 Means and distributions of log (Next) in the baseline of the processing model. 
The columns give the values for the input and the processing stages scalding to chilling. 'Effect' shows 
the results for the processing effect until chilling. The last column shows the values after cutting (log 
(Next, f)). As results are expressed in log units, they are for contaminated units only. Mean and sd in the 
first two rows are the mean of the mean values for 500 carcasses per flock, for all 5000 iterations, and 
the mean of the standard deviations per iteration. Means of percentiles indicate the mean variability 
within flocks, and the percentiles of the mean represent the variability of the mean values per flock. 
The mean effect is positive in 3% of the iterations, indicating that Next increases due to processing in 
3% of the flocks. The mean prevalence of contaminated fillets from a contaminated flock after cutting 
is 94%.   
 input 
scalding 
defeathering 
evisceration 
washing 
chilling 
effect 
cutting 
mean 
6.71 
5.37 
4.88
4.65
4.38 
4.36 
-2.35 
1.97
sd 
0.56 
0.53 
0.40
0.41
0.41 
0.39 
0.38 
0.09
 
Means of the percentiles (mean variability within flocks) 
 
 
0.005 
5.31 
4.14 
4.12
3.88
3.63 
3.64 
-2.92 
1.94
0.05 
5.80 
4.53 
4.31
4.07
3.82 
3.82 
-2.81 
1.94
0.5 
6.71 
5.36 
4.83
4.60
4.33 
4.31 
-2.43 
1.97
0.95 
7.63 
6.25 
5.60
5.40
5.12 
5.08 
-1.62 
2.15
0.995 
8.12 
6.73 
6.05
5.91
5.63 
5.58 
-1.03 
2.44
 
Percentiles of the mean (variability between flocks) 
 
 
0.05 
4.36 
3.00 
2.18
1.90
1.63 
1.63 
-2.90 
0.00
0.5 
6.90 
5.56 
5.07
4.84
4.57 
4.54 
-2.74 
2.02
0.95 
8.43 
7.05 
6.88
6.72
6.45 
6.43 
-0.49 
3.87
 
   
              
between flock variabilty of means
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
input
scalding
defeathering
evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
mean
0.5
0.05
0.95
 
Figure 4.4 The effect of processing on the between-flock variability of the means of log(Next) 
per flock.  
The graph shows the mean of the between-flock distribution, and the 5%, 50% and 95%-iles. Next 
decreases and the variability slightly increases. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 79 of 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5 The distributions of the between-flock variability of the means, represented as 
cumulative distributions for the consecutive stages of processing until cutting (red line at the 
lower end).   
The variability is large and does not decrease. L2 = input, M2=scalding, etc. until cutting (=S2). 
  
Figure 4.6 Between-flock distributions of the means per flock of log(Next, input), log(Next, chilling) 
and log(Next cutting) and the effect of processing until chilling.  
The small value (left hand) tail of the upper graphs results from the flocks with low animal 
prevalence. The effect of processing is a skewed distribution. The tail in the effect of processing is a 
consequence of flocks where Cfec is large and Next is low. Here, cross-contamination by faeces yields 
higher levels at the exteriors, up to values higher than Next, input.  
Variability in means per flock
0.000
0.200
0.400
0.600
0.800
1.000
  
  
  
  
  
  
S2
L2
M2
N2
O2
P2
0
2
4
6
8
10
effect of processing
change in log cfu
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Mean=-2.349764 
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
 Mean=-2.349764 
N ext after cutting
log cfu
0.000
0.050
0.100
0.150
0.200
0.250
0.300
0.350
0.400
0.450
0.500
  
  
  
  
 Mean=1.966918 
0
2
4
6
 Mean=1.966918 
N ext after chilling
log cfu
0.000
0.050
0.100
0.150
0.200
0.250
0.300
0.350
0.400
  
  
  
  
 Mean=4.362211 
0
3
6
9
 Mean=4.362211 
N ext input
0.000
0.050
0.100
0.150
0.200
0.250
0.300
0.350
0.400
  
  
  
  
  
2
4
6
8
10

page 80 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.7  The results of a sensitivity analysis in @Risk, in which the output distribution of 
the mean of Next, cutting, is correlated with the input distributions of Panim , Next,input and Cfec by 
rank correlation.  
 
 
 
   
effect of animal prevalence
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
input
scalding
defeathering
evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
P anim var
P anim = 1
P anim = 0.1
P anim = 0.01
 
 
Figure 4.8  The effect of animal prevalence on the change in log (Next) during processing. 
In the baseline Panim varies between processed flocks. 
The mean result is a combination of results of flocks with high and low prevalence. For comparison, 
the mean results are shown of the baseline model with fixed values for Panim.   
 
correlations for N ext after cutting
Correlation Coefficients
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Next/G3
 .383
 mean C fec/D7
 .487
 anim prev/H37
 .532
-1
-0.75
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 81 of 128 
     
effect of decrease in input
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
input
scalding
defeathering evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
base
N -2 log
C - 2 log
 
Figure 4.9 Results for the mean effect of processing in the baseline model with animal 
prevalence Panim = 100% (base) and modified mean values of log (Next) and log (Cfec).  
Both the mean of Next and Cfec are decreased by two log units. 
 
                           
N_ext on filet: 
effect of storage
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
log cfu per filet
cum. frequency
before
after
 
Figure 4.10. The modelled effect on log(Next) of storage of chicken breast fillets in the 
refrigerator. 
 
After cutting and deboning, within-flock dynamics are no longer relevant and fillets are 
randomly sampled from the 5000 flocks simulated in the processing model. Hence, within-
flock variability and between-flock variability can be combined. Fig 4.10 shows the effect of 
storage on the distribution of Next, the number of campylobacters on the fillets. Note that 
these are only fillets of chickens from contaminated flocks. 
Finally, as an effect of food handling, the distribution of Nconsumption is once more shifted to 
lower numbers of campylobacter. For adults and young, the predicted frequency of exposure 
to campylobacter is in resp. 0.81% and 0.67% of the meals with chicken breast fillet and 
salad. For the whole population the prevalence of contaminated salad portions is estimated to 
be 0.80%.  

page 82 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
The distribution of the numbers ingested is illustrated in fig 4.11. It can be seen that the 
majority of exposures is to doses of 1 and 2 cfu. Less than 2% of the exposures is to  
doses > 100 cfu campylobacter. 
 
           
exposure
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
1
2
3-10
11-100
>100
cfu ingested
frequency
adults
young
 
Figure 4.11 The predicted frequency distribution of ingested doses of campylobacter 
resulting from the baseline risk model.  
These exposures occur in 0.81% (adults) and 0.67 % (young) of the meals considered in the 
assessment.  
 
In the end the baseline model predicts 12,327 cases if the classic dose-response model is 
applied and 170,136 cases if the new model (Teunis et al. 2005) is applied. In the latter model 
it is predicted that 17.84% of the cases are young people (14 years and younger). 
These numbers seem to be high estimates, being the cases of campylobacteriosis predicted 
per year in the Netherlands as the consequence of the consumption of salad prepared together 
with chicken breast fillet only. This is larger than expected on the basis of epidemiology. 
The relative frequency of the different dose classes as shown in fig 4.11 can be compared to 
the percentage of human cases attributable to exposure to that dose class. This is shown in 
table 4.2 and fig 4.12. Although 11.5% of the exposures is to doses > 10 cfu, 45.4% of the 
human cases is attributable to these exposures. 
 
Table 4.2 The ingested doses and their effects.  
For five classes of doses the table shows: the relative frequency (% exposures); the probability of 
infection given this dose; the probability of infection given exposure (= the product of the previous 
two columns); the relative frequency of cases attributable to the dose class (= the relative frequency of 
the previous column). 
dose 
(cfu ingested) 
% exposures 
P inf| dose 
Pinf 
% cases 
 
1 
50.1% 
1.9%
1.0%
16.5%
2 
16.3% 
3.5%
0.6%
10.0%
3-10 
22.2% 
7.2%
1.6%
28.1%
11-100 
9.7% 
19.5%
1.9%
33.2%
>100 
1.8% 
39.1%
0.7%
12.2%
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 83 of 128 
 
           
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
1
2
3-10
11-100
>100
cfu ingested
frequency
exposures
cases
 
Figure 4.12 The relative frequencies of dose classes and the percentages of human cases of 
campylobacteriosis attributable to those classes.  
Higher doses have more impact than the distribution of exposures suggests.  
 
In the analysis of the effects of interventions we focus on the relative risk and the relative risk 
reduction. Here the relative risk is defined as the ratio between the number of cases predicted 
after intervention, divided by the number of cases predicted in the baseline. Unless otherwise 
stated we apply the classic model, which seems to yield a more realistic prediction of the 
incidence of human cases. 
 
4.2 
Interventions 
 
A comparative overview of the results of the interventions is given in fig 4.13 and table 4.3.  
  
4.2.1 Farm 
A comparison of the predicted risk reduction (= 100% - relative risk) of interventions at the 
farm, shows that applying phage therapy has the largest effect.  
- For thinning we could not evaluate the effect of a ban on thinning practices: as this practice 
was not specifically incorporated into the baseline farm model, it could not be left out either. 
The opposite, however, the effect of thinning at all farms, could be modelled by incorporating 
the introduction of campylobacters at all farms about a week before slaughter. This mirrors 
the effect of a ban on thinning and the result is an increase of the relative risk (>100%). As in 
this case time is too short for campylobacter to spread through the farm, this yields many 
infected flocks with very low animal prevalence. Although it is assumed that all birds in 
colonized flocks are contaminated on their exterior (see sections 3.2.2. and 3.3.3.), the model 
shows that these low prevalent flocks have very little effect on the final risk. As confirmed by 
the alternative scenario analysis (see section 4.3.1), the effect of a low prevalence of 

page 84 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
colonized birds sufficiently lowers the human exposure. Overall, this gives a good argument 
for the statement that thinning will not be a significant risk factor. 
-   The predicted effect of improved hygiene at the farm is quite uncertain, mainly because 
there are little data that show how the effects of hygiene can be quantified. The 10% effect as 
implemented is a 10% reduction of the transmission coefficients in the farm model (Katsma 
et al. 2005) and is considered to yield the most likely value for this intervention. Pessimistic 
and optimistic effects are 5% and 25% effect, respectively. The 10% effect can also be split 
in a 10% decrease of the within-production cycle transmission coefficient only and a 10% 
decrease of the between-production cycle transmission coefficient only (which add up to the 
total 10% effect; see Katsma et al. (2005) for details). This shows that 25% of the risk 
reduction achievable by this intervention can be obtained by lowering within-production 
cycle transmission and 75% by lowering between-production cycle transmission.  
- Phage therapy lowers the concentration of campylobacter in the faeces (Cfec) by two logs, 
and this has considerable effect (about 75% risk reduction).  
 
Table 4.3  The estimated effects of interventions.  
Columns show the risks relative to the baseline model, the prevalence of contaminated fillets after 
cutting (for fillets from birds from contaminated flocks), the mean log number of campylobacters per 
contaminated fillet after cutting, and the risk reductions without (all) and with scheduled treatment 
(using dipstick, PCR and culture test methods) as shown in fig 4.13.    
* prepared meat without scheduled treatment is not a reasonable intervention, the results is given for 
comparison  
 
 
 
 
risk reduction 
 
relative 
risk 
prevalence 
after 
cutting 
mean 
log 
Next,cutting 
all 
dipstick 
PCR 
culture 
home freezing 
99.1% 
94% 
1.97 
0.9% 
 
 
 
kitchen hygiene 
96.5% 
94% 
1.97 
3.4% 
 
 
 
prepared meat 
0.0% 
- 
- 
100.0%* 
78.2% 
87.0% 
66.6% 
product freezing 
5.1% 
76% 
0.64 
94.9% 
74.0% 
82.3% 
63.0% 
irradiation 
0.0% 
0% 
- 
100.0% 
78.2% 
87.0% 
66.6% 
crust freezing 
17.2% 
85% 
1.08 
82.8% 
65.2% 
72.1% 
55.4% 
decont. 3x TSP 
9.4% 
80% 
0.87 
90.6% 
71.4% 
79.2% 
60.8% 
decont. 3x lactate 
7.9% 
77% 
0.70 
92.1% 
71.8% 
79.9% 
61.0% 
decont. 1x TSP 
13.1% 
83% 
0.98 
86.9% 
68.2% 
75.4% 
57.7% 
decont. 1x lactate 
12.1% 
83% 
0.94 
87.9% 
69.1% 
76.6% 
58.8% 
scald tank TSP 
82.0% 
89% 
1.57 
18.% 
 
 
 
scald tank lactate 
87.6% 
90% 
1.64 
12.4% 
 
 
 
faecal leakage 
22.9% 
91% 
1.48 
77.1% 
 
 
 
phage therapy 
25.6% 
92% 
1.54 
74.4% 
57.5% 
63.3% 
48.3% 
farm hygiene 
57.1% 
94% 
1.92 
42.9% 
 
 
 
always thinning  
101.3% 
- 
1.97 
-1.3% 
 
 
 
baseline 
100% 
94% 
1.97 
0% 
 
 
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 85 of 128 
4.2.2 Scheduled treatment 
With scheduled treatment flocks are tested for the presence of Campylobactre before 
slaughter, and positively tested flocks are treated by an intervention. The difference with 
logistic slaughter is that the order of processing flocks at a processing plant need not be 
changed. Negatively tested flocks are treated as usual, and with parameter values as 
risk reduction of interventions in the Dutch 
broiler chicken meat chain
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
home freezing
kitchen hygiene
prepared meat
product freezing
irradiation
crust freezing
decont. 3x TSP
decont. 3x lactate
decont. 1x TSP
decont. 1x lactate
scald tank TSP
scald tank lactate
faecal leakage
phage therapy
farm hygiene
thinning
no canal.
culture
dipstick
PCR
 
 
Figure 4.13 The predicted risk reduction as a consequence of the interventions. 
The risk reduction is 100% minus the relative risk of each intervention, and stands for the percentage 
of cases of campylobacteriosis due to the consumption of Dutch chicken meat  saved by 
implementation of this intervention. Yellow bars show the result without scheduled treatment, with 
error bars expressing an uncertainty interval that results from using pessimistic and optimistic 
interpretation of the effects of the interventions.  The other bars show the effects with scheduled 
treatment, using culture, dipstick and PCR resp. as testing method at the farm. 

page 86 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
applied in the baseline. Due to a limited sample size of tested birds in a flock (we assume a 
sample size of 10) and a test sensitivity smaller than 100%, these negatively tested flocks still 
hold (false negative) infected flocks, which may lead to chicken meat contaminated by 
campylobacter. These false negative flocks in general hold many flocks with low animal 
prevalence.  
The maximum risk reduction can be achieved by elimination of positive flocks from the fresh 
meat production chain, for example by giving heat treatment to the chicken meat products 
from positively tested flocks to produce prepared meat. These maximum effects are shown in 
fig 4.14 and table 4.4. The PCR test seems to be the best testing method due to the highest 
sensitivity, and despite the longer time needed between test and test result. The dipstick is 
second best and the traditional culture methods show the least risk reduction. No matter 
which test will be used, there will always be false negative flocks, due to the limited sample 
size. When the animal prevalence is low no reasonable sample size is sufficient to detect 
these low prevalence flocks. 
   
risk reduction scheduled treatment with elimination of positive 
flocks
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
PCR
dipstick
culture
   
Figure 4.14 Maximum risk reduction that may be achieved by scheduled treatment.  
The uncertainty in effects of scheduled treatment given by the confidence bars are a consequence of 
uncertainty in the test sensitivities. The risk reduction is shown when positive tested flocks are 
eliminated from the fresh food production chain (e.g. by heat treatment).  
 
4.2.3 Processing 
Interventions during processing are all aimed at the contamination of the carcass (or chicken 
product) exterior, except the intervention aimed at lowering faecal leakage. 
The latter may be quite effective, although this effect is rather uncertain. Decontamination of 
the exterior gets more effective further down the processing chain. Decontamination at the 
scalding stage is not very effective, as contamination with faeces can still occur after that 
stage. After evisceration cross-contamination by faeces will no longer occur, which makes 
decontamination more effective. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 87 of 128 
Table 4.4  The estimated effects of scheduled treatment applying different test methods.  
Here it is assumed that with scheduled treatment all positively tested flocks are processed as prepared 
meat. The relative risk compared to the baseline is a result of false negative (=negatively tested but 
colonized) flocks. In bold are the results for the most likely sensitivity and specificity of the tests. 
Alternatives have different sensitivity and/or specificity. Differences between methods in results with 
100% sensitivity and 100% specificity are caused by a difference in time span between testing and 
slaughter. The sample size for each test is 10 birds. The percentage of false negative flocks (last 
column) is the percentage of all processed flocks that are colonized but tested as negative. 
 sensitivity 
specificity 
relative 
risk 
risk 
reduction 
false neg. 
flocks 
dipstick low 
70% 
95% 
31.3% 
68.7% 
21.3% 
dipstick 
80% 
95% 
21.8% 
78.2% 
18.1% 
dipstick high 
95% 
95% 
8.8% 
91.2% 
13.2% 
dipstick best 
100% 
100% 
3.7% 
96.3% 
12.3% 
dipst. low spec 
80% 
80% 
21.6% 
78.4% 
16.2% 
PCR low 
90% 
100% 
16.4% 
83.6% 
17.2% 
PCR 
95% 
100% 
13.0% 
87.0% 
15.7% 
PCR high/best 
100% 
100% 
7.4% 
92.6% 
14.2% 
PCR low spec 
95% 
90% 
12.7% 
87.3% 
14.3% 
culture low 
50% 
90% 
54.2% 
45.8% 
28.7% 
culture 
75% 
90% 
33.4% 
66.6% 
21.7% 
culture high 
90% 
90% 
18.1% 
81.9% 
17.5% 
culture  best 
100% 
100% 
13.2% 
86.8% 
16.3% 
cult. high spec 
75% 
100% 
34.2% 
65.8% 
23.3% 
 
Results also show that the effect of decontamination of the carcasses with TSP seems to be 
less uncertain than the effect of lactate, but this may partly be due to the scarcity of data.  
Decontamination at three stages during processing is more effective than decontamination 
before chilling only. However, the difference in the predicted effect is rather small. 
The effect of crust freezing may be smaller than the effect of decontamination, but still gives 
a risk reduction of more than 80%.  
Finally, as expected, irradiation, product freezing and the production of prepared meat are 
very effective in reducing the relative risk. 
 
4.2.4 Consumer 
The effect of interventions at the consumer stage is expected to be small, mainly because 
these effects are based on the presumed limited effects of information campaigns. As stated, 
the effect of these campaigns on the actual behaviour of the public are hard to predict, largely  
depending on the precise implementation of these campaigns. Therefore the uncertainty 
bounds are quite imprecise. For freezing, the assumed duration of frozen storage has far less 
impact on the risk reduction than the effect of the information campaign. If people would 
store the product for two weeks instead of two days the risk reduction increases to 3%. 
 

page 88 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
risk reduction of interventions in the Dutch 
broiler chicken meat chain
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80% 100%
home freezing
kitchen hygiene
prepared meat
product freezing
irradiation
crust freezing
decont. 3x TSP
decont. 3x lactate
decont. 1x TSP
decont. 1x lactate
scald tank TSP
scald tank lactate
faecal leakage
phage therapy
farm hygiene
thinning
classic model
new model.
 
Figure 4.15. Comparison of the predicted risk reductions with application of the classic dose-
response model and the new dose-response model (Teunis et al. 2005). Roughly, effects are 
similar, but differences exist for example when intervention aim at either the carcass exterior, or the 
level of colonization in early stages of processing. These differences are to be explained by a change 
in the shape of the distribution of exposures. 
 
4.2.5 Comparison of response measures 
In the baseline model we apply the classic dose-response model (Teunis and Havelaar 2000). 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 89 of 128 
With the new dose-response model (Teunis et al. 2005) the predicted numbers of cases are 
much higher, but the effects of interventions in terms of risk reduction are similar. This is 
illustrated in fig 4.15, which shows that for most interventions a larger risk reduction is 
predicted, but not for the decontamination of the scalding tank. Reason for this must be the 
effect on the shape of the exposure distribution as a consequence of targeting Next when the 
carcass still holds its intestines. 
When the new dose-response model is applied, we are able to differentiate between the cases 
of young (14 years and younger) and adults (15 and older), assuming the first group is more 
sensitive to campylobacter than the second (See section 3.2.7 and fig 4.16.) The percentage of 
cases of each group varies for the different interventions, but only to a small extent (between 
14.4 and 18.4%).  
 
percentage cases aged 14 and younger
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
home freezing
kitchen hygiene
product freezing
crust freezing
decont. 3x TSP
decont. 3x lactate
decont. 1x TSP
decont. 1x lactate
scald tank TSP
scald tank lactate
faecal leakage
phage therapy
hygiene
thinning
baseline
 
 
Figure 4.16 The percentage of cases attributable to the young (14 years and younger) for the 
intervention scenarios and the baseline study. 

page 90 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
4.3 
Alternative scenarios 
 
An overview of the effects of the alternative scenarios on the relative risk as calculated with 
the risk model is given in fig 4.17.  
 
4.3.1 Input Next and Cfec 
- In the baseline risk model Next, input and Cfec are sampled independently. This implies that for 
bird/carcass i the level of contamination on the exterior and the concentration in the faeces 
are not correlated. This assumption may be doubted. When the model was run with 90% 
correlation between the two, however, the effect on the relative risk was small (3% lower risk 
with the classic dose-response model, the model used for evaluation unless stated otherwise.) 
- It is assumed in the baseline that all birds in flocks with at least one colonized bird are 
contaminated on their exterior due to cross-contamination between the faeces and exteriors of 
the birds during rearing and transport. This may not be realistic in low prevalent flocks.  
To study the impact of this assumption, we also ran the baseline model assuming that only 
colonized birds are contaminated on their exterior, omitting the correction for low prevalence 
in the baseline (see 3.3.3). In this case the relative risk is 3% lower, so it is almost identical to 
the baseline and it can be concluded that the effect of this assumption is negligible. The 
reason for this is that the total amount of campylobacters introduced in the system at the input 
remains equal.  
- Lowering Next, input to zero, or by one log unit, has little impact on the relative risk. (20-10% 
lower risk, to 80 and 90%) An increase by one log unit, however, doubles the risk. 
- Lowering Cfec to zero, or with two log units or more, all has an effect of about 75% lower 
risk, yielding relative risk 25%. (See also the effect of the intervention 'reduction of faecal 
leakage'.) A decrease with 1 log unit still gives relative risk 40%. An increase with 1 log unit 
triples the risk. 
Adding of the results for Next, input=0 and Cfec=0 yields 12891 cases, 105% of the baseline. A 
comparison of the two sources shows that about 22% of the cases result from campylobacters 
that are on the birds exteriors at the entrance of the processing plant and 78% from 
campylobacters in the leaking faeces. Hence the campylobacters in the faeces are predicted to 
be the dominant source. 
In this context it is interesting to have a closer look at the results for the scenarios Next, input=0 
and Cfec=0.  The results of a comparison of  the mean and 5, 50 and 95 percentiles of the 
between-flock distributions of the means per flock of log Next, chill and log Next, f are illustrated 
in fig 4.18. It shows that most frequently the campylobacters on the exterior at the entrance of 
processing are the main source of campylobacter: the geometric mean of the numbers and the 
median are larger for the Cfec=0 scenario. However, the variability in the numbers originating 
from leaking faeces is much larger. The 95 percentile for the Next, input=0 scenario is higher 
than the same percentile for the other scenario. This upper tail of the distribution is most 
important for the final health risk and thus determines the finding that most human cases of 
campylobacteriosis are predicted to result from campylobacters in the birds intestines at the 
entrance of the processing plant. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 91 of 128 
Figure 4.17. Risks as calculated with alternative scenarios, relative to the baseline risk 
estimate (=100%).  
The bars give the results per scenario for the classic dose-response model. Note the log scale at the x-
axis. Results and abbreviations are discussed in the main text, in the sections mentioned in the boxes. 
1%
10%
100%
1000%
10000%
correlation NC
N_ext = 0
N_ext -1
N_ ext +1
C_fec =0
C_fec -4
C_fec -2
C_fec -1
C_fec +1
P_anim =100%
no flock var
no bird var
no var at all
var in leaking
uncert. incl
uncert. only
5% level
95% level
mean unc vals
experts unweighted
Glob_ no_opt
full intestines
cutting var α
α = 0.5
 α = 2
frac µ = 10%
frac µ = 32%
cutting z =0.1
cutting z =0.25
cutting π = 0
cutting π = 2.3
cutting π = 1.3
storage = 0
transfers mean
f_cf = 100%
f_cf = 40%
f_cf = 60%
f_hw = 100%
f_hw = 50%
f_hw = 90%
f_nsb = 0%
f_nsb = 85%
f_nsb = 100%
f_bw = 100%
f_bw = 55%
f_bw = 75%
f_sw = 100%
f_sw = 50%
f_sw = 70%
meal size
Pill|inf = 25%
Pill|inf = 40%
Relative change in baseline risk
4.3.1
4.3.3
4.3.6
4.3.4
4.3.2
4.3.5

page 92 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Figure 4.18 Comparison of the birds exterior and their intestines as source of campylobacter 
on the meat.  
The variability in mean results per flock are compared for the baseline and the alternatives Next, input =0 
and Cfec = 0 for all birds in the flock. The boxes indicate the mean and the median, bars give the range 
between 5 and 95 percentiles. If the mean is smaller than the median the box is white, else it is black. 
The graph left shows the result for log Next, chill, right for log Next, f. Central values for the Cfec = 0 
scenario are larger, but the 95% is lower. The latter has most impact on human exposure and the 
associated health risk. 
 
4.3.2 Variability between birds and flocks 
- When differences in the animal prevalence are omitted and the prevalence is set at 100% in 
all flocks, this yields a higher relative risk (increase to 140%). This is not unexpected because 
more contaminated animals are introduced.  
- If the variability in Next,input and Cfec between flocks and/or the variability between birds is 
omitted, by setting the matching standard deviations at zero, the relative risk decreases 
dramatically (to 8%, 45%, 3% for between-flock, between bird and both.). The reason for this 
that the distributions for Next,input and Cfec  are lognormal, so that the arithmetic mean is 
decreased when the standard deviation is decreased.  
- When the variability between birds in the amounts of leaking faeces (ms σ) is increased 
(standard deviation is 0.5 instead of 0.001) the effect is negligible.  
These results show that taking variability between flocks and between birds into account is 
essential for the model. However, variability in amounts of leaking faeces could just as well 
have been omitted from the model. An important factor here is the fact that for Next,input and 
Cfec we assume a lognormal distribution, and a normal distribution for ms. 
 
4.3.3 Processing model and expert study uncertainty 
The uncertainty in the processing model parameters has been studied extensively in the 
formal expert judgement study (Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 2005). However, we were not able 
to integrate this uncertainty in the final baseline risk model, because this would require a third 
between flock variability after chilling
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
baseline
C_fec=0
N_ext=0
scenario
log cfu per carcass
between flock variability after cutting
0
1
2
3
4
5
baseline
C_fec=0
N_ext=0
scenario
log cfu per fillet

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 93 of 128 
order Monte Carlo, incorporating two levels of variability and this uncertainty additional to 
that. We were not able to do that with the available research facilities. The impact of the 
uncertainty could however be explored by running the model with some alternative scenarios. 
- If the uncertainty in the model parameters is included as if it were variability between 
flocks, the relative risk increases to about 235%. Reason for this effect is that the tails of the 
distributions get larger, due to an increased variance. The right hand tail, with large values for 
levels of contamination etc., is dominant in determining the final risk. 
- If the between-flock variability is excluded, by setting Panim = 100% and setting the 
between-flock standard deviation of Next,input and Cfec at zero, and the uncertainty of the 
processing model parameters as derived in the expert study (Van der Fels-Klerx et al., 2005) 
is taken into account, the change in relative risk is not informative. However, other model 
results give relevant insight of the impact of this uncertainty. This is illustrated in fig 4.19 to 
4.22.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.19. Uncertainty distributions of the mean levels of Next per flock, in 5000 simulation 
runs of the risk model without between-flock variability, but with uncertainty in the 
processing model parameters. 
Distributions of Next  are shown for the input, after defeathering, the effect of processing (until 
chilling) and after cutting. The uncertainty increases down the processing chain. Note the bimodal 
distributions after defeathering, caused by the bimodal shape of the uncertainty of parameter benv, def 
(see fig 4.22). The bar at the bottom shows the central 90% percentiles. 
 
 Distribution for mean / input/L2
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
  
  
  
  
  
 Mean=7.270002 
7.16
7.21
7.26
7.31
7.36
7.16
7.21
7.26
7.31
7.36
 5%
 90%
5%
 7.2291 
 7.3117 
 Mean=7.270002 
 Distribution for mean / defeathering/N2
 
0.000
0.100
0.200
0.300
0.400
0.500
0.600
0.700
0.800
  
  
  
  
  
 Mean=5.53406 
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
 5%
 90%
5%
 4.491 
 6.5916 
 Mean=5.53406 
 Distribution for mean / effect/R2
 
0.000
0.100
0.200
0.300
0.400
0.500
0.600
  
  
  
  
  
 Mean=-2.489244 
-4.5
-3.5
-2.5
-1.5
-0.5
-4.5
-3.5
-2.5
-1.5
-0.5
 5%
 90%
5%
 -3.6387 
 -1.2327 
 Mean=-2.489244 
 Distribution for mean / cutting/S2
 
0.000
0.100
0.200
0.300
0.400
0.500
  
  
  
  
  
 Mean=2.189926 
0
1.125
2.25
3.375
4.5
0
1.125
2.25
3.375
4.5
 5%
 90%
5%
 1.0058 
 3.4282 
 Mean=2.189926 

page 94 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
 
Figure 4.20. The cumulative uncertainty distributions of log (Next ) (from right to left) at the 
input and after scalding (black line), defeathering, evisceration, washing, chilling and 
cutting.  
The bimodal shape of the distribution is illustrated by the shoulder in the curves.  
 
Figure 4.21. The results of a sensitivity analysis in @Risk, in which the output distribution of 
the mean of Next, cutting, is correlated with the input distributions of the processing model 
parameters.  
It shows that the uncertainty of estimates at the defeathering (def) stage has the largest effect on the 
uncertainty in the level after cutting. The fraction transmitted with cutting, π (indicated by pi), can 
also be found higher up in the list. 
 
From the tornado chart with correlations between input and output (fig 4.21; the level of 
campylobacter on carcasses after cutting) it can be seen that this output is most sensitive to 
the uncertainty in the parameters for the defeathering stage, with on top the parameter benv, def, 
describing the probability per cfu campylobacter in the environment during defeathering to 
 Correlations for mean / cutting/S2
Correlation Coefficients
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 a ext chi / par/Q22
-.066
 c env ev / par/Q30
-.069
 c env sc / par/Q28
 .071
 m int sc / par/Q15
 .071
 c env wa / par/Q31
-.095
 p int sc / par/Q12
 .123
 a ext was / par/Q21
-.125
 b sc / par/Q33
 .165
 a ext sc / par/Q18
-.218
 a ext evi / par/Q20
-.235
 pi / fraction transmitted/L61
 .247
 c anim ch / par/Q27
-.273
 m int def / par/Q16
-.293
 a ext def / par/Q19
-.348
 c env def / par/Q29
-.615
 b def / par/Q34
 .624
-1
-0.75
-0.5
-0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
 Distribution for mean / cutting/S2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.000
0.200
0.400
0.600
0.800
1.000
  
  
  
  
  
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
 5%
 90%
5%
 1.0058 
 3.4282 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 95 of 128 
move to the carcass. As a result of the probablistic inversion (Cooke et al. 2004) on the 
parameter estimates, the uncertainty of this parameter appears to be bimodal. As illustrated in 
fig 4.19 this bimodality is expressed in the distribution of the mean level per flock after 
defeathering, and to a lesser extent in the distributions of the effect of processing and the 
level after cutting.    
Figure 4.22 The uncertainty distribution of the processing parameters aext (axa) cext  (ca), benv 
(b), cenv (ce), and 1- afec (aintcmplt) for the defeathering process, resulting from the 
probablistic inversion on the expert estimates.  
Note that the uncertainty distribution of benv is bimodal. 
 
- Analysis of the results of model runs where the uncertainty is included show that the 5% 
and 95% percentiles of the uncertainty distribution show a decrease of about 1 log unit and an 
increase of about 1.5 log unit in the mean value of Next  after cutting. To get an impression of 
the uncertainty in the estimates of the baseline risk as a consequence of the uncertainty in 
processing model parameters, the model is run by subtracting 1 log unit to the level Next after 
cutting and adding 1.5 log unit after cutting. This is a rather rough method to explore the 
uncertainty about the estimate of 12327 cases as a consequence of the effects of industrial 
processing. It yields relative risks of 19% and 740% respectively, illustrating that the range of 
this uncertainty is large. 
- In the baseline model analysis we use the median values of the processing model 
parameters. This choice was made because the uncertainty distributions may be quite skewed. 
The model was also run with mean values instead of median values. This yielded a relative 
risk of 400%. 
- The ‘best’ decision maker that resulted from the calibration and weighing of experts in the 
expert study was the ‘global optimized decision maker’ (see Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 
(2005)). We therefore analyzed the model with the median estimates for two other decision 
makers considered: one where the weighing of experts was omitted and another one where a 
global non-optimized decision maker was taken (in which more weighted experts are 
included than for  the global optimized decision maker). This results in a decrease (to 75%) 
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log value
axa
 ca
 b
 ce
 aintcmplt

page 96 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
and increase (to 300%) of the relative risk, again illustrating that the end result of the model 
depends on some subjective assumptions.  
- Also, in the baseline the choice was made to use the expert estimates for 'half full' intestines 
of the (usually to some extent fastened) birds entering the processing plant. This is one of the 
two alternatives for which expert were elicited in the expert study, the (less common) 
alternative being flocks with ‘full intestines’. Birds in such flocks are not fastened and are 
therefore expected to leak higher amounts of faeces during processing. Using expert 
estimates for ‘full intestines’ has little impact (relative risk 130%). This is in contradiction to 
the observed impact of the reduction of faecal leakage (see 4.2.3). The discrepancy may be 
due to the complexity of this issue and the underlying assumptions of the consulted experts. 
 
4.3.4 Cutting and storage 
- For the partitioning model at the cutting stage we studied the effect of changes in α1, a 
parameter of the Beta distribution Beta(α1,α2) describing the variability of probability pcut, 
and µ, the mean value of pcut . The impact of changes in α1 (by either taking a lower or large 
value, or taking it as a variable) is negligible. We could have chosen a Binomial distribution 
with fixed probability for the partitioning process instead of a Betabinomial distribution 
(Nauta 2005). The mean value of pcut (baseline 24%) is set at a lower and upper bound as 
discussed in section 3.2.3. The lower (10%) yields a relative risk of 55%, the upper bound 
(32%) yields a relative risk of 125%. 
- Cross-contamination parameters are studied by analyzing the effect of changes in 
parameters z (the percentage of the campylobacter contamination on the fillet directly 
originating from the breast cap that it is cut from) and - log π (the estimated -log of the 
fraction transmitted from breast cap to double fillet). Changes in z have little impact, but the 
impact in changes in π may be larger. If we take log π = 0, as concluded by Berrang et al. 
(2001), we get the highest relative risk in the alternative scenario analysis, > 1000%. Values 
closer to the (uncertain) value adapted in this study, based on Dutch expert guesses, this still 
has a considerable impact on the end result (- log π = 2.3, relative risk 44%; -log π = 1.3, 
relative risk 200%) 
- For the storage effect we apply data recently collected for the CARMA project, showing 
that storage at refrigeration temperature leads to a decrease in the level of campylobacter on 
chicken breast fillet. If this (uncertain) effect is neglected, the relative risk increases to 350%. 
 
4.3.5 Consumer food handling 
- For the food handling processes, we modified the values of the frequencies in which certain 
handling are performed by the consumers. It shows that if every consumer cooking a chicken 
meal washes her/his hands, the relative risk lowers to 43%. If 90% washes hands instead of 
80%, it decreases to 70%. The impact of frequency changes in other practices modelled is 
smaller. Note that we could not find any data on the frequency in which chicken is prepared 
before the salad, and that this frequency is linearly related to the incidence of 
campylobacteriosis due to the modelled salads. A thorough sensitivity analysis of the 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 97 of 128 
consumer food handling model is presented in Mylius et al. (submitted), who concluded that 
it might be better to aim an information campaign at board washing than at hand washing. 
- If we simplify the model and do not incorporate the knowledge of numbers of table-
companions from the third Dutch National Food Consumption Surveillance as discussed in 
section 3.2.7., assuming people ingest all campylobacter transferred to salad by one fillet, the 
relative risk increases to 180%. 
 
4.3.6 Dose-response 
- If Pill|inf = 0.33 is modified to 25% and 40%, this modifies the relative risk to 78% and 
122%, a linear effect.  
- When, for the new dose-response model, the hazard function derived by Teunis et al. (2005) 
was used as a description of the probability of illness given infection, instead of the fixed 
probability Pill|inf = 0.33, this gives an increase in the relative risk for this model to 160%. 
(This result could not be shown in fig 4.17.) 
 

page 98 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 99 of 128 
5. 
Discussion 
5.1 
Chicken meat as a source of campylobacteriosis 
 
In Chapter 2 the sources of human exposure to Campylobacter are studied by two different 
approaches: a laboratory driven case-control study and an exposure assessment. Both 
approaches show that chicken meat is an important transmission route, but not the only one. 
In the exposure assessment direct contact to animals (cats and dogs at home, animals at city 
farms and at farms in general) and food are identified as the major categories of exposure. 
The case-control study points at (unintentionally) undercooked meat as another relevant 
source and the (deliberate) consumption of raw meat is identified as important in the 
exposure assessment. However, routes other than cooked chicken meat are not included in the 
risk model described in the other chapters of this report. This choice has been made at the 
start of the CARMA project, based on discussion with the risk management and the need to 
restrict the risk model to allow a complete quantitative analysis. Clearly, the other routes 
should be a focus of campylobacter risk assessment in the future. 
Of the other transmission routes of campylobacter, exposure due to undercooked chicken 
meat may quite easily be incorporated in the model presented here. The industrial processing 
model is directly applicable, but the chicken meat product may be different and the consumer 
phase model should include the effect of undercooking. Basically, these new components of 
the model will predict that only a fraction of campylobacters on the carcass after processing 
will survive and will ultimately be ingested by the consumer. When implemented in models, 
this has a similar effect as cross-contamination, which also results in a fraction of the 
campylobacters being ingested. So, although the exposure distribution may be modified, there 
is no reason to expect that the effects of interventions in the production chain before the 
consumer phase will be very different when undercooked meat is incorporated in the analysis. 
The percentage of human cases of campylobacteriosis that are the consequence of chicken 
meat preparation and consumption is not evident yet. In the case-control study the population 
attributable risk (PAR) of chicken consumption is found to be 23% of indigenous cases or 
19% of all cases (including those which are travel-related), in the exposure assessment it is 
among the more important routes. Another interesting observation is that of Vellinga and Van 
Loock (2002) during the dioxin crisis in Belgium in 1999, which led to a ban on chicken meat 
and eggs for four weeks. Here the incidence of campylobacteriosis dropped by 40%, 
indicating that this is the relative contribution of chicken meat to the incidence of 
campylobacteriosis in this country at the Dutch border. This percentage is considered to be 
the upper limit for the Netherlands. Hence, our best estimate of the contribution of chicken 
meat to the Dutch incidence of campylobacteriosis is 20% with an upper limit of 40%. 
 
 
 

page 100 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
5.2 
Baseline 
 
The baseline risk model is a representation of the most likely situation for broiler chicken 
meat produced in the Netherlands in 2000, from birds reared in Dutch farms, calculating the 
risk for Dutch consumers. It uses most likely values for the model parameters, including 
variability in levels of campylobacter between flocks and between birds (and carcasses) 
within a flock, stochasticity in faecal leakage, variability in effects of storage between 
industrial processing and consumer food preparation, and variability in food preparation and 
consumption. 
The results show that, on average, there is a continuous decrease in the level of 
Campylobacter on the carcasses and the meat, Next. This is the consequence of the absence of 
growth and the repeated inactivation and removal of Campylobacter during processing, as a 
consequence of submersion, washing, defeathering, skinning, storage etc. Contamination of 
the carcass exterior by faeces leaking from the carcass (predominantly during defeathering) 
may give a temporal increase in the level of Campylobacter when the concentration in the 
faeces, Cfec, is relatively high and Next is relatively low (see fig 4.9). On average this effect is 
dominated by a continuous decrease because (1) with a lower animal prevalence for many 
birds Cfec = 0, whereas it is assumed that Next is always > 0 and (2) apparently values of Next 
are relatively large compared to values of Cfec.  The reason for both (1) and (2) is that 
apparently the bird's exterior is already heavily contaminated with faeces at the entrance of 
the processing plant. Furthermore, results show that cross-contamination during processing 
and food handling leads to a dispersal of campylobacters over the units (birds, carcasses, 
fillets) involved, and as a consequence the prevalence of contaminated units may increase, 
whereas the variability between units decreases (see also Nauta et al. (2005)).  
An interesting finding is that, although on most carcasses the bird's exterior is the source of 
the majority of campylobacters on the chicken breast (Next, f), those originating from the 
leaking faeces cause about 70% of the cases of human campylobacteriosis (see fig 4.18). This 
is a consequence of the variability due to the large standard deviation of the lognormal 
distribution describing the input values of the concentration of Campylobacter in the faeces, 
Cfec. This implies that, sometimes, very high numbers of faecal bacteria are transmitted to the 
carcasses. These peak numbers drive consumer risk to a large extent. 
The uncertainty about the baseline risk estimate is large, and is only analyzed quantitatively 
to a limited extent. Reasons for this are that at some stages it is very hard to quantify 
uncertainty, that it was difficult to implement the uncertainty in the risk model, and that the 
final interpretation of this uncertainty is complex. However, uncertainty in parameter 
estimates was incorporated in the expert study performed for the processing model (Van der 
Fels-Klerx et al. 2005). Analyses of these results show that the uncertainty is large (see 
section 4.3.3). Furthermore, uncertainty is explored in the analysis of alternative scenarios, as 
discussed below in section 5.4. Its impact on the relative risk is discussed in section 5.5.3. 
The ingested doses at exposure are generally very low, the majority only one or two cfu. This 
corresponds to for example a previous risk assessment result concerning Shigatoxin 
producing E. coli O157 in steak tartare (Nauta et al. 2001). It is the consequence of the fact 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 101 of 128 
that the distribution describing the variability of numbers of pathogens in and on food units is 
shifted to lower values by processing. When the distribution shifts to the left, only the right 
hand trail remains (the rest of the distribution shifts to a value of zero), and the majority of 
numbers remaining is very low. For a risk estimate this is rather troublesome, because dose-
response information usually concerns much higher doses, and the estimated effects of low 
doses have to be assessed by extrapolation. The classic dose-response model applied here 
predicts 1.9% probability of infection and 0.6% probability of illness when 1 cfu 
campylobacter is ingested, and the new model predicts even 68.6% probability of infection 
and 22.6% probability of illness when 1 cfu is ingested. These estimates deviate substantially 
and are crucial for the final prediction of the number of cases, but also quite uncertain. They 
are based on inference of results of higher or unknown (for the new model, see Teunis et al. 
(2005)) doses, in a food matrix different from chicken meat and salad. Nonetheless, it is the 
best we can get at the moment.  
The baseline estimate of 12327 cases of campylobacteriosis as a consequence of the 
consumption of salad cross-contaminated after handling chicken breast fillet, should be 
interpreted with regard to the identified uncertainties. Throughout the analysis the relative 
impact of interventions and alternative scenarios, expressed as relative risk, is the preferred 
output measure.         
 
5.3 
Interventions 
 
The predicted effects of a list of interventions are shown in section 4.2. These interventions 
aim at different stages of the production chain and at the consumer. Here we regard the 
assessed effect on the relative risks of these interventions only. Costs and social acceptance 
are analyzed together with these assessments elsewhere (Mangen et al. 2005a, Bogaardt 
2005). 
The risk model analysis shows that the most effective intervention at the farm may be 
improvement of hygiene. However, the precise measures that are needed at the farm to 
achieve the desired effect could not be identified. As a consequence, the predicted effect of 
this intervention is quite uncertain. It seems that hygiene at the farm alone will not be 
sufficient to eradicate Campylobacter from the broiler chicken meat production chain. This 
intervention is discussed further by Katsma et al. (2005). Phage therapy, an intervention at 
the farm shortly before slaughter, is predicted to be quite effective. It is an intervention which 
is still under development and its effectivity in practice should probably be tested more 
extensively. Alternatively, the use of bacteriocins may be a method which can achieve similar 
results (Svetoch et al. 2003) .  
In this report, scheduled treatment refers to a separate treatment of positively and negatively 
tested flocks, without necessarily changing the order of processing. Negative flocks get no 
extra treatment, whereas positive flocks do. The farm model (Katsma et al. 2005) predicts 
that about 20% of the contaminated flocks have a low animal prevalence (<5%), which will 
easily remain undetected if flocks are tested for Campylobacter at the farm. The inevitable 

page 102 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
presence of false negative flocks makes it very difficult for scheduled treatment to guarantee 
a special treatment of all contaminated flocks. 
It was found earlier in the CARMA project that logistic slaughter, a special form of scheduled 
treatment where positive flocks are processed at the end of the day to prevent cross-
contamination to negative flocks at the processing plant, is expected to be not very effective 
(Evers 2004, Havelaar et al. 2004). False negative flocks will have a significant effect on 
lowering the effect of this intervention and the average level of contamination of carcasses 
from cross-contaminated flocks will be several log units lower than the average level of 
positive flocks. Furthermore, it is difficult to implement this intervention by the processing 
industry, especially in combination with logistic slaughter for Salmonella. Scheduled 
treatment only is easier, because here only the treatment of the flock is different, depending 
on the status of the flock. The order of processing of the flocks on the day of slaughter need 
not be modified with scheduled treatment. 
We compared three different test methods, the classic culture test, and two newly developed 
tests, PCR and dipstick (see also Katsma et al. (2005)). These tests differ in sensitivity and 
specificity, and in the required time span between sampling and test result. The most effective 
test will combine a quick and easy test (like the dipstick) with a high test sensitivity (like 
PCR). Results show that PCR seems to be the most efficient testing method. However, this 
method is still under development. 
Intervention is most effective during processing. In this stage intervention can aim at the 
campylobacters in the gut (Cfec and thus Nfec) and at campylobacters on the exterior (Next). 
Phage therapy (which is actually administered at the farm) and reducing faecal leakage are 
directed at the former, decontamination (by chemicals, cold, heat or irradiation) is directed at 
the latter. Lowering the contamination at the exterior is most effective after evisceration, 
when cross-contamination (or recontamination) by faeces is no longer possible. Of the 
methods that aim to do so, irradiation is most effective, but its suitability for implementation 
is disputable (Mangen et al. 2005a, Bogaardt 2005). Decontamination by lactate or TSP 
before chilling seems to be a simple and relatively effective intervention.  
As a combined intervention aiming at the reduction of both Nfec and Next seems very 
promising, an additional model run was performed in which interventions VI and VIIILb 
were combined. If faecal leakage is decreased (reduction of Cfec by 6 logs) and the carcass is 
decontaminated with lactate before chilling (reduction of Next, wash by 1.3 logs, the risk 
reduction is 98.3%, so the relative risk is 1.7%. The mean value for log Next, cutting gets down 
to 0.57. This result confirms that a combined approach, aiming at both campylobacters in and 
on the carcass can be very successful. 
Intervention at the consumer stage is considered by performing a mass media information 
campaign. The effectivity of such a campaign is hard to predict, but will probably be limited. 
A recent Dutch study shows that consumer food preparation behaviour is largely habitual, 
and therefore difficult to change by just launching an information campaign (Fischer et al. 
2005). In the risk model, the effectivity of intervening in the consumer phase is predicted to 
be very small. 
For the whole chian, it can be concluded that intervention at the processing plant is most 
promising, certainly when intervention aims at both reduction of faecal contamination and/or 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 103 of 128 
faecal leakage during processing, and decontamination of the carcass exterior. Hygiene at the 
farm is important to minimize the input of campylobacters into the system. Scheduled 
treatment may be a good option if differentiation in chicken meat products (e.g. fresh and 
processed) is acceptable. However, it seems that none of these interventions can guarantee 
the sales of campylobacter free chicken meat. This will only be achieved by irradiation. 
As the baseline model predictions are uncertain, the predicted effects of interventions are 
uncertain too. Moreover, the effects of many of the interventions were difficult to quantify. If 
measured, the quantitative effects of some frequently proposed decontamination methods 
(like the use of lactate and TSP) are poorly documented in the literature. As discussed further 
below (section 5.5) it is very difficult to quantify the total uncertainty as it is a combination of 
uncertainty based on assumptions (e.g. on representativity), simplifications and statistical 
uncertainty. The quantitative predictions should therefore be treated with quite some 
reservation. However, the qualitative conclusions drawn in this section appear to be quite 
robust. Intervening by lowering the levels of both campylobacters in and on the carcass will 
be effective regardless of many of the model assumptions. 
 
5.4 
Alternative scenarios 
 
Alternative scenarios are explored to test the impact of model assumptions, input values and 
parameter estimates. This gives insight in the robustness of model results and important gaps 
in knowledge. 
Input distributions of Next,input and Cfec are based on a limited data set. The variability between 
flocks and between birds appears to be large, and the description of these variabilities has 
considerable impact on the final results of the model. In the model we assume for simplicity 
that Next and Cfec are not correlated, an assumption which appears to have little impact on the 
end result. The assumption that, even if the prevalence of infected animals is low, all birds of 
infected flocks are contaminated on their exterior at the entrance of processing presumably 
has little impact, as lowering the mean value of Next has less effect than changing Cfec. A 
decrease in Cfec by one or two log levels has only little less effect than lowering it by higher 
levels. This suggests there is some threshold concentration in the faeces, below which the 
campylobacters in the chicken faeces are irrelevant for the final contamination of the meat. 
This finding is also important in the light of intervening by reducing faecal leakage or phage 
therapy. Reduction by a few log levels may be almost as effective as elimination of 
campylobacter from the faeces. 
The effect of incorporating variability in levels of campylobacter both between and within 
flocks is very large. The reason for this finding is the assumed lognormal distribution of 
concentrations and numbers of campylobacter. Numbers of microorganisms are usually 
expressed in logs. It is however important to realize that the mean of the logs, the geometric 
mean, is lower than the arithmetic mean (If you take 10Normal(µ,σ) , the 10log of the arithmetic 
mean of the number of Campylobacters is µ + σ2 ln(10)/2). The arithmetic mean is the value 
which best represents the total amount of campylobacters in the processing chain. In the 
dose-response relationship the effect of these campylobacters is not logarithmic, but 

page 104 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
approximately linear for low doses, which are dominant in this risk assessment. As a 
consequence, omitting the variability in the analysis by putting σ = 0, lowers the exposure 
dramatically, and thus also the predicted number of cases. 
Further analysis of the industrial processing model and the uncertainty identified in the expert 
study shows that the uncertainty about the model parameters for the defeathering stage has 
the most profound effect on the total uncertainty. This implies that more quantitative data on 
the effects of processing at the defeathering stage can effectively lower the total uncertainty 
of the model predictions. The bimodal uncertainty distribution of the model parameter benv,def 
is interesting and even affects the shape of the uncertainty distribution of the level after 
cutting. The bimodality is a consequence of the analysis (see also Cooke et al. (2004)) and 
may reflect that experts are in two minds about the true value of this parameter.  
It appears that the choice for weighing the experts as we did (using the optimized decision 
maker as described by Van der Fels-Klerx et al. (2005)) has relatively little impact on the 
predicted number of cases. However, the uncertainty about the effects of processing may be 
quite different between the three weighting schemes applied, as the uncertainty distributions 
of the model parameters resulting from the expert judgement study may differ substantially. 
When experts are not weighted, the total uncertainty increases substantially (data not shown). 
The model for the stages cutting and storage are based upon a very limited amount of data, on 
the opinion of only one consulted expert and some additional guesses. The alternative 
scenario analysis shows that taking different (but feasible) values for π (referring to the 
amount of campylobacter transmitted from carcass to fillet) and rstorage may have considerable 
impact on the end result. Therefore, more and better quantitative data on these processes may 
substantially lower the final uncertainty of the model predictions too.  
The data used for the consumer phase model are generally not specific for Campylobacter 
and the preparation of a salad along with chicken breast fillet. They are, however, the best 
quantitative data we could find in the literature. The frequencies of handling are based upon 
statements of consumers, which may not reflect their actual behaviour (Redmond and Griffith 
2003). Therefore, the uncertainty about these parameters is quite large too. Quantitative 
observational data on human behaviour should be gathered to get better information on these 
food handling frequencies. The analysis of alternative scenarios shows that the effect of 
individual parameter estimates is not very large if compared to other risk model parameters.  
The impact of the uncertainties in the dose-response model as investigated in our analysis is 
not very large either. However, the new model predicts about 14 times more cases of 
campylobacteriosis, due to the much larger probability of illness due to low doses as 
explained in section 4.1.  This implies that the choice of the hazard model or fixed probability 
of illness given infection is less important than the choice for a model for the probability of 
infection. The difference between the shapes of the potential dose-response curves for 
campylobacter as illustrated in fig. 3.5 is remarkable, and shows that the dose-response 
relation for campylobacter is still largely unknown and needs more research. 
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 105 of 128 
5.5 
Uncertainties 
 
Addressing and quantifying uncertainties is an essential part of risk assessment. 
Unfortunately, we have not been able to fully implement this quantification here, so it is 
difficult to make explicit statements about the uncertainty of our conclusions. 
To clarify the context of the model described in this report, the ten key simplifying 
assumptions made are listed in the Box I. These assumptions had to be made to allow doing a  
quantitative risk assessment which evaluates the effects of interventions in the food chain on 
an exposure distribution to Campylobacter. The validity of these assumptions may be a topic 
of further discussion, and their consequences for risk assessment and the results presented in 
this report may be the subject of further research. 
Some of the assumptions mentioned need some special explanation, and are discussed below. 
 
5.5.1 Expert judgement as data source 
The expert judgement study performed for the CARMA project (Van der Fels-Klerx et al. 
2005) is an essential part of the risk model and the methodology applied. This structured 
expert study was done after the processing model was constructed, in line with the MPRM 
methodology, which puts the model construction step before data collection (Nauta 2001, 
Nauta 2002). From this expert study, we obtained estimates of the processing model 
parameters which we could not have obtained otherwise. As the processing model includes 
the combined cross-contamination and inactivation/removal dynamics and differentiates 
between campylobacters on the exterior and in the faeces leaking during processing, it is 
expected to better reflect the transmission of Campylobacter during chicken processing. 
Therefore it is expected to better predict the effects of interventions than a linear model based 
on a set of count data obtained along the processing lines (e.g. Oosterom et al. (1983), 
Berrang and Dickens (2000)). Also, the expert data better reflect the situation in the 
Netherlands in the base year 2000 than any other data available.  
Of course, there is a disadvantage in applying expert judgement instead of microbiological 
data, as expert judgement inevitably includes the subjectivity of the consulted experts. 
Experts may be biased and wrong. To deal with this fact as best as one can, the experts have 
been calibrated and weighted in the expert judgement study. The effect of the weighing 
scheme applied has been evaluated in the list of alternative scenarios (section 5.4) and shows 
to have some impact, but not very much. This could be studied further in the future.  
The alternative, applying microbiological data, has some drawbacks too. First, such data may 
not be representative for the Netherlands in the base year 2000, and are not directly 
applicable in the processing model. Also, like expert judgement data, microbiological data 
may be biased as a consequence of the microbiological techniques that are applied when 
counting campylobacters on poultry carcasses. (The procedure applied to wash-off the 
campylobacters from the carcass, for example, is not perfect, because it is extremely difficult 
(if possible at all) to wash off and count everything that is on a carcass.) Also, 
microbiological data usually lack important information of the history of the processed 
flocks. Ideally, the same flocks are sampled and campylobacters counted at a series of stages 

page 106 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
BOX I.      Ten key simplifying assumptions of the risk assessment 
1. Process model: The process modelled is representative for broiler chicken processing in 
the Netherlands in the base year 2000.  
 
It is not possible to include all variations in processing that exist nationwide. Stakeholders 
have agreed that the processes of producing broiler chicken meat are sufficiently similar to 
allow the use of one process model. 
 
2. Models: The (cross-contamination, survival, removal) models applied for the modules in 
the risk model are suitable to quantitatively describe the transmission dynamics of 
Campylobacter along the chain of production and consumption of broiler chicken meat. 
 
This is common practice in Quantitative Microbiological Risk Assessment. 
 
3. Data: The data applied are representative for broiler chicken processing in the 
Netherlands in the base year 2000; counts properly reflect the numbers of viable 
campylobacters on the counted objects. 
 
Scarcity of quantitative data does not permit an alternative. The model shows that good 
quantitative data are crucial for a good evaluation of interventions during processing. 
Collection of quantitative data, in particular on variability in numbers and concentrations, 
is indicated as a future research priority.   
 
4. Expert judgement: The parameter value estimates based on expert judgement, obtained 
by a structured expert judgement study or otherwise, are a correct reflection of 
transmission dynamics of campylobacters in the Dutch broiler processing chain in the base 
year 2000, and are as representative as the other data applied in the model. 
 
A structured expert judgement study was performed  to obtain representative quantitative 
data for the processing model parameters. The mechanistics included in this newly 
developed model are essential for calculation of the effects of interventions during 
processing. As it was not possible to apply a structured expert judgement study for all 
unknown parameters, less formal procedures had to be used to complete the risk model. 
Especially the effects of deboning, cutting and storage need further study.  
 
5. Campylobacter: All thermophilic campylobacters on broiler chickens and meat can be 
treated alike; there are no differences in attachment properties, viability, virulence etc.  
 
Variation in these characteristics between Campylobacter strains may be quite important, 
but information that can be incorporated in the risk assessment is lacking. To date, typing 
studies indicate that it is not (yet) possible to differentiate between virulent and less 
virulent strains of Campylobacter (Wassenaar et al. 2004).  

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 107 of 128 
 
6. Dose-response: The dose-response relationship can be applied for all campylobacters to 
which the Dutch population is exposed. 
 
The 'classic' dose-response model is based on a study with young healthy male volunteers, 
the 'new' model incorporates data on two outbreaks among school children drinking raw 
milk. The first is generally applied in Campylobacter risk assessment and was also our 
choice for the baseline model.  
 
7. Interventions: The quantitative effects of each of the interventions on the model 
parameters are properly assessed. 
 
These estimates are based an the available quantitative data. Alternatives are explored in 
the uncertainty analysis of the effects of interventions (error bars in fig 4.13)  
 
8. Extrapolation: Consumption of salad cross-contaminated by chicken breast fillet is 
representative for all human exposure to campylobacter via chicken meat 
 
It is not possible to model all possible exposure pathways in detail. This specific pathway 
is generally considered important both in frequency of occurrence and potential risk, and 
includes all relevant food preparation processes that may lead to exposure, except 
undercooking.  
 
9. Cooking: Campylobacters do not survive cooking of chicken meat. 
 
Low temperatures at ‘protected areas’ in the meat or insufficient heating of chicken meat 
during cooking may lead to survival of Campylobacter (Anonymous  2001, Anderson et al. 
2003). This is not incorporated in the risk model because it is thought to be a minor source 
of exposure. As indicated in section 5.1 it is not expected that this assumption will have a 
major effect on the relative risk associated with interventions preceding the consumer 
phase. 
 
10. Relative Risk: the predicted relative risk and risk reduction, used to predict the effect 
of interventions on the public health burden, are not very sensitive to the assumptions 
made and uncertainties attending the risk estimates. 
 
Due to the complexity of the model and the need to incorporate within- and between-flock 
variability, we have not been able to perform a full quantitative analysis on this issue. It is 
reasonable to expect that the uncertainty in relative risks (which are a quotient of risks) is 
far less than the uncertainty in absolute risk estimates. The impact of this assumption 
should be a future research priority in the development of risk assessment methodology. 
(See also section 5.5.3.)   
 

page 108 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
 
from farm until the end of processing. Hence, being the result of another imperfect tool, we 
decided to use the available microbiological count data for validation in this study, as 
discussed in section 5.6.1. 
 
5.5.2 Extrapolation 
The results of the risk model relating to the effects of intervention are extrapolated from the 
modelled chicken meat meals with cross-contaminated salad after cutting fillet, to all 
consumed chicken products. Hence the results of a fine and precise analysis are assumed to 
be representative for all sorts of meals prepared with chicken meat: whole grilled chickens, 
barbecues with chicken meat, fried legs etc. As we only consider cross-contamination in our 
risk model, risks associated with undercooking are not incorporated in the model. 
The pragmatic approach of this risk assessment has been that it is better to make a precise 
model for one product than a less precise model for all. This allowed us to include non-linear 
dynamics related to cross-contamination, presumably the process leading to the highest 
exposure. By choosing a meat product frequently eaten in the Netherlands, and a route of 
(cross) contamination considered important by many, we aimed to get important insight in the 
dynamics leading to exposure to campylobacter via chicken meat. Further research could 
focus on the preparation and consumption of chicken meat with skin (where higher level of 
campylobacter may be expected on the raw meat) and for example barbecue meals where 
cross-contamination and undercooking may be more frequent. As indicated in section 5.1, it 
may be expected that the effects of undercooking are not basically different from those of 
cross-contamination in the domestic environment, so that the effects of interventions in other 
parts of the food chain are probably similar. However, this should be confirmed by future 
research. 
 
5.5.3 Relative Risk 
The estimated relative risks are the most important results of the risk assessment, as they are 
the primary base of the response to the questions posed by the risk management. Therefore it 
is important to reflect on the uncertainty about these relative risks.  
Due to the complexity of the model and the need to incorporate within- and between-flock 
variability, we have not been able to perform a full quantitative analysis on the uncertainty in 
the relative risks. It is reasonable to expect that the uncertainty in relative risks (which are a 
quotient of risks) is less than the uncertainty in absolute risk estimates: the uncertainty in the 
numerator and the denominator may (partly) cancel out if both are larger or smaller than 
stated in the baseline. This yields a good argument to believe that, in general, the predicted 
(ranking of) relative risks is rather insensitive to the uncertainty in the model parameters. 
In this context, the philosophical interpretation of the uncertainty that can be quantified if 
research time and resources allow this, is important. Uncertainty that represents ‘how certain 
we are that a statement is true’, is usually a belief, and depends on assumptions made by the 
researchers and stakeholders. If the uncertainty about all parameters is quantified, this is 
always based on some prior beliefs and (simplifying) assumptions, and therefore this 
quantified uncertainty is dependent on a set of assumptions: the uncertainty itself is uncertain 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 109 of 128 
too. Hence, even if performed, a full quantitative uncertainty analysis may suggest there is a 
'true' uncertainty, and by that mislead the risk managers.  
In the model presented here, there is uncertainty as a consequence of the simplifying 
assumptions (see Box 1), uncertainty in the (representativity of) data, statistical uncertainty, 
etc. The effects of some of these sources of uncertainty can be explored. The uncertainty in 
the effects of interventions, for example, are analyzed and results are given by the error bars 
in fig 4.13. (But note that this uncertainty depends on some assumptions too.) Also, the 
uncertainty in the parameter values estimated by the expert judgement study, is fully 
characterized (see the Appendix).  
Although, for reasons of complexity as indicated above, we have not been able to quantify 
the uncertainty about the processing model in our analysis, some extra model simulations 
were run to explore the effect of uncertainty in the input values and the effect of the 
quantified uncertainty in processing model parameters on the relative risks of some 
interventions. The results of these exploratory analyses are given in table 5.1 and fig 5.1. 
First, the effect of uncertainty in Cfec µ on the predicted relative risks of some interventions is 
studied. Taking log Cfec µ = 4, that is a decrease by two logs, has considerable impact on the 
relative risk of interventions aiming at this particular parameter (see table 5.1). Given the 
alternative scenario results shown in fig 4.17 this is not unexpected. The maximum effect of 
lowering Cfec inevitably decreases if the initial value of  Cfec is lower. Hence, although a 2 log 
reduction in Cfec µ is rather large, this example shows that uncertainty in this input variable 
can have quite some effect on the estimated relative risk of the interventions ‘phage therapy’ 
and ‘reduction of faecal leakage’. 
 
Table 5.1  Relative risks of some interventions given that the mean concentration in the 
faeces Cfec µ is 2 logs lowers than assumed in the baseline.  
Baseline results are compared with this alternative. The effects of interventions aimed at reducing 
carcass contamination by campylobacters in the faeces decrease strongly, effects on two other 
interventions are small.  
 
baseline 
Cfec µ   - 2 logs 
phage therapy 
25.6% 
89.2% 
faecal leakage 
22.9% 
89.2% 
1x decont. lactate 
12.1% 
8.1% 
farm hygiene 
57.1% 
55.8% 
 
Next, the uncertainty about the processing model parameters is taken into account by taking 
ten random sets of samples from the (interdependent) uncertainty distributions of these 
parameters, derived from the expert study (see Appendix). When the relative risk of 
intervention VIIILb, submersion of carcasses in lactate between washing and chilling, is 
calculated for each of these ten sample sets, it varies between 10.1 and 23.7%. So the 
uncertainty range of the risk reduction is at least between 76% and 90%, where the estimate 
based on median processing model parameter estimates is 87.9% (see table 4.3). As 
illustrated in fig 5.1, large relative risks are associated with high estimates of the incidence of 
campylobacteriosis. The uncertainty in the relative risk is much lower than the uncertainty in 

page 110 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
the incidences with and without interventions. The uncertainty is partly cancelled out in the 
calculation of the relative risk, but not completely.  
 
        
100
1000
10000
100000
1000
10000
100000
1000000
baseline
1x decont. lactate
samples
median
rel risk median
 
        
100
1000
10000
100000
1000
10000
100000
1000000
baseline
faecal leakage reduction
samples
median
rel risk median
 
Figure 5.1 Incidences (cases per year) predicted by the baseline model plotted against 
incidences predicted after intervention.  
The circle indicates the reported result (table 4.3), taking median values for the processing model 
parameters. Other dots show the result for ten random samples from the uncertainty distributions 
obtained from the expert study. The line maps relative risks equal to that of the median result. 
Above: results for the intervention 'submersion of carcasses in lactate between washing and chilling', 
with relative risk of 'median' 12.1%. For higher incidences relative risks are larger (and risk 
reductions are smaller), but the uncertainty in relative risks is much smaller than the uncertainty in 
incidences. 
Below: results for the intervention 'reduction of faecal leakage', with relative risk of  'median' 22.9%. 
For this intervention the uncertainty in relative risks is much larger.     
 
However, when the relative risk of intervention VI, reduction of faecal leakage, is calculated, 
the uncertainty appears to be very large. Here the uncertainty range of the risk reduction is at 
least between 41% and 98%, where the estimate based on median processing model 
parameter estimates is 77.1% (see table 4.3). As shown in fig 5.1, the correlation between 
baseline incidence and predicted incidence after intervention is much lower than for the other 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 111 of 128 
intervention. Apparently the uncertainty of the expert panel about the processing model 
parameters has considerable impact on the uncertainty of the risk reduction due to 'reduction 
of faecal leakage'. The probable reason for this is that this intervention is aimed at the start of 
processing, so that uncertain parameters at several processing stages will have more influence 
on this intervention than on an intervention at the end of processing.  
Summarizing, it is shown that the estimated relative risks are less uncertain than the 
incidence, but may still be substantially large. The examples of uncertainty analysis clearly 
illustrate that it is worthwhile to extend this uncertainty analysis by additional research.  
 
5.6 
Model Validation 
 
Some data are available that can be used for validation of the model. It should be noted 
beforehand that the impact of this validation on the validity of the effects of the interventions, 
the most important aspect of this risk assessment, is not evident. If model predictions of the 
baseline study on the situation in 2000 appear correct, this does not mean that the relative 
risks associated with the interventions are properly predicted, because the effect of these 
interventions on the model parameters may be improperly assessed due to a lack of data. 
Also, if predicted values are not validated, this does not imply that the predicted effects are 
wrong because the (ranking of the) relative risks may be assessed quite well. Nonetheless, 
good correspondence between the model and data from the real world will of course be 
regarded as a good support for the model and the risk assessment. 
 
5.6.1 Processing model 
In the summer of 2004 we sampled a set of flocks for numbers of Campylobacter at different 
stages of processing (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). For two of these flocks we sampled 
carcasses and fillets at the relevant stages, for a third flock all but the caecal content data 
yielded quantitative data. First, the number of campylobacters per sample is estimated by 
MLE fitting to a Poisson distribution of counts per sample, using all count data (including 
data of upper and lower limits, if the dilution series applied appeared to be inefficiently 
chosen to obtain proper counts). Next, the results for the different samples within a flock 
(expressed in logs) are fitted to the best fitting normal distribution, also using MLE, to obtain 
a distribution describing the variability between units.  
Results as shown in table 5.2 and fig 5.2 are caecum counts per gram for two flocks, exterior 
before processing (carcass with feathers; cfu per carcass), carcass after chilling, chicken 
breast fillet after cutting, and chicken breast fillet after cool storage at 4°C for one week. 
For validation, the processing model was run with the count data for Cfec and Next, input as input 
values, for flocks 1 and 3, assuming 100% animal prevalence, incorporating the uncertainty 
in the parameter estimates of the processing model. Results (see fig 5.3) show that for flock 1 
the model prediction for the level of contamination after chilling is too high, but it is within 
the 90% uncertainty range for flock 3.  
 

page 112 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Table 5.2 Results of fitting count data of three flocks processed in The Netherlands in 2004 
(Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). 
 Mean and sd are the mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution fitted through the log 
counts. 
 
 
flock 1 
flock 2 
flock 3 
 
 
mean 
sd 
mean 
sd 
mean 
sd 
caecum 
Cfec 
9.2 
0.46 
> 5 
 
7.77 
0.4 
carcass with feathers Next, input 
8.03 
0.5 
7.39 
0.5 
6.39 
0.69 
carcass after chilling Next, chill 
5.16 
0.56 
5.26 
0.32 
5.18 
0.24 
fillet after cutting 
Next, f 
3.53 
0.29 
4.01 
0.48 
2.96 
0.26 
fillet after storage 
Next, fs 
3.42 
0.39 
2.75 
0.44 
2.19 
0.31 
 
count data flocks 2004
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
caecum
exterior +
feathers
chilled
carcass
filet
stored filet
stage
log cfu per unit
flock 1
flock 2
flock 3
 
Figure 5.2 Overview of count data of three flocks processed in the summer of 2004 in the 
Netherlands (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep. ). 
Error bars indicate 95% interval ( = 2*sd) of variability in counts between carcasses/fillets from the 
flock. 
 
The mean level predicted for flock 1 carcasses after chilling is 7.24 (sd 0.24) and on the fillet 
4.59 (sd 0.07), much higher than means of the count data 5.16 and 3.53 (table 5.2). The mean 
level predicted for flock 3 carcasses after chilling is 5.77 (sd 0.23) and on the fillet 3.09 (sd 
0.07), close to the means of the count data 5.18 and 2.96. The decrease in standard deviation 
as predicted by the model can be found in the data, be it to a smaller extent. This higher 
standard deviation in the data may be explained by the uncertainty associated with the 
counting method.  
This comparison of model predictions with independent count data does not allow a clear 
statement about validation. For one flock the model predictions and count data fit quite well, 
for the other they do not. Note that in flock 1 Cfec has very high values, based on counts of 
caecal contents. As mentioned in section 3.3.2  the campylobacter concentration in the 
caecum is usually higher than that in the leaking faeces. Hence, the count data may not be 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 113 of 128 
representative for Cfec as applied in the model and overestimate the concentration in the 
leaking faeces. If, for example, the model is run for flock 1 with the probably more realistic 
mean of Cfec 1.5 log lower (7.7), the 90% CI for the level after chilling is 4.8 - 7.2 log cfu per 
carcass, and includes the data mean 5.16. 
 
uncertainty of means flock 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
input
scalding
defeathering evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
mean
0.5
0.05
0.95
data
uncertainty of means flock 3
3
4
5
6
7
8
input
scalding
defeathering evisceration
washing
chilling
processing stage
log cfu
mean
0.5
0.05
0.95
data
 
Figure 5.3  Results of validation runs of the model, using count data of carcasses processed 
in the Netherlands in the summer of 2004.  
The lines are model predictions for log (Next), the red dots are data points measured by Jacobs-Reitsma 
et al. (in prep.). The predicted increase in log (Next) after defeathering is a consequence of the 
relatively high values of Cfec. 
 
In her risk assessment study on Campylobacter in chicken, Hartnett (Hartnett 2001, Hartnett 
et al. 2002) uses count data of several studies on Campylobacter during chicken processing. 
These count data (Oosterom et al. 1983, Izat et al. 1988, Berrang and Dickens 2000), report a 
decrease of 0.7 to 3.4 log units decrease due to soft scalding, an increase (up to 2.8 log units) 
or decrease (up to 0.8 log units) by evisceration, and again a substantial decrease due to 
washing (0.4 to more than 3 log units). For defeathering she has developed a cross-
contamination model and does not apply the data of Oosterom et al. (1983), showing a 
change in level of campylobacter on the pericloacal skin between -0.2 and 1.6 log units (i.e. 
on average an increase in number of campylobacter). So international data point at occasional 
increase in level during defeathering and evisceration and a relatively strong decrease during 
washing. This is different from the results presented for our baseline model, where the 
numbers of campylobacter on the exterior (slightly) decrease over the processing stages.  
It is not evident how the reported data can be used for model validation. Not only may the 
processing practices be different from the common situation in the Netherlands in 2000, also 
the application of means of restricted data sets of different birds from the same flock 
for validation of a model on changes in levels on individual birds is complex. (See Nauta et 
al. (2005) for discussion on this issue). The increase in level during defeathering fits in the 
model used in this risk assessment: as illustrated in figs 4.9 and 5.3, when Cfec is relatively 
high compared to Next  this may give an increase in level after defeathering and, occasionally, 
during evisceration. Apparently, in those processing lines where an increase in levels of 
contamination was found, the leaking faeces is an important source of Campylobacter 

page 114 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
contamination of carcasses. Overall, the variability in data fits well with the variability in the 
model results of the risk model 
 
5.6.2 Monitoring results 
The Dutch Food Inspectorate monitors chicken meat on the presence of Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. In 2000, 30.5% of the chicken meat products at retail was found to be 
contaminated with Campylobacter (Van der Zee et al. 2002). This value is an intermediate 
value compared to results in surrounding years. It is less than the percentage of products 
expected to be contaminated in our model. Although this percentage is not explicitly 
modelled, we assume a flock prevalence of 44.4% and find 94% of the fillets from 
contaminated flocks contaminated after cutting, yielding 41.7% contaminated overall. 
However, the percentage assessed by the model is expected to be larger than the percentage 
found in monitoring, because with the current detection methods low numbers of 
Campylobacter may not be detected. A closer look at the results of the baseline model shows 
that 30.5% of the fillets after cutting would be expected to be positive for Campylobacter if 
the detection limit of the method applied in the monitoring program is 20 cfu. This 20 cfu 
seems to be a reasonable value for such a detection limit, so it can be concluded that our 
model results are in line with the monitoring results.   
 
5.6.3 Fillet counts 
As shown in table 3.4 in section 3.2.4., in the summer of 2004 we counted campylobacters on 
fillets directly after cutting and after storage at 4 °C (Jacobs-Reitsma et al. in prep.). Within 
flocks means of logs in six sampled flocks are between 2.9 and 4.0 log cfu, with mean 3.3. 
These values are considerably larger than the predicted mean (1.97 log cfu for fillet after 
cutting), and lie at the upper end of the distribution of means per flocks as predicted by the 
model (50% 2 log cfu, 95% 3.9 log cfu). The correspondence between the data and the model 
improves somewhat if it is taken into account that the count data are from chicken products of 
flocks tested positively at the farm. If we consider these flocks only, the median mean level 
on the fillets is 2.3 log cfu and the 95%-ile is 4.1. Still, this comparison suggests that the 
model underestimates the level on the fillets after cutting, which, like the alternative scenario 
analysis, supports the need for more research on the effects of cutting on campylobacter 
contamination. Note however that, if this finding is correct, an underestimation by the risk 
model of the level of contamination coincides with an overestimation of the predicted number 
of human cases of campylobacteriosis. This is a similar result as in a previous risk assessment 
of STEC in steak tartare (Nauta et al. 2001). 
 
5.6.4 Epidemiology 
As explained elsewhere (chapter 2, Mangen et al. 2005a, Havelaar et al. 2005) epidemiologic 
studies in the Netherlands lead to a mean estimate of about 80.000 human cases (90% 
confidence interval between 20.000 and 160.000 cases) of campylobacteriosis per year. As 
the attributive fraction of chicken meat lies between 20 and 40%, between 16.000-32.000 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 115 of 128 
cases are estimated to be caused by the consumption of chicken meat. A fraction of these will 
be the consequence of the consumption of cross-contaminated salad. Therefore the estimate 
of more than 12000 cases, resulting from the baseline model, is rather high. However, given 
the uncertainty of the assessed exposure distribution, and the uncertainty of the dose-response 
relationship, especially at low doses, this rather high estimate is not surprising. A similar high 
estimate was found in a risk assessment of STEC O157 in steak tartare in the Netherlands 
(Nauta et al. 2001), where doses of only one cfu were predicted to be frequent as well, but the 
largest number of cases was associated with higher doses.  
 
5.7 
Gaps in knowledge 
 
As discussed in previous parts of this chapter, there is quite some uncertainty attending the 
risk assessment described in this report. Representative quantitative data are scarce and the 
effects of processing steps and interventions in daily life practice are not well known. In this 
study we used the best information available (to our knowledge) and asked for expert opinion 
where adequate data were lacking. 
To decrease the uncertainty, data collection should be focused more on quantitative data. 
Currently much effort is put in collecting data on flock prevalences at farms, but these data 
could only be applied to a very limited extent in the farm phase of the risk model. In 
comparison, highly relevant quantitative data on animal prevalences and levels of 
campylobacter in chicken faeces and on birds entering the processing plant (let alone the 
variability therein) is very scarce. For risk assessment, more research effort needs to be aimed 
at collecting such quantitative data, including for example seasonal effects. This effort should 
combine further improvement and standardization of the microbiological counting 
methodology, as well as the statistical methods to interpret these data. For quantitative risk 
assessment, improved methodology to separate variability and uncertainty in the analysis of 
count data would be very useful.     
In the production chain more quantitative data on the effect of processing steps could be 
helpful to obtain more precise estimates of the model parameter values now estimated by 
expert judgement. Here, better knowledge on particularly the stages defeathering, cutting and 
storage at refrigerator temperatures is important. 
For the consumer phase of the model, data on actual daily life practices of consumers are 
preferred above data on statements about behaviour. At least the relationship between what 
people say and what people do should me made more transparent. In combination with the 
need to more precisely assess the potentials of risk intervention at the consumer phase, 
transdisciplinary research in this area involving social scientists, microbiologists and risk 
modellers is required. Such research has recently started in the Netherlands (Fischer et al. 
2005). 
The last important step in the model is the dose-response relationship. As low doses are 
frequent, a better insight in the effects of low doses in different substrates (milk, chicken, 
salad) would be desirable. There seems to be no reason to assume that the currently available 
dose-response relationship are representative for exposures as assessed in farm to fork models 

page 116 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
as those presented in this report. Also, as also indicated in chapter 2, more knowledge on the 
effects of acquired immunity to Campylobacter is needed to understand the discrepancy 
between the predicted exposure rates and the cases of campylobacteriosis estimated from 
epidemiological data. 
A final, general 'gap in knowledge' which requests additional scientific research is 
quantitative risk modelling itself. One of the findings of the CARMA project, like other 
international QMRA projects, is that it takes a major investment in time and resources to do a 
risk assessment, while the result does not solve all uncertainties that exist. Further 
development of methods to simplify QMRA, yet keeping the crucial complexities aboard, is 
necessary. One of the possibilities here is to look back on the CARMA risk model (and 
related models developed elsewhere) and study why which modelling details are essential, 
where simplified methods could have been applied, and how these can be identified in future 
risk assessments. For Campylobacter risk assessment, a next step could be to aim for a user 
friendly model interface that can be used at an international scale. 
 
5.8 
Model and Methodology 
 
The risk model is constructed applying MPRM (Modular Process Risk Model) methodology. 
For this study a combined basic process model is developed, which integrates cross-
contamination and removal. It is applied for industrial processing and, in a simpler version, 
for the cutting stage. The model incorporates some simple mechanistics and is a non-linear 
model (see Nauta et al. (2005)). It shows that removal is the dominant effect for units 
(carcasses) contaminated with relatively high numbers of campylobacters, and cross-
contamination is dominant for units with relatively low numbers. Hence, the variability in the 
numbers between units decreases. Along with the inclusion of both campylobacters òn the 
exterior and ìn the faeces as distinct sources of contamination, the structural application of 
this non-linear model is a novelty is process risk modelling. It yields results that cannot be 
obtained by models based on linear relationships only. The latter has been the approach of 
previous risk assessments of campylobacter, which are based on some count data of chicken 
processing and linear relationships between the means of log concentrations of 
campylobacter over the processing stages (e.g. Rosenquist et al. (2003)). The advantage of 
such an approach is that it is based on actual data, and may thus seem to be a more realistic 
representation of the actual ('present') situation. However, the disadvantage is that it may 
improperly model the dynamics of cross-contamination when other levels of contamination 
apply. As a consequence it may incorrectly assess the effects of interventions, and thus be 
less suitable for risk management (see Nauta et al. (2005)). 
The model does assume linearity for inactivation and removal. This means that the log 
reduction due to storage, low and high temperature, wash off and decontamination is the 
same, independent of the level of contamination of the product. This may not be the case. It is 
known that attachment of Campylobacter to the chicken surface may occur. There may be 
different types of Campylobacter on the meat, with different attachment capacity and 
different survival or inactivation dynamics. As a consequence the effects of two inactivation 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 117 of 128 
steps may not sum up. Also, it is known that Campylobacter can occur in different states, 
'normally' viable, coccoid and a sublethal (sometimes called ‘viable non culturable’) state 
(e.g. Koenraad et al. 1997). This may also have profound impact on the survival dynamics. 
However, by a lack of adequate quantitative data on these issues, we choose a simplified, 
linear approach, as usually adopted in QMRA. 
The model is implemented as a Monte Carlo spreadsheet model. Including two relevant levels 
of variability (see section 4.3), it is a rather large computer model, which allows only a 
limited number of iterations. This means that two independent runs of the model will not give 
exactly the same result. For the baseline model the predicted number of cases may therefore 
vary by a few (< 3) percent. This problem gets more relevant when the levels of 
campylobacter and the exposure are low (for example after intervention). The risk estimate is 
then based on only a limited number of positive exposures, and thus less precise. However, 
compared to the total uncertainty attending the model, the imprecision of the estimates thus 
obtained is small. 
Finally, from the calculations it follows that occasional high levels of campylobacter may 
lead to higher doses and have a large impact on the final risk estimate. Therefore, the (right 
hand) tails of the (lognormal and other) distributions are important. These tails are a 
consequence of the precise distributions applied, which may be based on limited data sets, 
with little data on these tails. This may be an important source of error for the final risk 
estimate. Overall, rare events (like disturbance of industrial processing, unusual consumer 
behaviour) may in practice lead to quite some exposure to Campylobacter. Such potentially 
relevant events are not documented and cannot be included in a risk model as the one 
presented here. Therefore, further development of risk models aiming at this aspect is needed. 
   
5.9 
Conclusions  
 
A risk assessment of Campylobacter in broiler chicken meat in the Netherlands has been 
described in this report, together with an analysis of the relative importance of this source of 
campylobacteriosis.  
From the baseline model, representing the most likely situation for broiler chicken meat 
produced in the Netherlands in 2000, from birds reared in Dutch farms, it can be concluded 
that on average there is a continuous decrease in the level of Campylobacter on the carcasses 
and meat product. However, variability between flocks is large, and increases in level may 
also occur. Carcasses are contaminated by campylobacters on the exterior and in the faeces of 
the birds entering the processing plant. The effects of cutting the carcass and storage of the 
meat may be considerable, but are also very uncertain. These processes require more 
research. As consumer behaviour is very variable and data on consumer behaviour and the 
effect of that behaviour on the microorganisms is scarce, exposure is difficult to assess. The 
model predicts that most exposures will be low, only one or two cfu. The latter seems to be a 
rather robust prediction, as with current insight it is hard to imagine how to predict otherwise. 
Interventions seem to be most effective in the processing plant. At farm level one should 
strive for further improved hygiene, as this reduces the risk and simplifies scheduled 

page 118 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
treatment. Furthermore, if farm hygiene gets too little attention, this could lead to higher 
levels of contamination of the birds, which may have serious impact on the human risk. In the 
processing plant, a combined intervention strategy aiming at the campylobacters in the faeces 
(by phage therapy or the reduction of faecal leakage) and decontamination (chemical or 
otherwise) at some stage after evisceration is most promising.  
In the risk model it is found that interventions aiming at a lower concentration of 
campylobacter can be very effective, and more efficient than aiming at the prevalence (at 
flock level, animal level or product level). A similar conclusion was drawn from the risk 
assessment of campylobacter in broiler flocks in Denmark (Rosenquist et al. 2003). 
One to two log reduction by some form of decontamination can lead to more than 80% risk 
reduction. This reduction may not be seen if products are only tested for presence or absence 
of Campylobacter at the end of processing or at retail, but it has a strong impact at the level of 
exposure and probability of illness. The (simplified) explanation for this is that the dose-
response curve is approximately linear at low doses. One log reduction in exposure will thus 
lead to approximately 90% less cases. To achieve the same effect by lowering the prevalence 
only, the prevalence should be lowered by 90%. This probably will be more difficult to 
realize than lowering the concentration.  
Finally, at the end of this report, the reader should realize that the risk model presented is 
indeed a model, purposely a much simplified representation of reality constructed with the 
aim to gain insight in complex processes and to assess and compare the impact of a set of 
potential control measures to reduce the incidence of human campylobacteriosis in the 
Netherlands. Here, qualitative outcomes are more relevant than the precise numbers resulting 
from the quantitative analysis. The authors realize this model lacks many aspects of reality 
that may be more relevant than assumed in the modelling approach. However, using the best 
available knowledge, in a project in which governmental risk managers and stakeholder from 
industry and other parties were actively involved, the model presented may be considered a 
well structured and helpful tool for risk management decisions, and a handle for further 
research to control campylobacter. 
 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 119 of 128 
References 
Anderson, S., Christensen, B.B., Fazil, A., Hartnett, E., Lammerding, A., Nauta, M., Paoli, 
G., and Rosenquist, H., 2003. A draft risk assessment of Campylobacter ssp. in broiler 
chickens. Joint FAO/WHO activities on risk assessment of microbiological hazards in 
foods - Interpretative summary - , WHO/FAO. 
Anonymous, 2001. Hazard Identification, hazard identification and exposure assessment of 
Campylobacter spp. in broilers.  FAO / WHO, Rome / Geneva. 
Anonymous, 2003. Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures Relating to 
Public Health On The Evaluation of Antimicrobial Treatments for Poultry Carcasses. 
European Commission, Health & Consumer Protection Directorate-General. 
Bashor, M.P., Curtis, P.A., Keener, K.M., Sheldon, B.W., Kathariou, S., and Osborne, J.A., 
2004. Effects of carcass washers on Campylobacter contamination in large broiler 
processing plants. Poult Sci 83: 1232-9. 
Belongia, E.A., Chyou, P.H., Greenlee, R.T., Perez-Perez, G., Bibb, W.F., and DeVries, E.O., 
2003. Diarrhea incidence and farm-related risk factors for Escherichia coli O157:H7 
and Campylobacter jejuni antibodies among rural children. J Infect Dis 187: 1460-8. 
Berrang, M.E., Buhr, R.J., Cason, J.A., and Dickens, J.A., 2002. Microbiological 
consequences of skin removal prior to evisceration of broiler carcasses. Poult Sci 81: 
134-8. 
Berrang, M.E. and Dickens, J.A., 2000. Presence and level of Campylobacter spp. on broiler 
carcasses throughout the processing plant. Journal of Applied Poultry Research 9: 43-
47. 
Berrang, M.E., Ladely, S.R., and Buhr, R.J., 2001. Presence and level of Campylobacter, 
coliforms, Escherichia coli, and total aerobic bacteria recovered from broiler parts 
with and without skin. J Food Prot 64: 184-8. 
Bhaduri, S. and Cottrell, B., 2004. Survival of cold-stressed Campylobacter jejuni on ground 
chicken and chicken skin during frozen storage. Appl Environ Microbiol 70: 7103-9. 
Black, R., Levine MM, Clements ML, Hughes TP, and Blaser MJ, 1988. Experimental 
Campylobacter jejuni infection in humans. . Journal of Infectious Diseases  157: 472-
479. 
Bogaardt, M.J., 2005. Maatschappelijke acceptatie van maatregelen tegen Campylobacter in 
kippenvlees. Een onderzoek naar de houding van vleeskuikenhouders, 
pluimveeslachterijen en consumenten in Nederland ten aanzien van mogelijk te 
nemen maatregelen om de besmetting van kippenvlees met Campylobacter te 
verminderen. LEI, Den Haag. 
Bouwknegt, M., van de Giessen, A.W., Dam-Deisz, W.D.C., Havelaar, A.H., Nagelkerke, 
N.J.D., and Henken, A.M., 2004. Risk factors for the presence of Campylobacter ssp. 
in Dutch broiler flocks.  Preventive Veterinary Medicine  62: 35-49. 
Chan, K.F., Le Tran, H., Kanenaka, R.Y., and Kathariou, S., 2001. Survival of clinical and 
poultry-derived isolates of Campylobacter jejuni at a low temperature (4 degrees C). 
Appl Environ Microbiol 67: 4186-91. 
Chen, Y., Jackson, K.M., Chea, F.P., and Schaffner, D.W., 2001. Quantification and 
variability analysis of bacterial cross- contamination rates in common food service 
tasks. J Food Prot 64: 72-80. 
Cogan, T.A., Slader, J., Bloomfield, S.F., and Humphrey, T.J., 2002. Achieving hygiene in 
the domestic kitchen: the effectiveness of commonly used cleaning procedures. J Appl 
Microbiol 92: 885-92. 
Cooke, R.M., Nauta, M.J., Havelaar, A.H., and Van der Fels, H.J., 2004. Probabilistic 

page 120 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
inversion for chicken processing lines.  Proceedings of the Conference on Sensitivity 
Analysis of Model Output.  Los Almos, New Mexico. 
Corry, J.E. and Atabay, H.I., 2001. Poultry as a source of Campylobacter and related 
organisms. J Appl Microbiol 90: 96S-114S. 
Corry, J., James C, O'Neill DO, Yaman H, Kendall A, and Howell M, 2003.  Physical 
methods, readily adapted to existing commercial processing plants, for reducing 
numbers of campylobacters on raw poultry. Int J Med Microbiol  293: 32. 
Cudjoe, K.S. and Kapperud, G., 1991. The effect of lactic acid sprays on Campylobacter 
jejuni inoculated onto poultry carcasses. Acta Vet Scand 32: 491-8. 
Curtis, L.M., Patrick, M., and Blackburn, C.D., 1995. Survival of Campylobacter jejuni in 
foods and comparison with a predictive model. Lett Appl Microbiol 21: 194-7. 
De Wit, M., Koopmans, M., Kortbeek LM, Wannet WJB, Vinjé J, Leusden F van, Bartelds 
AIM, and Duynhoven van YTHP , 2001. Sensor, a population-based cohort study on 
gastroenteritis in the Netherlands: incidence and aetiology.  Am J Epidemiol   154: 
666-74. 
Doorduyn, Y., Brandhof, van den W.E., Duynhoven van Y.T.H.P., Wagenaar J.A., and Pelt, 
van W., in prep a. Risk factors for endemic Campylobacter jejuni infections in the 
Netherlands: a case-control study.  
Doorduyn, Y., Breukink, J., Brandhof, van den W.E., Duynhoven van Y.T.H.P., Wagenaar 
J.A., and Pelt, van W., in prep b. Risk factors for endemic Campylobacter coli 
infections in the Netherlands.  
Evans, M.R., Roberts, R.J., Ribeiro, C.D., Gardner, D., and Kembrey, D., 1996. A milk-borne 
Campylobacter outbreak following an educational farm visit. Epidemiology and 
Infection 117: 457-462 . 
Evers, E.G., 2004. Predicted quantitative effect of logistic slaughter on microbial prevalence. 
Prev Vet Med 65: 31-46. 
Evers, E.G., Van der Fels, H.J., Nauta, M.J., Schijven, J.F., and Havelaar, A.H., 2004. Het 
relatieve belang van Campylobacter transmissieroutes op basis van 
blootstellingsschatting. RIVM rapport 250911003, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Farkas J, 1996. Status and prospects of decontamination and preservation of poultry meat / 
carcasses by ionizing radiation. In: COST Action 97, Pathogenic micro-organisms in 
poultry and eggs, 7. Status and prospects of decontamination and preservation of 
poultry and egg products (Colin P, Mulder RWAW, Eds.), p. 75-82. Working Group 
3, Proceedings of a workshop, Ploufragan, France, 25-26 November 1996. 
Farkas, J., 1998. Irradiation as a method for decontaminating food. A review. Int J Food 
Microbiol 44: 189-204. 
Fazil, A.M., Lowman, R., Stern, N., and Lammerding, A., 1999. Quantitative Risk 
assessment model for Campylobacter jejuni in chicken.  10th International Workshop 
on CHRO.  abstract CF10, pp 65. 
Federighi, M., Cappelier J-M, and Rossero A, 1996. Effect of AvgardTM decontamination 
process on reduction of thermophilic Campylobacters on chicken carcasses. In: COST 
Action 97, Pathogenic micro-organisms in poultry and eggs, 7. Status and prospects 
of decontamination and preservation of poultry and egg products (Colin P, Mulder 
RWAW, Eds.), p. 125-128. Working Group 3, Proceedings of a workshop, 
Ploufragan, France, 25-26 November 1996. 
Fischer, A.R.H., De Jong, A.E.I., De Jonge, R., Frewer, L.J., and Nauta M.J., 2005. 
Improving food safety in the domestic environment: the need for a transdisciplinary 
approach. Risk Analysis in press. 
Gezondheidsraad, 1988. Campylobacter jejuni infecties in Nederland.  
Hafez, H.M., 1999. Poultry meat and food safety: pre- and post-harvest approaches to reduce 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 121 of 128 
foodborne pathogens. Worlds Poultry Science Journal 55: 269-280. 
Hartnett, E., 2001. Human infection with Campylobacter spp. from chicken consumption: a 
quantitative risk assessment (PhD thesis).  University of Strathglyde, Glasgow, UK. 
Hartnett, E., Kelly, L.A., Gettinby, G., and Wooldridge, M., 2002. A quantitative risk 
assessment for campylobacter in broilers: work in progress. International 
Biodeterioration & Biodegradation 50: 161-165. 
Havelaar, A.H., 2001. Campylobacteriose in Nederland; Risico's en 
interventiemogelijkheden. RIVM rapport 250911001, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Havelaar, A.H., Evers, E.G., and Nauta, M.J., 2004. Het effect van logistiek slachten en/of 
een kiemreducerende behandeling op de besmetting van kippenvlees met 
Campylobacter. RIVM rapport 250911002, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Havelaar, A.H., Nauta, M.J., Mangen, M.-J.J., de Koeijer, A., Evers, E.G., Jacobs-Reitsma, 
W.F., Bogaardt, M.-J., and Wagenaar, J.A., 2005. Kosten en baten van 
Campylobacter bestrijding in Nederland; Integratie van risico-analyse, epidemiologie 
en economie. RIVM rapport 2509011008, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Havelaar, A., de Wit, M., and van Koningsveld, R., 2000. Health burden in the Netherlands 
(1990-1995) due to infections with thermophilic Campylobacter species. RIVM 
rapport 284550004, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Izat, A.L., Gardner, F.A., Denton, J.H., and Golan, F.A., 1988. Incidence and level of 
Campylobacter jejuni in broiler processing. Poultry Science 67: 1568-1572. 
Jacobs-Reitsma, W., Nauta, M.J., and et al., in prep. Campylobacter counts st several broiler 
chicken processing stages.  
James, C., 2004. Review of meat decontamination. FRPERC JOB Report (draft) on 
25.05.2004, University of Bristol, UK. 
Katsma, W.E.A., de Koeijer, A.A., Fischer, E.A.J., Jacobs Reitsma, W.F., and Wagenaar, 
J.A., 2005. Campylobacter prevalence in broiler flocks in the Netherlands. Modelling 
transmission within and between flocks and efficacy of interventions.  Animal 
Sciences Group (ASG)Wageningen-UR. Report ASG05/I00113. 
Keener, K., Bashor MP, Curtis PA, Sheldon BW, and Kathariou S, 2004.  Comprehensive 
Review of Campylobacter and Poultry Processing. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety  3: 105-116. 
Kist, M., 2002. Food-borne Campylobacter infections. Bundesgesundheitsblatt 
Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz 45: 497-506. 
Kistemaker, C., Bouman, M., and Hulshof, K., 1998. De consumptie van afzonderlijke 
producten door Nederlandse bevolkingsgroepen - Voedselconsumptiepeiling 1997-
1998.   1998; .  TNO-rapport V98.812, TNO Voeding The Netherlands. 
Koenraad, P.M.F.J., Rombouts, F.M., and Notermans, S.H.W., 1997. Epidemiological 
aspects of thermophilic Campylobacter in water-related environments: A review. 
Water Environment Research 69: 52-63. 
Koidis, P. and Doyle, M.P., 1983. Survival of Campylobacter jejuni in the presence of 
bisulfite and different atmospheres. Eur J Clin Microbiol 2: 384-8. 
Kusumaningrum, H.D., van Asselt, E.D., Beumer, R.R., and Zwietering, M.H., 2004. A 
quantitative analysis of cross-contamination of Salmonella and Campylobacter spp. 
via domestic kitchen surfaces. J Food Prot 67: 1892-903. 
Lindqvist, R., Sylven, S., and Vagsholm, I., 2002. Quantitative microbial risk assessment 
exemplified by Staphylococcus aureus in unripened cheese made from raw milk. Int J 
Food Microbiol 78: 155-70. 
Mangen, M.-J.J., Havelaar, A.H., Nauta, M.J., de Koeijer, A.A., and de Wit G.A., 2005a. 
Controlling Campylobacter in the chicken meat chain – Cost-effectivity and cost-
utility analysis. RIVM report 250911007, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 

page 122 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Mangen, M.-J.J., Havelaar, A.H., and Poppe, K., 2005b. Controlling Campylobacter in the 
chicken meat chain – Estimation of intervention costs. Agricultural Economics 
Institute (LEI), Den Haag. LEI report 6.05.01. 
Mead, G., 2004. Campylobacter update - the solution. International Poultry Production 12: 9-
11. 
Mead, G.C., Hudson, W.R., and Hinton, M.H., 1995. Effect of changes in processing to 
improve hygiene control on contamination of poultry carcasses with campylobacter. 
Epidemiology and Infection 115: 495-500. 
Medema, G.J., Teunis, P.F., Havelaar, A.H., and Haas, C.N., 1996. Assessment of the dose-
response relationship of Campylobacter jejuni. Int J Food Microbiol 30: 101-11. 
Montville, R., Chen, Y., and Schaffner, D.W., 2001. Glove barriers to bacterial cross-
contamination between hands to food. J Food Prot 64: 845-9. 
Moorhead, S.M. and Dykes, G.A., 2002. Survival of Campylobacter jejuni on beef trimmings 
during freezing and frozen storage. Lett Appl Microbiol 34: 72-6. 
Mylius, S.D., Nauta, M.J., and Havelaar, A.H., submitted. Cross-contamination during food 
preparation: a mechanistic model applied to chicken-borne Campylobacter.  
Nauta, M.J., 2000. Separation of uncertainty and variability in quantitative microbial risk 
assessment models. International Journal of Food Microbiology 57: 9-18. 
Nauta, M.J., 2001. A modular process risk model structure for quantitative microbiological 
risk assessment and its application in an exposure assessment of Bacillus cereus in a 
REPFED.  RIVM report 149106007, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Nauta, M.J., 2002. Modelling bacterial growth in quantitative microbiological risk 
assessment: is it possible? Int J Food Microbiol 73: 297-304. 
Nauta, M.J., 2005. Microbiological risk assessment models for partitioning and mixing 
during food handling. International Journal of Food Microbiology in press. 
Nauta, M.J., Evers, E.G., Takumi, K., and Havelaar, A.H., 2001. Risk assessment of Shiga 
toxin producing Escherichia coli O157 in steak tartare in the Netherlands. RIVM 
report 257851003, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. 
Nauta, M.J., Van der Fels-Klerx, H.J., and Havelaar, A.H., 2005. A poultry processing model 
for quantitative microbiological risk assessment. Risk Analysis 25:85-98. 
Neijssen, P., 1988a. Levensmiddelendoorstraling. Inleiding tot levensmiddelendoorstraling 
aan de hand van vaak gestelde vragen. VMT  2-5. 
Neijssen, P., 1988b. Levensmiddelendoorstraling (vervolg). Inleiding tot 
levensmiddelendoorstraling aan de hand van vaak gestelde vragen. VMT   6-8. 
Oosterom, J., de Wilde, G.J.A., de Boer, E., de Blaauw, L.H., and Karman, H., 1983. 
Survival of Campylobacter jejuni during poultry processing and pig slaughtering. 
Journal of Food Protection 46: 702-706. 
Puridec, 2004. Understanding the key radiation processing parameters - a guide for food 
producers. Handout at Isotron conference ‘Voedselveiligheid, ook uw prioriteit’, 21 
september 2004, Ede, The Netherlands. 
Redmond, E.C. and Griffith, C.J., 2003. Consumer food handling in the home: a review of 
food safety studies. J Food Prot 66: 130-61. 
Rietveld, H., 2002. De wettelijke aspecten van doorstraling. Presentation at Isotron 
conference ‘Voedselveiligheid, ook uw prioriteit’, 21 september 2004, Ede, The 
Netherlands. 
Ritz-Bricaud, M., Nauta, M., Federighi, M., and Havelaar, A., 2003. What part of uncertainty 
and variability in the modeling of Campylobacter survival in frozen chicken meat?  
In: J.F.M. van Impe, A.H. Geeraerd, I. Leguérinel and P. Mafart (Eds.), Predictive 
Modelling in Foods  Conference Proceedings, p. 332-334. Katholieke Universiteit 
Leuven/BioTeC, Belgium. 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 123 of 128 
Rosenquist, H., Nielsen, N.L., Sommer, H.M., Norrung, B., and Christensen, B.B., 2003. 
Quantitative risk assessment of human campylobacteriosis associated with 
thermophilic Campylobacter species in chickens. Int J Food Microbiol 83: 87-103. 
Sandberg, M., Hofshagen M, Řstensvik Ř, Skjerve E, and Innocent G , Submitted. 
Campylobacter on frozen broiler carcasses as a function of time.  
Slavik, M., Kim J-W, Pharr M.D., Raben D.P/, Tsai S., and Lobsinger C.M., 1994. Effect of 
Trisodium Phosphate on Campylobacter Attached to Post-Chill Chicken Carcasses. 
Journal of Food Protection 57: 324-326. 
Smith, S., Dunbar, M., Tucker, D., and Schaffner, D.W., 2003. Efficacy of a commercial 
produce wash on bacterial contamination of lettuce in a food service setting. J Food 
Prot 66: 2359-61. 
Snijders, J.M.A., Lipman, L.J.A., and Nedelkovski, R., 2004. Practical germicidal treatment 
in the poultry processing line. V&V report 0402, Utrecht University, the Netherlands. 
Stekelenburg, F.K. and Logtenberg, H., 2004. De ins en outs van decontaminatie van 
pluimveevlees. TNO-rapport V 5667, Zeist, the Netherlands. 
Stern, N.J., Clavero, M.R.S., Bailey, J.S., Cox, N.A., and Robach, M.C., 1995. 
Campylobacter spp. in broilers on the farm and after transport. Poultry Science 74: 
937-941. 
Stern, N.J., Hiett, K.L., Alfredsson, G.A., Kristinsson, K.G., Reiersen, J., Hardardottir, H., 
Briem, H., Gunnarsson, E., Georgsson, F., Lowman, R., Berndtson, E., Lammerding, 
A.M., Paoli, G.M., and Musgrove, M.T., 2003. Campylobacter spp. in Icelandic 
poultry operations and human disease. Epidemiol Infect 130: 23-32. 
Stern, N., Rothenberg P.J., and Stone J.M., 1985. Enumeration and reduction of 
Campylobacter jejuni in poultry and red meats. Journal of Food Protection  48: 606-
610. 
Svetoch, E.A., Stern, N.J., Eruslanov, B.V., Kovalev, Y.N., Volodina, L.I., and et al., 2003. 
Use of Bacillus and Paenibacillus produced bacteriocins for therapeutic control of 
Campylobacter jejuni in chickens. International Journal of Medical Microbiology 293: 
26-27. 
Teunis, P., Van den Brandhof, W., Nauta, M., Wagenaar, J., Van Pelt, W., and Van den 
Kerkhof, H., 2005. A reconsideration of the Campylobacter dose-response relation. 
Epidemiology and Infection in press. 
Teunis, P.F. and Havelaar, A.H., 2000. The Beta Poisson dose-response model is not a single-
hit model. Risk Analysis 20: 513-20. 
Teunis, P.F., Nagelkerke, N.J., and Haas, C.N., 1999. Dose-response models for infectious 
gastroenteritis. Risk Anal 19: 1251-60. 
Uyttendaele, M., De Troy, P., and Debevere, J., 1999. Incidence of Salmonella, 
Campylobacter jejuni, Campylobacter coli, and Listeria monocytogenes in poultry 
carcasses and different types of poultry products for sale on the Belgian retail market. 
J Food Prot 62: 735-40. 
Van den Brandhof, W., Wagenaar, J., and Van den Kerkhof, H., 2003. An outbreak of 
campylobacteriosis after drinking pasteurized milk, 2002, The Netherlands. 
International Journal of Medical Microbiology 293 (S35): 142. 
Van der Fels-Klerx, H.J., Goossens, L.H.J., Nauta, M.J., Cooke, R.M., and Havelaar, A.H., 
2005. A structured expert judgment study for microbiological risk assessment on 
campylobacter transmission during broiler chicken processing . Risk Analysis 25:109-
124. 
Van der Zee, H., Wit, B., and De Boer, E., 2002. Monitoring pathogenen in kip en 
kipproducten. Keuringsdienst van Waren Oost, afd. Signalering, Zutphen, The 
Netherlands. 

page 124 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Van Netten, P., Huis in ’t Veld J, and Mossel D.A.A., 1994a. An in-vitro meat model for the 
immediate bactericidal effect of lactic acid decontamination on meat surfaces . 
Journal of Applied Bacteriology  76: 49-54. 
Van Netten, P., Huis in ’t Veld J.H.J., and Mossel D.A.A., 1994b. The immediate bactericidal 
effect of lactic acid on meat-borne pathogens. Journal of Applied Bacteriology  77: 
490-496. 
Van Pelt, W. and Valkenburg, S.M., 2001. Zoonoses and zoonotic agents in humans, food, 
animals and feed in the Netherlands . Keuringsdienst van Waren, RIVM. 
Vellinga, A. and Van Loock, F., 2002. The dioxin crisis as 'experiment' to determine poultry 
related Campylobacter enteritis. Emerging Infectious Diseases 8: 19-22. 
Vose, D., 2000. Risk Analysis: A quantitative guide. 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester. 
VVDO, 1998. Decontaminatie van pluimveevlees. Rapport 97.01, Universiteit Utrecht. 
Wagenaar, J., Van Bergen, M., Mueller, M., Monie, K., and Carlton, R., 2001. Phage therapy 
of Campylobacter jejuni colonisation in broilers. poster CHRO . 
Wassenaar, T., Van der Wal, F.J., and Wagenaar J., 2004. De typering van Campylobacter en 
de relatie tussen Campyloacter type en virulentie. Rapport nr ASG04/0010255, 
Animal Sciences Group Wageningen UR, Lelystad. 
WHO, 1997. Food irradiation  sky’s the limit. Press Release WHO/68. 
WHO/FAO, 1988. Food irradiation. A technique for preserving and improving the safety of 
food.  
Whyte, P., Collins, J.D., McGill, K., Monahan, C., and O’Mahony, H., 2001. Quantitative 
investigation of the effects of chemical decontamination procedures on the 
microbiological status of broiler carcasses during processing. J Food Prot 64: 179-83. 
Whyte, P., McGill, K., and Collins, J.D., 2003. An assessment of steam pasteurization and 
hot water immersion treatments for the microbiological decontamination of broiler 
carcasses. Food Microbiology 20: 111-117. 
Worsfold, D. and Griffith, C.J., 1997. Assessment of the standard of consumer food safety 
behavior. Journal of Food Protection 60: 399-406. 
 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 125 of 128 
Acknowledgements 
 
The study described in this report would not have been realized without the help of a lot of 
people.  
The following people and teams are gratefully acknowledge for their contributions: 
Hanne Rosenquist (DFVF, Denmark) 
Janet Corry (University of Bristol, UK) 
FAO/WHO drafting group ‘Risk assessment of Campylobacter in broiler chickens’ 
(Anderson et al. 2003) 
Decisionalysis Risk Consultants Inc. (Ottawa, Canada) 
Peter Enthoven, (CCL-Research) 
Jaap Obdam, (Plukon Poultry, Wezep) 
The expert panel consulted for the expert judgement processing model (Van der Fels-Klerx et 
al. 2005) 
Jos van de Nieuwelaar (Stork) 
Willem Heemskerk (Meyn) 
Roger Cooke (Technical University Delft) 
Louis Goossens (Technical University Delft) 
Ratko Nedelkovski (IRAS, Utrecht University) 
Jos Snijders (IRAS, Utrecht University) 
Ine van der Fels-Klerx (RIVM, now at RIKILT, Wageningen University))  
Sido Mylius (RIVM) 
Peter Teunis (RIVM) 
Yvonne Doorduyn (RIVM) 
Gert Steentjes (RIVM)  
Martine Bakker (RIVM) 
Annemarie Pielaat (RIVM) 
Anne Mensink (RIVM) 
CARMA industry forum 
CARMA project group 
CARMA steering committee 
 

page 126 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 

 RIVM report 250911006 
page 127 of 128 
Appendix    
Summary of expert judgement results 
The parameter values of the industrial processing model applied in the baseline model are the 
median values of a set of 500 samples of the uncertainty distributions obtained from the 
expert judgement study described by Van der Fels-Klerx et al. (2005) and Cooke et al. 
(2004). Results of a larger set of 10.000 samples are given in table A1. (Due to the 
differences in sample size median values may differ from the values given in table 3.14.)  
For the five transfer coefficient distributions are illustrated in fig A1. As most distributions 
are skewed, the horizontal axis is represented on a log scale. The median is considered to be 
more representative for the average of the distribution than the mean.  
 
 
Figure A1.  The uncertainty distributions of the processing parameters aext (axa) cext  (ca), 
benv (b), cenv (ce), and 1- afec (aintcmplt) for the five processing stages, resulting from the 
probablistic inversion on the expert estimates.  
Scalding
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
log value
axa
 ca
 b
 ce
 aintcmplt
Defeathering
-6
-4
-2
0
log value
axa
 ca
 b
 ce
 aintcmplt
Evisceration
-6
-4
-2
0
log value
axa
 ca
 b
 ce
 aintcmplt
Air chilling
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log value
axa
ce
ca
b
Washing
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
log value
axa
ce
ca
b

page 128 of 128 
RIVM report 250911006 
Correlations between parameter values are included in samples of sets of parameter values 
resulting from probablistic inversion. Correlation can be included in the model analysis of the 
uncertainty by running the model for random sets of samples, as e.g. in the uncertainty 
analysis leading to fig 5.1. These correlations are not mentioned here. 
 
 
Table A1. Summary of the results of the expert judgement study for industrial broiler chicken 
processing.  
The mean, standard deviation and 5, 50 and 95 percentiles of the model parameter estimates express 
the uncertainty of the global optimized decision maker, resulting from a set of 10,000 samples after 
probablistic inversion.  
 
 
 
aext 
 cext 
 benv 
 cenv 
 1-afec 
ms µ 
pfec 
scalding 
mean 
0.760 
0.715
8.37E-06
0.052
1.59E-06 
1.97 
0.495
 
sd 
0.232 
0.138
3.23E-06
0.078
1.06E-06 
0.66 
0.196
 
0.05 
0.222 
0.534
4.46E-06
0.012
3.41E-07 
1.02 
0.207
 
0.50 
0.848 
0.714
7.13E-06
0.036
1.42E-06 
2.00 
0.493
 
0.95 
0.965 
0.944
1.48E-05
0.166
2.63E-06 
3.00 
0.800
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defeathering mean 
0.855 
0.050
3.09E-02
0.101
1.34E-05 
1.72 
0.675
 
sd 
0.145 
0.028
3.78E-02
0.025
1.17E-05 
0.65 
0.147
 
0.05 
0.648 
0.007
1.60E-04
0.049
2.51E-06 
1.02 
0.602
 
0.50 
0.904 
0.048
1.11E-03
0.113
1.03E-05 
2.02 
0.698
 
0.95 
0.983 
0.092
9.78E-02
0.124
2.95E-05 
2.98 
0.800
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evisceration 
mean 
0.464 
0.040
1.08E-05
0.084
6.23E-03 
1.72 
0.668
 
sd 
0.292 
0.017
4.77E-06
0.009
1.16E-02 
0.65 
0.147
 
0.05 
0.040 
0.016
5.00E-06
0.070
6.03E-04 
1.00 
0.400
 
0.50 
0.450 
0.040
1.00E-05
0.085
2.95E-03 
2.00 
0.693
 
0.95 
0.940 
0.065
2.09E-05
0.095
2.51E-02 
2.98 
0.800
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
washing 
mean 
0.335 
0.216
7.18E-03
0.062
 
 
 
 
sd 
0.210 
0.151
1.82E-02
0.020
 
 
 
 
0.05 
0.003 
0.000
1.25E-04
0.026
 
 
 
 
0.50 
0.295 
0.262
1.24E-03
0.061
 
 
 
 
0.95 
0.664 
0.360
3.73E-02
0.096
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chilling 
mean 
0.099 
0.221
9.22E-03
0.017
 
 
 
 
sd 
0.114 
0.258
1.20E-02
0.012
 
 
 
 
0.05 
0.008 
0.000
2.49E-04
0.002
 
 
 
 
0.50 
0.063 
0.054
4.28E-03
0.016
 
 
 
 
0.95 
0.300 
0.641
3.51E-02
0.037
 
 
 
 
 
