University of Groningen
Pronoun processing
van Rij, Jacolien
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publication date:
2012
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA):
van Rij, J. (2012). Pronoun processing: computational, behavioral, and psychophysiological studies in
children and adults. [Thesis fully internal (DIV), Rijksuniversiteit Groningen]. s.n.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.
Download date: 05-01-2026

Pronoun processing
Computational, behavioral, and psychophysiological
studies in children and adults
Jacolien van Rij

Groningen Dissertations in Linguistics 108
ISBN printed version: 978-90-367-5920-5
ISBN digital version: 978-90-367-5919-9
The work presented in this thesis has been carried out under the auspices of the Research
School of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences (BCN) and the Center for Language and
Cognition Groningen (CLCG) of the University of Groningen.
This investigation was partially supported by a grant from the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO) awarded to Petra Hendriks (grant. no. 277-70-005) for the VICI
project Asymmetries in Grammar.
Cover design by Petra van Berkum, illustrator | www.petravanberkum.nl
Printed by Gildeprint Drukkerijen, Enschede, The Netherlands | www.gildeprint.nl
© 2012, Jacolien van Rij

RIJKSUNIVERSITEIT GRONINGEN
Pronoun processing
Computational, behavioral, and psychophysiological
studies in children and adults
Proefschrift
ter verkrijging van het doctoraat in de
Letteren
aan de Rijksuniversiteit Groningen
op gezag van de
Rector Magnificus, dr. E. Sterken,
in het openbaar te verdedigen op
donderdag 29 november 2012
om 12.45 uur
door
Jacomina Cornelia van Rij-Tange
geboren op 26 oktober 1981
te Middelburg

Promotor:
Prof. dr. P. Hendriks
Copromotor:
Dr. D. H. van Rijn
Beoordelingscommissie:
Dr. J. E. Arnold
Prof. dr. ir. J. Nerbonne
Prof. dr. S. Vasishth

Acknowledgements
Finishing this book is the end of the four-year PhD project. Many people have contributed to
this project with ideas, advice, and practical assistance, or indirectly by making my time in
Groningen more enjoyable.
First of all, I would like to thank Petra Hendriks and Hedderik van Rijn, who supervised
my PhD project and the preceding Master project. Thank you for your enthusiasm, ideas, and
support. Petra, your enthusiasm was very inspiring. You always made time for answering
my questions, and regularly commented on my work during holidays.
Also thanks for
encouraging me to visit so many conferences. Hedderik, you came up with many new creative
ideas and interesting statistical analyses – I learned a lot from that. Thank you for the
possibilities to learn new experimental techniques and methods. I’m also thankful to Jennifer
Spenader, who was involved in the early stages of this project. Thank you for helping me to
get started in research.
I would like to thank the reading committee for the time they took to read and evaluate
this work, and for their valuable comments: Jennifer Arnold, John Nerbonne, and Shravan
Vasishth.
The four experiments reported in this thesis could not have been performed without
the help and practical assistance of the following people: Petra van Berkum and Robbert
Prins for drawing the pictures used in the object pronoun experiments; Margreet Drok and
Atty Schouwenaars for recording sentences; Sanne Berends and Sanne Kuijper for assisting
with testing children; Charlotte Koster, Gisi Cannizzaro, and Sanne Kuijper for their help in
creating all the stories for the subject pronoun experiments; Simone Sprenger for helpful
advice on the design of psychophysiological experiments; Tadeusz Kononowicz for teaching
me how to do EEG experiments and for explaining the preprocessing of EEG data; Harald
Baayen for the useful discussions about statistical analyses of EEG data; Heleen Meijburg,
Trudy Buwalda, and Marijke Beulen for assisting with the EEG experiment; and the children,
teachers and parents of the Nassauschool in Groningen for participating in the slowed-speech
experiment.
During my PhD I had the privilege to participate in two different, but very good research
groups. The Asymmetries in Grammar NWO Vici project directed by Petra Hendriks provided
a friendly working atmosphere. I learned a lot about language acquisition research and
eye tracking from discussions and collaborations with Charlotte Koster, Bart Hollebrandse,
John Hoeks, Petra Hendriks, Peter de Swart, Gisi Cannizzaro, Sanne Kuijper, Jessica Overweg,
Franziska Köder, and the other members. Thank you for the good time.
I also participated in the CogMod Lab, where I learned a lot from discussion about

experimental designs, new experimental methods, and about how to make perfect posters and
presentations. Niels Taatgen, Hedderik van Rijn, Jennifer Spenader, Leendert van Maanen,
Jelmer Borst, Katja Mehlhorn, Marieke van Vugt, Enkhbold Nyamsuren, Ben Meijering,
Tadeusz Kononowicz, Stefan Wierda, Menno Nijboer, Udo Böhm, Trudy Buwalda, and all other
members of the group, thank you for your critical questions, feedback, and support.
In addition, I would like to thank the Experimental Linguistic group and the Language
Acquisition group for their feedback: Ryan Taylor, Laurie Stowe, Harm Brouwer, Angeliek
van Hout, Ruggero Montalto, Susanne Grassmann, Atty Schouwenaars, and other regular
visitors of these meetings. Also thanks to Gisi Cannizzaro and Peter de Swart for organizing
the Statistical Reading group, which helped me to read difficult, but useful papers and books.
I want to thank a number of other people for their support during my PhD time. My
paranimphs, Jelmer and Sanne, for being paranimfs and for your advice on the thesis and
the defense day. Jelmer, great that you could schedule your stay in Groningen after the
defense date was sure. Sanne, I enjoyed the coffee and tea moments in our/your office. Gisi,
thanks for all your ”strenge” comments on English writings, and for getting me involved in
eye tracking research. Veerle, I also appreciated the regular lunch conversations very much.
Your practical help and sharing frustrations were invaluable. Katja, working with you at
Psychology was always gezellig. Many thanks for letting us borrow Thor and Parvati. Martijn,
thanks for the interesting conversations about statistics and for all practical things you
organized and achieved in the interest of PhD students. Thanks to all people I shared an office
with. Especially I would like to thank Leendert and Jelmer, Katja, Veerle and Myrte, Sanne, and
Menno and Udo for the good time. Furthermore, thanks to my CLCG colleagues Ankelien and
Hanneke for sharing information about practical matters around printing the thesis, and also
to Wyke van der Meer, the coordinator of the CLCG, for help with administrative questions.
There is more to life than science.
Hennie, Jeroen, Harm Jan, Jorien, Karin, Peter,
Tjard, Margreet, Johan, Hieke, Remco, and Emmy, and other friends, thank you for your
friendship. You have made our time in Groningen unforgettable. I’m grateful to my parents
for encouraging me to go to Groningen, and for their involvement, advice and support all
these years. Also I would like to thank my sisters, mother-in-law, and my brothers- and
sisters-in-law for their interest and support. Finally, I want to thank Jaco for sharing all these
years in Groningen with me. Without your encouragement and support I probably would not
have started this project, and without your advice and your ability to put things in the right
perspective, I could not have finished it.

Contents
1
Introduction
1
1
Pronoun processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The cognitive architecture ACT-R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Linguistic background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Cognitive architectures and language acquisition:
A case study in pronoun comprehension
13
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Delay of Principle B Effect (DPBE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Optimality Theory explanation of the DPBE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Testing linguistic theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Cognitive models of language acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Study 1: Experimental study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Study 2: Simulation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
General discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3
A
cognitive
model
of
the
acquisition
and
use
of
referring
expressions: Eﬀects of working memory and perspective taking
43
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2
Empirical phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3
A computational model of the production and comprehension of referring ex-
pressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Results of the simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
General discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4
How WM load inﬂuences linguistic processing in adults:
A computational model of pronoun interpretation in discourse
73
1
Interpretation of subject pronouns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
2
Cognitive model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3
Dual-task experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86

5
Context resolves ambiguity before an ambiguous pronoun is read:
An ERP study of the eﬀects of context and working memory load
on pronoun comprehension
89
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
2
Experimental materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
6
Event-related pupil dilation tracks integration of contextual and
grammatical information
115
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
2
Experimental materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
7
Discussion
133
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
2
Effects of cognitive factors and linguistic constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
3
Theoretical implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
4
Implementation issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
5
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
References
143
Nederlandse samenvatting
153

chapter 1
Introduction


1
1
Pronoun processing
In many contexts, a speaker can choose between several forms to refer to a particular event
or individual. However, some referring expressions are more specific than others. Pronouns,
such as he, she, him, or her, do not have a fixed interpretation. Rather, their interpretation
depends on the context, in contrast to the interpretation of proper names such as Epke Zon-
derland. Generally, a pronoun is used when reference is intended to a salient referent in
the linguistic context, whereas more specific forms are used when reference is intended to
less salient referents or when new referents are introduced. Although most theories of pro-
noun use would agree with this, they use different notions to capture the referent’s promi-
nence in the linguistic context, such as accessibility (Ariel, 1988), givenness (Gundel, Hedberg,
& Zacharski, 1993) and topicality (Givón, 1983).
In languages like Dutch and English, pronouns are only specified for case, number and
gender information. Therefore, in many situations more than one referent in the context can
be the antecedent of the pronoun (i.e., the referent to which the pronoun refers). For exam-
ple, when encountering a pronoun at the end of a paragraph in a novel with many different
characters, you may discover that you are not sure whom the author is referring to. Also in the
following sentences the pronoun is ambiguous for most non-Dutch readers, and may refer to
Mart Smeets or Epke Zonderland: Mart Smeets and Epke Zonderland talked about the preparation
for the olympic gold winning routing on the acrobatic high bar. He worked very hard to achieve this
result.1 Interestingly, in most situations people do not experience any difficulties in the in-
terpretation of potentially ambiguous pronouns, but immediately interpret the pronoun the
way it was intended by the speaker or writer. In the previous example about the olympic gold
medal, all Dutch readers immediately interpret the pronoun as referring to Epke Zonderland.
Pronoun resolution is crucial for sentence comprehension: If you are not able to resolve
the pronoun, you may not grasp the meaning of the sentence and hence may misunderstand
the entire story or conversation. Therefore, important questions in linguistic and psycholin-
guistic research are: How do listeners know what is the referent of a pronoun, and what deter-
mines a speaker’s choice for a pronoun instead of a more informative referring expression,
such as a proper name, a definite noun phrase (the gymnast) or an indefinite noun phrase
(a gymnast)? Previous research has shown that several factors play a role in pronoun inter-
pretation and production, such as grammatical principles and the structure of the preceding
linguistic context.
Studies on the acquisition of pronouns indicate that cognitive development also plays an
important role. Dutch and English-speaking children acquire adult-like pronoun interpre-
tation and production relatively late in language development, generally not before the age
of six (a.o., Chien & Wexler, 1990; Spenader, Smits, & Hendriks, 2009; Karmiloff-Smith, 1985;
Grimshaw & Rosen, 1990; Philip & Coopmans, 1996; Koster, 1993), suggesting that the adult-
like use of pronouns is hard to master. This raises further questions: What makes pronouns
so difficult to learn, and what cognitive factors are critical for adult-like pronoun process-
ing? Although pronoun resolution is an important topic in linguistic and psycholinguistic
research, there is no general agreement about the underlying mechanisms. It also remains
3

unclear how the different factors, such as grammatical principles, the linguistic context, and
cognitive factors, interact.
1.1
Research questions
This thesis aims to investigate the relative contribution of linguistic constraints and general
cognitive factors on the interpretation and production of pronouns. Different cognitive fac-
tors have been found to influence language processing, such as working memory capacity,
speed of processing, and Theory of Mind-like skills. How do these factors influence pronoun
processing? Investigating the interaction between the linguistic constraints and the limita-
tions of the cognitive system that is used for language processing may provide insights in
pronoun acquisition and the pronoun processing mechanism.
Different linguistic constraints influence pronoun processing: grammatical principles,
such as the principles of Binding Theory (Chomsky, 1981) and discourse factors like the
saliency of referents in the linguistic context. Traditionally, the grammatical principles that
guide the use of pronouns are studied in the syntactic domain, whereas the effects of the
context are studied in the pragmatic domain. In the linguistic framework that is used in this
thesis, Optimality Theory (OT; Prince & Smolensky, 1997, 2004), grammatical principles and
discourse factors can both be formulated as linguistic constraints. This thesis tries to inte-
grate the insights from syntax and pragmatics by investigating the subquestion of how people
combine grammatical principles and discourse information in pronoun processing.
1.2
Research methodology
To investigate pronoun processing, I have implemented a computational model in the cogni-
tive architecture ACT-R (Anderson, 2007; Anderson et al., 2004) that simulates the production
and comprehension of referring expressions. The computational model is based on linguistic
theories of pronoun production and interpretation (a.o., Hendriks & Spenader, 2006). Imple-
menting a computational model requires the modeler to specify the workings of the theory
in detail, and to make all underlying assumptions explicit.
Implementing computational models within a cognitive architecture has additional ad-
vantages. A cognitive architecture aims at being a unified theory of cognition that can explain
human cognition across a range of different situations. The assumptions of the cognitive ar-
chitecture are based on the results of numerous psychological and neurophysiological exper-
iments. Implementing a computational model within a cognitive architecture such as ACT-R
ensures cognitive plausibility because the implementation is grounded in a general theory of
cognition. Additionally, implementing a computational model within a cognitive architecture
reduces the number of free parameters because the many simulations that are implemented
within the same cognitive architecture together validate the assumptions and parameters of
the cognitive architecture. The goal of implementing a cognitive model of pronoun process-
ing is to generate very specific, testable, and cognitively plausible predictions with respect to
the production and comprehension of pronouns, based on the model’s simulations.
4

1
Using cognitive models of pronoun processing embedded in the cognitive architecture
ACT-R, this thesis investigates the complex interaction between linguistic constraints and
cognitive factors. The predictions of our cognitive model can subsequently be investigated
using empirical and psychophysiological experiments. Different off-line and on-line empiri-
cal methods can be used to examine these predictions because the assumptions formulated in
our cognitive model constrain the interpretation of our results. Note that this methodology
does not involve comparing different computational models that implement different theo-
retical assumptions. Rather, because our predictions are very precise and our assumptions
based on the linguistic theories have been made explicit, the results of the empirical studies
can be used to validate the cognitive model under investigation, as well as the linguistic theo-
ries on which the model is based. In addition, the results may provide new insights in pronoun
processing, which could justify adjusting or extending the model. Thus, my methodology is
an iterative process that consists of computational modeling, generating testable predictions,
testing these predictions with empirical studies, and evaluating the model, as illustrated in
Figure 1.
age 1
age 2
age 3
0
50
100
4 yrs
5 yrs
6 yrs
0
50
100
Figure 1: Overview of the methodology used in cognitive modeling.
In the rest of this chapter, I will introduce the cognitive architecture ACT-R in more detail
and present the theoretical assumptions that form the basis of this thesis. I will conclude with
an overview of the next chapters.
2
The cognitive architecture ACT-R
Cognitive models are computational simulations of the cognitive processes involved in per-
forming a task, such as comprehending a sentence (R. L. Lewis & Vasishth, 2005). The cogni-
tive model presented in this thesis is implemented in ACT-R (Adaptive Control of Thought-
Rational; Anderson, 2007; Anderson et al., 2004), which is a cognitive architecture that aims to
explain human cognition in different situations and tasks. As such, it is not only a modeling
framework, but also a theory of cognition in which a range of assumptions are implemented
that are based on more specialized theories of cognition. ACT-R’s detailed and well-tested
assumptions about the cognitive system make it a suitable framework to investigate the ef-
fects of cognitive factors, such as processing speed and working memory capacity, on pronoun
processing. ACT-R models may result in cognitively plausible predictions about higher-level
cognition, such as behavioral performance and on-line processing in experimental tasks.
5

2.1
The structure of ACT-R
Figure 2 illustrates the modular structure of ACT-R. The modules are based on smaller the-
ories of cognition. The two modules of ACT-R that are most relevant for this thesis are the
declarative memory and the central production system.
visual
perception
motor
control
auditory
perception
control
state
central production
system
declarative 
memory
external world
ACT-R
Figure 2: The modular structure of ACT-R (adapted from Anderson et al., 2004).
The declarative memory module contains chunks of factual information, such as the lin-
guistic knowledge necessary for the interpretation and production of pronouns. Chunks can
be connected with other chunks, forming a network. Each chunk has an activation value that
reflects its own history and its relevance in the current context. The activation of chunks
determines both the probability that this chunk will be retrieved and the time required for
retrieval. In the ACT-R framework, the central production system contains IF-THEN rules,
which implement strategies or procedures that language users apply in sentence processing
and production. The production rules issue the retrieval of information from the declarative
memory and subsequently manipulate that information for further use. For example, these
production rules may implement grammatical principles that guide sentence processing (cf.
R. L. Lewis & Vasishth, 2005). Note that the choice for firing a production rule depends on
whether the IF-clause of the production rule matches the state of the current task and the
usefulness of that production rule in the past, as reflected by the utility of the production
rule.
The assumptions of the ACT-R architecture determine the language processing mecha-
nism. A basic assumption of ACT-R is that only one production rule can fire at a time, which
requires the language processing models to perform certain actions serially. However, the
architecture also assumes that some subprocesses are performed in parallel. For example,
while the system is waiting for the retrieval of declarative information, the visual module
may focus on new visual information that is coming in. Another example is that the acti-
vation of chunks fluctuates continuously depending on their own history and the current
context. Thus, ACT-R poses more restrictions on sentence processing with respect to timing
and competition between different kinds of information than most constraint-based theories
6

1
of sentence processing assume (a.o., MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994). Although
ACT-R poses restrictions on the implementation of sentence processing, it does not enforce a
particular strictly modular or serial account of sentence processing, which assumes that first
a syntactic analysis of the sentence is constructed, before semantic and discourse information
is integrated (a.o., Frazier,1987; see van Gompel & Pickering, 2007, for a review). In Chapter 3,
relevant assumptions of ACT-R are explained in more detail. So, by implementing the models
in ACT-R, our computational implementation of pronoun processing is constrained by ACT-
R’s assumptions about cognitive processing.
3
Linguistic background
As the starting point of our implementation of pronoun processing, we use Hendriks and Spe-
nader’s (2006) linguistic account of the acquisition of object pronouns. This account provides
an explanation of the finding that English-speaking and Dutch-speaking children up to age 6
still make errors interpreting object pronouns (a.o., Chien & Wexler, 1990; Philip & Coopmans,
1996; Koster, 1993). Hendriks and Spenader’s Optimality Theoretic account of this compre-
hension delay in language acquisition predicts that children acquire adult-like production
of object pronouns before they acquire adult-like comprehension of object pronouns. This
prediction was confirmed by later empirical studies (De Villiers, Cahillane, & Altreuter, 2006;
Spenader et al., 2009; Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello, 2009). Hendriks and Spe-
nader proposed that the grammatical principles that guide the production and interpreta-
tion of object pronouns are direction-sensitive, causing an ambiguity in the interpretation
of object pronouns but at the same time resulting in correct production of object pronouns.
Children show this ambiguity in their interpretation of object pronouns and incorrectly al-
low the object pronoun to corefer with the subject of the sentence as well. Adults, in contrast,
use perspective taking to resolve the ambiguity of the pronoun: by taking the perspective
of the speaker into consideration they know that if a speaker intended to refer to the local
subject, he or she would have used a reflexive. Therefore, adult listeners interpret an object
pronoun as reference to a non-subject referent, whereas children also allow the subject as the
antecedent of the pronoun.
A similar grammatical account has been proposed for the production of subject pronouns.
Here, adult speakers have been argued to consider the listener’s perspective when choosing a
referring expression to use (Hendriks, Englert, Wubs, & Hoeks, 2008). Support for this account
of the use of subject pronouns has been provided by Wubs, Hendriks, Hoeks, and Koster (2009),
who found that 4- to 6-year-old children use pronouns even for reference to a not very salient
discourse referent. In contrast, adult speakers try to avoid ambiguity for the listener and use
a full noun phrase instead.
Using a direction-sensitive grammar, these accounts are able to explain asymmetries be-
tween production and interpretation in language acquisition. These asymmetries in language
acquisition disappear when children have learned to use perspective taking. We have imple-
mented the theory of Hendriks and Spenader in ACT-R with the aim of explaining why chil-
dren do not use perspective taking and how exactly they acquire the perspective taking skills
7

that are necessary for adult-like processing of pronouns.
3.1
The linguistic theory Optimality Theory
Hendriks and Spenader formulated their account within the linguistic framework Optimal-
ity Theory (OT; Prince & Smolensky, 2004). In semantics, OT models the relation between an
input form and the optimal meaning for that form (e.g., Hendriks & de Hoop, 2001). In syn-
tax, OT models the relation between an input meaning and the optimal form to express that
meaning. The OT optimization process for interpretation is illustrated in Figure 3.
“ ...him ”
possible
interpretations
input
evaluation based 
on grammar
output 
(ambiguous)
“...himself ”
(not ambiguous)
Figure 3: Optimization from input to output in OT (left), illustrated with the interpretation
of object pronouns (middle) and reflexives (right) for the sentence During the inter-
view, Mart Smeets pointed to him / himself
On the basis of the input, candidate outputs are generated, which are evaluated by the
grammar. As illustrated in Figure 3, for pronouns and reflexives several candidate interpre-
tations compete: the pronoun or reflexive may refer to the subject referent (Mart Smeets) or
to a non-subject referent (Epke Zonderland). According to the grammar, reflexives must refer
to the subject referent, but pronouns are ambiguous. Pronouns can refer to a non-subject ref-
erent as well as to a subject referent. This corresponds to the interpretational pattern shown
by Dutch children.
An OT grammar consists of a set of ranked and violable constraints. These OT constraints
pertain to syntactic, semantic, and discourse information and may interact. To determine
the optimal candidate, these constraints are simultaneously applied to the candidates. The
output of the OT grammar is the candidate that commits the least severe constraint viola-
8

1
tions. In OT, it is more important to satisfy one highly ranked constraint than several lower
ranked constraints. Thus, the optimal output does not necessarily satisfy all constraints. In
this respect, violable constraints differ from inviolable rules.
After finding the optimal output(s), the opposite perspective is taken into account
to check whether the optimal choice for the listener is also optimal for the speaker and
vice versa. In OT this process of perspective taking is modeled as bidirectional optimiza-
tion (Blutner, 2000). In bidirectional optimization, both the listener’s perspective and the
speaker’s perspective are relevant for determining the optimal form or meaning. Through
this process, adults are hypothesized to block reference of an object pronoun to the subject
referent.
3.2
Implementation of OT account
This OT account is implemented within the cognitive architecture ACT-R in accordance with
the assumptions of ACT-R. For example, as the declarative knowledge in ACT-R is not ranked
but rather organized in networks of connected chunks, we have not implemented a strict hi-
erarchical ranking of grammatical constraints. Instead, the ranking of the grammatical con-
straints is reflected in the activation of the chunks representing the grammatical constraints
(but see Misker & Anderson, 2003, for a different implementation of OT in ACT-R). Further-
more, we used ACT-R’s learning mechanisms to explain the acquisition of object pronouns
because OT does not specify the learning mechanism for acquiring adult-like bidirectional
behavior (although learning mechanisms have been proposed in OT to account for children’s
reranking of constraints, see Tesar & Smolensky, 1998; Boersma & Hayes, 2001).
The cognitive model uses the same grammatical constraints for the interpretation and
production of object pronouns, as proposed by Hendriks and Spenader. In addition, the model
implements bidirectional optimization as two subsequent processes of unidirectional opti-
mization. In the first process the model takes its own perspective as a listener (interpretation)
or speaker (production), and in the second process the model takes the opposite perspective.
3.3
Generalizing the cognitive model
In Chapter 2, I will present a cognitive model that explains the acquisition of object pronouns.
In Chapter 3, the model is extended to explain the acquisition of subject pronouns. Tradition-
ally, subject pronouns are studied in the domain of pragmatics, which focuses on the effects of
the preceding discourse, whereas object pronouns are studied in the syntactic domain, which
focuses on the grammatical principles that guide sentence interpretation. However, the Opti-
mality Theoretic accounts explaining the acquisition of object pronouns and subject pronouns
are very similar because both delays in acquisition are explained from children’s difficulty
with perspective taking. Based on these accounts, I implemented a cognitive model of subject
pronouns using the same underlying mechanism as was used in the cognitive model account-
ing for the acquisition of object pronouns. In addition, insights from pragmatic theories of
pronoun use were implemented, such as the influence of discourse on the saliency of the ref-
erents in the linguistic context (a.o., Ariel, 1988; Arnold, 1998; Givón, 1983). The extended
9

model thus integrates a grammatical account and a discourse account of pronoun use, and
may also be used to explain the processing of subject pronouns and object pronouns.
4
Overview
In this thesis, I present a cognitive ACT-R model as a novel account of the interpretation and
production of referring expressions in discourse, and discuss the predictions that follow from
computational simulations and the results of the empirical studies that are performed to ad-
dress these predictions.
Chapter 2 describes the first version of a cognitive ACT-R model that simulates the acqui-
sition of object pronouns. On the basis of this model I predict that adult-like interpretation,
but not adult-like production, of object pronouns requires sufficient processing speed. This
chapter also presents a behavioral experiment with 4-6 old Dutch-speaking children testing
this prediction. The experiment shows that children who show a Delay of Principle B Effect
in acquisition perform better in pronoun comprehension if they are presented with slowed-
down speech. This result supports the prediction of our model.
Chapter 3 describes a cognitive model that explains the acquisition of subject pronouns
in discourse. The model is an extension of the cognitive model presented in Chapter 2. The
assumptions and implications of the model are discussed and the chapter concludes with spe-
cific and testable predictions. On the basis of this model, we argue that adult-like interpre-
tation and production of subject pronouns in discourse requires sufficient working memory
(WM) capacity and sufficient speed of processing.
Chapter 4 addresses the predictions from the cognitive model presented in Chapter 3. We
present a dual-task experiment with adult participants in which we manipulated WM load.
The behavioral results indicate that with higher WM load, adults show more child-like per-
formance on their interpretation of subject pronouns in discourse.
Chapter 5 presents a follow-up study of the dual-task experiment in Chapter 4. ERPs were
measured during a similar dual-task experiment. The results indicate that WM load and dis-
course structure influence the cognitive representation of the discourse structure already
very early in the discourse, disambiguating potentially ambiguous pronouns before they are
encountered.
The cognitive model simulating subject pronoun processing is an extension of the earlier
implemented model simulating object pronoun processing. The only addition is a component
of discourse processing. This raises the question whether discourse also influences object pro-
noun processing. Although we did not simulate influences of the linguistic discourse on object
pronoun processing, we predict on the basis of our earlier model that, whereas off-line perfor-
mance of object pronoun interpretation is not expected to be affected in adults, their on-line
processing may be affected. Chapter 6 presents a pupil dilation study with Dutch adults, in
which we investigated whether discourse affects the on-line processing of object pronouns.
Our results show very early effects of linguistic discourse, and also of visual context, sug-
gesting that on-line processing of object pronouns is influenced by the referents’ discourse
saliency.
10

1
Chapter 7 evaluates the cognitive models on the basis of the empirical results. The chapter
concludes with the implications of this novel account of the interpretation and production of
pronouns in discourse for language acquisition, language processing and language disorders.
Notes
1 Mart Smeets is a long-time sports presenter and commentator with the Dutch
public broadcaster (see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mart_Smeets).
Epke Zonder-
land is a Dutch gymnast and 2012 Olympic gold medalist in the high bar (see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epke_Zonderland).
11

12

chapter 2
Cognitive architectures and
language acquisition:
A case study in pronoun comprehension
This paper was previously published as:
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (2010).
Cognitive architectures and language
acquisition: A case study in pronoun comprehension. Journal of Child Language, 37(3), 731-766.

Abstract
In this paper we discuss a computational cognitive model of children’s poor performance on
pronoun interpretation (the so-called Delay of Principle B Effect, or DPBE). This cognitive
model is based on a theoretical account that attributes the DPBE to children’s inability as
hearers to also take into account the speaker’s perspective. The cognitive model predicts
that child hearers are unable to do so because their speed of linguistic processing is too lim-
ited to perform this second step in interpretation. We tested this hypothesis empirically in a
psycholinguistic study, in which we slowed down the speech rate to give children more time
for interpretation, and in a computational simulation study. The results of the two studies
confirm the predictions of our model. Moreover, these studies show that embedding a theory
of linguistic competence in a cognitive architecture allows for the generation of detailed and
testable predictions with respect to linguistic performance.

2
1
Introduction
An influential but also controversial distinction in linguistic research is the distinction be-
tween linguistic competence and linguistic performance (Chomsky, 1965). Linguistic compe-
tence pertains to the idealized linguistic knowledge a language user has of his or her language,
which is often contrasted with linguistic performance, the actual use of this knowledge in con-
crete situations. This distinction between competence and performance provided a rationale
for studying linguistic phenomena separately from cognitive factors. However, this distinc-
tion also created the methodological problem that it became impossible to empirically test
theories of linguistic competence solely by studying linguistic performance. As a result, lin-
guistic analyses appealing to aspects of linguistic performance such as insufficient working
memory capacity, processing limitations or pragmatic skills are difficult to evaluate. Never-
theless, such analyses have been proposed in many areas of language acquisition to explain
differences in linguistic performance between children and adults.
The aim of this paper is to show that embedding a theory of linguistic competence in a
cognitive architecture may allow for the generation of detailed and testable predictions with
respect to linguistic performance. A cognitive architecture is a general framework that incor-
porates built-in and well-tested parameters and constraints on cognitive processes. Within
a cognitive architecture, computational models can be built that simulate the cognitive pro-
cesses involved in performing a task such as interpreting a sentence. The predictions gener-
ated by these computational models can be tested on the basis of empirical data, for example
the performance results obtained from a psycholinguistic experiment. As a case study, we
present an account of the Delay of Principle B Effect in language acquisition (e.g., Chien &
Wexler, 1990; Jakubowicz, 1984; Koster, 1993). The Delay of Principle B Effect (DPBE) con-
cerns the observation that children’s comprehension of pronouns is delayed in comparison
with their comprehension of reflexives. Initially, children show incorrect performance on
pronoun comprehension as well as on reflexive comprehension. However, when they have
mastered reflexive comprehension, they still show incorrect performance on pronoun com-
prehension. This phenomenon in language acquisition is referred to as the DPBE. It can take
several years before children show correct performance on both pronoun comprehension and
reflexive comprehension.
The DPBE has received a variety of explanations, many of which appeal to performance
factors to account for children’s errors in comprehending pronouns. One such explanation
is formulated within the linguistic framework of Optimality Theory (Hendriks & Spenader,
2006). We show how a cognitive model can be built within the cognitive architecture ACT-
R (Anderson et al., 2004) that implements an optimality theoretic explanation of the DPBE.
The resulting cognitive model predicts that children will make fewer errors in their interpre-
tation of pronouns but not in their interpretation of reflexives if they are given more time
for comprehension, for example by slowing down the speech rate. We tested this prediction
empirically in a psycholinguistic study as well as in a computational simulation study.
The organization of this paper is as follows. First, we discuss the DPBE and several of the
proposed explanations to account for this delay in language acquisition, including a detailed
15

account of the optimality theoretic explanation of the DPBE. Then we present a cognitive
model that is based on the optimality theoretic explanation of the DPBE. The hypotheses de-
rived from this cognitive model are first tested in a psycholinguistic experiment involving 75
Dutch children between 4;1 and 6;3 years old. Then a simulation study is discussed in which
the effects of speech rate on the comprehension of sentences with pronouns and reflexives
are modeled. In this second study, the performance of a group of children is simulated and
compared to the results of the psycholinguistic experiment. The paper concludes with a dis-
cussion of the considerations and limitations in using cognitive models to study theories of
language acquisition.
2
Delay of Principle B Eﬀect (DPBE)
A well-established finding in language acquisition research is the observation that, in lan-
guages such as English, French and Dutch, children’s comprehension of pronouns is delayed
in comparison with their comprehension of reflexives (e.g., Chien & Wexler, 1990; Jakubow-
icz, 1984; Koster, 1993; Philip & Coopmans, 1996; Spenader et al., 2009). This phenomenon is
called the Delay of Principle B Effect (DPBE). Principle B is one of the two principles of Binding
Theory that relate to the adult use and interpretation of reflexives and pronouns (Chomsky,
1981):
1a. Principle A: a reflexive must be bound in its local domain.
1b. Principle B: a pronoun must be free in its local domain.
The local domain is defined as the minimal clause containing both the lexical anaphor and a
subject. An anaphor is bound when it is co-indexed with and c-commanded by an antecedent.1
Sentences 2a and 2b illustrate the application of Principles A and B:
2a. The penguini is hitting himselfi/*j with a pan.
2b. The penguini is hitting him*i/j with a pan.
The reflexive himself in Sentence 2a can only co-refer with the local subject the penguin, in ac-
cordance with Principle A, and may not co-refer with another referent. In contrast, Principle
B prevents the pronoun him in Sentence 2b from co-referring with the penguin. Therefore,
him must co-refer with another referent present in the linguistic or extra-linguistic context.
From the age of 3;0 on, children are able to interpret sentences with reflexives, like 2a, cor-
rectly, thus displaying knowledge of Principle A. However, up to the age of 6;6, children show
difficulties in the interpretation of pronouns in sentences like 2b (e.g., Chien & Wexler, 1990).
They seem to choose freely between a coreferential interpretation, in which the pronoun co-
refers with the local subject, and a disjoint interpretation, in which the pronoun co-refers
with an antecedent outside its local domain. Thus, in comprehension children act as if they
only have access to Principle A. Their acquisition of Principle B seems to be delayed.
16

2
2.1
Explanations of the DPBE
To explain the Delay of Principle B Effect (DPBE), several theories have been proposed within a
nativist framework (a notable exception is the usage-based account of Matthews et al., 2009).
In this section, we limit ourselves to two well-accepted theories: the pragmatic account of
Thornton and Wexler (1999), and the processing account of Reinhart (2006). Both Thornton
and Wexler’s and Reinhart’s account proceed from a nativist view on language. Hence, they
assume that children have knowledge of both Principle A and B, and should in principle be able
to apply this knowledge. However, the accounts differ in their explanation of why Principle
B is delayed.
Thornton and Wexler (1999) propose that the DPBE is caused by a deficiency in pragmatic
knowledge. The starting point for their theory is the observation that in certain special con-
texts a pronoun may receive a coreferential interpretation, for example when the event being
described is unexpected or uncharacteristic. To indicate that such an exceptional coreferen-
tial interpretation is intended, speakers stress the pronoun (‘Mama Bear is washing HER’, see
Thornton & Wexler, 1999, p. 94), in addition to providing special pragmatic context. Thorn-
ton and Wexler argue that children do not yet have sufficient world knowledge and prag-
matic knowledge to determine whether the event described by the sentence reflects a typical
or atypical situation, that is, to evaluate whether the context licenses a coreferential inter-
pretation. Furthermore, Thornton and Wexler argue that children do not recognize stress
on a pronoun as an indication that the speaker intended to express an atypical interpreta-
tion. As a result, children accept a coreferential interpretation of a pronoun sentence such as
‘Mama Bear is washing her’. For adult language users, only a disjoint interpretation is possi-
ble for this sentence, because adults do not allow a coreferential interpretation in the absence
of stress. So children over-accept coreferential interpretations of pronouns because they are
unable to distinguish the contexts that license coreferential interpretations from the contexts
that do not license such interpretations. Children will have to acquire the world knowledge
and pragmatic knowledge necessary to disallow a coreferential interpretation of a pronoun
in non-exceptional contexts.
Although their account focuses on the comprehension of pronouns, Thornton and Wexler
point out that this lack of pragmatic knowledge has ramifications for children’s production
as well (1999, p. 95). However, under their account it remains a mystery why children who
show difficulties on pronoun comprehension at the same time show adult-like performance
on pronoun production (see De Villiers et al., 2006; Spenader et al., 2009).
In contrast to Thornton and Wexler, Reinhart (2006) argues that children possess all
knowledge required for the interpretation of pronouns. The crucial difference between chil-
dren and adults is that children fail to complete the operation of reference-set computation.
Reference-set computation is an operation that is performed by the parser to choose between
multiple interpretations generated by the grammar. The operation is required for determin-
ing whether a coreferential interpretation is permitted for a pronoun. For a sentence such as
3, for example, the grammar generates two different derivations: one giving rise to a bound
variable interpretation 3a, and one giving rise to a coreferential 3b or disjoint 3c interpre-
tation. A coreferential interpretation arises if the two variables x and y both happen to be
17

resolved to the same referent, in this case Lili, whereas a disjoint interpretation arises if x and
y are resolved to different referents.
3. Only Lili thinks she’s got the flu. (adapted from Reinhart, 2006, p. 167)
a Bound variable interpretation: Only Lili (λx (x thinks x has got the flu))
b Coreferential interpretation: Only Lili (λx (x thinks y has got the flu) & y = Lili)
c Disjoint interpretation: Only Lili (λx (x thinks y has got the flu) & y ̸= Lili)
The grammar allows the bound variable interpretation 3a for Sentence 3, because the pronoun
she is not bound within its local domain (cf. Principle B). The grammar also allows the pro-
noun to be interpreted as a free variable, giving rise to the disjoint interpretation 3c. Whether
coreferential interpretation 3b is allowed, however, must be determined through reference-
set computation. Reference-set computation involves the comparison of pairs of derivations
and their corresponding interpretations. A coreferential interpretation is allowed for 3 only
if this interpretation is different from the bound variable interpretation. If these interpre-
tations are indistinguishable, a coreferential interpretation is not allowed because it is in-
efficient to revert back to an interpretation that is ruled out by the grammar through the
discourse option of coreference. With respect to sentence 3, the coreferential interpretation
is allowed, because 3a and 3b have slightly different meanings. Interpretation 3a entails that
other people do not think that they have got the flu, whereas interpretation 3b entails that
other people do not think that Lili has got the flu. The situation is slightly different for the
sentence in 4.
4. Mama Bear is washing her.
a Bound variable interpretation: Mama Bear (λx (x is washing x))
b Coreferential interpretation: Mama Bear (λx (x is washing y) & y = Mama Bear)
c Disjoint interpretation: Mama Bear (λx (x is washing y) & y ̸= Mama Bear)
For this sentence, the grammar (Principle B) disallows the bound variable interpretation 4a,
because the pronoun her would be bound within its local domain. Although 4a is disallowed by
the grammar, reference-set computation nevertheless requires that a bound variable deriva-
tion is constructed and its interpretation is compared with the coreferential interpretation
4b. Because the two interpretations are indistinguishable, the coreferential interpretation is
not allowed for sentence 4. Consequently, only the disjoint interpretation 4c is possible for
this sentence.
Reinhart argues that children may be unable to perform this operation of reference-set
computation because of working memory limitations. If children fail to complete the opera-
tion of reference-set computation, they resort to a guessing strategy and arbitrarily choose
between a coreferential and a disjoint interpretation. Other strategies are conceivable as well
and are used with other marked forms requiring reference-set computation, such as con-
trastive stress. Only when children have developed sufficient working memory capacity will
they be able to complete the operation of reference-set computation and disallow the corefer-
ential interpretation for pronouns. Because the grammar generates two derivations for pro-
noun sentences but not for reflexive sentences, reference-set computation is not involved in
18

2
the interpretationofreflexives. Withrespecttotheproduction ofpronouns, as speakersknow
which meaning they intend for the utterance, reference-set computation is not involved in
production either. This would explain why children are able to produce pronouns correctly
from a young age on while still having difficulties with the comprehension of pronouns (De
Villiers et al., 2006; Spenader et al., 2009).
In the next section, we contrast these theories with an alternative theory: the optimality
theoretic account of Hendriks and Spenader (2006), which assumes that only Principle A is
part of grammar and Principle B is a derived effect.
3
Optimality Theory explanation of the DPBE
A third type of explanation of the DPBE is provided by Hendriks and Spenader (2006). They
argue that the DPBE is the result of a direction-sensitive grammar, that is, a grammar that
has different effects in production and comprehension. Their account is formulated within
the framework of Optimality Theory (OT), a linguistic framework that models the relationship
between a surface form and its underlying structure by means of optimization from a partic-
ular input to the optimal output for that input (Prince & Smolensky, 2004). In the domain
of semantics, OT describes the relation between an input form and the optimal meaning for
that form (e.g., Hendriks & de Hoop, 2001). Applied to syntax, OT describes the relation be-
tween an input meaning and the optimal form for expressing that meaning. OT thus provides
an account of linguistic competence with respect to language production (i.e., OT syntax) as
well as language comprehension (i.e., OT semantics). In OT, the grammar consists of a set of
violable constraints, rather than inviolable rules. For every input, which can be either a form
or a meaning, a set of potential outputs, or candidates, is generated. These candidates are
evaluated on the basis of the constraints of the grammar. In OT, constraints are as general
as possible and hence may conflict. OT resolves conflicts among constraints by ranking the
constraints in a language specific hierarchy on the basis of their strength. One violation of a
stronger (i.e., higher ranked) constraint is more important than many violations of a weaker
(i.e., lower ranked) constraint. The optimal candidate is the candidate that commits the least
severe constraint violations. Only the optimal candidate is realized.
3.1
Direction-sensitive grammar
For their explanation of the DPBE, Hendriks and Spenader (2006) exploit the fact that an OT
grammar is inherently direction-sensitive: The form-meaning relations defined by the OT
grammar are not necessarily the same from the speaker’s perspective (involving optimization
from meaning to form) as from the hearer’s perspective (involving optimization from form to
meaning) (Smolensky, 1996). This property of OT is a result of the output orientation of the
markedness constraints in OT. OT assumes two kinds of constraints. Faithfulness constraints
evaluate the similarity between input and output. Because faithfulness constraints pertain to
the mapping between input and output, these constraints are direction-insensitive and also
apply in the reverse direction of optimization. An example is the constraint Principle A (5),
19

which prohibits reflexives from being locally free. This constraint induces hearers to assign a
locally bound interpretation to reflexives and at the same time prohibits speakers to express
a disjoint interpretation by using a reflexive.
5. Principle A: A reflexive must be bound in its local domain.
Markedness constraints on forms, on the other hand, reflect a preference for unmarked forms,
irrespective of their meaning. Because they pertain to the output only, markedness con-
straints on form only have an effect when a form must be selected from a set of candidate
forms. That is, they only have an effect from the speaker’s perspective. An example is the
constraint Avoid Pronouns. For hearers, this constraint does not have any effect, because
for hearers the form is already given as the input. The hearer’s task is to select the optimal
meaning for this form. Since the constraint Avoid Pronouns does not distinguish between
potential meanings, it does not have any effect from the hearer’s perspective. The constraint
Avoid Pronouns is part of the constraint hierarchy Referential Economy (6). This
constraint hierarchy consists of several markedness constraints, of which Avoid Reflex-
ives is the lowest ranked. The hierarchy reflects a preference for less referential content:
Reflexives are preferred over pronouns, and pronouns over full NPs.
6. Referential Economy: Avoid full NPs ≫Avoid pronouns ≫Avoid reflexives2.
In this discussion we limit ourselves to the choice between pronouns and reflexives and hence
only consider the constraint Avoid Pronouns. This constraint is violated by any pronoun
in the output, and is satisfied by any reflexive in the output. The presence of markedness
constraints such as Avoid Pronouns can lead to an asymmetry between production and
comprehension, as is shown below.
The evaluation of candidates on the basis of the constraints of the grammar can be illus-
trated with an OT tableau. Figure 1 displays the two comprehension tableaux representing
the comprehension of a reflexive and the comprehension of a pronoun, respectively. The in-
put to a comprehension tableau is a form and the output is the optimal meaning for this form.
The constraints are presented in columns in order of descending strength, from left to right.
Principle A must be ranked higher than Avoid Pronouns because otherwise pronouns
would never be selected. The relevant candidate outputs (in this case, potential meanings for
the input form) are listed in the first column. A violation of a constraint is marked with a ‘*’,
and a fatal violation with a ‘!’. The optimal output is marked by ‘’.
When a hearer encounters a pronoun or a reflexive, he has to choose between a corefer-
ential interpretation (first row) and a disjoint interpretation (second row). The coreferential
interpretation is the optimal interpretation for a reflexive (Figure 1a), because the disjoint in-
terpretation violates the strongest constraint Principle A, whereas the coreferential inter-
pretation satisfies this constraint. When comprehending a pronoun (Figure 1b), Principle
A is not relevant because it does not define the antecedent possibilities of pronouns. Because
Avoid Pronouns does not apply in comprehension, both the coreferential interpretation
and the disjoint interpretation are optimal candidates according to the grammar. As a result,
pronouns are ambiguous. Hence, children might randomly choose one of the two candidate
meanings when no contextual clues are available.
20

2
Input: reflexive
Principle A
Avoid Pronouns

coreferential
disjoint
*!
Figure 1: a. OT tableau of the comprehension of a reﬂexive
Input: pronoun
Principle A
Avoid Pronouns

coreferential

disjoint
Figure 1: b. OT tableau of the comprehension of a pronoun.
Figure 2 shows the tableaux for the production of a coreferential interpretation and a
disjoint interpretation, respectively. A violation of a constraint is marked with a ‘*’, and a
fatal violation with a ‘!’. The optimal output is marked by ‘’.
Input: coreferential
Principle A
Avoid Pronouns

reflexive
pronoun
*!
Figure 2: a. OT tableau of the production of a coreferential meaning
Input: disjoint
Principle A
Avoid Pronouns
reflexive
*!

pronoun
*
Figure 2: b. OT tableau of the production of a disjoint meaning.
When a speaker wishes to express a coreferential meaning (Figure 2a), the relevant com-
peting candidate forms are a pronoun and a reflexive. Principle A does not distinguish
between these two candidates, because this constraint allows a coreferential interpretation
to be expressed by a reflexive as well as a pronoun. However, Avoid Pronouns prefers re-
flexives over pronouns. Therefore, a reflexive is a better form for expressing a coreferential
meaning than a pronoun. On the other hand, a pronoun is the optimal form for expressing a
disjoint meaning (Figure 2b), because it satisfies Principle A, whereas a reflexive does not.
In summary, an optimality theoretic grammar is direction-sensitive, because the optimal
form-meaning pairs in production are not necessarily the same as the optimal form-meaning
pairs in comprehension. Specifically, a pronoun can have a coreferential and a disjoint in-
terpretation according to the grammar, whereas the best form for expressing a coreferential
interpretation is a reflexive and the best form for expressing a disjoint interpretation is a pro-
noun according to the same grammar. This fits the pattern typically displayed by 4- to 7-year
21

old English and Dutch children, leading to an asymmetry between their production and their
comprehension (De Villiers et al., 2006; Spenader et al., 2009).
3.2
Explanation for adults’ comprehension of pronouns
In contrast to children, adult language users always interpret a pronoun as having a disjoint
meaning. According to Hendriks and Spenader (2006), the difference between children and
adults is that adult hearers also take into account the perspective of the speaker, whereas
children only consider their own perspective. The adult way of interpretation can be modeled
as bidirectional optimization (Blutner, 2000). Figure 3 illustrates the serial implementation of
bidirectional optimization proposed by Hendriks, van Rijn, and Valkenier (2007).
Figure 3: Taking into account the speaker’s perspective in comprehension. The coreferen-
tial interpretation for pronouns (represented by the dotted line) is blocked be-
cause a coreferential interpretation is best expressed by a reflexive.
When an adult hearer encounters a pronoun or a reflexive, he has to determine the op-
timal meaning for this form. This requires the hearer to optimize in the hearer’s direction
of optimization: from form to meaning. In addition, however, the hearer must also check
whether the selected meaning is indeed expressed by the encountered form. This requires
that the hearer also optimizes from meaning back to form, that is, that the hearer adopts
the speaker’s perspective. When comprehending reflexives, this process of bidirectional op-
timization leads to the same result as unidirectional optimization. In both cases, the optimal
meaning for a reflexive is a coreferential interpretation. However, when comprehending pro-
nouns, bidirectional optimization leads to a different result. Recall that, from a hearer’s per-
spective, pronouns are ambiguous and can also receive a coreferential interpretation. From
the speaker’s perspective, however, a coreferential meaning is best expressed using a reflex-
ive. If a hearer were to select the coreferential meaning for the ambiguous pronoun in the first
22

2
step of optimization, he would find out in the second step of optimization that a coreferen-
tial meaning is best expressed with a reflexive. So the resulting form (a reflexive) is different
from the encountered form (a pronoun). As a consequence, the coreferential interpretation
is blocked for pronouns, and pronouns are only assigned a disjoint interpretation.
In summary, children’s pattern of comprehension and production can be explained by
unidirectional optimization, which is a formalization of the idea that children only consider
their own perspective. The adult pattern can be explained by bidirectional optimization,
which is a formalization of the idea that adults take into account the opposite perspective
in addition to their own perspective. This OT explanation provides an adequate description
of the Delay of Principle B Effect. It can account for the observation that the interpretation
of pronouns is acquired later than the interpretation of reflexives. It also explains why chil-
dren’s production of pronouns may already be adult-like, while their comprehension of pro-
nouns is still poor. Furthermore, the analysis of the DPBE can be generalized to other acqui-
sition delays, either in comprehension or in production. This contrasts with the processing
account of Reinhart (2006), which only predicts delays in comprehension.
4
Testing linguistic theories
In the previous sections, we discussed three different explanations for the DPBE: Thornton
and Wexler’s (1999) pragmatic account, Reinhart’s (2006) processing account and Hendriks
and Spenader’s (2006) OT account. These explanations illustrate the lack of consensus with
respect to the cause of the DPBE. An important reason for this lack of consensus is that it
is difficult to contrast the theories on the basis of linguistic data alone. The theories men-
tioned above attribute the DPBE to non-linguistic factors such as a lack of pragmatic knowl-
edge, limited working memory capacity or the inability to take into account another person’s
perspective. However, without further specification of these non-linguistic factors and how
they influence linguistic performance, it is difficult to evaluate these theories. To arrive at
a full understanding of linguistic competence, it is therefore essential that theories of lin-
guistic competence are tested in combination with viable theories of pragmatic reasoning,
memory, parsing and other cognitive processes. Only then will it be possible to generate pre-
cise predictions for linguistic performance that can be empirically evaluated on the basis of
experimental data.
A possible way to combine a theory of linguistic competence with theories of cognition
and cognitive processes is by embedding the linguistic theory in a cognitive architecture. Cog-
nitive architectures combine several theories of different cognitive subsystems into a single
theory of the human cognitive system. A number of architectures have been proposed e.g.,
EPIC: Meyer & Kieras, 1997; Soar: Newell, 1990; ACT-R: Anderson et al., 2004 that offer a com-
putational environment in which models can be constructed of the phenomena under study.
By constructing a model in the context of an architecture, the model automatically respects
the assumptions of the architecture.Computational simulations are a powerful tool for test-
ing theories since they allow for assessing the completeness of the theoretical account. Also,
they make explicit which cognitive processes are required for explaining the phenomenon
23

that is studied. The output of a simulation typically consists of the observed behavior and
of estimates of the time it takes to perform the task. Therefore, precise predictions can be
generated of human behavior (for a review of language-related computational models, see
Dijkstra & De Smedt, 1996).
As we saw in the previous section, OT provides a way to account for children’s and adults’
linguistic competence with respect to pronouns. However, since OT is a theory of linguistic
competence, it does not provide an explanation for the change in optimization mechanism
between children and adults. Also, OT does not make any predictions about the time it takes to
develop the ability to apply bidirectional optimization, or about the factors that are relevant
in developing this ability.
The following section presents a computational cognitive model of the acquisition of pro-
noun comprehension that is based on the theoretical OT model of Hendriks and Spenader
(2006) and is implemented in the general cognitive architecture ACT-R (Anderson et al., 2004).
Inthemodel, ACT-RinteractsdirectlywiththeOTgrammartoproducelinguisticperformance
(cf. Hendriks et al., 2007; see Misker & Anderson, 2003, for an alternative approach to inte-
grating OT and ACT-R). This is possible because of two important properties of OT: its robust-
ness and its cross-modularity. Because OT is robust and does not pose any restrictions on the
input, OT is able to assign an optimal output even to incomplete, dispreferred or ill-formed
inputs. Hence, it is able to explain incremental parsing and certain parsing preferences with-
out having to assume a separate parser (e.g., S. Stevenson & Smolensky, 2006). Furthermore,
because OT can be applied to any linguistic domain, OT constraints can be ordered in one large
constraint hierarchy. As a consequence, an OT grammar is inherently cross-modular and does
not require any interfaces to mediate between different linguistic modules. These two prop-
erties allow us to implement the OT grammar (i.e., the constraints and their ranking) directly
into the cognitive architecture ACT-R. As we will show, the resulting computational cognitive
model generates testable predictions with respect to children’s and adults’ performance on
pronoun comprehension.
5
Cognitive models of language acquisition
The computational cognitive model we constructed is built in the cognitive architecture ACT-
R (Adaptive Control of Thought-Rational; Anderson et al., 2004). ACT-R is both a theory of
cognition and a modeling environment. As a theory of cognition, its aim is to explain hu-
man cognition and to account for a broad range of data from psychological and neurocogni-
tive experiments.3 It has a modular structure: Each of ACT-R’s modules is based on smaller
theories on cognition. For example, ACT-R contains a theory about retrieving declarative
knowledge that is based on Anderson and Schooler’s rational analysis of memory (Anderson
& Schooler, 1991) and a theory about the processing of auditory stimuli that is loosely based
on EPIC (Meyer & Kieras, 1997). ACT-R also is a modeling environment that can be used to im-
plement a computational simulation of a specific task. The architecture constrains these sim-
ulation models to ensure psychological plausibility. The constraints imposed on the models
are based on experimental data and define how information is processed, stored and retrieved
24

2
within modules, and how information is communicated between modules (Anderson, 2007).
Although many decisions have to be made when a linguistic analysis is translated into a com-
putational simulation, mainly related to the non-linguistic aspects of the task, the constraints
of the cognitive architecture guide these decisions.
5.1
General structure of ACT-R
ACT-R distinguishes several modules that are involved in different aspects of human cognitive
functioning. The two main modules of ACT-R are declarative memory and the central produc-
tion system. Declarative memory contains chunks of factual information. The central produc-
tion system contains IF-THEN rules. The IF-clause of each production rule specifies a number
of conditions that must be met for that production rule to be considered for execution. For
example, a production rule that initiates a search in memory for alternative interpretations
of a linguistic input is subject to the condition that a linguistic input is available in memory
that has not already been fully processed, and that the memory system is currently not in use
by another operation. The THEN-clause specifies which actions need to be performed if that
production rule is selected for execution (for example, the instruction to initiate the retrieval
of a memory element, or to initiate a key press). At each time step, the central production
system matches the production rules to the current state of the system, and the most active
matching rule is selected for execution. The activation value of production rules reflects the
utility of that rule and is an expression of the expected benefits of executing that production
rule discounted for the costs associated with that production rule. Elements in declarative
memory are ranked on the basis of their activation value. The activation value of declarative
memory elements (often called chunks) reflects the usefulness of that chunk in the current
context. This activation value is based on a weighted average of the number of prior occur-
rences of that chunk in general, and the number of prior occurrences of that chunk in the
current context.
An assumption of ACT-R that is important for the present study is the assumption that ev-
ery operation, for example the retrieval of a fact from declarative memory or the execution
of a production rule, takes a certain amount of time. The total execution time of a cognitive
process is not simply the sum of the durations of all constituting operations, as the different
modules can operate in parallel. However, each module in itself can only perform a single
action at a time. Thus, the duration of a process critically depends both on the timing of the
serial processes within a module, and on how the different modules interact. To provide spe-
cific time estimations for a cognitive process, a computational simulation model can be con-
structed within the ACT-R system that provides precise predictions when it is run (Anderson
et al., 2004).
5.2
Modeling unidirectional optimization
In this section, we present an ACT-R model that implements Hendriks and Spenader’s (2006)
theoretical account of the DPBE. Our computational DPBE/ACT-R model is a refined imple-
mentation of Hendriks et al. (2007), that enables us to derive more precise predictions re-
25

lated to the DPBE4. The main difference between our implementation and the original model
(Hendriks et al., 2007) is that our DPBE/ACT-R model is more generic than the original model.
Our DPBE/ACT-R model can simulate not only the acquisition of pronoun comprehension, but
the acquisition of pronoun production as well. Moreover, the current implementation allows
for more principled timing of the processes involved in linguistic performance (see R. L. Lewis
& Vasishth, 2005; van Maanen, van Rijn, & Borst, 2009; van Rijn & Anderson, 2003, for other
approaches modeling temporal aspects of linguistic processing in ACT-R).
In our model, different candidate forms and candidate meanings are implemented as
chunks in declarative memory. From a hearer’s perspective, there are two possible candidate
interpretations for a pronoun or a reflexive: a disjoint meaning and a coreferential mean-
ing. From a speaker’s perspective there are two possible candidate forms to express a disjoint
meaning or a coreferential meaning: a pronoun or a reflexive. These four different candidates
are represented as separate chunks. The optimality theoretic constraints are implemented in
terms of the violations they incur. Each constraint is represented as a collection of chunks.
The chunks specify for each possible input which candidate outputs violate this constraint.
As there are four possible inputs in the current domain, each constraint is represented as
four chunks. Production rules define strategies to retrieve forms, meanings, and constraints
from memory. Figure 4 illustrates the process of finding the optimal meaning. Although the
process can be applied to comprehension as well as production, in this study we focus on
comprehension.
Box 1
Retrieve
Candidate
Cm  
Box 2
Retrieve
Candidate
Cn 
Box 3
Retrieve
Constraint
Box 4
Evaluation
Cm ≠Cn  
Box 5
Evaluation
Cm = Cn  
Box 6
Output:
optimal 
candidate  
Figure 4: Structure of the ACT-R model of learning to optimize bidirectionally (adapted from
Hendriks et al., 2007).
In comprehension, the input for the DPBE/ACT-R model consists of a pronoun or a reflex-
ive for which the optimal interpretation has to be determined. The first step is to retrieve
two of the possible candidates from declarative memory. After the retrieval of the two can-
26

2
didates, a chunk is retrieved representing a constraint that can be used to evaluate the two
candidates. Because chunks are ordered based on their activation value, the system will re-
trieve the highest ranked constraint first. If one of the candidates violates the constraint,
that candidate is replaced by another candidate from declarative memory, and another pro-
cess of comparison takes place. If there is no other candidate, the remaining candidate will be
selected as the optimal meaning. If the two candidates show the same pattern of constraint
violations (both violating or satisfying this constraint), the next constraint will be retrieved.
If none of the constraints distinguishes between the two candidate meanings, then one of the
meanings is randomly selected as the optimal meaning. This process is similar to a recursive
optimization process that finds the optimal candidate by evaluating the candidates against
the highest ranked constraint and evaluating the candidates against lower ranked constraints
only if necessary. A complete recursive optimization process would continue until all poten-
tial candidates are evaluated. However, the optimization process can be interrupted in the
simulations because of cognitive constraints.
In the optimality theoretic analysis of Hendriks and Spenader (2006), Principle A is the
strongest of the two constraints. When the input is a reflexive, the application of Principle
A is already sufficient to select the coreferential meaning as the optimal meaning. However,
when the input is a pronoun, the application of both Principle A and Avoid Pronouns
is insufficient to distinguish between the two candidate meanings. Therefore, one of these
candidates is randomly selected as the optimal meaning. At this stage, the model performs at
chance on pronoun comprehension, whereas it shows almost correct performance on reflex-
ive comprehension. Because the model requires more steps to arrive at an interpretation for
the pronoun (first applying two constraints and then selecting a candidate at random) than
for the reflexive (just applying one constraint), it is predicted that it takes the model more
time to process a pronoun than a reflexive.
5.3
Modeling bidirectional optimization
Bidirectional optimization can be thought of as two processes of unidirectional optimization
to be performed during on-line sentence processing (Hendriks et al., 2007). In a processing
account of bidirectional OT, a straightforward implementation of bidirectional optimization
is to have the second step of optimization follow the first step of optimization, as the second
step requires the output of the first step. Therefore, we have implemented bidirectional opti-
mization as two unidirectional optimization processes that are performed in sequence. This
was already schematically described in Figure 3.
In the computational simulation new inputs arrive at a fixed rate. As in the situation in
which an external speaker determines the speaking rate, the model as a hearer cannot in-
fluence this rate. Therefore, the amount of time available for selecting an optimal meaning
is limited. Because bidirectional optimization consists of two sequential processes of unidi-
rectional optimization, bidirectional optimization takes more time than unidirectional opti-
mization. In the DPBE/ACT-R model, initially the model can only perform a single process of
unidirectional optimization within the limited time and is therefore unable to perform bidi-
27

rectional optimization during on-line sentence processing. This results in performance that
is similar to the performance of young children. As discussed earlier, a unidirectional process
results in the correct interpretation of reflexives. However, because two steps of unidirec-
tional optimization are needed for correct pronoun interpretation, performance on pronouns
remains at chance level. Only if more time is provided, or when processing efficiency im-
proves, bidirectional optimization becomes possible. This account of the DPBE implies that
children are in principle capable of applying bidirectional optimization but do not succeed
because of limited resources.
In the ACT-R architecture, higher processing efficiency is obtained through the mech-
anism of production compilation (Taatgen & Anderson, 2002). Production compilation is a
learning mechanism that combines two production rules that are repeatedly executed in se-
quence into one new production rule. By means of this learning mechanism cognitive pro-
cessing becomes much faster, since the new rule has the same functionality as the two pro-
duction rules before compilation. For example, the model contains two production rules that
retrieve candidates from declarative memory. The first production rule requests the retrieval
of a candidate on the basis of the received input. The next production rule processes that re-
trieval and requests another candidate that is not the same as the first retrieved candidate.
After repeatedly using these two rules in sequence, the production compilation mechanism
creates a new production rule that stores the information of the two candidates at the same
time. As this production rule is much more efficient than the two original production rules,
this new rule will be preferred by the model. This new rule can again be combined with other
production rules in exactly the same way. For example, a production rule may be created
that not only retrieves two candidates, but also evaluates these two candidates on the basis
of the highest ranked constraint. Eventually, sentence processing is performed fast enough
for bidirectional optimization to succeed within the available amount of time. Note that the
time course of learning depends on the frequencies of the input forms, as the compilation
of production rules is a function of the number of times a set of rules has been executed in
sequence.
In summary, we modeled bidirectional optimization as two sequential processes of uni-
directional optimization. If the model cannot perform both steps within the allotted time,
pronouns remain ambiguous and a guessing pattern emerges. However, when the model is
given more time for interpretation, it will show increased performance on pronoun compre-
hension. To test this prediction, we performed a psycholinguistic study described in the next
section.
6
Study 1: Experimental study
In this section, we present the results of a psycholinguistic study that we carried out to test
the predictions of the cognitive model discussed in the previous section. Based on the proper-
ties of the DPBE/ACT-R model, we predict that performance of children displaying the DPBE
increases when they are given more time for interpretation. We allowed children more time
for interpretation by slowing down the speech rate. In contrast to the predicted increase
28

2
in performance on pronoun interpretation, we predict children’s performance on reflexive
interpretation to remain level.
6.1
Method and materials
A Truth Value Judgment Task was carried out to test children’s comprehension of pronouns
and reflexives in Dutch. Participants were shown a picture on a computer screen (see Fig-
ure 5), and had to judge whether a prerecorded sentence presented to them was a correct
description of the picture.
Figure 5: An example of a picture showing a non-reflexive action (left) and a reflexive action
(right).
All pictures contained two animals, one of which was depicted as the actor. Both ani-
mals were drawn in approximately the same size, to avoid a difference in saliency that may
have influenced earlier experiments (for a discussion, see Elbourne, 2005). Each test sentence
contained either the reflexive zichzelf ‘himself’ or the pronoun hem ‘him’:
7. Kijk, een pinguïn en een schaap zijn op de stoep.
De pinguïn slaat hem / zichzelf met een pan.
‘Look, a penguin and a sheep are on the sidewalk.
The penguin is hitting him / himself with a pan.’
To allow for the experimental manipulation of processing time, the pronouns and reflexives
were always followed by a prepositional phrase. The verbs that were used are bijten ‘to bite’,
kietelen ‘to tickle’, schminken ‘to make up’, wijzen naar ‘to point at’, slaan ‘to hit’, vastbinden ‘to
tie up’, zien ‘to see’, schilderen ‘to paint’, and tekenen ‘to draw’. All verbs are typically used for
describing an other-directed action, thus avoiding a bias towards a coreferential interpreta-
tion (Spenader et al., 2009). The same verbs were used in both speech rate conditions, but the
sentences differed in the choice of actors and prepositional objects. Half of the sentences were
combined with a matching picture and the other half were presented with a non-matching
picture. In addition to the test sentences, four control sentences per condition were included
to measure the participants’ general performance on the task.
All sentences were prerecorded at normal speech rate (mean speech rate 4.0 syllables
per second). Sentences for the Slow Speech Rate condition were then digitally slowed-down,
29

while keeping the pitch constant. Using the software Adobe Audition 1.5, the audio files were
stretched 1.5 times, resulting in a reduction of the speech rate with a factor 2/3 (mean speech
rate 2.7 syllables per second) (cf. Love, Walenski, & Swinney, 2009; Montgomery, 2004; Weis-
mer & Hesketh, 1996). Native Dutch speaking adults did not report perceiving the slowed-
down sentences as disfluent or unnatural. They described the slowed-down sentences as
utterances from a slow speaker. During the experiment, the child participants never com-
mented on the speech rate of the test sentences. So there is no indication that slowing down
the sentences resulted in an artificial test situation.
6.2
Procedure
Every participant was tested in normal and slow speech rate condition. The order of condi-
tions was counterbalanced over participants. Participants were tested individually in a room
by two experimenters. A laptop was used to present the pictures and the prerecorded sen-
tences. The sentences started half a second after the picture appeared on the screen. The
participants were instructed to press a button with a green smiley face when they considered
the sentence a correct description of the picture, and a button with an orange frowning face
when they thought the sentence was not a correct description of the picture. Before the test
phase, participants practiced the task with two trial items that were presented in the same
speech rate as the following condition. They could take as much time as needed to give a re-
sponse and they were allowed to hear the prerecorded sentence once more when they asked
for it. The conditions were presented as blocks of 20 sentences, i.e., 8 pronoun sentences, 8
reflexive sentences, and 4 control sentences, with a short break in between the two blocks.
6.3
Participants
Seventy-five children between 4;1 and 6;3 years old were tested. They were all recruited from
a Dutch local elementary school. From these 75 children, 13 were excluded from further anal-
ysis (4 children were bilingual or nonnative Dutch speakers, 5 did not finish the task, and 4
responded incorrectly to more than two out of eight control items). The data of the remain-
ing 62 children (35 boys and 27 girls), ranging in age from 4;1 to 6;2, were used for statistical
analysis.
6.4
Results
Looking at the data of all participants, the percentage of correct interpretations was found to
be higher for reflexive sentences than for pronoun sentences (90% for reflexives, 60% for pro-
nouns; repeated-measures ANOVA: F(1,61)=125.968, p<0.001), replicating the results of earlier
studies (a.o., Chien & Wexler, 1990; Spenader et al., 2009). Our main question was whether
there is a difference in performance between the two speech rate conditions. Statistical anal-
ysis of all data showed no significant effect of speech rate on either pronoun comprehension
or reflexive comprehension (repeated measures ANOVA: main effect of Speech Rate F(1,61)<1;
interaction effect of Speech Rate and Expression F(1,61)<1).
30

2
However, a closer look at the individual data reveals that a possible effect of speech rate
may have been masked, because the participants showed different, and sometimes even op-
posite, behavior on the task as a function of speech rate. In order to investigate the effect of
speech rate on pronoun comprehension in more detail, the participants were classified into
different developmental stages on the basis of their performance. This division in groups is
crucial for the purposes of our study, as only those children who display the DPBE are pre-
dicted to show increased performance with slowed-down speech. First, the criteria used for
classifying the participants are described. This is followed by more detailed analyses of the
effect of speech rate on the different developmental groups.
6.4.1
Classification of different developmental stages
We divided the 62 participants in our study into three different groups, based on their task
behavior.5 For our classification, we defined (almost) correct performance as more than or
equal to 80% correct. Incorrect performance was defined as less than 80% correct.
i) Children who showed incorrect performance on pronouns as well as reflexives at Normal
Speech Rate were categorized as belonging to the Incorrect Performance group (n=5: 3 boys, 2
girls; age 4;3-4;7; mean 4;5),
ii) Children who showed incorrect performance on pronouns but (almost) correct perfor-
mance on reflexives at Normal Speech Rate were categorized as the DPBE group (n=43: 23 boys,
20 girls; age 4;1-6;2; mean 5;1), and
iii) Children who showed (almost) correct performance on both reflexives and pronouns at
Normal Speech Rate were categorized as the Correct Performance group (n=14: 9 boys, 5 girls;
age 4;2-6;0, mean 5;5).
On the basis of the criteria mentioned above, none of the children showed the fourth con-
ceivable pattern of (almost) correct performance on pronouns but incorrect performance on
reflexives. Figure 6 shows the distribution of the ages for the three different groups.
Children’s scores were analyzed using (logistic) linear mixed-effect models (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008; Bates, 2005). This type of analysis is more suited for the data than
repeated-measures ANOVAs, because several assumptions for using ANOVAs are not met (see
Baayen, 2008, for a discussion on this topic). As our DPBE/ACT-R model starts out from the sit-
uation in which knowledge of the linguistic constraints and their ranking is already in place,
we will only discuss the results of the DPBE group and the Correct Performance group.
6.4.2
Results of the DPBE group
Figure 7 shows the mean percentage of correct interpretations of the 43 children display-
ing the DPBE. The left plot presents the mean performance on sentences with pronouns and
reflexives. The right plot distinguishes between performance on sentences matching the pic-
ture and sentences not matching the picture.
Figure 7 shows a clear difference in performance on match items (Normal Speech Rate:
77% , Slow Speech Rate: 74%) versus mismatch items (Normal Speech Rate: 23%, Slow Speech
Rate: 34%), probably caused by a yes-bias (see also Chien & Wexler, 1990; Grimshaw & Rosen,
31

Incorrect
Performance
(n=5)
DPBE
(n=43)
Correct
Performance
(n=14)
50
55
60
65
70
75
Ages in months
4;0
5;0
6;0
Figure 6: Mean age in months for the different groups in the psycholinguistic study.
1990). To determine the relative contribution of a number of factors on performance, logis-
tic linear mixed-effects models (Bates, 2005) were fit to the data by Laplace approximation.
The factors included as fixed effects were: Block, a between-subjects factor defining the or-
der of presentation of the two conditions; Expression, a within-subjects factor specifying type
of anaphor (pronoun or reflexive); ExpectedAnswer, a binary within-subjects factor specifying
whether the sentence matched the picture or not (yes or no), and a within-subject binary fac-
tor SpeechRate specifying speech rate (normal or slow). The interactions between Expression,
ExpectedAnswer and SpeechRate were included as well. Subject and a by-subject effect for
ExpectedAnswer were included as random effects, to account for individual differences of the
participants and for individual answer biases of participants. Separate sets of models were
Normal
speech rate
Slow
speech rate
Pronoun comprehension
Percentage correct interpretations
0
20
40
60
80
100
23% 77%
34% 74%
Normal
speech rate
Slow
speech rate
Reflexive comprehension
92% 92%
82% 95%
error bars: ± 2*se
Mismatch
Match
Normal
speech rate
Slow
speech rate
General results
Percentage correct interpretations
0
20
40
60
80
100
50% 92%
55% 89%
Pronoun
Reflexive
Figure 7: Mean percentage of correct interpretations of sentences with a pronoun or a re-
flexiveinthetwospeechrateconditions, forthe childrenshowingtheDPBE(n=43).
32

2
constructed with pronouns and reflexives as dependent variables.
For the sentences with pronouns, we compared the mixed-effects model that included
SpeechRate as a factor with the model that did not, to measure whether manipulation of
SpeechRate significantly affected the participants’ performance. A comparison was con-
ducted on the basis of the models’ log-likelihoods (Baayen, 2008). The comparison showed
that the model including SpeechRate explains significantly more variance (χ2(2)= 7.1796,
p=0.028) than the model without SpeechRate. Thus, slowed-down speech has a significant ef-
fect on pronoun comprehension. The following factors contributed to the participants’ score
on the pronoun items: ExpectedAnswer (yes) β =2.964; z = 8.24; p < 0.001, SpeechRate (Slow) β
=0.689; z = 2.67; p = 0.008, Block (Slow Speech Rate condition first) β =0.242; z = 0.82; p = 0.412,
and the interaction between ExpectedAnswer and SpeechRate β =-0.841; z = -2.25; p = 0.024.
The yes-bias, as illustrated in Figure 7 (right plot), is reflected in the significant effect of Ex-
pectedAnswer. The positive β-value of Speech Rate (0.689) indicates that slowed-down speech
has a positive effect on pronoun comprehension, although this effect is reduced in the match
items, as suggested by the negative coefficient of the interaction effect between Expected An-
swer and Speech Rate (-0.841). Further analysis of the interaction between ExpectedAnswer
and SpeechRate confirmed that there is a significant positive effect of slowed-down speech on
the mismatch items (23% correct interpretations in the Normal Speech Rate condition versus
34% correct interpretations in the Slow Speech Rate condition; paired t(42)=2.457, p=0.018).
However, no significant difference was found for the match items (paired t(42)<1). The main
conclusion from these analyses is that slowed-down speech has a positive effect on pronoun
comprehension for children that show the DPBE, as predicted by the DPBE/ACT-R model.
Similar linear mixed-effects models were used to analyze the performance on sentences
with reflexives. Figure 7 shows almost correct performance on reflexive comprehension with
match items as well as mismatch items in the Normal Speech Rate condition. However, in the
Slow Speech Rate condition, the percentage of correct responses decreases on the mismatch
items, but not on the match items, suggesting a small yes-bias. This decrease in performance
on mismatch items also suggests a detrimental effect of slowed-down speech.
Again, we compared a model including the factor SpeechRate with a model without
SpeechRate. The model including the factor SpeechRate explains significantly more variance
(χ2(2)=9.757, p=0.008) than the simpler model. Although this shows that slowed-down speech
has a significant effect on reflexive comprehension, the effects are not as straightforward as
with pronouns. The effects of the included factors on the reflexive items are: Block (Slow
Speech Rate condition first) β = -1.696; z = -4.29; p = 0.000, ExpectedAnswer (yes) β = 1.827; z =
2.61; p = 0.009, SpeechRate (Slow) β = -0.967; z = -2.79; p = 0.005, and the interaction between
ExpectedAnswer and SpeechRate β = 1.666; z = 2.47; p = 0.013. The negative estimated effect
of SpeechRate (-0.967) might be due to interaction between ExpectedAnswer and SpeechRate
(1.666). Further analysis revealed that slowed-down speech indeed has a significant effect
only in the mismatch (no) items (paired t(42)=-2.418, p=0.020), and not in the match (yes)
items (paired t(42) < 1).
In the pronoun analyses, the estimate of Block was not significantly different from zero,
but in these reflexive analyses, Block has a negative effect on the percentage of correct inter-
33

pretations. Children who started the experiment with the Slow Speech Rate condition per-
formed worse on reflexive comprehension in slowed-down speech than children who first
participated in the Normal Speech Rate condition. It might be that starting the experiment in
the Slow Speech Rate condition triggers other processing strategies, causing additional effects
in comprehension. As the effects are more pronounced in the pronoun sentences, a similar
effect could be hidden in the variance of that dataset. However, the current data does not
allow for testing this.
To summarize, if the child displays the DPBE, slowed-down speech has a positive effect
on children’s comprehension of pronouns. In contrast, slowed-down speech has a negative
effect on children’s comprehension of reflexives.
6.4.3
Results of the Correct Performance group
The computational model discussed above predicts that if children are able to take into ac-
count both their own perspective and the speaker’s perspective under normal conditions,
they are also able to do so when they have more time for interpretation. Therefore, the model
predicts no effects of speech rate on pronoun or reflexive comprehension in the Correct Per-
formance group. To test this prediction, performance on pronoun comprehension was an-
alyzed, again using linear mixed-effect model comparisons. The factors Block, ExpectedAn-
swer and SpeechRate were included as fixed effects, as well as the interaction effects of Ex-
pectedAnswer and SpeechRate. In addition, Subject and a by-subject effect for ExpectedAn-
swer were included as random effects. The factor SpeechRate was found to have a signif-
icant effect on pronoun comprehension (χ2(2)= 17.450, p<0.001, with as estimated effect of
SpeechRate: β =-1.618; z = -2.99; p = 0.003). In particular, slowed-down speech has a negative
effect on pronoun comprehension. Because the effect of SpeechRate is significant both for
mismatch items (paired t(13)=-3.647, p=0.003) and match items (paired t(13)=-2.687, p=0.019),
slow speech may have a general negative effect on linguistic performance. Support for this
idea comes from the observation that a marginally significant effect is also found for the fac-
tor Block (β =-1.273; z = -1.85; p = 0.064). Because slow speech is especially detrimental at the
start of the experiment, this suggests that the negative effects of slow speech pertain to task
performance in general rather than to performance on particular items.
6.5
Discussion
The experiment investigated whether children’s errors in pronoun interpretation are caused
by their limited processing speed. The results show that slowed-down speech has a beneficial
effect on pronoun comprehension, but only if the child displays the DPBE. This supports the
hypothesis that children showing the DPBE do not have sufficient time to take into account
the speaker’s perspective, causing pronouns to remain ambiguous. The results of the children
who already perform correctly on pronouns suggest that in other cases slowed-down speech
has an overall negative effect on performance, making the positive effects of slowed-down
speech in the DPBE group even more striking.
34

2
7
Study 2: Simulation study
We constructed a computational cognitive model to test whether the mechanism of bidirec-
tional optimization can account for children’s behavior in the experiment discussed above. To
this end, we combined the DPBE/ACT-R model with a computational model of sentence pro-
cessing. The resulting model, which we refer to as the Speech Rate model, is able to process
incoming sentences on a word-by-word basis. With this model we simulated the performance
of a group of child participants on sentences with normal and slowed-down speech rate.
7.1
Sentence processing
Words are presented to the model in a serial fashion, with an interval between the consecutive
words that is derived from the speech rate. The same sentences are used as in the experiment
described above. Two different speech rates were used: a normal speech rate of 4.0 syllables
per second (resulting in an inter-word interval of 0.31 seconds) and a slow speech rate of 2.1
syllables per second (inter-word interval: 0.62 seconds). To simulate the differences among
utterances in naturally occurring speech, normally distributed noise (m=0, SD=0.01) is added
to each inter-word interval. A typical trial commences as follows. As soon as the model detects
an audio-event, it focuses its attention on that sound. A word is then retrieved from declar-
ative memory on the basis of the properties of the perceived stimulus. After retrieving the
word, its syntactic category is retrieved (for a more extensive description of how concept and
lemma information is represented, see van Maanen & van Rijn, 2007). After these retrievals,
the word’s lexical information is attached to the syntactic goal category that represents the
syntactic structure of the sentence (see R. L. Lewis & Vasishth, 2005). As a complete simulation
of parsing is not required for investigating the effects of speech rate on the DPBE, this part
of the process is implemented in a similar fashion as in the model of reading and dictating of
Salvucci and Taatgen (2008).
As soon as the model identifies, on the basis of the retrieved syntactic category, the cur-
rent word as a pronoun or a reflexive, the model starts the optimization process described
earlier (see also Figure 5). So the model does not wait with the process of bidirectional opti-
mization until the sentence is completed but starts the process of bidirectional optimization
immediately when it encounters a pronoun or reflexive.
7.2
Selecting the response
After the sentence is processed, the model has to decide whether the sentence is a correct de-
scription of the picture. The interpretation of the picture is given to the model from the onset
of the trial, as it was also available on the screen before the participants in the experiment
heard the sentence. Therefore, the response of the model depends on the outcome of the op-
timization process, which is the model’s interpretation of the anaphor. If the optimization
process results in a single interpretation, the model uses that interpretation in its response.
However, if the model cannot settle on a single interpretation, it will randomly select a re-
sponse (with a 80/20 yes-no distribution to reflect the yes-bias, cf. Chien & Wexler, 1990).
35

Note that this random selection process only takes place when the model cannot settle on an
interpretation, that is, when the input is a pronoun and no bidirectional optimization took
place. Because the successful use of bidirectional optimization will increase with time, the
effect of the yes-bias will gradually decrease. After selecting an answer, the model generates
a response by pressing the appropriate button.
7.3
Modeling the acquisition of bidirectional optimization
Because we assume that bidirectional optimization is in principle available, the model devel-
ops the ability to perform this process by mere exposure to sentences with pronouns or re-
flexives. Hereto, we presented the model with randomly selected sentences containing either
a pronoun or a reflexive. By means of production compilation, over time the model learns to
perform the required operations quicker and with fewer errors.
To simulate the differences in frequency between pronouns and reflexives in natural lan-
guage, the model was presented with pronouns in 90% of the training trials and reflexives in
the remaining 10%. The model was given about 0.32 seconds to determine the optimal mean-
ing for the input, comparable to the time frame in normal speech. As in earlier work on de-
velopmental modeling (e.g., McClelland, 1995; van Rijn, van Someren, & van der Maas, 2003),
the model was presented with experimental sessions at regular intervals (every 50 trials) to
assess the current stage of development. This way, each simulation resulted in 13 simulated
experimental datasets. During the “experimental sessions”, learning was turned off. This
testing scheme was chosen to prevent too much influence of the repeated presentation of the
experimental sentences on the outcome.
7.4
Performance of the model on the experiment
For assessing the performance of the model, we ran the model for 16 simulations, result-
ing in 208 simulated datasets. This way, the effect of speech rate is compared over different
simulated participants, who received different amounts of training, thus making the dataset
comparable to the human dataset discussed earlier. The same criteria were used to classify
the simulated participants into different groups. Of the simulated participants, 97 showed
the DPBE (mean number of training trials 177, SD=156) and 110 showed correct performance
(mean number of training trials 408, SD=149)6. None of the simulated participants showed
similar behavior as the children in the Incorrect Performance group, because the model is
already able to perform unidirectional optimization from the start.
Similar to the analysis of the experimental data, we analyzed the performance of the
simulated participants who showed the DPBE by fitting separate mixed-effect models on the
performance on pronoun and reflexive comprehension. The first model contains a random
variable to account for the effects of the different simulated participants, and ExpectedAn-
swer (yes or no) to account for the introduced yes-bias. The second model contains the same
variables, but also contains the variable SpeechRate. A significant difference was found be-
tween the mixed-effect models of pronoun comprehension (χ2(2) = 47.801, p < 0.001), but
no difference was found between the models of reflexive comprehension (χ2(2) = 0). Thus,
36

2
slowed-down speech has a similar effect on comprehension for the model as for the partici-
pants of the experiment. A follow-up analysis on the models’ performance on pronoun sen-
tences showed that slowed-down speech did have a beneficial effect on both match (paired
t(96)=2.672, p=0.009) and mismatch trials (paired t(96)=5.010, p<0.001).
7.4.1
Model fit
Figure 8 shows the fit of the model with the experimental data of the DPBE group on pronoun
sentences (Pearson r2= 0.96, RMSSD= 1.74).
Mismatch
Match
Normal speech rate condition
Percentage correct interpretations
0
20
40
60
80
100
23% 17%
77% 70%
Mismatch
Match
Slow speech rate condition
 error bars: ± 2*se
34% 35%
74% 80%
Experiment
Model
Figure 8: Comparison between mean percentages of correct interpretations of sentences
containing a pronoun in the two speech rate conditions, for children (Experiment:
n=43) and simulated participants (Model: n=97) showing the DPBE.
The model accounts for the two general trends earlier discussed: the increase in per-
formance on the mismatch items caused by the slowed-down speech, and the large yes-bias.
However, one aspect is not captured. The model predicts a significant increase in perfor-
mance under slowed-down speech for mismatch and match items, whereas the experimental
data did not show an increase in performance in the match trials. This might suggest that our
implementation of the yes-bias is not sensitive enough to capture the details of the child data.
The model’s fit on reflexives is not as good as the fit on pronouns. Figure 9 shows the
mean percentage of correct interpretations on reflexive comprehension for the model and
the experimental data. The model correctly predicts the overall performance on reflexive
comprehension for children showing the DPBE. However, the model predicts perfect perfor-
mance, whereas this level of performance is never found in experimental data with children.
Despite these differences, the overall fit (i.e., pronoun and reflexive sentences combined) of
the model’s performance on the data of the DPBE group is very high (Pearson r2= 0.96, RMSSD=
2.68).
7.5
Discussion
The computational simulation captures the main effects of the psycholinguistic experiment
with children, such as the difference in performance on pronouns versus reflexives, the yes-
bias, and the beneficial effect of slowed-down speech on pronoun comprehension in the DPBE
37

Mismatch
Match
Normal speech rate condition
Percentage correct interpretations
0
20
40
60
80
100
92% 100%
92% 100%
Mismatch
Match
Slow speech rate condition
 error bars: ± 2*se
82% 100%
95% 100%
Experiment
Model
    
Figure 9: Comparison between mean percentages of correct interpretations of sentences
containing a reflexive in the two speech rate conditions, for children (Experiment:
n=43) and simulated participants (Model: n=97) showing the DPBE.
group. However, there are also differences between the model and the experimental data. For
example, the model predicts perfect performance on reflexive comprehension in the DPBE
group. In contrast, the DPBE children in our experiment did not show perfect performance.
Another difference between the behavior of the model and children’s performance is that
the children in our experiment showed a significant decrease in performance with reflexives
(DPBE group) and pronouns (Correct Performance group) in the slowed-down speech condi-
tion. Children probably have to adjust to the unusually slow speech. The model, on the other
hand, is not adjusted to normal speech, and as such does not need to readjust. To summarize,
although the model does not explain all details of children’s performance in the experiment,
it does explain the major effects associated with the DPBE as well as adult-like performance
on pronoun and reflexive comprehension.
8
General discussion
In this paper we showed how a linguistic explanation of the DPBE that is embedded in a cogni-
tive architecture allowed us to generate and test detailed predictions with respect to linguistic
performance. According to Hendriks and Spenader’s (2006) optimality theoretic account of
the DPBE, pronouns are ambiguous and are disambiguated only if hearers not only select the
optimal meaning for the pronoun, but also take into account the speaker’s perspective. This
allows them to block the coreferential meaning. We modeled this process in the cognitive
architecture ACT-R (Anderson et al., 2004). Our DPBE/ACT-R model simulates adult pronoun
comprehension as a process consisting of two consecutive steps. The first step involves se-
lecting the optimal meaning for the pronoun, and the second step involves checking whether
a speaker would have expressed this meaning with the same form. Our DPBE/ACT-R model
predicts that performing the two steps consecutively requires more processing time than per-
forming only the first step. If children are given sufficient time to perform both steps within
the available time, they are predicted to be able to block the coreferential meaning for the
pronoun. We tested this prediction by comparing children’s comprehension of pronouns at a
38

2
normal speech rate with their comprehension at a slower speech rate. Our finding confirms
the predictions of the DPBE/ACT-R model: slowed-down speech has a significant beneficial
effect on pronoun comprehension, but only if the child displays the DPBE.
If the DPBE were caused by children’s lack of pragmatic knowledge, as Thornton and
Wexler (1999) argue, it remains unexplained how slowing down the speech rate would pro-
vide children with the necessary pragmatic knowledge or the ability to use this knowledge to
interpret pronouns correctly. Although Reinhart’s (2006) explanation of the DPBE in terms
of children’s limited working memory capacity appears to be related to the explanation pre-
sented here, it is unclear how exactly working memory limitations influence children’s com-
prehension, and how this relates to the present findings. It has been argued that slowed-down
speech places a greater temporal load on working memory, because information must be re-
tained over a longer duration (e.g., Small, Andersen, & Kempler, 1997). If this is true, then
slowed-down speech is expected to decrease performance when working memory capacity is
limited, in contrast to what Reinhart predicts. However, the results of studies investigating
the relation between slowed-down speech and working memory are not very clear. For exam-
ple, Montgomery (2004) did not find an association between sentence processing at different
speech rates and working memory capacity in children. So although Thornton and Wexler
(1999) and Reinhart (2006) attribute the DPBE to non-linguistic factors, it is difficult to see
how these accounts would explain the present findings. In addition, it remains unclear how
these accounts relate to general constraints on cognition, and what predictions they would
and would not generate regarding children’s and adults’ linguistic performance.
The results of the psycholinguistic experiment are predicted by the DPBE/ACT-R model,
which was constructed by embedding the optimality theoretic account of Hendriks and Spe-
nader (2006) in the cognitive architecture ACT-R. However, these results do not necessarily
follow from the optimality theoretic account in itself. Hendriks and Spenader’s optimality
theoretic account would also be compatible with an explanation in terms of perspective tak-
ing: Children may be unable to use bidirectional optimization because they lack the cognitive
ability to take into account another person’s perspective. In contrast to the explanation im-
plemented in the DPBE/ACT-R model, this explanation would not predict an effect of slowed-
down speech, because it is unclear how slowed-down speech would improve children’s cogni-
tive skills. Another conceivable explanation of the DPBE that is compatible with an optimality
theoretic account is the view that bidirectional optimization is an off-line pragmatic decision
process. This view contrasts with our DPBE/ACT-R model, as we implemented bidirectional
optimization as a process that takes place during on-line sentence processing. If bidirectional
optimization is only performed after completion of the sentence, slowed-down speech is not
expected to have any effect on comprehension. In the two speech rate conditions, the same
amount of processing time was available at the end of the sentence: Participants in the psy-
cholinguistic experiment could take as much time as needed to give a response in either con-
dition. However, within the sentence, processing time was limited due to the presentation
of the next word of the sentence, as the critical word (i.e., a pronoun or a reflexive) was al-
ways followed by further sentence material in the form of a prepositional phrase. Therefore,
the results of this study suggest that the process of bidirectional optimization is an on-line
39

process.
In addition to a psycholinguistic study, we also performed a simulation study to inves-
tigate the predictions of the DPBE/ACT-R model. We built a new cognitive model that also
allowed for incremental sentence processing. This model was shown to capture the main ef-
fects of slowed-down speech on comprehension that were seen in the psycholinguistic study.
For those simulated participants who displayed the DPBE, the cognitive model showed an in-
crease in performance due to slowed-down speech on the comprehension of pronouns, but
no effect of slowed-down speech on the comprehension of reflexives. These results support
the hypothesis that difficulties with pronoun comprehension are caused by a limited speed of
processing, due to which the process of bidirectional optimization cannot be completed.
In our simulations, the process of bidirectional optimization gradually became more effi-
cient as the number of trainings items increased, because the production compilation mech-
anism of ACT-R is dependent on frequency of use. As a consequence, the model predicts that
repetitive testing of children showing the DPBE on pronoun sentences in binding contexts
will result in an increase of their performance on pronoun comprehension (although we did
not simulate this in our model). However, we assume that children only start to perform
bidirectional optimization for pronoun comprehension when their cognitive and linguistic
capacities are sufficiently developed (cf. Case, 1987; van Rijn et al., 2003). This is reflected
in the starting point of our model, according to which children are in principle able to per-
form bidirectional optimization, but not yet within the limited amount of time. Therefore, we
predict that children will only show a positive effect of repetitive testing and slowed-down
speech when they are ready to master the process of bidirectional optimization.
Our simulation study also illustrates some of the considerations and limitations in using
cognitive models to study theories of language acquisition. First, cognitive models necessar-
ily are simplifications of reality. Therefore, choices have to be made as to what aspects of the
task should be modeled and what aspects can be left unspecified. For example, we chose not
to model the sentence-processing component of the model in detail. One of the effects of this
choice was that the performance of the model only increased significantly on the compre-
hension of pronouns at half the normal speech rate. In contrast, the DPBE children showed
an increase in performance already at two-third of the normal speech rate. This difference is
caused by a simplification of the sentence processing component: In the current version of
the model, processing a word takes almost all the time that is available before the next word
comes in (about 300 of the 320 ms). Hence, not much time is left for bidirectional optimization.
To obtain a significant effect of bidirectional optimization, we had to slow down the speech
rate more. However, this simplification of the cognitive model did not result in a qualitative
difference between the simulation model and the psycholinguistic study, but only in a quan-
titative difference. It is left for further study whether a more realistic sentence-processing
component would lead to better predictions by the cognitive model.
Adifficulty inusingcognitivemodelstostudylanguage is thepossibility that the linguistic
theory and the cognitive architecture may employ different or even conflicting assumptions.
For example, Optimality Theory, due to its roots in neural network theory, assumes candi-
dates to be evaluated in parallel, and also assumes the constraints of the grammar to apply
40

2
in parallel. ACT-R, on the other hand, assumes a central processing bottleneck. This implies
that only one production rule can be applied at a time. We chose to adopt the ACT-R assump-
tion, since it imposes the strongest restrictions on cognitive processing. Note that this choice
is not incompatible with OT per se, as it preserves the input-output relations predicted by
the OT grammar as well as the linguistic knowledge constraining these relations, but merely
specifies the process by which these input-output relations are obtained. As a result of this
choice, in the DPBE/ACT-R model only two candidates are evaluated at a time and the con-
straints are applied one by one. The hypothesis that children do not have sufficient time to
perform bidirectional optimization follows from this particular property of the DPBE/ACT-R
model.
A related issue concerns those cases where a particular effect could in principle be ex-
plained by the grammar, but also by the cognitive architecture. In language acquisition re-
search, computational models of grammar typically use corpus data as input and observed
patterns in the child’s speech as output. As a consequence, frequency distribution patterns
in the input and output are of crucial importance to the grammar. In a cognitive model-
ing approach, the grammar may be non-probabilistic because the cognitive model already
is sensitive to frequency distributions. For example, our DPBE/ACT-R model was trained on
language input which consisted of 10% reflexives and 90% pronouns, reflecting the unequal
distribution of reflexives versus pronouns found in corpus studies of child-directed speech
(e.g., Bloom, Barss, Nicol, & Conway, 1994). Because the production compilation mechanism
of ACT-R is dependent on frequency of use, this unequal frequency distribution resulted in
a faster acquisition of bidirectional optimization for pronouns than for reflexives (although
the model assigns a correct interpretation to reflexives faster, because its interpretation is
not dependent on bidirectional optimization). So cognitive modeling accounts of language
acquisition are not incompatible with frequency-based accounts, but rather provide comple-
mentary insights. The exact division of labor between grammar and cognitive architecture
may be determined by theory-internal considerations as well as empirical observations.
In conclusion, embedding a theory of linguistic competence in a cognitive architecture is
a promising new approach to understanding issues in the domain of language. While linguis-
tic theories may offer an adequate account of children’s linguistic competence, cognitively
informed models are required to test these competence theories empirically. Because cogni-
tive architectures are based on well-founded theories of cognition and guide the construction
of computational simulations that allow us to test the performance of a cognitive system un-
der different conditions, they may help us to gain a better understanding of the process of
language acquisition.
Notes
1 The definition of c-command used here is: Node A c-commands node B if the first
branching node of the syntax tree that dominates A, also dominates B.
2 A ≫B means that constraint A is higher ranked, i.e., stronger, than constraint B.
41

3 For an overview of existing ACT-R models, see: http://actr.psy.cmu.edu/publications
4 The
code
of
the
discussed
ACT-R
models
can
be
retrieved
from:
http://www.let.rug.nl/jacolienvanrij/modelcode.html
5 In earlier papers (van Rij, Hendriks, Spenader, & van Rijn, 2009a, 2009b), we distin-
guished four different groups: i) the No DPBE group (n=5), ii) the Extra-Linguistic Strat-
egy group (n=9), iii) the DPBE group (n=34), and iv) the Correct Performance group
(n=14). Participants who were classified as belonging to the Extra-Linguistic Strategy
group used the extra-linguistic strategy of answering ‘yes’ to all pronoun mismatch
items in both speech rate conditions, while their performance on reflexive items was
correct. Participants who were classified as belonging to the DPBE group did not seem
to make use of a particular strategy for answering the pronoun items, sometimes giv-
ing a correct response while at other times giving an incorrect response, although they
showed a general bias to say ‘yes’. For simplicity, we combined the Extra-Linguistic
Strategy group with the DPBE group in this paper. In addition, we changed the name of
the No DPBE group into Incorrect Performance group, because this name better reflects
the behavior of its members.
6 Only 207 simulated participants are reported (97 DPBE and 110 Correct Performance),
because the final experiment of one of the simulations was interrupted, resulting in
only 12 experimental datasets for that particular simulation.
42

chapter 3
A cognitive model of the acquisition
and use of referring expressions:
Eﬀects of working memory and perspective taking
This manuscript was submitted as:
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submitted). A cognitive model of the acquisition and
use of referring expressions: Effects of working memory and perspective taking. Manuscript,
October 2011.

Abstract
In this paper we present a cognitive model of the acquisition and use of referring expres-
sions in discourse. In certain discourse contexts, 4- to 7-year-old children produce unrecov-
erable pronouns where a full noun phrase would have been the adult choice. Also in their
comprehension of pronouns in discourse, these children make non-adult choices. Based on
computational simulations, we argue that mature use of referring subjects requires (a) suf-
ficient working memory capacity to identify the discourse topic, and (b) sufficient speed of
processing to determine whether the intended meaning is recoverable for the listener from
the expression used. The cognitive model allows us to investigate the complex interaction be-
tween linguistic constraints and cognitive factors. In addition, the model generates detailed
and testable predictions with respect to further linguistic performance.

3
1
Introduction
When speakers wish to refer to a character, event or object that has already been introduced
in the context, they can choose between different referring expressions. For example, they
can use a proper name, a definite noun phrase or a pronoun when referring to a character.
These expressions differ, on the one hand, in the type and amount of information they convey,
and, on the other hand, in their structural complexity and length. How do speakers determine
which referring expression fits a particular situation best? Consider the following story:
1. A soccer player misses a penalty in the ﬁnal. 
2. He agrees to give an interview after the match. 
3. A reporter asks the soccer player some sharp questions. 
4a. He thinks the team didn't play well. 
4b. The soccer player thinks the team didn't play well. 
Figure 1: Example story with two alternatives for the last sentence.
In Sentence 2, a subject pronoun (he) is generally preferred over a definite noun phrase
(the soccer player) for reference to the soccer player. Contrastively, the unstressed subject
pronoun in Sentence 4a cannot be used for reference to the soccer player because a pronoun
in this position will be interpreted as reference to the reporter. Rather, a definite noun phrase
must be used for reference to the soccer player, as in Sentence 4b. What processes do speakers
use that makes them prefer a pronoun in Sentence 2, but a definite noun phrase in Sentence
4? And if these processes have to be learned, can we find signatures of this development in
children?
Two influential linguistic approaches have been put forward to account for the choice
of referring expressions. The first approach, which we will refer to as the discourse-oriented
approach, assumes that the choice of referring expression is crucially dependent on the prop-
erties of the linguistic discourse (a.o., Ariel, 1988; Givón, 1983). More specifically, the saliency
or accessibility of a character in the discourse determines which referring expression is ap-
propriate to use. For example, pronouns are used for reference to the character that is most
accessible in the current discourse, and full noun phrases are used for characters that are less
accessible. So according to the discourse-oriented approach, a speaker selects a referring ex-
pression based on the accessibility of the referent. A listener, in turn, can infer the intended
referent on the basis of the implied accessibility level and the mutual knowledge of speaker
and listener. For Sentence 2 this means that a speaker will use a pronoun for reference to the
soccer player because at this point the soccer player is the only and thus most accessible refer-
ent in the discourse. For Sentence 4, however, a pronoun cannot be used for reference to the
soccer player because now the reporter is the most accessible referent. The second approach,
the listener-oriented approach, provides an alternative explanation for the choice of referring
expressions (a.o., Gundel et al., 1993; Hendriks et al., 2008). In contrast to discourse-oriented
accounts that assume a focus on the speaker’s mental states, this approach assumes that when
45

more than one referring expression can be used, a speaker takes into account the listener’s
perspective. In particular, Gundel et al. argue that speakers apply Grice’s Maxim of Quan-
tity (Make your contribution as informative as required, but do not make your contribution
more informative than is required, cf. Grice, 1975). According to this approach, the speaker
cannot use a pronoun for reference to the soccer player in Sentence 4 because a listener would
interpret this pronoun as referring to the reporter as the reporter is the most salient referent.
In sum, the two approaches propose different mechanisms to explain the same phenom-
ena. It is difficult to exclude one of these approaches in favor of the other on the basis of lin-
guistic considerations only because the accounts often make the same predictions. However,
the two approaches differ in the way selection of the appropriate referring expression is re-
lated to cognitive factors. The discourse-oriented approach associates the accessibility of the
discourse referents with the accessibility of representations in memory, so that referents with
lower accessibility take more time to retrieve (Ariel, 1988). In this regard, this approach is a
linguistic variant of sentence-processing theories that explain language processing in terms
of memory processes and activation of representations (a.o., Just & Carpenter, 1992; R. L. Lewis
& Vasishth, 2005; Sprenger, Levelt, & Kempen, 2006). The listener-oriented approach, on the
other hand, does not make specific predictions about processing, but assumes that taking into
account the listener’s perspective requires Theory of Mind-like abilities (Gundel, Ntiletheos,
& Kowalski, 2007). As a consequence of these differences, the two linguistic approaches make
different predictions about the acquisition of referential choice, to which we will return later.
In this paper we show that the two approaches are not necessarily incompatible nor can
one be reduced to the other. Rather, we argue that both accessibility and perspective taking
are necessary to account for the choice of referring expressions. Within the framework of
ACT-R (Anderson et al., 2004), we developed a computational cognitive model that simulates
the production and interpretation of referring expressions in subject position, expanding on
and complementing our earlier model of referring expressions in object position (van Rij, van
Rijn, & Hendriks, 2010). Our computational model integrates the main ideas of the discourse-
oriented account and the listener-oriented account, as illustrated in Figure 2.
In our computational model, the accessibility of the discourse referents is modeled as
activation of representations in memory. The level of activation is determined by the preced-
ing discourse. To construe an adult-like representation of the discourse, sufficient working
memory capacity is required. After selecting an initial referring expression to use, the model
checks whether this referring expression will be interpretable for the listener. If not, the re-
ferring expression is discarded and another referring expression is selected. The speaker’s
choice of referring expression is thus implemented as a Theory of Mind-like process that
is performed during on-line production. Crucially, this process requires sufficient process-
ing speed, which is obtained through linguistic experience (van Rij et al., 2010). Thus, our
model associates the accessibility of the discourse referents with the accessibility of repre-
sentations in memory, as in the discourse-oriented approach, and uses this accessibility to
evaluate whether a referring expression is interpretable for the listener by taking into ac-
count the listener’s perspective, as in the listener-oriented approach.
By integrating ideas from both approaches, this cognitive model provides a novel expla-
46

3
Discourse-oriented approach
Speakers select appropriate refer-
ring expression on the basis of 
referent’s accessibility
Listener-oriented approach
Speakers take into account 
listener’s perspective
Cognitive model:
depends on  
WM capacity
depends on
speed of processing
+
Accessibility
Listener’s 
perspective
Linguistic approaches of the use of referring expressions
Figure 2: In our cognitive model we combine two influential linguistic accounts to explain
the use and interpretation of referring expressions, and their acquisition.
nation of how adult speakers determine what is the best referring expression to use in a par-
ticular context. Importantly, we can formulate precise and testable predictions with respect
to the use and acquisition of referring subjects in discourse, by computationally simulating
how the processes of reference production and comprehension are learned. On the basis of
simulations that are compared to empirical data of 4- to 7-year old children and adults, we ar-
gue that sufficient WM capacity as well as sufficient processing speed is required for adult-like
performance on the production and comprehension of referring subjects.
This paper is organized as follows. We start with a presentation of the main empirical
phenomena related to referring subjects. Subsequently, we present our cognitive model and
describe the modeling decisions we made. Finally, we discuss the main results of the simula-
tions run with our model, and the implications of this work for our understanding of the use
of referring expressions.
2
Empirical phenomena
In this section we briefly discuss relevant experimental results of adults’ and children’s use
and interpretation of referring expressions, and suggest possible explanations for children’s
difficulties with referring expressions.
2.1
Adults’ use and interpretation of referring expressions in discourse
In general, speakers use a pronoun for reference to highly prominent referents in the dis-
course and use more specific forms, such as a full noun phrase (NP), for less prominent refer-
ents (e.g., Ariel, 1990; Grosz, Weinstein, & Joshi, 1995; Gundel et al., 1993). Previous research
47

has identified various discourse factors that affect the use and interpretation of referring ex-
pressions, including how recently a referent was used (e.g., Arnold, 1998; Clark & Sengul, 1979;
Ehrlich & Rayner, 1983; Givón, 1983), the grammatical role of the referent (e.g., Arnold, 1998;
Brennan, 1995; Crawley, Stevenson, & Kleinman, 1990; Grosz et al., 1995; Kaiser & Trueswell,
2008), the order of mentioning of the referents (e.g., Gernsbacher & Hargreaves, 1988; Gordon,
Grosz, & Gilliom, 1993; Kaiser & Trueswell, 2008), verb semantics (e.g., McDonald & MacWhin-
ney, 1995), and parallelism of the syntactic roles of pronouns and their potential antecedents
(e.g., Chambers & Smyth, 1998; Grober, Beardsley, & Caramazza, 1978). In addition to the
characteristics of the linguistic discourse, experimental results suggest that speakers try to
avoid expressions that would result in interpretation difficulties for the listener (e.g., Arnold
& Griffin, 2007; Brennan & Hanna, 2009; Clark, 1996; Gundel et al., 1993; Haywood, Pickering,
& Branigan, 2005; Heller, Grodner, & Tanenhaus, 2008; Hendriks et al., 2008; Tily & Piantadosi,
2009). However, the speaker’s estimation of the listener’s interpretation seem to have lim-
itations because speakers do not avoid ambiguities in every situation (e.g., Bard et al., 2000;
Ferreira & Dell, 2000; Horton & Keysar, 1996; Keysar, Barr, & Horton, 1998), and sometimes use
overspecified expressions when there is no ambiguity for the listener (e.g. Arnold & Griffin,
2007).
So, where discourse and perspective taking both seem to play a role in adult’s production
and comprehension of pronouns, children do not use discourse information and perspective
taking in the same way as adults do. The differences between children’s and adults’ perfor-
mance may provide insight into the cognitive processes that play a role in the use and acqui-
sition of referring expressions.
2.2
Children’s production of referring expressions in discourse
Children have been found to make errors with the production of referring expressions up
to a relatively late age, sometimes as late as age 6. Using story-books with pictures to elicit
narratives, Karmiloff-Smith (1985) found that English and French speaking children younger
than seven used mainly pronouns, even if the use of a pronoun may be interpreted incorrectly
by a listener who does not have access to the pictures. The question is what causes this over-
use of pronouns.
Children are able to use discourse factors such as the accessibility of referents when
choosing a referring expression. Hickmann and Hendriks (1999) found that children of 6,
9 and 11-year old used significantly more pronouns for a referent that was prominent in the
story than for the other referents in the story. However, a recent study by Wubs et al. (2009)
shows that children have difficulties when the listener’s perspective has to be taken into ac-
count when choosing a referring expression. In this study, children aged 4-6 and adults were
asked to tell stories about two characters on the basis of series of pictures that were designed
to elicit two topic shifts. In the first few pictures of each story, only one of the two charac-
ters is visible. The first topic shift occurs halfway through the story, after the introduction of
the second character, and results in the second character becoming the new discourse topic.
The second topic shift, back to the initial character, is initiated at the end of the story as the
48

3
final picture focuses on the first character again. Crucially, as both referents are of the same
gender, using a pronoun to refer to the first character while the second character is the dis-
course topic will result in potential ambiguity. Wubs et al. report that children mostly used
pronouns for reference to the character that is not the discourse topic, which would result
in an incorrect interpretation for the listener. To avoid an incorrect interpretation for the
listener, adult participants only used full NPs. Wubs et al. concluded on the basis of these re-
sults that children fail to take into account the listener’s perspective in language production,
resulting in an over-use of pronouns.
2.3
Children’s interpretation of referring expressions in discourse
When looking at children’s performance in the comprehension of referring expressions, a
more mixed picture emerges. Some studies find that children are sensitive to discourse fac-
tors from a very young age, whereas other studies report that children have difficulties incor-
porating discourse factors. Song and Fisher (2005, 2007) argue that even very young children
use similar factors as adults to determine the saliency of referents in the discourse. They
report that their 2.5 and 3-year old participants showed a preference for looking at the most
salient referent a second after having heard an ambiguous subject pronoun at the end of short
stories. However, Arnold, Brown-Schmidt, and Trueswell (2007) compared adults’ and 3 to 5
year old children’s processing of subject pronouns following a sentence that introduced two
referents. When the pronoun was ambiguous, adults showed a clear preference for the first-
mentioned referent as the antecedent of the ambiguous pronoun. Children, however, did not
show a first-mention bias in their answers and in their gaze behavior (Arnold et al., 2007).
Wubs et al. (2009) also investigated how discourse structure influences the interpretation of
pronouns in short stories. The children and adults that participated in the earlier mentioned
production task also performed a comprehension task in which the participants listened to
pre-recorded stories involving two characters. The stories differed in whether they did or did
not contain a topic shift. The final sentence of each story contained a potentially ambiguous
subject pronoun, followed by a comprehension question of which the answer is dependent on
the interpretation of that pronoun. Wubs et al. (2009) found that in most stories with a topic
shift, adults selected the new discourse topic (i.e., the second character) as the antecedent for
the pronoun, and in almost all stories without a topic shift they selected the initial discourse
topic (i.e., the first character). In contrast, children did not use the prior discourse structure,
as their performance was not influenced by the presence or absence of a topic shift. Thus,
children do not use the linguistic information that signals a topic shift in the same way as
adults do.
To summarize, although children from a very young age display sensitivity to some dis-
course factors (e.g., Hickmann & Hendriks, 1999; Song & Fisher, 2005, 2007), children up to
age 6 show difficulties with pronoun use and interpretation (Arnold & Griffin, 2007; Wubs et
al., 2009).
49

2.4
Explanations for children’s non-adult performance
An important question is whether children’s deviations from adult-like performance in com-
prehension and production can be explained by a single set of mechanisms (Karmiloff-Smith,
1985; Kempen, Olsthoorn, & Sprenger, 2011; Wubs et al., 2009). As mentioned earlier, if the
accessibility of discourse referents reflects the activation of memory representations (e.g.,
Ariel, 1988), working memory limitations may give rise to non-adult performance on pro-
noun production and comprehension. On the other hand, it has been proposed that Theory of
Mind skills are required for adult-like performance on pronoun production, as speakers need
to take into account the listener’s perspective (Gundel et al., 2007). On the basis of empiri-
cal findings we argue that both insufficient working memory capacity and underdeveloped
Theory-of Mind skills may cause non-adult performance.
2.4.1
Working memory
To investigate whether comprehension and production of referring subjects are affected by
processing limitations. Wubs et al. (2009) also measured children’s and adults’ working mem-
ory (WM) capacity. Koster, Hoeks, and Hendriks (2011) report that children with higher WM
scores performed more adult-like in the production and comprehension tasks. Similarly,
Hendriksetal.(2008)foundacorrelationbetweenaperformancemeasureoftheproductionof
referring subjects, and scores on the working memory (WM) task in elderly participants: the
lower the WM score, the more pronouns were produced in situations where a full NP would
have been more appropriate. These results suggest that adult-like production and compre-
hension of referring subjects requires sufficient WM capacity. Moreover, the performance of
young adults was not affected by WM (Koster et al., 2011) suggesting that performance is not
influenced if the WM span is above a certain threshold.
2.4.2
Theory of Mind
The question arises whether, besides WM capacity, also Theory of Mind skills are crucial for
adult-like use of referring expression. If speakers must consider the listener’s perspective
to check whether the intended referring expression is recoverable, they will need mature
Theory of Mind skills as they must be able to predict and reason about the beliefs, knowledge,
intentions, emotions and desires of other people (Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Children below
4 years old show difficulties in predicting other people’s beliefs on false-belief tasks (Wellman,
Cross, & Watson, 2001; Wimmer & Perner, 1983, but see Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005). Studies
that investigate the language skills of children and adults with autism support the hypothesis
proposed by Gundel et al. (2007) that Theory of Mind is required for adult-like production of
referring expressions. Children and adults with autism, who have difficulties with Theory of
Mind reasoning (a.o., Baron-Cohen, Leslie, & Frith, 1985), also have problems in producing a
contingent discourse. These problems with discourse production are closely related to their
difficulties in performance on Theory of Mind tasks (Hale & Tager-Flusberg, 2005). In addi-
tion, Arnold, Bennetto, and Diehl (2009) report that children with autism (ages 9-12) produce
50

3
more overspecified referring expressions (i.e., producing a NP where a pronoun would have
sufficed) than adolescents with autism (ages 13-17) and control participants of the same age.
These differences in performance cannot be explained solely by the lower WM score of par-
ticipants with autism because the adolescents with autism, who also have lower WM scores,
did not produce more overspecified referring expressions than control participants (Arnold
et al., 2009). These findings suggest that adult-like use of referring expressions in discourse
requires mature Theory of Mind skills. This is in line with the listener-based approach to
referential choice, according to which speakers use a Theory-of-Mind-like process to avoid
producing referring expressions that are unrecoverable for the listener. Therefore, an ad-
equate account of referential choice should combine the dependency of mature production
and comprehension of referring expressions on sufficient WM capacity with the need for the
speaker to take into account the listener’s perspective.
2.4.3
Processing speed
To investigate how adult-like performance is achieved, we have extended our previous cog-
nitive model, which explained children’s difficulties with perspective taking by their limited
speed of processing (van Rij et al., 2010). The basic idea of this model is that children’s process-
ing is not efficient enough yet to take into account the conversational partner’s perspective if
the available time is limited, as in on-line comprehension. The results of our previous experi-
mental study with object pronouns (van Rij et al., 2010) support the idea that children’s devel-
opment of the interpretation of pronouns is linked to an increase in their speed of processing:
Only when children have acquired sufficient processing speed, they can use perspective tak-
ing within the available time and interpret object pronouns in an adult-like way. Whereas the
use of object pronouns is strongly influenced by syntactic constraints, the use of subject pro-
nouns is more dependent on the preceding discourse. We have extended our earlier cognitive
model so that it explains the acquisition and use of subject pronouns in discourse too and can
also account for the WM effects that have been found in various studies (a.o., Hendriks et al.,
2008; Wubs et al., 2009). On the basis of our extended computational model, we argue that the
speaker needs to determine the current discourse topic and needs to take into account the
listener’s perspective to decide which referring expression to use. We predict that sufficient
WM capacity is necessary for determining the discourse topic. On the other hand, Theory
of Mind skills and sufficient processing speed are required for applying perspective taking
during on-line production.
3
A computational model of the production and
comprehension of referring expressions
In this section we discuss our computational model and the results of the simulations of this
model. Before describing the actual implementation and the performance of the model, we
will first introduce the cognitive architecture ACT-R, in the context of which our model is
implemented.
51

3.1
ACT-R model
Cognitive models are computational simulations of the cognitive processes involved in per-
forming a task, for example comprehending a sentence (e.g., Budiu & Anderson, 2004). Our
model of the acquisition and use of referring expressions is implemented within the cognitive
architecture ACT-R (Adaptive Control of Thought-Rational; Anderson et al., 2004). ACT-R’s
modeling environment constrains simulation models on the basis of built-in and well-tested
mechanisms and parameters to ensure psychological plausibility. As a theory, ACT-R has a
modular structure: Each of ACT-R’s modules is based on smaller theories on cognition. The
two main modules of ACT-R are declarative memory and the central production system (a de-
scription of the other modules and a more extensive description of the architecture can be
found in Anderson et al., 2004).
The declarative memory module contains chunks of factual information. Chunks can be
connected with other chunks, forming a network. Each chunk has an activation value that is
based on a weighted average of the number of prior occurrences of that chunk. This activation
decays with time. However, activation is not only determined by the chunk’s own history, but
also by the usefulness of that chunk in contexts similar to the current context. Chunks that
are retrieved or manipulated spread activation to all chunks they are connected with. So the
activation of a chunk is the summation of its own base level activation and the spreading
activation from other chunks that are currently being processed. The activation of chunks
determines both the probability that this chunk will be retrieved and the time required for
retrieval.
In the ACT-R framework, the central production system contains IF-THEN rules. The IF-
clause of each production rule specifies the conditions that must be met for that production
rule to be considered for execution (for example, the presence of a certain stimulus in the
visual system, or a linguistic form that requires an interpretation). The THEN-clause speci-
fies which actions will be performed if that rule is selected for execution (for example, a key
press or the retrieval of a memory element). At each time step, the central production system
matches the production rules to the current state of the system, and the most active match-
ing rule is selected for execution. The activation value of production rules reflects the utility
of that rule and is an expression of the expected benefits of executing that production rule
discounted for the costs associated with that production rule.
3.2
Implementation of perspective taking
Our cognitive model simulates the use and interpretation of referring expressions. We have
implemented a linguistic account of the use of referring subjects in terms of optimization de-
scribed below in ACT-R as an extension of our cognitive model of the acquisition and use of
object pronouns (van Rij et al., 2010). This account explains children’s non-adult-like perfor-
mance as resulting from a constraint-based grammar in combination with children’s inability
to take into account the opposite perspective in conversation. Figure 3 provides a schematic
overview of how the model produces a referring subject.
Choosing a referring expression requires several steps: First, the model needs to deter-
52

3
Determine current 
discourse topic
input = topic?
Find referring 
expression
 speaker’s perspective
Find meaning
 listener’s perspective
Evaluate meaning
input = listener’s 
meaning?




INPUT
OUTPUT
Production of a referring expression:
Figure 3: ACT-R model of producing a referring expression (output) for a given referent (in-
put) by combining optimization from the speaker’s perspective (step 2) with opti-
mization from the listener’s perspective (step 3).
mine what is the current discourse topic on the basis of the prior discourse (Figure 3, step
1). Furthermore, the model needs to apply perspective taking to determine which referring
expression to use (Figure 3, Step 2-4). As a speaker, our model tries to find the optimal form
(either a pronoun or a full NP) for reference to an input referent that either is or is not the
discourse topic (Step 2). To determine whether the listener can correctly interpret this ex-
pression, in a next step (Step 3) the model takes the perspective of a listener. As a listener, the
model optimizes in the opposite direction, starting from the selected expression (a pronoun
or full NP) and deriving the optimal interpretation of that form (i.e., reference to the discourse
topic or to a non-topical referent). The model then evaluates whether the selected referring
expression leads to the intended interpretation for the listener and decides whether it should
use that expression or discard it (Figure 3, Step 4). In this section, we will first discuss how
the model learns to consider the opposite perspective in communication (Step 3-4). Following
this discussion, we will explain how the model determines the current discourse topic (Figure
3, Step 1).
In Step 2 in Figure 3, our model selects the optimal referring expression or meaning from a
set of candidates that best satisfies the ranked and violable constraints of the language (cf. Op-
timality Theory; Prince & Smolensky, 2004). This selection process makes use of two linguistic
constraints that have been proposed to guide the production and comprehension of pronouns
in discourse: ProTop and Referential Economy. ProTop is a constraint stating that
pronouns refer to the discourse topic (Beaver, 2004; Grosz et al., 1995; Hendriks et al., 2008). As
it establishes an association between a particular form (a pronoun) and a particular meaning
(reference to the topic), this constraint has an effect in both production and comprehension.
In production, however, the stronger constraint Referential Economy also plays a role.
Referential Economy (cf. Burzio, 1998; Hendriks & Spenader, 2006) expresses the idea
that it is more economical to use a pronoun than a full NP, regardless of whether the referent
is the topic or not. As this constraint expresses a preference among forms irrespective of their
meanings, this constraint only has an effect in production. Since Referential Economy
is stronger than ProTop, the combination of these two constraints will result in a general
preference for pronouns over full NPs in production.
Figure 4 shows how the model uses linguistic knowledge when selecting the referring
expressiontobeused(Step2inFigure3)orwhenselectingthebestinterpretationforacertain
53

referring expression (Step 3 in Figure 3).
Optimization process
Evaluation
C1 ≠ C2
Evaluation
C1 = C2
Output:
Optimal 
Candidate
Retrieve
Constraint
Retrieve
Candidate 2:
C2
Retrieve
Candidate 1:
C1
Figure 4: Structure of the ACT-R model of linguistic optimization. The same optimization
process is used for production (Step 2 in Figure 3) and comprehension (Step 3 in
Figure 3). From a set of candidate outputs, production optimization (i.e., optimiza-
tion from the speaker’s perspective) selects the optimal form and comprehension
optimization (i.e., optimization from the listener’s perspective) selects the optimal
meaning.
In our model, candidate forms, candidate referents, and linguistic constraints are all rep-
resented as chunks in declarative memory. For any given input, the model first retrieves two
possible candidates from declarative memory, followed by the retrieval of a relevant con-
straint of the grammar (see Figure 4). The system will retrieve the highest ranked constraint
first because the constraint ranking reflects the activation of the chunks. On the basis of the
retrieved constraint the model evaluates the two candidates. If one of the candidates violates
the constraint but the other candidate does not, the model selects the other candidate as the
optimal candidate. If both candidates either violate or satisfy the constraint and hence the
constraint does not distinguish the candidates, then the model retrieves the next ranked con-
straint to evaluate the candidates. If the model cannot retrieve another relevant constraint,
for example because there are no more relevant constraints left or because time is up, one of
the two candidates is selected at random as the optimal candidate. The model uses a greedy
optimization process by only evaluating two candidates at a time until one of the two evalu-
ated candidates is preferred over the other. This way, the model needs less time (compared to
an exhaustive search) to find a solution, although the solution that is found might be subop-
timal. If more time is available, the model will try to find a better solution by comparing the
optimal candidate at that point with additional candidates. Note that this approach hinges
on the assumption that the previous discourse increases the activation of the relevant candi-
dates, since the candidates with the highest activation will be evaluated first.
In our model, perspective taking consists of at least two steps of unidirectional optimiza-
tion in opposite directions (i.e., bidirectional optimization), which are performed serially dur-
ing on-line sentence production and comprehension (cf. van Rij et al., 2010). In production,
54

3
the model starts with the speaker’s perspective. In comprehension, the model initially takes
the listener’s perspective. The output of this initial process serves as the input for another
process, in which the model takes the opposite perspective (see Figure 3). For example, if
the model’s goal is to produce the optimal expression for referring to a particular referent,
the model starts out from the perspective of a speaker. Optimization proceeds in the model
by first retrieving two candidates, a pronoun and a full NP, and a constraint, Referential
Economy. On the basis of Referential Economy, the model determines that a pronoun
is the optimal form. This form is the input to another step of optimization (Step 3 in Figure
3), in which the model takes the perspective of the listener and checks whether this form, a
pronoun, is recoverable for the listener. From the listener’s perspective, the constraint Pro-
Top determines that a pronoun will be interpreted as referring to the discourse topic. As the
input of the initial step and the output of this step (Step 3 in Figure 3) are identical, the model
concludes that the meaning of the pronoun can be recovered by the listener.
In particular cases, the meaning may not be recoverable for the listener from the selected
form even after the second step of perspective taking. In such cases, if time permits, the
model considers whether the meaning is recoverable for a bidirectionally optimizing listener
by performing a third step of optimization. This more complex process of perspective taking
can be compared with second-order Theory of Mind reasoning. If the selected form is also
not recoverable for a bidirectionally optimizing listener, the model starts a new process of
optimization, while blocking the unrecoverable form from being a possible candidate.1
Because bidirectional optimization consists of two or more steps of unidirectional opti-
mization, bidirectional optimization takes more time to complete than unidirectional opti-
mization. In comprehension, the amount of time available for selecting an interpretation is
limited because the speaker determines the speaking rate. In production, more time may be
available for selecting a form, but still the amount of time is limited because of the expectancy
ofreasonablyfluentspeech. Animportantassumptionofourmodelisthat, initially, themodel
can usually only perform a single step of unidirectional optimization within the amount of
time available.2 As a result, the model as a speaker only produces pronouns as referring sub-
jects, and as a listener the model fails to interpret the use of a full NP as indicating a topic shift.
However, the ACT-R architecture assumes a learning mechanism called production compila-
tion (Taatgen & Anderson, 2002) that makes cognitive processing more efficient as a result of
experience. Production compilation combines two production rules that are repeatedly exe-
cuted in sequence into one new production rule. This new production rule takes less time to
execute than the two old rules. Therefore, the model will learn to prefer the new rule over the
two old rules. This new production rule can again be combined with other productions rules,
so that eventually the processes of comprehension and production become so efficient that
bidirectional optimization can be completed within the limited time (cf. van Rij et al., 2010).
In other words, because of this architectural learning mechanism, processing speed increases
and therefore performance increases as a function of linguistic experience.
This linguistically motivated computational model of grammar determines optimal forms
and meanings on the basis of the constraints of the grammar and the discourse status of po-
tential referents. Although the grammar uses constraints referring to discourse status, such
55

as Protop, the grammar does not determine which referent in the discourse is the topic.
This selection procedure is modeled as a separate process, which is explained in the next sec-
tion.
3.3
Implementation of discourse processing
To be able to computationally simulate children’s and adults’ production and comprehension
of referring expressions, the model must know whether the referent is the discourse topic (see
Figure 3, step 1). The discourse topic is generally considered to be what the linguistic context
is about (a.o., Ariel, 1990; Arnold, 1998; Givón, 1983; Grosz et al., 1995; Gundel et al., 1993).
In our model, the topic is simply the discourse referent with the highest accessibility. The
accessibility of a discourse referent is determined by the activation of the chunk in declarative
memory representing the discourse referent (cf. Arnold, 2008; Foraker & McElree, 2007). This
activation is dependent on the structure of the discourse.
Our model creates a representation of the discourse while it processes the sentence. First,
the model incrementally builds up the syntactic structure of the sentence. To this end, sen-
tence processing is implemented as an incremental process of very efficient memory re-
trievals (cf. R. L. Lewis & Vasishth, 2005). Every time a word is encountered, lexical and syn-
tactic information about the incoming word is retrieved and stored as chunks in declarative
memory. On the basis of this information, the model retrieves a syntactic structure to which
the word can be attached. For example, if the incoming word is the noun soccer player follow-
ing the determiner the, the model retrieves an earlier created syntactic chunk representing a
noun phrase, with the as the determiner and an empty position for the noun. The encountered
word is then attached to the retrieved syntactic chunk, and this modified chunk is attached
to the syntactic representation of the sentence.
In addition, the model incrementally builds up the discourse structure using the lexical
concepts accessed by the words in the sentence. When the model retrieves a lexical concept
for a noun for the first time, the model creates a new discourse referent. This discourse ref-
erent contains a link to the lexical concept and includes features such as animacy, gender,
and number. The activation value of a discourse referent is determined by the recency of the
last retrieval, the history of retrievals, and the association with other chunks. When a lexical
concept is retrieved for which a discourse referent already exists, the model does not create
a new discourse referent but re-activates the existing chunk. Thus the representation of the
discourse is not only based on the prior sentence but on all sentences in the current discourse
(in contrast to, for example, Grosz et al., 1995). However, the activation of a discourse referent
decays over time. Therefore, the probability to retrieve a referent that is introduced many
sentences earlier decreases, unless that chunk is re-activated again.
By modeling accessibility as activation, the accessibility of discourse referents in our
model is determined by cognitive rather than linguistic constraints. The grammar uses this
gradient information to make all-or-none decisions about candidate forms and meanings
through the notion of discourse topic.
The discourse status of referents plays a different role in production and comprehension.
56

3
In production, the model first checks whether an input referent is the discourse topic or not
by comparing the intended referent with the most active discourse referent. The resulting
discourse information (i.e., whether the input meaning is the discourse topic or a non-topical
referent) is added to the input of the optimization process. In comprehension, discourse sta-
tus is used to rank candidate meanings for a given input form. If the model encounters a
pronoun, the model first retrieves the discourse topic as a possible referent. Only if the sub-
sequent optimization process reveals that the input expression cannot be interpreted as ref-
erence to the topic, will the model retrieve a non-topical referent. In contrast, if the model
encounters a full NP, discourse status is not used to determine the referent. The model can
retrieve the meaning of the full NP on the basis of the information from declarative memory
and use that meaning to access the associated discourse referent.
Since the discourse topic is defined as the most active discourse referent, discourse sta-
tus is dependent on activation. In our model, the probability of being the discourse topic is
high when the referent has been mentioned often or when the referent has been mentioned
recently (cf. Arnold, 1998). In addition, we propose that spreading activation from other dis-
course referents also plays a role and is crucially influenced by WM capacity, as explained
below.
3.4
Implementation of working memory capacity
ACT-R assumes no separate WM component (but see Borst, Taatgen, & van Rijn, 2010). How-
ever, Daily, Lovett, and Reder (2001) proposed that WM capacity can be explained in ACT-R by
the amount of source activation. Source activation is the activation spreading from the current
goal to other chunks, so that information associated with the goal is more accessible. The goal
contains information to keep track of the current state in performing a task. Chunks that are
retrieved or manipulated are placed in one of the buffers of the ACT-R system, for example the
goal buffer. The production rules can only access and manipulate chunks from the different
modules when they are placed in a buffer, which can hold only one chunk at a time. Crucially,
only the chunks in the buffers spread activation.
According to Daily et al. (2001), a low WM capacity can be explained by a relatively small
amount of spreading activation from the current goal, whereas a high WM capacity can be
explained by a large amount of spreading activation. In the domain of language production,
Reitter (2008) uses this theory of spreading activation to explain short-term priming of syn-
tactical structures, and R. L. Lewis and Vasishth (2005) assign memory processes a central role
in their model of sentence processing. We implemented Daily et al.’s spreading-activation ac-
count of WM to explain the observed correlation between children’s performance on the use
and comprehension of referring expressions and their WM capacity. We propose that differ-
ences in participants’ WM capacity can be accounted for by differences in spreading activation
from the sentential subject. Subjects of a sentence are highly prominent elements, not only
within their own sentence but also in the discourse. Pronouns are preferably interpreted as
referring to the subject of the previous sentence (a.o., Arnold, 1998; Grosz et al., 1995; Mc-
Donald & MacWhinney, 1995). To implement this idea, the model keeps the subject of the
57

previous sentence active as part of the current goal, as a simplified representation of the pre-
vious sentence.
Recall that the activation of chunks is the summation of their own base-level activation,
determined by the history of the chunk, and the spreading activation of all other chunks that
currently reside in one of the buffers. The subject of the previous sentence is proposed to be
an additional source of spreading activation and to spread activation to all discourse referents
associated with the subject. If a participant simulated by the model has a high WM capacity,
the previous subject spreads a large amount of activation and, as a result, discourse referents
that are associated with the subject become more activated. As a consequence, the previous
subject is more likely to be selected as the antecedent for the current pronoun. If the subject
spreads a small amount of activation, as is the case for a simulation of a low WM capacity
participant, then there will be a neglectable effect on the discourse referents associated with
the subject. In that case, the effects of frequency and recency will be the main determinants
of the activation of the discourse referents.
To summarize, in our cognitive model the activation of a discourse referent is determined
by the recency and frequency with which the chunk is mentioned in the discourse, and the
spreading activation from the subject of the previous sentence. The model uses the infor-
mation about the activation of the discourse referents in the process of perspective taking to
select a referring expression or to find an interpretation for a given referring expression.
On the basis of our model’s simulations, we argue that both sufficient spreading activation
as well as sufficient speed of processing are required for the production and comprehension
of referring expressions in discourse.
4
Results of the simulation
To evaluate the performance of the model, it was subjected to simplified but similar produc-
tion and comprehension tasks as the participants in Wubs et al.’s (2009) study. We tested
the model’s production and comprehension of stories consisting of six sentences about two
characters of the same gender, similar to the stories in Figure 5.
a. Story with topic shift 
 
1. The pirate is playing with a ball. 
2. He kicks the ball in the water. 
3. He tells a knight what happened. 
4. The knight rescues the pirate’s ball. 
5. The knight gives the ball to the pirate. 
6. He is happy.  
b. Story without topic shift 
 
1. The pirate is playing with a ball. 
2. He kicks the ball in the water. 
3. He tells a knight what happened. 
4. The pirate asks the knight for help. 
5. The pirate gets a net from the knight. 
6. He rescues the ball. 
Figure 5: Examples of stories with and without a topic shift (adapted from Wubs et al., 2009).
The references to the two characters are underlined.
58

3
The stories differed in whether they do or do not contain a topic shift. In stories with a
topic shift (Figure 5a), the second character becomes the new topic halfway through the story.
In stories without a topic shift (Figure 5b), the first character remains the topic throughout
the story. The final sentence of each story contains a potentially ambiguous subject pronoun.
In the production task, the model was presented with five sentences as in Figure 5, to bring
the computational model in a state it would have after producing these five sentences. The
model was then asked to produce a referring expression for the firstly introduced character,
which was not the current discourse topic. In the comprehension task, the model was pre-
sented with six sentences as in the stories of Figure 5. The referent that the model selected as
the antecedent of the ambiguous pronoun was registered. To study development over time,
we included training sessions for the model, so that it could acquire perspective taking. In
these trials the model was not presented with stories, but with either a pronoun or full NP (in
comprehension) or a topic or non-topic referent (in production).
Thus, in each run, the model alternated between experimental sessions (with one produc-
tion task consisting of 4 trials and one comprehension task consisting of 8 trials) and training
sessions (which consist of a total of 400 production and comprehension trials between two
subsequent experimental sessions). Learning was turned off during the experimental ses-
sions to allow for the repeated presentation of the same experimental stimuli (cf. McClelland,
1995; van Rij et al., 2010; van Rijn et al., 2003). Each run consisted of four experimental ses-
sions, with interleaved training sessions. To simulate the difference in WM between children
and adults, no activation spread from the subject to other linguistic structures in the first two
experimental sessions (resulting in low WM simulations), whereas spreading activation was
enabled in the last two experimental sessions (resulting in high WM simulations). We will
first discuss the learning of perspective taking during the training and the effect of the WM
manipulation in the production and comprehension task, and then evaluate the model’s per-
formance in the experimental sessions. The model’s latter performance will be compared to
the performance of the children and adults in Wubs et al.’s study.
4.1
Simulating the acquisition of perspective taking
During training, the model was presented with comprehension and production trials in ran-
dom order. The input for comprehension trials was the type of discourse referent for which
a expression had to be found, either ‘topic’ or ‘non-topic’. The input for production trials was
a type of referring expression for which an interpretation had to be found, either a full NP
or a pronoun. The input for the trials was randomly determined. In production, the model
had to select a referring expression for a ‘topic’ referent in 75% of the trials, and for a ‘non-
topic’ referent in the remaining 25%, thus reflecting the intuition that people tend to refer to
the topic more often than to a non-topic. In comprehension, the model was presented with
pronouns and full NPs with equal probabilities and had to determine whether the expression
referred to a ‘topic’ referent or a ‘non-topic’ referent. For practical reasons we simplified the
training trials and did not present the model with entire discourses during training. We sim-
ply provided the model with information about the discourse status of the two referents (i.e.,
59

‘topic’ or ‘non-topic’). Therefore, during training the acquisition of perspective taking was
not influenced by the WM manipulation.
0
400
800
1200
1600
0
25
50
75
100
Production
% Adult-like performance
Input:
non-topic
topic
0
400
800
1200
1600
0
25
50
75
100
Comprehension
NP
pronoun
Figure 6: Learning to use and interpret referring expressions on the basis of the training
data, mean of 15 simulations. Moving average (25 trials) of the percentage adult-
like performance per number of training trials. The four vertical lines indicate the
four experimental sessions alternating the training sessions of 400 trials each.
Figure 6 displays the percentages of adult-like performance on the training trials. In pro-
duction, the dashed line, which is at ceiling from the start, indicates that the model correctly
produces a pronoun for reference to a topic from the start, as pronouns are the preferred form
according to the constraints of the grammar. As a consequence of this preference, however,
the model initially also uses pronouns for reference to a non-topic, showing non-adult like
performance. To reach adult-like performance with non-topics, the model needs more train-
ing trials. Recall that the selection of a full NP requires bidirectional optimization, which can
only be performed after sufficient experience. In comprehension, a similar pattern can be ob-
served. As the constraints of the grammar specify the interpretation of pronouns, pronoun
comprehension is adult-like from the start. However, the model needs more trials to learn
that a full NP signals a topic shift. Initially, the model randomly chooses between a topic and
a non-topic interpretation because the grammar does not restrict the meaning of a full NP.
Gradually, the model learns that a full NP is interpreted as reference to a non-topic referent
because a pronoun would have been used if the speaker had intended reference to a topic
referent.
Twomechanismsdrivethelearningofadult-likeproductionandcomprehension: thepro-
duction compilation mechanism (introduced above, Taatgen & Anderson, 2002) and internal
feedback. Recall that the production compilation mechanism shortens the processing time
by combining production rules that are repeatedly performed in sequence into a single, more
efficient production rule. During training, a success was registered if the candidate selected
by the model was identical to the output resulting from bidirectional optimization. In other
words, a success was registered if the model came up with the same solution an adult speaker
would have selected according to the linguistic analysis. This success increases the chances
60

3
of using the same steps at the next run by updating the parameters associated with the pro-
duction rules (Hendriks et al., 2007; Taatgen & Anderson, 2002; van Rij et al., 2010; van Rijn et
al., 2003). As a result, sequences of production rules that lead to a success are more likely to
undergo production compilation, thus speeding up the learning process.
Not every simulation results in 100% adult-like performance on the comprehension of full
NPs. Because the constraints of the grammar do not restrict the interpretation of full NPs, the
comprehension of full NPs generally takes more time than the production of full NPs for refer-
ence to non-topics, which also requires bidirectional optimization. To decide between a topic
referent and a non-topic referent in comprehension, the model tries to retrieve another con-
straint. However, this takes extra time. Some simulations cannot complete the bidirectional
optimization process that is necessary for the comprehension of full NPs within the available
time and, as a result, no feedback is received. With unlimited time for interpretation, every
simulation would reach 100% adult-like performance.
To summarize, the results of the training sessions in our simulations show that the model
gradually acquires the efficiency to complete bidirectional optimization as a result of linguis-
tic experience (cf. van Rij et al., 2010). Our simulations thus suggest that learning to take
into account the opposite perspective in communication, a Theory of Mind-like process, is
shaped by the frequency of the linguistic forms in the input, which determines how much
time it takes to learn more efficient production rules. In the next section we discuss how WM
capacity affects the discourse status of referents in our model and consequently may affect
the input for the process of perspective taking.
4.2
Simulating working memory diﬀerences
The model not only received training materials, but was also presented with two experimen-
tal tasks (a production task and a comprehension task) at four points in the simulations (see
Figure 6). In contrast to the training trials, the experimental trials were not simplified and
the model was presented with entire discourses which either did or did not contain a topic
shift. Recall that in the production task, the model produces a referring expression after pro-
cessing the first five sentences of a story. In the comprehension task, the model identifies the
antecedent of the potentially ambiguous pronoun in the sixth sentence of the story. For both
tasks, it is required that the model on the basis of the first five sentences first determines what
is the discourse topic. Therefore, we first discuss how the model’s selection of the discourse
topic is influenced by its working memory capacity. After that, we evaluate the model’s re-
sults on the simulated production and comprehension tasks.
Figure 7 illustrates how spreading activation affects the choice for one of the referents as
the current discourse topic. A low WM simulation and a high WM simulation are presented
with the same story with a topic shift. The activation of the two discourse referents in the
story is measured in both simulations during the processing of the five sentences. When the
model is presented with the first referring expression in the story, a new discourse chunk is
created that connects information about the current discourse with lexical information about
the referent. Importantly, as can be seen in Figure 7, the activation of the discourse chunk,
61

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
4
6
8
10
Story with topic shift
Activation LOW WM
NP1
P
P
NP2
NP2
NP1
NP2
NP1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
4
6
8
10
Activation HIGH WM
Time (ms)
P
NP2
NP2
NP1
NP2
NP1
NP1
P
Figure 7: Activation of the two referents over time (s) in a story with topic shift in a low WM
simulation (top) and a high WM simulation (bottom). The horizontal lines repre-
sent the duration of the first five sentences of the story, whereas the vertical lines
depict the start of a referring expression (NP1 represents a full NP unambiguously
referring to referent 1, NP2 unambiguously refers to referent 2, and P is a pro-
noun). The gray activation line represents the activation of the firstly introduced
referent; the black activation line represents the activation of the second referent.
represented by the thick gray line, is higher in the high WM simulation than in the low WM
simulation. The first referent is introduced in subject position. Therefore, in the high WM
simulation the spreading activation from the subject boosts the activation of this discourse
referent. In Sentence 2 and Sentence 3, a pronoun is used for the first referent. As there is
only one referent available in the current discourse, the low WM and high WM simulation will
always select this referent as the antecedent of the pronouns. The second referent is intro-
duced with a full NP in the third sentence and this referent becomes the subject in the next
two sentences. In the high WM simulation, the spreading activation from the subject causes
62

3
an increase in activation of the second referent, represented by the thin black line in Figure
7. In addition, it causes a decrease in activation of the first referent because this referent does
not receive activation anymore from spreading activation. In the low WM simulation, the
activation of both referents fluctuates around the same activation level because no referent
receives activation from spreading activation. The different frequencies of mentioning of the
first and second referent cause only a small difference in activation.
After processing all five sentences, the model retrieves the referent with the highest ac-
tivation at that point in the discourse as the current discourse topic. Due to spreading ac-
tivation, the referent that was the subject of the previous sentence will be selected as the
discourse topic in the high WM simulation. In contrast, in the low WM simulation the two
referents are equally likely to be selected as the discourse topic. For stories without a topic
shift (not shown here), the activation pattern for the low WM simulation looks the same as
for stories with a topic shift. In the high WM simulation, however, the first referent in stories
without a topic shift will be selected more often as the discourse topic than in stories with a
topic shift. This is because in stories without a topic shift, the activation of the first referent
remains high throughout the story, as the first referent is the subject of each sentence.
Note that for simplicity, we modeled WM capacity as a discrete phenomenon. The low
WM simulation does not spread activation from the subject at all, whereas the high WM sim-
ulation spreads a large amount of activation. Spreading activation from the subject reflects
the capacity to keep information about the grammatical roles in the previous sentence acces-
sible. Of course, we expect this capacity to be gradually acquired through maturation.
Our simulations show that spreading activation affects the activation of discourse refer-
ents and thus provides an explanation for the way differences in working memory may alter
the use and interpretation of pronouns in discourse. In the previous section, we explained
how the model’s referential choice was altered by its ability to take into account the listener’s
perspective. The combination of these two factors, the amount of working memory capacity
and perspective taking, may explain the differences between children’s and adults’ perfor-
mance with referring expressions. In the next two sections, we evaluate the performance of
our model on the production and comprehension tasks.
4.3
Simulating the production task
The simulated production task is a simplified version of the storybook task of Wubs et al.
(2009) and consisted of four different experimental trials. As mentioned earlier, the model is
presented with the first five sentences of a story to give it a background, and is then asked
how it would continue the story. Thus, in every trial, the model is presented with a story
with a topic shift presented word by word. After processing these five sentences, the model’s
goal is to produce a referring expression to re-introduce the first character, which is not the
current discourse topic. The first step in selecting the referring expression is to determine
whether the given referent is the current discourse topic (see Figure 3). This information is
the input to the second step, an optimization processes that selects a referring expression and
checks the recoverability of its meaning. The output of the model is either a pronoun or a full
63

NP. After 600 training trials and two experimental sessions, spreading activation is increased
to simulate an increased WM capacity due to cognitive development. Figure 8 compares the
model’s performance with the findings of Wubs et al. The model captures the main effects of
the data. That is, both children and the low-WM simulation overuse pronoun, and adults and
the high-WM simulation prefer full NPs.
Children
Model
low WM
0
25
50
75
100
% Used referring expression
63
33
4
86
14
0
PRODUCTION: Stories with topic shift
Adults
Model
high WM
0
25
50
75
100
3
97
0
11
88
1
pronoun
full NP
other
Figure 8: Production of referring subjects. The performance of the child and adult partici-
pants in the experiment of Wubs et al. (2009) is compared with the performance
of the low-WM and high-WM simulations (mean of 15 simulations).
The overuse of pronouns in the low-WM simulations (86% of the trials; mean of 15 simu-
lations) is caused by its low amount of spreading activation (57% of the trials) and its limited
processing speed (29% of the trials). In 57% of the trials the intended referent is incorrectly
considered to be the current discourse topic, as there is no spreading activation to increase
the activation of the subject of the previous sentence. If the referent were the discourse topic,
the adult choice would indeed have been a pronoun. So in these cases, the error resides in the
first step of determining the discourse status of the referent. On the other hand, in 68% of the
trials where the low WM simulations correctly consider the intended referent to be a non-
topic (i.e., in 28% of all trials), the model chooses a pronoun for reference. In these trials, the
error results from the later steps of the production process, as the model is not fast enough
yet to take into account the listener’s perspective. During the training sessions the model
gradually acquires more efficient production rules, so that it can use this process of perspec-
tive taking in the production tasks to determine whether the selected referring expression is
interpretable for a listener. In the high WM simulations, in 11% of the trials the process of per-
spective taking is not completed and consequently a pronoun is chosen for reference. Thus,
even if the model has sufficient WM capacity, for adult-like production Theory of Mind-like
perspective taking is required.
64

3
4.4
Simulating the comprehension task
In each experimental session of our simulation of the comprehension task, the model receives
four stories with a topic shift and four stories without a topic shift. Each time the model
encounters a pronoun, it starts the resolution process by retrieving the discourse topic and
evaluating on the basis of the grammar whether the optimal interpretation of this pronoun
is the discourse topic or a non-topic. We coded whether the pronoun in the final sentence of
the story is interpreted by the model as referring to the first or the second referent. Figure 9
compares the model’s performance with the findings of Wubs et al. (2009).
Children
Model
low WM
0
25
50
75
100
% Used referring expression
50
26 24
57
43
0
COMPREHENSION: Stories with topic shift
Adults
Model
high WM
0
25
50
75
100
36
64
0
1
99
0
1st referent
2nd referent
other
Children
Model
low WM
0
25
50
75
100
% Used referring expression
55
19 26
65
35
0
COMPREHENSION: Stories without topic shift
Adults
Model
high WM
0
25
50
75
100
92
7
1
99
1
0
1st referent
2nd referent
other
Figure 9: Comprehension of referring subjects. Performance of the child and adult partic-
ipants in the experiment of Wubs et al. (2009) is compared with performance of
our low-WM and high-WM simulations (mean of 15 simulations). The upper plots
display the performance on stories with topic shift, the lower plots display perfor-
mance on stories without a topic shift.
The model captures the two main effects in the children’s data: (a) the low-WM simula-
tion shows a small preference for the first referent, and (b) the low-WM simulation shows no
65

difference in performance between the two discourse conditions. The model further captures
the pattern shown by adults: in the high WM simulations the model displays a large difference
in performance between the two discourse conditions.
In contrast with the model’s performance on the production task, its performance on the
comprehension task is mainly determined by the WM manipulation. For the comprehension of
a pronoun, perspective taking is not required as the constraints of the grammar (in particular
the constraint PROTOP) already specify the discourse topic as the antecedent. Our simulations
thus suggest that an adult-like comprehension of pronouns does not require Theory of Mind-
like perspective taking but merely sufficient WM capacity.
As can be seen in Figure 9, the model captures the main effects found in the empirical
data. However, whereas the high-WM simulation almost always selected the second charac-
ter as the antecedent of the pronoun in the comprehension stories with a topic shift, the adults
still chose the first character in a third of the cases. We can think of several explanations for
this pattern. First, it is conceivable that the first mention of a referent boosts the activation
of this referent in such a way that this referent remains more active than subsequently in-
troduced referents. A second explanation, put forward by Koster et al. (2011), is that adults’
frequent selection of the first referent in the topic shift condition may have been caused by
the structure of the sentences in the construed stories. Although the stories with a topic shift
keep the first referent active by continued reference also after the topic shift, to match the
production stories, it may have been more natural to omit mention of the first referent when
the second referent has become the new topic. Further research is needed to identify the ex-
act cause of this additional effect in the adult data, which is also the reason why we decided
against implementing one of these strategies in our model. Most importantly however, this
additional effect does not affect our explanation of the experimental results.
Another difference between the model and the empirical data is the fact that the model
does not account for the ‘other’ responses that children sometimes gave in the comprehen-
sion task. These ‘other’ responses included references to previous stories, and may have been
triggered by difficulties in processing the current input but might also be genuine references
to the most activated discourse referent. However, as our model processed each story in-
dependently from all other stories, it had not access to other characters as referent for the
ambiguous pronoun.
5
General discussion
To investigate how linguistic constraints, discourse structure, and the speaker’s estimation of
the listener’s interpretation determine the speaker’s choice of referring expression, we devel-
oped a computational ACT-R model of the acquisition and use of referring expressions. On the
basis of this model we propose that for adult-like performance on the production and inter-
pretation of referring subjects not only sufficient WM capacity is necessary, but also sufficient
speed of processing to perform the Theory of Mind-like process of perspective taking. Below,
we discuss the relation between referential choice and linguistic experience, Theory of Mind
and working memory capacity, respectively.
66

3
5.1
Relation between referential choice and linguistic experience
In our cognitive model, we implemented the speaker’s task as a production step followed by
a comprehension step. This implementation was based on a linguistic account of the use of
referring subjects (Hendriks et al., 2008). This account holds that speakers not only select
the form that is optimal according to the constraints of the grammar, but also consider the
listener’s perspective. This second step is needed to determine whether the intended meaning
is recoverable from the selected form. The hypothetical listener uses the same grammar as
the speaker, but selects the best meaning for the given form, rather than the best form for a
given meaning.
Simulations of our computational model showed that this process of bidirectional opti-
mization becomes more efficient when it is repeatedly used. Eventually, the process becomes
so efficient that bidirectional optimization can be performed within the limited time avail-
able. Because this process depends on frequency of use, the frequency distribution of the
linguistic input determines the speed of acquisition of bidirectional optimization. This ex-
plains why children, who initially produce unrecoverable pronouns, acquire the adult-like
use of referring expressions with linguistic experience.
5.2
Relation between referential choice and Theory of Mind
In our model, production and comprehension are implemented as gradually specializing in-
stantiations of bidirectional optimization. Given the similarity to Theory of Mind-like pro-
cesses, it is expected that possessing these skills is required for the mature use of referring
expressions (cf. Arnold et al., 2009; Gundel et al., 2007). When children possess Theory of
Mind skills, they should in principle be able to apply this ability in taking into account the per-
spective of the conversational partner in referential choice. However, this complex process
initially takes too much time to complete during on-line sentence production and comprehen-
sion. Gradually, however, the process of bidirectional optimization becomes more efficient
through linguistic experience. Consequently, the model predicts that the application of The-
ory of Mind skills to language is not acquired through maturation, but rather on the basis of
the input frequencies of the relevant linguistic forms.
5.3
Relation between referential choice and working memory capacity
In previous studies (Hendriks et al., 2008; Koster et al., 2011), correlations were found between
WM capacity and elderly adults’ and children’s use of referring expressions. In our model, WM
capacity was implemented as the amount of spreading activation from the sentential subject
to all associated discourse referents.3 As the subject of the preceding sentence is an important
factor in determining the current topic, the subject information has to be retained in the goal
buffer across sentences. In that respect, our implementation of spreading activation differs
from the spreading activation account of Reitter (2008) that limits spreading activation to
within-sentence effects.
67

Our model predicts that it is more difficult to determine the discourse topic for language
userswithalowWMcapacitythanforlanguageuserswithahighWMcapacity. IfWMcapacity
is high, the discourse referent associated with the subject of the previous sentence receives an
extra amount of activation due to spreading activation from the subject. As a result, a high-
WM simulation is more likely to select the subject of the previous sentence as the discourse
topic. On the other hand, if WM capacity is low, the discourse topic is determined on the basis
of frequency and recency only. Because the two discourse conditions in the experimental
task did not differ in the frequency of the referents, the low-WM simulation displayed similar
performance on these stories. So WM capacity determines whether the model can take into
account the discourse structure. This prediction is in line with the working memory-account
of Daneman and Carpenter (1980). They argue that readers with a smaller reading span, a
measure correlated with working memory capacity, are less likely to have prior information
active in working memory, and hence these readers will be less successful or take more time
to compute the referent of a pronoun. Results of a study with adult participants (van Rij, van
Rijn, & Hendriks, 2011) provide additional support for our model’s prediction: In a dual-task
experiment in which one of the tasks was a comprehension task similar to the one in the
present study, participants were less likely to consider the subject of the previous sentence
as the discourse topic when the secondary task induced a high WM load, in comparison with
a secondary task that was less demanding. That is, when adults’ working memory was taxed,
their comprehension of pronouns in discourse became more child-like.
5.4
Integration of discourse-based and listener-based approach
Even if our cognitive model has a high WM capacity, it will still need perspective taking to
block the production of unrecoverable pronouns for non-topic inputs. On the other hand,
if the model is able to apply perspective taking successfully but has a low WM capacity, it
will have difficulty determining the discourse topic. If an incorrect choice is made for the
topic and the referent is incorrectly taken to be the discourse topic, the model will produce
an unrecoverable pronoun too. This may explain why elderly adults with a low WM capacity,
who have had sufficient linguistic input, nevertheless produce unrecoverable pronouns (cf.
Hendriks et al., 2008). For the correct use of referring expressions, therefore, both sufficient
WM capacity and sufficient processing speed are necessary. Our model thus integrates the
discourse-based approach to referential choice (Ariel, 1990; Givón, 1983) with the listener-
based approach (Gundel et al., 1993), while providing a truly cognitive basis for the term ‘cog-
nitive status’ employed in this linguistic work. Furthermore, the results of our model con-
tribute to the ongoing debate as to whether speakers and listeners coordinate their actions
(e.g., Brennan & Hanna, 2009; Clark, 1996; Keysar et al., 1998; Shintel & Keysar, 2009; Wardlow
Lane & Ferreira, 2008): In our model, speakers aim at taking into account the hypothetical
listener, but are not always able to do so due to processing limitations.
68

3
5.5
Further predictions of the model
Besides fitting existing experimental data, the advantage of a cognitive model is that it can
generate precise predictions regarding language users’ performance in new linguistic tasks.
Wubs et al. tested the production of stories with topic shift and the comprehension of stories
with and without topic shift. In addition to these three situations, which we could simulate
using the experimental results from the Wubs et al. study, we looked at the model’s perfor-
mance on the production of similar stories without a topic shift, which were not investigated
by Wubs et al. In such stories, the first referent is the topic throughout the story. After hearing
a discourse consisting of five sentences, the model’s task is to produce the optimal expression
for referring to the first character. On the basis of the grammar, adults are expected to use a
pronoun. However, the low WM simulation predicts a temporary decrease in the use of pro-
nouns by children, as a result of the interaction between learning to apply perspective taking
and a low WM capacity (see Figure 10). When children incorrectly consider the second char-
acter to be the topic, and at the same time happen to succeed in perspective taking, they will
be overly specific and produce a full NP. This prediction has not been tested yet.
0
400
800
1200
1600
0
25
50
75
100
% Adult-like performance
Number of training items
Production
low WM    high WM
+TS
-TS
Figure 10: Predictions of our ACT-R model for the production of stories without topic shift,
compared with the performance on the production task testing stories with topic
shift (mean of 20 simulations). The symbols show the percentages adult-like per-
formance in the four experiments (mean of 20 simulations): L represent stories
with a topic shift (+TS), H represent stories without a topic shift (-TS). After 600
training trials, the model’s WM capacity is increased (indicated by the dashed
line). Note that the performance on these experimental sessions displays a simi-
lar pattern as the acquisition of perspective taking shown in Figure 6. As Figure
6 depicts the acquisition of perspective taking in training sessions, this indicates
that performance depends on the model’s use of perspective taking.
Another prediction of the model concerns the comprehension of much simpler stories
with mainly intransitive sentences that have only one referent per sentence (e.g., “The knight
wants to play with the ball. He...”), as compared to the transitive sentences we modeled pre-
viously (e.g., “The knight gives the ball to the pirate. He …”). In production, the model’s
task is to determine the optimal referring expression for re-introducing a previously men-
69

tioned referent. Because the low-WM simulation has a slight preference for the most recently
mentioned second referent as the topic, the model produces more full NPs than it did in the
production stories discussed earlier. In comprehension, the model’s task is to determine the
optimal antecedent of the pronoun in the final sentence of the story. In stories with a topic
shift, the low-WM simulation shows a slight preference for the most recently mentioned sec-
ond referent. In stories without a topic shift, the low-WM simulation will correctly select the
first character as the referent of the pronoun because the first character is much more fre-
quent than the second character. Thus, the computational simulations predict that children
will perform better on pronoun resolution in simple discourses consisting of intransitive sen-
tences. Although this prediction might seem straightforward, a more stringent prediction is
that performance in these conditions will not be correlated with WM capacity.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a computational model of children’s and adults’ production and
comprehension of referring subjects. By modeling the speaker’s task as a step of production
followed by a step of comprehension, the model is able to explain children’s non-adult-like
production of unrecoverable pronouns. Due to insufficient processing speed, children are
not yet able to perform the consecutive steps of this Theory of Mind-like process of perspec-
tive taking in an adult-like way. Based on the simulations of our model, we argue that the
speaker’s consideration of the listener’s perspective is crucially dependent on speed of lin-
guistic processing, whereas the speaker’s identification of the discourse topic is dependent
on sufficient WM capacity. These two cognitive measures may develop independently: speed
of linguistic processing was shown to increase as an immediate effect of linguistic experience,
whereas WM may develop with age. The integration of a theory of grammar and discourse in
a cognitive model allows us to provide cognitively plausible explanations for previous exper-
imental results. In addition, this approach is able to generate precise predictions regarding
language users’ performance in new linguistic tasks. This may provide a fruitful way to gain
new insights into the complex interaction between linguistic constraints and various cogni-
tive factors in language processes.
Notes
1 For modeling the use of referring objects (van Rij et al., 2010), two steps were sufficient.
This corresponds to strong bidirectional optimization in an OT framework. For mod-
eling the use of referring subjects, on the other hand, sometimes more than two steps
are necessary. This corresponds to the recursive version of bidirectional optimization,
weak bidirectional optimization (cf. Blutner, 2000).
2 Initially, a single process of unidirectional optimization takes at least 250 milliseconds
because at least four production rules (which each take 50 milliseconds to fire) are nec-
essary to evaluate two candidates on the basis of one constraint. This is a relatively
70

3
long time in on-line sentence production and comprehension, considering the fact that
speech is typically produced at a rate of 3 or 4 syllables per second.
3 In our model, we implemented processing efficiency and WM capacity as two indepen-
dent cognitive constraints. However, the effects of the two mechanisms interact. Given
that WM capacity is considered to be the amount of source activation (cf. Daily et al.,
2001), a higher WM leads to a higher activation of chunks. If chunks have a higher ac-
tivation, the retrieval time is shorter (Anderson et al., 2004). As a result, an increase
in WM capacity leads to an increase in processing speed, which enhances the effect of
processing efficiency. Thus, although linguistic experience and WM capacity are two
independent factors, both influence processing speed and consequently affect the on-
set of adult-like performance.
71


chapter 4
How WM load inﬂuences linguistic
processing in adults:
A computational model of
pronoun interpretation in discourse
This manuscript was submitted as:
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submitted). How WM load influences linguistic
processing in adults:
A computational model of pronoun interpretation in discourse.
Manuscript, September 2012.

Abstract
This paper presents a study of the effect of working memory load on the interpretation of
pronouns in different discourse contexts: stories with and without a topic shift. We discuss
a computational model (in ACT-R, Anderson, 2007) to explain how referring expressions are
acquired and used. On the basis of simulations of this model, new predictions were generated
with respect to the influence of WM load in adults, suggesting that WM constraints only af-
fect pronoun resolution in stories with a topic shift, but not in stories without a topic shift.
This latter prediction was tested in an experiment. The results of this experiment support
the prediction that WM load has specific effects on adults’ off-line interpretation of referring
expressions in discourse.

4
1
Interpretation of subject pronouns
Listeners interpret referring expressions such as pronouns by using information from the pre-
ceding linguistic discourse. However, representing and accessing this discourse information
may come with certain costs. In this study we investigate the influence of working memory
load on adults’ interpretation of pronouns in discourse.
Table 1 shows two short stories about two characters of the same gender. In the stories,
the final sentence starts with a potentially ambiguous pronoun (he), which can refer to both
male characters in the given linguistic context (Eric and Philip).
A. Story with topic shift
B. Story without topic shift
1.
Eric / gaat / voetballen / in de sporthal.
1.
Eric / gaat / voetballen / in de sporthal.
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports
hall.’
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports
hall.’
2.
Philip / vraagt / Eric / om mee te rij-
den/naar de training.
2.
Eric / vraagt / Philip / om mee te rij-
den/naar de training.
‘Philip asks Eric to carpool to the training.’
‘Eric asks Philip to carpool to the training.’
3.
Philip / haalt / Eric / na het eten / met de
auto op.
3.
Eric / haalt / Philip / na het eten/met de
auto op.
‘Philip picks up Eric after dinner by car.’
‘Eric picks up Philip after dinner by car.’
4.
Hij / voetbalt / al twintig jaar.
4.
Hij / voetbalt / al twintig jaar.
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’
Question: Wie voetbalt al twintig jaar? / ’Who has played soccer for twenty years?’
Table 1: Example of a story in Dutch with (A) and without (B) topic shift.
Generally, pronouns are used to refer to the most salient character or entity (i.e., the topic)
in the linguistic discourse (a.o., Ariel, 1990; Gundel et al., 1993). In contrast, full noun phrases
or proper names are used to refer to less salient characters or to introduce new characters.
Different factors have been found to affect the interpretation of pronouns (see Arnold, 1998,
for a review), among others the grammatical role of potential referents. As the subject of
the previous sentence is likely to be the current topic (Grosz et al., 1995), listeners will often
interpret a pronoun as referring to the previous subject (a.o., McDonald & MacWhinney, 1995;
R. Stevenson, Crawley, & Kleinman, 1994).
Koster et al. (2011) presented children (age 4-6) and adults with prerecorded stories, of
which the last sentence started with a potentially ambiguous pronoun. In half of the stories
the topic shifted halfway by changing the grammatical role of the characters (similar to the
stories in Table 1). In agreement with the literature, they found that adult listeners prefer to
interpret the ambiguous subject pronoun as referring to the subject of the previous sentence
(Philip in Table 1a, and Eric in Table 1b). Children, however, showed a general preference for
the first character of the story as the referent of the pronoun (Eric in Table 1a and 1b), and did
not distinguish between stories with and without topic shift. Interestingly, Koster et al. report
that children with a higher auditory working memory capacity performed more adult-like in
75

their pronoun use.
We implemented a computational model within the cognitive architecture ACT-R
(Anderson, 2007) that simulates the acquisition of referring expressions in discourse (van Rij,
van Rijn, & Hendriks, submitteda). The computational simulations of our ACT-R model sug-
gest that limited WM capacity may cause decreased performance on children’s choice and
interpretation of referring expressions in discourse, thus providing a detailed, mechanistic
explanation of the empirical correlation reported by Koster et al. (2011). Our ACT-R account
is in line with previously proposed computational models in different frameworks that ex-
plain the relation between WM capacity and language processing, such as CC READER (Just &
Carpenter, 1992) or 4CAPS (Just & Varma, 2007). In these models, WM capacity is implemented
as a limited amount of activation, which is different for different individuals. If more capac-
ity is required for processing or storage than is available, this will result in longer processing
times or retrieval errors (e.g., Daneman & Carpenter, 1980). However, alternative accounts
have been put forward to explain the relation between WM capacity and language process-
ing. For example, MacDonald and Christiansen (2002) propose that differences in WM capacity
are differences in skill that arise from variations in exposure to the language and biological
differences. Alternatively, Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) and Kintsch (Construction-Integration
model; 1998) argue that WM capacity reflects the efficiency of retrieval cues present in the
active portion of working memory. In their view, more efficient cues result in more accurate
and faster retrieval of information from declarative memory.
In this paper we show that our ACT-R model makes specific predictions about adults’ lin-
guistic performance under different conditions of WM load. Based on simulations of our ACT-
R model, we expect adults’ interpretation of subject pronouns in discourse to be influenced
by the amount of WM capacity available for interpretation. We present empirical evidence
supporting this novel prediction.
2
Cognitive model
In a previous study, we implemented a computational model within the cognitive architec-
ture ACT-R (Anderson, 2007) that simulates children’s acquisition of referring expressions in
discourse (van Rij et al., submitteda). In our implementation, we focused on the differences
between potentially ambiguous pronouns (he) and more explicit referring expressions such as
full noun phrases (the soccer player) or proper names (Eric). The cognitive model was shown to
simulate the acquisition data reported in Koster et al. (2011). This paper presents new predic-
tions, following from simulations of the cognitive model, for adults’ interpretation of referring
expressions in discourse. Before describing the simulations, we will give a short overview of
the model.
2.1
Overview of the model
The model consists of two parts, namely the memory principles that determine the repre-
sentation of the linguistic discourse, and the linguistic principles that underlie the choice
76

4
and interpretation of referring expressions. The model uses general memory principles to
build a representation of the discourse during sentence comprehension. The saliency of dis-
course referents is represented by the activation of elements in memory. The discourse ref-
erent with the highest activation is taken to be the current discourse topic. In addition to this
memory-based process that automatically constructs a discourse representation, the model
uses a rule-based process to perform its task of producing or interpreting a referring expres-
sion. To produce a referring expression, the model evaluates possible forms, such as a pronoun
or a full noun phrase, on the basis of linguistic principles. It then takes the perspective of the
listener to select the expression that is not only economical to use, but also understandable for
the listener in the current discourse. To interpret a referring expression, the model evaluates
possible discourse referents, such as the current topic, based on linguistic principles. Then it
takes the perspective of a speaker to determine whether a speaker would indeed have used
the expression for the selected interpretation. The model thus integrates linguistic theories
based on the accessibility of referents (e.g., Ariel, 1990) and those that assume a pragmatic
reasoning process (e.g., Gundel et al., 1993).
Here, we focus on the interpretation of subject pronouns, which is mainly driven by the
linguistic discourse and not by sentence-internal factors, in contrast to object pronouns (van
Rij et al., submitteda). The linguistic discourse must be represented in the listener’s mem-
ory. By modeling the memory principles determining the representation of the linguistic dis-
course, we can generate model-based predictions about children’s and adults’ interpretation
of referring expressions in discourse.1
2.2
Simulations: The eﬀect of WM capacity on pronoun interpretation
Simulating the task of Koster etal. (2011), the model is presented with stories with and without
topic shift. The six-sentence stories are presented to the model word by word. During on-line
processing, the model builds a (simplified) representation of the preceding discourse: every
time a character is encountered in the story, that character is represented in the declarative
memory. Each memory representation (referred to as chunk) has a certain amount of acti-
vation that reflects the saliency of that character in the current discourse (consistent with
Foraker & McElree, 2007; but in contrast with Grosz et al., 1995; Gundel et al., 1993). The final
sentence of each story starts with a potentially ambiguous pronoun. As the current discourse
topic, and hence the referent of the pronoun, the model selects the chunk with the highest
level of activation.
In ACT-R, the activation of a chunk reflects the chunk’s history and the chunk’s useful-
ness in the current context (see Appendix 1). The activation of chunks decays with time, but
is increased when the chunk is retrieved. This base-level activation is dependent on the fre-
quency of use (the more frequently used, the higher the activation) and the recency of the
last retrieval from memory (the more recent the last retrieval, the higher the activation). In
addition, spreading activation from other chunks can temporarily boost a chunk’s activation:
chunks that are currently being processed spread activation to other, connected chunks in
declarative memory. As the amount of spreading activation determines the ability to main-
77

tain goal-relevant information, differences in spreading activation account for individual dif-
ferences in working memory capacity (Daily et al., 2001).
In our model, the subject of the previous sentence spreads activation to all discourse el-
ements associated with it (similar to the implementation of short-term syntactic priming of
Reitter, Keller, & Moore, 2011). We manipulated the amount of spreading activation to explain
the difference between children’s and adult’s interpretation of subject pronouns reported by
Koster et al.. If the amount of spreading activation is high, the chunk representing the sub-
ject spreads a large amount of activation and discourse elements that are associated with the
subject become more activated in comparison with other discourse elements. As a result, the
model will retrieve the referent that was the subject of the previous sentence as the current
discourse topic. On the other hand, if the subject spreads a small amount of activation, reflect-
ing a low WM capacity, then there will be no effect on the discourse elements associated with
the subject. In that case, the effects of frequency and recency will be the main determinants
of referent retrieval.
Figure 1 shows the effect of WM capacity (i.e., the amount of spreading activation) on the
activation of the two referents in the stories with topic shift presented to the model.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
4
6
8
10
Activation LOW WM CAPACITY
Time (s)
R1
P
P
R2
R2
R1
R2
R1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
4
6
8
10
Activation HIGH WM CAPACITY
Time (s)
P
R2
R2
R1
R2
R1
R1
P
Figure 1: Activation of the two referents over time (s) in a story with topic shift in a low WM
capacity and a high WM capacity simulation. The horizontal lines represent the
duration of the first five sentences of the story, whereas the vertical lines depict
the start of a referring expression (R1 and R2 represent expressions unambigu-
ously referring to referent 1 and 2, and P is a pronoun). The red activation line
represents the activation of the firstly introduced referent; the black activation
line represents the activation of the second referent (adapted from van Rij, van
Rijn, & Hendriks, submitted).
The second character is introduced in Sentence 3. The topic shift condition starts to differ
from the no topic shift condition in Sentence 4, where the second character becomes the
subject in the topic shift stories, but not in the stories without topic shift (cf. Koster et al.,
2011). With a high WM capacity, the model selects the subject of the previous sentence as
the referent of the pronoun in Sentence 6, because this discourse element clearly has the
highest activation (Fig. 1, right). However, with a low WM capacity, the model will show a
much-reduced preference for the second character as the referent of the pronoun, and often
chooses the first character. Similarly to children’s performance, the model’s interpretation
78

4
of pronouns is not affected by grammatical role (Fig. 1, left).
2.3
New prediction: Eﬀect of WM load on adults’ interpretation of
pronouns
On the basis of our model’s simulations we propose that an individual’s WM capacity influ-
ences the extent to which the grammatical structure of the previous sentence plays a role in
resolving a potentially ambiguous subject pronoun. If this hypothesis is correct, we expect
that adults show difficulties in detecting a topic shift when their WM is taxed by having to per-
form a memory task in parallel. This prediction follows directly from the ACT-R model: goal-
relevant information spreads a proportion of the total spreading activation to other chunks in
the declarative memory. If the number of sources from which activation is spread increases,
the amount of spreading activation received by individual chunks decreases. In a high WM
load situation, more information needs to be maintained in an activated state and as a result,
the subject of the previous sentence spreads less activation to the discourse elements asso-
ciated with the subject. Therefore, the model predicts that adult listeners or readers show
more child-like performance in high WM load conditions: they will more often select the first
character as the current discourse topic. In addition, as the level of activation determines the
retrieval time, the model predicts that it will take more time to retrieve a discourse referent
in a high WM load situation: due to spreading activation, the activation of discourse referents
in a high WM load condition is lower.
3
Dual-task experiment
We performed a dual-task experiment to test our prediction that adult listeners will show dif-
ficulties in their comprehension of a topic shift if they have less WM capacity available (see
for a similar dual-task manipulation in the domain of the processing of referring expression,
Campana, Tanenhaus, Allen, & Remington, 2011). To manipulate WM load, participants were
asked to perform a combined task: memorizing a sequence of digits for later recall while per-
forming a moving-window task (Just, Carpenter, & Woolley, 1982).
3.1
Methods
3.1.1
Digit task
At the start of each trial, participants had to memorize a sequence of either three or six digits
(low and high WM load conditions). Digits were shown for 1 second each in the center of a
computer screen. The digits were pseudo-randomly chosen from 1 to 9, while ensuring that
not all the digits were the same. After completing the moving-window task, the participants
had to recall the memorized digits.
79

3.1.2
Moving-window task
After the presentation of the digits, participants had to read stories consisting of four sen-
tences each (see Table 1), followed by a comprehension question. The sentences were pre-
sented one by one and were subdivided into smaller word clusters (indicated by slashes in
Table 1). Using a typical moving-window paradigm (Just et al., 1982), only the letters of one
single word cluster were visible at a time, and the other letters were replaced by a dot. By
pressing a button, the participant could move the window to the next word cluster. After
reading the four-sentence story, a question was presented with two answer alternatives. Par-
ticipants had to press the corresponding button to answer the question. After answering the
question, they had to type in the digits that were presented at the beginning of the trial. At
the end of each trial, participants only received feedback on the digit task to ensure sufficient
focus on the WM task. We collected different measures per trial: reading times per region,
accuracy and reaction times for the questions and accuracy in reproducing the digits.
3.1.3
Design
Stories. Every story featured two characters of the same gender. The final sentence of each
story started with an ambiguous subject pronoun hij (‘he’) or zij (‘she’): the pronoun could
refer to both characters, so that the only clue to the interpretation of the pronouns was the
structure of the story. We designed two variants of every test story (see Table 1), in which we
manipulated whether there was a topic shift or not. The topic shift is realized by placing the
second character (Philip) in subject position in Sentence 2. If there was no topic shift, we ex-
pected participants to prefer the firstly introduced character as the referent of the ambiguous
pronoun. If there was a topic shift, we expected participants to prefer the second character.
At the end of every test story a question was presented to elicit the preferred interpretation
of the ambiguous pronoun.
Lists. The presented materials were part of a larger experiment, in which we additionally
tested two other variants of the stories. In total, 64 test stories were designed in four dif-
ferent variants. Four lists of 64 test stories (16 test stories per condition) were constructed
to separate the different variants of the test stories. The lists also contained 128 filler items
with the same structure as the test stories (32 filler stories per condition, the same for all
lists). The filler stories were followed by a question about the first or second sentence of the
story, to avoid reading strategies and to mask the goal of the experiment. Half of the filler
questions asked about a character, the other half were what- or where-questions. Note that
in contrast to the test questions, filler questions were not ambiguous and could be scored as
right or wrong.
Here, we report on 2 x 32 test items, and the 64 filler items with the same two discourse
structures. One test story (both variants) was removed from the data, because of a technical
problem during presentation.
80

4
3.1.4
Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four lists. The experiment consisted of
two blocks: a low WM load block (3 digits) and a high WM load block (6 digits). The order of
blocks was counterbalanced; within blocks the items were randomly distributed. Participants
received instructions for each block. The experiment started with a practice trial suited for
the current WM load condition.
3.1.5
Participants
Sixty-two first-year psychology students (18 men, 44 women; mean age 19) participated in
the experiment in exchange for course credits. Five participants could not complete the ex-
periment because of technical problems. Another 5 participants were excluded from data
analysis, because they answered less than 75% of the filler questions correctly in the low WM
load condition, and/or performed at chance level in one of the two types of filler questions.
Data of 52 participants (15 men, 37 women) was used for the statistical analyses.
3.2
Results
In this section, we first discuss the performance on the digit task. We then present the off-
line results on the linguistic task (i.e., the answers on the questions and the reaction times),
followed by the on-line results on this task (i.e., the reading times).
3.2.1
Results on digit task
Participants made more errors on the digit task in the high WM load condition than in the
low WM load condition (percentage correct trials: 3-digits=77.2%, 6-digits=52.0%), indicating
that the 6-digit condition was indeed more difficult.
3.2.2
Off-line results on linguistic task
Answers. Figure 2 (left) shows the percentages of times that the subject of the previous sen-
tence was chosen as the referent of the ambiguous pronoun. In addition, the percentages of
correct answers on the filler questions (right) are given for comparison. Figure 2 shows that
participants were sensitive to the topic-shift manipulation. In both WM load conditions, the
subject of the previous sentence was preferred.
We examined the effects of Topic shift, WM load, Trial position (the trial position in the ex-
periment) and Session (the first or the second block of the experiment) on the choice for the
previous subject (yes or no) in the test items using logistic mixed-effects models (cf. Baayen,
2008). More complex models that included additional predictors such as list, the position of
the subject answer on the screen (left or right), or the accuracy of repeating the memorized
digits, did not show qualitatively different effects. In all the presented models, participant
and item (all variants of a story were labeled as the same item) were included as crossed-
random effects, with the maximum random effect structure that was justified by the data.
81

Test stories
0
25
50
75
100
% Subject answers
Shift
No shift
79
68
76 72
Low WM load
High WM load
Fillers stories
0
25
50
75
100
% Correct answers
Referent
Other
88 86
98 97
Figure 2: Left: Preference for the subject of the previous sentence as the referent of the
pronoun for stories with and without topic shift (± 1SE); this would be Philip in
the story with topic shift in Table 1, and Eric in the story without topic shift. Right:
Percentage correct answers for filler questions asking about a referent or a non-
referent (± 1SE).
We compared different models using a stepwise variable deletion procedure, starting with
the complete interaction model (Baayen & Milin, 2010).
To explain the choice for the subject of the previous sentence (yes or no), the four-way
interaction between Topic shift, WM load, Trial position and Session needed to be included in the
model (χ2(1)= 7.950, p=.005). The full-interaction model (Appendix 2, Table A1) showed that
in Session 1 the subject was selected less often in the high WM load condition than in the low
WM load condition for stories with a topic shift (β=-0.676, z=-2.71; p=.007), in line with the
assumption that decreasing WM capacity reduces the performance on pronoun resolution.
However, Trial position attenuates this effect: near the end of the session, the difference be-
tween the WM load conditions became smaller (β=-0.336, z=-3.15; p<.001). A negative main
effect of Trial position (β=-0.009, z=-2.98; p=.003) indicates that participants were less likely
to choose the subject as referent near the end of the experiment. Note that these interac-
tions between WM load, Topic shift, Trial position and Session are mainly driven by the topic shift
condition: a mixed-effects model to explain the stories with a topic shift shows a significant
three-way interaction between these predictors (χ2(1)= 5.707, p=.017). Crucially, no effects of
WM load, Trial position or Session were found using the same analysis for the stories without a
topic shift.
Reaction times. In the same way as we analyzed the choice of referent, we analyzed the
log-transformed reaction times after excluding the short outliers (<=50ms; less than 1% of
the data). We found a significant interaction between Trial position and Session (χ2(1)= 7.783,
p=.005), indicating that participants became faster in answering during the experiment, but
no significant effects of WM load and Topic shift. The best-fitting model additionally included
a the predictor Subject (χ2(1)= 11.597, p<.001): Participants were faster when selecting the
subject than when selecting the non-subject referent.
To summarize, we found that WM load affects the comprehension of stories with a topic
82

4
shift, but not the stories without a topic shift: participants less often select the subject of the
previous sentence as the referent of the ambiguous pronoun in the high WM load condition.
However, we did not find a difference in reaction times between the two types of stories,
suggesting that the questions after stories with a topic shift are not more difficult to answer.
These findings support our prediction that adults will show difficulties in processing a topic
shift under higher WM load.
3.2.3
On-line results on linguistic task
Reading times. Before analyzing the reading time data we removed missing data (2%), short
outliers (smaller than 50 ms, 19%) and used a log-transform to reduce the effect of the long
outliers (cf. Baayen & Milin, 2010). The relatively large amount of short outliers was caused
by a technical problem. As the outliers were equally distributed over the story conditions
and the WM load conditions (χ2(1)=0.925, p>.1), it is unlikely that this influences our results
in qualitative ways.
We analyzed the log-transformed reading times of Sentence 2 and Sentence 4, to deter-
mine whether WM load influenced the processing of the topic shift and the processing of the
ambiguous pronoun.
Sentence 2: Topic shift
reading time (ms)
Philip
'Philip
vraagt
asks
Eric
Eric
om ...
to ...
...
...'
150
200
250
300
350
400
No topic shift
Eric
'Eric
vraagt
asks
Philip
Philip
om ...
to ...
...
...'
Sentence 4: Topic shift
Hij
'He
voetbalt
has played soccer
...
...'
150
200
250
300
350
400
No topic shift
Hij
'He
voetbalt
has played soccer
...
...'
Figure 3: Reading times (± 1SE) of Sentence 2 (left) and Sentence 4 (right) in the low WM
load condition (dashed line) and the high WM load condition (solid line). Note the
logarithmic scale on the y-axis.
Sentence 2. Figure 3 (left) shows the reading times of Sentence 2 on a logarithmic scale. We
expected an interaction in reading times between the topic shift conditions and the WM load
conditions at the start of the sentence: The introduction of a new referent is expected to cause
an increase in reading times, in comparison with repeated reference to the previous subject.
However, this difference between the topic shift conditions is not expected for the high WM
load condition, because the model predicts that a high WM load decreases the activation of the
subject referent. To test these hypotheses, we analyzed the effects of WM load and Topic shift
in the first and second region, which may reflect residual effects of retrieving the discourse
referent after processing the word.
In the analysis of the first region, we included Trial position, Session, Letters (the number
of letters of the word) in the linear mixed-effects model. The best-fitting model (Appendix
2, Table 2) contained significant interaction between Trial position and Session (χ2(1)= 6.371,
83

p=0.012), and between WM load and Trial position (χ2(1)=18.829, p<.001). The latter interaction
indicates that reading times became faster towards the end of the experiment in the high WM
load condition (β=0.103, t=-2.42), although reading times were generally slower in the high
WM load condition (β=0.001, t=2.09). There was no significant effect of Topic shift (β=-0.011,
t<1).
In the analysis of the second region we included Trial position, Session, and LogRT1 (the log-
transformed reading times on the first region), to control for autocorrelation effects. How-
ever, we did not find any significant interaction. The main-effects model (Appendix 2, Table
3) did show a main effect of Topic shift (β=0.028, t=2.15, p=.032), indicating that readers needed
more time to read the second region in the stories with topic shift, but no significant effect of
WM load (β=0.015, t=1.13; p>.1).
Additional analyses that evaluate all reading times of the sentence to investigate the ef-
fects of WM load and Topic shift over time, showed significant effects of these predictors at the
end of the sentence, but no interaction. These effects may point to a reasoning process or a
task-specific strategy, which is beyond the scope of this study.
Sentence 4. Figure 3 (right) shows the reading times for the final sentence of the story,
which started with an ambiguous pronoun. We analyzed this sentence using the analyses
described before, to determine whether WM load influenced the retrieval of the referent of
the pronoun. However, we did not find significant effects of Topic shift or WM load, nor an
interaction between these two factors in the first two regions of Sentence 4.
To summarize, in Sentence 2 we found an effect of WM load on the first word and an effect
of Topic shift on the second word, but no interaction between WM load and Topic shift. The
prediction that more salient discourse referents give rise to shorter retrieval times was not
reflected in the reading time data.
4
Discussion
We predicted, on the basis of our cognitive model, that adults would show more difficulties
in processing a topic shift in higher WM load conditions. We performed a dual-task experi-
ment to investigate this prediction. We hypothesized that as WM load increased, adult readers
would show a significant decrease in their preference for the second character as the referent
of a pronoun in the stories with a topic shift. In addition, we expected an increase in read-
ing times in stories with a topic shift as a result of the topic shift, but we expected that this
increase would diminish in the high WM load condition.
The off-line data support the model’s prediction: participants selected the first charac-
ter as the referent of the ambiguous pronoun significantly more often in the high WM load
condition. No differences in reaction times were found, suggesting that the comprehension
questions were equally difficult to answer for the two types of stories.
With respect to the reading times, we found an increase in reading times immediately
after presenting a new referent in subject position. This indicates that readers expect to see
the subject of the previous sentence again, instead of a new referent. However, we did not
measure a significant interaction between WM load and story type. Different explanations
84

4
are possible for why this interaction did not reach significance, contrary to our expectations.
It could be that WM load does not affect the processing of the sentence, but only affects the
updating of the discourse representation with new sentence information. In that case, sen-
tence wrap-up effects could have masked an interaction between topic shift and WM load. An
alternative explanation is that the moving-window task is not suited for detecting the effect
of WM load. It is reasonable to assume that the effect of WM load on topic shift is spread out
over different regions and is thus more difficult to detect. ERP studies provide support for
this explanation, because for unexpected noun phrases readers show an ERP effect 300-600
ms after the determiner of the unexpected noun phrase (Otten & van Berkum, 2009), which is
much longer than it took participants in our experiment to read one region (approximately
200 ms).
The link between WM capacity and language processing is not new. Within the context
of ACT-R, R. L. Lewis and Vasishth (2005) have explained difficulties in sentence processing,
which have been attributed to WM load, by ACT-R’s fluctuating activation and similarity-
based interference in the retrieval of chunks. Our account is also in line with previously
proposed accounts that consider WM capacity as a limited source of activation that is dif-
ferent for different individuals (a.o., Daneman & Carpenter, 1980; Just & Carpenter, 1992; Just
& Varma, 2007). Alternatively, Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) argue that WM capacity reflects
the efficiency of constructed representations in memory (Kintsch, 1998, Chapter 7), which is
only consistent with our data under the assumption that higher WM load changes the repre-
sentations that are constructed in memory. In other words, higher WM load may reduce the
probability that the grammatical role is encoded in the discourse representation of a referent.
This is subtly different from our implementation, since instead of changing the discourse rep-
resentation itself, our account suggests that WM load affects the contribution of the previous
subject to the activation of referents but does not change the internal representation. Fur-
thermore, our data shows that WM load only affects the interpretation of stories with a topic
shift, which is difficult to explain in terms of individual variation in exposure to the language
and biological differences (as MacDonald and Christiansen, 2002, propose).
To conclude, we found that WM load can affect adults’ interpretation of ambiguous pro-
nouns by reducing the influence of the discourse context. This specific effect of WM load
on pronoun interpretation was predicted by our cognitive model. Our model implies that
readers or listeners without sufficient WM capacity rely more on the base level activation of
discourse elements, instead of using information about the grammatical roles of the referents
in the previous sentence. This study thus shows that language comprehension can be differ-
ent for adults in different situations, and that adults may become more child-like under high
WM load.
Notes
1 The
code
of
the
discussed
ACT-R
model
can
be
retrieved
from:
http://www.let.rug.nl/jacolienvanrij/wm-model.html
85

Appendices
1
Activation formula of ACT-R
In ACT-R (Anderson, 2007) the activation of chunk i is defined by: Ai = ln(∑n
k=1 t−0.5
k
) +
∑m
j=1 WjSji +ϵi, with n being the number of presentations of chunk i, and tk the time since
the kth presentation, m the number of chunks that are connected with chunk i, Wj the amount
of activation that is spread from chunk j, Sji the strength of association between j and i, and
ϵi noise. The activation of a chunk determines the time it takes to retrieve it from declarative
memory: T = e−Ai.
2
Statistical analyses
Table A1: Fixed effects of best fitting logistic mixed-effects model to fit the choice for the
subject as the referent of the ambiguous pronoun in the test stories.
Formula
choiceSubj ~ (WMload + TopicShift + Session + TrialPosition)^4 + (1|Subject) +
(1+TopicShift|Item)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
z value
p-value
Intercept
***
2.123
0.348
6.11
0.000
WMload1
-0.207
0.250
-0.83
0.406
Topicshift2
0.238
0.330
0.72
0.472
Session3
-0.170
0.334
-0.51
0.610
Trialposition4
**
-0.009
0.003
-2.98
0.003
WMload:Topicshift
-0.138
0.250
-0.55
0.580
WMload:Session
-0.274
0.268
-1.02
0.307
WMload:Trialposition
0.000
0.002
0.12
0.901
Topicshift:Session
0.269
0.330
0.82
0.414
Topicshift:Trialposition
-0.003
0.003
-0.99
0.322
Session:Trialposition
-0.001
0.003
-0.24
0.810
WMload:Topicshift:Session
**
-0.676
0.250
-2.71
0.007
WMload:Topicshift:Trialposition
0.003
0.002
1.36
0.173
WMload:Session:Trialposition
0.002
0.002
0.72
0.474
Topicshift:Session:Trialposition
-0.001
0.003
-0.44
0.662
WMload:Topicshift:Session:Trial
position
**
0.007
0.002
2.84
0.005
Model characteristics
1 Contrast used for WM load: Low WM load (-1) versus High WM load (1);
2 Contrast used for Topic shift: No topic shift (-1) versus Topic shift (1);
3 Contrast used for Session: Session 2 (-1) versus Session 1 (1);
4 Trial position: range 1-192; linear fit, because log-transformed predictor or more complex transforma-
tions did not improve the model.
86

Table A2: Fixed effects of the mixed-effects model (including all two-way interactions) to
fit the reading times on the first region of Sentence 2.
Formula
LogRT
~
(WMload
+
TopicShift
+
TrialPosition
+
Session)^2
+
Letters
+
(1+WMload|Subject) + (1 |Item)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value1
Intercept
***
5.458
0.110
49.63
WMload
*
0.118
0.053
2.23
Topicshift
-0.046
0.051
-0.89
Trialposition
***
-0.005
5e-4
-9.18
Session
*
0.161
0.061
2.63
Letters
0.022
0.014
1.61
WMload:Topicshift
0.015
0.014
1.08
WMload:Trialposition
*
-0.001
5e-4
-2.52
WMload:Session
-0.047
0.064
-0.74
Topicshift:Trialposition
4e-4
5e-4
0.69
Topicshift:Session
0.012
0.028
0.41
Trialposition:Session
***
-0.002
5e-4
-4.5
Model characteristics
1 Exact p-values are not estimated, because a random slope for WM load needed to be included for Sub-
jects (χ2(2)=14.929, p<.001).
See Table 1 for an explanation of the contrast coding used.
Table A3: Fixed effects of the mixed-effects model (including all two-way interactions) to
fit the reading times on the second region of Sentence 2.
Formula
LogRT ~ WMload + TopicShift + TrialPosition + Session + Letters + LogRT1 +
(1|Subject) + (1 |Item)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
z value
p-value
Intercept
***
3.391
0.189
17.916
0.000
WM load
0.015
0.013
1.125
>.1
Topic shift
*
0.028
0.013
2.151
0.032
Trial position
***
-0.003
6e-4
-4.659
0.000
Session
-0.040
0.030
-1.331
>.1
Letters
-0.030
0.017
-1.762
0.078
LogRT1
***
0.442
0.026
16.711
0.000
Model characteristics
See Table 1 for an explanation of the contrast coding used.
87


chapter 5
Context resolves ambiguity before
an ambiguous pronoun is read:
An ERP study of the eﬀects of context and
working memory load on pronoun comprehension

Abstract
ERP studies on pronoun processing often elicit strong effects when the referent of the pro-
noun is ambiguous, an effect that has been shown to be modulated by individual differences in
working memory capacity. These studies, however, typically provide only limited linguistic
context. Here we examined the electrophysiological correlates of experimentally manipu-
lated WM load during the on-line resolution of pronouns in discourse. While participants had
to remember a series of either 3 or 6 digits, they read short stories introducing two agents by
name, with an ambiguous pronoun in the final sentence. In half of the stories the saliency of
the secondly introduced referent was increased by reversing the grammatical roles of the two
referents. Interestingly, no or only small ERP effects were observed at the pronoun. Instead,
clear effects of discourse structure and WM load were already found at the first introduction
of the second referent. Based on these results, we argue that 1) that discourse saliency already
anticipates the most likely referent of an upcoming pronoun, effectively resolving any poten-
tial ambiguity at the pronoun itself, and 2) higher WM load changes discourse processing,
which may also affect off-line story comprehension. This study provides further evidence for
the notion that pronoun resolution may reflect discourse ambiguity. However, as this study
also suggests that disambiguation of referential roles often associated with pronoun process-
ing might already take place at the first introduction of a second referent.

5
1
Introduction
Pronouns such as he, she, or they do not have a fixed interpretation, but refer to a character
in the context that matches the pronoun in gender and number features. In many situations,
more than one character in the context can be selected as the antecedent of the pronoun.
As a result, listeners or readers may perceive the pronoun as ambiguous. For example, when
encountering a pronoun at the end of a paragraph in a novel with many different characters,
you may discover that you are not sure who the author is referring to with the pronoun.
More often, luckily, readers do not seem to be aware that the pronoun can have more than
one interpretation, but immediately choose the correct interpretation.
In this study we investigate whether potentially ambiguous pronouns are indeed ambigu-
ous. Do people have to choose between possible referents when they encounter a pronoun,
or is there no need for them to consider alternative referents at the pronoun because the
preceding linguistic discourse context has already constrained the choice of referent? Does
the structure of the linguistic discourse already invoke the necessary processes for referential
disambiguation of the pronoun? As these processes obviously require an internal represen-
tation of the potential referents and their relative prominence in the linguistic discourse,
cognitive aspects such as working memory capacity might affect these disambiguation pro-
cesses. Therefore, a related question is whether and how pronoun interpretation depends on
the amount of cognitive resources available for language processing: Can we still combine
all information from the preceding linguistic context to resolve the reference of the pronoun
when we are busy with another cognitively demanding task? Investigating these questions
may provide insights in how listeners are able to integrate linguistic information very rapidly
during language processing.
1.1
Pronominal ambiguity
Many reading time studies have reported that it takes longer to read sentences containing
an ambiguous pronoun than sentences with an unambiguous pronoun with only one gender-
matching referent (a.o., Caramazza, Grober, Garvey, & Yates, 1977; Ehrlich, 1980; Crawley et
al., 1990). Pronouns that are ambiguous because the linguistic context contains more than one
gender-matching referent, are generally interpreted as referring to the most salient charac-
ter in the linguistic context, the discourse topic. The saliency of the characters in the linguistic
context is influenced by many factors (see Arnold, 1998, for an overview), among other things,
the grammatical roles of the referents in the linguistic discourse (a referent that is the subject
of the previous utterance is preferred over a referent that is an object of the previous utter-
ance), order of mention (the referent that is mentioned first is preferred over a referent that
is mentioned later in the linguistic discourse), and recency (referents that were referred to in
a recent utterance are preferred over referents that were referred to several utterances back),
and verb causality (some verbs are biased towards one of the previously mentioned referents
based on their grammatical role). However, although all these factor influence saliency, they
do not always work in the same direction. Hence, it is not uncommon to encounter ambiguous
pronouns.
91

Ambiguity of reference may not be resolved in the same way by all listeners or read-
ers. Various studies have related differences in ambiguity resolution to individual differences
in working memory capacity (a.o., Just & Carpenter, 1992; Miyake, Just, & Carpenter, 1994;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006; van Rij et al., 2011). For example, Nieuwland and van Berkum
(2006) found that participants’ scores on a reading span task correlated with the electrophys-
iological recordings associated with resolving the ambiguity of subject pronouns.
Interestingly, the effects of context on referent saliency and individual differences in am-
biguity resolution interact. In a behavioral study (van Rij et al., 2011; van Rij, van Rijn, & Hen-
driks, submittedb), it was found that experimentally manipulating the amount of WM load
during comprehension influences participants’ sensitivity to the factors influencing the ref-
erent’s saliency in the linguistic context, and thus affected their pronoun interpretation. In
these studies, participants were asked to memorize a sequence of 3 or 6 digits for later recall
before reading stories about two characters of the same gender (see Table 1 for examples).
Two types of stories were tested: stories with and without a topic shift. The topic is the most
salient referent in the linguistic discourse. The discourse topic is viewed here as a local notion,
which can shift from one utterance to the next and is determined by grammatical prominence
(cf. Grosz et al., 1995). In the stories with a topic shift the topic shifted halfway, as the sec-
ond character replaced the first character as the grammatically most prominent referent by
becoming the subject of next sentences. In all stories the final sentence started with a poten-
tially ambiguous pronoun (he or she).
A. Story with topic shift
B. Story without topic shift
1.
Eric gaat voetballen in de sporthal.
1.
Eric gaat voetballen in de sporthal.
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports
hall.’
‘Eric is going to play soccer in the sports
hall.’
2.
Philip vraagt
Eric om
mee te rij-
den/naar de training.
2.
Eric vraagt
Philip om
mee te rij-
den/naar de training.
‘Philip asks Eric to carpool to the training.’
‘Eric asks Philip to carpool to the training.’
3.
Philip haalt Eric na het eten met de auto
op.
3.
Eric haalt Philip na het eten/met de auto
op.
‘Philip picks up Eric after dinner by car.’
‘Eric picks up Philip after dinner by car.’
4.
Hij voetbalt al twintig jaar.
4.
Hij voetbalt al twintig jaar.
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’
‘He has played soccer for twenty years.’
Question: Wie voetbalt al twintig jaar? / ’Who has played soccer for twenty years?’
Table 1: Example of the Dutch sentences (and the English translations) of a story with and
without topic shift as used in van Rij, van Rijn, & Hendriks (2011, submittedb) and
in this study. Time windows for ERP analyses are marked in gray.
In the 6 digit condition, which resulted in higher concurrent memory load, participants
less frequently selected the subject of the previous sentence as the antecedent of the pronoun
after a topic shift than in the 3 digit condition, indicating that the pronouns in the topic shift
92

5
stories became more ambiguous with higher memory load. Importantly, no effect of WM load
was found on the choice of referent in the stories without a topic shift. This suggests that
with higher WM load, participants were less sensitive to discourse prominence factors such
as grammatical role in determining the referent of an ambiguous subject pronoun. Instead,
they relied more on other factors, such as frequency and recency of mentioning. Thus, the
referents’ saliency during the interpretation of subject pronouns is a function of the working
memory capacity that is available during sentence processing, in accordance with the findings
of Nieuwland and van Berkum (2006).
In the same study (van Rij et al., 2011, submittedb), no differences were found between
conditions in the reading times on the pronoun in Sentence 4 (see Table 1), which is surprising
given earlier studies that found reading times reflecting the ambiguity of the pronoun (a.o.,
Caramazza et al., 1977; Ehrlich, 1980; Crawley et al., 1990). It might be that subject-paced
reading times are not sensitive enough to detect the change in ambiguity in the topic shift
stories, even though the preference for the first referent as the antecedent of the pronoun is
reduced with 10% in the higher WM load condition compared with the lower WM condition.
However, the reading times did show effects in Sentence 2. In Sentence 2, the second referent
is introduced on the first word in the topic shift stories and on the third word in the stories
without topic shift. On the first word, reading times were slower in the high WM load in com-
parison with the low WM load condition in both story types. The second word, the spillover
region, showed increased reading times for stories with a topic shift. The effects of WM load
and topic shift indicate that readers noticed the topic shift, and that this topic shift immedi-
ately changed the relative saliency of the referents in the discourse representation because
no effects of ambiguity were found on the reading times later in the story. Thus, the intro-
duction of the second referent in the grammatically most prominent subject position caused
an immediately commitment for that referent as the topic of the story, instead of leaving the
choice for a discourse topic undetermined until other processes require the identification of
the discourse topic.
Given the paradoxical results discussed above, we conduct an EEG study to examine
whether WM load and Topic shift interact in the on-line resolution of pronouns. More specif-
ically, we are interested to see whether an electrophysiological analogue of the effects ob-
served in van Rij et al. (2011, submittedb) can be found, indicating that the reader already
commits to a particular discourse topic and thus already anticipates the most likely referent
of a not yet encountered pronoun.
1.2
ERP eﬀects of context, pronominal ambiguity and individual
diﬀerences
Many ERP studies on language processing have reported a negative deflection peaking around
400 ms after stimulus onset: a N400 component (see Kutas, Van Petten, & Kluender, 2006, for
a review). The amplitude of this ERP component is modulated by the semantic context and
by the lexical properties of the stimulus word (a.o., Kutas & Hillyard, 1980, 1984; Holcomb &
Neville, 1991). Generally, the N400 amplitude of open class words (nouns and verbs) decreases
93

with each subsequent word in a semantically congruent sentence, suggesting that the sen-
tence context constraints the interpretation of the sentence (Van Petten & Kutas, 1990). Not
only the sentence, but also the linguistic context preceding the sentence has been found to
influence the amplitude of the N400 (a.o., St. George, Mannes, & Hoffman, 1994; van Berkum,
Hagoort, & Brown, 1999; Van Petten, 1995). Van Petten (1995) reports that the N400 ampli-
tude only decreases with word position in isolated sentences, but not when these sentences
are preceded by a meaningful linguistic context. van Berkum et al. (1999) report that words
that are semantically anomalous given the preceding discourse, but at the same time accept-
able within the local sentence context, elicit a larger N400 than when the same words is pre-
sented in isolation without any preceding context. Thus, the N400 reflects how words fit in
the preceding context.
Recently, a number of ERP studies have specifically focused on pronoun processing (a.o.,
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006; Streb, Rösler, & Hennighausen, 1999; Streb, Hennighausen, &
Rösler, 2004; Swaab, Camblin, & Gordon, 2004). Streb et al. (1999) observed a larger negativity
for unambiguous pronouns than for proper names in the second sentence of discourses con-
sisting of two parallel sentences or two nonparallel sentences, in which the grammatical roles
of the referents are reversed. In addition, they found that unambiguous pronouns and proper
names in the nonparallel discourse structures also elicited a larger negativity than in the par-
allel discourse structures. This finding is in line with the results from the behavioral study
(van Rij et al., 2011, submittedb) since a change in grammatical role influenced the resolution
processes.
Using a different manipulation of the saliency of the potential references, Nieuwland and
van Berkum (2006) found that ERPs can reflect contextual influences on pronoun resolution.
They examined whether the ERP signal reflects influences of world-knowledge biases on pro-
noun resolution by comparing sentences with an ambiguous pronoun (two potential refer-
ents) with sentences with an unambiguous pronoun (one potential referent). The ambiguous
pronoun sentences were manipulated so that different levels of ambiguity could be compared.
The sentences with an ambiguous pronoun that was weakly biased towards one of the
two referents elicited an increased and sustained frontal negative shift starting around 300
ms (e.g.,The chemist hit the historian, while he... in 53% the historian is selected as antecedent;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006), compared to the sentences with an unambiguous pronoun.
In contrast, the sentences with a pronoun that was moderately biased towards one of the ref-
erents did not differ from the disambiguated sentences (e.g. Linda invited Anna, when her... in
70% Linda is selected as antecedent). Interestingly, the distribution of responses, which re-
flects how ambiguous a pronoun was, was similar for the moderately biased sentences used
by Nieuwland and Van Berkum and the stimuli used the study of van Rij et al. (2011, submit-
tedb). In our study, no effects were found in the readings times on the ambiguous pronoun,
but effects of the manipulation of saliency were found earlier in the discourse. This obser-
vation raises the question whether similar signatures of disambiguation can be found in ERP
components elicited by the shift in discourse topic.
Nieuwland and Van Berkum also observed that only participants with a higher working
memory (WM) capacity score showed a sustained negative shift for the sentences with am-
94

5
biguous pronouns (collapsed over moderate and low bias conditions) relative to sentences
with unambiguous pronouns. In contrast, the participants with a low WM capacity score did
not show a difference. They refer to this slow negative shift as Nref or referential ambiguity
effect (van Berkum, 2008) because it is different from the N400 in duration (similar onset la-
tency to N400, but sustaining up to more than a second) and distribution (more anterior than
the N400). Interestingly, a similar negative shift is also associated with working memory de-
mands (a.o., King & Kutas, 1995; Münte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998; Phillips, Kazanina, & Abada,
2005) . For example, King and Kutas (1995) showed that high WM capacity readers showed
a larger difference in the slow frontal negative shift when comparing the reading of subject
relative sentences to object relative sentences. These slow negative shifts are not specific for
language processing, but are also observed in non-verbal memory and attention tasks (see
Bosch, Mecklinger, & Friederici, 2001; Kutas & Federmeier, 2007; van Berkum, Koorneef, Ot-
ten, & Nieuwland, 2007, for reviews).
1.3
Current study
In the current study, we address the question whether people resolve pronominal ambigu-
ity in the discourse by an early commitment for one of the referents as the discourse topic
instead of resolving the ambiguity when the pronoun is encountered. As previous research
indicates that the amount of WM capacity available for language processing may change the
sensitivity for the ambiguity in the discourse, we also address how WM load affects on-line
story comprehension. Therefore, we measure EEG while participants read short stories simi-
lar to the stories used in van Rij et al. (2011, submittedb), as shown in Table 1. We manipulate
memory load by a secondary task that elicits higher or lower WM load. By recording the EEG
signal during reading we want to examine 1) whether a potential ambiguity in the discourse
is resolved immediately after a topic shift, or only when reading a pronoun and 2) whether
higher WM load changes discourse processing, which may affect off-line story comprehension
as well. Based on the reviewed literature, we focus on ERP components in the N400 region and
slow negative shifts, which may indicate high processing load.
2
Experimental materials and methods
The current study uses a dual-task set-up to investigate the influences of topic shift and WM
load on on-line pronoun processing. The design and materials were adapted from van Rij et
al. (2011, submittedb).
2.1
Methods
2.1.1
Digit task
At the start of each trial, participants had to memorize a sequence of either 3 digits (low WM
load condition) or 6 digits (high WM load condition). Digits were shown for 1 second each
in the center of a computer screen. The digits were pseudo-randomly chosen from 1 to 9 to
95

ensure that not all digits were the same. After completing a trial of the story-reading task,
the participants had to recall the memorized digits. Feedback was provided for the digit task,
after the trial was completed.
2.1.2
Story-reading task
After the presentation of the digits, participants read stories consisting of four sentences each
(see Table 1), followed by a comprehension question. The stories were presented word by
word with a variable serial visual presentation procedure (cf. Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006),
which combines a relatively natural temporal reading pattern with fixed presentation dura-
tions for critical words. The presentation duration for non-critical words was dependent on
their length, with 30 ms per letter (with an upper bound of 8 letters / 240 ms) added to an off-
set of 190 ms. The critical words (the first four words of sentence 2 and the first two words of
sentence 4, highlighted in Table 1) were presented with a fixed duration of 325 ms (based on
the mean number of letters of the critical words). Sentence final words stayed 300 ms longer
on the screen. Between words, an empty screen was presented for 150 ms, and between sen-
tences, for 1000 ms. Importantly, the first name of each story was presented with a duration
of 1000 ms because reading the first name was crucial for detecting the topic shift. Subjec-
tive evaluations indicated that the resulting temporal pattern allowed for a relatively natural
reading pattern. We recorded the real onset and offset times for each presented word to be
able to align the EEG data to the precise onset of the target words. As a result of small delays
caused by, among other things, the refresh rate of the monitor, the critical words followed
each other after on average 490.2 ms (sd=1.4), the duration of the empty screen following
each word included.
After reading the four-sentence story, a question was presented with two answer alterna-
tives presented on the left and right side of the screen. To answer the question, participants
had to press either the left arrow key on the keyboard (for the left answer) or the right arrow
key. After answering the question, they had to type in the digits that were presented at the
beginning of the trial. At the end of each trial, participants received feedback on the digit task
to ensure sufficient focus on the WM task. Before the start of a new trial, participants were
instructed to remove their hands from the keyboard.
2.1.3
Design
Stories. Every story featured two characters of the same gender. The final sentence of each
story started with an ambiguous subject pronoun hij (‘he’) or zij (‘she’): the pronoun could
refer to both characters, so the only clue to the interpretation of the pronouns was the struc-
ture of the story. We designed two variants of every story (see Table 1), in which we ma-
nipulated whether there was a topic shift or not. The topic shift is realized by placing the
second character (Philip) in subject position in Sentence 2. Thus, the only difference between
the two variants of each story was the grammatical role of the referents, causing a difference
in relative prominence. In the no shift stories, the first character was the subject of all sen-
tences before the pronoun. In the topic shift stories, the second character became the subject
96

5
of the second and third sentence. Subjective evaluations indicated that both variants of the
stories were equally natural and that world-knowledge biases did not affect the interpreta-
tion of the pronoun. When there was no topic shift, we expected participants to prefer the
firstly introduced character as the referent of the ambiguous pronoun because this referent
was the grammatical subject in the sentence preceding the pronoun. In addition, it was firstly
introduced, and most frequently mentioned. When there was a topic shift, we expected par-
ticipants to prefer the second character because this referent was the grammatical subject in
the sentence preceding the pronoun. At the end of every experimental story a question was
presented to elicit the preferred interpretation of the ambiguous pronoun.
Lists. In total, 160 stories were designed in two different variants, with the variants randomly
assigned to one of two lists. Of the 160 stories, 64 stories were followed by a question regarding
the preferred interpretation of the ambiguous pronoun. The other 96 stories were followed
by a question about the first or second sentence of the story, to discourage reading strategies.
2.1.4
Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two lists. The experiment consisted of
two blocks: a low WM load block (3 digits) and a high WM load block (6 digits). The order of
blocks was counterbalanced; within blocks the items were randomly distributed. Participants
received separate instructions for each block. The experiment started with a practice trial
suited for the current WM load condition.
2.2
Participants
Twenty-one undergraduate students (5 men; 2 left handed1; age range 17-242, mean age 19)
participated in the experiment in exchange for course credits or money. Seven participants
did not finish all trials in the experiment because of technical problems. All participants were
included for statistical analyses with on average 146 trials per participant (range 80-160), and
appropriate care was taken during analysis to address unbalanced numbers of observations
in the different cells.
2.3
EEG recordings
EEG was recorded at 500 Hz from 30 electrodes fitted in an elastic cap (AFz, Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz,
Pz, FP1/2, F7/8, F3/4, FC5/6, FC1/2, T7/8, C3/4, CP5/6, CP1/2, P7/8, P3/4, O1/2). Horizontal
eye movements were monitored with a bipolar electrode pair, positioned left from the left
eye, and right from the right eye. Vertical eye movements and blinks were recorded with a
bipolar electrode pair, under and above the left eye. FieldTrip (version 2011-12-08; Oosten-
veld, Fries, Maris, & Schoffelen, 2011), a Matlab software toolbox for EEG analysis, was used
for preprocessing and artifact rejection: The data of the second and fourth sentences was re-
referenced to the mean of left and right mastoids, time locked to the onset of the first word of
that sentence, segmented (500 ms before to 2500 ms after the sentence onset), filtered (But-
terworth bandpass filter 0.1-125Hz, and band stop filter 48-52Hz), and down sampled to 256
97

Hz after. All trials were semi-automatically screened for muscle artifacts, alpha waves and
recording problems. In our artifact rejection procedure, 7% from the recordings of Sentence
2, and 8% from the recordings of Sentence 4 were excluded. Eye movements, blinks, heart
activity, and slow voltage shifts were removed from the data using Independent Component
Analysis (ICA; using the Runica algorithm in FieldTrip). After artifact rejection, the data was
filtered (band-pass filter at 0.1-20Hz), baselined per trial per participant (50 ms before to 50
ms after the onset of the sentence) and down sampled to 75Hz for analysis.
3
Results
In this section, we first discuss the performance on the digit task and the off-line story com-
prehension results, i.e., answers on the questions and the related reaction times, before pre-
senting the ERP data.
3.1
Performance digit task
In the low WM load condition, participants remembered 78.0% of the digit sequences cor-
rectly, but in the high WM load condition this percentage was significantly reduced to 59.5%
(paired-t(19)=-6.89; p<.001). We did not find any effect of story condition on the percentages
correct trials in the digit task. The performance on the digit task was used as a control mea-
sure, since the WM load manipulation depends on participants memorizing the digits while
reading the stories. Therefore, all trials with too many mistakes in the memorized digits se-
quence were excluded from further analyses: in the low WM load, only correct trials were
included (78.0% were included; 328 of 1475 trials were removed), but as participants are more
likely to make errors during recall when a longer list of digits has to be recalled even if the list
was memorized, one mistake was allowed in the sequence of six digits in the high WM load
condition (80.9% were included; 296 of 1600 trials were removed).
3.2
Performance comprehension questions
After excluding the trials in which the digit sequence was not memorized correctly, we ana-
lyzed the answers on the 64 story comprehension questions eliciting the preferred interpre-
tation of the ambiguous pronoun. Figure 1 (right panel) shows the proportions of selection
of the subject of the previous sentence as the antecedent of the pronoun (in the example in
Table 1, this would be Philip in stories with topic shift, and Eric in stories without topic shift).
Participants clearly make use of the structure of the discourse because in around 70% of the
trials the subject of the previous sentence is selected as the antecedent of the pronoun. This
preference of 70% for one of the referents is comparable with the moderately biased pronouns
in the Nieuwland and van Berkum (2006) study, for which they did not measure a difference
in ERPs with the unambiguous pronouns.
We examined the effects of the two level factors Topic shift and WM load, and Trial, the po-
sition of the trial in the experiment, on the choice for the subject of the previous sentence (yes
98

5
Shift
No shift
Answers:
% subject referent
0
25
50
75
100
79 68
76 72
previous study (n=52)
Shift
No shift
0
25
50
75
100
69 71
77 69
current study (n=21)
Reaction times (ms)
low
WM load
high
WM load
2000
3000
4000
 subject
non-subject
low WM load
high WM load
Figure 1: Preference for the subject as referent of the pronoun in stories with and without
topic shift (±1SE) and reaction times (±1SE). Left: results from previous behav-
ioral study using the same stories (adapted from Van Rij et al., submitted). Center:
results from current study. Right: reaction times from current study.
or no) using logistic mixed-effects models (cf. Baayen, 2008). More complex models that in-
cluded additional predictors did not show qualitatively different effects. Participant and item
(i.e., both variants of a story were labeled as the same item) were included as crossed-random
effects. Using a stepwise variable deletion procedure, starting with the complete interaction
model, we found only a marginal significant main effect for WM load (χ2(1)= 3.68; p=.055), sug-
gesting that with higher WM load the subject of the previous sentence is less often selected
as the antecedent of the pronoun. The lack of effects in the answers on the comprehension
questions is not surprising, given that the effect of WM load on the use of discourse structure
is very subtle. Although we tried to make the stories as neutral as possible towards both ref-
erents with respect to implicit verb biases, the effect of discourse structure may be masked by
idiosyncratic preferences of the words in the sentence. Also, the smaller number of partici-
pants in this EEG study compared to the previous behavioral experiment might have reduced
power.
Additionally, we analyzed the reaction times on the story comprehension questions (see
Figure 1, right panel). Mixed-effects models were used to analyze the logarithmically trans-
formed reaction times with Topic shift, WM load, and Trial as predictors, but also SubjectAnswer
(whether or not participants selected the previous subject as the antecedent of the pronoun).
Using a stepwise variable deletion procedure, starting with the complete interaction model,
we found a significant main effect for SubjectAnswer (χ2(1)= 21.74; p<.001), suggesting that par-
ticipants are slower to select the answer when they do not choose the subject of the previous
sentence as the antecedent of the pronoun. In addition, a significant interaction was found
between WM load and Trial (χ2(1)= 21.23; p<.001). This interaction suggests that as the experi-
ment progresses, participants become faster, but the reaction times increase more in the high
WM load condition, although participants are generally slower in the high WM condition than
in the low WM load condition. Thus, a significant effect of WM load is present in the reaction
times, and a similar effect is marginal significant in the answers.
99

The main goal of the current experiment was collecting electrophysiological markers of
disambiguation. Since both filler and test stories have the same discourse structure, and only
differ in the comprehension questions, all stories were used for EEG analyses.
3.3
EEG data
Figure 2 shows the grand averages for the Cz electrode of each condition in Sentence 2 and
Sentence 4 of the stories. For ease of interpretation, we will focus our attention on the Cz
electrode, which reflects N400 differences (a.o., Münte, Heinze, & Mangun, 1993). The same
three regions of interest that were highlighted in Table 1 are indicated with gray in Figure 2:
the first and third word of Sentence 2 (the two proper names), and the first word of Sentence
4 (the pronoun). Sentence 2 initiates a topic shift in the topic shift stories by introducing the
second referent in subject position. In the stories without a topic shift, the second referent is
introduced with the third word in the grammatically less prominent object position. Sentence
4 always starts with a pronoun, that can in principle refer to either of these referents.
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Cz, Sentence 2:
No shift
Topic shift
Eric
asks
Philip
to...
Philip
asks
Eric
to...
 Topic shift 
 No shift 
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
0
500
1000
Cz, Sentence 4:
He
has...
He
has...
−2
1
0
1
2
μV difference
low WM load
high WM load
Figure 2: Grand average at electrode Cz elicited when reading word 1 to 4 in Sentence 2 (left
panel) and word 1 and 2 in Sentence 4 (right panel). The first row presents the sto-
ries without topic shift; the second row presents the stories with topic shift. The
black lines indicate the low WM load condition, and the red lines indicate the high
WM load condition. The gray areas highlight the N400 regions (250-500 ms) fol-
lowing the presentation of a referring expression (proper name or pronoun). The
scalp distributions present a difference topography calculated over these regions
(high WM load minus low WM load).
100

5
The first row in Figure 2 shows the ERPs for stories without a topic shift. In Sentence 2 (left
panel), the low WM condition shows a slow sustained negative shift relative to the high WM
condition. This negative shift is not present in Sentence 4 (right panel). The second row in
Figure 2 shows the ERPs for stories with a topic shift. Sentence 2 (left panel) shows a positive
shift with respect to the baseline (onset sentence), and a decrease in amplitude when the
sentence unfolds. The ERPs of the topic shift stories in Sentence 4 (right panel) are visually
similar to the ERPs of the stories without topic shift (top row, right panel), with also no large
differences between the WM load conditions.
3.4
Analyses
In this study, we use generative additive models (GAMs, Wood, 2006; see Tremblay & Baayen,
2010, for an application of GAMs to EEG data from a immediate free recall experiment) to
analyze ERPs because this approach is designed to capture differences over time within a sin-
gle analysis. GAMs are generalized linear models in which linear predictors can be specified
by non-linear functions of predictor variables (i.e., smooth functions). These functions are es-
timated using a penalized regression method called penalized iteratively re-weighted least
squares, and the parameters for each smooth function such as the degree of smoothness are
estimated using cross validation (see Wood, 2006, chapters 3 and 4). These estimation pro-
cesses that determine the smooth functions and parameters are designed to avoid overgen-
eralization and overfitting of the data.
We use GAMs to estimate the effects of topic shift and WM load on the time course of the
un-averaged, time locked EEG data per sentence per participant. We did not use participant
averages for the analyses, because of the different numbers of items per cell. Three time win-
dows were defined for analyses based on the three regions of interest. The first time window
starts 50 ms before the onset of the first word of Sentence 2 and ends 50 ms after the onset of
the third word of the same sentence. The second time window starts 50 ms before the onset
of the third word of Sentence 2 and ends 50 ms after the onset of the fifth word. The third
time window starts 50 ms before the onset of the first word of Sentence 4 and ends 50 ms af-
ter the onset of the third word of the same sentence, thus including the pronoun. The time
windows are 1080 ms long and included the presentations of two words, so that also later ERP
differences could be detected.
For each time window, the same analysis procedure was applied to all electrodes. Here
we focus on the Cz electrode for explaining the analyses and interpretation in more detail,
followed by an evaluation of the distribution of the effects based on the analyses of all elec-
trodes. In each analysis, we first removed the main trends in the EEG data over time, followed
by the time trends of individual subjects, and the random intercepts of individual items. To
investigate whether the residual data is influenced by Topic shift and WM load over time, we
included smooth functions to account for the differences in time trends for these factors and
the interaction between Topic shift and WM load. In addition, we included a predictor for Trial,
to account for the variability in the time trends due to order of trials in the experiment. We
compared different models using a stepwise variable deletion procedure, starting with the
101

complete interaction model. Below we first discuss the analysis of the three time windows
for the Cz electrode because this electrode can reflect N400 differences (a.o., Münte et al.,
1993). In Section 3.4.4, we will briefly discuss the analyses for the other electrodes.
3.4.1
Analysis Sentence 2, word 1 and 2 for Cz
In line with the leftmost panels of Figure 2, which suggest an influence of Topic shift and WM
load, the best-fitting model of the Cz data for the first time window includes the main effects of
Topic shift (F(9.76, 184812)=21.37; p<.001) and WM load (F(4.97, 184812)=35.97; p<.001). Adding
the interaction of these two factors did not significantly improve the model (see Appendix
1, Table 1). To appreciate the contributions of the individual factors, Figure 3 depicts the
estimated effects of the factors and the main effect of time.
The first row of Figure 3 graphs the main trend in the ERP data over time that was removed
before testing the effects of Topic shift and WM load. This main trend captures all the typical
ERP components with are shared by all four conditions, such as the N1-P2 complex (100 and
200 ms after the onset of the word, indicated with a dotted vertical line) followed by a N400,
peaking around 400 ms after word onset. Since we are interested in the relative effects of the
two main predictors, we will focus on the additive effects of Topicshift and WMload. Hereto, we
fitted GAMs to the residual data of the main trend over time, but also took out the variability
associated with participants, items and trial position (by removing the estimated effects of
these factors). The second row in Figure 3 shows the estimated effects of Topic shift and WM
load on the residual data. The gray dashed line indicates the effect of Topic shift. Because
contrast coding was used, all predictors are estimated with respect to the baseline condition:
the stories without topic shift in the low WM load condition, indicated by the horizontal line
through zero. Therefore, the gray dashed line shows the estimated difference of stories with a
topic shift compared to stories without a topic shift. Stories with a topic shift elicit an increased
negativity starting as early as 150 ms after the onset of the first word and continuing until
700 ms with a peak at at 400 ms. The red solid line shows the effect of WM load, namely
the estimated difference of the high WM load condition relative to the low WM condition.
In the high WM load condition the ERPs are more positive, starting around 200 ms. After a
positive peak at 350 ms, the high WM load condition stays more positive than the low WM
load condition.
In the third row of Figure 3, the estimated effects of Topic shift and WM load are added to
the main trend over time. During processing the first word (the first proper name), the two
main effects result in a larger negativity for stories with a topic shift, and a larger negativity
for the low WM load conditions. The effect of Topicshift is larger than the effect of WMload, and
both topic shift stories have a larger amplitude than the stories without topic shift. However,
the pattern changes during processing of the second word (the verb): the negative effect of
Topic shift changes into a small positive effect. After reading the second word, stories without
a topic shift show a larger negativity than stories with a topic shift, just as the low WM load
conditions compared with the high WM conditions.
102

5
Analysis Cz
Sentence 2: word 1-2
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
2.5
1.5
0.5
-0.5
-1.5
-2.5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
Time
Predictors
Time + Cond.
Observed data
Sentence 2: word 3-4
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
2.5
1.5
0.5
-0.5
-1.5
-2.5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
Sentence 4: word 1-2
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
2.5
1.5
0.5
-0.5
-1.5
-2.5
μV
5
3
1
-1
-3
-5
μV
μV
Topic shift
WM load
Topic shift x WM load
 -TS, low WM load
+TS, low WM load
 -TS, high WM load
+TS, high WM load
→  -TS: 2. Eric asks Philip to... 4. He has...
→ +TS: 2. Philip asks Eric to... 4. He has...
0
500
1000
980
1480
1980
0
500
1000
Figure 3: Estimated effects (±1SE) of the predictors on the ERP at Cz over time in three time
windows, each starting on the onset of the referring expression (note that the re-
gions are partly overlapping). The dotted vertical lines indicate the onset of a new
word, and the shading around the lines in rows 1-3 represent ±1SE. First row: the
main effect of Time. Second row: the additive effects of Topic shift (gray, dashed
line), WM load (red solid line) and Topic shift x WM load (red, dashed line). Note
that the interaction was not significant in the first time window. Third row: the
effects of predictors added to the main effects over time for each condition. Fourth
row: the observed data for the Cz electrode (see also Figure 2 for a different pre-
sentation of the same data).
103

These results are similar to the reading times in our previous study (van Rij et al., 2011,
submittedb), in which we found main effects of WM load and Topic shift on the first two words
of Sentence 2. The higher amplitude for reading a new name in the topic shift stories than
reading the name of an earlier introduced referent in the stories without topic shift is in line
with earlier studies (Streb et al., 1999; Swaab et al., 2004) and may reflect the additional pro-
cessing required for the integration of new information in the discourse representation. The
lower N400 amplitudesin the high WM load conditions may indicate a smaller effect of context
on reading referring expressions due to less WM capacity available for discourse processing,
as the N400 is assumed to reflect how words fit in the preceding context.
3.4.2
Analysis Sentence 2, word 3 and 4 for Cz
The best-fitting model of the Cz data for the second time window included the main effects of
Topic shift (F(8.23, 184816)=18.07; p<.001) and WM load (F(3.98, 184816)=62.77; p<.001), but also
the interaction Topic shift x WM load (F(2.12, 184816)=38.83; p<.001) (see Appendix 1, Table 2).
The middle panel of Figure 3 shows the estimated effects for the second time window. The
first row displays the main trend over time while participants process word three and four.
The second row plots the estimated effects of Topic shift (dashed gray line), WM load (solid red
line) and the interaction Topic shift x WM load (dashed red line). Topic shift and WM load elicit
a positive shift, indicating that stories with a topic shift become more positive than stories
without a topic shift during this time window, and that ERPs in the higher WM load condition
become more positive during this time window than the ERPs in the low WM load condition.
The negative estimated effect of the interaction indicates that the stories with topic shift in
the high WM load condition do not become extra positive, because the increasing negativity
of the interaction effect reduces the increasing positive effects of topic shift and WM load.
Together, these effects indicate that all conditions become increasingly more positive over
time, except for the baseline condition: the amplitudes in the stories without topic shift in
the low WM condition remain the same, while the other conditions become relatively more
positive. This is illustrated in the third row of Figure 3, where the estimated effects of Topic
shift, WM load, and Topic shift x WM load are added to the main trend over time. The positive
shift for the high WM load conditions relative to the low WM load conditions starts very early
after the onset of the sentence. The positive shift for the stories with a topic shift starts around
800 ms, during the processing of the verb.
Interestingly, during the processing of the second name in the sentence (word 3) the pos-
itivity peaks around 450 ms after the onset of that name (i.e., 1430 ms after sentence onset),
indicating a reduced N400 amplitude. The effects of WM load and the interaction Topic shift
x WM load do not show a similar peak in the second time window, suggesting a more linear
trend over time. These effects indicate that only topic shift influences the N400 amplitude,
but not WM load. In general, the slow positive shift of Topic shift and WM load that are found
over the whole time window, and the slow negative shift of the interaction predictor reflect
a difference between the baseline condition and the other conditions: the baseline remains
negative over time, whereas the other conditions become increasingly more positive as the
104

5
sentence unfolds. As explained before, sustained negative shifts may reflect increased mem-
ory demands or processing load. This implicates that the baseline condition in Sentence 2
may require more memory demands than the other conditions.
3.4.3
Analysis Sentence 4, word 1 and 2 for Cz
The best-fitting model of the Cz data for the third time window included the main effects of
Topic shift (F(3.77, 182299)=5.45; p<.001), WM load (F(8.29, 182299)=8.08; p<.001), and also the
interaction Topic shift x WM load (F(5.98, 182299)=6.67; p<.001) (see Appendix 1, Table 3). The
rightmost panel of Figure 2 shows the estimated effects of the main effects and interaction
during the pronoun sentence (Sentence 4).
The data of Sentence 4 is baselined to the onset of that sentence. The first row shows
the main trend over time. Reading a pronoun elicits a slightly reduced N400 in comparison
with reading the proper names in Sentence 2 (as can be seen by comparing the gray areas of
Sentence 2 with the gray areas of Sentence 4 in the first row of Figure 3). The N400 consists
of two smaller peaks around 300 and 450 ms. The second row of Figure 3 shows the estimated
effects for Topic shift, WM load, and Topic shift x WM load. Although the main effect of Topic
shift was statistically significant, inspection of the plot indicates that the effect size is limited
since the line reflecting the estimated effect hardly deviates from zero. WM load elicits a pos-
itive effect peaking around 500 ms after pronoun onset. The interaction shows the reversed
pattern, indicating that the effect of WM load is reduced for the stories with topic shift. Thus,
in the high WM load condition, the N400 amplitude is lower than in the low WM load condi-
tion after reading the pronoun, and this effect is largest for the stories without topic shift. The
third row of Figure 3 shows this interaction. Note that the differences in Sentence 4, although
significant, are much smaller than the effects found in Sentence 3.
3.4.4
Distribution of effects
The analyses of Cz show differences in N400 amplitude on the referring expressions in Sen-
tence 2 and 4, with the largest effect size for topic shift. In addition, WM load shows more slow
wave effects in Sentence 2, and a smaller and shorter effect in Sentence 4. To test whether the
slow effects of WM load are similar to the slow negative shift elicited by referential ambiguity
(Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006) or processing load (a.o., King & Kutas, 1995), we analyzed all
electrodes using the same protocol as described for Cz. The slow negative shift is generally
distributed over the fontal part of the scalp, slightly left lateralized (see Bosch et al., 2001;
Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006; King & Kutas, 1995). The N400 elicited by context effects is
found in centroparietal regions of the scalp. Therefore, we would expect to see this distribu-
tion for the effects of Topic shift.
Figure 4 indicates for each time window where the main effects of Topic shift and WM
load and the interaction Topic shift x WM load are significant and needed to be included in the
model. The color coding indicates the level of significance and the direction of the effect: the
red colors indicate that the effect results in a positive shift (averaged over the time window),
and the blue colors indicate that the effect results in a negative shift. Note that we did not
105

need to include the interaction between Topic shift and WM load in the analysis model for Cz,
but this interaction does significantly contribute to the explanation of the data in the lateral
and posterior electrodes.
Topic Shift
WM load
Topic shift x WM load
average positive, p < .0001
average positive, p <.001
average positive, p < .01
no effect
average negative, p < .01
average negative, p <.001
average negative, p < .0001
Time window 1:
Sentence 2, word 1-2
Time window 2:
Sentence 2, word 3-4
Time window 3:
Sentence 4, word 1-2
Figure 4: Distribution of the effects of Topic shift, WM load and the interaction Topic shift
x WM load for each time window (viewed from above). White areas indicate that
the respective predictor is non-significantly contributing to the explanation of the
variance of the statistical model. The red colors indicate that the predictor shifts
the ERP signal in a positive direction; the blue colors indicate that the predictor
shifts the ERP signal in a negative direction.
The leftmost panel of Figure 4 shows the distribution of the predictor Topic shift. The
central dark blue area on the scalp in time window 1 (top row) indicates that in this time
window the stories with topic shift are significantly more negative than the stories without
topic shift. The distribution of this negativity clearly indicates a central N400 effect. Time
window 3 (bottom row) also shows a negative effect, localized centroparietal, but this effects
is more broadly distributed and less clear, reflected by the lighter colors that indicate a lower
level of significance. This may be due to the difference in effect size (which is not graphed
in this plot, but see Appendix 2, Figure 1): in Sentence 2, the maximum estimated difference
between stories without and with topic shift is -1.62 µV (estimated for FCz, from 250-500 ms
after sentence onset), whereas in Sentence 4 the maximum estimated difference between sto-
ries without and with topic shift is -0.39 µV (estimated for P4, from 250-500 ms after sentence
onset). In contrast to time windows 1 and 3, time window 2 shows a general positivity over
the whole scalp, as we also found in Cz (previous section). To summarize, the left panel of
Figure 3 shows that topic shift stories elicit a clear N400 difference with stories without topic
shift at the start of both sentences.
The middle panel of Figure 4 graphs the effect of WM load. The red color in all time win-
106

5
dows indicates a significant positive shift distributed over the fontal part of the scalp, slightly
left lateralized. The localization of this positive shift is similar to the slow ERP wave reported
in earlier studies. Interestingly, the effect reaches a higher level of significance in time win-
dows 2 and 3, indicated by the darker red color. Thus, in the higher WM load condition the
ERP signal is generally more positive than in the lower WM load condition. The estimated
effects are considerably larger in Sentence 2 than in Sentence 4: in Sentence 2, the maximum
estimated difference between stories without and with topic shift is 1.47 µV (estimated for F8,
from 250-500 ms after sentence onset), whereas in Sentence 4 the maximum estimated differ-
ence between stories without and with topic shift is 0.82 µV (estimated for Cz, from 250-500
ms after sentence onset).
The right panel of Figure 3 shows the interaction effect of Topic shift x WM load. The
clearest pattern is found in time window 2 (middle row), which is very similar to the distri-
bution of WM load (middle panel of Figure 3), although in the oppositive direction. In time
window 2, Topic shift and WM load cause a positive shift, but the interaction reduces this posi-
tive shift for stories with topic shift in the high WM load condition. Together with the analyses
of Cz, this pattern suggests that the ERP of the baseline condition (stories without topic shift
in the low WM load condition) is generally more negative than the other conditions (see Ap-
pendix 2 for the estimated scalp distributions for the different conditions). In time window
1 a similar interaction is visible, but only lateral. In the central region the interaction is not
significant, which may be caused by the N400 effects in the same time window. The lateral
interaction effects may indicate the start of the general positive shift in comparison with the
baseline condition that is visible in time window 2.
To summarize, the effects of Topic shift differ per time window: a topic shift causes a large
negative amplitude at the start of Sentence 2, when a new referent is introduced in prominent
position. A similar negativity is found at the start of Sentence 4, when the ambiguous pronoun
is processed, but the difference between the topic shift conditions is very small. The observed
differences here are mostly due to WM load. Later in Sentence 2 a positive deflection follows
in the stories with a topic shift compared to the stories without topic shift. The more positive
effect of WM load is consistently found in all time windows, although the size of the effect is
reduced in the final sentence of the stories, and is localized in the left and frontal electrodes.
The distribution of the effect of Topic shift suggests an N400 difference, and the distribution
of the WM load effects are similar to the earlier reported slow wave components that are
associated with memory demands and processing load.
4
Discussion
In this study we aimed to investigate how linguistic context and WM load influence the pro-
cessing of potentially ambiguous pronouns. We performed a dual-task experiment in which
we manipulated WM load during story comprehension. The final sentence of each story
started with an ambiguous pronoun. In half of the stories, the grammatical roles of the two
referents in the stories were reversed in the second and third sentence, signaling a shift in
discourse topic. To examine whether the WM load caused by the secondary task and the dis-
107

course structure of the story influenced pronoun processing, we measured EEG while partic-
ipants read the short stories. We analyzed the ERP data from the second sentence, where the
second proper name was mentioned in a less prominent object position (no shift stories) or
in the more prominent subject position (topic shift stories). We also analyzed the ERP data of
the final sentence that started with a pronoun. Analysis of the ERP data reveals large effects
in Sentence 2, but much smaller effects on the pronoun in Sentence 4.
4.1
Pronominal ambiguity
Our first question was whether ambiguous pronouns are indeed ambiguous or whether the
structure of the discourse already resolves the ambiguity of the pronoun. If the potential
ambiguity is not resolved before the pronoun is encountered, and the pronoun is ambiguous,
then we would expect to find differences in the N400 region caused by the discourse structure
and WM load, similar to previous research (a.o., Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006). Indeed, we
do find significant effects of topic shift, WM load and the interaction between topic shift and
WM load starting around 200 ms after pronoun onset: higher WM load reduced the ampli-
tude of the N400 on the pronoun, but on the verb only the stories with topic shift in the high
WM load condition elicited a lower N400. The effects in the final sentence were significant,
but relatively small. The effect of topic shift is hardly visible in Figure 2. Therefore, we are
hesitant to conclude that these pronouns are ambiguous. These small effects contrast with
earlier reading time studies (a.o., Caramazza et al., 1977; Ehrlich, 1980; Crawley et al., 1990)
that showed increased reading times for pronouns with two gender-matching antecedents
compared to reading times for pronouns with only one gender-matching antecedent present
in the discourse. On the other hand, the small effects on the pronoun are in line with the
findings of Nieuwland and van Berkum (2006), who report no significant differences between
unambiguous pronouns and moderately biased pronouns. Therefore, one explanation for the
small on-line effects could be that our stories were not sufficiently ambiguous to elicit a clear
ERP effect of pronoun ambiguity. However, our behavioral results and reaction time data in-
dicate that WM load causes a change in ambiguity, which we would expect to be reflected in
the on-line pronoun data. Thus, our results are in the same direction as the results of van Rij
et al. (2011, submittedb), who report a significant change in ambiguity due to WM load, but no
effect at all in the reading times on the pronoun. In the current study we find only small ef-
fects of WM load and topic shift on reading the pronoun, although the off-line answers suggest
that pronoun interpretation is affected by WM load.
4.2
Discourse resolves ambiguity
Another explanation of the small effects of pronominal ambiguity on reading the pronoun re-
lates to our second question, whether the structure of the linguistic discourse already has re-
solved the potential ambiguity before the pronoun is encountered. If the alternative referents
are not considered at the pronoun because the preceding discourse has already constrained
the choice for a referent, then we would expect to find differences in the N400 region caused
by topic shift and WM load already early in the discourse. Note that the earlier mentioned al-
108

5
ternative explanation, that topic shift and WM load do not cause a difference in ambiguity at
all, would be supported if we did not find any differences in the second sentence or fourth sen-
tence. However, this is not the case: On the first proper name in Sentence 2 significant main
effects of topic shift and WM load were found that modulated the N400 amplitude. Interpret-
ing a new referent in subject position caused a larger negative deflection, whereas higher WM
load caused a positive deflection around the start of the N400. These effects in Sentence 2 are
much larger in amplitude than the effects found on the pronoun in Sentence 4.
The reducing effect of WM load on the N400 elicited by the referring expressions reflects
a smaller influence of the preceding discourse on the processing of referring expressions, as
the N400 is assumed to reflect how the word fits in the preceding context (a.o., van Berkum,
2008; van Berkum et al., 1999; Van Petten & Kutas, 1990; Van Petten, 1995). This effect is in line
with van Rij et al. (2011, submittedb, submitteda), who propose on the basis of computational
simulations that the constraining effect of discourse on sentence processing may be reduced
when listeners do not have sufficient WM capacity for using relevant information from the
discourse, such as information about grammatical role.
To summarize, the effects of WM load and topic shift are considerable larger in Sentence 2
than on the ambiguous pronoun in Sentence 4. Therefore, we argue that the discourse struc-
ture largely resolved the potential ambiguity before the pronoun is encountered.
4.3
The cost of referent introduction
The larger amplitude on the first proper name of Sentence 2 for stories with a topic shift rela-
tive to stories without a topic shift may result from the difference between a new name, which
requires the integration of new information in the discourse representation, and repeating
the name of an already introduced referent, which only requires retrieving information as-
sociated with this referent from the discourse representation (Swaab et al., 2004). Streb et
al. (1999) suggest that the integration of information in an existing discourse representation
may require more processing demands if the referents do not have the same grammatical po-
sition as in the sentence before. The ERP effect of topic shift found on the second proper name
in Sentence 2 in the current study supports the idea that introducing a new referent requires
additional processing effort: On the second proper name, the N400 amplitude is higher in the
stories without topic shift, where a new referent is introduced in this position, than in the
stories with topic shift, where the firstly introduced referent is repeated in this position.
4.4
Eﬀects of limited WM capacity
The N400 effects of topic shift and WM load were followed by a general increasing slow pos-
itive shift, starting around the onset of the second proper name. As mentioned before, the
reduced N400 in the high WM load condition may reflect a reduced constraining influence
of the preceding discourse on the interpretation of a sentence. In addition, a significant in-
teraction between WM load and Topic shift was found later in the sentence (but earlier for
lateral electrodes, see in Figure 3). The stories without topic shift in the low WM load condi-
tion elicited a sustained negative deflection relative to the other conditions, increasing as the
109

sentence unfolded. This slow shift was localized frontal and on the left side of the scalp, and
has been associated with increased memory demands (a.o., Kutas & Federmeier, 2007; Bosch
et al., 2001) and referential ambiguity (Nieuwland & van Berkum, 2006; van Berkum, 2008), as
discussed in the Introduction.
The presence of this slow wave in the stories without topic shift might indicate that the
repetition of a name causes more processing load because referring to a salient referent with a
repeated name results in a less coherent discourse than using a pronoun instead (a.o., Gordon
et al., 1993; Swaab et al., 2004). Interestingly, a series of studies (Swaab et al., 2004; Ledoux,
Gordon, Camblin, & Swaab, 2007; Camblin, Gordon, & Swaab, 2007) that have compared ERPs
on repeated names with ERPs on new names do not report a similar slow shift for repeated
names, but only report a negative deflection up to 700 ms after the onset of the proper name.
These studies used single sentences to test the effects of repetition of referring expressions,
whereas in our materials the referents are mentioned in different sentences.
Regardless of what underlying language processing strategy may cause the slow wave
shift, the absence of this shift in the high WM load condition suggests that participants change
their on-line language processing when WM capacity is insufficient due to higher WM load.
Note that we did not find a similar interaction in the N400 effects on reading the first proper
name, which only shows two main effects of topic shift and WM load. Because the distribution
of the N400 effects on reading the first proper name are clearly different from the distribution
of the effects on reading the second proper name, we hypothesize that WM load may affect
sentence processing in different ways: 1) higher WM load causes more difficulties in using
information from the preceding context, as suggested by lower N400 amplitudes as discussed
before, and 2) people change their language processing strategies if they have insufficient WM
load available. Both effects of WM load are likely to affect story comprehension.
4.5
Story comprehension
On the basis of the effects in Sentence 2 and Sentence 4, we propose that the saliency of ref-
erents in the discourse already differs as a result of the grammatical position in which they
are introduced, and this difference in saliency causes an early commitment of participants for
one of the referents as being the discourse topic. WM load may influence this early difference
in saliency, by attenuating the effect of the preceding discourse. Furthermore, our results
indicate that higher WM load may change the strategy of sentence processing to avoid addi-
tional WM load. These effects of WM load will in turn affect story comprehension. Thus, we
propose that the ERP effects found in Sentence 2 are predictive for off-line story comprehen-
sion. In contrast, the differences in saliency that arise already at the topic shift in Sentence
2, disambiguate the on-line pronoun resolution. Together, these results suggest that off-line
pronoun resolution, necessary for story comprehension, may be guided by additional factors
than on-line pronoun resolution.
Note that different factors, such as grammatical role, verb biases, and world-knowledge,
influence the referent’s discourse saliency. As a result, some discourses do not unambiguously
establish a discourse topic. A pronoun following such a discourse structure will reflect the
110

5
ambiguity of the discourse structure and be truly ambiguous for the reader or listener.
4.6
Conclusion
We examined whether WM load and discourse structure interact in the on-line resolution of
pronouns by measuring EEG during story comprehension in a dual-task experiment. The sec-
ondary task increased the WM load of participants in the high WM load condition while they
read short stories. In contrast to other reading time studies, but in line with our previous
reading time study using the same stories, we measured only small differences due to WM
load and the discourse structure on reading the pronoun. However, earlier in the story, when
a topic shift was elicited by introducing the second referent in subject position, we found sig-
nificant effects of discourse structure and WM load, indicating that the discourse saliency of
the referents resolved the potential ambiguity of the discourse. In addition, our data suggests
that with higher WM load, participants use a different sentence processing mechanism that
requires less WM capacity but may result in interpretational differences. On the basis of our
results we conclude that a potential ambiguity is not necessary resolved at the onset of the
pronoun, but might already be disambiguated at the introduction of the referents.
Notes
1 All participants signed a form to document informed consent. In addition, undergrad-
uate students younger than 18 received permission from parents or caregivers to par-
ticipate in the experiment.
2 We decided to include the left-handed participants in the data because of the within-
subjects design of the study. We controlled for handedness by removing the time trends
per subject from the data to reduce the noise from participants, and used the residual
data for statistical analyses (as described in Section 3). After removing the individual
time trends, no effect of handedness was found in the residuals.
111

Appendices
1
Statistical analyses
Package mgcv 1.7-19 (Wood, 2006) of the statistical software package R was used for analysis.
1.1
Procedure for removing variability due to participants and items
To avoid any spurious effects due to variability of participants and items, we used the follow-
ing procedure of removing different sources of variation before analyzing the residual data
for effects of Topic shift and WM load.
1. GAM model for removing main trend over time:
Cz ~ s(Time, k=40)
2. GAM model for removing main trend over time for each participant:
res0 ~ s(Time, by=Subject, k=40)
3. Linear mixed effect model for removing random intercept for each item:
res1 ~ 1 + (1|Item)
1.2
Investigating the effects of Topic shift and WM load
Table A1: Best-fitting model for Cz over time window 1 (Sentence 2, word 1-2) on the resid-
ual data after removing the main trend of Time and variability due to subject and
items.
Formula
res3 ~ s(Time, by = Shift) + s(Time, by = WM) + te(Time, Trial)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
***
-0.23007
0.05528
-4.162
<.001
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Shift
***
7.571
8.673
22.234
<.001
s(Time):WM
***
6.808
7.941
22.701
<.001
te(Time,Trial)
***
14.554
18.132
7.827
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.00244, Deviance explained = 0.26%
REML score = 7.4211e+05, Scale est. = 179.72, n = 184842
112

Table A2: Best-fitting model for Cz over time window 2 (Sentence 2, word 3-4) on the resid-
ual data after removing the main trend of Time and variability due to subject and
items.
Formula
res3 ~ s(Time, by = Shift) + s(Time, by = WM) + s(Time, by = Interaction) +
te(Time, Trial)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
***
-1.24779
0.08557
-14.58
<.001
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Shift
***
6.082
7.205
19.069
.<001
s(Time):WM
***
3.062
3.568
68.502
<.001
s(Time):Interaction
***
2.094
2.168
37.911
<.001
te(Time,Trial)
**
13.788
17.370
2.345
0.00125
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.00195, Deviance explained = 0.208%
REML score = 7.9451e+05, Scale est. = 316.88, n = 184842
Table A3: Best-fitting model for Cz over time window 3 (Sentence 4, word 1-2) on the resid-
ual data after removing the main trend of Time and variability due to subject and
items.
Formula
res3 ~ s(Time, by = Shift) + s(Time, by = WM) + s(Time, by = Interaction) +
te(Time, Trial)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
**
-0.19536
0.06409
-3.048
0.0023
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Shift
**
4.752
5.627
3.821
0.0012
s(Time):WM
***
5.658
6.681
8.101
<.001
s(Time):Interaction
***
5.542
6.524
5.300
<.001
te(Time,Trial)
***
15.157
18.051
10.484
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.00179, Deviance explained = 0.196%
REML score = 7.2753e+05, Scale est. = 171.06, n = 182331
113

2
Distribution of eﬀects
Figure A1: Estimated scalp distributions in N400 range for each time window. Averages are
based on the predicted effects of the best fitting model for each electrode.
114

chapter 6
Event-related pupil dilation tracks
integration of contextual and
grammatical information

Abstract
This study measured pupil dilation to investigate whether and when during sentence process-
ing listeners use contextual information to resolve object pronouns (him, her). The interpre-
tation of object pronouns is assumed to be constrained by grammatical principles. However,
in this study we found that the referents’ prominence in the linguistic and visual context also
affects pupil dilation. To manipulate the discourse prominence of the referents, we changed
the order of introduction of the two referents. When the agent of the target sentence with the
object pronoun was introduced first in the linguistic context, the visual context affected pro-
noun resolution. On the other hand, it did not when the agent was introduced second. Very
early after the onset of the pronoun, pupil dilation showed reliable differences between these
conditions, indicating that linguistic and visual context compete with grammatical principles
during pronoun resolution.

6
1
Introduction
Pronouns such as he and him differ from proper names like John in that they can refer to var-
ious referents in the linguistic or non-linguistic discourse. To interpret pronouns, listeners
often base their choice of referent on features of the preceding linguistic discourse that they
have stored in memory. These features concern, among other things, the grammatical roles
of the referents in the linguistic discourse (a referent that is the subject of the previous utter-
ance is preferred over a referent that is an object of the previous utterance), order of mention
(the referent that is mentioned first is preferred over a referent that is mentioned later in the
linguistic discourse), and recency (referents that were referred to in a recent utterance are
preferred over referents that were referred to several utterances back) (see Arnold, 1998, for
an overview). The effects of these determinants of discourse prominence on pronoun resolu-
tion have been established on the basis of the interpretation of subject pronouns (he, she).
In contrast, linguistic discourse is often assumed to play only a minor role in the interpre-
tation of object pronouns (him, her). In languages such as English and Dutch, object pronouns
cannot have the same reference as the subject of the clause, as is illustrated by sentence pair
1:
1. Here you see a penguin and a sheep. The penguin is hitting him with a pan.
In this sentence pair, the object pronoun him cannot refer to the same individual as the sub-
ject of the same clause, the penguin, and hence is preferably interpreted by adult listeners
as referring to the other referent in the linguistic discourse, the sheep. This restriction on
the interpretation of object pronouns is known in linguistic theory as Principle B of Binding
Theory (Chomsky, 1981). Because the interpretation of object pronouns is guided by Principle
B of the grammar, it is often assumed that the linguistic discourse only plays a minor role, if
any, in the interpretation of object pronouns. However, several recent studies suggest that
the linguistic discourse does influence children’s offline interpretation of object pronouns as
well as adults’ online interpretation of object pronouns (Clackson, Felser, & Clahsen, 2011;
Spenader et al., 2009).
This raises the question whether, how and when information from the linguistic discourse
is taken into account in the interpretation of object pronouns. Do listeners initially only ap-
ply grammatical principles to guide their search for possible referents? Or do listeners also
use information from discourse in object pronoun resolution, as they do in subject pronoun
resolution? And if so, at which point in time is the information from grammar and discourse
combined? The reported study investigates when listeners use the linguistic discourse in their
resolution of object pronouns.
1.1
Previous research on the on-line resolution of object pronouns
How do listeners combine different sources of information during sentence processing to de-
termine the interpretation of an object pronoun? To explain the time course of pronoun res-
olution, two conflicting types of accounts have been proposed. The initial-filter account (a.o.,
Clifton, Kennison, & Albrecht, 1997; Nicol & Swinney, 1989) assumes that the set of poten-
117

tial antecedents for the pronoun is restricted by the grammar. Other sources of information,
such as discourse context, only affect the choice of antecedent at a later stage of processing,
when the grammar has already filtered out antecedents that violate Principle B. In contrast,
the competing-constraints account (a.o., Badecker & Straub, 2002; Kennison, 2003) assumes that
grammar competes with other sources of information during pronoun resolution. Hence, dis-
course context may affect the choice of antecedent for a pronoun already from the start.
Experiments that addressed whether the grammar acts as an initial filter on the set of
potential antecedents for an object pronoun yielded mixed results. For example, Nicol and
Swinney (1989) used cross-modal priming to investigate the reactivation of referents in sen-
tences like 2:
2. The boxer told the skier that the doctor for the team would blame him • for the recent
injury. (• indicates the probe point)
They found significant priming effects after the pronoun him only for the boxer and the
skier, but not for the local subject the doctor, suggesting that only grammatically appropriate
antecedents are reactivated during pronoun resolution. In a series of self-paced reading stud-
ies, however, Badecker and Straub (2002) found opposite effects. In their studies, they focused
on the referent that is ruled out as the antecedent of the pronoun by Principle B of the gram-
mar because it is the subject of the same clause. Sentences in which this local subject matches
the object pronoun him in gender (e.g., if the local subject would be John) are compared with
minimally differing sentences in which the local subject does not match the object pronoun
in gender (e.g., if the local subject would be Jane). Badecker and Straub report that reading
times are increased on the words following the pronoun when the local subject matches the
pronoun in gender (John) compared to when the local subject does not match the pronoun
in gender (Jane). This difference in reading times suggests that a local matching subject is at
least initially considered as a potential antecedent of the pronoun. If the local subject were
already filtered out by the grammar as a potential antecedent of the pronoun, as stated by the
initial-filter account, it should not matter whether the gender of the local subject matches the
pronoun or not.
A recent study by S. Lewis, Chow, and Phillips (2012) using the same methodology, how-
ever, was unable to replicate Badecker and Straub’s findings. This contrasts with a visual-
world eye-tracking study by Clackson et al. (2011), whose results seem to be in line with
Badecker and Straub (2002). Clackson et al. (2011) investigated the time course of listeners’
interpretation of object pronouns by presenting participants with two-sentence stories such
as Example 3.
3a. Peter was waiting outside the corner shop. He watched as Mr. Jones bought a huge box
of popcorn for him over the counter.
3b. Susan was waiting outside the corner shop. She watched as Mr. Jones bought a huge
box of popcorn for her over the counter.
Participants showed significantly fewer looks to Peter in the presence of a local subject
of the same gender (Mr. Jones in sentence 3a) compared to looks to Susan in the presence of
118

6
a local subject of a different gender (Mr. Jones in sentence 3b). This result confirms Badecker
and Straub’s finding that local subjects are not immediately filtered out by the grammar as
potential antecedents of an object pronoun. All in all, therefore, previous work has yielded
contradictory results regarding the role of grammatical information.
In this study, we investigate how and when the linguistic discourse and grammar inter-
act during the resolution of object pronouns. We do not manipulate the gender properties
of potential antecedents, as previous studies did, but rather we manipulate their prominence
in the discourse. Under the initial-filter account as well as the competing-constraints ac-
count, determinants of discourse prominence such as the order of mention could influence
the interpretation of object pronouns too, just like they influence the interpretation of sub-
ject pronouns. However, the accounts make different predictions about the effect of discourse
prominence: Under the competing constraints account but not the initial filter account, dis-
course prominence also affects the availability of the local subject as a potential antecedent of
the pronoun. We thus aim to investigate whether and when discourse factors such as order of
mention influence the availability of the local subject as the antecedent of an object pronoun
in simple transitive sentences. We investigate these issues using the method of pupil dilation,
which is a robust measure to detect differences in processing load during on-line language
processing (a.o., Beatty & Lucero-Wagoner, 2000; Just & Carpenter, 1993; Engelhardt, Ferreira,
& Patsenko, 2010).
1.2
Eﬀects of discourse prominence
If the linguistic discourse influences object pronoun resolution even at the earliest moments
ofprocessing thepronoun, wemayfindsignaturesofthe samediscoursefactors thatinfluence
subject pronoun interpretation, such as order of mention (e.g., Gernsbacher & Hargreaves,
1988; Gordon et al., 1993; Kaiser & Trueswell, 2008). Firstly mentioned referents are perceived
as more prominent and hence are more likely antecedents of a subject pronoun than referents
that are mentioned later. In the reported study, we manipulate the discourse prominence of
the local subject by changing the order of introduction in sentences such as Example 1. Recall
that Principle B of the grammar prohibits the local subject the penguin as the antecedent of
the pronoun in a sentence such as The penguin is hitting him with a pan. Reversing the order
of introduction of the two referents (i.e., Here you see a sheep and a penguin rather than Here
you see a penguin and a sheep) and introducing the penguin secondly rather than firstly makes
the penguin less prominent. If this first mention bias not only influences the interpretation of
subject pronouns but also of object pronouns, the reversed order of introduction is expected
to result in less processing difficulty. That is, decreasing the discourse prominence of the
local subject is expected to have a similar effect as replacing a local subject that matches the
pronoun in gender by a referent that does not match the pronoun.
To investigate whether and when discourse prominence affects the processing of object
pronouns, we performed a visual-world eye-tracking study in which we measured the partic-
ipants’ pupil size during the task.
119

1.3
Pupil dilation
The size of the pupil is mainly determined by light and accommodation reflexes, but in con-
ditions of constant lighting, small fluctuations (usually less than 0.5 mm) in pupil size can be
measured that have been found to reflect cognitive processing (for reviews, see, a.o., Beatty,
1982; Beatty & Lucero-Wagoner, 2000; Janisse, 1977). These fluctuations in pupil size have
been found to be a reliable measure of processing load in tasks that investigate memory, at-
tention, reasoning, decision-making and memory. Pupil dilation is a slow measure that peaks
around 1000 ms after the stimulus that triggered the dilation. However, the peak may vary
between tasks: For example, Hoeks and Levelt (1993) estimated the mean peak latency in a
simple reaction task on 930 ms after the stimulus, whereas Just and Carpenter (1993) report
peak latencies around 1.3 ms.
Pupil dilation is not used very often to study language comprehension, although pupil
dilation is sensitive to effects of processing load for various linguistic phenomena (Engelhardt
et al., 2010; Hyönä, Tommola, & Alaja, 1995; Just & Carpenter, 1993; Scheepers & Crocker, 2004;
Zellin, Pannekamp, Toepel, & van der Meer, 2011). For example, Just and Carpenter (1993)
compared subject and object relative clauses and different types of filler-gap sentences. Their
results show more pupil dilation for more complex sentences.
More recently, Engelhardt et al. (2010) reported that prosody affected pupil dilation dur-
ing the processing of syntactic ambiguities if the presented visual context was inconsistent
with the correct interpretation of the sentence. Zellin et al. (2011) investigated how discourse
information (new versus contrastive information) and prosody influenced processing load.
Different effects were found for peak dilation, the maximal dilation of the pupil, and peak
latency, the amount of time between the start of the measurement interval and the peak di-
lation.
These studies show that pupil dilation is sensitive to subtle linguistic differences, associ-
ated with differences in processing load. Therefore, we measured pupil dilation during sen-
tence processing to investigate whether the discourse prominence of the local subject refer-
ent influences processing load.
2
Experimental materials and methods
The current study aimed to investigate whether and when referents’ discourse prominence
affects processing load during the resolution of object pronouns. The presence of an imme-
diate effect of the local subject’s prominence on pupil dilation would suggest that the gram-
mar does not filter out the local subject as a potential antecedent, but that the linguistic dis-
course competes with the grammar during object pronoun processing. We manipulated the
discourse prominence of the local subject referent by changing the order of introduction of
the two referents.
120

6
2.1
Materials and task
To study object pronoun resolution, we used a picture verification task in a visual-world
paradigm. Participants were asked to judge whether a two-sentence story that was audi-
torily presented correctly described the picture presented on the screen. Sentences were
pre-recorded and presented starting 500 ms after the picture appeared on the screen.
In the first sentence, two referents were introduced (see Example 4). The order of in-
troduction was manipulated to change the discourse prominence of the referents. With an
Agent-Patient (AP) introduction the agent becomes more prominent in the discourse because
it is introduced first in the discourse (first mention bias, a.o., Gernsbacher & Hargreaves,
1988). In contrast, with a Patient-Agent (PA) introduction the prominence of the patient
increases because the patient is introduced first in the discourse.
4. Example test sentences (in Dutch, with their English translations given below):
Introduction Order Agent-Patient (AP):
Hier zie je een pinguïn en een schaap.
‘Here you see a penguin and a sheep’
Introduction Order Patient-Agent (PA):
Hier zie je een schaap en een pinguïn.
‘Here you see a sheep and a penguin’
Test sentence:
De pinguïn slaat hem met een pan.
‘The penguin is hitting him with a pan’
Figure 1 shows two pictures for which the test sentence in 4 is a correct or an incorrect
description. Instead of choosing between these two pictures (i.e., a picture-selection task),
participants were presented with only one picture and were asked to judge whether the pre-
sented sentence was a correct description of the picture or not. If the picture on the screen
showed an other-oriented action (Figure 1a), the description was correct (congruent item). If
the picture showed a self-oriented action (Figure 1b), the description was incorrect (incon-
gruent item). In addition, filler sentences without a pronoun were included in the experiment
to provide incorrect descriptions for the pictures with an other-oriented action and correct
a. Picture showing other-oriented action
b. Picture showing self-oriented action
Figure 1: A pictures that is congruent (left) and a picture that is incongruent (right) with
the sentence ‘The penguin is hitting him with a pan’.
121

descriptions for pictures with a self-oriented action.
Each trial started with a fixation cross. After 750 ms the picture appeared on the screen. In
half of the trials the picture was mirrored (randomly determined before each trial). The pre-
recorded sentences started 500 ms later. The picture remained visible on the screen another
2500 ms after the sentences were finished, so that the pupil size could decrease to its normal
size. The picture on the screen was then replaced by the two possible answers (‘right’, ‘wrong’)
presented on the left and right side of the screen. To prevent participants from preparing
their motor response, the location of the answer on the screen was randomized per trial. This
delayed and randomized presentation of the answer options allows us to disentangle the pupil
dilation that is triggered by sentence processing from the pupil dilation that is triggered by
preparing the response on the judgment task. After an answer was given using one of the two
front buttons of a game pad, a blank screen was presented for 2500 ms before the next trial
started.
2.2
Design and procedure
The 2x2 design (Introduction Order x Congruency) was tested within subjects. Four variants
were created of each of the 32 test items that were distributed over 4 lists. In addition, 32 filler
items were created analogously to the experimental items, but without a pronoun. Instead,
half of the fillers contained a reflexive object and the other half of the fillers were intransitive
sentences that did not contain an object. The filler items were balanced for type of Introduc-
tion Order and Congruency. All items ended with a prepositional phrase.
The pupil area was monitored continuously during the picture verification task with an
EyeLink 1000 (SR research) at 250 Hz (settings: monocular tracking based on pupil and corneal
reflection, noise reduction with filter level 2). Stimulus presentation was programmed using
E-Prime 2.0 software. The eye-tracker was calibrated at the start of the experiment and in the
two breaks, at 1/3 and 2/3 of the experiment. The computer screen was set at a resolution of
1,024 x 786. The background of the screen was white during the trials and calibration. A chin
and forehead rest was used to keep the distance between the participant’s head and the screen
constant. Luminance of the room was normal and kept constant during the experiment.
2.2.1
Participants
Participants were 18 native-Dutch speaking students, who were paid 10 euros or rewarded
with course credits. One participant was excluded because of blinks and track loss in more
than half of the trials. The data of 17 participants (mean age 19.4, range 18-21; 4 men) is
analyzed.
2.2.2
Pupil dilation recording and processing
Eye blinks were corrected for by linear interpolation. Trials with more than 25% of the data
being replaced by interpolation were excluded from analyses (n=14 of 497). The data was fil-
tered with a low pass Butterworth filter with an upper band of 25 Hz using the package ‘signal’
122

6
of the statistical software package R (www.r-project.org). Trials were temporally aligned to
the onset of the pronoun, and down sampled to 50 Hz. The average pupil size in the interval
from 0 ms to 250 ms after the picture onset (i.e., 500 to 250 ms before the sentence onset)
was used as a baseline. Data were normalized by calculating the proportion of increase of the
pupil size compared to the baseline for each data point.
3
Results
3.1
Oﬀ-line performance
Participants gave very few wrong answers on the task. Answer accuracy was more than 93%.
We excluded incorrectly answered items (n=16 of 483) from all subsequent analyses.
3.2
Pupil dilation
Figure 2 shows the average pupil dilation per condition (Introduction Order x Congruency),
aligned on the onset of the pronoun, from the start of the trial to approximately 3000 ms after
the pre-recorded sentences are finished.
Congruent items
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Time from onset pronoun
Start S1
Start S2
Pronoun
End S2
AP
PA
Incongruent items
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Time from onset pronoun
Start S1
Start S2
Pronoun
End S2
AP
PA
Figure 2: Mean pupil dilation (±1SE) from the start of the trial to 4000 ms after the onset
of the pronoun (baseline 0 to 250 ms after the start of the trial) for the congruent
trials (with picture showing other-oriented action) and incongruent trials (with
picture showing self-oriented action), averaged over time bins of 100 ms for pre-
sentation purposes. The red lines indicate an agent-patient (AP) introduction sen-
tence, and blue lines a patient-agent (PA) introduction sentence. Vertical lines
show the average onset of sentence 1 and sentence 2, and the average offset of
sentence 2.
In the introduction sentence, the pupil dilation increases until the introduction of the
second referent. From the start of the test sentence, the dilation starts to increase again up
to the end of the sentence, after which the dilation decreases. To test for effects of referent
123

introduction on pronoun resolution, the pupil dilation is analyzed from 200 ms before the
onset of the pronoun to 3000 ms after the pronoun (the white areas in Figure 2), aligned on
the onset of the pronoun and with the same baseline of 0 to 250 ms after the start of the trial.
Previous studies report differences in (mean) peak dilation, peak latency (a.o., Beatty &
Lucero-Wagoner, 2000; Just & Carpenter, 1993) and sometimes dilation slope (e.g., Engelhardt
et al., 2010). In this study, we use generative additive models (GAMs, Wood, 2006; see Trem-
blay & Baayen, 2010 for an application of GAMs to EEG data from a immediate free recall ex-
periment, and Wieling, Nerbonne, & Baayen, 2011, for an application of GAMs to investigate
linguistic variation) to analyze pupil dilation because this approach can capture differences
in peak dilation and peak latency within a single analysis.
3.3
The eﬀect of order of introduction and congruency on pupil dilation
GAMs are generalized linear models in which linear predictors can be specified by non-linear
functions of predictor variables (i.e., smooth functions). These functions are estimated using a
penalized regression method called penalized iteratively re-weighted least squares, and the
parameters for each smooth function such as the degree of smoothness are estimated using
cross-validation (see Wood, 2006, chapters 3 and 4). These estimation processes determining
the smooth functions and parameters are designed to avoid overgeneralization and overfit-
ting of the data.
We use GAMs to estimate the effects of Congruency and Introduction on the time-course
of the un-averaged pupil dilation. To avoid any spurious effects due to variability of partici-
pants and items, we used a conservative procedure of removing different sources of variation
and analyzing the residual data for effects of Congruency and Introduction. First, we removed
the main trends of pupil dilation over time, followed by the time trends of individual subjects.
Subsequently, we removed the time trends of individual items, and also included a predictor
to account for the variability in the time trends due to order of trials in the experiment, and a
linear predictor for the effect image direction, which pertains to the positions of agent and pa-
tient in the picture. To investigate whether the residual data is influenced by Congruency and
Introduction Order over time, we included smooth functions to account for the time trends for
each condition. We compared different models using a stepwise variable deletion procedure,
starting with the complete interaction model, which was the best fitting model (Appendix
1, Table 4). The best fitting model includes an intercept for Condition (factor with four levels
representing the Introduction Order x Congruency conditions; F(1.26,74704)=5.27; p=.015) and
the effect of Condition over time (F(12.43, 74704)=11.93; p<.001), providing evidence that In-
troduction Order and Congruency influence the measured pupillary dilation. Figure 3 shows
how these factors influence the pupil dilation.
The panel in the top row of Figure 3 shows the estimated effect of Time from the onset
of the pronoun. The pupil dilation starts with an intercept of 0.165 and peaks around 1000
ms after the pronoun onset (indicated by the dotted vertical line), which is close to the peak
latency of 930 ms reported by Hoeks and Levelt (1993).
The second row of Figure 3 shows in the four rightmost panels the estimated effects for
124

6
Time
0
1
2
3
0.07
0.11
0.15
0.19
0.23
 intercept
Time + Conditions
0
1
2
3
0.07
0.11
0.15
0.19
0.23
AP congruent
0
1
2
3
-0.03
-0.01
0.01
0.03
Conditions:
AP incongruent
0
1
2
3
PA congruent
0
1
2
3
PA incongruent
0
1
2
3
Grand averages
of conditions
0
1
2
3
0.07
0.11
0.15
0.19
0.23
Intercepts
of conditions
-0.06
-0.02
0.02
0.06
AP con.
AP incon.
PA con.
PA incon.
Figure 3: Estimated effects (± 1 SE) of the predictors on pupil dilation over time from the
onset of the pronoun. First row: the main effect of Time peaking around 1000 ms
after the onset of the pronoun as indicated by the dashed line. Second row: the
four rightmost panels show the partial effects of Time x Condition; the leftmost
panel shows the effects of condition added to the main effect of time. Third row:
The right panel shows the difference in intercepts of each condition, indicating
the differences in pupil dilation at the start of the pronoun. The left panel shows
the effects of Condition over time with intercepts added.
each condition (Introduction Order x Congruency) over Time, after removing the main time
trend of pupil dilation. In the AP-congruent condition, the pupil dilation peak is reduced, in-
dicated by the initially negative curve. However, the pupil dilation peak is increased in the
incongruent conditions AP-incongruent and PA-incongruent, which show a similar initially
positive curve. The PA-congruent condition does not show a significant difference with the
main time trend, indicated by the flat line around zero. Note also that the end of the curves for
the incongruent items (AP-incongruent and PA-incongruent) is negative, suggesting a faster
decrease of pupil dilation, but positive for the AP-congruent condition, suggesting a slower
decrease of pupil dilation. The leftmost panel shows the effects of condition added to the main
time trend. The peak dilation is considerable lower in the AP-congruent condition than in all
other conditions, and it takes longer in the AP-congruent condition for the pupil dilation to
reduce to the baseline. The peak dilation in the PA-congruent condition is somewhat lower
than in the incongruent items. The differences between conditions arise early in the time
course: within 500 ms after the pronoun onset the dilation slopes separate. There was no dif-
ference over time between the AP-incongruent condition and the PA-incongruent condition
from the onset of the pronoun.
The bottom row completes the pattern of differences between conditions over time. The
125

right panel of the bottom row shows the estimated intercepts per condition, reflecting the dif-
ference from the mean in pupil size at the onset of the pronoun. Treatment coding was used,
which contrasts a baseline condition (AP-congruent; β=-.032, SE=.013, t=-2.43, p=.015) with
other conditions. Only AP-incongruent has a higher intercept than AP-congruent (β=.034,
SE=.018, t=1.97, p=.049).
The rightmost panel of the bottom row shows the effects of each condition over time
added to the condition intercepts. If the local subject is very prominent in the linguistic con-
text (i.e., in the AP conditions), then the visual context makes a difference in peak dilation:
if the picture shows a self-oriented action, participants show significantly increased process-
ing load compared to the other conditions, but if the picture shows an other-oriented action,
participants show reduced processing load. The visual context does not influence processing
load much if the local subject referent is introduced second (i.e., in the PA conditions).
To summarize, not only the order of referent introduction (Introduction Order), but also
the visual context (Congruency) influences pupil dilation during on-line pronoun resolution.
4
Discussion
To investigate whether and at which point during sentence processing listeners use discourse
prominence in their resolution of object pronouns, we carried out a visual-world picture ver-
ification task with Dutch adults, while measuring their pupil size. We manipulated discourse
prominence through the order of referent introduction in the sentence preceding the object
pronoun. Participants showed an interaction between the type of picture and the order of
referent introduction. According to the grammar of Dutch, a non-reflexive object pronoun
cannot refer to the same referent as the local subject. When this ‘ungrammatical’ antecedent
was introduced before a competing ‘grammatical’ antecedent and hence was more promi-
nent, participants experienced more processing load in the incongruent items than in the
congruent items. If the grammatical antecedent was introduced first, the congruency effect
was much smaller.
4.1
Theoretical implications
According to the initial-filter account, the grammar acts as a filter removing ungrammat-
ical antecedents as potential referents of the object pronoun. This implies that only ref-
erents that are allowed by the grammar as the antecedent of the pronoun are considered
during on-line pronoun resolution. The local subject is not allowed by the grammar and
hence its discourse prominence should not influence the resolution of the object pronoun.
The competing-constraints account, on the other hand, assumes that grammar and discourse
compete during pronoun resolution. This implies that not only properties of grammatical
referents but also of ungrammatical referents may influence on-line pronoun resolution.
The interaction between grammar, linguistic discourse and visual context found in this
study cannot be explained in terms of an initial-filter account. According to the initial-filter
account, the subject of the test sentence is not a grammatically appropriate antecedent of
126

6
the object pronoun and hence is not even considered. However, when this ungrammatical
antecedent is prominent in the linguistic discourse because it is introduced first and, in ad-
dition, the visual context is congruent with the sentence (as in the AP-congruent condition),
lower pupil dilation is measured than when the ungrammatical antecedent is less prominent
(as in the PA-congruent condition). This is interpreted as lower processing load in the AP-
congruent condition than in the PA-congruent condition. When the visual context is incon-
gruent with the sentence, the order of introduction has an opposite effect on pupil dilation.
Thus, these results suggest that the grammar, linguistic discourse and visual context inter-
act during the on-line resolution of object pronouns. Moreover, the linguistic discourse and
visual context influence pupil dilation very early in the pronoun resolution process because
the conditions start to differ in pupil dilation slope quickly (around 250 ms) after the onset of
the pronoun.
4.2
The inﬂuence of contextual information
Engelhardt et al. (2010) report a similar interaction between visual context and prosody in
the processing of garden path sentences. As discussed in the introduction, they found that
prosodic information reduced processing load if it was congruent with the correct reading
of a temporarily syntactically ambiguous sentence, but only if the visual context was incon-
gruent with this correct interpretation. If the picture matched the correct, but initially less
preferred, reading of the sentence, prosody did not affect processing load because the visual
context already may have disambiguated the sentence. In our experiment, the visual context
could not disambiguate the sentence before the onset of the pronoun, because the sentence
could have continued with a reflexive (himself ) rather than a pronoun, resulting in a match
between the sentence and the picture. Therefore, the effects of visual context are somewhat
different in our study than in Engelhardt et al.’s.
Although the visual context could not disambiguate the sentence in our study, partici-
pants may have relied on the accompanying picture more in the AP conditions than in the
PA conditions. In the AP-congruent condition, pronoun processing is facilitated by the vi-
sual context, indicated by lower pupil dilation. In contrast, in the AP-incongruent condition
pronoun processing is hindered by the conflicting information from the visual context. Gen-
erally, speakers tend to mention the agent before the patient or place the agent in a more
prominent grammatical position (e.g., the subject position) than the patient when describing
pictures (a.o., Griffin & Bock, 2000; Gleitman, January, Nappa, & Trueswell, 2007; Myachykov,
Thompson, Scheepers, & Garrod, 2011). As a consequence, a discourse starting with an AP-
introduction is more natural than a discourse starting with a PA-introduction, given the pic-
ture on the screen. Following this reasoning, the PA-introduction may warn the participants
not to rely on the interpretation presented on the screen because the PA-introduction sug-
gests that the patient is more important than the visual context shows, which conflicts with
the information of the visual context (in both the congruent and incongruent conditions).
This could explain the lack of influence of visual context on the PA conditions.
This explanation, which proposes that the visual context interacts with linguistic infor-
127

mation during sentence processing, is in line with previous eye-tracking studies (a.o., Spivey,
Tanenhaus, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 2002; Knoeferle, Crocker, Scheepers, & Pickering, 2005) show-
ing that the visual context resolves or reduces temporarily syntactic ambiguities during on-
line sentence processing. These effects of visual context provide support for the competing
constraints account, which assumes that non-linguistic information may influence on-line
pronoun resolution already early on.
4.3
Conclusion
Using pupil dilation as a measure of processing load, we found effects of linguistic discourse
(the order of referent introduction) and visual context (whether the sentence and the pic-
ture match or do not match) during the resolution of object pronouns in a sentence-picture
verification task. Together, these results provide strong evidence against the view that the
grammar acts as an initial filter on the selection of possible antecedents for object pronouns.
Our study thus supports the view that grammar, linguistic discourse and visual context com-
pete in determining the antecedent of an object pronoun.
128

Appendices
1
Statistical analyses
Package mgcv 1.7-18 (Wood, 2006) of the statistical software package R was used for analysis.
Table A1: Model 1 for removing the main trend over time from the onset of the pronoun.
Formula
Pupil ~ s(Time)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
***
0.165
0.000625
264.3
<.001
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time)
***
7.248
8.265
271.6
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.0292, deviance explained = 2.93%
REML score = -25950, scale estimation = 0.029215, n=74720
129

Table A2: Model 2 for removing the main trend over time per subject from residuals of
model 1.
Formula
res1 ~ s(Time, by=Subject)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
***
0.902
0.037
24.11
<.001
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Subject1
***
5.722
6.733
43.522
<.001
s(Time):Subject10
***
5.131
6.075
25.504
<.001
s(Time):Subject11
***
7.311
8.235
181.826
<.001
s(Time):Subject12
***
7.025
8.002
38.138
<.001
s(Time):Subject13
***
4.684
5.553
46.846
<.001
s(Time):Subject14
***
5.288
6.253
18.312
<.001
s(Time):Subject15
***
7.241
8.18
146.61
<.001
s(Time):Subject16
***
7.738
8.539
382.204
<.001
s(Time):Subject17
1.019
1.032
0.211
0.654
s(Time):Subject2
***
3.647
4.356
5.111
0.000287
s(Time):Subject3
***
5.721
6.733
17.72
<.001
s(Time):Subject4
***
7.426
8.322
500.588
<.001
s(Time):Subject15
***
6.302
7.334
153.513
<.001
s(Time):Subject16
***
7.213
8.157
226.5
<.001
s(Time):Subject17
***
5.053
5.985
17.981
<.001
s(Time):Subject18
***
6.874
7.871
210.374
<.001
s(Time):Subject19
***
3.512
4.203
27.966
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.237, deviance explained = 23.8%
REML score = -35856, scale estimation = 0.022286, n=74720
130

Table A3: Model 3 for removing the main trend over time per item from residuals of model
2, and the effects of trial position and whether the picture was mirrored.
Formula
res2 ~ ImgDir + s(pTime, by = Item) + te(pTime, trial)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
Intercept
***
0.607
0.0795
7.64
<.001
ImgDir
***
-0.0136
0.000529
-25.75
<.001
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Item
***
4.143
4.914
55.43
<.001
s(Time):Item10
***
4.722
5.598
23.024
<.001
s(Time):Item11
***
5.315
6.285
61.384
<.001
s(Time):Item12
***
4.682
5.552
34.304
<.001
s(Time):Item13
***
5
5.924
5.834
<.001
s(Time):Item14
***
6.272
7.304
206.779
<.001
s(Time):Item15
***
3.99
4.735
15.209
<.001
s(Time):Item16
***
4.804
5.695
17.547
<.001
s(Time):Item17
***
4.425
5.246
21.409
<.001
s(Time):Item18
***
3.962
4.703
8.249
<.001
s(Time):Item19
***
3.83
4.551
24.287
<.001
s(Time):Item2
***
4.589
5.441
12.583
<.001
s(Time):Item20
***
6.099
7.131
17.636
<.001
s(Time):Item21
***
4.429
5.251
13.338
<.001
s(Time):Item22
***
4.261
5.053
21.735
<.001
s(Time):Item23
***
6.011
7.039
121.698
<.001
s(Time):Item24
***
5.075
6.012
15.705
<.001
s(Time):Item25
***
3.629
4.32
25.384
<.001
s(Time):Item26
***
4.644
5.506
7.072
<.001
s(Time):Item27
***
5.668
6.676
21.044
<.001
s(Time):Item28
**
1
1
9.894
0.00166
s(Time):Item29
***
5.703
6.713
22.474
<.001
s(Time):Item3
***
3.352
4
24.887
<.001
s(Time):Item30
***
4.858
5.758
28.093
<.001
s(Time):Item31
***
4.52
5.357
34.935
<.001
s(Time):Item32
***
4.502
5.338
29.346
<.001
s(Time):Item4
***
4.053
4.808
24.43
<.001
s(Time):Item5
***
4.376
5.189
9.626
<.001
s(Time):Item6
***
4.495
5.33
10.92
<.001
s(Time):Item7
***
2.826
3.371
23.205
<.001
s(Time):Item8
***
5.238
6.198
92.289
<.001
s(Time):Item9
***
4.061
4.817
15.201
<.001
te(Time,trial)
***
19.588
21.599
132.865
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.145, deviance explained = 14.7%
REML score = -41634, scale estimation = 0.01902, n=74720
131

Table A4: Best fitting model explaining the effects of Introduction Order and Congruency
on pupil dilation from the onset of the pronoun (on the residuals of model 3).
Formula
res3 ~ Condition + s(pTime, by = Condition)
Predictor
Estimate
SE
t value
p-value
(Intercept)
*
-0.0317
0.0131
-2.430
0.0151
ConditionPA-congruent
0.00755
0.0135
0.561
0.5747
ConditionAP-incongruent
*
0.0350
0.0178
1.965
0.0494
ConditionPA-incongruent
-0.000601
0.0146
-0.041
0.9672
Smooth term
edf
Ref.df
F
p-value
s(Time):Cond.AP-congruent
***
4.596
5.637
14.079
<.001
s(Time):Cond.PA-congruent
1.045
1.089
0.315
0.594
s(Time):Cond.AP-incongruent
***
4.169
5.139
4.750
<.001
s(Time):Cond.PA-incongruent
***
2.618
3.261
9.795
<.001
Model characteristics
R-sq.(adj) = 0.0049, deviance explained = 0.51%
REML score = -42219, scale estimation = 0.018885, n=74720
132

chapter 7
Discussion


7
1
Introduction
This thesis investigated the relative contribution of linguistic constraints and cognitive fac-
tors in pronoun processing. I implemented two cognitive models in the cognitive architecture
ACT-R to explain how children acquire, and adults process, pronouns in subject and object po-
sition. These cognitive models incorporated linguistic constraints restricting the production
and interpretation of referring expressions: pronouns such as the subject form he and the ob-
ject form him, reflexives such as himself, and definite full NPs such as the definite description
the pirate and the proper name Eric. Based on computational simulations of the cognitive mod-
els and the results of various empirical and psychophysiological studies with Dutch-speaking
children and adults, I argue that adult-like pronoun processing requires sufficient process-
ing speed to take into account the perspective of the conversational partner. In addition,
adult-like pronoun processing requires sufficient working memory (WM) capacity to build
and update a representation of the linguistic discourse. In this discussion, I will first return to
the main research questions posed in the introduction. Then, I will discuss the implications
of this investigation for language acquisition, language processing and language disorders.
2
Eﬀects of cognitive factors and linguistic constraints
Chapter 2 addressed children’s acquisition of object pronouns in languages such as Dutch and
English. In these languages, children up to 7 years old still make errors in their interpretation
of object pronouns such as him, although at the same time they show adult-like production
of object pronouns. I tested the hypothesis that children’s interpretation follows from the
constraints of the grammar, which allow object pronouns to corefer with the subject. Adult
listeners take into account the speaker’s perspective and thus block coreference between the
object pronoun and the subject, but children are not capable of such perspective taking. On
the basis of computational simulations of our cognitive model, I predicted that children are
not yet able to complete the process of perspective taking because they lack sufficient pro-
cessing speed. The results from our empirical study with Dutch-speaking 4- to 6-year-old
children provide support for our cognitive model. When presenting children with pronoun
sentences in slowed-down speech and normal speech, children’s interpretation of object pro-
nouns improved with slowed-down speech. On the other hand, their interpretation of reflex-
ives (himself ) deteriorated with slowed-down speech. This selective effect of slowed-down
speech suggests that children who make errors with object pronouns do so because they fail
to complete the necessary process of perspective taking at normal speech rate.
In Chapter 3 another cognitive model was discussed. This model is in fact an extension
of the cognitive model presented in Chapter 2. The extension of the model consisted of a
discourse component that implemented discourse saliency as memory activation that is af-
fected by the referents’ current discourse prominence. The aim of this model was to explain
the acquisition of subject pronouns in Dutch. Dutch-speaking children up to 7 years old show
non-adult-like interpretation and production of subject pronouns: In their interpretations,
they do not seem to use the discourse status of referents in the local discourse as a cue for
135

subject pronoun interpretation. In their productions, they overuse pronouns, even for refer-
ence to an individual that is not the discourse topic. On the basis of our extended cognitive
model, we predicted that children’s non-adult-like pronoun processing may have two differ-
ent causes. First, children may not have sufficient processing speed for taking into account
the perspective of a hypothetical conversational partner in their interpretation and produc-
tion. Second, children may not have sufficient WM capacity to process discourse structure in
an adult-like way.
In Chapter 4, I presented the results of a dual-task experiment with adults providing
support for the prediction that the mature use of discourse structure and the linguistic con-
straints pertaining to this discourse structure require sufficient WM capacity. If WM load in
adults is increased due to a difficult secondary task, less WM capacity is available for sen-
tence processing. In such a dual-task situation, adult participants were less likely to use the
discourse status of referents to interpret subject pronouns. Thus, they started to resemble
children in their linguistic behavior.
In a follow-up study described in Chapter 5 we measured EEG during a similar dual task to
test whether participants consider alternative referents for the pronoun during on-line pro-
noun resolution. The results of this ERP study show that the preceding discourse already
resolved the ambiguity in the discourse before the pronoun was read: Effects of WM load and
topic shift were found at the introduction of a second referent in the prominent subject posi-
tion, which causes a shift of topic. Effects of WM load and topic shift were also present on read-
ing the pronoun, but considerably reduced. The results indicate that the relative discourse
saliency of referents constrains the choice for a referent during on-line pronoun processing,
although the discourse ambiguity may play a role in off-line pronoun resolution.
In this thesis, I proposed that subject pronouns are produced and interpreted using the
same underlying mechanism as for object pronouns: the cognitive model explaining object
pronoun acquisition was extended with a discourse processing component to explain subject
pronoun acquisition. If object pronouns and subject pronouns make use of similar underlying
mechanisms, combining the two cognitive models would yield the prediction that the on-line
processing of object pronouns, but not necessarily the outcome of the process, is influenced by
the structure of the preceding discourse in a similar way as the discourse influences subject
pronoun processing. Chapter 6 described an experiment testing this prediction. We mea-
sured pupil dilation to investigate whether discourse may change the processing load during
object pronoun interpretation. Our results indicate that the introduction order of referents,
which affects the referents’ relative discourse saliency, has a very early influence on object
pronoun resolution.
This thesis has yielded a cognitively motivated account of the effects of processing speed
and WM capacity on pronoun processing. This account has implications for theories of lan-
guage acquisition, for models of sentence processing and for the communication deficits as-
sociated with cognitive disorders.
136

7
2.1
Cognitive factors in pronoun processing
Our findings support the predictions of our cognitive model that both speed of processing
and WM capacity play an important role in pronoun processing, albeit in different ways. In-
sufficient speed of processing interacts with the use of grammatical constraints in pronoun
processing, and may impede the process of perspective taking, a Theory of Mind-like process.
Insufficient WM capacity, on the other hand, affects discourse processing, as it hinders the
mature use of local aspects of the discourse structure such as the grammatical role of ref-
erents in the discourse. In this thesis, we did not investigate the interaction between WM
capacity and processing speed. In ACT-R, processing speed is influenced by WM capacity, be-
cause higher WM capacity increases the activation of referents and concepts in declarative
memory, resulting in shorter retrieval times. However, these increases in processing speed
due to higher WM capacity are outperformed by the increase in processing speed due to ACT-
R’s learning mechanism of production compilation. This learning process incorporates all
declarative knowledge in highly specialized production rules, so that retrieval of declarative
knowledge is unnecessary (Taatgen & Anderson, 2002, see Chapter 2 and 3). Although WM
capacity and speed of processing may interact, they affect the acquisition, use and interpre-
tations of pronouns differently.
3
Theoretical implications
3.1
Implications for language acquisition research
Our cognitively motivated account of pronoun processing has a number of implications for
language acquisition research. We proceeded from the assumption that 4 to 7-year-old Dutch-
speaking children already possess mature knowledge of the constraints of the grammar per-
taining to pronoun use, and their relative ranking. However, they still make systematic errors
in their interpretation (of object pronouns, see Koster, 1993; Philip & Coopmans, 1996; Spe-
nader et al., 2009) and their production (of subject pronouns, see Wubs et al., 2009). We argued
in previous chapters that these errors disappear if children are capable of perspective taking
and mature discourse processing.
Importantly, our model predicts that sufficient processing speed and sufficient WM ca-
pacity are not necessarily acquired around the same time, because these cognitive factors
are acquired through different underlying mechanisms. In our cognitive model, processing
speed is crucially dependent on the input frequency of the pronouns. This is because pro-
cessing speed increases as a result of the repeated use of production rules in ACT-R, due to
ACT-R’s learning mechanism (cf. Taatgen & Anderson, 2002). On the other hand, in ACT-R
spreading activation reflecting the amount of WM capacity available for maintaining task rel-
evant information ready to use is independent of experience and frequency. This is in line
with other capacity accounts of working memory, who assume WM capacity to be acquired
through maturation (a.o., Just & Carpenter, 1992; Daneman & Carpenter, 1980).
So children must acquire sufficient WM capacity to process pronouns in an adult-like way.
Interestingly, even in adults the amount of available WM capacity influences pronoun pro-
137

cessing. In Chapter 4 and 5, we discussed our finding that a secondary task with a high rather
than low WM load, which results in less available WM capacity for pronoun processing, al-
ters the way adults interpret short stories containing a pronoun. This finding goes against
the frequency-based account of working memory of MacDonald and Christiansen (2002), who
propose that individual differences in WM capacity emerge from an interaction of biologi-
cal factors and language experience. Although we agree that language experience plays an
important role in sentence processing, for example in the acquisition of perspective taking,
language experience cannot account for the change in interpretation within the same indi-
vidual as a result of a higher WM load.
In addition to sufficient WM capacity, children need to be able to take into account the
perspective of their conversational partner. As speakers, they need to be able to take into
account the perspective of the listener, and as listeners, they need to be able to take into ac-
count the perspective of the speaker. With sufficient processing speed, these two processes of
considering one’s own perspective and subsequently considering the perspective of one’s con-
versational partner can be completed within a reasonable time. Processing speed increases
through linguistic experience, which is dependent on the frequencies of the forms and mean-
ings in the language. The complex interaction between the frequency of a form or meaning
in child-directed speech and WM capacity, which are both relevant for mature sentence pro-
cessing, may be responsible for the large individual differences in the age of acquisition of
pronoun interpretation and production. For example, some children may already interpret
object pronouns correctly at the age of 4, whereas other typically-developing children con-
tinue to make interpretation errors until the age of 6.
The acquisition of referential skills is not an easy job. Children need to acquire the rele-
vant grammatical constraints and their relative weights, they need to develop their perspec-
tive taking abilities, they need to acquire sufficient WM capacity for discourse processing, and
they need to gain sufficient experience with pronoun processing to be able to use perspective
taking during on-line pronoun production and interpretation. A basic assumption within our
implementation is that children already start out with the general ability to take into account
the opposite perspective. The process of perspective taking used for pronoun interpretation
and production is a specialization of the general process of perspective taking, which may also
be applied in other (linguistic or non-linguistic) tasks. Because adult-like use of perspective
taking is dependent on frequency of the forms and meanings in the language, the time to ac-
quire adult-like use of perspective taking is expected to be different for the various linguistic
phenomena that require perspective taking.
3.2
Implications for models of sentence processing
In this thesis, I propose a unified account of pronoun processing that explains the processing
of object pronouns and subject pronouns using the same underlying mechanism. Tradition-
ally, subject pronouns are studied in the domain of pragmatics, where the effects of the preced-
ing discourse are investigated. Object pronouns, on the other hand, are studied in the domain
of syntax (although recent years have seen a move away from purely syntactic accounts of ob-
138

7
ject pronouns to accounts at the syntax-pragmatics interface, see, e.g., Reinhart, 2006), where
the grammatical principles guiding sentence generation and interpretation are investigated.
In this thesis, I argue that the same underlying mechanism can be used to explain the use
of pronouns in both linguistic environments. Obviously, grammatical principles play a less
prominent role in the processing and use of subject pronouns than in the processing and use
of object pronouns. Conversely, the preceding discourse plays a less prominent role in the
processing and use of object pronouns than in the processing and use of subject pronouns.
In languages such as English and Dutch, on which I focused in this thesis, subject pronouns
are less constrained by grammatical principles, because they tend to appear relatively early
in the sentence and occur in a syntactically prominent position. Object pronouns are less in-
fluenced by the preceding discourse, because they tend to occur later in the sentence and the
number of possible interpretations becomes smaller as the sentence unfolds. However, we
still can find influences of the preceding linguistic discourse on the on-line interpretation of
object pronouns, as our pupil dilation study in Chapter 6 shows. This provides evidence for
the lack of a fundamental distinction between sentence-based processes and discourse-based
processes in pronominal reference.
The implementation of pronoun processing as proposed in this thesis is in line with
constraint-based accounts of sentence processing (a.o., MacDonald et al., 1994; Trueswell,
Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994; Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995, see Van Gompel & Pickering, 2007,
for review), which assume that all available information may influence sentence processing
simultaneously. In the cognitive model, discourse factors have an immediate influence on
pronoun processing, because they may change the saliency of referents in the discourse rep-
resentation. As discourse saliency is implemented in the model as activation in memory, dis-
course saliency reflects the referent’s local relevance in the current context, in addition to
the global relevance of the referent based on its history of mentioning. The higher the ref-
erent’s activation in memory, the more likely it is that the model will retrieve this referent
from memory. Thus, the linguistic discourse functions as a gradient filter that makes partic-
ular information easier to retrieve. As a result, this information is more likely to be used at
a later moment in discourse, as it is more readily available during language processing. This
anticipatory effect of discourse is in line with memory-based accounts of sentence process-
ing and production (a.o., R. L. Lewis & Vasishth, 2005; Reitter et al., 2011) and memory-based
accounts of referent processing (a.o., Foraker & McElree, 2007; Ariel, 1990; Arnold, 1998, see
a.o., Otten & Van Berkum, 2009, for empirical support).
Our cognitive model uses perspective taking to validate whether the mapping between a
form and the interpretation of this form selected by a listener is also optimal from the per-
spective of a speaker. The process of perspective taking in the model is particularly important
for resolving ambiguities. This thesis focused on pronoun processing, but an interesting ques-
tion is whether this mechanism may be generalized to other potential ambiguities in sentence
processing.
139

3.3
Implications for accounts of communication deﬁcits
The account of pronoun processing proposed in this thesis may also be able to explain the
difficulties with pronoun processing in individuals with language disorders or cognitive dis-
orders. As sufficient processing speed is necessary for taking into account the perspective of
the conversational partner, and sufficient working memory (WM) capacity is necessary for
discourse processing, individuals who have a low WM capacity (such as elderly people whose
memory resources are decreasing due to cognitive decline), individuals who have insufficient
processing speed (such as patients with Broca’s aphasia, cf. Burkhardt, Avrutin, Piñango, &
Ruigendijk, 2008) or difficulties with perspective taking (e.g., individuals with an autistic spec-
trum disorder) may experience difficulties with pronoun processing. However, these factors
do not all cause the same problems with pronoun processing. For example, individuals with
insufficient WM capacity but no difficulties with perspective taking may produce subject pro-
nouns that are ambiguous in the context of use, because they have a different discourse rep-
resentation. Indeed, this was found when investigating the referential skills of elderly adults
in narrative discourse (Hendriks et al., 2008). The elderly produced more pronouns for refer-
ence to a referent that was not the topic of the discourse than young adults, and this overpro-
duction of pronouns was correlated with lower scores on a WM task (Hendriks et al., 2008).
People with a low WM capacity, but no difficulties with perspective taking, are not expected
to show differences with the interpretation of object pronouns, which is less influenced by
WM capacity. Individuals who have difficulties with perspective taking, because of a slow
processing speed or because they have limited Theory of Mind skills, are expected to show
difficulties with the interpretation of object pronouns and subject pronouns, as both require
perspective taking.
4
Implementation issues
Implementing linguistic theories within a cognitive model yielded specific and testable pre-
dictions. In addition, it allowed us to specify the assumptions and implications of the linguistic
theories on which we based our model. However, the integration of different theories some-
times resulted in implementational choices that need further investigation.
In the cognitive model, I combined linguistic constraints from Optimality Theory with dis-
course processes based on ACT-R’s memory principles. Discourse saliency was implemented
as memory activation (cf. Foraker & McElree, 2007). Thus, discourse factors have a grad-
ual effect. The linguistic constraints, however, assume that there is only one discourse topic
(cf. Grosz et al., 1995; Gordon et al., 1993; Beaver, 2004). This step from a gradual pattern
of activation of discourse referents to a discrete choice of one of these referents is achieved
by retrieving the referent with the highest activation at that point in the discourse as the
discourse topic. Because some of the linguistic constraints pertain to the current discourse
topic, identification of the discourse topic precedes the application of linguistic constraints,
As a consequence of this implementational choice, grammatical processing follows discourse
processing. It would be interesting to investigate whether speakers indeed have to choose the
140

7
current topic for pronoun use, or whether a more gradual notion of topic is used, reflecting
the likelihood of a referent being the topic. To address this question, however, the grammat-
ical principles need to be redefined in the cognitive model so that they base the choice for a
referring expression on the likelihood of a referent being the topic instead of retrieving the
topic for comparison. As not having to explicitly retrieve the topic saves costly time during
on-line production, this process may be more realistic (see also Foraker & McElree, 2007, for
a similar discussion). Note however that this alternative implementation would not change
the results described in this thesis.
Another implementational choice that may affect the performance of the model is the
assumption that discourse processing is similar for speakers and listeners, as discussed in
Chapter 3. This would imply that a speaker and a listener base their selected form and inter-
pretation on the same discourse representation. However, it may be the case that speaking
about a referent makes the referent more salient in the discourse than listening to this refer-
ence: the process of choosing a referring expression for a particular referent may increase the
saliency more than interpreting a referring expression, or vice versa. Because this issue falls
outside the scope of this thesis, I chose to simplify the implementation of pronoun processing
by assuming that producing referential expressions and interpreting referential expressions
result in similar discourse representations.
The final implementational choice I want to address is the implementation of WM capac-
ity. I based my implementation on the work of Daily et al. (2001), who modeled individual
differences in ACT-R by manipulating the amount of spreading activation from task-relevant
information to associated information in declarative memory. In this account, working mem-
ory in a certain sense is the activation of task-relevant information in memory. It is impor-
tant to realize, however, that ACT-R does not assume a single mechanism to capture working
memory. For example, another aspect of working memory is realized by ACT-R’s assumption
that only one piece of information can be retrieved and manipulated at a time for each mod-
ule (Borst et al., 2010). More research is needed to identify the effects of other aspect of WM
capacity on pronoun processing.
5
Conclusions
In every conversation we encounter pronouns, and we need to decide what the antecedents
of these pronouns are and whether we can use a pronoun to refer to a specific referent. We
are generally not consciously aware that during pronoun resolution we integrate informa-
tion from the preceding linguistic discourse, the grammar and our conversational partner’s
perspective. Furthermore, we may also other sources of information that were not investi-
gated in this thesis, such as the visual context, prosodic information and world knowledge.
Limations of our cognitive system, such as insufficient speed of processing, insufficient WM
capacity or difficulties with perspective taking, may hinder this process, causing difficulties
for language processing and communication. Thus, this thesis addresses a relevant topic, of
which the insights may have various applications.
Investigating the complex interaction between cognitive factors and pronoun processing
141

requires an interdisciplinary approach. Previous research, focusing on the grammatical as-
pects of pronoun processing or the discourse factors influencing referential choice has yielded
new insights and theories. However, as pronoun processing involves combining information
from different sources and even modalities, our methodology may be a valuable addition to
this research. It combines insights from different domains, resulting in an integrated account
of pronoun acquisition, use and interpretation. Cognitive modeling is a useful method for
studying complex interactions between domain-specific (e.g., linguistic) knowledge and the
limitations of the cognitive system, by using simulations within a unified theory of cognition.
In addition, computational modeling helps to specify the assumptions of the theories that are
modeled, and allows for the generation of cognitively plausible and testable predictions that
can be investigated with behavioral and psychophysiological measures (e.g., ERP and pupil
dilation).
To summarize, this thesis presented a novel account of pronoun processing that inte-
grates theories of grammar and discourse, and explains how cognitive factors such as speed
of processing and WM capacity interact with discourse and grammar in pronoun production
and interpretation. In addition, this integrated account may provide new insights in theo-
ries of language acquisition, models of sentence processing, and accounts of communication
deficits.
142

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in the physical universe? New York: Oxford
University Press, USA.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated
theory of the mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036-1060.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the environment in memory. Psycho-
logical Science, 2(6), 396-408.
Ariel, M. (1988). Referring and accessibility. Journal of Linguistics, 24(1), 65-87.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents. London: Routledge.
Arnold, J. E. (1998). Reference form and discourse patterns. Ph.D. thesis.
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Production-internal and addressee-oriented pro-
cesses. Language and cognitive processes, 23(4), 495-527.
Arnold, J. E., Bennetto, L., & Diehl, J. J. (2009). Reference production in young speakers with
and without autism: Effects of discourse status and processing constraints. Cognition,
110(2), 131-146.
Arnold, J. E., Brown-Schmidt, S., & Trueswell, J. C. (2007). Children’s use of gender and order-
of-mention during pronoun comprehension. LanguageandCognitiveProcesses, 22(4), 527-
565.
Arnold, J. E., & Griffin, Z. M. (2007). The effect of additional characters on choice of referring
expression: Everyone counts. Journal of Memory and Language, 56(4), 521-536.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics using R. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed
random effects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language.
Baayen, R. H., & Milin, P. (2010). Analyzing reaction times. International Journal of Psychological
Research, 3(2), 12-28.
Badecker, W., & Straub, K. (2002). The processing role of structural constraints on the in-
terpretation of pronouns and anaphors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28(4), 748-769.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M., Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000).
Controlling the intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue. Journal of Memory
and Language, 42(1), 1-22.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have a ’Theory of
Mind’? Cognition, 21(1), 37-46.
Bates, D. M. (2005). Fitting linear mixed models in R. R News, 5, 27-30.
143

Beatty, J. (1982). Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the structure of
processing resources. Psychological Bulletin, 91(2), 276-292.
Beatty, J., & Lucero-Wagoner, B. (2000). The pupillary system. In J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary,
& G. G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology (2nd ed., p. 142-162). New York,
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Beaver, D. (2004). The optimization of discourse anaphora. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(1),
3-56.
Bloom, P., Barss, A., Nicol, J., & Conway, L. (1994). Children’s knowledge of binding and coref-
erence: Evidence from spontaneous speech. Language(Baltimore), 70(1), 53-71.
Blutner, R. (2000). Some aspects of optimality in natural language interpretation. Journal of
Semantics, 17(3), 189-216.
Boersma, P., & Hayes, B. (2001). Empirical tests of the gradual learning algorithm. Linguistic
Inquiry, 32(1), 45-86.
Borst, J. P., Taatgen, N. A., & van Rijn, H. (2010). The problem state: A cognitive bottleneck
in multitasking. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(2),
363-382.
Bosch, V., Mecklinger, A., & Friederici, A. D. (2001). Slow cortical potentials during retention
of object, spatial, and verbal information. Cognitive Brain Research, 10, 219-237.
Brennan, S. E. (1995). Centering attention in discourse. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10(2),
137-167.
Brennan, S. E., & Hanna, J. E. (2009). Partner-specific adaptation in dialog. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1(2), 274-291.
Budiu, R., & Anderson, J. R. (2004). Interpretation-based processing: A unified theory of
semantic sentence comprehension. Cognitive Science, 28(1), 1-44.
Burkhardt, P., Avrutin, S., Piñango, M. M., & Ruigendijk, E. (2008). Slower-than-normal syn-
tactic processing in agrammatic Broca’s aphasia: Evidence from Dutch. Journal of Neu-
rolinguistics, 21, 120-137.
Burzio, L. (1998). Anaphora and soft constraints. In P. Barbosa, D. Fox, P. Hagstrom, M. McGin-
nis, & D. Pesetsky (Eds.), Isthebestgoodenough? Optimalityandcompetitioninsyntax (p. 93-
114). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Camblin, C. C., Gordon, P. C., & Swaab, T. Y. (2007). The interplay of discourse congruence and
lexical association during sentence processing: Evidence from ERPs and eye tracking.
Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 103-128.
Campana, E., Tanenhaus, M. K., Allen, J. F., & Remington, R. (2011). Natural discourse refer-
ence generation reduces cognitive load in spoken systems. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 17(3), 311-329.
Caramazza, A., Grober, E., Garvey, C., & Yates, J. (1977). Comprehension of anaphoric pro-
nouns. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 601-609.
Case, R. (1987). The structure and process of intellectual development. International Journal of
Psychology, 22(5), 571-607.
Chambers, C. G., & Smyth, R. (1998). Structural parallelism and discourse coherence: A test of
Centering Theory. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(4), 593-608.
144

Chien, Y. C., & Wexler, K. (1990). Children’s knowledge of locality conditions in binding as
evidence for the modularity of syntax and pragmatics. Language Acquisition, 1(3), 225-
295.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lecturesongovernmentandbinding: thePisalectures. Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands: Foris Publications.
Clackson, K., Felser, C., & Clahsen, H. (2011). Children’s processing of reflexives and pro-
nouns in english: Evidence from eye-movements during listening. Journal of Memory
and Language, 65, 128-144.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Sengul, C. J. (1979). In search of referents for nouns and pronouns. Memory and
Cognition, 7(1), 35-41.
Clifton, C., Kennison, S., & Albrecht, J. (1997). Reading the words her, his, him: Implications for
parsing principles based on frequency and on structure. JournalofMemoryandLanguage,
36(2), 276-292.
Crawley, R., Stevenson, R., & Kleinman, D. (1990). The use of heuristic strategies in the inter-
pretation of pronouns. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 19(4), 245-264.
Daily, L. Z., Lovett, M. C., & Reder, L. M. (2001). Modeling individual differences in working
memory performance: A source activation account. Cognitive Science, 25(3), 315.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual differences in working memory and read-
ing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19(4), 450-466.
De Villiers, J., Cahillane, J., & Altreuter, E. (2006). What can production reveal about Principle
B? In K. Deen, J. Nomura, B. Schulz, & B. Schwartz (Eds.), The Proceedings of the Inau-
gural Conference on Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition-North America (Vol. 1,
p. 89-100). Honolulu, HI.: University of Connecticut Occasional Papers in Linguistics 4.
(The Proceedings of the Inaugural Conference on Generative Approaches to Language
Acquisition-North America, University of Connecticut Occasional Papers in Linguis-
tics)
Dijkstra, T., & De Smedt, K. (1996). Computer models in psycholinguistics: An introduction.
Computational psycholinguistics, 3-23.
Ehrlich, K. (1980). Comprehension of pronouns. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
32(2), 247-255.
Ehrlich, K., & Rayner, K. (1983). Pronoun assignment and semantic integration during read-
ing: eye movements and immediacy of processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 22(1), 75-87.
Elbourne, P. (2005). On the acquisition of principle b. Linguistic Inquiry, 36(3), 333-365.
Engelhardt, P. E., Ferreira, F., & Patsenko, E. G. (2010). Pupillometry reveals processing load
duringspokenlanguagecomprehension. TheQuarterlyJournalofExperimentalPsychology,
63(4), 639-645.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychological Review, 102(2),
211-245.
Ferreira, V. S., & Dell, G. S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity and lexical availability on syntactic and
145

lexical production. Cognitive Psychology, 40(4), 296-340.
Foraker, S., & McElree, B. (2007). The role of prominence in pronoun resolution: Active versus
passive representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 56(3), 357-383.
Frazier, L. (1987). Sentence processing: A tutorial review. In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and
performance xii: The psychology of reading (p. 559-586). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Hargreaves, D. J. (1988). Accessing sentence participants: The advantage
of first mention. Journal of Memory and Language, 27(6), 699-717.
Givón, T. (1983). Topic and continuity in discourse: An introduction. In T. Givón (Ed.), Topic
continuity in discourse: A quantitative cross-language study (p. 1-42). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.
Gordon, P. C., Grosz, B. J., & Gilliom, L. A. (1993). Pronouns, names, and the centering of
attention in discourse. Cognitive Science, 17(3), 311-347.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics
(Vol. 3: Speech acts, p. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Griffin, Z. M., & Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about speaking. Psychological Science, 11(4),
274-279.
Grimshaw, J., & Rosen, S. T. (1990). Knowledge and obedience: The developmental status of
the Binding Theory. Linguistic inquiry, 21(2), 187-222.
Grober, E. H., Beardsley, W., & Caramazza, A. (1978). Parallel function strategy in pronoun
assignment. Cognition, 6(2), 117-133.
Grosz, B. J., Weinstein, S., & Joshi, A. K. (1995). Centering: A framework for modeling the local
coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21(2), 203-225.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive status and the form of referring
expressions in discourse. Language, 69(2), 274-307.
Gundel, J. K., Ntiletheos, D., & Kowalski, M. (2007). Children’s use of referring expressions:
Some implications for theory of mind. ZAS Papers in Linguistics, 48, 1-21.
Hale, C.M.,&Tager-Flusberg, H. (2005). Socialcommunicationinchildrenwithautism. Autism,
9(2), 157.
Haywood, S. L., Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (2005). Do speakers avoid ambiguities during
dialogue? Psychological Science, 16(5), 362-366.
Heller, D., Grodner, D., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). The role of perspective in identifying
domains of reference. Cognition, 108(3), 831-836.
Hendriks, P., & de Hoop, H. (2001). Optimality theoretic semantics. Linguistics and Philosophy,
24(1), 1-32.
Hendriks, P., Englert, C., Wubs, E., & Hoeks, J. (2008). Age differences in adults’ use of referring
expressions. Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 17(4), 443-466.
Hendriks, P., & Spenader, J. (2006). When production precedes comprehension: An optimiza-
tion approach to the acquisition of pronouns. Language Acquisition, 13(4), 319-348.
Hendriks, P., van Rijn, H., & Valkenier, B. (2007). Learning to reason about speakers’ alterna-
tives in sentence comprehension: A computational account. Lingua, 117(11), 1879-1896.
Hickmann, M., & Hendriks, H. (1999). Cohesion and anaphora in children’s narratives: A com-
parison of English, French, German, and Mandarin Chinese. Journal of Child Language,
146

26(2), 419-452.
Hoeks, B., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1993). Pupillary dilation as a measure of attention: A quantitative
system analysis. Behavior Research Methods, 25(1), 16-26.
Holcomb, P. J., & Neville, H. J. (1991). Natural speech processing: An analysis using event-
related brain potentials. Psychobiology, 19(4), 286-300.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take into account common ground?
Cognition, 59(1), 91-117.
Hyönä, J., Tommola, J., & Alaja, A.-M. (1995). Pupil dilation as a measure of processing load
in simultaneous interpretation and other language tasks. The Quarterly Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology, 48(3), 598-612.
Jakubowicz, C. (1984). On markedness and binding principles. Proceedings of the North Eastern
Linguistics Society, 14, 154-182. (Proceedings of the North Eastern Linguistics Society)
Janisse, M. (1977). Pupillometry. Washington, D.C.: Hemisphere.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual differ-
ences in working memory. Psychological Review, 99(1), 122-149.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1993). The intensity dimensionof thought: Pupillometric indices
of sentence processing. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47(2), 310-339.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982). Paradigms and processes in reading
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 111(2), 228-238.
Just, M. A., & Varma, S. (2007). The organization of thinking: What functional brain imag-
ing reveals about the neuroarchitecture of complex cognition. Cognitive, Affective, and
Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(3), 153-191.
Kaiser, E., & Trueswell, J. C. (2008). Interpreting pronouns and demonstratives in Finnish:
Evidence for a form-specific approach to reference resolution. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 23(5), 709-748.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1985). Language and cognitive processes from a developmental perspec-
tive. Language and Cognitive Processes, 1(1), 61-85.
Kempen, G., Olsthoorn, N., & Sprenger, S. (2011). Grammatical workspace sharing during
language production and language comprehension: Evidence from grammatical mul-
titasking. Language and Cognitive Processes.
Kennison, S. M. (2003). Comprehending the pronouns her, him, and his: Implications for
theories of referential processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(3), 335-352.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., & Horton, W. S. (1998). The egocentric basis of language use: Insights
from a processing approach. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7, 46-50.
King, J. W., & Kutas, M. (1995). Who did what and when? Using word- and clause-level ERPs
to monitor working memory usage in reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(3),
376-395.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New york, NY: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M. W., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, M. J. (2005). The influence of the
immediate visual context on incremental thematic role-assignment: Evidence from
eye-movements in depicted events. Cognition, 95, 95-127.
147

Koster, C. (1993). Errors in anaphora acquisition. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Koster, C., Hoeks, J., & Hendriks, P. (2011). Comprehension and production of subject pro-
nouns: Evidence for the asymmetry of grammar. In A. Grimm, A. Müller, C. Hamann,
& E. Ruigendijk (Eds.), Production-comprehension asymmetries in child language (p. 99-122).
Berlin: De Gruyter.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K. D. (2007). Event-related brain potential (ERP) studies of sentence
processing. In M. G. Gaskell (Ed.), Oxford handbook of psycholinguistics. Oxford University
Press.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. (1980). Reading senseless sentences: Brain-potentials reflect semantic
incongruity. Science, 207(4427), 203-205.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. (1984). Brain potentials during reading reflect word expectancy and
semantic association. Nature, 307(5947), 161-163.
Kutas, M., Van Petten, C. K., & Kluender, R. (2006). Psycholinguistics electrified ii (1994-2005).
In M. J. Traxler & M. A. Gernsbacher (Eds.), Handbook of psycholinguistics. Elsevier Ltd.
Ledoux, K., Gordon, P. C., Camblin, C. C., & Swaab, T. Y. (2007). Coreference and lexical repe-
tition: Mechanisms of discourse integration. Memory and Cognition, 35(4), 801-815.
Lewis, R. L., & Vasishth, S. (2005). An activation-based model of sentence processing as skilled
memory retrieval. Cognitive Science, 29(3), 375-419.
Lewis, S., Chow, W., & Phillips, C. (2012, 2012). Structural constraints on pronoun resolution:
Distinguishing early and late sensitivity to ilicit antecedents.
Love, T., Walenski, M., & Swinney, D. (2009). Slowed speech input has a differential impact
on on-line and off-line processing in children’s comprehension of pronouns. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 38(3), 285-304.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002). Reassessing working memory: Comment on
Just and Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review, 109(1),
35-54.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). The lexical nature of syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Psychological Review, 101(4), 676-703.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Pronoun co-referencing
errors: Challengesforgenerativistandusage-based accounts. CognitiveLinguistics, 20(3),
599-626.
McClelland, J. L. (1995). A connectionist perspective on knowledge and development. In
T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.), Developing cognitive competence: New approaches to pro-
cess modeling (pp. 157–204). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McDonald, J. L., & MacWhinney, B. (1995). The time course of anaphor resolution: Effects of
implicit verb causality and gender. Journal of Memory and Language, 34(4), 543-566.
Meyer, D. E., & Kieras, D. E. (1997). A computational theory of executive cognitive processes
and multiple-task performance: I. basic mechanisms. Psychological Review, 104(1), 3-65.
Misker, J. M. V., & Anderson, J. R. (2003). Combining optimality theory and a cognitive ar-
chitecture. In F. Detje, D. Dörner, & H. Schaub (Eds.), Proceedings of the fifth international
conference on cognitive modeling (p. 165-170). Bamberg: Universitäts-Verlag Bamberg.
Miyake, A., Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1994). Working memory constraints on the reso-
148

lution of lexical ambiguity: Maintaining multiple interpretations in neutral contexts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33(2), 175-202.
Montgomery, J. W. (2004). Sentence comprehension in children with specific language im-
pairment: effects of input rate and phonological working memory. International Journal
of Language and Communication Disorders, 39(1), 115-133.
Münte, T. F., Heinze, H.-J., & Mangun, G. R. (1993). Dissociation of brain activity related to
syntactic and semantic aspects of language. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(3), 335-
344.
Münte, T. F., Schiltz, K., & Kutas, M. (1998). When temporal terms belie conceptual order.
Nature, 395(71-73).
Myachykov, A., Thompson, D., Scheepers, C., & Garrod, S. (2011). Visual attention and struc-
tural choice in sentence production across languages. Language and Linguistics Compass,
5(2), 95-107.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nicol, J., & Swinney, D. (1989). The role of structure in coreference assignment during sen-
tence comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 18(1), 5-19.
Nieuwland, M. S., & van Berkum, J. J. A. (2006). Individual differences and contextual bias in
pronoun resolution: Evidence from ERPs. Brain Research, 1118(1), 155-167.
Gleitman, L. R., January, D., Nappa, R., & Trueswell, J. C. (2007). On the give and take between
event apprehension and utterance formulation. Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 544-
569.
Onishi, K., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs? Science,
308(5719), 255-258.
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J.-M. (2011). FieldTrip: Open source software
for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Computa-
tional Intelligence and Neuroscience, 1-9.
Otten, M., & van Berkum, J. (2009). Does working memory capacity affect the ability to predict
upcoming words in discourse? Brain research, 1291, 92-101.
Philip, W., & Coopmans, P. (1996). The double Dutch delay of Principle B effect. In Annual
boston university conference on language development (Vol. 20).
Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Abada, S. H. (2005). ERP effects of the processing of syntactic
long-distance dependencies. Cognitive Brain Research, 22, 407-428.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 1(4), 515-526.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1997). Optimality: From neural networks to universal grammar.
Science, 275(5306), 1604.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (2004). Optimality theory: Constraint interaction in generative grammar.
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Reinhart, T. (2006). Interface strategies: Optimal and costly computations. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Reitter, D. (2008). Context effects in language production: Models of syntactic priming in dialogue
corpora. Ph.D. thesis.
149

Reitter, D., Keller, F., & Moore, J. D. (2011). A computational cognitive model of syntactic
priming. Cognitive Science, 35.
Salvucci, D. D., & Taatgen, N. A. (2008). Threaded cognition: An integrated theory of concur-
rent multitasking. Psychological Review, 115(1), 101.
Scheepers, C., & Crocker, M. W. (2004). Constituent order priming from reading to listening:
A visual-world study. In M. Carreiras & C. Clifton (Eds.), The on-line study of sentence
comprehension: Eyetracking, ERPs, and beyond (p. 167-186). New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Shintel, H., & Keysar, B. (2009). Less is more: A minimalist account of joint action in commu-
nication. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2), 260-273.
Small, J. A., Andersen, E. S., & Kempler, D. (1997). Effects of working memory capacity on
understanding rate-altered speech. Aging, Neuropsychology, andCognition, 4(2), 126 - 139.
Smolensky, P. (1996). On the comprehension/production dilemma in child language. Linguistic
Inquiry, 27(4), 720-731.
Song, H.-J., & Fisher, C. (2005). Who’s “she”? discourse prominence influences preschoolers’
comprehension of pronouns. Journal of Memory and Language, 52(1), 29-57.
Song, H.-J., & Fisher, C. (2007). Discourse prominence effects on 2.5-year-old children’s inter-
pretation of pronouns. Lingua, 117(11), 1959-1987.
Spenader, J., Smits, E. J., & Hendriks, P. (2009). Coherent discourse solves the Pronoun Inter-
pretation Problem. Journal of Child Language, 36(1), 23-52.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Eye-movements and
spoken language comprehension: Effects of visual context on syntactic ambiguity res-
olution. Cognitive Psychology, 45(4), 447-481.
Sprenger, S. A., Levelt, W. J. M., & Kempen, G. (2006). Lexical access during the production of
idiomatic phrases. Journal of Memory and Language, 54(2), 161-184.
St. George, M., Mannes, S., & Hoffman, J. E. (1994). Global semantic expectancy and language
comprehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(1), 70-83.
Stevenson, R., Crawley, R., & Kleinman, D. (1994). Thematic roles, focus and the representation
of events. Language and Cognitive Processes, 9(4), 519-548.
Stevenson, S., & Smolensky, P. (2006). Optimality in sentence processing. In P. Smolensky
& G. Legendre (Eds.), The harmonic mind: From neural computation to optimality-theoretic
grammar (Vols. 2, Linguistic and philosophical implications).
Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Streb, J., Hennighausen, E., & Rösler, F. (2004). Different anaphoric expressions are investi-
gated by event-related brain potentials. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 33(3), 175-
201.
Streb, J., Rösler, F., & Hennighausen, E. (1999). Event-related responses to pronoun and proper
name anaphors in parallel and nonparallel discourse structures. Brain and Language, 70,
273-286.
Swaab, T. Y., Camblin, C. C., & Gordon, P. C. (2004). Electrophysiological evidence for reversed
lexical repetition effects in language processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(5),
715-726.
150

Taatgen, N. A., & Anderson, J. R. (2002). Why do children learn to say “Broke”? a model of
learning the past tense without feedback. Cognition, 86(2), 123-155.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (1995). Sentence comprehension. Speech, language, and
communication, 18, 217–262.
Tesar, B., & Smolensky, P. (1998). Learnability in optimality theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 29(2),
229–268.
Thornton, R., & Wexler, K. (1999). Principle B, VP ellipsis, and interpretation in child grammar. MIT
Press.
Tily, H., & Piantadosi, S. (2009). Refer efficiently: Use less informative expressions for more
predictable meanings. In K. van Deemter, A. Gatt, R. van Gompel, & E. Krahmer (Eds.),
Proceedings of the pre-cogsci 2009 workshop on production of referring expressions: Bridging the
gap between computational and empirical approaches to reference.
Tremblay, A., & Baayen, R. H. (2010). Holistic processing of regular four-word sequences:
A behavioral and erp study of the effects of structure, frequency, and probability on
immediate free recall. In D. Wood (Ed.), Perspectives on formulaic language: Acquisition and
communication. (p. 151-173). London: The Continuum International Publishing Group.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Garnsey, S. M. (1994). Semantic influences on parsing:
Use of thematic role information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory
and Language, 33, 285-285.
van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). Understanding sentences in context. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 17(6), 376-380.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. M. (1999). Semantic integration in sentences and
discourse: Evidence from the N400. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(6), 657-671.
van Berkum, J. J. A., Koorneef, A. W., Otten, M., & Nieuwland, M. S. (2007). Establishing refer-
ence in language comprehension: An electrophysiological perspective. Brain Research,
1146, 158-171.
van Gompel, R. P. G., & Pickering, M. J. (2007). Syntactic parsing. In M. G. Gaskell (Ed.), The
oxford handbook of psycholinguistics. (p. 289-307). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
van Maanen, L., & van Rijn, H. (2007). An accumulator model of semantic interference. Cogni-
tive Systems Research, 8(3), 174-181.
van Maanen, L., van Rijn, H., & Borst, J. P. (2009). Stroop and picture-word interference are
two sides of the same coin. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 16(6), 987-999.
Van Petten, C. K. (1995). Words and sentences: Event-related brain potential measures. Psy-
chophysiology, 32, 511-525.
Van Petten, C. K., & Kutas, M. (1990). Interactions between sentence context and word fre-
quency in event-related brain potentials. Memory and Cognition, 18(4), 380-393.
van Rij, J., Hendriks, P., Spenader, J., & van Rijn, H. (2009a). From group results to individual
patterns in pronoun comprehension. In J. Chandlee, M. Franchini, S. Lord, & M. Rheiner
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual Boston University Conference on Language Development
(Vol. 2, p. 563-574). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
van Rij, J., Hendriks, P., Spenader, J., & van Rijn, H. (2009b). Modeling the selective effects of
slowed-down speech in pronoun comprehension. In J. Crawford, K. Otaki, & M. Taka-
151

hashi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Generative Approaches to Language Acqui-
sition North America (GALANA 2008) (p. 291-302). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings
Project.
van Rij, J., van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (2010). Cognitive architectures and language acquisi-
tion: A case study in pronoun comprehension. Journal of Child Language, 37(3), 731-766.
(Chapter 2 of this thesis)
van Rij, J., van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (2011). WM load influences the interpretation of re-
ferring expressions. In Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on cognitive modeling and computa-
tional linguistics (p. 67-75). Portland, OR: Association for Computational Linguistics.
van Rij, J., van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submitteda). A cognitive model of the acquisition
and use of referring expressions: Effects of working memory and perspective taking.
Manuscript, University of Groningen, October 2011. (Chapter 3 of this thesis)
van Rij, J., van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submittedb). How WM load influences linguistic
processing in adults: A computational model of pronoun interpretation in discourse.
Manuscript, University of Groningen, February 2012. (Chapter 4 of this thesis)
van Rijn, H., & Anderson, J. R. (2003). Modeling lexical decision as ordinary retrieval. In
F. Detje, D. Dörner, & H. Schaub (Eds.), Proceedings of the fifth international conference on
cognitive modeling (p. 207-212). Bamberg: Universitätsverlag.
van Rijn, H., van Someren, M., & van der Maas, H. (2003). Modeling developmental transitions
on the balance scale task. Cognitive Science, 27(2), 227-257.
Wardlow Lane, L., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Speaker-external versus speaker-internal forces on
utterance form: Do cognitive demands override threats to referential success? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(6), 1466-1481.
Weismer, S. E., & Hesketh, L. J. (1996). Lexical learning by children with specific language
impairment effects of linguistic input presented at varying speaking rates. Journal of
Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 39(1), 177-190.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta analysis of theory of mind development:
The truth about false belief. Child development, 72(3), 655-684.
Wieling, M., Nerbonne, J., & Baayen, R. H. (2011). Quantitative social dialectology: Explaining
linguistic variation geographically and socially. PLoS ONE, 6(9), e23613.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining func-
tion of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception. Cognition, 13(1),
103-128.
Wood, S. N. (2006). Generalized additive models: An introduction with R. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Wubs, E., Hendriks, P., Hoeks, J., & Koster, C. (2009). Tell me a story! Children’s capacity
for topic shift. In J. Crawford, K. Otaki, & M. Takahashi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd
Conference on Generative Approaches to Language Acquisition North America (GALANA 2008)
(p. 313-324). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Zellin, M., Pannekamp, A., Toepel, U., & van der Meer, E. (2011). In the eye of the listener:
Pupil dilation elucidates discourse processing. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
81(3), 133-141.
152

Nederlandse samenvatting
De uitspraak Gisteren sprak James met Rob. Hij bekende de diefstal. kan betekenen dat James de
diefstal bekende, of dat Rob dat deed. Deze zin is ambigu, dat wil zeggen dat er twee moge-
lijke betekenissen zijn, omdat het persoonlijke voornaamwoord hij naar James kan verwijzen
of naar Rob. Persoonlijke voornaamwoorden zoals hij, zij, hem en haar hebben geen vaste be-
tekenis, maar hun betekenis is afhankelijk van de context. Persoonlijke voornaamwoorden
zijn cruciaal voor taalbegrip: als je een andere interpretatie voor een voornaamwoord kiest,
dan krijgt de zin een andere betekenis. Vervolgens begrijp je het verhaal of de conversatie
waarschijnlijk ook verkeerd. Daarom is er veel onderzoek gedaan naar de verschillende taal-
kundige factoren die een rol spelen bij de interpretatie en het gebruik van voornaamwoorden,
zoals grammaticale principes en de structuur van de voorafgaande zinnen.
Het is opvallend dat volwassenen meestal geen enkele moeite hebben met het interprete-
ren van een mogelijk ambigu voornaamwoord, maar en vaak meteen begrijpen wat de spreker
bedoelde te zeggen. Kinderen hebben hier meer moeite mee, want ze interpreteren persoon-
lijke voornaamwoorden soms anders dan de spreker bedoelde. Ze verwerven pas relatief laat
in de taalontwikkeling een volwassen interpretatie van voornaamwoorden, meestal niet voor-
dat ze zes jaar zijn. In dit onderzoek is onderzocht waarom persoonlijke voornaamwoorden
in talen zoals het Nederlands en Engels zo moeilijk zijn om te leren, en welke algemene cog-
nitieve factoren van invloed zijn op een volwassen verwerking van voornaamwoorden.
Om deze vragen te beantwoorden hebben we een combinatie van onderzoeksmethoden
gebruikt, waaronder computersimulaties en experimenten met kinderen en volwassenen. Fi-
guur 1 toont schematisch de methode die we hebben toegepast.
tijd 1
tijd 2
tijd 3
0
50
100
4 jaar
5 jaar
6 jaar
0
50
100
Figuur 1: Een schematische weergave van de onderzoeksmethode die is toegepast in dit on-
derzoek.
De computermodellen werden ontwikkeld om precieze en cognitief plausibele voorspel-
lingen te doen over de interpretatie en het gebruik van persoonlijke voornaamwoorden. Deze
153

voorspellingen zijn zo precies mogelijk geformuleerd zodat ze getest kunnen worden door
middel van experimenten. De resultaten van de experimenten kunnen worden gebruikt om
te evalueren in hoeverre de computermodellen correct zijn (zie de onderbroken lijn rechts in
Figuur 1). Ook kunnen de resultaten nieuwe informatie opleveren voor taalkundige theorieën
(zie de onderbroken lijn links in Figuur 1).
In de volgende paragrafen worden eerst de computermodellen beschreven en de voor-
spellingen die volgen uit de simulaties. Daarna worden de verschillende experimenten be-
schreven en wordt er een kort overzicht gegeven van de resultaten. Aan het eind van deze
samenvatting volgen de conclusies van dit onderzoek.
Computermodellen van taalverwerving
In deze sectie worden de computermodellen beschreven. Ze zijn gebaseerd op verschillende
taalkundige theorieën en simuleren hoe kinderen persoonlijke voornaamwoorden leren. De
computermodellen zijn geïmplementeerd in de cognitieve architectuur ACT-R (Anderson,
2007).
Cognitieve architectuur. Een cognitieve architectuur is een theorie over hoe het cognitieve systeem werkt.
Cognitieve architecturen, bijvoorbeeld ACT-R, proberen menselijke cognitie te verklaren in allerlei mogelijke
verschillende taken variërend van autorijden tot het begrijpen van een zin. Ze bevatten precieze aannames over
de werking van het menselijke cognitieve systeem, zoals bijvoorbeeld hoe lang het duurt om op een knop te drukken
of hoeveel tijd het kost om een feit uit het geheugen op te halen. De aannames zijn gebaseerd op de resultaten
van veel psychologische en neurofysiologische experimenten. Met behulp van deze aannames kunnen we in ACT-R
simuleren hoe kinderen en volwassenen persoonlijke voornaamwoorden, zoals hij en hem, begrijpen in een specifieke
taak. Deze simulaties kunnen vervolgens worden gebruikt om te onderzoeken hoe algemene cognitieve factoren,
zoals verwerkingssnelheid en werkgeheugencapaciteit, een rol spelen in het verwerken van voornaamwoorden.
Hoofdstuk 1 introduceert de cognitieve architectuur ACT-R en geeft een overzicht van
verschillende aannames van ACT-R die onze implementaties beïnvloeden. Hieronder worden
kort de twee modellen beschreven die zijn ontwikkeld in het kader van dit onderzoek. Deze
modellen zijn in meer detail beschreven in hoofdstuk 2 en hoofdstuk 3.
Model 1: verwerving van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie
Hoofdstuk 2 beschrijft het eerste computermodel dat is ontwikkeld voor dit onderzoek. Dit
model simuleert hoe kinderen woorden zoals hem en haar leren te begrijpen. Hem en haar zijn
persoonlijke voornaamwoorden die als direct object (lijdend voorwerp) kunnen voorkomen.
Denk bijvoorbeeld aan de uitspraak Hier zie je een pinguïn en een schaap. De pinguïn slaat hem
met een pan. Voor volwassenen kan dit alleen betekenen dat de pinguïn het schaap slaat, want
anders zou de spreker wel gezegd hebben dat de pinguïn zichzelf slaat. Maar in talen zoals
het Engels en het Nederlands blijken kinderen tot ongeveer zeven jaar veel fouten te maken
met de interpretatie van dit soort zinnen. Voor hen kan de zin betekenen dat de pinguïn het
schaap slaat, maar evengoed dat de pinguïn zichzelf slaat.
154

In het computermodel hebben we de hypothese geïmplementeerd dat kinderen moeite
hebben met voornaamwoorden in objectpositie, omdat ze geen rekening houden met het per-
spectief van de spreker. Als een luisteraar rekening houdt met de spreker, dan komt hij/zij
erachter dat de spreker niet naar de pinguïn verwijst, want dan had de spreker wel het woord
zichzelf gebruikt in plaats van hem. In het model wordt dit proces in twee stappen gesimu-
leerd. In de eerste stap gebruikt het model de grammaticale principes om te bepalen naar wie
het voornaamwoord kan verwijzen. In de tweede stap probeert het model te bedenken welk
woord een spreker zou gebruiken om naar die persoon te verwijzen. Op deze manier kan het
model erachter komen wie de spreker bedoelde. Hierbij moet opgemerkt worden dat in de
computersimulaties het uitvoeren van iedere stap tijd kost.
Simulaties van het model laten zien dat het mogelijk is dat kinderen vanaf een jaar of vier
wel al weten dat ze rekening moeten houden met het perspectief van de spreker. Ze hebben
echter niet voldoende verwerkingssnelheid om dat te doen tijdens het interpreteren van een
zin. Anders gezegd: kinderen hebben alleen maar tijd om de eerste stap uit te voeren, maar
op het moment dat ze proberen om ook de tweede stap uit te voeren, moeten ze alweer verder
met de volgende woorden om de rest van de zin te kunnen begrijpen.
Op basis van deze simulaties volgt de voorspelling dat voldoende verwerkingssnelheid
nodig is om rekening te kunnen houden met het perspectief van de conversatiepartner.
Model 2: verwerving van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie
Hoofdstuk 3 beschrijft het tweede computermodel. Dit model is een uitbreiding van het vo-
rige model. Het is zo aangepast dat het simuleert hoe kinderen woorden zoals hij en zij leren
begrijpen. Hij en zij zijn persoonlijke voornaamwoorden die als subject (onderwerp) voorko-
men.
Engelstalige en Nederlandstalige kinderen tot ongeveer zeven jaar maken veel fouten met
dit soort voornaamwoorden, niet alleen in hun interpretatie, maar ook in hun gebruik van
voornaamwoorden. Volwassenen gebruiken een persoonlijk voornaamwoord om te verwij-
zen naar personen of dingen (referenten) die erg prominent zijn in de context. Wanneer de
persoon minder prominent is in de context, dan gebruiken volwassenen vaak een eigennaam
(Rob) of een zelfstandig naamwoord (de piraat). Hierdoor voorkomen ze onduidelijkheid voor
de luisteraar. Kinderen gebruiken veel vaker voornaamwoorden. Ze gebruiken zelfs persoon-
lijke voornaamwoorden voor referenten die niet prominent zijn. In dat geval kunnen luiste-
raars het voornaamwoord verkeerd interpreteren, namelijk als verwijzing naar een andere,
meer prominente, persoon.
Om de interpretatie en de productie van woorden zoals hij en zij te simuleren, bouwt het
tweede computermodel een representatie op in het geheugen van de talige context waarin
de zin voorkomt. Dat is nodig om contextuele informatie te gebruiken bij de interpretatie
van voornaamwoorden. Daarnaast bewaart het model tijdelijk informatie over de voorgaande
zin in het werkgeheugen. Dit geheugenmechanisme zorgt ervoor dat prominente referenten
meer kans maken om te worden gekozen als interpretatie van het voornaamwoord dan min-
der prominente referenten. Maar dit mechanisme werkt alleen bij voldoende werkgeheugen-
155

capaciteit.
Op basis van de simulaties hebben we de voorspelling gedaan dat er twee oorzaken zijn
voor de moeilijkheden die kinderen ervaren bij de interpretatie en het gebruik van voornaam-
woorden in subjectpositie: 1) net als bij de verwerving van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie
hebben kinderen ook bij voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie onvoldoende verwerkingssnel-
heid om rekening te kunnen houden met het perspectief van de conversatiepartner en 2)
kinderen hebben onvoldoende werkgeheugencapaciteit om de informatie uit de voorgaande
zin te gebruiken om te bepalen wat de meest prominente referent is in de context.
Samengevat voorspellen we dus dat voor een volwassen interpretatie en gebruik van
voornaamwoorden voldoende verwerkingssnelheid en voldoende werkgeheugencapaciteit
nodig zijn. Maar zoals hiervoor is uitgelegd, beïnvloeden deze twee factoren het gebruik van
voornaamwoorden op een verschillende manier.
Gedragsexperimenten
Er zijn twee gedragsexperimenten uitgevoerd om deze voorspellingen te testen, namelijk een
experiment met kinderen en een experiment met volwassenen.
Experiment 1: Verwerkingssnelheid
Een belangrijke voorspelling op basis van de simulaties is dat kinderen moeite hebben met de
interpretatie van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie vanwege een te lage verwerkingssnel-
heid. Om deze voorspelling te onderzoeken hebben we getest of kinderen tussen de 4 en 6
jaar minder fouten maken wanneer ze meer tijd krijgen voor de verwerking van voornaam-
woorden.
In het experiment dat beschreven is in hoofdstuk 2 kregen de kinderen zinnen in een
normaal spraaktempo te horen en zinnen in vertraagde spraak. In het laatste geval hadden
ze dus iets meer tijd voor de interpretatie. De resultaten van het experiment laten zien dat
kinderen minder fouten maakten met het begrijpen van voornaamwoorden bij het horen van
vertraagde spraak dan bij het horen van normale spraak. Maar dit effect gold alleen voor het
persoonlijke voornaamwoord hem, want vertraagde spraak bleek een nadelig effect te hebben
op zinnen met zichzelf.
Met andere woorden, wanneer kinderen vertraagde spraak horen lijken ze meer op vol-
wassenen in het verwerken van voornaamwoorden. Dit ondersteunt de voorspelling van het
model dat voor het verwerken van voornaamwoorden voldoende verwerkingssnelheid nodig
is.
Experiment 2: Werkgeheugencapaciteit
Een andere voorspelling op basis van de simulaties van het computermodel was dat voor het
verwerken van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie voldoende werkgeheugencapaciteit no-
dig is. Werkgeheugencapaciteit is nodig om op basis van informatie uit de voorgaande zin te
bepalen wat de meest prominente referent in de talige context is.
156

Hoofdstuk 4 beschrijft een experiment waarin we hebben onderzocht of de interpretatie
door volwassenen van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie verandert bij onvoldoende werk-
geheugencapaciteit. Om dat te onderzoeken hebben we de volwassen deelnemers gevraagd
om korte verhaaltjes te lezen terwijl ze tegelijkertijd een tweede taak moesten uitvoeren. De
tweede taak zorgde ervoor dat de deelnemers meer of minder werkgeheugencapaciteit over
hadden om het verhaaltje te begrijpen. De tweede taak was makkelijk of moeilijk: De mak-
kelijke taak bestond uit het onthouden van drie getallen, de moeilijke taak bestond uit het
onthouden van zes getallen. Na het lezen van het verhaaltje moesten deze getallen worden
herhaald. Wanneer de tweede taak makkelijk was, dan hadden de deelnemers meer werkge-
heugencapaciteit over om het verhaaltje te begrijpen. Wanneer daarentegen de tweede taak
moeilijk was, dan hadden deelnemers minder werkgeheugencapaciteit over om het verhaaltje
te begrijpen. De laatste zin van de verhaaltjes begon met het potentieel ambigue voornaam-
woord hij of zij. De resultaten van het experiment laten zien dat bij het uitvoeren van een
moeilijke tweede taak volwassen deelnemers vaker voor een niet-prominente referent kozen
dan bij het uitvoeren van een makkelijke tweede taak. De reden hiervoor is dat ze bij een moei-
lijke tweede taak minder gebruik maakten van de informatie uit de vorige zin.
Met andere woorden, met een hogere belasting van het werkgeheugen lijken volwassenen
meer op kinderen in het verwerken van voornaamwoorden. Dit ondersteunt de voorspelling
van het model dat voor het verwerken van voornaamwoorden voldoende werkgeheugenca-
paciteit nodig is.
Psychofysiologische experimenten
In aanvulling op de twee hierboven beschreven gedragsexperimenten hebben we twee psy-
chofysiologische experimenten uitgevoerd om te onderzoeken wat er gebeurt tijdens het
verwerken van voornaamwoorden.
Psychofysiologische experimenten. In een psychofysiologisch experiment wordt getest of verschillende condities,
bijvoorbeeld het interpreteren van zinnen in verschillende contexten, ook leiden tot verschillen in fysiologische
signalen, zoals het registreren van elektrische activiteit in de hersenen (EEG) of pupilgrootte. In het geval dat er
verschillenwordengevondeninhetfysiologischesignaalalsgevolgvandeverschillendecondities, danisdevolgende
vraag op welk tijdstip de signalen van elkaar beginnen te verschillen. Psychofysiologische metingen kunnen op deze
manier een preciezer beeld geven van de processen die optreden tijdens het verwerken van een zin.
In deze sectie worden een EEG-experiment en een pupilgrootte-experiment beschreven
waarmee twee aannames van de computermodellen zijn getest.
Experiment 3: Eﬀect van context op het begrijpen van voornaamwoorden
in objectpositie
In de zinnen Gisteren sprak James met Rob. Hij bekende de diefstal. is het persoonlijke voornaam-
woord hij ambigu, omdat er twee mogelijke referenten in de context aanwezig zijn: James en
Rob. De vraag is of volwassen deelnemers bij het lezen van een voornaamwoord eerst terug
157

gaan naar de talige context om een keuze te maken tussen verschillende mogelijke referen-
ten, of dat ze al meteen bij het lezen van een voornaamwoord de meest plausibele referent
paraat hebben.
Hoofdstuk 5 presenteert een experiment waarin we deze vraag hebben onderzocht met
een vergelijkbare dubbele taak als het vorige experiment: aan volwassen deelnemers werd ge-
vraagd om korte verhaaltjes te lezen, terwijl ze tegelijkertijd een tweede taak moesten uitvoe-
ren. Deze tweede taak kon moeilijk of makkelijk zijn. De laatste zin van de verhaaltjes begon
met een mogelijk ambigu voornaamwoord hij of zij. In dit experiment werden via elektrodes
op de hoofdhuid van de deelnemer elektrische signalen geregistreerd tijdens het uitvoeren
van de dubbele taak. We hebben onderzocht of de elektrische activiteit die ontstaat in de her-
senen tijdens het lezen van de verhaaltjes verschillend zijn afhankelijk van de zinsstructuur
van de context en de moeilijkheid van de tweede taak.
De resultaten van dit experiment laten zien dat deelnemers bij het lezen van een ambigu
voornaamwoord niet alle mogelijke referenten overwegen, maar vaak al meteen weten wie er
wordt bedoeld. Voor de deelnemers was al snel tijdens het lezen van een verhaaltje duidelijk
wie de meest prominente persoon was in dit verhaaltje. In het begin van het lezen van het
verhaaltje werd er een effect gemeten van de moeilijkheid van de tweede taak: deelnemers
lijken de informatie uit de voorgaande zinnen meer te gebruiken bij een makkelijke tweede
taak dan bij een moeilijke tweede taak. Maar aan het eind van het verhaaltje, tijdens het lezen
van het voornaamwoord, waren deze verschillen in EEG signalen bijna verdwenen.
Experiment 4: Eﬀect van context op het begrijpen van voornaamwoorden
in subjectpositie
In onze computermodellen wordt hetzelfde onderliggende mechanisme gebruikt voor de ver-
werking van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie (hij, zij) als voor voornaamwoorden in ob-
jectpositie (hem, haar). Omdat de context een vroeg effect blijkt te hebben op de verwerking
van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie, volgt de voorspelling dat de context ook een vroeg
effect kan hebben op de verwerking van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie. In talen zoals
het Nederlands en Engels wordt de interpretatie van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie sterk
bepaald door grammaticale principes op zinsniveau. Daarom zal de context niet snel de uit-
eindelijke interpretatie van voornaamwoorden beïnvloeden, maar mogelijk wel het proces
waardoor die interpretatie gevonden wordt.
Hoofdstuk 6 beschrijft een experiment om het effect van de context op de verwerking
van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie te onderzoeken, waarbij de pupilgrootte wordt geme-
ten. Het groter of kleiner worden van de pupil is een onbewuste reflex en treedt bijvoorbeeld
op bij fel licht, met als doel de lichtinval te blokkeren. Maar ook bij een constante lichtbron
kunnen kleine wijzigingen in pupilgrootte worden gemeten ten gevolge van cognitieve acti-
viteit, geheugenbelasting of emotionele reacties.
In het vierde experiment binnen dit onderzoek hebben we de pupilgrootte gemeten tij-
dens de verwerking van zinnen als Hier zie je een pinguïn en een schaap. De pinguïn slaat hem met
een pan. We hebben onderzocht of de verwerking van het voornaamwoord hem moeilijker of
158

makkelijker wordt als de referenten in omgekeerde volgorde worden geïntroduceerd: Hier zie
je een schaap en een pinguïn.... Als de context een effect heeft op de interpretatie van voornaam-
woorden, dan verwachtten we dat eerstgenoemde referenten, die prominenter zijn, eerder
overwogen worden dan later genoemde referenten. Tijdens het horen van de zin zagen de
deelnemers een afbeelding die de correcte interpretatie van de zin weergaf (een pinguïn die
een schaap sloeg) of een afbeelding die een incorrecte interpretatie van de zin weergaf (een
pinguïn die zichzelf sloeg).
De resultaten van het experiment laten zien dat tijdens het horen van het voornaam-
woord zowel de volgorde van introductie van de referenten als de passendheid van de zin
bij het plaatje effect hebben op de pupilgrootte. Wanneer de introductie zin begint met de
pinguïn, dan overwegen de deelnemers in eerste instantie de interpretatie die ze zien op het
plaatje. Dit leidt tot een lagere pupilgrootte (minder cognitieve activiteit) als het plaatje cor-
rect is, maar tot een grotere pupilgrootte (meer cognitieve activiteit) als het plaatje incorrect
is. Wanneer de introductie zin begint met het schaap, dan is er geen verschil in pupilgrootte.
Waarschijnlijk is er hier geen verschil, omdat deelnemers in dit geval niet vertrouwen op het
plaatje en dus liever wachten met het maken van een keus tot ze de rest van de zin hebben
gehoord.
De verschillen in pupilgrootte tussen de condities ontstaan al erg vroeg tijdens de ver-
werking van het voornaamwoord. Dit ondersteunt de voorspelling van het model dat context
een vergelijkbare rol speelt in de verwerking van voornaamwoorden in objectpositie als in de
verwerking van voornaamwoorden in subjectpositie.
Conclusies
In dit onderzoek is onderzocht waarom kinderen er zo lang over doen om het gebruik en de
interpretatievanpersoonlijkevoornaamwoordenonderdeknietekrijgen, enwelkealgemene
cognitieve factoren van invloed zijn op de volwassen verwerking van voornaamwoorden.
De resultaten van de twee cognitieve modellen en de vier experimentele studies die zijn
gepresenteerd in dit proefschrift wijzen erop dat de interpretatie en het begrip van voor-
naamwoorden voldoende verwerkingssnelheid en voldoende werkgeheugencapaciteit verei-
sen. Door onvoldoende verwerkingssnelheid en onvoldoende werkgeheugencapaciteit ma-
ken Nederlandstalige en Engelstalige kinderen nog tot zeker hun zesde jaar fouten met ver-
schillenden soorten voornaamwoorden. Maar ook volwassen kunnen vergelijkbare fouten
maken wanneer hun werkgeheugen zwaar belast is.
Een ander interessant resultaat van dit onderzoek is dat de context een vroeg effect heeft
op het begrijpen van voornaamwoorden. Volwassenen hebben meestal geen problemen met
de ambiguïteit van voornaamwoorden, omdat de structuur van de talige context de luisteraar
vaak voldoende aanwijzingen geeft om de bedoelde referent te achterhalen. Kortom, volwas-
senen gebruiken de talige context om voorspellingen te doen over hoe de zin of het verhaal
verder zal gaan.
Hoofdstuk 7 bespreekt de verschillende implicaties van dit onderzoek. Een belangrijk
onderwerp in normale taalontwikkeling is hoe kinderen leren waar persoonlijke voornaam-
159

woorden naar verwijzen en hoe deze verwijzende woorden worden gebruikt. De resultaten
geven meer inzicht in dit onderwerp. Daarnaast geven de resultaten meer inzicht in de me-
chanismes die volwassen voor het verwerken van taal, en in de rol van context in zinsver-
werking. Het is belangrijk om meer te weten over deze mechanismes, omdat moeilijkheden
met het verwerken van voornaamwoorden door bijvoorbeeld cognitieve problemen of een
taalstoornis kunnen leiden tot problemen in de communicatie.
160

Groningen Dissertations
in Linguistics
1. Henriëtte de Swart (1991). Adverbs of Quantification: A Generalized Quantifier Approach.
2. Eric Hoekstra (1991). Licensing Conditions on Phrase Structure.
3. Dicky Gilbers (1992). Phonological Networks. A Theory of Segment Representation.
4. Helen de Hoop (1992). Case Configuration and Noun Phrase Interpretation.
5. Gosse Bouma (1993). Nonmonotonicity and Categorial Unification Grammar.
6. Peter I. Blok (1993). The Interpretation of Focus.
7. Roelien Bastiaanse (1993). Studies in Aphasia.
8. Bert Bos (1993). Rapid User Interface Development with the Script Language Gist.
9. Wim Kosmeijer (1993). Barriers and Licensing.
10. Jan-Wouter Zwart (1993). Dutch Syntax: A Minimalist Approach.
11. Mark Kas (1993). Essays on Boolean Functions and Negative Polarity.
12. Ton van der Wouden (1994). Negative Contexts.
13. Joop Houtman (1994). Coordination and Constituency: A Study in Categorial Grammar.
14. Petra Hendriks (1995). Comparatives and Categorial Grammar.
15. Maarten de Wind (1995). Inversion in French.
16. Jelly Julia de Jong (1996). The Case of Bound Pronouns in Peripheral Romance.
17. Sjoukje van der Wal (1996). Negative Polarity Items and Negation: Tandem Acquisition.
18. Anastasia Giannakidou (1997). The Landscape of Polarity Items.
19. Karen Lattewitz (1997). Adjacency in Dutch and German.
20. Edith Kaan (1997). Processing Subject-Object Ambiguities in Dutch.
21. Henny Klein (1997). Adverbs of Degree in Dutch.
22. Leonie Bosveld-de Smet (1998). On Mass and Plural Quantification: The case of French ‘des’/‘du’-NPs.
23. Rita Landeweerd (1998). Discourse semantics of perspective and temporal structure.
24. Mettina Veenstra (1998). Formalizing the Minimalist Program.
25. Roel Jonkers (1998). Comprehension and Production of Verbs in aphasic Speakers.
26. Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang (1998). Machine Learning of Phonotactics.
27. Paulien Rijkhoek (1998). On Degree Phrases and Result Clauses.
28. Jan de Jong (1999). Specific Language Impairment in Dutch: Inflectional Morphology and Argument Struc-
ture.
29. H. Wee (1999). Definite Focus.
161

30. Eun-Hee Lee (2000). Dynamic and Stative Information in Temporal Reasoning: Korean tense and aspect in
discourse.
31. Ivilin P. Stoianov (2001). Connectionist Lexical Processing.
32. Klarien van der Linde (2001). Sonority substitutions.
33. Monique Lamers (2001). Sentence processing: using syntactic, semantic, and thematic information.
34. Shalom Zuckerman (2001). The Acquisition of ”Optional” Movement.
35. Rob Koeling (2001). Dialogue-Based Disambiguation: Using Dialogue Status to Improve Speech Under-
standing.
36. Esther Ruigendijk (2002). Case assignment in Agrammatism: a cross-linguistic study.
37. Tony Mullen (2002). An Investigation into Compositional Features and Feature Merging for Maximum
Entropy-Based Parse Selection.
38. Nanette Bienfait (2002). Grammatica-onderwijs aan allochtone jongeren.
39. Dirk-Bart den Ouden (2002). Phonology in Aphasia: Syllables and segments in level-specific deficits.
40. Rienk Withaar (2002). The Role of the Phonological Loop in Sentence Comprehension.
41. Kim Sauter (2002). Transfer and Access to Universal Grammar in Adult Second Language Acquisition.
42. Laura Sabourin (2003). Grammatical Gender and Second Language Processing: An ERP Study.
43. Hein van Schie (2003). Visual Semantics.
44. Lilia Schürcks-Grozeva (2003). Binding and Bulgarian.
45. Stasinos Konstantopoulos (2003). Using ILP to Learn Local Linguistic Structures.
46. Wilbert Heeringa (2004). Measuring Dialect Pronunciation Differences using Levenshtein Distance.
47. Wouter Jansen (2004). Laryngeal Contrast and Phonetic Voicing: A Laboratory Phonology.
48. Judith Rispens (2004). Syntactic and phonological processing in developmental dyslexia.
49. Danielle Bougaïré (2004). L’approche communicative des campagnes de sensibilisation en santé publique
au Burkina Faso: Les cas de la planification familiale, du sida et de l’excision.
50. Tanja Gaustad (2004). Linguistic Knowledge and Word Sense Disambiguation.
51. Susanne Schoof (2004). An HPSG Account of Nonfinite Verbal Complements in Latin.
52. M. Begoña Villada Moirón (2005). Data-driven identification of fixed expressions and their modifiability.
53. Robbert Prins (2005). Finite-State Pre-Processing for Natural Language Analysis.
54. Leonoor van der Beek (2005). Topics in Corpus-Based Dutch Syntax
55. Keiko Yoshioka (2005). Linguistic and gestural introduction and tracking of referents in L1 and L2 dis-
course.
56. Sible Andringa (2005). Form-focused instruction and the development of second language proficiency.
57. Joanneke Prenger (2005). Taal telt! Een onderzoek naar de rol van taalvaardigheid en tekstbegrip in het
realistisch wiskundeonderwijs.
58. Neslihan Kansu-Yetkiner (2006). Blood, Shame and Fear: Self-Presentation Strategies of Turkish Women’s
Talk about their Health and Sexuality.
59. Mónika Z. Zempléni (2006). Functional imaging of the hemispheric contribution to language processing.
60. Maartje Schreuder (2006). Prosodic Processes in Language and Music.
61. Hidetoshi Shiraishi (2006). Topics in Nivkh Phonology.
62. Tamás Biró (2006). Finding the Right Words: Implementing Optimality Theory with Simulated Annealing.
162

63. Dieuwke de Goede (2006). Verbs in Spoken Sentence Processing: Unraveling the Activation Pattern of the
Matrix Verb.
64. Eleonora Rossi (2007). Clitic production in Italian agrammatism.
65. Holger Hopp (2007). Ultimate Attainment at the Interfaces in Second Language Acquisition: Grammar and
Processing.
66. Gerlof Bouma (2008). Starting a Sentence in Dutch: A corpus study of subject- and object-fronting.
67. Julia Klitsch (2008). Open your eyes and listen carefully. Auditory and audiovisual speech perception and
the McGurk effect in Dutch speakers with and without aphasia.
68. Janneke ter Beek (2008). Restructuring and Infinitival Complements in Dutch.
69. Jori Mur (2008). Off-line Answer Extraction for Question Answering.
70. Lonneke van der Plas (2008). Automatic Lexico-Semantic Acquisition for Question Answering.
71. Arjen Versloot (2008). Mechanisms of Language Change: Vowel reduction in 15th century West Frisian.
72. Ismail Fahmi (2009). Automatic term and Relation Extraction for Medical Question Answering System.
73. Tuba Yarbay Duman (2009). Turkish Agrammatic Aphasia: Word Order, Time Reference and Case.
74. Maria Trofimova (2009). Case Assignment by Prepositions in Russian Aphasia.
75. Rasmus Steinkrauss (2009). Frequency and Function in WH Question Acquisition. A Usage-Based Case
Study of German L1 Acquisition.
76. Marjolein Deunk (2009). Discourse Practices in Preschool. Young Children’s Participation in Everyday
Classroom Activities.
77. Sake Jager (2009). Towards ICT-Integrated Language Learning: Developing an Implementation Framework
in terms of Pedagogy, Technology and Environment.
78. Francisco Dellatorre Borges (2010). Parse Selection with Support Vector Machines.
79. Geoffrey Andogah (2010). Geographically Constrained Information Retrieval.
80. Jacqueline van Kruiningen (2010). Onderwijsontwerp als conversatie. Probleemoplossing in interprofes-
sioneel overleg.
81. Robert G. Shackleton (2010). Quantitative Assessment of English-American Speech Relationships.
82. Tim Van de Cruys (2010). Mining for Meaning: The Extraction of Lexico-semantic Knowledge from Text.
83. Therese Leinonen (2010). An Acoustic Analysis of Vowel Pronunciation in Swedish Dialects.
84. Erik-Jan Smits (2010). Acquiring Quantification. How Children Use Semantics and Pragmatics to Constrain
Meaning.
85. Tal Caspi (2010). A Dynamic Perspective on Second Language Development.
86. Teodora Mehotcheva (2010). After the fiesta is over. Foreign language attrition of Spanish in Dutch and
German Erasmus Student.
87. Xiaoyan Xu (2010). English language attrition and retention in Chinese and Dutch university students.
88. Jelena Prokić (2010). Families and Resemblances.
89. Radek Šimík (2011). Modal existential wh-constructions.
90. Katrien Colman (2011). Behavioral and neuroimaging studies on language processing in Dutch speakers
with Parkinson’s disease.
91. Siti Mina Tamah (2011). A Study on Student Interaction in the Implementation of the Jigsaw Technique in
Language Teaching.
163

92. Aletta Kwant (2011). Geraakt door prentenboeken. Effecten van het gebruik van prentenboeken op de
sociaal-emotionele ontwikkeling van kleuters.
93. Marlies Kluck (2011). Sentence amalgamation.
94. Anja Schüppert (2011). Origin of asymmetry: Mutual intelligibility of spoken Danish and Swedish.
95. Peter Nabende (2011). Applying Dynamic Bayesian Networks in Transliteration Detection and Generation.
96. Barbara Plank (2011). Domain Adaptation for Parsing.
97. Çaǧri Çöltekin (2011). Catching Words in a Stream of Speech: Computational simulations of segmenting
transcribed child-directed speech.
98. Dörte Hessler (2011). Audiovisual Processing in Aphasic and Non-Brain-Damaged Listeners: The Whole is
More than the Sum of its Parts.
99. Herman Heringa (2012). Appositional constructions.
100. Diana Dimitrova (2012). Neural Correlates of Prosody and Information Structure.
101. Harwintha Anjarningsih (2012). Time Reference in Standard Indonesian Agrammatic Aphasia.
102. Myrte Gosen (2012). Tracing learning in interaction. An analysis of shared reading of picture books at
kindergarten.
103. Martijn Wieling (2012). A Quantitative Approach to Social and Geographical Dialect Variation.
104. Gisi Cannizzaro (2012). Early word order and animacy.
105. Kostadin Cholakov (2012). Lexical Acquisition for Computational Grammars. A Unified Model.
106. Karin Beijering (2012). Expressions of epistemic modality in Mainland Scandinavian. A study into the
lexicalization-grammaticalization-pragmaticalization interface.
107. Veerle Baaijen (2012). The development of understanding through writing.
108. Jacolien van Rij (2012). Pronoun processing: Computational, behavioral, and psychophysiological studies
in children and adults.
GRODIL
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen (CLCG)
P.O. Box 716
9700 AS Groningen
The Netherlands
164
