 The Asia-Pacific Journal | Japan Focus
Volume 2 | Issue 10 | Article ID 1571 | Oct 11, 2004
1
Looking Back on My Days as Ri Koran (Li Xianglan)
Tanaka Hiroshi, Utsumi Aiko, Onuma Yasuaki
Looking Back on My Days as Ri Koran Li
Xianglan)
Tanaka Hiroshi, Utsumi Aiko and Onuma
Yasuaki
Otaka Yoshiko was born Yamaguchi Yoshiko in
Manchuria  in  1920.  After  joining  the
Manchurian  Film  Association  in  1938,  she
starred in films as a Chinese actress under the
name of Li Xianglan (Ri Koran in Japanese).
Arrested as a spy by the Chinese Nationalists
following Japan's surrender, she was arraigned
before a war crimes tribunal and acquitted.
Following her release, she was active as an
actress and singer in Japan and then in the
United States. She subsequently served as a
television host and journalist covering Vietnam
and the Middle East. She served in the upper
house of the Diet between 1974 and 1992. This
is one in a series of Japanese Lives.
What my father tried to convey to me
Q. In the autobiography Ri Koran -- My Life
(Yamaguchi Yoshiko with Fujiwara Sakuya), I
was  particularly  struck  by  your  learning
Mandarin as a girl, and by the figure of your
father, who tutored you. He taught Chinese,
and  associated  with  Chinese  people  as  an
equal. That point of view differentiated him
from most Japanese at the time. It's clear that
his  approach  --  learning  the  language
completely and respecting the culture of the
host country -- was passed down to you as his
daughter.
Otaka From the time that I was 3 or 4, my
father (Yamaguchi Fumio) taught Chinese to
employees of Mantetsu (The South Manchurian
Railroad). He had been attracted to China in
his youth, had gone to Beijing to study, and put
immense effort into learning Chinese. When I
was in kindergarten, he taught me Chinese
pronunciation  one-on-one.  When  I  started
elementary  school,  he  had  me  attend  the
Chinese night class he taught at Mantetsu; I
was the only child in a class of adults. I went to
a Japanese girls' school until the second grade,
then transferred to a Chinese girls' school.
My father had a lot of close friends among
Chinese who were sympathetic to the Japanese,
and  the  reason  that  I  have  the  names  "Li
Xianglan" and "Pan Shuhua" is that he made a
pact as blood brothers with one of his Chinese
friends  and  had  me  adopted  according  to
Chinese customs. That's the origin of my stage
name, Li Xianglan (Ri Koran).
Q. Since your Chinese was so fluent, was it
impossible for Chinese to tell that you were
Japanese?
Otaka  Even  in  Japanese  elementary  school,
Mandarin was a required subject, and I had
always been good at music, so I think that I had
a good ear. That must be why my Mandarin
pronunciation improved as it did.
Q. Japanese people often put up fences around
themselves when they go abroad. But while you
had the Japanese name Yamaguchi Yoshiko, in
essence you were not Japanese. It seems to me
that  as  someone  raised  on  the  Chinese
continent  you  transcended  national  borders.
Otaka Well, in that era, there was a vigorous
anti-Japanese movement and so I tried to avoid
being identified as Japanese. I masked the fact
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1557466004000907 Published online by Cambridge University Press

 APJ | JF
2 | 10 | 0
2
that I was a Japanese completely, making sure
that I didn't behave in a way that betrayed my
Japaneseness.
Appearing in films as Li Xianglan (Ri Koran)
Q. You started working at the Manchurian Film
Association as Li Xianglan in 1938, after the
Sino-Japanese War had begun, is that right?
Otaka When I was a girl, I had a mild case of
tuberculosis, and so I was sickly. The doctor
recommended that for my health I should do
exercises to regulate my breathing. That's why
I began singing, and it was really the first thing
that set me on the path to becoming a singer
and actress. In Fengtian I was trained by a
prominent  opera  singer  named  Madame
Podresov, and it was when I was playing a
minor role in a recital she gave that I was
scouted by Fengtian Broadcasting. In 1937 the
"Manchurian  Film  Association"  [hereafter
Manei] was begun with the joint investment of
the Manchukuo government and Mantetsu, and
they  chose  me  to  star  in  their  movie,
Honeymoon  Train  (Mitsugetsu  kaisha).  [I
imagine I was chosen in part because] at the
time in China, there weren't any actresses who
could sing.
After that, I appeared in a number of movies,
and when the movies and songs became big
hits, I traveled all over China. After being in
three movies for Manei, I was recruited to be in
The Song of the White Orchid (Hakuran no
uta),  which  was  co-produced  by  Toho  and
Manei. The movie was advertised widely using
the  slogans  "Goodwill  between  Japan  and
Manchuria!" and "Friendship among the Five
Ethnic Groups" but for me, what was important
was that I was going to be performing with the
big star Hasegawa Kazuo, which made me very
nervous. I was fortunate enough to perform
with Hasegawa in Chinese Nights (Shina no
yoru) and The Oath of Hot Sand (Nessa no
chikai).
Q. When you first tried to come to Japan when
you were 18, I gather that because you were
wearing  Chinese  clothes,  one  of  the  ship's
policemen said, "Aren't you ashamed, wearing
Chink  clothing  like  that  and  speaking  that
Chink language?" and "If you're a subject of the
Japanese empire, speak Japanese."
Otaka  Yes,  it  was  on  the  boat  between
Shimonoseki and Pusan. When he said that, I
didn't say, "I'm Japanese." I took those words as
if I were Chinese. Having such experiences, I
grew to hate Japanese people. What a nasty
group of people, I thought, with their blatant
feelings of superiority and prejudice against
Asian people.
On that visit, I participated in the Exposition
for the Founding of Manchukuo (held at the
Tokyo  Takashimaya  Department  Store)  as  a
representative of Manei, as an envoy for their
Manchurian  Japanese  actresses.  For
promotional events at the exposition and at the
Nichigeki Theater, I sang wearing a Chinese
costume. There, too, I directly experienced the
disdainful gaze that was directed at "Chinese."
What was expected of Ri Koran?
Q.  At  the  time,  you  weren't  aware  of  the
content of the movies that you were appearing
in, is that right?
Otaka Yes, back then I didn't know much about
the content of the movies. In any case, I just
gave it my all, thinking it for the purpose of
"Goodwill between Japan and Manchuria."
Then, as much as ten years later, in order to
write Ri Koran -- My Life, my coauthor Fujiwara
Sakuya and I saw the three films together.
When we were filming, I was so busy that I
never saw them from start to finish. I would
just film the scenes that I was in, then rush off
to  the  next  location.  For  Glory  and  Fame
Everafter (Bansei ryuho) I went to Shanghai,
and My Bush Warbler (Watashi no uguisu) was
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1557466004000907 Published online by Cambridge University Press

 APJ | JF
2 | 10 | 0
3
in Harbin, so I didn't ever see one of the movies
I was in all the way through.
When I saw them for the first time, when we
were writing the book, I cried. How could I
have starred in such stupid movies! What could
I have been thinking, I wondered; I became
desperate to the point that I even thought of
suicide.
Q. Just to take one example, what did you think
of Chinese Nights?
Otaka After the war I was asked in a war
crimes  tribunal,  why  I  had  made  Chinese
Nights. There's a scene, for example where I
get hit by Hasegawa Kazuo. Even though I
defended his hitting me as a Japanese-style
expression of love, from the Chinese point of
view, it was completely unacceptable. At any
rate, when after being hit by one of the enemy,
[my  character]  begins  to  feel  affectionate
toward him and finally falls in love with him --
that's a Chinese being made a fool of, two, no
three, times over.
Q. Perhaps because you were young at the
time, you ended up playing roles on screen that
were quite difficult for Chinese people to bear.
To  put  it  harshly,  you  were  used  as  a
"handmaiden of Japanese imperialism."
Otaka I feel great guilt for having played a
Chinese woman useful for Japanese purposes.
Q.  However,  while  this  film  served  as  a
spearhead  for  the  Japanese  invasion,  that
wasn't all it did. Can't we say -- thinking for
example of the fact that so many people fell in
love with its title song, Suzhou Serenade -- that
it also had a certain brightness that filled the
hearts of many people?
Otaka When I met Hattori Yoichi later, he said
"I wrote the best song I could for Ri Koran,"
and I was moved. Even now, when I think back,
I feel a mixture of emotions, embarrassment
about the movie and fondness for the music.
Thinking about it now, if citizenship had been
granted by place of birth, as is the case in
America today, as someone born in Manchuria,
I could have held Manchurian citizenship, and I
think I likely would have gone about things a
bit differently. But the rigidity of the situation
was such that Japan was my homeland, and I
was a Japanese. In addition, Japan and China,
two countries that should be the closest of
friends, were at war. In the midst of all this, I
too simply believed in the slogan of "Goodwill
between Japan and Manchuria."
Farewell to Ri Koran
Q. When you visited China again much later,
you felt a need to make amends for the Ri
Koran of your youth, is that right?
Otaka I hadn't been in Beijing for twenty or so
years. I began to feel really uneasy even when
we were just flying over Beijing, and when we
landed at the airport, I couldn't get off for quite
a  while.  Sun  Pinghua  of  the  China-Japan
Friendship Association came to meet us. Mr.
Sun looked at me with a very severe expression
and I felt that he was saying, "We haven't
forgotten for a moment what you did during the
war, you know."
As one of the scheduled parties during my visit
was  ending,  Mr.  Sun  said  that  he  had
something that he wanted to ask me and that
he would come to my room later. A number of
Chinese from the association joined us and we
stayed up talking until four in the morning.
That was the first time I ever had a thorough
conversation with Chinese people about the era
when I was Ri Koran. Mr. Sun is from the
northeast, so he knew all about me from the
time that I began working as Ri Koran. He had
looked up a good deal, so much so that he
seemed to know more than I did.
Talking with them until dawn made me feel a
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1557466004000907 Published online by Cambridge University Press

 APJ | JF
2 | 10 | 0
4
little bit better. I felt that Mr. Sun and I were
really able to communicate our feelings to one
another. Of course, I don't think that means
that I am done making amends, but...
Q. When Japanese [in China] who supported
the war effort came to know after the war of
the wrongs that had been done, what sort of
stance  did  they  take?  Did  they  keep  silent
about their participation in the war, keeping
their  past  buried  forever?  Or,  although
extremely painful, did they reveal their past
and look closely at what they had done?
Otaka The year the war ended, I witnessed the
killing of a great many people in Shanghai in
American air raids. It was a truly miserable
experience. FEN news reported on the 10th of
August that Japan was about to lose the war,
and a good number of people there realized
this.
When the war ended, the situation changed
completely and the Chinese began going after
those who had collaborated with the Japanese
under suspicion of being Chinese traitors. Lots
of people investigated the Chinese actors and
directors that I had worked with. Even if they
hadn't made movies with Japanese, just to have
made a movie was enough to make one suspect
as a traitor.
Around that time, there were numerous press
reports saying that a death sentence had been
handed down for Ri Koran. Of course there was
no basis for this, and because I was Japanese,
the crime of Chinese traitor didn't apply to me.
But  there  were  reports  branding  Ri  Koran,
Kawashima Yoshiko, and Tokyo Rose as three
cultural traitors; the hatred toward me was that
strong.  A  number  of  times  the  Nationalist
government asked about my work during the
war,  and  at  first  I  didn't  have  any  formal
documents to prove that I was Japanese, so I
had a very hard time. In the end, however,
during the war crimes tribunal, my Japanese
citizenship was proved, and I was acquitted and
ordered to leave the country.
A New Start in the Postwar
Otaka I was planning on taking a boat with
evacuees from China back to Japan in February
of 1946. Even though I wasn't wearing any
make-up and was dressed sloppily, they figured
out that I was Ri Koran. I wasn't allowed to
board and my return to Japan was delayed.
However, I did make it home one month later.
At the time, my whole family was in Beijing,
and they weren't evacuated until several years
later.
As soon I got back to Japan, I received several
offers of work. I had vowed, however, that I
would never again use the name Ri Koran. I
said, "Ri Koran is dead and gone." The next
time I appeared in a film was in Yoshimura
Kosaburo's Someday my Life Will Shine (Waga
shogai no kagayakeru hi).
Q. After coming back to Japan, you debuted
again  as  a  stage  actress,  a  singer,  and  an
actress. After that you were active in film in
America, married the artist Isamu Noguchi, and
later divorced. Then you remarried, had the
experience of being a full-time diplomatic wife,
and in 1967 became the host of The Three O'
Clock You (Sanji no anata) TV show, reporting
on problems in Palestine as well as the Vietnam
War. Since then I believe you have continued to
work on the Palestinian issue.
Otaka All the Palestinians I met were incredibly
proud and refined. I marveled, thinking "these
people are so poor and are living in refugee
camps and yet..." The children also had a great
attitude.  I  even  saw  little  children  in  the
refugee camps walking around with armfuls of
books. I sensed a strong will to study hard.
From the time I was small, I was curious about
journalism.  Three  O'  Clock  You  targeted
married women and often took up such topics
as fashion. That was of no interest to me. The
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1557466004000907 Published online by Cambridge University Press

 APJ | JF
2 | 10 | 0
5
director also realized that it wasn't a good
match for me, and so, on August 15th, I went to
Vietnam  to  report  on  the  war.  I  saw  the
frontlines  in  Vietnam,  and  next  I  became
interested in learning what the Middle East
War was all about.
When I arrived in Beirut and got to my hotel, I
saw the picture of a beautiful woman on the
front page of all the papers. When I asked who
she was, I learned that she was a hijacker
named Leila Khaled. In other words she had
just been caught for hijacking and was being
returned in exchange for the passengers of the
four hijacked planes. "I'm going to interview
this woman," I said, and I went out looking for
her. I went to the PFLP (People's Front for the
Liberation of Palestine) and met with her.
Q. Do you have a vivid memory of the day that
diplomatic  relations  were  restored  between
Japan and China?
Otaka At exactly three, during my program, the
news arrived. I mustn't cry, I thought, I can't
let the women in the studio see me crying, so I
went and hid behind the speakers in the studio
and covered my face with a handkerchief. The
director, Mori Akio, saw me crying and shot me
from behind.
There  was  a  small  article  in  the  Sankei
Shimbun. While all the stations were showing
Zhou Enlai and Tanaka Kakuei shaking hands,
Yamaguchi Yoshiko was hosting Three O' Clock
You. A camera captured her from behind as she
wiped away her tears. Her heart must have
been full of all sorts of emotions. That's what it
said.
I certainly was happy that day. I even think that
very day was the "best day of my life."
This  article  appeared  in  Sekai,  September
2003, pp. 171-75.
Translated for Japan Focus by Melissa Wender
and posted on October 11, 2004.
Melissa  Wender  is  currently  on  leave  from
Bates College and teaching at Tufts University.
Her book, Lamentation as History: Narratives
by Koreans in Japan, 1965-2000, is forthcoming
from Stanford
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1557466004000907 Published online by Cambridge University Press
