Imperial Provisions 
for Pergamum: OGIS 484 
A. D. Macro 
I
N HIS BOOK Banques et banquiers dans les cites grecques (Leiden 1968), 
R. Bogaert made valuable observations concerning the interpreta-
tion of the intractable document OGIS 484, directing his attention in 
the main towards its financial aspects (pp.231-34). The contribution 
offered here in the form of translation and commentary incorpo-
rates Bogaert's work and has two principal ends: to explain the 
financial. commercial and juridical features of the text and to emend 
misinterpretations which have gained currency over the years largely 
by default. 
The inscription, fragmentary at its beginning and end, preserves 
an imperial epistula, \vhich addresses itself to problems of currency 
exchange experiened in the Pergamene market and to matters of 
legal procedure having to do with default, distraint and trial. Written 
in response to a petition made to the Roman emperor about various 
abuses perpetrated by money changers, it upholds the institution of 
an exchange monopoly locally at Pergamum and at the same time 
establishes corrective measures on the basis of what purports to be a 
thorough examination of the complaints. Though its tenor is pre-
dictably paternalistic, nonetheless it was framed with an eye towards 
consumer welfare and with the clear intent of eliminating duress. In 
fine, it provides an intriguing insight into entrepreneurial pressures 
and schemes in the marketplace. 
Nowhere in the surviving portion of the document do those at the 
centre of the controversy, those who stand accused of illegal-or, at 
the very least, arbitrary-conduct, receive a name. Their prime activ-
ity is described as money-changing, but they were also involved in 
lending. It will do no harm to refer to them as 'bankers' and their 
business concretely as <the bank', so long as it is remembered that 
the raison d' etre of this bank was to produce revenue for the city of 
Pergamum from currency exchange. Any other facilities it (may ha ve) 
offered were subsidiary. The document itself is cast in the form of an 
169 

170 
IMPERIAL PROVISIONS 
epistle. It does not conform with the principles by which an edict or a 
rescript to a libellus was formally drawn Up.1 
DESCRIPTION OF STONE 
Two fragments of white marble. Fragment A: (1-46 + left side 47-
59) broken top and bottom; found in 1900 at the eastern end of the 
north portico in the lower market at Pergamum; now in the Vorder-
asiatisches Museum, East Berlin. Fragment B: (right side 47-62) broken 
on all sides except the right where the margin is preserved; found in 
1884 at the site of a Byzantine Church at Pergamum; first edited by 
M. Fraenkel, Alterthumer von Pergamon VIII 2, 216 no.279; likewise in 
Berlin. Editio princeps: by H. von Prott, who compared Fraenkel's 
readings of B with squeezes and through the agency of others (see 
Bibliography A, below). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
A. 
Greek Text and Commentary 
M. Fraenkel, Alterthiimer von Pergamon VIII 2,216 no.279 (=fr.B), with draw-
ing; editio princeps: H. von Pratt, HRoemiseher Erlass betreffend die oefIent-
Hehe Bank von Pergamon," AthMitt 27 (1902) 78-89 no.72, with photograph of 
fr.A. [cf AEpigr 1903 no.148]; W. Dittenberger, OGIS (1905) 484, pp. 105-12 and 
552; F. F. Abbott and A. C. Johnson, Municipal Administration in tlte Roman 
Empire (Princeton 1926) 401-03 no.81; T. R. S. Broughton, "Roman Asia 
Minor" in An Economic Survey of Ancient Rome ed. T. Frank, IV (Baltimore 
1938) 892-95, with translation; A. C. Johnson, P. R. Coleman-Norton, F. C. 
Bourne, Ancient Roman Statutes (Texas 1961) 205-06 no.246, without Greek 
text (hereafter, ARS); E. M. Smallwood, Documents Illustrating the Principates 
of Nerva, Trajan and Hadrian (Cambridge 1966) 163-64 no.451, text only. 
B. 
Reference and Discussion 
B. Keil, "Zu zwei pergamenisehen Insehriften," AthMitt 29 (1904) 73-75; H. F. 
Hitzig, "Die Astynomeninschrift von Pergamon," ZSav 39 (1905) 440-41; B. 
Keil, "Ueber kleinasiatische Grabinschriften," Hermes 43 (1908) 558-59; L. C. 
West, "Gold and Silver Coin Standards in the Roman Empire," ANSNNM 94 
(New York 1941) 93-94; D. Magie, Roman Rule in Asia Minor (Princeton 1950) 
624-25 and 1486 n.51 (hereafter, MAGIE, Roman Rule); S. Bolin, State and 
Currency in the Roman Empire to 300 A.D. (Stockholm 1958) 238-43 (hereafter, 
IOn the form of imperial correspondence, see U. Wilcken, "Zu den Kaiserreskripten," 
Hermes 55 (1920) 1-42; J. H. Oliver, Marcus Aurelius: Aspects of Civic and Cultural Policy in the 
East (Hesperia Supp!. 13, Princeton 1970) 35ff. 

A. D. MACRO 
171 
BOLIN, State &- Currency); R. Bogaerr, Banques et banquiers dans les cites grecques 
(Leiden 1968) 231-34. 
The text of W. Dittenberger (OGIS 484) has been used for trans-
lation, because, of those readily available, it is the most complete. 
Also, with due allowance for one error and more venturesome restor-
ations at the fragmentary beginning and end, it is a faithful replica of 
Pratt's first edition. The error and those few instances where I have 
departed from Dittenberger's text are noted in the brief apparatus 
which accompanies the translation. 
Translation 
N.B. Brackets thus: [ .... J enclose translation of words restored to the Greek 
text; and thus: C .... ) enclose words supplied by the translator for clari-
fication. 
[I have given the matter my careful consideration], wishing to seem 
[fair as is my] habit, and to examine only those [charges brought by 
the tradesmen in] your city, about which Calvisius Glyco, [the envoy 
sent by you], informed me. [And I asked them to appear before me, 
as is only proper,] in case they wished to say anything (in person). 
Now the [company of exchange-dealers (i.e., bankers)] were taking it 
[upon themselves to indulge in actions] which were unjust and con-
trary to the terms of their agreement with the city. 
(8) For though they were bound (by the terms of the agreement) to 
receive 18 asses for a denarius from the tradesmen, small stall-holders 
and fish-sellers, all of whom are accustomed to dealing in small 
change, and to payout 17 asses to any who wanted to exchange a 
denarius, they were not satisfied with the exchange of asses, but even 
when someone bought fish for silver denarii, they exacted an as for 
every denarius. (13) And so I thought it proper to correct this (abuse) 
for the future, so that the buying public should not be taxed by the 
exchange dealers in kinds of sale in which no authority has in fact been 
given to them. Moreover, as to the matter of small fish sold by weight, 
whose price is fixed by the agoranomi, I have thought it right that, 
even in the case of any who buy several minas' worth, they should 
pay the price in bronze coin, so that as a result the premium from the 
exchange is kept for the city; and likewise, in the case where several 
individuals go in together for the purpose of buying (in bulk) in silver 
denarii and then divide up the purchase among themselves, they 

172 
IMPERIAL PROVlSIONS 
should pay the fish-seller in bronze coin for him to deposit with the 
bank. But they should pay at the rate of 17:1, since the matter of the 
exchange tariff is meant to concern only the tradesman in the market. 
(24) Furthermore, they (= the exchange dealers) were shown to 
have made agreements among themselves for certain other kinds of 
profit, that is, on unworn coin and on what they call 'kickbacks', by 
means of which they gave particular offence to the fish traders; and 
so I saw fit to correct this abuse too. For it was unfair that even these 
few individuals (= fish traders) were being taken advantage of by 
them; moreover the fact was that this unfair loss sustained by the 
sellers was felt by the buying public as a whole. 
(30) They were also accused of exacting 'festival payments' from the 
tradesmen; in this matter I was happy to believe their denial and I 
accepted their joint affirmation that this sort of thing should not 
take place. They only admitted that (annually) in the month of 
Hyperberetaeus they received payment of the so-called 'Hermes-
money', which originated in the following way: they had agreed 
among themselves to demand an oath from those tradesmen who 
deal in bronze coin and who deposit it with them for exchange to the 
effect that they had done and were still doing nothing at variance 
with the (city's financial) statute; and so those who were unable to 
swear the oath because of guilty conscience paid them this something, 
so that there remained no need for them to swear the oath. This 
(explanation) seemed quite reasonable. (They further stated) that 
they in their turn swore that they had done and were still doing no 
injustice to the tradesmen in the payment of silver coin (= denarii). 
And this too I thought acceptable. 
(41) They were also charged with having executed distraint on their 
own initiative and with having [sometimes] taken over the entire 
businesses of tradesmen, though their contract (with the city) does 
not allow it; rather it stipulates that they should make representa-
tions to the tamiae, if they have a claim against one (for payment 
overdue), and get from them a public slave so that they may execute 
distraint within the law, that is, in such a way that whatever is taken 
(as security) by this procedure [before] judgement remains available to 
the [debtors (until the matter is settled by trial)]. 
(48) Now I have decided that whatever is taken ought to match (in 
value) the contents of the bankers' account books and that distraint 
made through the agency of the public [slave] should [not be out of] 

A. D. MACRO 
173 
proportion: either satisfaction should be taken without recourse to 
judgement by trial or, if [agreement (between the parties)] is not 
forthcoming, then the object taken should be commensurate in 
value with the claim and the fine attached thereto. 
(S2) I think it right, however, that the trials be heard not before 
the tamiae but before a selected panel of ex-strategi; not that I think 
it improper that the tamiae retain an interest in the procedures, but 
the fact is that the ex-strategi are men of experience in law and public 
affairs, being the agency to withhold ... 
BRIEF ApPARATUS 
2/-,ETETTE/-'J¢S&.p:'1]v Dittenberger, butETTEcKE}/sa/-,'7v is equally possible. 4 Ditten-
berger's restoration leaves the line 3-4 spaces short; if correct, TWV Epyct.{O/-,€VWII 
will refer to tradesmen, not exchange dealers. 6 illct. 81]'\Joll ~II Dittenberger, 
but the syntax is exquisite: WC 1I0/-,L/-, ]011 or 8lKct.t ]011 (line 28) or Kct.01jK ]011 (line 
55) all suit the sense; cf L. Robert, RevPhil41 (1967) 63-64. 6-7 Dittenberger's 
restoration here is unsound, based upon a misreading of the stone: Ot ovv T1jc 
a I [JLEt7TTtK1jC - - OU - - a],\ <,\ >a Prott. Since the exchange dealers do not appear 
in the first six extant lines of the inscription but are the unspecified subject 
of the next clause (lines 9ff), they require identification here; hence I suggest 
Ot ow T1]C a I [/-,EtTTTtK1]C KEKOtVWVYjKOTEC TTO]'\ < A >a, which my translation reflects 
10 [TO 8'7]vae[LOV] Prott, Dittenberger et alii, TO;; 8'7]vct.e[tov] W. K. Prentice 
apud ARS p.206, which is preferable. 46 Dittenberger's inclusion of the 
article [TO TTpO T1]C] I KPLCEWC is warranted by the space available. 49 Kct.O]c.:,C is 
perhaps preferable to OTT ]wc: see Dittenberger ad loco (n.42) and A. Debrunner, 
MusHelv 1 (1944) 37ff, who quotes: SIG3 685, line 21: Kct.06Tt Ta ... yp&.JLJLct.Tct. 
TTEPL€XEt. SEG III 421, line 33: Kct.OWC ~ wvTJ TTEPL€XEL. Also, MAMA VIII 554, line 3: 
Kct.OWC Kct.1. 8ta TijC YEVO/-,€II7]C EK86cEWC 8t(~ To[D XPE]OcpV>"ct.Ktov 8'7>"OVTct.t. 49-50 
[80VAOV 
JL~ cU]f.L/-,EITPOV Prott, Dittenberger et alii, [80v>..ov 
JL~ &]JLEITPOII 
J. H. Oliver, per litteras. 
Commentary 
The author of the epistle is the Roman emperor, as the use of the 
first person plural in the text would seem to show;2 probably Hadrian, 
whose interest in the institutions and ambience of the Greek people 
is well known. Also Hadrian was a travelling emperor; and since it 
may reasonably be inferred (5-6) that the examination was conducted 
in Asia Minor-for there is nothing in the text to suggest that the 
respondent had asked the disputant parties to assemble for interview 
t Dittenberger, OGIS 484 n.1. 

174 
IMPERIAL PROVISIONS 
in Rome, it is likely that the document was prepared during one of 
his two tours of inspection in Asia, in A.D. 123-124 or A.D. 129-131.3 
Other evidence may be adduced which accords with a Hadrianic 
date, though it lacks precision. If the name Calvisius Glyco, the envoy 
sent by the Pergamenes (5), reflects a bestowal of citizenship by P. 
Calvisius Ruso (cos. suffect. A.D. 79), proconsul of Asia in the time of 
Domitian, then we have a terminus post quem; there is no record of 
any other Calvisius as governor of Asia.4 Furthermore, because of the 
similarity of lettering, it is claimed that the same mason is respon-
sible for the lex de Astynomis Pergamenorum (= OGIS 483), which was 
cut in the early second century, and the series of monuments of C. 
Antius Aulus Iulius Quadratus, cos. 94 and 105, governor of Asia 
?l09/110.5 
LINES 1-8. The (consortium of) exchange dealers operated a monop-
olistic exchange bank as lessees of the city. This privilege was granted 
to them by a contract or licence (cvvccAAccY/7) which guaranteed, 
among other things, that no money-changing should occur except 
throught their agency. The principles of the contract were contra-
vened by them in a variety of ways with a view towards increasing 
their profits. One assumes that the Pergamene magistrates were slow 
to move to put a stop to the abuse, since the public treasury was also 
a beneficiary of this extra income. The tradesmen, in resentment, 
made representations to the emperor. He heard the arguments and 
sought to dispose of the matter once for all by this epistle. 
LINES 8-24. The assarion (= as) was the unit of the local, bronze 
coinage, a token currency for use in the Pergamene market. At 17:1, 
its ratio to the Roman silver denarius was arbitrary since the going 
rate for the period (to which this epistle would seem to belong) was 
16 asses: 1 denarius.6 There is nothing sinister in this. Because the valid-
ity of the Pergamene assarion was undoubtedly limited to the city and 
its environs, there was no possibility of a profiteering traffic in the 
I Magie, Roman Rule, 612ff and 1470 n.6. 
• PIRs C 350: P. Calvisius Ruso Iulius Frontinus. 
~ Similarity of lettering: Prott, AthMitt 27 (1902) 82; Dittenberger, OGIS 483 n.l. Monu-
ments of luI ius Quadratus: (= PIR I I 507): Fraenkel, Alt. v. Perg. 298ff. Date of his governorship: 
R. Syme, Tacitus (Oxford 1958) 665. Date and purpose of the astynomic law (= OGIS 483): G. 
Klaffenbach, AbhBerl, Kl. Sprachen 1953, no.6; J. H. Oliver, "The Date of the Pergamene 
Astynomic Law," Hesperia 24 (1955) 88-92. 
IOn the relationship of bronze to silver in the eastern Empire, see Bolin, State & 
Currency, ch. X. 

A. D. MACRO 
175 
coin developing from city to city, such as John of Giscala, for instance, 
managed in oil a few decades earlier in Syria.? 
The majority of items for sale in the market were marked in the 
local asses and the essential foodstuffs were priced by the agoranomi. 
Customers brought with them to the market both silver and bronze, 
though chiefly the latter, which they could obtain from the bank at 
17:1. On a typical day, the tradesmen, stall-keepers and others re-
ceived a steady influx of the local bronze asses, which they could 
exchange at the bank at 18: 1 for the denarius. They needed the universal 
denarius to pay their wholesale suppliers, who would have no interest 
in local token currency. Clearly it was to the buyers' and sellers' 
advantage to do business direct in silver denarii, whether the article 
for sale was priced in bronze or silver, bypassing the bank and thereby 
avoiding agio. In this way it was possible for the tradesman (as at 
Mylasa, ocrs 515, early III cent.) to act as 'unofficial banker' and to 
operate a black market in exchange. Such finesse provoked the inter-
vention of the bank: the official, licenced changers tried to put a stop 
to the direct changing, having as their accomplices the agoranomi, 
who had the feel of the market. This is nowhere stated but may 
reasonably be assumed. The changers, then, intervened in direct 
denarii purchases, claiming an as per denarius: i.e., they claimed for 
the bank the same premium as if the transaction had been conducted 
in asses. 
The emperor's measures to prevent these abuses of the tariff 
regulations by changers, tradesmen and consumers are contained in 
the subsequent paragraphs of the document (13-24). 
I. henceforth the money changers shall not interfere in transactions 
that lie outside the compass of the regulations that they had 
negotiated with the city (cvvaAAaYrl); i.e., they cannot exact an 
as per denarius on sales of goods priced in denarii (13-15); 
II. henceforth, in the matter of small fish sold by weight, i.e., food 
marked for sale in bronze coin and priced by the agoranomi, 
(1) whoever buys at gross any quantity the value of which exceeds 
a denarius shall still pay the seller in bronze coin; 
(2) whoever form themselves into a group to buy in bulk and 
propose to pay in (silver) denarii cannot do so: they may buy in 
bulk but must pay in bronze; however, the customers in these 
7 Joseph. Bell. 2. 591-92, Vita 74-76. 

176 
IMPERIAL PROVISIONS 
two cases (1 and 2) shall pay at the attractive rate of 17:1, provided 
that their purchase exceeds the value of one denarius (16-24). 
By his measures, therefore, the emperor reinforces the bank's monop-
oly of exchange. He is at some pains to point out that the revenue 
from exchange will accrue to the city. It will have done so in accord-
ance with whatever terms the changers had negotiated with the city: 
one assumes that a percentage of profits was paid by the changers, 
but the document is silent on this aspect of the cvva'\'\aY17. Further-
more, the consumers' interests were protected: the agio charged on 
bulk-rate items, whether purchased collectively or not, must not be 
passed on to the buyer; the seller is obliged to offer a bulk rate and 
in such cases support the agio himself. For the buyer, who acquired 
his bronze coin at the bank at 17:1, buys in bulk at 17:1. But the 
tradesman turns his cash received from sales into denarii at the rate 
oflS:1. 
In summary: neither consumer nor seller may profit directly from 
exchange; the exchange monopoly for the bank is assured. 
LINES 24-41. The next section addresses further areas of disagreement 
that had arisen between the two parties (tradesmen and money 
changers), as a result of which, one may easily imagine, the consumer 
has been the main victim. But since these particular disputes have 
already been settled prior to the emperor's involvement and he is 
assured that the city's financial policy (Sux'Tagtc) has not been im-
paired, he merely records his approval of the settlement and offers 
no amendment.8 
LINES 41-57. The final section is fragmentary and incomplete. Its 
substance is juridical, the manner terse, the meaning obscure. 
It seems that the emperor has two objectives in mind: to reinforce 
due process in litigation concerning unpaid debt; and to place the 
judgement of lawsuits before a panel of more responsible judges. 
The exchange dealers have been flouting the procedures for redress 
against debtors whom they allege to be delinquent and have taken 
matters into their own hands (41-43). The procedures were defined 
by the cvva'\'\aY17' which, as we have seen, was the licence granted by 
the city to the consortium of bankers on certain terms and conditions, 
enabling them to conduct their business. Two of these conditions are 
8 8LCha~,c (lines 36-37)= budget or law concerning financial policy: cf. L. Robert, He!· 
Imica IX (1950) 14-18. 

A. D. MACRO 
177 
indicated by the text: that EVExvpacta should be Inanaged through 
the treasurers' office (ralLtat) and be carried out in the presence of 
the public slave; and that whatever was taken by EVExvpacta should 
remain available to the debtor (44-47). 
There is ambiguity in the meaning oUvExvpacla.9 It has to do both 
with receiving an object (or objects) offered as security and taking (i.e., 
seizing) an object (or objects) on the basis of some authority, whether 
constitutional or judicial. Context does not always specify. Such is the 
case here. The following argument. however, sheds some light. 
The security taken by EVExvpacta "remains with the debtor" (46-
47)-so much is explicit. It seems anomalous. How can what is taken 
in distraint be kept by the one distrained upon? Yet the apparent 
anomaly is dispelled by the recognition of an ellipsis: one infers that 
there can be no resort to securities, no conveyance of property, until 
a judicial decision has been reached. Trial is the inevitable consequence 
of EVExvpacta. In this context, therefore, EVExvpacta, when Hproperly 
and legally applied" (46), is the expression of the creditor's litigious 
resolve. By means of it, he not only serves formal notice of intent, 
but selects an object or objects on which he will distrain, if given a 
favourable judicial verdict. The presence of the public slave in the 
proceedings is required more to make the act a matter of public 
record than to police the confrontation between debtor and creditor.Io 
EVExvpada, then, as envisaged by the cVVaAAaY17, is conditional and 
ceremonial distraint. 
The force of the cvvaAAaJ177 has been diminished because the bankers 
have disregarded its terms. And so the emperor turns to restatement 
and amendment (48-52). He draws attention to the ;K8onc. This is 
the editio rationum, the presenting of the register kept by the bankers 
which contained a record of the charges drawn on each individual's 
account.H Bankers were obliged to keep such accounts under Roman 
• €vI£xvpacla: H. F. Hitzig, Das griechische Pfandrecht (Muenchen 1895) 56ff; L. Beauchet, 
L'Histoire du droit prive de la rq,ublique athbtienne III (Paris 1897) 223ff; RE 5 (1905) 2561 
(Thalheim), 10 (1919) 2511 S.v. KaTI£vI£xvpacla (Weiss); A. B. Schwartz, "Sicherungsuebereig-
nung und Zwangsvollstreckung in den Papyri," Aegyptus 17 (1937) 241-82; A. R. W. 
Harrison, The Law of Athens: Procedure (Oxford 1971) 244-47. 
10 For the employment of an 'attendant' (tnrTJP€TT}c) with a similar function at fourth-
century Athens, cf Oem. 48.35 and 52, and Beauchet, op.cit. (supra n.9) 225 n.4. 
11 KaO]wc 1TI£lpu;:L'XI£V .q iKoonc (lines 48-49), "matching the contents of the bankers' state-
ment of account." ;Kooc£c=editio (rationnm)=presentation of accounts: B. Keil, Hermes 
43 (1908) 558-59, who quotes Dig. II 13.4 (Ulpian); cf L. Robert, Hellenica XIII (1965) 197. 
'1r<,-pdXE(v 'to contain': A. Oebrunner, "Verschobener Partizipialgebrauch im Griechischen," 

178 
IMPERIAL PROVISIONS 
law; and one assumes that its maintenance at Pergamum was en-
joined by an article of the CVVCXAACXYJ7. The emperor urges that the 
parties to the dispute avail themselves of the evidence of the EKOOCLC. 
Since creditors and debtors are ever likely to see things differently, it 
should serve as an invaluable control in estimating the equivalency 
between the value of the security taken and the amount of the un-
paid debt. It is a fair assumption that the bankers have failed to make 
the data of the EKOOCLC available. Such a failure contravenes the law. 
Next the emperor amends the juridical procedure. He offers an 
alternative to decision by trial: namely, <settlement out of court' (-TO 
lKCX!'[OV TTpO Kp{C]EWC .\[CX]p.,B&IVEC8cxL= satis accipere, 50-51) if the parties 
can agree on a formula; i.e., if agreement is reached on an equiva-
lency between security and debt, whereupon the debtor will relin-
quish all claim to the security.12 Otherwise, if such a settlement 
proves to be beyond reach, the value of the security taken should 
be equal to that both of the unpaid debt and the fine for late pay-
ment.IS Then the entire case goes to trial for disposal. 
The emperor goes on to justify his removal of these cases from the 
jurisdiction of the tamiae to that of a board of ex-magistrates (ex-
strategi). He does not wish to offend, as his language (54-55) shows: 
"not that I think it improper that the tamiae have an interest in the 
proceedings." But he wants the removal anyway. His rationale 
appears of a sort with Nero's, who appointed to the public treasury 
of Rome, the aerarium, those men praetura perfunctos et experientia 
probatos. These ex-magistrates replaced quaestores who, as young, 
inexperienced men at the start of their public career, lacked dis-
MusHelv 1 (1944) 31-46, esp. 39fT. §7: TO: 1I"£pdXovra="der Inhalt', where evidence from in-
scriptions and papyri is collected. 
12 1I"pO Kp{e£we (line 50)=without recourse to trial, i.e., 1I"PO "in place of': see J. Partsch, 
Griechisches Buergschaftsrecht (Leipzig 1909) 221 n.2; W. Wyse, ed. 'leawe, The Speeches of 
Isaeus (Cambridge 1904) 418 (7Tp6 OlK"1e); A. R. W. Harrison, op.cit. (supra n.9) 246. Compare 
the meaning of the preposition in 1I"P6 'T"ile Kple£llJC (line 46) where, with the article, it is 
strictly temporal. Remark: if the dispute is settled without recourse to trial, one assumes 
capitulation of the debtor in face of legal threat. The debtor. therefore. effectively is pro 
iudicato, a condition to which 1I"P6 Kple£we (line 50) alludes. The following translations of 
Roman legal formulae may be noticed: T6 [Kav6v ~a.p.{3av£e8a, (line 50)= satis accipere; oeov 
riV"7"6 71PUypn. ~ (line 52)=quanti ea res erit: "at whatever shall be the value thereof," for 
which see Gaius IV 39fT on the Roman formulary system. 
13 1I"poeT'fWV (line 52)= fine. The fine (for alleged breach of contract) will be payable only 
if the court condemns the debtor. 

A.D. MACRO 
179 
cretion.u The exact nature of the condition which Hadrian is treating 
at the fragmentary end of the document is unclear: there is mention 
of "the authority to confiscate (or withhold) property"-an authority 
that is due to the ex-magistrates (56-57)-and of the function of at 
least one other civic officer with regard to the trial procedures (58). 
But restoration is hazardous and elusory. 
The resolutions contained in this imperial epistle as it stands are 
measured and benign. The approach is essentially conservative-
some adjustment, nothing radical: the bank's monopoly of exchange 
is kept, the existing legal procedures with regard to distraint are 
reinforced with minor amendments, and jurisdiction in cases taken 
to trial is brought into line with established Roman practice.1s 
ST DAVID'S UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, WALES and 
TRINITY COLLEGE, HARTFORD 
March,1976 
u. Tac. Ann. 13.29.3. Tacitus gives an example of this alleged quaestorian fault in the pre-
vious chapter (28.5). The Greek of the text (line 56) reflects a Ciceronian formula: e.g. 
iudex, homo et iuris et officii peritissimus (in Verr. II 12.31). 
1Ii I am grateful to Professor J. H. Oliver for guidance and criticism in the writing of this 
article. 
