RESEARCH
IMISCOE
European Immigrations
Trends, Structures and 
Policy Implications
Marek Okólski (ed.)
A M S T E R D A M  U N I V E R S I T Y  P R E S S

European Immigrations

IMISCOE
International Migration, Integration and Social Cohesion in Europe
The IMISCOE Research Network unites researchers from, at present, 28 institutes
specialising in studies of international migration, integration and social cohesion in
Europe. What began in 2004 as a Network of Excellence sponsored by the Sixth
Framework Programme of the European Commission has become, as of April 2009, an
independent self-funding endeavour. From the start, IMISCOE has promoted integrated,
multidisciplinary and globally comparative research led by scholars from various
branches of the economic and social sciences, the humanities and law. The Network
furthers existing studies and pioneers new scholarship on migration and migrant
integration. Encouraging innovative lines of inquiry key to European policymaking and
governance is also a priority.
The IMISCOE-Amsterdam University Press Series makes the Network’s findings and
results available to researchers, policymakers and practitioners, the media and other
interested stakeholders. High-quality manuscripts authored by Network members and
cooperating partners are evaluated by external peer reviews and the IMISCOE Editorial
Committee. The Committee comprises the following members:
Tiziana Caponio, Department of Political Studies, University of Turin / Forum for
International and European Research on Immigration (FIERI), Turin, Italy
Michael Collyer, Sussex Centre for Migration Research (SCMR), University of Sussex,
United Kingdom
Rosita Fibbi, Swiss Forum for Migration and Population Studies (SFM), University of
Neuchâtel / Institute of Social Sciences, University of Lausanne, Switzerland
Agata Górny, Centre of Migration Research (CMR) / Faculty of Economic Sciences,
University of Warsaw, Poland
Albert Kraler, International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD), Vienna,
Austria
Jorge Malheiros, Centre of Geographical Studies (CEG), University of Lisbon, Portugal
Marco Martiniello, National Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS), Brussels / Center for
Ethnic and Migration Studies (CEDEM), University of Liège, Belgium
Marlou Schrover, Institute for History, Leiden University, The Netherlands
Patrick Simon, National Demographic Institute (INED), Paris, France
Miri Song, School of Social Policy and Sociology, University of Kent, United Kingdom
IMISCOE Policy Briefs and more information on the network can be found at
www.imiscoe.org.

European Immigrations
Trends, Structures and Policy Implications
edited by Marek Okólski
IMISCOE Research

Cover design: Studio Jan de Boer BNO, Amsterdam
Layout: The DocWorkers, Almere
ISBN
978 90 8964 457 2
e-ISBN 978 90 4851 727 5 (pdf)
e-ISBN 978 90 4851 728 2 (e-Pub)
NUR
741 / 763
© Marek Okólski / Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam 2012
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved
above, no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the written
permission of both the copyright owner and the author of the book.

Table of Contents
Introduction
7
Marek Okólski
1
Transition from emigration to immigration
Is it the destiny of modern European countries?
23
Marek Okólski
2
Early starters and latecomers
Comparing countries of immigration and
immigration regimes in Europe
45
Joaquín Arango
3
‘Old’ immigration countries in Europe
The concept and empirical examples
65
Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger
4
Migration transitions in an era of liquid migration
Reflections on Fassmann and Reeger
91
Godfried Engbersen
5
Immigrants, markets and policies in Southern Europe
The making of an immigration model?
107
João Peixoto, Joaquín Arango, Corrado Bonifazi,
Claudia Finotelli, Catarina Sabino, Salvatore Strozza and
Anna Triandafyllidou
6
The Southern European ‘model of immigration’
A sceptical view
149
Martin Baldwin-Edwards
7
Framing the Iberian model of labour migration
Employment exploitation, de facto deregulation and
formal compensation
159
Jorge Malheiros

8
Patterns of immigration in the Czech Republic, Hungary
and Poland
A comparative perspective
179
Dušan Drbohlav
9
An uncertain future of immigration in Europe
Insights from expert-based stochastic forecasts for selected
countries
211
Arkadiusz Wiśniowski, Jakub Bijak, Marek Kupiszewski and
Dorota Kupiszewska
10
Comments on ‘An uncertain future of immigration
in Europe’ by Wiśniowski et al.
233
Leo van Wissen
11
Migration policy matters
A comparative analysis of policy recommendations
239
Magdalena Lesińska
12
The evolving area of freedom, security and justice
Taking stock and thinking ahead
259
Dora Kostakopoulou
Europe, a continent of immigrants
A conclusion
269
Marek Okólski
Contributors
275
6
EUROPEAN IMMIGRATIONS

Introduction
Marek Okólski
Not long ago, Europe was symbolically reunited – at least, such might be
the perception of the first eastward enlargement of the European Union on
1 May 2004. The accession of eight Central and Eastern European (CEE)
countries to the EU gave rise to further dismantling of those barriers
between East and West that had been erected in the Cold War era. What
followed was a softening of divisions across European societies and an
intensification of mutual contacts and flows of knowledge and ideas. Many
varied social phenomena in the East were expected to converge with those
in other parts of the continent. Migration patterns, regimes and policies
ranked among those phenomena.
At the beginning of 1989, when the Poles – and slightly later, citizens of
other CEE countries – were granted unlimited freedom of international
travel, a considerable part of western public opinion and western states re-
acted with anxiety, if not phobia. It was feared that freedom of movement
– a basic human right that for decades prior to 1989 the West had unstint-
ingly supported – could result in excessive flows of people from CEE to
the West.
The East-West exodus did not happen, however. This was because the
former communist countries of Europe, still aptly perceived in the late
1980s as politically and economically similar, set different goals for them-
selves and chose various strategies for transition to democracy and market
economy, thus undergoing massive change. An important outcome of that
change was a growing capacity to contain within the region itself the vast
migration potential that had accumulated over the period of communist
repression. This is why in the early 1990s, tens of thousands of Bulgarians,
Romanians, Ukrainians and other CEE nationals opted for migration to
other former communist countries, notably to the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Poland, instead of following in the footsteps of their fellow
countrymen who (in much smaller numbers than expected) headed for the
West.1 In comparison with Western Europe, the Czech Republic and some
other economically booming CEE countries were both geographically and
culturally closer for the migrants and thus involved less risk for the pio-
neers of international mobility of people from Ukraine, Romania or other
source countries.

Over the 1990s the inflow of foreigners to CEE countries continued. Its
forms became more mature; the earlier dominant form – the movement of
petty traders and irregular workers engaged in various odd jobs – gave way
to the flow of predominantly regular contract workers or small-scale entre-
preneurs. By attracting considerable numbers of migrants from faraway
countries, such as China (in Hungary and the Czech Republic) or Vietnam
(in the Czech Republic and Poland), the national and ethnic composition of
incoming foreigners became more diverse. At this time, communities of
settled migrants began to appear, especially in large cities.
It appeared that those CEE countries in the forefront of political and eco-
nomic transition were undergoing changes similar to those experienced a
few decades earlier by four Southern European countries – namely, Italy,
Spain, Greece and Portugal. These southern countries, along with the proc-
ess of economic integration with Western Europe, rather rapidly changed
their migration statuses. Having been important source countries for guest
worker migration to many western economies in the 1950s and 1960s,
while suffering from excess labour supply, they shifted to become new
major European destinations for immigrant workers.
Since almost all Western European countries had also undergone such a
transition, albeit at least a quarter of a century earlier, it seemed rather nat-
ural to predict that once Eastern Europe became economically integrated
with the rest of the continent, the migration patterns in that region would
change accordingly. Or, at least, to profoundly consider such a hypothesis.
*
Indeed, large scope of geographical coverage, long duration, high volume
of migratory movements and a shift in migration balance from negative to
positive on the European soil seem to be an unprecedented social phenom-
enon of modernity.2 The beginning of mass emigration from Europe is usu-
ally dated to the early nineteenth century. Jean-Claude Chesnais (1986) ar-
gues that over a whole century, in the period 1815-1914, more than 60
million inhabitants of Europe (one fifth of its 1850 population) abandoned
the continent of origin and, according to Russell King (1996), approxi-
mately 50 million Europeans moved to other continents between 1850 and
1914.3 In roughly the same period (1861-1920), the United Sates, alone,
saw the arrival of 30 million immigrants, 27 or 28 million of whom were
probably of European origin (Miller & Castles 1993 after Borjas 1990).4 In
addition, many millions of European people migrated to other countries
within the continent. For instance, between 1876 and 1920, from a total of
fifteen million Italian immigrants, nearly seven million went to other
European
countries,
notably
to
France,
Switzerland
and
Germany.
Similarly, a considerable proportion of Irish migrants moved to England
and Scotland, whereas Germany was a destination of a large number of
8
MAREK OKÓLSKI

Poles (Castles & Miller 1993). In a sharp contrast, until the late 1940s in-
tercontinental migration to Europe did not match the emigration figures. It
predominantly included returning emigrants whose proportion relative to
the out-migrants was usually well below 50 per cent (King 1996).
In relative terms, (overseas) emigration per 1,000 resident population
was very high in almost all European countries. In certain decades of the
1850-1910 period, it exceeded five per 1,000 on a yearly basis. In coun-
tries such as England, Scotland, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, Finland,
Austria-Hungary, Italy, Spain and Portugal, it accounted for a large part of
their natural increase (Baines 1991; Hatton & Williamson 2008).
The recent picture is strikingly different. Europe has become a continent
of net immigration. From 1960 to 2010, the overall positive migration bal-
ance was around 32.9 million, that is approximately one fourth of the total
128.3 million increase in the European resident population in that period
(UN 2009). According to the United Nations estimate, between 1960 and
2005, the number of international migrants in three of four major parts of
the continent (northern, southern and western) rose from 10.3 million to
39.3 million or, in relative terms, from 2.8 per cent to 9.0 per cent of the
total population (UN 2006).5
A growing importance of immigration to Europe can be best illustrated
by the following observation: the first decade of the twenty-first century
saw the rate of net migration close to (plus) 3.5 per 1,000 population in the
group of 27 member countries of the European Union, whereas the respec-
tive rate of natural increase was below one per 1,000 (Eurostat 2009).
Corrado Bonifazi (2008) attempted to establish the time when Europe at-
tained its status of net immigration. In the 1950s, the migration balance
was still strongly negative (-4.8 million over the decade). In the 1960s, the
net loss continued, but at a substantially lower level (-600,000). In the next
decade, the balance became positive (+3 million). Thus, the 1970s wit-
nessed a breakthrough. Since that time the gap between immigration and
emigration in favour of the former has been systematically growing.
Bonifazi, however, also stressed distinctive differences in migration trends
between major groups of countries and individual countries themselves.
Western Europe turned to a net immigration regime in the 1950s, where-
as Northern and Southern Europe only did so in the 1970s.6 In turn, if the
Russian Federation was excluded, Eastern Europe remained a net emigra-
tion region until the end of the century, if not beyond that date.7 On the
other hand, Belgium, France, Switzerland and Germany became a net im-
migration area as soon as in the 1950s,8 while Italy only did so in the
1990s. In 1950, many countries of Europe which nowadays are perceived
as immigration areas, hardly hosted foreign residents; in Finland, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain and the United
Kingdom, their share in the total population was below 1 per cent (in some
of them – below 0.3 per cent). After a half-century or so, the proportion of
INTRODUCTION
9

foreign residents in those countries multiplied by a factor five to ten
(Bonifazi 2008).
*
Those simple empirical facts, besides the authors’ intuition, became the in-
spiration for a research project from which this volume emanated.9
The emergence of ever-new immigration countries in Europe in recent
decades makes the question of a common European migration pattern perti-
nent and indeed topical. Cultural proximity and common cultural heritage,
comprehensive political, economic and historical links between societies
and regions, similar contemporary socio-economic and demographic chal-
lenges and convergence of institutions and policies (partly through acces-
sion to the EU) can offer a provisional justification.
On the other hand, the succession of European countries in assuming the
status of immigration area resembles the phenomenon of gradual entrance
by those countries of the mass migration era over several decades in the
nineteenth century. From a cross-country and inter-regional perspective,
mass emigration from Europe in the period from the 1820s until the out-
break of World War I (and in some cases until the early 1950s) was by no
means a uniform process, either in terms of its overall volume or time dis-
tribution. Similarly, in the period of intensified immigration, after World
War II, European countries and their regions significantly differed with re-
spect to the size and persistence of inflows over time. What particularly
mattered in the later period from the European viewpoint were also the dif-
ferences in forms of flows, the conditions of migrants’ stay and employ-
ment and thus immigrants’ propensity or ability to settle and integrate in
the host society. Those differences notwithstanding, a general tendency
appears clear and indeed unquestionable: until the mid-twentieth century, a
great majority of European regions and Europe as a whole were primarily
a sending area, whereas, since the second half of that century, they have
gradually become a net receiving area.10
*
This volume is dedicated to a broadly conceived European migration pat-
tern, to a unique coincidence and interplay of mass migration and the for-
mation of modern Europe. Taking such a long and general view, the analy-
ses in the ensuing chapters, however, focus on relatively recent (or future)
phenomena transpiring in the group of countries that belong to the EU.
An underlying assumption is that a typical feature for modernising
European countries is the change of a migration balance from net emigra-
tion to net immigration. In addition, two basic hypotheses explicitly mark
the conceptual framework.
10
MAREK OKÓLSKI

–
Patterns of immigration in ‘new’ destination countries (latecomers) re-
call historical patterns observed in ‘old’ destination countries (early
starters).11
–
Each individual country – in the process of transformation from net em-
igration to net immigration – displays a number of important distinctive
characteristics that are dependent on geographic location, previous mi-
gration links and routes, as well as the historical time of the transforma-
tion and international migratory context at the time.
Through systematising and examining the available body of knowledge
about mass migration in Europe, the analyses in this volume seek to recon-
struct immigration patterns in individual countries and groups of countries
and identify major similarities and differences across those patterns. They
also aim to link specific migration patterns with their root causes, historical
contexts and structural factors. In particular, an attempt is made to evaluate
the impact of migration policies on the course of immigration. Last but not
least, the volume includes an exercise on the projection of immigration
trends in the ‘foreseeable’ future that exploits the knowledge about past
migration and innovative analytical tools.
These aims are to be achieved by in-depth analyses of causes, character-
istics and effects of past and current migration flows to EU countries, espe-
cially those located in the southern and eastern rims of the European
Community. A special importance is to be given to comparing and assess-
ing the political background of immigration in the countries of destination,
including its institutional and administrative setup.
The countries included in the analysis represent three parts of Europe
that obviously differ according to geographic location and the time when
net positive immigration status was (or will be) reached. The countries
where the change in migration balance was accomplished before or during
the third quarter of the twentieth century are named ‘old’ immigration
countries. Those where such change occurred in the fourth quarter of the
twentieth century are named ‘new’ immigration countries; and the remain-
der (the change to be completed some time in the twenty-first century) are
named ‘future’ immigration countries. The respective breakdown of those
countries is presented in Table 1.
The main concept underlying the framework and the method of analysis
is that of country migration status. Migration status, perceived in terms of
migration balance and inflows/outflows volume, became a crucial category
in the analysis of migration transition – the process of a former emigration
country acquiring the attributes of a new immigration country. In turn,
those concepts and categories were framed by a more general conception
of the migration cycle.
‘Migration cycle’ is an analytically useful, but by no means innovatory
idea. For instance, as early as 1954, Brinley Thomas examined long swings
INTRODUCTION
11

in trans-Atlantic migration (and urban development) in the period 1870-
1910 within the concept of ‘migration cycle’,12 while Castles and Miller
(1993) suggested a cycle-like four-stage ‘model’ of migration as a tool for
systematising and identifying the time-dependent internal dynamics of im-
migration.13 Similarly, and also in 1993, Anthony Fielding argued that
mass migration to, from and within Europe changes ‘in tune with the
stages of the business cycle’ (Fielding 1993: 10). He distinguished four
stages of the cycle, each being distinctly different with respect to basic mi-
gration characteristics. As economic activity fluctuates in a regular pattern,
from an expansion (up to a peak) to a recession (down to a trough), and
from a recession to an expansion, mass migration behaves in the way that
is presented in Table 2.
Moreover, the ‘migration cycle’ underlies such concepts as ‘mobility
transition’ (Zelinsky 1971), ‘migratory transition’ (Chesnais 1986) and
‘transition from trickle to flood’ (Hatton & Williamson 2008), and has
been exploited in many empirical studies. Some of those applications are
referred to in chapter 1 of this volume. It might be mentioned here,
Table 1
Breakdown of countries with respect to their migration status
Part of Europe
Time
Early
4th quarter of
the twentieth century
Late
West
Austria, France
South
Italy, Greece,
Portugal, Spain
East
Czech Republic,
Hungary, Poland
Source: Own elaboration
Table 2
Stages of a migration cycle dependent on the business cycle
Stage 1 (expansion)
Stage 2 (peak)
Stage 3 (recession)
Stage 4 (trough)
Immigration starts low and rises rapidly;
emigration starts high and falls rapidly;
net immigration replaces net emigration.
Immigration peaks high; emigration bottoms
out low; high net immigration
Immigration starts high and falls rapidly;
emigration starts low and rises rapidly;
net emigration replaces net immigration.
Immigration bottoms out low; emigration
peaks high; high net emigration
Source: Fielding (1993: 11)
12
MAREK OKÓLSKI

however, that no universal or unequivocal sense and meaning is attributed
in the literature to the concept of migration cycle.
The authors of the present volume apply ‘migration cycle’ in a flexible
manner, in its narrower or wider meaning, according to analytical needs,
aspect of migration or time-horizon of analysis. For instance, one of those
applications followed the pioneering effort of Felice Dassetto (1990), who
himself understood the cycle as a combination of cross-generation proc-
esses making migrants from poor countries enter and settle in a rich coun-
try. In this volume, it is exploited in the analysis of European countries
passing to ever-greater ‘maturity’ with respect to immigration (see chapter
2 by Joaquín Arango in this volume). Another example was the application
of the ‘migration cycle’ to the systematisation of stages in the change in
country migration status, where the fundamental and constitutive process
of the cycle comes to be the migration transition (see chapter 1 by Marek
Okólski and chapter 3 by Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger in this vol-
ume). The principal difference between the approaches adopted by the au-
thors is that some of them (mainly chapter 1 and, to a lesser degree, also
chapter 3 plus some others) take a very long view and reach as far back as
to the origins of mass emigration, while others (mainly chapter 2) focus on
relatively recent developments in European migration history, namely, the
stage when European countries were experiencing sizeable and sustained
flows of immigrants. The reason of this distinction seems obvious and it is
purely functional. The former enables us to capture and compare the
change in migration patterns in virtually all countries of Europe; the latter
serves as an in-depth analysis of similarities and diversity in the establish-
ment and maturing of the area and pertains exclusively to the present
(‘old’ and ‘new’) net immigration countries.
*
This volume is organised as follows. The first two chapters focus on the re-
cent history of European migration and the conceptual underpinnings of
the analyses presented later in the volume. The next part (chapters 3
through 8) consists of three syntheses that test the concept of a regional
immigration pattern in each of the three groups of countries and inquire
into similarities and differences in migrant flows, immigrant integration
and migration policies in those groups. It becomes clear that a synthetic
perspective is more appropriate and manageable for countries with rela-
tively long histories and rich experiences of immigration, as opposed to
countries where immigration is a rather new phenomenon.
In the synthesis depicting immigration in ‘old’ immigration countries
(chapter 3), the authors take a rather long and general view and offer styl-
ised facts about migration. A corresponding chapter 5, related to ‘new’ im-
migration countries, while also attempting to draw a general picture, pays
INTRODUCTION
13

more attention to details and specificities of time, country and context of
immigration. In contrast to these two, chapter 8, devoted to ‘future’ immi-
gration countries – adhering to the cross-country comparative approach –
mainly describes trends and patterns in individual countries; the author
here is rather cautious in pointing to common regional characteristics of
the analysed processes. The first two of those syntheses are accompanied
by chapters 4, 6 and 7 presenting either different perspectives on the virtue
of a ‘regional’ model of immigration or discussion of some of the key find-
ings of those syntheses. The inclusion in the volume of these three critical
chapters seems to have enriched the body of arguments in the debate on a
‘European pattern of immigration’.
The next part of the volume (chapters 9 and 10) deals with migration
forecasts. First, past attempts at migration forecasting, focusing mainly on
inadequate data and techniques, are critically assessed and, in turn, an
innovative approach to improving those forecasts is developed. Such a
view is challenged and, to some extent, balanced in a brief rejoinder that
follows. The final part of the volume (chapters 11 and 12) concentrates on
lessons that can be learned from a comparative analysis of migration poli-
cies carried out in the individual countries and the groups of countries, as
well as from recent trends in the management of migration in the context
of European integration. In its conclusion, this part identifies the major
challenges faced by the EU in the area of migration and immigrant integra-
tion policy. The volume closes with a brief account of major conclusions
and an appraisal of the degree to which the authors’ objectives have been
accomplished. Here the hypothesis of European migration pattern is crit-
ically reassessed.
Turning to a more detailed look at the chapters, the first, by Okólski,
deals with the premises of migration status change in European countries.
It is based on the hypothesis that, in the long run, migration results primar-
ily from the degree of disequilibrium between population and other resour-
ces, which at times manifests itself in various degrees of overpopulation or
underpopulation. He points to the circumstances under which countries of
Northern and Western Europe transformed from sending masses of their
population overseas to receiving large numbers of people from all around
the world and, consequently, from net emigration to net immigration. He
also suggests that a similar shift in the migration pattern and balance, albeit
after a certain time lag, occurred in a number of Southern European coun-
tries. This leads him to elaborate some considerations about the present mi-
gration status of Central and East European countries and basic prerequi-
sites for their change of migration status in the near future. Okólski
concludes that such a change in any country requires, above all, the out-
flow of excess population and, secondly, embarking on the path of sus-
tained modern economic growth. When this is coupled with the completion
of the demographic transition (natural increase close to zero and advanced
14
MAREK OKÓLSKI

ageing of the population), emigration starts to decline. On the other hand,
economic competition and the search for cheap labour by employers in-
duce segmentation of the labour market and increase demand for foreign
workers. In effect, in the course of time the inflow of people becomes larg-
er than the outflow.
In the following chapter, Arango seeks an answer to the question: Do
different migration realities and experiences among European countries
stem from historical factors (e.g. the moment when the migration pattern
or regime started to change) or from structural socio-economic differences?
In order to do so, he develops an analytical framework that serves as a ba-
sis for identification of distinct groups of immigration countries and a tool
for the analysis of intra-group similarities and inter-group differences. This
framework refers to the notion of a migration cycle conceived as a multi-
stage process through which immigrants become better adapted to and (ul-
timately) integrated in the receiving society, and the socio-demographic
characteristics of immigrants increasingly resemble those of the native pop-
ulation. It also implies the following four criteria of grouping and analysis
of the immigration countries: age (stage of the migration cycle), generation
(historical context of initial and formative phases of the cycle), historical
precedence and socio-economic regime. In the next step, Arango applies
that framework to examine the distinctiveness of the immigration patterns
and characteristics of immigrant populations in the three groups of
European countries. He concludes that the set of analysed countries
presents great complexity and variation with respect to migration. This not-
withstanding, the three different migration regimes in Europe seem to be a
reality, where four Southern countries represent the highest degree of inter-
nal homogeneity and three CEE countries represent the lowest.
In the volume’s first chapter devoted to a specific group of European
countries, Fassmann and Reeger describe in a detailed manner the migra-
tion patterns observed in ‘old’ immigration countries. In doing so, they ex-
tensively use the concept of a migration cycle composed of three distinct
stages: initial (pre-transformation), intermediate (transition) and adaptation
(post-transformation). They also consider four characteristics of each stage:
historical time, quantities (flows, stocks, pace of growth, fluctuations), pub-
lic perception and legal measures. In their analysis, they include Germany
and the UK in addition to Austria and France, and contrast those countries
with Spain (as an example of a ‘new’ immigration country). Accounting
for the differences between the countries at any given time, Fassmann and
Reeger come to a straightforward final conclusion: with regard to immigra-
tion, European countries are developing in the same direction and in a sim-
ilar way.
Godfried Engbersen’s chapter widens the scope of analysis that deals
with ‘old’ immigration countries. The author argues that the long-run ap-
proach adopted by Fassmann and Reeger, which he calls ‘path-dependent’,
INTRODUCTION
15

fails to recognise the importance of contemporary (or current) migration
flows to Western countries, whose nature seems significantly different from
the bulk of flows observed in the past. The essence of that new mobility,
exemplified by the case of flows of people from CEE to the Netherlands,
is a fluid (liquid) form of labour migration. In an institutional context
entirely different from that of the old guest worker system of the 1960s
and 1970s, the migration pattern in ‘old’ countries now seems to be deviat-
ing from the path depicted by the concept of a migration cycle. New mi-
grations are, among others, characterised by a regular status of migrants’
employment, temporary stay, individualised life strategies, multiplicity and
multidirectionality of movements and loosely defined aspirations and op-
tions of migrants. All of this makes rather pertinent the question put for-
ward by Engbersen: Are we witnessing a shift from the adaptation stage (ac-
cording to Fassmann and Reeger, the final in the migration cycle) to a new
initial stage?
The three succeeding chapters deal with the specificity of the so-called
Southern (or Mediterranean) model of immigration, pertaining to ‘new’
countries of immigration. In the opening chapter, João Peixoto and six co-
authors skilfully synthesise the immense research and new findings pertain-
ing to four countries – Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal (Arango,
Bonifazi, Finotelli, Peixoto, Sabino, Strozza & Triandafyllidou 2009).
They refer to earlier comparative analyses of immigration experiences in
Southern European countries with the intention of testing their validity and
updating them. In their analysis, Peixoto et al. focus on the phenomenon of
irregular migration, the mechanisms of migrant workers’ insertion in the
labour market and migration policy responses. Special attention is paid to
regularisation policies, executed – typical for Southern countries – ex post,
as well as to their effectiveness and social costs. Through cross-country
analysis, the authors scrupulously examine various aspects of migration-
related experiences, tracking signs of both regional homogeneity and diver-
sity. Despite the differences with regard to timing, quantity and types of
migrant flows or to policy tools, ultimately, they seem to be convinced that
a ‘Southern model’ does exist. They stress, however, that the model is
dynamic because with time it acquires ever-new dimensions and meanings
and includes new social frameworks and new policy instruments.
In turn, Martin Baldwin-Edwards presents a sceptical view about the
utility and validity of a ‘Southern model’, identified in earlier years by the
author himself and several others, especially when it comes to analyses of
ongoing migration processes in the respective countries. Further, he adds a
number of factors that – according to him – could enrich the analysis by
Peixoto et al.; these include the role of local governance in policy directed
at integration of immigrants, the role of NGOs and civil society in provid-
ing social support and acceptance of immigrants and the dependence of mi-
gration policy on political ideology and the operation of political parties.
16
MAREK OKÓLSKI

In conclusion, Baldwin-Edwards suggests that a ‘Southern model’ might
be too simple and too broad to adequately grasp all complexities and expe-
riences acquired to date by the Mediterranean countries.
The last in the series of three chapters devoted to Southern European
countries limits itself to Portugal and Spain, to what is called the ‘Iberian
model of labour migration’. Author Jorge Malheiros takes an in-depth look
at a major feature of that model: the low degree of regulation of migration
flows ‘in a society characterised by practices marked by familiarism, infor-
mality and patrimony-based traditions’. He finds a close match between
economic interests and migration policies that bring about a specific pat-
tern of foreign worker recruitment, insertion and, ultimately, integration in
the labour market. He argues that in this respect, Portugal and Spain, which
are similar, differ significantly from Italy and radically from Greece.
The next chapter is devoted to immigration trends and patterns in three
CEE countries: the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. In this chapter,
Dušan Drbohlav draws extensively from a comprehensive cross-country
analysis pertaining to the three countries (Grabowska-Lusińska, Drbohlav
& Hars 2011). He points out that the three ‘future’ immigration countries,
although expected to be experiencing similar migration-related processes,
are in fact strongly differentiated. Migration flows to the Czech Republic
are rather strong, emigration is low and the migration balance is clearly
positive; Hungary has little immigration and hardly any emigration, result-
ing in a tiny surplus of immigrants; and in Poland emigration by far ex-
ceeds immigration, leading to a negative migration balance. On the other
hand, Poland has a strong inflow of circular or short-term migrants (a good
proportion of those migrants fit the concept of liquid migration, introduced
in chapter 4) whereas in the Czech Republic and Hungary, long-term immi-
gration is the predominant type. Drbohlav concludes that all three countries
are undergoing migration transition, an intermediary stage between being
an emigration country and being an immigration country, but find them-
selves in different phases of the transition. Poland is in its incipient phase,
whereas Hungary and the Czech Republic, especially, are considerably fur-
ther on in that process. Those differences notwithstanding, all three are at
the moment too ‘young’ as immigration countries to justify a meaningful
search for a ‘regional model’ of immigration or to draw a parallel between
those countries and the rest of Europe.
The following two chapters deal with the issue of immigration in the fu-
ture, or, strictly speaking, with the limits to migration forecasting.
Arkadiusz Wiśniowski and his three co-authors argue that the relevant fore-
casts yield inevitably uncertain results if only for three reasons: the inabil-
ity to adequately define migration, difficulty in its precise measurement
and imperfections in knowledge about the nature of the processes involved.
A considerable part of these weaknesses is attributed by them to the deter-
ministic character of population forecasts, in general, and migration, in
INTRODUCTION
17

particular. In order to alleviate at least some of the weakness of migration
forecasting, they suggest using a stochastic approach and, in particular,
Bayesian statistics. This leads them to apply the concept of migration fore-
casting in a flexible manner, complementing official immigration data with
expert data derived from a series of Delphi surveys. In turn, with help of
autoregressive models and vector autoregressive models, Wiśniowski et al.
present numerical results from that approach for a number of immigration
countries representing various parts of Europe. Summing up, they seem to
be confident that migration is mostly an unpredictable phenomenon and
claim that ‘precise forecasting of the exact values of immigration flows is
virtually impossible’. Although the application of stochastic models to the
forecasting of migration flows enables researchers to quantify and account
for a degree of uncertainty, the lesson for policymakers is clear: any migra-
tion forecast must be viewed with great caution and all the more caution
for longer time horizons.
Leo van Wissen, in the second chapter in this section, applauds the ap-
proach adopted by Wiśniowski et al., which he describes as innovative and
elegant. However, he disagrees with their main message, namely that mi-
gration is hardly predictable. To support his view, Van Wissen discusses in
a rather technical way a handful of factors that – in favourable circumstan-
ces – might make the results less uncertain. Thus, room for improvement
can be found in the following: a better translation of expert ideas into dis-
tributions of the parameters of the forecasting model; more careful assump-
tions about the interdependency of model parameters; a lengthening of the
time series for explanatory variables included in the model; a more accu-
rate (‘optimal’) mathematical formulation of the model; and more inter-
nally consistent data on migration extracted from official statistics.
The two chapters preceding the final conclusions might be viewed as
being practically oriented. They present policy recommendations that stem
from analyses of most recent migration phenomena observed in Europe
and attempt to refer those recommendations to the mainstream debate
about a common European migration policy. First, Magdalena Lesińska
lists the premises required by ‘ideal’ or ‘mature’ migration policy. Through
this lens, she examines the process of learning by countries in earlier
phases of the migration transition from countries in more advanced phases.
In this context, she identifies and analyses the lessons to be learned, first,
from the current ‘old’ immigration countries and then from the ‘new’ im-
migration countries. Lesińska also attempts to address the main questions
she considers ‘the pillars of migration policy’. She answers the question
‘how should labour migration be managed?’ by promoting the search for
more flexible and effective rules and recruitment schemes. ‘How should
irregular immigration be coped with?’ is met with a proposal for controls,
regularisation and addressing root causes. Finally, she asks about the
modes of solving ‘the eternal problem of integration’ and offers a very
18
MAREK OKÓLSKI

elaborate discussion that accounts for the integrity and coherence of policy
aims and measures; the scope and organisational structure of integration
policy; a variety of inclusion activities and combating discrimination and
marginalisation; integration-promoting education and information; protec-
tion of vulnerable groups; and participation of migrants in the formulation
and execution of integration policy.
The problem of integration in the context of so-called Europeanisation,
with which Lesińska’s chapter concludes, is further investigated by
Theodora Kostakopoulou. She considers that aspect of migration policy
from the legal and institutional perspective and, in doing so, she pays spe-
cial attention to the evolution of the area of freedom, security and justice
in the European Communities. Her analysis draws on a critical review of
the development of policy goals and instruments in that area and she calls
for a readjustment of European migration law and policy. As Kostakopou-
lou argues:
[...] there is an urgent need to rethink the existing political frames
of migration and integration, and to devise a coherent framework of
migration governance that de-securitises migration, reflects interna-
tional and European legal commitments and takes sufficiently into
account the specificity of migration patterns in the ‘old’, ‘new’ and
‘future’ migration countries.
Bearing in mind that ‘mobility is an integral part of the European integra-
tion project’, a shift in paradigm is required – ‘from perceiving and fram-
ing migration as a threat or nuisance to viewing it as a resource’.
Notes
1
The CEE’s economic and political polarisation (the emergence of migration attrac-
tion poles in the region) proved to be a precondition for that shift in the expected
out-migration of CEE populations. Other important underlying factors included: a
dramatic liberalisation of migration policies (especially the rules of entry) through-
out CEE, concomitant with the introduction of more rigorous admission rules in
Western countries; intra-regional differences in demography and imbalances in la-
bour markets in CEE; and – last but not least – the opening of ways for (until 1989,
largely repressed) movements of various ethnic groups that were territorially divided
or scattered by the redrawing of state borders in CEE during the Yalta Conference in
1945 (Oko´lski 2004).
2
A vast literature exists on this subject. Among the most influential works one might
mention are: Bade (2003), Baines (1991), Castles and Miller (1993), Cohen (1987),
Eltis (1983, 2002), Hatton and Williamson (1994, 1998, 2008), King (1996),
Lucassen (1987), Potts (1990), Thomas (1954, 1958, 1972), Willcox (1929, 1931).
3
Stephen Castles and Mark Miller (1993 after Decloıˆtres 1967) offer a slightly lower
figure (for 1800-1930) – namely, 40 million – but confine that estimate to the
INTRODUCTION
19

overseas migration, thus excluding a huge migration of Russian population to
Siberia and Central Asia since the 1890s (around 13 million according to McKeown
2004). Klaus Baade (2003) offers a variety of reliable estimates of European overseas
emigration in a period of around 100 years between the beginnings of the nine-
teenth and the early twentieth centuries that range between 37 million and 63
million.
4
According to another account (Eltis 1983), in the period 1820-1880 13.7 million im-
migrants in the US arrived from Europe (in the period 1760-1820 the number was
only 800,000).
5
In Eastern Europe, the increase also seemed very steep – from 6.8 million to 24.8
million (2.2 per cent to 7.5 per cent of the total population). These figures, however,
to a large degree constitute an artefact. The initially large number of immigrants
stemmed from the definition of international migrant adopted by the United
Nations and based on the country of birth criterion. In turn, the period 1960-2005’s
growth owed to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing reclassification of
persons who over that period moved within the boundaries of that country (and, of
course, until around 1990 were considered internal migrants). From the time of the
Soviet Union’s disintegration they became international migrants. Those reserva-
tions are much less meaningful in the case of other parts of Europe (see Bonifazi
2008).
6
Precisely for that reason, the entities that compose Western Europe merit the name
of ‘old immigration countries’, while those of Southern Europe are often called ‘new
immigration countries’.
7
The picture for Russia (and the whole former USSR, in fact) is blurred and cannot
be compared with other parts of Europe due to reasons explained in note 5.
8
France presents a clear exception here. It was a country of net immigration already
in some decades of the late nineteenth century and in the 1920s (King 1993).
9
IDEA – an acronym for the project known as Mediterranean and Eastern European
Countries as New Immigration Destinations in the European Union – was con-
ceived in early 2006 and carried out from 2007 to 2009. It benefited from financial
support
granted
by
the
European
Commission
within
the
6th
Framework
Programme (Priority SSP-5A, Area 8.1 B.2.5, Project no. 44446). IDEA was coordi-
nated by the Centre of Migration Research (CMR) at the University of Warsaw and
conducted by a consortium of eleven research institutions including, alongside the
coordinator (in alphabetical order): the Central European Forum for Migration and
Population Research (IOM Warsaw); the Centre for International Migration and
Refugee Studies (Institute of Ethnic and National Minority Studies of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest); the Centre of Research in Economic
Sociology and Organisation (Lisbon); the Department of Social Geography and
Regional Development (Charles University, Prague); the Hellenic Foundation for
European and Foreign Policy (Athens); the Institute for Urban and Regional Studies
(Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna); the Institute for Research on Population
and Social Policies (National Research Council, Rome); the Institute of Political
Science (Paris University X, Nanterre); the Mediterranean Laboratory of Sociology
(National
Centre
of
Scientific
Research,
Aix-en-Provence);
Ortega
y
Gasset
University Institute for Research (Madrid). Full documentation and all research out-
comes of the project are available at www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl.
10
Distinct exceptions to this tendency, however, could be observed even at the time of
this writing. In particular, Poland and Romania from among the EU members and
Ukraine from among non-EU countries ranked among important migrant-sending
areas.
20
MAREK OKÓLSKI

11
Strikingly, Timothy Hatton and Jeffrey Williamson (2008) speak about ‘old’ and
‘new’ emigrants from Europe during the period of mass overseas migration in refer-
ence to emigrants from Western and Northern Europe in the first instance and from
Eastern and Southern Europe in the second. King (1996) referring to Michael Piore
(1979) distinguishes between ‘old’ and ‘new’ immigration to the US (originating
from North-Western and South-Eastern Europe, respectively).
12
In reference to Thomas’ concept, Hatton and Williamson (1994) explicitly spoke of
the ‘emigration cycle’.
13
To be sure, in subsequent editions of the book, the concept of a four-stage model
has been somehow diluted and presented in a very vague form.
References
Arango, J., C. Bonifazi, C. Finotelli, J. Peixoto, C. Sabino, S. Strozza & A. Triandafyllidou
(2009), ‘The making of an immigration model: Inflows, impacts and policies in Southern
Europe’,
IDEA
Working
Papers
9,
www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP_9_Southern_
countries_synthesis.pdf.
Baade K.J. (2003), Migration in European history. Oxford: John Wiley/Blackwell.
Baines, D. (1991), Emigration from Europe 1815-1930. London: Macmillan.
Bonifazi, C. (2008), ‘Evolution of regional patterns of international migration in Europe’, in
C. Bonifazi, M. Okólski, J. Schoorl & P. Simon (eds.), International migration in Europe.
New trends and new methods of analysis, 107-128. IMISCOE Research Series. Amster-
dam: Amsterdam University Press.
Castles, S. & M.J. Miller (1993), The age of migration: International population movements
in the modern world. Houndmills: Macmillan.
Chesnais, J.-C. (1986), La transition démographique: Etapes, formes, implications écono-
miques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Cohen, R. (1987), The New Helots: Migrants in the international division of labour.
Aldershot: Avebury.
Dassetto, F. (1990), ‘Pour une théorie des cycles migratoires’, in A. Bastenier & F. Dassetto
(eds.), Immigration et nouveaux pluralisms: Une confrontation de sociétés, 11-40.
Brussels: De Boeck-Wesmael.
Eltis, D. (ed.) (2002), Coerced and free migration: Global perspectives. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Eltis, D. (1983), ‘Free and coerced transatlantic migrations: Some comparisons’, American
Historical Review 88: 251-280.
Eurostat (2009), ‘Population and social conditions’. Data in focus 31: 1-11.
Fielding, A. (1993), ‘Mass migration and economic restructuring’, in R. King (ed.), Mass mi-
grations in Europe: The legacy and the future, 7-17. London: Belhaven Press.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I., D. Drbohlav & A. Harš (eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative
analysis of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland before and after joining the EU.
Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (2008), Global migration and the world economy: Two centu-
ries of policy and performance. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (1998), The age of mass migration: Causes and economic im-
pact. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (eds.) (1994), Migration and the international labour market,
1850-1939. London: Routledge.
King, R. (1996), ‘Migration in a world historical perspective’, in J. van den Broeck (ed.), The
economics of labour migration, 7-75. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
INTRODUCTION
21

King, R. (1993), ‘European international migration 1945-90: A statistical and geographical
overview’, in R. King (ed.), Mass migration in Europe: The legacy and the future, 19-39.
London: Belhaven Press.
Lucassen, J. (1987), Migrant labour in Europe 1600-1900. London: Croom Helm.
McKeown, A. (2004), ‘Global migration 1846-1940’, Journal of World History 15: 155-189.
Okólski, M. (2004), ‘The effects of political and economic transition on international migra-
tion in Central and Eastern Europe’, in D.S. Massey & J.E. Taylor (eds.), International
migration: Prospects and policies in a global market, 35-58. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Piore, M.J. (1979), Birds of passage: Migrant labour in industrial societies. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Potts, L. (1990), The world labour market: A history of migration. London: Zed Books.
Thomas, B. (1972), Migration and urban development: A reappraisal of British and American
long cycles. London: Methuen.
Thomas, B. (ed.) (1958), The economics of international migration. London: Macmillan.
Thomas, B. (1954), Migration and economic growth: A study of Great Britain and the
Atlantic economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
UN (2009), World population prospects: The 2008 revision. New York: United Nations.
UN (2006), Trends in total migrant stock: The 2005 revision. New York: United Nations.
Willcox, W.F. (ed.) (1931), ‘International migrations’, Vol. II, NBER Occasional Paper 18.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Willcox, W.F. (ed.) (1929), ‘International migrations’, Vol. I, NBER Occasional Paper 14.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Zelinsky, W. (1971), ‘The hypothesis of the mobility transition’, Geographical Review 61:
219-249.
22
MAREK OKÓLSKI

1
Transition from emigration to immigration
Is it the destiny of modern European countries?
Marek Okólski
1.1
Purpose of this chapter
This book makes extensive use of two basic concepts: migration transition
and the migration cycle. Expounded within its framework, the central
premise of those concepts is such that, over time and under specific cir-
cumstances, individual European countries transform their migration status
from one of emigration to one of immigration. This change in migration
status has been termed the ‘migration transition’.
As explained in the Introduction of this volume, the ‘migration cycle’ in
its more general sense involves three distinct, consecutive phases: the first
occurs when a country is overwhelmed by the outflow of its inhabitants,
while the proportion of foreign nationals in the total population continues
to be marginal; the second begins when the migration transition takes
place; and the third begins when immigration systematically predominates
over emigration and foreigners constitute a considerable proportion of the
population. The central part of the cycle, the migration transition, also
involves distinct parts (i.e. stages), which can be distinguished according
to a given country’s degree of maturity in terms of its immigration pattern
or regime (see chapter 2 in this volume). A sequence of the stages – from
immature to mature immigration country – makes up the ‘migration cycle’
(or rather ‘immigration cycle’) in a narrower sense.1
The main hypothesis underlying the analyses included in the present vol-
ume was that each European country finds itself in a specific stage of the
immigration cycle. Consequently, countries included in the project were
divided into three groups: the most advanced (‘old’), the moderately ad-
vanced (‘new’) and the least advanced (‘future’). As will be shown in part
3 of this chapter, of all countries analysed in depth in the present volume,
Austria belongs to the first group (‘old’); Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain
to the second group (‘new’); and the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland
to the third group (‘future’). Similarly, Ruby Gropas and Anna Triandafylli-
dou (2007) describe five types of European countries made distinct by their

migration patterns: old host countries, recent host countries, countries in tra-
nsition, small island countries and non-immigrant countries. Leaving aside
‘small islands’ (which include, according to Gropas and Triandafyllidou,
Cyprus and Malta – and I would add Iceland here), this typology, apart from
the three groups distinguished by the authors of this book, accounts for non-
immigration status, the status attributed to the Baltic States, Slovakia and
Slovenia.
This chapter specifically addresses the process a country undergoes to
attain ‘immigration country’ status. To begin with, we should be more spe-
cific when using the notion of an ‘immigration country’ (or ‘receiving
area’). Does any type of inflow count, e.g. one comprising foreigners and/
or return migrants; settlers and/or circular migrants – irrespective of its vol-
ume, durability or form – or should there be some additional requirements?
It seems that immigration, in order to be studied as such (especially in the
context of an immigration country) needs to attain a certain (high) critical
mass and to be a relatively sustained phenomenon. Moreover, it seems
conceivable that high-volume and sustained immigration goes hand in hand
with net emigration. Assuming, then, that no country becomes an immigra-
tion country out of the blue, but rather reaches that status after a process of
transformation from net emigration to net immigration, it seems useful – at
least insofar as the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland are concerned –
to extend the concept of the migration cycle further, by adding an early
stage (‘prenatal’ or ‘embryonic’) of the migration transition, where emigra-
tion declines and the nuclei of immigrant settlements are being set up.
For Central and Eastern European countries (and likely for other coun-
tries, e.g. Finland, Iceland and Ireland, as well) the real analytical crux,
around which respective hypotheses could be tested empirically, is whether
these countries are changing their statuses from net emigration to net immi-
gration and, if so, how?
This sort of approach, however, requires taking a far-reaching retrospec-
tive view.
1.2
Factors of European migration in historical perspective
Whereas the present volume is about relatively recent migratory phenom-
ena, in this chapter, I take a long view. This is because I argue that the
change in the migration status of any European country (population/soci-
ety/state) should be conceived of as embedded in a broader demographic
context and analysed as a structurally determined phenomenon. Such an
approach evidently requires a long-time perspective.2
Precisely speaking, in pre-modern contemporary societies migration
plays an ancillary role in population reproduction. It becomes an important
component of reproduction once mortality begins its systematic and secular
24
MAREK OKÓLSKI

decline. With the fall in death rates and ensuing, albeit delayed, fertility
decline, the rate of natural increase reaches much higher levels than ever
before and gives rise to several-decades-long, uninterrupted and relatively
fast population growth. Thus, potential for mass emigration accrues. When
the decrease in fertility rate is complete and fertility becomes close to the
generation-to-generation replacement level, there is no longer need nor
potential for massive and systematic emigration. On the contrary, under
low and stable mortality, the close-to-replacement fertility brings about a
very long process of population ageing. This, in turn, creates room for im-
migrant population. If, under such a reproduction regime, population is to
increase and at the same time ‘resist’ fast ageing, steady immigration has
to be reality. By this, migration maintains or reinforces its vital role in pop-
ulation reproduction, the role acquired at a certain point of the secular mor-
tality decline.
Therefore, the demographic transition, the process that encapsulates the
above-depicted phenomena, can be considered a structural foundation of
the said change in migration status of European countries.
On the other hand, one might perceive the demographic transition as an
intermediate stage of the modernisation-related3 population cycle, whose
initial (pre-modern) and ultimate (modern) stages assume some form of en-
during population stability and a more or less erratic but also enduring
equilibrium between the population size and its man-made environment. A
shift in the predominant form and reproductive function of external migra-
tion, viewed from the perspective of any population that undergoes such a
cycle, is, according to Jean-Claude Chesnais (1986), an integral part of the
demographic transition and is called by him the migration transition.
Pre-modern migration is dependent upon political or economic conjunc-
ture and rarely assumes mass scale.4 Typically, short-term mobility of circu-
latory character predominates in the movements of population. Underneath,
births and deaths – their high levels and short-term but rarely coherent varia-
tions notwithstanding – remain in a long-term balance.
Colin Clark (1977) and Jean-Noël Biraben (1979) suggest that over one
thousand years (the period between 14 AD and approximately 1000),
Europe’s population size did not change at all,5 though in between it dis-
played numerous ups and downs. Around the year 1400, its level was still
not much higher than fourteen centuries earlier (Poursin 1976).6 Since the
fifteenth century, European population seemed evidently on the rise, and in
the period 1400-1800 it grew (according to Carr-Saunders 1936) by a little
more than 300 per cent (United Nations 1973: 21) or (according to a more
up-to-date estimate) by some 180 per cent (Biraben 2006: 13).7 This, how-
ever, was only a prelude to a really explosive increase.
In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, within the period of less
than 100 years, European populations recorded unprecedented growth, usu-
ally by more than factor two. According to Walter F. Willcox (after
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
25

Chesnais 1986: 299), between 1800 and 1930, the population whose moth-
er tongue was Russian increased by a factor of six; while in the case of
English, the growth was fivefold; Italian and Polish: three-and-a-half-fold;
Spanish: threefold; German: two-and-a-half-fold; and French: a bit more
than twofold. Chesnais (1992: 319) estimates that in the presently highly
developed countries, the growth of population size between the initial and
final years of the demographic transition (on average, one hundred years)
reached 300 per cent. It was mainly due to a systematic decrease of mortal-
ity and a consistently elevated natural increase. As alluded to in this vol-
ume’s Introduction, a large part of that surplus population left for other
continents.8 This was due in some part to greatly improved means of trans-
portation and good opportunities elsewhere that lured immigrants (Hatton
& Williamson 2008; King 1996), but mainly because of a different and
very special reason. That reason is verbalised in Chesnais’ words (1992:
306):
[…] emigration helped, at a time when the competition of young
adults on the job market was at its highest, to reduce the threat of
over-population […]. External migration [was] a manifestly strate-
gic variable in the process of a population’s adjustment to its
milieu.
As a matter of fact, Chesnais develops and substantiates empirically a hy-
pothesis which posits a close to twenty-year time lag between time series
of births (or natural increase) and emigration (Chesnais 1992: 171-175)
and, by the same token, a ‘substitution of mortality by migration’.9 Russell
King (1996: 35), in reference to the safety valve theory, offers a similar
explanation:
As the death rate in Europe declined and the birth rate failed to
respond to keep population growth in check, emigration functioned
as a safety-valve to skim off a significant proportion of the surplus.
By many accounts, mass emigration from Europe, which started in the
early nineteenth century, can be considered a breakthrough in European
population history. In reference to that phenomenon, Timothy Hatton and
Jeffrey Williamson (2008) speak of the transition from a trickle to mass
migration.10 As a matter of fact, it is just one of the manifestations of a
broader concept – the mobility transition, in terms of Wilbur Zelinsky’s
(1971) well-known hypothesis. Its essence is that ‘physical and social mo-
bility’ always substantially increases as society (‘community’ in his own
words) experiences the process of modernisation. Moreover, ‘the course of
the mobility transition closely parallels that of the demographic transition’
(Zelinsky 1979: 171). One of the characteristics of early modernisation
26
MAREK OKÓLSKI

(‘the early transitional society’ phase) is a ‘major outflow of emigrants to
available and attractive foreign destinations’, concomitant with a ‘rapid de-
cline in mortality [and] a relatively rapid rate of natural increase, and thus
a major growth in size of population’ (Zelinsky 1979: 173).
By a striking contrast, after around 100 to 150 years from the onset of
mass intercontinental outflow of people, many countries of Europe wit-
nessed exacerbated inflow of immigrants, largely of non-European origin,
and at about the same time (if not a few decades earlier) European overseas
emigration began to fade. Conspicuously, this new tendency generally ap-
peared first in those countries where the mass emigration (and the demo-
graphic transition) was initiated at the earliest. In fact, labour markets in
some of those countries had attracted large numbers of foreigners several
decades before that time. At that time, however, the migrants originated as
a rule from other (less advanced in the process of industrialisation) coun-
tries of Europe and often they assumed the role of temporary workers in
their host countries.
The beginning of the 1970s saw some 10 million migrant workers in
Europe, many of them from Turkey, India, Pakistan, British, Dutch and
French colonies of the Caribbean, various African countries and the East
Indies. Between the early 1950s and the early 1970s, the foreign popula-
tion in Germany increased by around 3.5 million; in France and Britain by
more than 2.5 million; in Switzerland by nearly 800,000; in Belgium by
400,000; and in the Netherlands and Sweden by 300,000 (King 1986;
Castles & Miller 2003). Not only did foreign citizens become a part of the
resident populations in Europe in the decades to follow, but, moreover, the
number and geographical diversity of their origin greatly increased, as did
the number of European destination countries.
That profound change also finds a reflection in the hypothesis of the mo-
bility transition.11 In the late phase of the transition, as Zelinsky (1979:
173, 174) argues, ‘emigration is on the decline or may have ceased alto-
gether’ and next, the phase of ‘advanced society’ witnesses a ‘significant
net immigration of unskilled and semi-skilled workers from relatively
underdeveloped lands’. All that is due to ‘a slight to moderate rate of natu-
ral increase or none at all’, caused by the decline of fertility which finally
‘oscillates rather unpredictably at low to moderate levels’.
Levels of fertility in North-Western Europe after the mid-1960s (and lat-
er in other parts of the continent) turned out very low, in fact substantially
below the replacement level. This was hardly predicted by the demo-
graphic transition model. Such unexpected fall in fertility prompted Dirk
van de Kaa (1999)12 to extend and adjust the classical model of demo-
graphic transition by assuming that the natural increase of population can
be both positive and negative, and explicitly adding net migration as a
component of the population change that continuously interplays with nat-
ural increase. He incorporated in the model the idea developed by Hatton
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
27

and Williamson (1994), who suggested that, as natural increase (assuming
systematically positive values) first rises and later declines, emigration
goes through four phases – initiation, growth, saturation and regression –
and with further decline in natural increase (within its negative values), im-
migration comes to the fore. Referring to contemporary Europe, Van de
Kaa (1999: 29, 34) assumed that it
will face a lengthy period of below-replacement fertility and,
equally, a lengthy period of immigration […]. The region will
surely come to grips with reality and will start acting as an immi-
gration area. This will lead to a carefully controlled influx, possibly
during a couple of generations.
Therefore an important conclusion might be drawn here. During the time
of mass population movements, rates of migration are strongly linked (at
least in the statistical sense) to rates of natural increase.13 This is even
more so when it comes to long trends (Chesnais 1992).
Coming back to the nineteenth century, all European societies experi-
enced massive territorial mobility, including massive waves of emigration.
Compared to the types of migrations observed in earlier periods of
European history, the type of mobility that arose during the nineteenth cen-
tury displayed two important, distinct characteristics. First of all, it was by
and large intentional and usually included the aim of settlement. In addi-
tion, it was principally individualistic and economically oriented, as it was
undertaken by entrepreneurs (including farmers) and workers in search of
gainful employment.
It began, naturally, with capitalism and modernisation, and as a sustained
quasi-unidirectional process of complex social change. The Industrial
Revolution in England, an early component and factor of modernisation,
gave rise to an unprecedented and long-lasting decline in mortality and ac-
celerated population growth.14 Shortly, the population explosion became
an all-European phenomenon.
Increasing populations nourished industrial growth, both by enhancing
the demand for goods and by supplying the labour market with ever more
labour. Modernisation and the demographic transition became interwoven
and mutually interdependent (Dyson 2001).
Initially, surpluses of population and labour occurred mainly in back-
ward areas, which were barely influenced or penetrated by modern social
change and the related institutions or social relationships.
Thus, the flow of people moving to fulfil the unsatisfied labour demand
in modernising areas took a clear direction – from the peripheries with
(mostly) subsistence (pre-capitalist) economies to metropolitan centres with
full-fledged markets and highly monetised (capitalist) economies. This phe-
nomenon, inter alia, contributed to the expansion of demand for goods and
28
MAREK OKÓLSKI

stimulated production growth. It should be mentioned that those flows of
labour assumed the two forms, internal and international migration, both
complementary or substituting for each other, depending on contextual cir-
cumstances, e.g. the phase of economic (business) cycle (Thomas 1954).
Population growth in Europe in the nineteenth century turned out to be
so dynamic that the flows of people from the peripheries to the core, i.e.
typically from rural to urban areas – both within particular countries and in
the trans-European space – did not substantially reduce the population sur-
plus and the emerging demographic-economic imbalance. As a conse-
quence, a large overseas emigration movement emerged and attained an
unprecedented scale. While in the early 1800s the population of all conti-
nents besides Europe consisted of less than 5 million European settlers or
their ancestors, today the respective number has skyrocketed to between
550 million and 650 million (Grabowska-Lusińska & Okólski 2009).
With the phenomenon of modernisation and of colonisation by Europeans
of countries overseas, the world has gradually been divided into a group of
core (or centre) countries, where modern changes were either complete or
highly advanced, and a group of peripheral countries, where these changes
were only just pending. A long-term process that characterises this division
is the movement of individual countries from the former group towards the
latter.
Depending on the course of both modernisation and demographic transi-
tion, the demand for labour in the metropolitan centres occasionally
exceeded the supply of migrant labour (originating predominantly in the
peripheries), but sometimes the opposite happened. The former scenario
favoured immigration, whereas the latter case favoured emigration. A gen-
eral tendency, however, was that of net emigration in the early stages of
economic and demographic change, and net immigration in the later stages.
France, for instance, where the pace of demographic transition was rela-
tively ‘low’ and social change was rather deep, experienced very little emi-
gration and rather quickly became a net immigration country (Morokvasic-
Müller, Dinh, Potot & Salzbrunn 2008).
That net immigration status is typical of advanced modernity – which,
in turn, coincides with the end of demographic transition periods – is a
result of the very nature of the latter phenomenon. The end of demographic
transition means, among other things, very low fertility, close to zero popu-
lation growth and fast population ageing. Under the circumstances of rapid
economic growth, this unavoidably leads to labour shortages and to
labour’s ‘importation’ from outside (third countries).
The shift from a relative abundance of labour to a deficit could be seri-
ously affected (amplified or impeded) by several other factors. One of
these catalysts is the date when modern changes begin, or, strictly speak-
ing, the relative level of modernity of a given society vis-à-vis other soci-
eties at the moment of the process’s initiation. The later a society enters
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
29

modernisation, the more it can borrow or copy from pioneers or predeces-
sors, and the less consistent social changes in that society seem to be.
Modernisation processes in Mediterranean and CEE societies serve as an
illustration here. It might also be the case, however, that the latecomers en-
counter more acute and prolonged imbalances between the unsatisfied de-
mand for labour generated by the centre and the excessive supply of labour
generated by the periphery.
Another crucial factor that contributes to the increased diversity among
various societies in the course of the migration status change involves
inherent cultural differences between those societies. The societies that are
culturally similar to each other are more likely to undergo a comparable
course of transition from a net emigration to net immigration status than
those more dissimilar. Finally, there is virtually a plethora of factors of
more universal or more local reach that are believed to have facilitated or
accelerated or modified the course and essence of the transition, such as
transportation costs, wage level and rates, conjuncture (phase of the busi-
ness/investment cycle), the Irish Famine, ethnic cleansing (e.g. persecution
of Jews in the Russian Empire), structure of the world economy (‘Atlantic
economy’), public policy (e.g. government subsidies), the strength of kin-
ship and social networks, etc. (e.g. Baines 1991; Chesnais 1986; Gliwic
1934; Hatton &Williamson 2008; King 1996; Thomas 1954, 1972). In a
short term, under the influence of those factors, many cases were noted to
be of significant deviation from the main trend or even distinct exceptions
from that trend. In the long run, however, the impact of demographic phe-
nomena, especially the change in the regime of (vital) population reproduc-
tion, turns out to be essential.15
Neither modern social change nor demographic transition is a uniform
and linear process, and each one heavily depends on, among other things,
starting points and cultural particularities. For instance, latecomer countries
usually experience very rapid declines in mortality and strong surges in
natural increase (i.e. the increase in native-born population)16 relative to
pioneer countries, but the persistence of traditional lifestyles and subsis-
tence economies among the latecomers at the beginning of their transitions
is comparatively larger, and makes their drift to modernity more arduous
and slow. Under such circumstances, even if emigration attains a large size,
the population surplus is sustained – if not increased – which hampers or
undermines social change.
In order to synchronise the two processes, i.e. demographic and social
change, a bit of luck is necessary. In the case of the Mediterranean coun-
tries (Italy, Spain, Greece and Portugal), ‘luck’ meant a contemporaneous
decline in fertility and increase in the outflow of surplus population, which
responded to an unfulfilled demand for foreign labour in the pioneer coun-
tries of Western and Northern Europe. This happened in the 1950s and
1960s, when the Mediterranean countries were already fairly advanced not
30
MAREK OKÓLSKI

only in the modernisation of their institutions and socio-economic struc-
tures, but also in imitating ‘Western’ patterns of culture. The outflow of
redundant population then brought about a crowding-out effect and made
room for the completion of modern changes.17
1.3
Diversity of migration trends across Europe
Let me now take a more restricted view and focus on European migration
in the post-World War II period. Looking at basic migration trends in that
period, and especially at migration status transformation from net emigra-
tion to net immigration, it becomes apparent that, although major charac-
teristics of that change were preserved, it was by and large influenced by a
new post-war political reality. To clarify this point, I rely on a division of
the post-war period into five stages presented in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1
Stages of post-World War II migration processes
Stage/sub-period
Key characteristics
1. 1945-1947
Post-war reconstruction; new partition of Europe; adjustment
migration
2. 1948-1973
Political bipolarity; Cold War and the arms race; blooming western
market economies vis-à-vis state-controlled and non-efficient
economies of Southern Europe and CEE; western economic
integration (European Economic Community); strong labour flow
from the South to the West and suppressed labour mobility in
the East
3. 1974-1988
Political détente; major cracks in the political system in CEE
(1980, Poland); globalisation challenges; economic restructuring
and deeper integration (inclusion of the South); search for
available low-cost labour; inflow of irregular migrants from CEE
(including many ‘ethnic Germans’ leaving their CEE countries of
origin and entering Germany as tourists) and non-European
countries; failure of ‘socialist modernisation’
4. 1989-2004
Breakdown of the Communist bloc; end of bipolarity; sudden
increase in population displacements; regional conflicts and wars;
new political entities; a complete project of European integration
(including common immigration policy and management);
economic transition in CEE
5. after 2004/2007
Restoration of European unity; strong competition on the part of
non-European economies; human capital deficits; continuous
demand for immigrants vis-à-vis intensified difficulties in migrant
integration
Source: Own elaboration
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
31

Having identified these stages and sub-periods, I will highlight basic differ-
ences in migration trends between three groups of countries: Western and
Northern Europe (WNE), Southern Europe (Mediterranean) and Central and
Eastern Europe (CEE). What is an essential component of this geographical
breakdown is, among other things, the temporal distance between respective
initiations of modern social change. For example, WNE countries preceded
Mediterranean countries, and Mediterranean countries preceded CEE coun-
tries. To further elucidate this point, subsequent sub-periods can be distin-
guished by their predominant characteristics and be considered specific to a
given sub-period flow of people. These can be termed, respectively: ‘post-
war adjustment migration’, ‘migration related to labour recruitment’, ‘mi-
gration related to a “new globalisation”’, ‘post-communist migration’ and
‘post-enlargement migration’. They are succinctly described in Table 1.2.
Directly after the period of post-war adjustment migration, WNE coun-
tries, facing serious labour deficits and the challenge of deep economic re-
structuring, were prepared for a massive intake of foreign workers. A
Table 1.2
Sub-stages of post-World War II migration processes
Stage/
sub-period
Region
Western and
Northern (WNE)
Southern
(Mediterranean)
Central and
Eastern (CEE)
1. Post-war
adjustment
migration
Post-war return migration; politically and ethnically motivated
displacements
(1945-1947)
(Germany)
(Greece)
(All countries)
2. Migration
related to
labour
recruitment/
bilateral
agreements
(1948-1973)
Labour shortages;
foreign recruitment;
towards net immigra-
tion; Finland, Ireland
(major exceptions);
fears of brain drain in
some WNE countries
(Low-skilled) labour
outflow; freeing
labour markets of
redundant workforce;
high net emigration;
networks and ethnic
niches in WNE
Ban on international
movements;under-
urbanisation; GDR,
Hungary, Czecho-
slovakia (political
exceptions), Yugoslavia
(economic exception)
3. Migration
of the onset
of ‘new
globalisation’
(1974-1988)
Cessation of rec-
ruitment; labour
market segmen-
tation; inflow for
family reunion;
inflow of asylum
seekers; irregular
employment of
foreigners
Rapid decline in
outflow; labour
deficit leads to
admission of for-
eigners (large
scale of irregular
work); towards
net immigration
Movements con-tained
within CEE region;
resumption
of ethnicity-motivated
outflow; onset of in-
complete migration
32
MAREK OKÓLSKI

continuous flow of immigrants was soon triggered and, after some time,
the WNE countries, one by one, turned into net immigration areas.
Many of the migrating workers originated from the Mediterranean coun-
tries. According to numerous accounts, between 1950 and 1970, anywhere
from 7 million to 10 million persons emigrated from Italy, Spain, Greece
and Portugal (circa 8 to 10 per cent of the mid-period population), of which
a half went to WNE (Layard, Blanchard, Dornbush & Krugman 1992).
Massimo Livi Bacci (1972: 17) estimates that in the period 1965-1970 ‘em-
igrant workers [from southern countries]18 make up about 50 per cent on
the average, of the potential increase of the labour force’, of which 89 per
cent in the case of Italy, 85 per cent in the case of Portugal, 65 per cent in
the case of Greece and 46 per cent in the case of Spain.19 An outflow of
this huge magnitude was possible due to considerable underemployment or
‘disguised’ unemployment in those countries.20 In more underdeveloped
areas of the Mediterranean countries, the outflow comprised up to 85 to 90
per cent of the potential increase of the labour force (Danieli 1972).
Running parallel to this, from the late 1960s onwards, all four Mediterra-
nean countries experienced a rapid and consistent decline in fertility – from
a maximum total fertility rate (TFR) of 2.4-3.1 to 1.4-1.7 around 1985
(United Nations 2007). The labour potential at the time was therefore
Table 1.2
(continued)
Stage/
sub-period
Region
Western and
Northern (WNE)
Southern
(Mediterranean)
Central and
Eastern (CEE)
4. Post-com-
munist migration
– related to dis-
ruption of com-
munism and
orientation
towards
‘Fortress Europe’
(1989-2004)
Advanced segmentation of labour market
(secondary jobs for foreigners); massive
inflow of undocumented migrants and
asylum seekers; migrant smugglers
and traffickers; selective admission for
the highly skilled
Incomplete migration;
post-communist
adjustment migration;
economic polarisation
within CEE ! intra-
regional movements;
towards net immigration
(Czech Republic)
Prospective trends in the 10-15-year time span
5. Post-
enlargement
migration –
integrated
European
migration space
(after 2004/2007)
Inflows due to population stagnation and ageing (main underlying
factors); further segmentation of labour markets; intra-EU competition
for the highly skilled; low level of intra-EU mobility (some but shallow
potential in Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and the Baltic states; towards
completion of labour market draining of redundant labour in CEE)
Source: Own elaboration
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
33

significantly reduced due to emigration, and a continuously diminishing la-
bour potential was stabilised largely due to below-replacement fertility.
Those were the main demographic underpinnings for major social
change and sustained modern economic development. Social change in
Italy accelerated in the 1950s, in Spain in the 1960s, but in Greece and
Portugal only in the 1980s. In each case, however, a breakthrough occurred
when economies opened up and integration with more developed European
countries became a structural process.
As a result, after 1973, in the sub-period of migration related to the
process of ‘new globalisation’, the Mediterranean countries – first Italy and
later the three others – were strongly affected by shortages of labour. The
worker outflow was drastically reduced and, soon thereafter, the labour
markets were opened to the inflow of foreigners. By the end of the 1980s,
all four countries changed their migration statuses and came to be new net
immigration areas.
Contrary to WNE and Mediterranean Europe, the population movements
in CEE over the period leading up to the late 1980s were strongly subordi-
nated to political factors. In fact, after the abrupt interruption of massive
post-war resettlements in 1948, both the outflows and the inflows were al-
most completely reduced to exceptional cases. Not only did international
migration come to a halt, but also any cross-border mobility was effec-
tively stopped. Under the circumstances of high natural increase and slug-
gish economic development, a large backlog of unrealised migration arose
in many CEE countries, notably in Poland and Romania.21
Over time, however, and alongside a softening grip on human freedoms,
a variety of forms of out-movement began emerging that became alterna-
tives to ‘regular’ emigration. These movements, heavily controlled by the
authorities, reflected a specific pattern that ran concomitantly with an inter-
nal political cycle. In particular, compared to periods characterised by a
‘hard grip’ on international mobility, many more people were allowed to
leave the country in times of political turmoil and during shifts in political
leadership. Gradually, more and more CEE residents who managed to travel
abroad became residents of foreign countries – as immigrants or temporary
workers, refugees, co-ethnics or undocumented migrants (e.g. ‘overstaying
tourists’).
What greatly differentiated CEE countries from other important migra-
tion source countries were, until at least 1989, their migrants’ concealed
motives and forms of movement. While a great majority of migrants from
CEE countries sought employment in foreign countries – which undoubt-
edly constituted the main motive of their migration – they were compelled
to declare other purposes both to the government of their country of origin
and that of the host countries in order to be allowed to leave or enter and
stay. This forced them into an unstable and disadvantageous, if not precari-
ous, situation in the labour market and in social life in general. Even after
34
MAREK OKÓLSKI

1989, when departures from CEE countries were newly permitted and resi-
dents could easily enter many traditional destination countries, they could
do so legally only as tourists – which was seldom an actual motive for
journeying abroad.
Because of their somewhat irregular status, most migrants originating
from CEE countries endured discriminatory practices of employers and
were usually grossly underpaid. In order to cope with that reality, CEE mi-
grants developed a peculiar pattern of mobility that enabled them to boost
the real value of their foreign earnings. It was incomplete migration, a sort
of circulation of individual household members, often repeated, and char-
acterised by short-term employment abroad and a very high proportion of
earnings being remitted or repatriated to the migrant’s home country, where
the cost of living was substantially lower. By spending most of the ‘foreign
money’ they earned abroad in their countries of origin, the migrants’ real
wages became relatively high and enabled migrant households to survive,
if not enjoy a decent lifestyle. At the same time, however, migrant house-
holds remained anchored and indeed enmeshed in the peripheries of CEE
countries, despite the significant mobility of some of their members.
As a result, throughout the entire sub-period of post-communist migration,
the outflows of people from CEE countries barely contributed to unburden-
ing them of redundant people. Despite growing out-migration, labour sur-
pluses were sustained. At the same time, however, at least one radical change
occurred that was in line with what happened earlier in WNE countries and
Mediterranean Europe: fertility decreased to levels far below replacement.
While in 1985 the TFR was still as high as 2.3 in Poland, Romania and
Slovakia (then a part of Czechoslovakia) and 2.1 in the Baltic States, in 2000
it reached a level of around 1.3 throughout the entire region (United Nations
2007). This marked the beginning of a rapidly shrinking demographic labour
potential.
Now it would seem opportune to question whether the accession of CEE
countries to the European Union resulted in any significant changes in the
migration trends of their populations.
It will not be possible to attain reliable estimates of the post-enlargement
outflow until the results of the forthcoming population censuses are re-
leased. For now, we can venture only guesstimates at best. This is because
no existing record adequately measures various types of flows and stocks
of migrants. Typically, the size and composition of migrant stocks differ
from country to country because the definition of an immigrant resident
differs. Some countries do not distinguish, for example, between migrants
who moved before their home country’s accession date and those who
moved later. This is especially pertinent when the act of accession provided
migrants with an opportunity to change their statuses from clandestine and
undocumented to regular and documented. Migrant flows are thus not
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
35

broken down according to the length of migrants’ sojourns in the destina-
tion countries, which could result in multiple counts and other deficiencies.
These caveats aside, it can be said that the date of the first eastward EU
enlargement, 1 May 2004, marked the beginning of a new quality in the
outflow of people from CEE countries. It has become quite clear, after two
and a half years, that the change in differentia specifica of migration af-
fected many of its aspects: the volume of flows, which increased substan-
tially, and their composition – regional, social, economic and demographic.
Forms of flows and the motives of migrants also became more diversified.
A cautious World Bank (2006) estimate of the outflow from the EU-8 ac-
cession countries to the three EU-15 countries, which, on 1 May 2004, did
not introduce transitory precautions to protect their labour markets, sug-
gested a very large scale of mobility. It found that, over the first twenty
months, until 31 December 2004, Lithuania lost 3.3 per cent of its working-
age population, Latvia 2.4 per cent, Slovakia 1.3 per cent, Poland 1.2 per
cent and Estonia 1.1 per cent. That came as a surprise to many analysts, see-
ing as during the pre-accession period little was known about the migration
potential of such countries as Latvia or Slovakia and the populations of
those countries were not regarded as highly prone to emigration.
It could be safely assumed that, between 1 May 2004 and 1 January
2007, at least 1 million persons, 80 to 90 per cent of whom were job-
seekers, emigrated from Poland. This corresponds to slightly more than 4
per cent of the total working-age mid-period population (2.6 per cent of
the entire population). Keeping in mind the estimates of the outflow during
the 1980s (more than 1 million long-term emigrants), and between 1991
and 2003 (approximately 750,000), it can be argued that, over the last
quarter of a century, around 2.5 million Poles emigrated – which amounts
to over 67 per cent of the natural population increase in that period and
over 6.5 per cent of the total population (Grabowska-Lusińska & Okólski
2009). Comparing the rate and volume of that outflow to the outflow
recorded in Mediterranean Europe during labour recruitment-related migra-
tion, we can conclude that Poland might not be far from completing the
crowding-out process.
Polish Labour Force Survey (LFS) data leave no doubt that the acces-
sion date constituted a breakthrough in outflow trends. Until the beginning
of 2004, the stock of temporary migrants, who traditionally predominate in
the outflow from Poland, was fairly stable at a level of around 200,000.22
This was especially true for the number of long-term migrants; the stock of
short-term migrants slowly decreased over the 1990s and slowly increased
from 2000 to 2003.23 In the middle of 2005, the migrant stock surpassed
300,000; by mid-2006 it reached 450,000; and, at the end of that year,
500,000 Poles were recorded (by account of LFS) as temporary migrants.
A similar conclusion can be drawn on the basis of host countries’
sources. For instance, an accelerated inflow to Britain is documented by
36
MAREK OKÓLSKI

the National Insurance Number statistics, where Poles, along with Slovaks
and Lithuanians, became leading nationalities among those issued a new
number. One year before the accession date, they were barely featured at
all in those statistics, with an overall share of around 4 per cent of all for-
eigners. Just one year later, Poland became a clear leader in the statistics,
and in the year 2006/2007, of the top six nationalities, three were CEE
countries, which accounted for an overall share of 39 per cent. The British
International Passenger Survey data also confirm that the movements of
the citizens of accession countries into the United Kingdom, Poles in par-
ticular, increased rapidly after 1 May 2004. The same trend was observed
in Sweden, where not only did the inflow from CEE accelerate, but, in ad-
dition to migrant workers, it comprised proportionally more family mem-
bers. The case of the inflow into Ireland presents another striking
illustration of this phenomenon. Until the middle of 2004, Ireland hosted
few immigrants from CEE countries, but in 2006 CEE, citizens became a
clearly predominant group among the newly arrived (Grabowska-Lusińska
& Okólski 2009).
The three countries that did not limit access to their labour markets were
not the only ones to have experienced elevated inflows from CEE coun-
tries. With the one distinct exception of Germany, a significant increase
was also observed in other WNE countries.
Taken together, a considerable outflow of people from the CEE countries
during the post-enlargement sub-period, which coincided with a rapid de-
cline in fertility and a soon-to-be reduced demographic labour potential,
provided for a historic opportunity to unburden CEE countries’ labour mar-
kets of superfluous people and, as a consequence, improve their efficiency.
Since this went hand in hand with modern economic change – which was
a requisite for economic integration with the EU – the CEE accession
countries could soon experience a breakthrough in the transformation of
their migration status from net emigration to net immigration. As was his-
torically the case for the four Mediterranean countries, a bit of luck in
bringing about that major change proved helpful, if not indispensable. This
time, for the CEE countries, the bit of luck came from Britain: it material-
ised in the visionary and strong-willed British polity and in the huge ca-
pacity of the booming British economy to absorb incoming labour.
The significance of the outflow of people from CEE countries in the
post-accession period cannot be overestimated. The crowding-out of those
countries’ labour markets was a major, structurally determined social phe-
nomenon, a foundation for further modern social change and, ultimately,
an impetus for convergence with the core objectives of the EU.
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
37

1.4
Transformation of migration status: An outline of the model
Taking the long view, migration can be perceived as a response to a dis-
equilibrium that arises between population size and growth and the stock
and composition of resources that a given population uses or needs to sup-
port itself (Coleman 2006). As pointed out in section 1.2 of this chapter,
modernisation stimulates two processes that are of vital importance for mi-
gration, namely:
–
The shrinking of the subsistence sector of the economy, which has his-
torically symbolised backwardness and, by diminishing, makes way for
an expanding and highly monetised market sector.
–
A specific change in population (called the demographic transition)
whose major traits include a systematic and accelerated increase in the
number of people that goes parallel with, on the one hand, a clustering
of those people in the enclaves of backwardness or the peripheries of
modernity, and, on the other hand, a growing shortage of people in
emerging economic growth poles (centres).
This sort of social change entails a mass migration from the periphery to
the centre, whose direct cause is the relatively uneven distribution of the
population. This is a multistage phenomenon, ranging from the strictly
local through the global stage.
It could be argued that population surpluses hamper or occasionally pre-
clude the modernisation of peripheries. The outflow of redundant people
constitutes one major impetus for the completion of the modernisation
project – though it is not capable of either initiating or substituting modern
reforms.
A rapidly onsetting period of modernity, due to an increasing (and usu-
ally relatively high) natural population increase, is conducive to emigra-
tion. Outflows generally originate in overpopulated rural areas (including
tiny towns located in the middle of those areas), then expand to include de-
veloping urban areas or colonised lands. A mature level of modernisation
coincides with a declining (and usually relatively low, sometimes negative)
natural population increase. Population ageing is also usually set in motion.
What ensues is a structural deficit in a given population, manifested above
all in a steady labour shortage. Needless to say, this is conducive to
immigration.24
An additional factor determining the flow of people from country periph-
eries to centres that is related to modernisation and relevant from an
international perspective is the timing of the initiation of modern changes
in particular countries (a ‘generation effect’).25 As a rule, pioneer countries
in early stages of modernisation, apart from sending population surpluses
generated by their peripheries to modernity poles (centres), export some of
these surpluses to other countries – typically to colonies overseas.
38
MAREK OKÓLSKI

Latecomer countries, however, usually lack such opportunities. What even-
tually facilitates migration for the latecomer countries is, quite paradoxi-
cally, a difference in the timing of the transformation process’ initiation be-
tween them and the pioneer countries: the latter are converted sooner from
countries of net emigration to net immigration. The erosion of traditional
socio-economic structures and institutions within the latecomer countries
goes hand in hand with an advanced level of modernity and often with la-
bour shortages within the pioneer countries (Massey 1999).
The subsistence (natural) sector in a modernising society can be thought
of as something of a vestigial organ or other archaic remnant in the body
of an advancing economy. No convergence mechanism exists to make it
compatible with the market (capitalist) sector. In the long run, it can only
perish or become parasitic for the latter. People functioning in subsistence
sectors have little chance of changing their social and economic roles and
positions unless they abandon their outdated lifestyles or occupations. In
the vast majority of cases, however, abandonment means out-migration.
There is something of a structural incompatibility between the subsis-
tence and market economy. The virtues of the former include a ‘closed-
ness’ or semi-isolation, a struggle for survival and continuity. The virtues
of the latter include an openness and a tendency towards expansion. The
mentality, work culture and skills of the people in one sector are useless in
the other. The characteristics of cultural and human capital – indefinitely
reproduced and propagated in the subsistence sector – do not fit the market
sector. There is thus a kind of superfluity of population resources in the
subsistence sector.
In modern society, with welfare states as its prominent institution, the
natural or subsistence sector gives rise to extra social costs. These costs are
particularly acute under conditions of low mobility or when mobility (out-
flow) is impeded by existing institutions. This is because the natural
increase of people living in the subsistence sector is relatively high, which
puts pressure on social benefits and leads to increasing related costs. The
preservation of the subsistence sector under otherwise modern conditions
thus impairs or impedes development. The scale of modernising reforms
(e.g. investment in modern infrastructure and R&D) is severely limited by
competition stemming from the necessary financing of extra social costs
that result from the very existence of a subsistence sector.
Modern and self-sustained development within a country is possible and
particularly beneficial if three conditions are met at about the same time:
–
Deep reforms leading to the expansion of the competitive market
sector.
–
A reduction in fertility, bringing about a low natural increase.
–
High mobility (especially spatial mobility) of the population, which fa-
cilitates
internal
transfers
of
demographic
surpluses
within
the
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
39

subsistence sector and outflows of the remaining redundant population
to third countries.
The subsistence sector then rapidly diminishes and sources of superfluous
population begin to dry out. A modern, liberalised economy is strength-
ened and consolidated when, among other things, strong international com-
petition exists and no population pressure is exerted (close to zero natural
increase) on it. The attempts of economic actors (firms) to lower labour
costs (or at least to prevent their increase) are accompanied by and, in a
way, confronted with a diminishing local workforce and a weakening pro-
pensity of local workers to accept low-paying jobs. This tendency results
from, and is reinforced by, the very nature of the institutions of the welfare
state. The ensuing evolution of the labour market gives way to a specific
structural form called a ‘dual labour market’, which displays a characteristic
segmentation pattern. The expansion of a labour market segment with lax
regulatory standards and wage rigidities becomes a source of comparative
advantage to certain firms linked to that segment. However, with an insuffi-
cient supply of local labour, the inflow of migrant workers from peripheral
economies is a fundamental prerequisite of such a sector’s expansion.
Specific institutions and mechanisms exist to facilitate the inflow of
workers responding to the volume and structure of modern economies’ de-
mand for labour. Systematic immigration contributes to the emergence and
growth of a ‘foreigners’ sector’ within the labour market. Migrant workers
in foreigners’ sectors become over-represented relative to their share in the
total labour force and, in some cases, even outnumber the local workers.
In sum, the indispensable requisites for any country to transform its mi-
gration status are, first, the outflow of redundant population (the crowding-
out) and, secondly, embarking on the path of sustained modern develop-
ment. Under these circumstances, emigration declines rapidly. In turn, the
completion of the demographic transition (natural increase at close to zero
and rapid ageing of the population, including the workforce) and the eco-
nomic competition-led segmentation of the labour market bring about an
inflow of foreign workers whose number, over time, becomes larger than
that of outgoing local workers. A former emigration country thus becomes
an immigration country.
Notes
1
In this very meaning, ‘migration cycle’ is narrower from a historical time perspec-
tive, but it goes more deeply as far as contextual matters are concerned.
2
I adhere here to an approach of studying historical structures evolving over a long
time by means of problem-oriented and comprehensive analyses (lire l’histoire à re-
bours, according to Marc Bloch), as developed by French historians and known as
longue durée (Braudel 1999). Akin to that approach in the area of migration study
40
MAREK OKÓLSKI

are such seminal works as Zelinsky (1971), Piore (1979), Chesnais (1986) and
Massey (1999).
3
One of the key notions used in this chapter and to some extent throughout the en-
tire volume is ‘modernisation’. I realise how ambiguous, if controversial, this term
might sound nowadays. My preferred meaning of modernisation is rather simple
and refers to a dichotomous typology of European societies, often applied to the his-
tory of the recent few hundred years, which distinguishes between ‘pre-modern’ (tra-
ditional) type and ‘modern’ type. In accordance with this, each European society
evolves from the former to the latter; between the pre-modern and modern type
there is a specific transition, an all-embracing structural social change, called moder-
nisation. While the outcome of modernisation seems clear – it is a structurally and
strikingly different society – the criteria of that difference are numerous and by no
means mutually exclusive. They depend on the cognitive perspective represented by
those who are or were involved in the study of that process. The perspectives
adopted by such scholars as Herbert Spencer, Ferdinand To¨nnies, Max Weber, Emile
Durkheim, Talcott Parsons, Henry Maine, Robert Redfield and Krishan Kumar evi-
dently differed, but probably none of them would have found it difficult to point out
fundamental differences of structural character between a pre-modern and a modern
society, and even less to indicate the time and place on Earth where the change
called ‘modernisation’ came about. Needless to add, in this volume we distance our-
selves from ‘modernisation’ in Walt Rostow’s sense.
4
Apart from periods of war or conquests and colonisations, international migrants in-
clude mostly relatively small numbers of merchants, mercenaries or missionaries.
David Coleman (2006: 37) argues that ‘labour movement does not become generally
international until a much later date, particularly during the Industrial Revolution
[…]’.
5
It was estimated at some 39.5 million in AD 14 and at 39.2 million circa the year
1000 (Clark 1977: 64).
6
Jean-Marie Poursin’s (1976: 21) estimate for circa 1400 is 45 million. Biraben
(2006: 13), however, puts the number of Europeans around that year much higher,
at some 52 million.
7
All estimates exclude the population living on the territory of the former USSR.
Here, similarly, its size did not change between Anno Domini and 1400, while in
the period 1400-1800 it grew by a little less than 300 per cent (Biraben 2006).
8
According to Poursin (1976: 23), between 1650 and 1950, the population of
European origin became larger by over 800 million and reached 940 million, 300
million of whom lived outside of Europe.
9
According to Chesnais (1992: 165): ‘Migration is at its highest during the period
when, following the decline in mortality, the curve of natural increase approaches its
apex; and the size of the wave of departures is closely connected with the level of
natural increase and hence with patterns of demographic transition. The traits of
migration are inseparable from the profiles of transition, and vice versa.’
10
In an earlier work (Hatton & Williamson 1994), the authors spoke of the ‘emigra-
tion cycle’, which extends from a growing emigration rate to receding emigration.
11
A very similar perspective is represented by the concept of the ‘migration curve’, i.e.
a historical process in which populations make the transition from net emigration
to net immigration (Ackerman 1976 quoted after Massey 1999).
12
Earlier Van de Kaa (together with Ron Lesthaeghe) developed a concept of the sec-
ond demographic transition, a phenomenon typical of North-Western Europe, where
it developed since the mid-1960s. He distinguished the two transitions in the follow-
ing way: ‘While mortality decline provided the “engine” for the first transition, ferti-
lity decline is the “engine” of the second. In both instances international migration
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
41

plays a significant role in the balancing equation, but while it provided a safety valve
of sorts in the first, it is a carefully guarded inlet in the second’ (van de Kaa 2004:
8).
13
Brinley Thomas (1954) suggested that it is much more than a statistical relationship.
He argued that, contrary to widespread opinion, the volume and fluctuations of
European immigration to the United States depended not only on the demand for
labour in this country, but above all on demographic changes in the countries of ori-
gin. Thomas found that all four main upsurges of emigration from Europe until the
outbreak of World War I followed, with a 25-year time lag, a peak in natural
increase.
14
King (1996: 45) cites interesting observations made by Friedrich Engels, who was
one of the first to recognise the important role of population growth in the develop-
ment of English industry.
15
The opposite view is represented by Anthony Fielding (1993). According to him, un-
til recently mass migration in Europe was determined by the medium-term econom-
ic fluctuations (the business cycle). After the mid-1970s, however, Western Europe
underwent fundamental change in the production system – from Fordist to post-
Fordist, which substantially affected migration: ‘the most important feature of mass
migration under post-Fordist forms of production organization is its absence!’
(Fielding 1993: 14). Mass migration gives way to ‘small-scale and more individualis-
tic forms’ of inter-regional and international mobility.
16
It is not rare that in the initial stage of changes fertility rises, which is due to,
among other things, the deep mortality decline itself (better chances of potential
mothers’ survival).
17
For the discussion of the ‘crowding-out effect’, see Kaczmarczyk and Oko´lski
(2008).
18
Including also the former Yugoslavia and Turkey.
19
Taking into account migration of seasonal and temporary workers, however, would
significantly increase that estimate. Thus, according to Livi Bacci (1972: 18), ‘we can
by all means say that […] the number of emigrant workers has been greater than the
natural increase of the labour force’.
20
Excess supply of manpower in the agricultural sector, especially the unemployed or
underemployed peasants searching for a job in foreign countries, was believed to be
the main source of emigration potential in the Mediterranean countries (Livi Bacci
1972).
21
Interestingly, a study carried out in the 1960s by the UN Economic Commission for
Europe (UN ECE 1968), devoted to the determinants of labour supply in Europe un-
til 1980 – which inter alia evaluated labour market situation in CEE – found strong
but latent migration pressures in the then socialist countries, which at that time
were contained by the existing legislation and administrative order. Referring to that
study, Luisa Danieli (1972) pointed to Poland and Romania as CEE countries having
a vast surplus of manpower (from one fifth to one half of the active population) and
to Czechoslovakia and Hungary as countries with probably insufficient labour
supply.
22
Polish LFS provides quarterly estimates of the stock of temporary migrants (i.e.
those who at the time of survey are registered as ‘permanent’ residents of Poland).
In general, the survey is limited to households where at least one member is present
in his or her domicile at the time of survey and, if that condition is met, to the
household members fifteen years old or more. Thus, the migrant count based on
LFS might be seriously underestimated.
42
MAREK OKÓLSKI

23
Short-term migrants are defined as those whose uninterrupted stay outside of
Poland does not exceed twelve months at the time of survey; otherwise, the migrants
are considered to be long-term.
24
Massey (1999: 40), referring to Michael Piore’s theory of immigration driven by the
mechanisms of segmented labour market, notes that the main factor of immigra-
tion, ‘the imbalance between the structural demand for entry-level workers and the
limited domestic supply of such workers […] in developed countries’, stems from
two major root causes. One of them is a combination of ‘fundamental socio-demo-
graphic trends’, such as very low natural increase of the working-age population, the
depletion of labour reserves in rural communities and the rise of female labour-force
participation together with the transformation of women’s jobs into a source of pri-
mary income support. Another main root cause is ‘the built-in demand for inexpen-
sive and flexible labour’ in modern industrial societies, which results from ‘funda-
mental characteristics of advanced industrial societies and their economies’, such as:
‘structural inflation’, ‘social constraints on motivation embedded within occupational
hierarchies’ and ‘the inherent duality of labour and capital’, producing a segmented
labour market structure (Massey 1999: 37-39).
25
See chapter 2 in this volume.
References
Baines, D. (1991), Emigration from Europe 1815-1930. London: Macmillan.
Biraben, J.-N. (2006), ‘The history of the human population from the first beginnings to the
recent day’, in G. Caselli, J. Vallin & G. Wunsch (eds.), Demography: Analysis and
Synthesis. A Treatise in Population Studies, 5-17. Burlington: Academic Press.
Biraben, J.-N. (1979), ‘Essai sur l’évolution du nombre des hommes’, Population 34 (1): 13-
26.
Braudel, F. (1999), Historia i trwanie. Warsaw: Czytelnik.
Castles, S. & M.J. Miller (1993), The age of migration: International population movements
in the modern world. Houndmills: Macmillan.
Chesnais, J.-C. (1992), The demographic transition: Stages, patterns and economic implica-
tions. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Chesnais, J.-C. (1986), La transition démographique: Etapes, formes, implications écono-
miques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Coleman, D. (2006), ‘Migration as a primary force in human population processes’, in G.
Caselli, J. Vallin & G. Wunsch (eds.), Demography: Analysis and Synthesis. A Treatise in
Population Studies, 19-40. Burlington: Academic Press.
Clark, C. (1977), Population growth and land use. London: The Macmillan Press.
Danieli, L. (1972), ‘The demographic and social pattern of emigration in Europe’, in M. Livi
Bacci (ed.), The demographic and social pattern of emigration from Southern European
countries, 377-394. Florence: Universita di Firenze.
Dyson, T. (2001), ‘A partial theory of world development: The neglected role of the demo-
graphic transition in the shaping of modern society’, International Journal of Population
Geography 2 (7): 67-90.
Fielding, A. (1993), ‘Mass migration and economic restructuring’, in R. King (ed.), Mass mi-
grations in Europe: The legacy and the future, 7-17. London: Belhaven Press.
Gliwic, H. (1934), Materjał ludzki w gospodarce światowej. Warsaw: Trzaska, Evert i
Michalski.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I. & M. Okólski (2009), Emigracja ostatnia? Warsaw: Wydawnictwo
Naukowe Scholar.
TRANSITION FROM EMIGRATION TO IMMIGRATION
43

Gropas, R. & A. Triandafyllidou (eds.) (2007), European immigration: A sourcebook.
Aldershot: Ashgate.
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (2008), Global migration and the world economy: Two centu-
ries of policy and performance. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hatton, T.J. & J.G. Williamson (1994), ‘International migration 1850-1939: An economic sur-
vey’, in T.J. Hatton & J.G. Williamson (eds.), Migration and international labour market:
1850-1939, 3-32. London: Routledge. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kaczmarczyk, P. & M. Okólski (2008), ‘Demographic and labour-market impacts of migration
on Poland’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 3 (24): 599-624.
King, R. (1996), ‘Migration in a world historical perspective’, in J. van den Broeck (ed.), The
economics of labour migration, 7-75. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Layard, R., O. Blanchard, R. Dornbush & P. Krugman (1992), East-West migration: The alter-
natives. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Livi Bacci, M. (ed.) (1972), The demographic and social pattern of emigration from Southern
European countries. Florence: Universita di Firenze.
Massey, D.S. (1999), ‘Why does immigration occur? A theoretical synthesis’, in C.
Hirschman, P. Kasinitz & J. DeWind (eds.), The handbook of international migration:
The American experience, 34-52. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Morokvasic-Muller, M., B. Dinh, S. Potot & M. Salzbrunn (2008), ‘Immigrant France:
Colonial heritage, labour (im)migration and settlement’, IDEA Working Papers 2, www.
idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP2_France.pdf.
Okólski, M. (2008), ‘Europa en moviemento: La migracion desde y hacia Europa Central y
del Este’, Revista CIDOB d’Afers Internacionals 84: 11-32.
Okólski, M. (2007), ‘Europe in movement: Migration from/to Central and Eastern Europe’,
CMR Working Papers 22 (80).
Piore, M.J. (1979), Birds of passage: Migrant labour in industrial societies. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Poursin, J.-M. (1976), Ludność świata. Warsaw: Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe [origi-
nally published in 1971 as La population mondiale, Paris: Éditions du Seuil].
Thomas, B. (1954), Migration and economic growth: A study of Great Britain and the
Atlantic economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
United Nations (2007), World population prospects: The 2006 revision. New York: United
Nations.
Van de Kaa, D. (2004), ‘Is the second demographic transition a useful research concept.
Questions and answers’, Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 2: 4-10.
Van de Kaa, D. (1999), ‘Europe and its population: The long view’, in D. van de Kaa, H.
Leridon, G. Gesano & M. Okólski (eds.), European populations: Unity in diversity, 1-50.
Word Bank (2006), ‘Labour migration from the new EU member states’, World Bank EU-
8 Quarterly Report September.
Zelinsky, W. (1979), ‘The demographic transition: Changing patterns of migration’, in
Population science in the service of mankind, 165-190. Vienna: Institute of Life/
International Union for Scientific Study of Population.
Zelinsky, W. (1971), ‘The hypothesis of the mobility transition’, Geographical Review 61:
219-249.
44
MAREK OKÓLSKI

2
Early starters and latecomers
Comparing countries of immigration and
immigration regimes in Europe
Joaquín Arango
‘Seek simplicity and distrust it’ (J. Davis)
2.1
Introduction
In recent decades, Europe has become one of the major immigration-
receiving regions in the world. No other region receives more immigrants
in absolute terms, although not in relation to population size. Put in histori-
cal perspective, this represents an epochal change, since Europeans tended
to predominate in international migration flows until the 1960s. Taken as a
whole, it can be said that Europe’s migration transition – i.e. its transfor-
mation from a primarily sending region to a primarily receiving one – took
place in the two decades that followed the end of World War II, albeit a
handful of countries had experienced it well before. This fact notwithstand-
ing, the present configuration of Europe as an immigration-receiving re-
gion is better understood as the outcome of a gradual accumulation of
national migration transitions, some of which are still in process. Further
national transitions can be expected in the coming years.
In the specialised literature, Europe is often referred to as an internation-
al migration system. Since the 1990s, the notion of migration systems has
gained momentum. The idea of applying system analysis to the study of
migration is no doubt an appealing concept, one that emphasises the bi-
directionality that exists between groups of countries that exchange migra-
tion flows alongside other exchanges. It was effectively applied by the
geographer Akin Mabogunje in a seminal study of international migration
flows in Western Africa (Mabogunje 1970) and later promoted by Mary
Kritz, Lin Lean Lim and Hania Zlotnik at the beginning of the 1990s
(Kritz, Lim & Zlotnik 1992). At present, however, it is still richer in unde-
livered promises than in tangible results. It suffers from considerable ambi-
guity, as its central premise is used with a diversity of meanings that are
seldom made clear. In its most common application, it pertains to groups

of more or less contiguous or proximate receiving countries that have im-
portant elements in common – thereby excluding the countries where the
bulk of immigrants originate, as the initial and more orthodox version of
the notion would have it (Zlotnik 1992). In so doing, it does not go far be-
yond what geographers used to term ‘migration regions’.
Defined in this limited way, Europe is one of the four major systems in
the contemporary world, together with North America, the Persian Gulf
and the Asia Pacific region (Massey, Arango, Hugo, Kouaouci, Pellegrino
& Taylor 1998). Put in a global perspective and compared with the remain-
ing three, Europe appears to be a relatively homogeneous entity. Yet, taken
in itself, and looking inwards rather than outwards, there can be little doubt
that, if anything characterises Europe, it is a high degree of diversity – an
unsurprising fact given the large number of countries that it comprises.
Europe is synonymous with heterogeneity, and this applies to migration
realities as well as to many other factors.
A minor semantic clarification might be advisable before proceeding fur-
ther. In recent years the age-old distinction between sending and receiving
countries has been increasingly questioned. No doubt, strictly speaking, it
can be said that all countries are sending, receiving and transit countries at
the same time. The distinction justifiably often rests, however, on solid
foundations and is analytically useful, as out-migration and immigration
are phenomena that yield very different outcomes and impacts, and they re-
sult in different realities, needs and policies. Doing away with these well-
established concepts implies renouncing useful labels and putting countries
that are markedly different in terms of migration in a single bag, which
could serve to blur the analysis rather than to clarify it. Some countries are
primarily immigration-receiving ones and others are, above all, sending
ones, while some may be significantly sending and receiving at the same
time. The decisive criterion for defining a country as immigration-receiving
is not so much net migration in a given year – in a receiving country it can
be occasionally negative – but rather the societal impact of receiving or
hosting significant numbers of immigrants. And, mutatis mutandis, the
same goes for defining sending or transit countries. In other words, in this
chapter a receiving country is one in which the most socially significant
phenomenon in terms of international mobility is immigration.
Understood in this way, the condition of immigration-receiving can be
applied to a large number of countries in Europe. It is clearly the case of
the fifteen that were members of the EU before the 2004 enlargement, as
well as of Switzerland and Norway. It is also the case of some of the coun-
tries that joined the EU in 2004, including some that are significantly send-
ing and receiving at the same time.1
Comparing the countries that form the European migration system, con-
servatively defined as comprising only its receiving end, can help improve
the knowledge of national immigration experiences and their determinants
46
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

and provide a better understanding of the latter’s implications for policy.
The heuristic potential of the comparative perspective has been sufficiently
substantiated in the social sciences, and does not require further examina-
tion here. Yet, the large number of countries involved in this case makes
the comparison difficult, though not impossible. Comparing countries that
have long hosted populations of immigrant background with others that
started to receive significant numbers of immigrants a few years ago fur-
ther compounds the analytical difficulties. No doubt, every country is par-
ticular and different from all the others, also in matters of migration.
Nevertheless, significant similarities among countries can be found as well.
Indeed, identifying meaningful groups of receiving countries might be
an effective way of reducing the high degree of complexity resulting from
heterogeneity. If the aim is to seek significant patterns, it can be posited
that the comparative exercise will be analytically richer if it is carried not
only among a large number of individual countries, but also among a much
smaller number of meaningful groups of countries. In turn, it can be sur-
mised that these groups could be seen as representative of different types
of immigration-receiving countries, as ideal types that may have analytical
value and prove useful in the explanation of different migration realities.
Identifying their core characteristics may have analytical value in itself,
and could help explain policy outcomes.
This chapter aims to identify and analyse factors that may help to signif-
icantly group sets of immigration-receiving countries in Europe, factors
that, in other words, bundle together a set of countries by relevant similar-
ities and distinguish them from other sets of countries. Admittedly, doing
so constantly incurs the risk of overgeneralisation – difficult to avoid given
the nature of the subject matter. Existing theories are of little or no use in
this exercise. The analytical framework has to be developed inductively,
going back and forth between models and reality and taking relevant no-
tions from both.
The identification of different types of immigration countries and their
implications commands increasing attention in these times (King 2000;
Gropas & Triandafyllidou 2007). This exercise can be particularly relevant
in the case of an EU that has now formally embarked on the construction
of a common immigration and asylum policy. The existence of significant
differences, in terms of migration realities and orientations among member
states, can add to the staggering difficulties that this ambitious enterprise
entails, as experience so far suggests. Ascertaining which differences are
more relevant and how they affect national stances towards common policy
could be one of the outcomes of this comparative exercise. Determining
what recent destination countries can learn from the experiences of those
that preceded them as receiving countries could be an additional outcome.2
This exercise should help to improve understanding of the core characteris-
tics of each group or of each type of receiving country. In turn, these
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
47

characteristics could help to understand different policy approaches and to
identify priorities. They could also clarify their underlying determinants,
including prevailing attitudes towards immigration that, in turn, may be
affected by the impacts of immigration as they are perceived by different
societies.
2.2
Analytical considerations and hypotheses
This chapter departs from the basic proposition that, on the basis of both
similarities and differences, meaningful groupings of immigration-receiving
countries in Europe can be identified. To be significant, each group will
comprise those countries that show greater similarities among them and
greater differences with the remaining countries. The groups selected will
be meaningful and relevant if similarities prevail over differences, and if
differences with countries in other groups are generally larger than those
among them. A set of hypotheses relative to the variables that are relevant
to the grouping of countries will be put forth. Historical and socio-economic
factors will be the foremost candidates for the explanation of similarities
and differences. In theory, the hypotheses ought to be tested against the ex-
isting wealth of empirical data. Yet, testing them against the empirical evi-
dence available for a large number of countries is a Herculean task, one
that goes well beyond the possibilities of this chapter. Instead, some gener-
al, impressionistic remarks about their possible validity will be offered.
The comparative exercise requires identification of the criteria upon
which the grouping of countries rests. Are they chiefly structural factors,
i.e. having to do with significant differences in socio-economic regimes
and other societal characteristics? Are they mainly historical in nature, i.e.
related to the length of the immigration-receiving experience and the impli-
cations that derive from chronology or timing? In other words, are migra-
tion experiences and realities among European regional groups of receiving
countries significantly different because they are structurally different –
and because structural socio-economic differences are the result of different
migration patterns – or because some countries developed earlier as immi-
gration-receiving countries, or both? Finally, are these groupings regional
in character, i.e. do they roughly coincide with well-defined geographic
regions?
2.2.1
Hypothesis 1: The ‘age effect’
Immigration-receiving countries are bound to differ significantly depending
on the stage of the migration cycle in which they find themselves, as mi-
gration stages decisively affect the composition of the immigrant popula-
tion and its changing relationship with the general population. In the
48
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

course of their immigration experience, receiving countries go through a
migration cycle – a notion inspired by the life cycle concept, borrowed by
the social sciences from biology (Clausen 1986; Glick 1947). Certain socio-
demographic structures and aggregate characteristics of the immigrant
population correspond to each stage of the cycle, which, in turn, makes
for different socio-economic impacts and contributes to different percep-
tions from among the general population. Borrowing from the demo-
graphic parlance, this can be referred to as an ‘age effect’. Immigration
realities are very much affected by the stage of the migration cycle in
which countries find themselves and they tend to evolve as countries ad-
vance into later stages.
The notion of a migration cycle was proposed by the Belgian sociologist
Felice Dassetto as the set of processes through which immigrants from less
developed countries enter and settle in more developed ones, in a time se-
quence that affects – and requires adaptation by – the immigrants them-
selves, the native population and the institutions of the receiving societies.
Within the migration cycle, certain stages can be identified. Dassetto points
out three: in the first stage, immigrants are, above all, socially marginalised
foreign workers; the second stage is dominated by family reunion – and
therefore by the appearance of new actors – as well as settlement and ac-
culturation, and is often further accompanied by social tensions between
the immigrant population and segments of the receiving society, connected
with the schooling of immigrant children, the use of public services, partic-
ularly health, and the establishment of immigrant families in the neighbour-
hood; the third stage has to do with the long-term inclusion and integration
processes of long-term residents (Dassetto 1990).
Typically, young adults – often single or unaccompanied by their fami-
lies – tend to prevail in the initial stages. Family reunion flows follow after
a certain, often variable time. A second generation develops over time, and
the number of elderly members increases. Gradually, the demographic
composition of the immigrant population tends to resemble that of the gen-
eral population. After several decades, it becomes multigenerational. Of
course, different immigration societies go through the immigration cycle in
different forms and at different speeds. The persistence or intensity of
flows at later stages obviously makes an impact on the composition of the
immigrant population.
Yet, the realities of countries that have, historically, long experienced
significant immigration, and which have a multigenerational immigrant
population, tend to be very different from those of countries of recent im-
migration, in which the first generation is still prevalent or of those in
which the second generation is still in the making. Immigrant populations
made up primarily of individuals greatly differ from those organised
around families containing more than one generation and around commun-
ities. Different socio-demographic profiles determine very different effects,
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
49

in terms of labour force participation rates, consumption of public services
and social benefits, patterns of housing and settlement, social visibility and
the like. In turn, different impacts, real or perceived, may affect societal at-
titudes towards immigration. The ‘age effect’ also affects policies, usually
entailing a greater concern for integration as time goes by.
Taking the long view, it can be argued that the effect of age as a differ-
entiating factor is transitory, and it will fade away after a few decades,
once a receiving country reaches the mature stage. This consideration
somewhat lessens its appeal. There is, however, another implication of the
timing variable, more precisely of the birth date of a country as an immi-
gration-receiving one, which is relevant in a different sense and for reasons
that go beyond the different composition of the immigrant population. It
can be referred to as the ‘generation effect’, to use demographic jargon
once again, and paves the way for another hypothesis.
2.2.2
Hypothesis 2: The ‘generation effect’
The timing factor has another implication that can be understood as a ‘gen-
eration effect’. It stems from the influence exerted on the course and char-
acteristics of the immigration experience by the historical context in which
its initial and formative phases took place. Especially influential elements
of this context are the types of immigration flows prevailing in that period
and the socio-economic conditions that determine them, the dominant con-
ceptions of migration, and the main characteristics of the international eco-
nomic order and of socio-economic regimes. These influences may leave a
long-lasting imprint on later stages of the immigration experience. These
formative years may shape dominant social orientations towards immigra-
tion that would have a long-lasting effect or produce facts or policies that
further impact future developments.
As a matter of fact, this last observation opens the door to a third hypoth-
esis, also related to timing, and borrowed this time from economic history.
It could be termed the hypothesis of the ‘influence of historical precedence’.
2.2.3
Hypothesis 3: The influence of historical precedence
Nearly half a century ago, the economic historian Alexander Gerschenk-
ron, in his seminal analysis of historical patterns of industrialisation,
pointed out that the experience of latecomers is bound to be markedly dif-
ferent from that of early starters, if only because of the influence that the
experience of the forerunners exerts on those that follow. Not only is the
pace usually quicker – there is often an advantage in catching up – but the
structures of production and industrial organisation are different, as is the
intellectual climate which harbours the process (Gerschenkron 1962).
Industrialisation and immigration are admittedly very different in nature,
50
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

but mutatis mutandis the distinction between early starters and latecomers
may provide a useful perspective for understanding the immigration experi-
ence of the latter in Europe, especially as far as the adoption of policies is
concerned. Of course, historical precedence is by no means the only source
of differences. In the case of Europe, the influence of the early starters’ ex-
perience over that of the latecomers is very much reinforced by the com-
mon membership in a supranational structure such as the EU.
According to all the foregoing, the ‘timing’ factor is likely to be a very
relevant criterion for any meaningful grouping of countries in Europe, for
reasons that have to do with the ‘age effect’, the ‘generation effect’ and the
‘precedence effect’. Yet it is certainly not the only one, and maybe not
even the most relevant one. Socio-economic regimes, or a number of
socio-economic structural characteristics, constitute another obvious candi-
date. To begin with, different chronologies of the immigration experience
relate to such structural differences and, more precisely, to diverse degrees
of development. It is there that reasons explaining why some countries ex-
perienced the migratory transition before others have to be sought.
2.2.4
Hypothesis 4: The influence of structural characteristics
It can be posited that immigration-receiving countries in Europe are also
bound to differ on account of their defining structural characteristics, i.e.
types of economy and social systems, which result in different intensities
and types of labour demand, in different orientations towards the inclusion
or exclusion of foreigners, and in different degrees of openness or closed-
ness towards the admission and incorporation of immigrants. Different
socio-economic regimes – i.e. more liberal or more corporatist; more
adapted to the European social model or closer to the Anglo-Saxon model
(Jordan 2007); with strong or weak labour union bargaining; with higher
or lower degrees of social protection; with higher or lower rates of female
labour force participation; with larger or smaller informal sectors – signifi-
cantly influence labour demand, admission policies, types of flows, public
perceptions of immigration and more accepting or more restrictive stances.
Different types of socio-economic structures or regimes result in a differ-
ent demand for immigrant labour. Some socio-economic regimes are more
prone than others to admit foreign workers and to facilitate their insertion
into the labour market. The strength of labour demand and the degree to
which it is filled by immigrant workers may, in turn, affect public percep-
tion, which can then influence admission policies.
2.2.5
Three major groups
Three major groups of countries can be identified in Europe, and they
roughly correspond to well-defined regions. Each of them is relatively
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
51

homogeneous and different from the other groups, chiefly on account of
historical and structural factors. The first group encompasses a number of
countries located in the north-western quadrant of Europe, which became
countries of immigration in the third quarter of the twentieth century or
earlier and which today can be termed ‘mature’ or ‘old’. The second is
made up of four countries in Southern Europe, which experienced their mi-
gratory transition in the final quarter of the twentieth century and which
can be considered as the second generation of immigration-receiving coun-
tries in Europe. The third includes a number of countries in Central and
Eastern Europe (CEE), which started their migratory transitions in the
years around the turn of the century, and can be seen as ‘recent’ or ‘future’
countries of immigration.3 At least the first two groups are representative
of different types or patterns of immigration-receiving countries. It is too
soon to determine whether the third group will yield a third, distinct type.
No doubt, the three aforementioned categories clearly coincide with
three regions often identified in Europe. North-Western Europe, Southern
Europe and Central-Eastern Europe are usual regional labels. A wide range
of different variables underlie and justify this regionalisation. Among them,
and without disregarding the influence of geographic factors – which are
especially clear in the case of the South – are those that have to do with
the economy, e.g. the degree of development or type of socio-economic re-
gime and welfare system and recent political history seem the most rele-
vant. In the case of immigration, historical factors that have to do with the
chronology of the migration experience should also be considered. It can
be posited that the timing of the immigration experience – that is, the tem-
poral distance that separates the present from the date in which they be-
came an immigration-receiving country – is relevant in more than one
instance.
2.2.6
‘Age effect’
The stage of the migration cycle in which different countries find them-
selves is likely to bring about decisive differences as far as immigration
realities are concerned. As far as this ‘age effect’ goes, there is little doubt
that the members of each regional group basically share a common chro-
nology. The mature countries of the north-western quadrant – namely
France, Germany, Great Britain, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg,
Switzerland, Sweden and Austria – became immigration-receiving coun-
tries in the third quarter of the twentieth century or earlier. Indeed, France
did so much earlier. Yet, regardless of the particular chronology of the mi-
gration transition in each case, all of the countries received large numbers
of immigrants in the 1950s and 1960s. Although quite a few of them re-
turned home, a large part of them remained after the crisis of the mid-
1970s that followed the first oil shock after the Yom Kippur War. Family
52
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

reunion had started to take place before that date and greatly intensified
afterwards. As a result, all these countries today host populations of immi-
grant background that span several generations.
Many implications derive from this fact. The socio-demographic profile
of the populations of immigrant background, initially biased towards a
marked preponderance of young adults, tended gradually to resemble that
of the general population. Their activity rate tended to decline, and the
level of unemployment to go up. Consumption of public services in-
creased, as did the degree of dependency on the welfare system.
Immigrants became more visible as families settled in neighbourhoods and
residential segregation processes set in (Tapinos 1993). All this is likely to
have had a considerable impact on perceptions and attitudes towards
immigration.
Admittedly, the immigration cycle can be travelled in different ways,
and not necessarily in a linear one. In particular, it will depend on whether
the volume of initial and intermediate flows is sustained or reduced after
these stages. The structure of the immigrant population and some of its
attendant characteristics, such as the activity rate, can be reinvigorated by
intense flows in mature stages, as recently happened in some countries –
namely the United Kingdom in the early years of this century. In the case
of north-western countries, massive flows tended generally to decline from
the mid-1970s onward, except for family reunion and asylum flows, at
least until the mid-1990s. The massive arrival of ethnic Germans (the
Aussiedler) to Germany in the early 1990s may have been the major excep-
tion to this pattern.
The countries of Southern Europe find themselves at a much earlier
stage of the immigration cycle. Out-migration prevailed until the mid-
1970s, then return migration was prominent, and only since the 1980s
could they be perceived as primarily receiving countries. This pattern is
less clear in the case of Portugal, where out-migration continued to be sig-
nificant after these dates and has intensified in recent years. Italy and
Greece received large flows during the 1990s, and Spain underwent a
vigorous immigration boom between the late 1990s and 2008. As a result,
young adults in the prime of working age are preponderant in their immi-
grant populations. Paramount implications of such a demographic profile
include an aggregate labour force participation that is higher than that of
the rest of the population; more geographic mobility; a relatively limited
consumption of public services – especially in the areas of healthcare and
pensions – and welfare benefits; a favourable fiscal balance; and a signifi-
cant contribution to the growth of GDP. A second generation is in the mak-
ing, though it is not yet as prominent as it is in more mature receiving
countries.
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
53

As for the countries that make up the third group, in CEE – they are still
at an earlier stage of the immigration cycle, in which first-generation immi-
grants, often single or unaccompanied by relatives, overwhelmingly prevail.
2.2.7
‘Generation effect’
The experience of Southern European countries is likely to diverge from
that of their North-Western counterparts not only because of ‘age’, but also
because their formative years as immigration countries occurred at a time
when both international migration flows and the historical context in which
they took place were structurally different from what they had been a quar-
ter of a century before. The same can be said of CEE countries with re-
spect to the other two groups of countries.
It can be surmised that the ‘mature’ countries of North-Western Europe
underwent their socialisation processes as immigration recipients in the
course of the third quarter of the twentieth century. This statement can
easily be challenged by arguing that France, by far the oldest country of
immigration in Europe, had done so much earlier. Notwithstanding this
truth, it can be posited that France underwent something akin to what psy-
chologists call a second adult re-socialisation process during the 1950s,
1960s and early 1970s, and that it probably was no less influential for later
developments than any preceding experience.
Unlike nowadays, the third quarter of the twentieth century was a time
when international migration flows were not yet global. The number of
sending countries significantly participating in out-migration was much
smaller than today. The fact that several European countries had to resort
to recruitment to meet their labour needs suggests a much more limited
scope. An unlimited, spontaneous supply of migrant labour as it exists to-
day could not be taken for granted then. The fact that international migra-
tion flows were not global, and that only a relatively limited array of send-
ing countries took part in them, has left its imprint on the ethnic
composition of the populations of immigrant background in several receiv-
ing countries – France, the UK, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium,
Austria and Switzerland – by the strong preponderance of a few national
groups, mostly from the Mediterranean basin or the Indian subcontinent
and the English-speaking Caribbean in the case of the UK. Although recent
flows have added a considerable degree of diversity, the birthmark of that
period is still perceptible.
It was also a time in which the demand for labour – and for immigrant
labour, for that matter – arose to a large extent from the central sectors of
the economy, including manufacturing and mining. These were sectors that
were still relatively labour-intensive and that very often consisted of firms
organised along Fordist lines. It was also a time when informal employ-
ment was much less expansive than it is currently, when industrial relations
54
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

were more regulated and when the welfare states were growing rather than
being questioned or reduced, as they are today.
Additionally, the third quarter of the twentieth century was a time when
much less was known about the dynamics of international migration than
what would later be known. For instance, lacking the benefit of hindsight
that is available today, the immigration authorities of the time thought that
temporary schemes such as the guest worker system could be the solution
to labour needs that were often perceived as transitory. Today, few would
think the same, as it was precisely the experience of those countries that
made clear that democratic states are at pains when trying to enforce
temporariness.
The relative failure of that option – not so much in solving the acute la-
bour shortages that constituted a bottleneck for economies undergoing
super-growth, as someone called it (Kindleberger 1968), but in enforcing
temporariness and preventing the settlement of the guest workers when
they were invited to return – would decisively mark the immigration his-
tory of several countries. The unforeseen consequences of such an option
may have contributed to the growth of a negative perception of immigra-
tion that seemed to be shared by large segments of the population; that is,
the perception of immigration as unwanted, as the outcome of an error in
calculation. The closure of borders to further immigration in the early or
mid-1970s, which was initially temporary, soon became permanent and, in
the context of a protracted economic slump, gave way to a new paradigm
that would be known as ‘zero migration’. In turn, the impossibility of clos-
ing the doors to immigration flows stemming from entitlement – family re-
union and asylum – meant that the flows that were drastically curtailed
were those of labour migration. This would reinforce the perception of a
large part of immigration as unwanted or, as it has been recently termed in
France, as immigration subie instead of immigration choisie.
In the case of north-western countries, the combination of a peculiar im-
migration history with a lesser demand for immigrant labour more recently,
as will later be argued, has resulted in a greater proportion of family migra-
tion and asylum seekers and refugees, and a lesser one of workers. This
constitutes an important difference with respect to the countries of
Southern Europe and has pervasive implications. In fact, the relative
weight of the different types of immigration flows – chiefly labour migra-
tion, family reunion, asylum and irregular streams – among countries and
possibly groups of countries is likely to be a powerful differentiating varia-
ble, as they have different socio-economic impacts and contribute to differ-
ent perceptions of immigration from the general population. The relative
weight of the types of flows in each country may have an impact on the
economic and social consequences of immigration and on the perception
the public has of it (wanted or unwanted). In turn, both consequences and
perceptions may affect policies, flows and integration outcomes. The
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
55

relative weight of types of flows in each country depends, inter alia, on ad-
mission policies, but these may be affected by the demand of labour that
different socio-economic regimes make, past immigration impacts and their
evaluation and the ability to control flows. All of these affect the consis-
tency of policies and outcomes.
The influence of that period is so pervasive that the north-western coun-
tries are sometimes referred to in the literature as ‘post-migration societies’,
in the sense that they are primarily concerned with managing the conse-
quences of past migration.
Being ‘socialised’ as countries of immigration in the 1950s and 1960s,
with Fordist economic structures and with a guest worker approach, is
bound to give way to an immigration experience very different from that
of the latecomers, who became countries of immigration in the 1980s and
1990s or later, when globalisation was in full swing and informalisation
and deregulation were (and are) rapidly increasing. Indeed, the Southern
European countries are now experiencing a ‘generation effect’ very differ-
ent from the one that marked the experience of north-western countries.
First of all, having surfaced as countries of immigration in an era of global
flows can, by itself, give way to greater diversity from the very beginning
of the immigration experience. This is especially true of Italy and Spain –
though not so much of Portugal, where the influence of the colonial past is
paramount – and of Greece, where geographic proximity is decisive. This
is not the proper place to discuss the implications of a larger degree of di-
versity, but its relevance as a variable leaves little doubt.
The Southern European countries have become countries of immigration
in a time agitated by intense winds of deregulation, informalisation and la-
bour precariousness, something that by itself generates very different con-
ditions for the insertion of immigrants into labour markets and entails dif-
ferent social consequences. It is also a time when the nexus between the
underground economy and irregular migration has grown in importance
(Berggren, Likic-Brboric, Toksöz & Trimikliniotis 2007). Although it is
certainly not the only driver, it contributes to a higher incidence of irregu-
lar migration in the South. It would be unsurprising if something similar
were said of CEE countries when sufficient time has elapsed to be able to
characterise their immigration experience.
Both the southern and the eastern groups of countries have become
countries of immigration at a time when the guest worker model is seldom
seen as a realistic option on account of the north-western experience – the
recent popularity of the notion of ‘circular migration’ notwithstanding.
2.2.8
The influence of historical precedence
It can be posited that the influence of historical precedence has signifi-
cantly conditioned the immigration policies of Southern and Eastern
56
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

European countries, and therefore their experiences and realities. This is
because they have grown, or are starting to grow, as countries of immigra-
tion at a time when other, more developed immigration countries existed
nearby. The more developed were capable of influencing the policies of
the less developed basically, but not only, through their common member-
ship in the EU. Very likely, this has de facto limited the policy options of
the latecomers. The influence of the ‘zero migration’ paradigm is percepti-
ble in the experience of the southern countries not because they have
accepted few immigrant workers – which is certainly not the case – but be-
cause they have done so through restrictive admission policies based on
the premise that hiring an immigrant worker usually requires passing the
labour market test; that is, proving that there are no national or communi-
tarian workers available for that job. Combined with factors that will be
discussed later, these policies have contributed to high rates of irregular
migration, as they conflict with an often vigorous demand for immigrant
labour. Another example of this sort of influence has been the requirement
imposed on the accession countries of 2004 and 2007 to accept the entire
Schengen acquis as a conditio sine qua non of their entry into the EU. In
itself, the influence arising from historical precedence would determine that
the path leading to the mature stage would be differently walked by the
latecomers.
2.2.9
The influence of structural differences
The foregoing suggests that migration realities and experiences are likely
to differ among the three groups of countries because the economies and
societies of North-Western Europe are structurally different from those of
the South and those of CEE.
Risking, perhaps, excessive generalisation, it can be said that the econo-
mies of the southern countries today demand more immigrant labour as a
rule than their north-western counterparts. This is due both to the fact that
they are more labour-intensive than the north-western countries and to the
greater weight in their economies of sectors more likely to rely on immi-
grant labour. These include personal services, such as domestic work and
the care of dependent or elderly persons, the tourist and hospitality indus-
try, construction and the building trades, and intensive agriculture and
fruit-picking. All these sectors are relatively larger in southern economies.
Sectors that are larger in north-western economies, such as manufacturing,
have become capital-intensive and make a scant demand for labour, espe-
cially of the less-skilled sort.
In today’s migration setting, which is characterised by a marked segmen-
tation of labour markets, the secondary labour market is the one that con-
tains the least appealing jobs – which are very often filled by immigrant
workers. There are good reasons to believe that this segment is relatively
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
57

larger in southern and eastern countries, which have a higher proportion of
low-skilled occupations in their economic structures. In mature countries, a
significant proportion of such jobs seems to be performed by the offspring
of previous immigrants.
Not surprisingly, on account of the foregoing, immigration rates in the
last two decades have tended to be higher in southern countries than in
north-western ones. Spain and Italy have been, by far, the countries that
have received the largest numbers of immigrants in the EU in recent years,
and Greece and Portugal have also registered considerable intakes at cer-
tain points.
Higher immigration rates in southern countries can be explained not on-
ly by higher demand for immigrant labour, but also by less restrictive la-
bour migration policies, either de jure or de facto, than those prevailing in
north-western countries, with the exception of the UK and Ireland – anoth-
er latecomer – in the first decade of the twenty-first century. In general
terms, southern countries have made more efforts to widen the avenues for
the legal access to the labour market, whether through quotas, mechanisms
of nominal invitation, shortage lists and other schemes.
The economies of north-western countries are, as a rule, more regulated
and controlled – especially in countries with corporatist regimes – with a
larger intervention of stakeholders in the functioning of the labour market.
This reduces some of the advantages of immigrant labour, including its
typically lower cost.
In Southern European countries, a considerable part of the immigrants
required by the economy either entered illegally or became irregular later
by overstaying – probably in a higher proportion than in north-western
countries. This would constitute an important difference in itself. But, in
addition, it paves the way for other relevant differences, such as larger
underground economies, more staggering difficulties for the control of en-
tries and stays, more permissive legal cultures and, maybe, more tolerant
stands towards irregular migration. A number of studies have suggested
that the relative ease of accessing the labour market without work or resi-
dence permits in informal sectors of southern countries may constitute an
alternative option to asylum demand (Finotelli 2007).
Another structural difference has to do with the size and type of welfare
systems. It can be argued that the larger welfare systems of north-western
countries provide an institutional context less favourable for the incorpora-
tion of cheap labour. In addition, they may generate a higher degree of
reluctance to share public goods (Brochmann & Dölvik 2006). On the
southern side, smaller, more conservative and family-oriented welfare sys-
tems contribute to a larger demand for care workers, which is often satis-
fied by immigrants.
58
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

2.3
Concluding remarks
Comparing and contrasting immigration-receiving countries may help to
better understand each country, what it has in common with others as far
as its immigration experience is concerned and how it differs and why.
This chapter has presented a series of reasons, expressed as hypotheses, as
to the basic similarities and differences that exist among different countries
and groups of countries in Europe. On the basis of these hypotheses, a con-
siderable degree of internal homogeneity within each of the three regional
groups identified in the volume could be expected, as could be significant
differences among the groups. All three groups seem to be meaningful, but
the second, made up of the four southern countries of Portugal, Italy,
Greece and Spain, seems to be the most homogeneous. The ‘old’ group of
the north-western quadrant appears to be more heterogeneous. Indeed, it
could be easily and usefully disaggregated into subgroups, especially since
different socio-economic regimes can be identified within it (Massey et al.
1998; Jordan 2006). It is too soon to say much about the third group, con-
stituted by the recent or ‘future’ countries of immigration in CEE – espe-
cially if other countries are included in the picture in addition to Poland,
the Czech Republic and Hungary. Because the experience of this group is
still incipient and because it is too soon to try to characterise it, this chapter
has dealt primarily with the first two groups – although parts of what has
been said about the southern countries could be extrapolated to their east-
ern counterparts. This would obviously be the case, even a fortiori, as far
as the implications of the ‘age effect’ and of the ‘precedence effect’ are
concerned, given that immigration-receiving countries in CEE are even
younger than those in Southern Europe and that the EU’s influence on the
design of immigration policies has become stronger, as attested to by the
conditions set for the 2004 enlargement. It would also apply to the influen-
ces stemming from the ‘generation effect’, as the defining traits of inform-
alisation and deregulation are no less prevalent in the first decade of the
twenty-first century than they were a quarter of a century ago.
As for the reasons underlying the basic differences among the three
groups, the first one has to do with their degree of newness or seniority as
immigration-receiving countries, something that has been referred to here
as the ‘age effect’. It is obvious that this factor clearly differentiates the
three groups. But by its very nature, this is a transient factor that will fade
away with the passage of time and is therefore of limited interest. Should
this be the only or foremost differentiating factor, there would be no reason
not to think that latecomers could replicate the experience of the early
starters.
Of course, it is not the only factor. A second hypothesis posits that the
birth date of countries as immigration-receiving ones may also be relevant
because of the long-lasting influences that they may be subject to during
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
59

their formative years, in a sort of ‘generation effect’. In the case of Europe,
there is little doubt that the historical context in which the ‘mature’ north-
western countries grew as immigration receivers and some of the strategic
orientations adopted in that context decisively conditioned their further ex-
perience with immigration, especially the option for the guest worker mod-
el and its relative failure. It is too soon to know what the legacy will be in
the case of the southern countries, but it is likely to be as different from
that of the early starters as the global context in which they have become
socialised as countries of immigration. The same, mutatis mutandis, can be
expected for CEE countries.
In addition, it could be expected that the three groups of countries would
differ on account of structural differences in their economies and societies
because different socio-economic regimes determine different migration
regimes. The migration regimes of North-Western and Southern Europe are
indeed different. In southern countries immigration rates have tended to be
higher in the last two decades; their economies have a larger demand for
immigrant labour, and immigration in them is, above all, labour migration;
asylum demand is much less prominent, and rates of favourable resolutions
are lower; the demand for immigrant labour is more geared to fill unskilled
jobs; the demand for highly skilled immigrants is smaller; labour migration
policies have tended to be more open, proactive and relatively innovative;
immigration seems to have been more accepted, in general terms; the pro-
portion of immigrants in an irregular condition is higher; extraordinary reg-
ularisations have been more frequent; and the control of flows is more dif-
ficult. The CEE countries of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic
show significant differences with respect to the preceding groups, but their
migration regime is still in the making. This notwithstanding, there are
good reasons to believe that it will be as different from the two other
groups as are their respective socio-economic regimes.
Both structural characteristics and historical factors therefore differenti-
ate the migration regimes of the three groups. Given that the chronology of
the immigration experience may be highly correlated with the chronology
and degree of economic development, and that the latter may be associated
with different types of socio-economic structures or regimes, it can be sur-
mised that both criteria for the grouping of countries – timing and structur-
al characteristics – may coincide to a large extent and in most, though not
all, cases. In other words, there is a certain degree of covariance between
the two orders of factors. Yet, identifying nuances and exceptions in this
coincidence can do justice to complexity. Countries such as Ireland and
Finland, which have much in common structurally with the north-western
group, but are relative latecomers, may complicate a framework that rests
on a degree of symmetry between the chronology of the immigration expe-
rience and certain socio-economic characteristics. Their inclusion in the
analysis could clarify which of the two bundles of factors, structural or
60
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

historical, is the most relevant. Comparing Malta and Cyprus, which are
structurally similar but more recent as immigration countries, or even
Slovenia, with the four southern countries that have been considered here
might also be enlightening (King & Thomson 2008).
Admittedly, cultural differences could also contribute to explaining var-
iation in migration regimes. Cultural variables have been left aside in this
chapter because they are elusive and hard to operationalise, not because
they are irrelevant. On the contrary, societal attitudes – which could
amount to a sort of national ethos – towards immigration may result in dif-
ferent degrees of acceptance or reluctance and explain, for instance, the de-
cision to implement a guest worker model or persistent reservations by
some countries to accept the conditions of a country of immigration
(Tränhardt 1995).
In any case, all the factors as addressed by the hypotheses put forth here
suggest that the migration experiences of the three groups of countries are
bound to be significantly different, and that they may correspond to three
different types of migration regimes. This seems to be clear already in the
case of the two less recent groups. It is therefore quite unlikely that late-
comers will replicate the experience of the early starters. Additionally, they
will not do so on account of the precedence effect. All this limits the po-
tential for more recent countries to learn from the experience of those that
preceded them, although it does not rule out the possibility of learning
from specific decisions or courses of action.
Finally, the existence of substantial differences in migration regimes and
experiences among European countries cannot but deeply condition the
construction of the common immigration and asylum policy in the EU. If
such a policy is to benefit all, these differences should not be disregarded.
Notes
1
Countries outside the EU whose population numbers less than one million are not
considered here.
2
The very title of the IDEA project from which this chapter arose – Mediterranean
and Eastern European Countries as New Immigration Destinations in the European
Union (see note 9 in the Introduction of this volume) – implicitly alluded to three
groups of countries: on the one hand, the Mediterranean or Southern and the
Eastern European Countries that represent the ‘new’ immigration destinations in
the EU; and on the other, the ‘old’ ones in respect to which the former are new.
Additionally, it could be easily reckoned that the degree of newness is rather different
among the two ‘new’ groups of destination countries.
3
The IDEA project started with these three predefined groups of countries, but the
criteria underlying the grouping were not made explicit. It can be surmised that it
was done intuitively or on the basis of common sense – a widely shared common
sense at that.
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
61

References
Allum, P. (1995), State and society in Western Europe. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Arango, J. (2003), ‘Is there a Southern European model of immigration?’, paper presented at
the European Population Conference EPC 2003, Warsaw, August 2003.
Arango, J. (1999), ‘Immigrants in Europe: Between integration and exclusion’, in Metropolis
international workshop: Proceedings, 231-256. Lisbon: Luso-American Foundation.
Arango, J. (1999), ‘Becoming a country of immigration at the end of the 20th century: The
case of Spain’, in R. King, G. Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress?
Migration in Southern Europe, 253-276. London: Macmillan Press.
Baganha, M.I. (ed.) (1997), Immigration in Southern Europe. Oeiras: Celta.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & J. Arango (eds.) (1999), Immigration and the informal economy in
Southern Europe. London: Frank Cass.
Berggren, E., B. Likic-Brboric, G. Toksöz & N. Trimikliniotis (eds.) (2007), Irregular migra-
tion, informal labour and community: A challenge for Europe, 40-50. Maastricht: Shaker
Publishing.
Bonifazi, C. (2008), ‘Evolution of regional patterns of international migration in Europe’, in
C. Bonifazi, M. Okólski, J. Schoorl & P. Simon (eds.), International migration in
Europe: New trends and new methods of analysis, 107-128. IMISCOE Research Series.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Brochmann, G. & J.E. Dölvik (2006), ‘Is Immigration an enemy of the welfare state?’, in D.
Papademetriou (ed.), Europe and its immigrants in the 21st century: A new deal or a con-
tinuing dialogue of the deaf?, 155-178. Washington, D.C.: Migration Policy Institute;
Lisbon: Luso-American Foundation.
Castles, S. (1986), ‘The guest-worker in Western Europe: An obituary’, International
Migration Review 20.
Clausen, J.A. (1986), The life course: A sociological perspective. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-
Hall.
Dassetto, F. (1990), ‘Pour une théorie des cycles migratoires’, in A. Bastenier & F. Dassetto
(eds.), Immigration et nouveaux pluralisms: Une confrontation de sociétés, 11:40.
Brussels: De Boeck-Wesmael.
Edye, D. & V. Lintner (1996), Contemporary Europe: Economics, politics and society.
London: Prentice Hall.
Esping Andersen, G. (1990), The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Finotelli, C. (2007), Illegale Einwanderung, Flüchtlingsmigration und das Ende des Nord-
Süd-Mythos. Münster: LIT.
Gerschenkron, A. (1962), Economic backwardness in historical perspective. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Glick, P. (1947), ‘The family life cycle’, American Sociological Review 12: 164-174.
Heckmann, F. & D. Schanapper (eds.) (2003), The integration of immigrants in European so-
cieties: National differences and trends of convergence. Stuttgart: Lucius & Lucius.
Jordan, B. (2007), ‘Migration regimes and irregular migration’, in E. Berggren, B. Likic-
Brboric, G. Toksöz & N. Trimikliniotis (eds.), Irregular migration, informal labour and
community: A challenge for Europe, 40-50. Maastricht: Shaker Publishing.
Kindleberger, Ch.P. (1967), Europe’s post-war growth: The role of labor supply. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
King, R. (2000), ‘Southern Europe in the changing global map of migration’, in R. King, G.
Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in Southern Europe,
1-26. London: Macmillan.
62
JOAQUÍN ARANGO

King, R. & M. Thomson (2008), ‘The Southern European model of immigration: Do the cases
of Malta, Cyprus and Slovenia fit?’, Journal of Balkan and Near Eastern Studies 10 (3):
265-291.
Kritz, M.M., L.L. Lim & H. Zlotnik (eds.) (1992), International migration systems. Oxford:
Clarendon Press Oxford.
Kuijsten, A. (1994), ‘International migration in Europe: Patterns and implications for receiving
countries in Europe’, in United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, International
migration: Regional processes and responses. New York and Geneva: United Nations.
Mabogunje, A.L. (1970), ‘Systems approach to a
theory of rural-urban migration’,
Geographical Review 2(1): 1-18.
Massey, D.S., J. Arango, G. Hugo, A. Kouaouci, A. Pellegrino & J.E. Taylor (1998), Worlds
in motion: Understanding international migration at the end of the millennium. Oxford:
Clarendon Press Oxford.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (several years), Trends in interna-
tional migration Sopemi. Paris: OECD.
Reyneri, E. & M. Baganha (2001), ‘Migration and the labour market in Southern Europe’,
IMIS-Beiträge 17: 33-53.
Schierup, C.-U. (2007), ‘ “Bloody subcontracting” in the network society: Migration and post-
Fordist restructuring across the European Union’, in E. Berggren, Br. Likic-Brboric, G.
Toksöz & N. Trimikliniotis (eds.), Irregular migration, informal labour and community:
A challenge for Europe, 40-50. Maastricht: Shaker Publishing.
Tapinos, G. (ed.) (1993), Inmigración e Integración en Europa. Barcelona: Fundación Paulino
Torres Domènech.
Tränhardt, D. (1995), ‘Germany: An undeclared immigration country’, New Community 21
(1): 14-36.
Triandafyllidou, A. & R. Gropas (eds.) (2007), European immigration: A sourcebook. Farhan:
Ashgate.
Werner,
H.
(1986),
‘Post-war
labour
migration
in
Western
Europe:
An
overview’,
International Migration 24 (3): 543-557.
Zlotnik, H. (1992), ‘Empirical identification of international migration systems’, in M.M.
Kritz, L.L. Lim & H. Zlotnik (eds.), International migration systems, 19-40. Oxford:
Clarendon Press Oxford.
EARLY STARTERS AND LATECOMERS
63


3
‘Old’ immigration countries in Europe
The concept and empirical examples
Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger
3.1
Introduction
In the course of their immigration experience, transitioning receiving coun-
tries go through a specific demographic development and policy learning
process that is called a migration cycle. It appears that this migration cycle
is to some extent similar to that which old immigration countries experi-
enced in the past. Migration processes of the past will never be repeated in
exactly the same way, but if the stages of the migration cycle are general-
ised, the similarities become apparent. This chapter applies this conceptual
model to the past and recent migration history of the ‘old’ immigration
countries in Europe. The authors critically evaluate the grouping of the old
immigration countries, prod for specific as well as general driving forces
and look for a general model to be applied to the shift that countries under-
go from emigration to immigration. For this purpose, the most important
‘old’ immigration countries are included in the considerations – namely
Germany, France, Great Britain and Austria. Also elaborated is the case of
Spain as an illustration of a ‘new’ immigration country in order to show
how the concept can also be applied (for more detailed information on
Spain, see chapters 5 and 7 in this volume).
3.2
Notions and concepts
3.2.1
The notion of ‘old immigration countries’
The notion of an ‘immigration country’ plays an important role in public
debate and signals a change in perception, but there is no commonly ac-
cepted definition. There are at least two approaches to operationalise this
concept. The first one defines an immigration country as a declared self-
perception. The political elite and the general public agree that immigration
is part of the nation-building process. Society is built upon migration – that
is the general idea. Whether the real number of immigrants is high or low

does not play a significant role; what is important is general self-percep-
tion. The so-called classical immigration countries (the United States,
Canada, Australia) adhere to this definition. The other approach is more
statistically based. Immigration countries are defined by a considerable and
systematic surplus of immigration over emigration over time, and thus by
positive net migration. It is assumed that positive net migration is not a sin-
gular event and is more or less a steady, stable situation. There are no
defined thresholds for how many years net migration must be positive in
order to label a country an immigration country, but clearly the majority of
years in a given period should show a positive balance.
There can be a discrepancy between the statistical definition of an immi-
gration country and self-perception. For example, Germany should be cate-
gorised as an immigration country as of the end of the 1950s or 1960s, but
its acceptance as such by the law, its population and politicians came about
only just recently, at the beginning of the twenty-first century. Austria ex-
perienced the same situation, with an excess of immigration over emigra-
tion since the 1960s, though this statistical fact has not been accepted by
the public without reservation. In this chapter (and throughout the present
volume), the statistical definition is used to designate an immigration
country.
The second point to be clarified is the attribute ‘old’. What is an old im-
migration country? In the context of this volume, ‘old’ is a relative term
which has little to do with an absolute number of years. The surplus of im-
migration over emigration occurred sometime in the past, without an ex-
actly pinpointed moment in time. But the attribute ‘old’ also implies that
‘young’ immigration countries exist, where the excess of immigration over
emigration is a more recent phenomenon. The terminology of ‘old immi-
gration countries’ is linked inevitably and necessarily to a time-dependent
process. The basic assumption is that European countries are shifting from
emigration to immigration statuses, and from young to old.
3.3
The concept of a migration cycle
The transition from a young to an old immigration country is not a linear
process (as was described by Zelinsky 1971), or one without any friction.
International migration changes societal compositions, highlights the ques-
tion of national or regional identity and sharpens distributional conflicts
over workplaces, on the housing market and in the public space. Especially
in times of an economic downswing, conflicts between the native and the
newly arriving population may emerge.
To better explain these processes of change, to underline the importance
of the transition of an emigration country or a country without any signifi-
cant immigration to one where immigration becomes the dominant
66
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

demographic event, the IDEA project (see note 9 in the Introduction of this
volume) developed the concept of a migration cycle. It is based on the gen-
eral idea that the society and the legal system of a country adapts to a new
situation and develops a mechanism to handle new or evolving migratory
circumstances. Countries and societies are ‘learning’, absorbing past expe-
riences and developing new adaptation strategies. Learning processes are
time-dependent and embedded in a certain temporal and spatial context. As
for the sources of this learning process, they include not only the country’s
own past, which certainly merits mention, but also countries’ ability to
learn from the experiences, successes and failures of other countries that
became immigration countries earlier. By no means does this imply, how-
ever, that all European countries pass through exactly the same cycle.
Furthermore, it is not postulated that the individual stages of the cycle last
for the same amount of time or exhibit identical characteristics. Countries
that are entering the transition process later could potentially require a
shorter period of time to adapt than the states that transitioned earlier. The
concept can nevertheless be used as a blueprint, or as a mirror for the de-
velopment of widespread immigration and emigration trends.
To newly emphasise the idea of a cycle, and in an attempt to further
clarify the concept, ‘migration transition’ connotes a time period of indeter-
minate duration when a country or region adapts to a new immigration sit-
uation. Former emigration countries, for example, become immigration
countries – or vice versa – and, during this process, go through at least
three different stages: an initial, pre-transition or preliminary stage; an in-
termediate or transition stage; and a net immigration stage. These stages
are the main components of the migration cycle and correspond to a very
general process involving system stability, disturbances and, finally, the
emergence of a new stability.
During the initial, pre-transformation or preliminary stage, emigration is
more important than immigration, or else net migration is zero. Stability is
a key factor in the initial stage. A certain and specific demographic situa-
tion is constant for a long period of time and, usually, both political and
social dynamics are attuned to it.
The second stage is of particular importance because the system begins
to undergo fundamental changes. During the intermediate or transition
stage, a former emigration country becomes, step by step, a new immigra-
tion country. The steps are of different lengths and of varying substance,
e.g. a given country’s transition could begin with a significant migration
surplus and could then be followed by a period of stagnation or a short-
term negative balance. But the general trends appear to be changing and,
from the transition’s inception, immigration typically outweighs emigra-
tion. Changes in the general trend do not happen invisibly, or without any
trace. The first economic crisis and the relative ‘overshooting’ of immigra-
tion usually cause the issue to become more and more prominent in public
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
67

discussions and debates. Immigration and migration control come to be
hot-button political topics and electoral votes are won or lost depending on
the way politicians address the migration issue. New mechanisms to con-
trol migration are imposed, step-by-step and over time.
The intermediate or transition stage then fades out into a third stage,
which is called the adaptation stage or post-transformation stage. This
stage’s main characteristic is newfound stability. Immigration is more or
less acknowledged as a necessary supplement to a demographically dimin-
ishing working population, on the one hand, and a growing economy, on
the other hand. Extreme expressions of opinion in support of one solution
or another lose popularity, and a new political rationality emerges by inte-
grating into a differentiated legal system a means of controlling internation-
al migration. Whereas during the pre-transition and transition stages the le-
gal system provided, at best, one means of entering the state, by the end of
the transition period, a whole panoply of strategies to obtain residence and
settlement titles would have likely developed. Conceptual differentiations
of the inflows and legal or judicial differentiations of the individuals who
are legally allowed to immigrate are important features of this phase.
The various stages of the immigration cycle are thus found in the transi-
tions from new or young immigration countries to old immigration coun-
tries, or else from emigration countries to immigration countries. Many
European countries are on their way to becoming full-fledged immigration
countries, and can be classified according to the stage they find themselves
in. Most of the new member states are in the initial or pre-transition stages,
though it appears some of them will be entering the transition stage sooner
(e.g. the Czech Republic, see chapter 8 in this volume), others, some time
later (e.g. Poland). Most of the Western European countries are in the inter-
mediate or post-transition stages, and some of them are entering the adap-
tation phase or post-transition stage. Most of the Southern European coun-
tries currently find themselves in the transition stages, albeit with high
fluctuations, wherein very contentious debates on migration and searches
for viable legal solutions are pervasive.
3.4
The main drivers
If a migration cycle is loosely defined as an adaptation and learning proc-
ess that becomes necessary when new demographic and economic condi-
tions arise, it begs the question of which factors are primarily responsible
for the new circumstances. This question leads us to the concept of main
drivers, which are defined as the most important independent variables that
explain the change. Why do most European countries enter the second
transition stage and leave the stable situation in which emigration
68
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

outnumbers immigration, or where net migration was zero? Which factors
are the most relevant for a country’s entering the migration cycle?
The question of which drivers matter most can be at least partly ad-
dressed by the usual migration theories for labour migration, such as the
push-and-pull model or the migration system theory, and depends on which
kind of migration is put into primary focus. The main drivers for asylum
seekers are different than those of labour migrants. For asylum seekers,
political crises, wars and persecutions in neighbouring countries and re-
gions, the geographical distance between their region of origin and the first
receiving country and the attractiveness of the receiving country’s asylum
procedure are all important drivers.
Regarding labour migration, the main drivers are to be found in demo-
graphic realities, in economic and sectoral development and in the structure
of the labour market. The effects of demographic development and the
structure of the labour market are rather long-term considerations, while
economic development is often a short-term factor.
First, it is a demographic reality that decreasing numbers of births lead –
after a time delay – to diminishing numbers of entries into the labour mar-
ket and to an ageing of the workforce. In this situation, the demand for
new labour increases, especially when economic growth is high and pro-
ductivity gains are less than or equal to a reduction in working time. A
shrinking and ageing labour force will have a direct effect on pull factors
and will stimulate immigration, especially when economic development
leads to an increase in labour demand. Furthermore, an ageing society will
manifest some effects not only on the quantity of immigration, but also on
the public’s selectivity. An ageing society will increase the demand1 for
health and care services, which are performed mainly by the female labour
force.
Second, increasing economic growth leads to an increasing demand for
new labour migration, especially when the demographic transition is in full
swing. Growth in GDP is usually highly correlated with a positive net mi-
gration balance. Short-term external events sometimes cause an above-
average increase in the demand for labour. Such events may be large
investments in short periods of time, such as world championships or
Olympic Games. Besides this short-term and cyclical effect, the long-term
structural change resulting from industrial economies’ shifts to service-
based economies during the past several decades should be taken into con-
sideration. Productivity gains in the service sector are limited, and the qual-
ities of the services are connected to human beings, not to machines.
Especially in domains such as tourism and health and personal services,
economic growth automatically leads to an increase in the work force.
The third independent process is the segmentation of the labour market
and rising tendency for natives – and, albeit more slowly and to a lesser
degree, the immigration population – to be more highly qualified. As
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
69

industrial development comes into full swing, labour market segmentation
becomes more and more important, and actually acts as a source for further
immigration. A well-developed labour market is characterised by the divi-
sion of the entire market into at least a primary and a secondary segment.
The primary segment employs well-educated labourers, who are the source
of high-ranking firms’ specific knowledge bases. These well-educated
labourers receive high wages and enjoy stable careers. In the secondary
labour market segment, the less-qualified labourers are concentrated, the
wages are lower and the careers are unstable. With the increasing qualifica-
tions of the native and some immigrant population, more and more gradu-
ates attempt to enter the primary segment, leaving the jobs in the secondary
segment vacant and increasing the demand for new labour migration
(Hudson 2007).
Finally, the state and related means of regulation of international migra-
tion must be included as main drivers. With its laws, regulations and
related practices, the public authorities shape immigration in a direct and
sustained way. Of course, the state does not act independently of the previ-
ously mentioned factors, and indeed state action is normally closely tied to
demographic and economic developments. Especially during times of a
diminishing labour supply and the economy needing more labourers, pub-
lic authorities become active in and reactive to that situation. Thus, the
state is not only a key driver, but is, at the same time, influenced by other
drivers.
It is important to note that these drivers interact or are mutually depend-
ent on one another. They also display different temporal characteristics.
Drivers like demographic development have a long-term effect, while eco-
nomic influences show short-term effects. These should be seen from a
double perspective: the way in which they manifest themselves both in tar-
get countries of migration and in potential countries of origin.2
3.5
Europe: Convergence and diversity of international
migration
During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Europe was a conti-
nent of emigration. Imre Ferenczi and Walter F. Willcox claim that roughly
50 million to 55 million people emigrated from Europe to the United
States, and approximately another ten million Europeans left for Argentina,
Canada and Brazil between 1846 and 1924 (Ferenczi & Willcox 1929:
185). But after 1945, a new era began – one that also affected European
migration. Nothing better illustrates the new economic and political rise of
Europe than the change in migration trends after World War II. Gradually,
most European countries were transformed into de facto immigration coun-
tries. But this was not the result of any comprehensive or concerted
70
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

strategy, but of specific economic, demographic and political develop-
ments. During the second half of the twentieth century, Europe became an
immigration continent ‘against its will’, and the main countries involved in
this development were those termed, ‘old immigration countries’ in this
volume.
3.5.1
The general pattern
There are good arguments in support of the use of both flow data and net
migration data to identify immigration countries. However, for both cases,
the availability and accuracy of migration statistics in European countries
is an unsolved problem. The individual nation-states use long-established
but very different instruments to determine population and migration statis-
tics, which are not generally easy to harmonise with each other. One possi-
bility for using long-term net migration data is offered by the Population
Division of the United Nations. They provide calculated net migration as
the result of comparing population figures from two different years.
Calculated net migration is arrived at using the main demographic equa-
tion: the population of t + 1 is the population of t plus birth and minus
death between t and t + 1. Net migration is therefore not only the result of
‘real’ migration flows; it also reflects any statistical changes and uncertain-
ties. However, these data provide net migration figures for every country
of the world since 1950, and therefore allow for a recalculation of the net
migration of the EU-27 countries for more than five decades.
It becomes apparent from these data that, until the beginning of the
1960s, more people left the EU-27 than came in. Back then, Europe was
still an emigration continent. Negative migration balances of more than
200,000 persons per year changed, for the first time, during the quinquen-
nium 1960-1965. The recruitment of foreign labour prevailed as a labour
market-related measure, and many European countries satisfied their addi-
tional demand for labour – which was usually accompanied by positive
economic developments due to immigration.
The positive balance only went down, or failed to grow with the inten-
sity most expected, during times of economic crisis (1968, 1973, 1980).
From the middle of the 1980s onwards, the international migration balance
of the EU-27 vis-à-vis the ‘rest of the world’ has always been positive, and
in fact grew from quinquennium to quinquennium. Between 2005 and
2010, it grew to 1,311,000 people, meaning that, year by year, the differ-
ence between the number of people coming to the EU-27 and those leaving
was 1,300,000 people. Taken as a long-term average (1950-2010), the an-
nual net gain from migration amounts to 420,000 people.
A further fact that can be illustrated using the net migration data of the
United Nations is the convergence of European migration. In the EU-27,
the variation in different nations’ net migrations decreased, but the process
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
71

was not linear. It was low during the 1950s, because almost all nation-
states were characterised by a prevalence of emigration. During the 1960s,
the variance grew remarkably fast because some countries had already
turned into immigration countries and others still were dominated by emi-
gration. The variation diminishes again during the 1980s, as the postulated
pattern – Europe turning into an immigration continent – generally wins
through. For the time being, there are only a few remaining countries in
Eastern Europe that still display a negative migration balance. But even in
that region, it is only a matter of time until immigration exceeds emigra-
tion. A main reason for this is a likely strong drop in fertility, which trans-
lates into a decreasing domestic labour supply. This process is typically
delayed for a time as a relatively fast-growing economy suddenly experien-
ces a need for a larger workforce. In the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Slovenia and Slovakia, immigration has been outweighing emigration since
the beginning of the 1990s – the international migration balance has been
positive since then.
3.5.2
Country-specific differentiations
As just pointed out, this development was not the same or even parallel in
all European countries. Some of them showed a positive migration balance
during the whole time period in question; other European countries only
did so in recent years. Table 3.1 displays these differences in temporal dy-
namics. The following section discusses the differences further.
During this entire time period, France displayed positive net migration.
On the one hand, this resulted from an active recruitment policy that was
specifically organised by the public authorities in order to attract a foreign
workforce. On the other hand, France received returning settlers, soldiers
and civil servants, as well as citizens of the former colonies, in the course
of the decolonisation process. This immigration was not only economic
and related to the labour market, but also dependent on external events.
For the entire period between the 1950s and 2007, net migration was posi-
tive (2007: +73,000). France can therefore indubitably be dubbed an ‘old
immigration country’. Its turning point from emigration to immigration,
however, dates back to the second half of the nineteenth century, and the
shape of its graph is different than the one for Germany. The average posi-
tive net migration for the whole time period (1950-2010) is 112,000 per-
sons. In 2008, there were about 3,650,000 foreigners living in France and
6,500,000 people who had been born abroad, a fact that underlines the im-
portance of colonial immigration and the quick granting of citizenship,
mostly for the second-generation children born in France. With a share of
foreigners at 5.7 per cent, France finds itself in the middle of the European
playing field.
72
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

Figure 3.1
Net migration in France, 1950-2010
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
51
53
55
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71
73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09
Source: United Nations Population Division; own design
Germany has experienced a near-constant positive net migration since the
1950s, though it was more strongly reflective of economic trends. The eco-
nomic crises following the first and second oil price shocks led to consid-
erably shrinking net migration. Fewer foreign labourers were recruited, or
else return migration was actively promoted. During the entire period be-
tween the beginning of the 1950s and the end of 2010, net migration was
positive. Only during a few years around 1975 and 1980 did the migration
balance become negative. Apart from labour market-oriented inflows of
immigrants into Germany, there was also a massive inflow of people of
German descent from Eastern Europe (including from the German
Democratic Republic to the Federal Republic of Germany before 1961).
The official figures for the inflow of labour into Germany (West Germany)
until 1989 are significantly biased due to the influx of ‘ethnic Germans’
from other countries. The peak period of net migration between the mid-
1980s and mid-1990s was mainly caused by the influxes of asylum seekers
and the ethnic Germans from the eastern parts of Europe.
Figure 3.2
Net migration in Germany, 1950-2010
-100,000
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Source: United Nations Population Division; own design
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
73

Germany is indisputably an old immigration country, but still saw more
than one turning point during its transition from a country of emigration to
one of immigration. Its average annual net migration is currently +181,000
persons, the highest of all the EU-27 countries. The stock of immigrants
totals about 10,500,000 people born abroad and 7,300,000 foreign citizens,
which makes for an 8.8 per cent share of foreigners.
The Austrian case is strongly reminiscent of the German example, as it
is also characterised by a strong link to economic trends. But there are two
main differences between the two countries. For one, Austria never imple-
mented a system tailored specifically to ethnic migration, whereby
descendants of Austrians living in the countries of Eastern Europe were
granted privileged statuses when they ‘returned’. Secondly, Austria experi-
enced an economic upswing later than Germany and, consequently, initi-
ated active recruitment policies later than Germany. Germany began sign-
ing recruitment contracts in the middle of the 1950s, whereas the Austrian
government did so only at the beginning of the 1960s. The long-term aver-
age of net migration in Austria during the past six decades amounts to
+14,000, but the total is +34,000 during the past two decades. Austria is
undoubtedly an immigration country, but only in the statistical sense, be-
cause its popular ‘self-perception’ is rather different – especially that of the
political elite. The stock of immigrants in Austria amounts to about
1,400,000 foreign-born and 800,000 foreign citizens, which together results
in a 10 per cent share of foreigners. This significant share places Austria in
the leading European group.
Table 3.1
Calculated net migration, 1950-2010 (in 1,000)
Years
Spain
France
UK
Germany
Austria
EU-27
1950-1955
-51
57
-101
55
-15
-267
1955-1960
-104
174
-15
144
-10
-201
1960-1965
-78
295
44
180
3
257
1965-1970
-43
120
-50
161
10
-71
1970-1975
3
123
-38
178
17
314
1975-1980
23
71
-11
66
1
309
1980-1985
-26
80
-50
-22
4
28
1985-1990
-15
80
6
391
22
436
1990-1995
65
48
33
530
47
760
1995-2000
159
38
99
190
13
578
2000-2005
501
152
190
186
44
1,605
2005-2010
350
100
190
110
32
1,311
Average per
annum
65
112
25
181
14
422
Source: World Population Prospects: 2008 revision (http://esa.un.org/unpp); own
calculation
74
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

Figure 3.3
Net migration in Austria, 1950-2010
-20,000
-10,000
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Source: United Nations Population Division; own design
The United Kingdom clearly represents a different type: only since the
mid-1980s has the UK shown a continuously positive migration balance.
Before that time, the UK was characterised more by emigration than immi-
gration. For many decades, UK citizens leaving for the US, Canada and
Australia outnumbered the return migrants from present or former colonies.
In addition, the immigration of citizens from the former colonies was more
and more restricted in both political and legal terms. The image of ‘Britain
under siege’ disseminated by the media also had political implications.
However, applying the strictly statistical definition already used here, the
UK did become an immigration country – a very young one, compared to
France. The turning point from emigration to immigration lies only two
decades back. But public self-perception did not change. The British public
has been surprised by the increase in immigration in recent years. Overall,
positive net migration amounted to 25,000 since the beginning of the
1950s, but reached 128,000 since the beginning of the 1990s. As of 2008,
about 3,700,000 foreign citizens are residing in the UK, and 6 million peo-
ple have been born abroad. As is well known, the UK has – just like
Ireland and Sweden – forgone temporary arrangements for controlling la-
bour immigration from the new member states and has thus turned into an
important target for Polish and Lithuanian workers. The share of foreigners
was 4.2 per cent in the year 2000, increasing to 6.5 per cent in 2008.
Only the Southern European countries are younger immigration coun-
tries than the UK. The case of Spain will be briefly described here. At the
beginning of the 1990s, Spain experienced the same transformation process
as Germany and Austria several decades prior – namely, the conversion of
the migration balance to positive values. Following its accession to the
European Union and positive economic developments, not only did emi-
gration stop, but a notable surge began of labour immigration targeting
agriculture, tourism and private households. The immigration of elderly
people from the UK, Germany and the Scandinavian countries – who
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
75

wanted to spend their sunset years in the European sunbelt – is also a con-
siderable immigration factor. The long-time average of net migration since
the 1950s was more than +65,000 persons, but since the beginning of the
1990s, it has been as high as +296,000. It thus exceeds the international
net migration of Germany, a fact impressively documenting its evolution
towards an immigration country, and the growing convergence in this re-
spect. In 2008 about 4,600,000 foreign citizens were registered in Spain,
which results in a share of immigrants of 11.5 per cent. Spain thus finds it-
self among the European countries with the highest shares of immigrants:
it is surpassed only by mini-states, which display even higher shares.
Figure 3.5
Net migration in Spain, 1950-2010
-200,000
-100,000
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Source: United Nations Population Division; own design
Figure 3.4
Net migration in the UK, 1950-2010
-150,000
-100,000
-50,000
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Source: United Nations Population Division; own design
76
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

3.6
The migration cycle: The Austrian example
In the following sections, the perspective taken is that of a single member
state, rather than from the European level. Austria is an apt example for
demonstrating, in detail, the transition from an emigration into an immigra-
tion country. It also exhibits the nuanced applicability of the concept of the
migration cycle. Upon closer inspection, it becomes apparent that the dif-
ferentiation of the cycle and its stages are always relative. There are per-
suasive arguments showing that Austrian migration history since 1945 can
be accurately described as a single cycle: one with a stable stage until the
beginning of the 1960s, an intermediate stage until the end of the 1990s,
and, finally, a stage of renewed stability. But the intermediate stage in
Austria could just as well be described using as two separate sub-stages:
the first one lasting until the mid-1980s, when the classic ‘guest worker re-
gime’ came to an end and stability returned; and a second one associated
with the fall of the Iron Curtain and in which stability and a new balance
only recently made an appearance.
3.6.1
Migration history in retrospect
Until the end of the 1950s, Austria was decidedly an emigration country.
The country was poor, unemployment was high and any hope for an eco-
nomic upswing came later than it did in Germany. The out-migration of
Austrian nationals exceeded immigration levels, with the most important
target regions being the US, Canada and Australia, as well as the neigh-
bouring countries of Germany and Switzerland. From the Austrians’ per-
spective, there were many advantages related to employment in these two
neighbouring countries: small distances, no language barriers and higher
levels of income than those available at home made emigration for labour
purposes an attractive option (Münz, Zuser & Kytir 2003: 20).
This emigration continued into the 1960s, with about 92,000 Austrians
leaving between 1962 and 1973. This number does not include commuters
(most of whom were located in Western Austria) or seasonal workers, who
kept their main residences in Austria. This means that the total number of
Austrian employees in Germany and Switzerland was even higher. In
1973, the total number of Austrians residing in Germany was 177,000,
with 101,000 gainfully employed; in Switzerland, the number of Austrians
amounted to 40,000 until just before the oil crisis (Münz et al. 2003: 20).
International immigration was a rarity, and only happened in the form of
political refugees. In 1956-1957, 180,000 Hungarians sought asylum in
Austria; in 1968-1969, 160,000 Czechs and Slovaks left via Austria, but
only 12,000 attempted to obtain asylum in Austria. Austria was not really
a target destination for many of these migrants – rather, it only happened
to be nearby and a direct neighbour, thus serving as a transit country for
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
77

refugees. Many of them preferred to travel on to other Western European
or overseas destinations, which were more attractive to them than a country
so close to the Iron Curtain and the countries they had just fled; some also
simply returned home. The Austrian public expressed sympathy for refu-
gees from behind the Iron Curtain, whom they saw as victims of
communism.
The 1961 census counted a foreign population of only 1.4 per cent, or a
little more than 100,000 people in absolute terms. The majority came from
Western Europe, with all other origins playing an insignificant role. The
immigration of the foreign population was neither a subject of public con-
cern nor an issue addressed by labour market policy. The situation changed
with the Austrian Wirtschaftswunder – a period of economic growth begin-
ning in the 1950s – and with the return of high fertility rates.
In the early 1960s, Austria faced a growing demand for labour as the
economy was still booming: the industrial sector was expanding, the cur-
rency had stabilised, inflation was below 5 per cent and the unemployment
rate was below 3 per cent. Taken together, this meant the goal of full em-
ployment had been achieved. The rates of labour force participation among
females decreased because many women had to leave their jobs in order to
take care of their newborns. The subsequent shortages within the labour
force – which primarily affected the industrial sector – had several underly-
ing sources. First, it could be perceived as a long-term consequence of the
human losses during World War II. Second, the high number of births and
the lack of childcare kept women away from the labour market. Third, the
temporal extension of education released fewer people directly into
employment.
Facing the need for additional labour, social partnerships agreed upon
contingents (quotas) for the employment of guest workers in 1961, with
the goal of letting them in only on a temporary basis and sending them
Table 3.2
Stock of the population by nationality in Austria, 1961
Country of origin
Foreign nationals
Absolute number
In % of total
population
In % of foreign
population
Total population
7,073,814
100
Austrian nationals
6,971,648
98.6
Foreign nationals
102,166
1.4
100
EU-14
59,215
0.8
58.0
Yugoslavia
4,565
0.1
4.5
Turkey
217
0.0
0.2
Visegrad*
6,498
0.1
6.4
Other
31,671
0.4
31.0
* Poland, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary
Source: Census 1961, Statistics of Austria; own calculation
78
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

back should there be any unfavourable economic developments. They were
to just serve as additional temporary workers. Generally speaking, Austrian
migration policy was a reflection of the needs of the labour market in this
first phase of guest worker immigration. Migration policy as such was not
an issue. The interests of entrepreneurs were dominant. Guest workers
were welcomed and seen as an additional source for wealth – but not as a
part of the Austrian society. Integration was not on the agenda, and long-
term residence of the imported labour force was not intended.
The Austrian recruitment of labour migrants happened later than in
Germany, Switzerland or Scandinavia. The first intergovernmental recruit-
ment agreements were established with Spain in 1962 (though in reality
these remained irrelevant), with Turkey in 1964 and with Yugoslavia in
1966. The so-called ‘rotation principle’ formed the basic idea at the begin-
ning of the immigration of guest workers. They were to stay only on a
temporary basis, with no opportunities for permanent settlement, family
migration or societal integration. But this idea failed, due to resistance
from both the employers’ and the foreign employees’ sides. Businesses
were reluctant to relinquish the workforce they had taken care to train, and
the migrants stayed because they were employed and earned more money
than they could at home (see Fassmann 1992: 101).
In practical terms, the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber established
recruitment centres in the sending countries and, in 1967, a provisional em-
ployment centre was installed directly at Ostbahnhof, one of Vienna’s main
train stations. But this concept of direct recruitment became less effective
over time, with ongoing immigration and the formation of networks
between businesses and guest workers already present in Austria; workers
actively recruited friends and relatives in the sending countries (Bauböck
1996: 13). These new labourers entered Austria as tourists, but under the
economic boom conditions of the early 1970s, it was quite easy for them
to get an employment permit.
Beginning in the larger cities in the northern republics of Yugoslavia,
and with high proportions of Slovenians and Croats, guest worker migra-
tion in its initial phases brought individual young people to Austria. These
individuals were not able to find employment in their home countries after
having finished school, or else were interested in earning more money
abroad. The quantitative increase from 1969 onwards went hand in hand
with social and geographical expansion. More and more older people with
lower qualifications from rural areas in the south-eastern parts of
Yugoslavia (Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia) were also in-
volved in the process. The motives of these guest workers were all the
same: maximising income and, at the same time, minimising the costs of
the stay abroad in order to be able to send as much money as possible back
home (Fassmann 1992: 102).
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
79

As it was increasingly successful in recruiting foreign labour, Austria
was facing a first wave of immigration of guest workers in the mid-1960s,
with an annual growth of more than 10,000 foreign workers from 1965
(11,200) until 1967 (14,700). This number rose to around 40,000 in the pe-
riod 1971-1973, ultimately representing the heyday of guest worker immi-
gration. The economic boom went on and the employment of foreign la-
bour reached its peak in 1973 with around 227,000 persons, 78.5 per cent
from Yugoslavia. Guest workers made up about 10 per cent of the total
Austrian labour force.
The national census only provides limited information about the stock of
the foreign population in the early phases of guest worker recruitment.
Guest workers whose families still resided in their countries of origin were
not counted as parts of the resident population, which was also characteris-
tic of the way politicians and decision-makers dealt with guest worker mi-
gration. But questions also arose regarding those workers whose families
were still back home: a publication was issued containing information on
‘guest workers living in Austria but not belonging to the resident popula-
tion’ (Österreichisches Statistisches Zentralamt 1974: 3). Table 3.3 com-
prises both groups. While the share of foreigners was only 1.4 per cent be-
fore Austria’s transformation from a country of emigration to immigration
(1961), it had doubled to 2.8 per cent in 1971, with the census already re-
flecting the dominance of immigration from the Balkans.
A comparison of the composition of the population in 1961 and 1971
clearly shows that the total increase in the foreign population (more than
100,000 persons) to a great extent resulted from immigration inflows from
Yugoslavia and Turkey. Yugoslavia was the main sending country, with 44
per cent of the 211,896 foreign nationals residing in Austria in 1971. All
in all, the guest workers made up 52 per cent of the total foreign
Table 3.3
Stock of the population by nationality in Austria, 1971
Country of origin
Foreign nationals
Females in %
Absolute
number
In % of total
population
In % of foreign
population
Total population
7,491,526
100
Austrian nationals
7,279,630
97.2
53.2
Foreign nationals
211,896
2.8
100
39.4
EU-14
64,594
0.9
30.5
48.5
Yugoslavia
93,337
1.2
44.0
36.9
Turkey
16,423
0.2
7.8
12.7
Visegrad*
6,853
0.1
3.2
42.1
Other
30,689
0.4
14.5
41.9
* Poland, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary
Source: Census 1961, Statistics of Austria; own calculation
80
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

population. Western Europe accounted for one third of the foreign resident
population in 1971.
The number of Turks immigrating to Austria was still comparatively
low at the beginning of the 1970s, with only 16,423 entering, with a clear
dominance of men: only 12.7 per cent of the Turks in Austria in 1971 were
women, while 37 per cent of the residing Yugoslavs were women. This
was a clear indicator that family migration or the independent immigration
of women, in their case, must already have started – to at least some extent
before 1971. But Yugoslav women had also entered Austria as guest
workers.
In the first half of the 1970s, the economic situation in Austria changed
enormously due to two parallel developments. The first was pronounced
economic stagnation after the first oil price shock in 1973, which marked
the end of the boom era that had lasted for a long period of time.
Stagnation led to growing unemployment, reduced working hours, in-
creased inflation and public debt as well as failing enterprises. Secondly,
the arrival of the baby boom cohorts on the labour market marked the end
of the internal labour shortage.
Public opinion about immigration and guest workers as such changed
rather dramatically. While people from the former Yugoslavia and Turkey
were tolerated in times of good economic performance, the public increas-
ingly perceived them as a threat and as those who short-changed the wel-
fare system. In an effort to fight the rising xenophobia, the ‘Kolaric’ poster
was hung in the streets of Vienna in 1973, and it is still famous today.
Featured in the poster is a man who was working in a Vienna slaughter-
house and whose real name was Kolaric. He is asked by a small, obviously
Austrian boy, why they call him ‘Tschusch’ (a swear word for people from
the Balkans), even though they (man and boy) have the same family name.
The dialogue between the Austrian boy and the man was supposed to bring
migration history back into the public sphere. The boy and the man are mi-
grants (or descendents of migrants), but one is treated in a xenophobic way
by the other, which is neither fair nor logical. Launched by the Aktion
Mitmensch of the Austrian advertising industry, the placard is an early ex-
ample of the promotion of tolerance towards migrants and their integration.
From 1974 to 1976, there were massive attempts to reduce the foreign
labour force in Austria and the official recruitment was thus stopped com-
pletely. The failure of the rotation principle and the trend towards perma-
nent settlement quickly became apparent. Contrary to official political
plans and expectations, the recruitment ban provoked a consolidation of
permanent residences for a part of the foreign workers, who earlier had
travelled back and forth, depending on the labour market situation, but
now – in fear of losing the right to live and work in Austria – decided to
stay permanently (Münz et al. 2003: 23).
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
81

In 1974, the Ministry for Social Affairs decreed a stepwise restriction of
labour immigration after negotiations with the social partners. At the level
of the federal states, a so-called Landesverhältniszahl was implemented; it
aimed at regulating the size of the average foreign labour force within the
total labour force. In 1976, the Aliens’ Employment Act (Ausländer-
beschäftigungsgesetz), aimed at regulating the admission of foreigners to
the Austrian labour market, came into force. The Aliens’ Employment Act
was based on the premise that foreigners could only be employed if the sit-
uation on the Austrian labour market – as well as public and overall societ-
al interests – allowed for further immigration. The Aliens’ Employment
Act introduced a system of graduated access to different types of permits
with differing durations: first, there were employment permits (Beschäfti-
gungsbewilligung), after one year, a work permit (Arbeitserlaubnis) and,
finally, a certificate of exemption (Befreiungs-schein) after five years of
employment.
All these measures led to significant reductions in the guest worker quo-
tas and to an ‘exportation of unemployment’. More than 31,000 guest
workers left in 1975 and another 19,000 in 1976. This reduction continued
– with only two years of an increase in foreign labour (1977, 1980) – until
1984, when the foreign labour force comprised only 139,000 persons, 40
per cent less than ten years before. Yugoslavians were more strongly af-
fected than Turks: the number of employed Turks only dropped from
30,000 (1974) to 27,700 in 1984, whereas more than 50 per cent of the
Yugoslav labour force left Austria and its labour market (1974: 169,400;
1984: 84,144). As naturalisations did not yet play an important role in
quantitative terms, one can assume that these guest workers actually did go
back home or else tried to seek employment elsewhere.
Table 3.4
Stock of the population by nationality in Austria, 1981
Country of origin
Foreign nationals
Females in %
Absolute number
In % of total
population
In % of foreign
population
Total population
7,555,338
100
Austrian nationals
7,263,890
96.1
53.0
Foreign nationals
291,448
3.9
100
EU-14
57,823
0.7
19.8
49.9
Yugoslavia
125,890
1.7
43.2
44.8
Turkey
59,900
0.8
20.6
40.0
Visegrad*
11,722
0.2
4.0
37.6
Other
36,113
0.5
12.4
44.1
* Poland, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary
Source: Census 1981, Statistics of Austria; own calculation
82
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

The 1981 census results show that the process of family reunification had
increased the number of women from Yugoslavia and Turkey in Austria, to
almost 45 per cent women for Yugoslavia and 40 per cent for Turkey.
Those who had not left after the oil crisis decided to stay in Austria for a
longer period of time and therefore managed to realise the plan to bring
their families to Austria. Thus – and despite the government’s successful
attempts to reduce the foreign labour force – the size of the foreign resident
population grew from 212,000 in 1971 to 291,000 in 1981 (or by 37 per
cent). At 63.8 per cent of the total foreign population, the dominance of
guest worker migration was substantial.
The time period between 1985 and 1994 saw two huge political changes
that had massive effects on the development of international migration, not
only for Austria, but for Europe as a whole. First of all, the fall of the Iron
Curtain in the late 1980s brought the newfound freedom of travel to people
of the former Eastern bloc, meaning i.e. the old paths of East-West migra-
tion were reopened. Furthermore, at the beginning of the 1990s, the wars
in Croatia (1991-1995) and Bosnia-Herzegovina (1992-1995) forced mil-
lions of refugees to flee from their countries. The annual net migration of
foreigners grew from +12,000 in 1985 to up to +85,000 in 1991, and re-
mained rather high until 1994 (+13,200).
Table 3.5
Stock of the population by nationality in Austria, 1991
Country of origin
Foreign nationals
Females in %
Absolute number
In % of total
population
In % of foreign
population
Total population
7,795,786
100
Austrian nationals
7,278,096
93.4
52.4
Foreign nationals
517,690
6.6
100
EU-14
79,437
1.0
15.3
51.8
Yugoslavia
197,886
2.5
38.2
43.1
Turkey
118,579
1.5
22.9
40.3
Visegrad*
58,731
0.8
11.3
39.6
Other
63,057
0.8
12.2
42.9
* Poland, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary
Source: Census 1991, Statistics of Austria; own calculation
As the census data show, the size of the foreign resident population grew
enormously between 1981 and 1991, namely from 291,000 to 518,000
(+227,000 persons). With a share of more than 60 per cent of the total for-
eign population, it was once again Yugoslavia and Turkey playing the
dominant role in the composition of the stock of foreigners in Austria in
1991. At this point, the massive wave of immigration due to the Balkan
Wars had not yet started. As for other regions of origin, the number of peo-
ple residing in Austria who were nationals of its eastern neighbouring
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
83

countries – including Romania and Poland – was four times higher in 1991
as compared to 1981, but was, in absolute numbers, still very low. The
share of females still varied substantially by sending region: the lowest
share (39.6 per cent) came from the then rather new immigration countries
from Eastern Europe.
These severe changes in Austria’s migration landscape led directly to
changes in public opinion about immigration, driven by fears of Austria
being ‘flooded by foreigners’ and, later on, in marked reforms of migration
policy. The right-wing party, FPÖ, increased its share of voters from 5 per
cent to 26.9 per cent by the end of the 1990s. In 1992, they launched a
referendum called ‘Austria first’, which was signed by 416,500 Austrians
(7.3 per cent of all eligible voters). During the referendum, the following
demands, among others, were made: an expulsion of delinquent foreigners,
a stricter naturalisation act and a complete stop to immigration. The imme-
diate reaction of those opposing the referendum was the ‘sea of lights’ on
the Heldenplatz in Vienna in January 1993, in which about 300,000 per-
sons took part. Organised by the NGO SOS Mitmensch, people demon-
strated against xenophobia and racism in the biggest protest the Second
Republic had ever seen.
Thus, in the first half of the 1990s, the Austrian political system was re-
active. In 1993, the ‘Aliens Act’ became effective. Half a year later,
Austria passed a new, so-called Residence Law, which was in fact an im-
migration law. Against the backdrop of the migration movements that took
place after the political changes in Europe, it aimed at regulating and re-
stricting new immigration (König & Stadler 2003: 226). Policy started to
evolve towards a system of controlling migration. Austria was one of the
first Western European countries that established an immigration law.
An annual quota for new immigration was established and potential im-
migrants were divided into different groups: most fundamentally, either EU
citizens or third-country nationals. Persons wanting to immigrate to Austria
needed a residence permit and had to provide evidence of their lodging
and means of subsistence. This meant that potential immigrants from out-
side the EU already had to have secured employment before arriving. The
residence permits were subject to the above-mentioned quota, and the first
application had to be filed from their country of origin. EU and European
Economic Community (EEC) citizens were exempted from these restric-
tions: they needed neither special authorisation for immigration nor a resi-
dence permit.
The residence law of 1993 was successful in curbing high rates of immi-
gration from third countries in the early 1990s. The size of the foreign la-
bour force, as well as that of the foreign population, remained relatively
stable between 1995 and 1999, and only grew slightly until 2002. But
comparison with the 1991 stock data shows that the foreign population had
grown enormously, by around 190,000 persons. They made up 9 per cent
84
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

of the total population in 2001, even though the number of naturalisations
was very high in the 1990s, and many foreign nationals in 1991 became
Austrians by 2001. With regard to the composition of the foreign popula-
tion residing in Austria, the situation did not change much between 1991
and 2001: 63 per cent of all foreign nationals still had their roots in one of
the classic sending countries, either Yugoslavia or Turkey.
Table 3.6
Stock of the population by nationality in Austria, 2001
Country of origin
Foreign nationals
Females in %
Absolute number
In % of total
population
In % of foreign
population
Total population
8,032,926
100
Austrian nationals
7,322,000
91.1
52.0
Foreign nationals
710,926
8.9
100
EU-14
106,173
1.3
14.9
50.5
Yugoslavia
322,261
4.0
45.3
47.0
Turkey
127,226
1.6
17.9
44.0
Visegrad*
67,092
0.8
9.4
49.4
Other
88,174
1.1
12.4
47.8
* Poland, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary
Source: Census 2001, Statistics of Austria; own calculation
After 2001, many laws were reformulated more restrictively in an effort to
limit new arrivals. The so-called Aliens’ Law Package (Ausländerpaket) of
2002 is of special relevance. The Aliens’ Law Package comprised the
Asylum Act, the Aliens’ Police Act and the Settlement and Residence Act,
and was influenced by five EU directives (long-term residence, family re-
union, free movement of EU citizens, students, et al.), which had to be ful-
filled as soon as possible. On the whole, Austria became more restrictive
for third-country nationals in terms of both immigration and integration.
But it also facilitated the employment of seasonal workers as well as the
immigration of key personnel. It established mandatory integration courses,
which included language classes and beginners’ lessons on various legal
and historical aspects of the country.
Austria developed a complex system to distinguish different immigrant
groups in order to fulfil the needs of the economy and, more generally, to
keep the influxes low. The public debate on the issues of migration, of for-
eigners and other societal development was once again highly politicised,
but the intellectual quality of the argument changed. Only a minority asked
for ‘Ausländer raus’ (‘go away, foreigner’), which was neither legal nor ra-
tional, while another minority demanded open borders and unlimited immi-
gration. Political discourse was more based on the acceptance of reality
than it was in the beginning of the 1990s. And the issue of integration be-
came more and more important, as it became clear that the idea of guest
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
85

workers as temporary migrants was, at least to some extent, an illusion. In
a shrinking demographic and ageing society with a simultaneously growing
economy, immigration became a structural phenomenon of both the present
and the future.
3.6.2
Generalising migration history
The Austrian case demonstrates how a former emigration country became
an immigration country. The example shows the changes in migration as
well as the adaptation of the society and the legal system to a changing mi-
gration pattern. Austria ‘learned’ to manage the new situation and to accept
its various consequences. This learning process was neither free from fric-
tion nor linear. In accordance with the concept of a migration cycle, signifi-
cant stages of this learning and adaption process can be identified, includ-
ing the initial stage, the intermediate stage and the adaptation stage.
Generally, the initial stage is characterised by low rates of immigration
and a public sphere that is not oblivious to international migration – unless
emigration is of comparatively more significance, which was the case for
many European countries. There are no specific political measures to regu-
late immigration; only emigration is controlled, mostly in the sense of im-
peding or restraining citizens from departure. For a long time, Austrian
legislation envisaged emigrants asking for permission before leaving the
country.
This situation changes in the intermediate stage. Immigration begins
when a growing national economy displays increased demand for addition-
al labour, on the one hand, and a demographic development occurs that
leads to a diminishing internal labour supply, on the other. Immigration is
coupled with economic cycles and thus tends to fluctuate strongly. The
public and politicians willingly accept this additional labour force as immi-
grants take on jobs that are poorly paid – thus helping domestic businesses.
The increase in demand-driven labour migration appears almost formally
regulated (Anwerbeabkommen) and is accompanied by the unregulated im-
migration of irregular workers. The migration regime is still poorly devel-
oped, as in the case of guest worker countries, and this occurs often
through a revival of the Fremdarbeiter regime.
This kind of immigration is not perceived as a regular inflow, but rather
as an exceptional phenomenon in a booming economy. The terms ‘guest
work’ and ‘guest worker’ imply temporal limitation. Similarly, the legalisa-
tion of labourers entering or being employed on an irregular basis is car-
ried out on the basis of the erroneous expectation that these are only excep-
tional cases, and ones that can be ‘repaired’. In the early intermediate
phase, the public almost completely ignores immigration, as the immi-
grants are predominately single males and thus not visible in the public
86
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

space or in schools. Furthermore, they usually reside in the outskirts of city
centres, on construction sites and in barracks.
As the intermediate stage proceeds, immigration becomes a constant
phenomenon, and more and more comes to the awareness and attention of
the public. The structure and composition of immigration changes from
single males to family migration, and these move from the outskirts to in-
ner city areas. The reactions of the public range from surprise to indigna-
tion. Arguments like ‘we are being flooded’, ‘we will lose our culture’ and
‘foreigners are a threat to social peace’ are often pervasive and are nothing
more than expressions of surprise at a new immigration situation. Another
part of the public is pleased by the cultural enrichment that accompanies
immigration, or feels sympathy for the comparatively worse-off immigrants
and their socially problematic situation in the host country. All of this re-
sults in political polarisation and legal measures that oscillate between lib-
eralisation and increased stringency.
Finally, the intermediate stage passes into a stage of adaptation.
Immigration is recognised as a necessary supplement to a demographically
Table 3.7
Stages of the cycle: A non-immigration country becomes an immigration
country
Stages
Temporal
(example
Austria)
Quantitative
dimension
Public
perception
Legal measures
Initial
Until the late
1950s
International
immigration
remains the
exception,
emigration is
dominating
The public does
not perceive
immigration,
at best only
emigration
No specific
immigration
policies at hand,
if at all, emigration
is regulated
Intermediate
1960 up to
approximately
1994
Emerging
immigration
becomes more
important than
emigration, but
is still related
to cyclic
phenomena,
high fluctuation
of balances
Immigration
becomes part
of the public
discourse when
economy is
declining and
the labour
market is
closing
Oscillating between
liberalisation
and tightening
of political
measures
Adaptation
After 1994
Immigration is
a constant
phenomenon,
high fluctuations
are over
Slowly growing
acceptance
Differentiated
legislation with
a multitude of
‘channels of
immigration’
Source: Own design
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
87

decreasing working population. The public is not surprised anymore and
comes to terms with a culturally heterogeneous society. Extreme expres-
sions of opinion in support of one way or another lose popularity and a
new political rationality surfaces. This can also be seen as regulating immi-
gration. While there was a certain type of ‘labour migrant’ during the inter-
mediate stage, a whole panoply of residence and settlement titles was de-
veloped over time.
3.7
Conclusion
This chapter has shown that Europe became an immigration continent with
a significant surplus of immigration, and that most European countries are
developing in a similar way. There is strong evidence to suggest that the
Southern European countries are becoming immigration countries, and that
the Eastern European ones are or will soon be heading in the same direc-
tion. But this discussion has also demonstrated that the timing and pattern
of the shift from a predominantly emigration country to one of immigration
differs from case to case. Economic and demographic developments, as
well as historical framing and context, are all extremely important for ex-
plaining different migration realities.
This chapter also discussed the content and the applicability of the mi-
gration cycle concept. The migration cycle concept assumes a general shift
from an emigration to an immigration situation and identifies significant
phases within this shift. It is illustrated by the Austrian example and proves
itself a useful conceptual tool for analysing migration history. It sets forth
a general guideline and reporting grid in order to make country reports
more analogous and easily compared. But it is essential to note that such a
heuristic phase model is a very rough simplification. It does not aim to
suggest that all European countries go through these exact phases, and it
should not be understood as an automatic phenomenon. It does, however,
reflect an ordered, observable sequence of actual migration, public percep-
tion and political measures, and serialises them in order to make them
more easily comprehended. This is extremely helpful because simple and
descriptive country reports were produced in large numbers: in this respect,
the IDEA project brought about significant scientific progress.
Notes
1
The bivariate correlation between the birth rate and net migration is indeed negative
and highly significant. Based on a long time series for Austria, it can be shown that
the correlation between the birth rate and net migration was -0.6 between 1950 and
2008: the higher the birth rate, the lower net immigration, and vice versa.
88
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

2
To test the postulated links empirically at least to some extent, a dataset has been
compiled from the Eurostat database (New Cronos) containing all EU-27 countries.
For the decade 1998-2008, the annual migration balances of each member state
have been extracted as dependent variables and the GDP per capita, the total fertility
rate and the unemployment rate have been added as independent factors. The expla-
natory value of the regression model is 28 per cent and the GDP per capita turned
out to be the most relevant variable: the higher the GDP per capita, the higher the
positive migration balance. The second variable, ‘unemployment’, is also significant,
but with a negative sign: the higher the unemployment in the EU-27 countries, the
lower the migration balance. Finally, the total fertility rate also displays a significant
effect: the lower it is, the higher the international migration balance.
References
Bauböck, R. (1997), ‘Migrationspolitik’, in H. Dachs (ed.), Handbuch des politischen Systems
Österreichs: Die Zweite Republik, 678-689. Vienna: Manz.
Bauböck, R. (1996), ‘Nach Rasse und Sprache verschieden’: Migrationspolitik in Österreich
von der Monarchie bis heute. Vienna: IHS.
Biffl, G. (2006), SOPEMI report on labour migration. Vienna: WIFO.
Fassmann, H. (1992), ‘Funktion und Bedeutung der Arbeitsmigration nach Österreich seit
1963’, in A. Hohenwarter & K. Althaler (eds.), Torschluß. Wanderungsbewegungen und
Politik in Europa, 100-110. Vienna: Verlag für Gesellschaftspolitik.
Fassmann, H. (2009), ‘European migration: Historical overview and statistical problems’, in
H. Fassmann, U. Reeger & W. Sievers (eds.), Statistics and reality: Concepts and meas-
urements of migration in Europe, 10-27. IMISCOE Reports Series. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Fassmann, H. & R. Münz (1996), ‘Österreich: Einwanderungsland wider Willen’, in H.
Fassmann & R. Münz (eds.), Migration in Europa: Historische Entwicklung, aktuelle
Trends, politische Reaktionen, 209-230. Vienna/New York: Campus.
Ferenczi, I. & W.F. Willcox (1929), International migrations, Volume I: Statistics. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hudson, K. (2007), ‘The new labor market segmentation: Labor market dualism in the new
economy’, Social Science Research 36 (1): 286-312.
König, K. & B. Stadler (2003), ‘Entwicklungstendenzen im öffentlich-rechtlichen und demo-
kratiepolitischen Bereich’, in H. Fassmann & I. Stacher (eds.), Österreichischer
Migrations- und Integrationsbericht: Demographische Entwicklungen – sozioökonomische
Strukturen – rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen, 226-260. Klagenfurt: Drava.
König, K. & B. Perchinig (2005), ‘Austria’, in J. Niessen, Y. Schibel & C. Thompson (eds.),
Current immigration debates in Europe: A publication of the European migration dia-
logue. Brussels: MPG.
Kraler, A. (2007), ‘The case of Austria’, in G. Zincone, R. Penninx & M. Borkert (eds.),
Migratory policymaking in Europe: The dynamics of actors and contexts in past and
present, IMISCOE Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. www.de-
mokratiezentrum.org/de/startseite/wissen/timelines/arbeitsmigration_nach_oesterreich_in_
der_zweiten_republik.html.
Münz, R., P. Zuser, P. & J. Kytir (2003), ‘Grenzüberschreitende Wanderungen und
ausländische Wohnbevölkerung: Struktur und Entwicklung’, in H. Fassmann & I. Stacher
(eds.),
Österreichischer
Migrations-
und
Integrationsbericht.
Demographische
Entwicklungen – sozioökonomische Strukturen – rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen, 20-61.
Klagenfurt: Drava.
‘OLD’ IMMIGRATION COUNTRIES IN EUROPE
89

National Contact Point Austria (ed.), (2006), Policy report: Immigration and integration in
Austria. Vienna.
Österreichisches Statistisches Zentralamt (ed.) (1974), Ausländer. Ergebnisse der Volkszählung
vom 12 Mai 1971. Vienna.
Reeger, U. (2009), ‘Austria’, in H. Fassmann, U. Reeger & W. Sievers (eds.), Statistics and
reality: Concepts and measurements of migration in Europe, 111-130. IMISCOE Reports
Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Tazi-Prevem I., J. Kytir, G. Lebhart & R. Münz (1999), Bevölkerung in Österreich:
Demographische Trends, politische Rahmenbedingungen, entwicklungspolitische Aspekte.
Vienna: Institut für Demographie der ÖAW.
Zelinsky, W. (1971), ‘The hypothesis of the mobility transition’. Geographical Review 61 (2):
219-249.
90
HEINZ FASSMANN AND URSULA REEGER

4
Migration transitions in an era of
liquid migration
Reflections on Fassmann and Reeger
Godfried Engbersen
4.1
Introduction
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to respond to the compelling contri-
bution of Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger. Their work demonstrates
their ability to reduce the complexity of international systems in a very ele-
gant way. Their conceptual model of a migration cycle offers an important
heuristic device for analysing migration history. To further illustrate its
applicability, I will apply it to my country, the Netherlands. However, this
sort of application and a closer look at current migration flows to ‘old’ im-
migration countries will necessarily provoke one major question. This
question is related to the emphasis given in their chapter to historical con-
text and its effects on emigration and immigration. This includes, for ex-
ample, a colonial past or certain labour recruitment policies in the 1950s
and 1960s. The question is whether such a historical, ‘path-dependent’ ap-
proach offers an adequate explanation for contemporary, rather unexpected
labour migration flows from Central European Countries (CEE) to Western
Europe. The European Union enlargements of 2004 and 2007 have gener-
ated substantial labour migration from CEE through the successive lifting
of restrictions to the majority of labour markets from the old EU member
states. Hundreds of thousands of migrants from Poland, Romania and
Bulgaria went to Western European countries as a consequence (Black,
Engbersen, Okólski & Panţîru 2010). This issue, which is related to labour
migration, does not do justice to the full complexity of the analysis by
Fassman and Reeger. However, I think it is relevant to analyse whether the
nature of contemporary labour migration differs from labour migration
flows in the past.

4.2
Path dependency versus new pathways of migration
For decades, the Netherlands was – like Germany and Austria – a ‘reluc-
tant country of immigration’ (Cornelius, Tsuda, Martin & Hollifield 2004;
Muus 2004). Although the Netherlands has had a positive immigration sur-
plus since the early 1960s, successive governments have continued to offi-
cially deny that the Netherlands was a country of immigration. It was not
until 1998 that the Dutch government officially acknowledged the fact that
the Netherlands had become an immigration country. The different stages
in a ‘migration cycle’, as proposed by Fassmann and Reeger, can be
applied to the Netherlands (Engbersen, Van der Leun & De Boom 2007).
Preliminary phase
After World War II, the Netherlands was a country of emigration. Many
Dutch citizens emigrated to immigration countries such as Australia,
Canada and New Zealand and, to a lesser extent, Brazil and South Africa.
Between 1946 and 1969, nearly 500,000 Dutch citizens left the Netherlands.
In the same period, the Netherlands was experiencing a massive inflow of
migrants (repatriates and Eurasians) from the former Dutch East Indies (now
Indonesia) after Indonesia’s independence in 1949 (see Figure 4.1). More
than 50 years later (in 2003), there were 400,000 people in the Netherlands
who had either been born in Indonesia or had at least one parent who had
been born there.
Figure 4.1
Net migration in the Netherlands, 1950-2009
-30,000
-20,000
-10,000
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08
Source: Statistics of the Netherlands; own design
92
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

Transformative phase
A new pattern arose in the early 1960s with the arrival of guest workers
from the Mediterranean (especially from Turkey and Morocco). When
guest workers started bringing their families over to the Netherlands, it
finally began to dawn on the Dutch that many of them were going to stay.
After Surinam’s independence in 1975, major flows of post-colonial immi-
grants from Surinam began to arrive in the Netherlands as well. In the
1970s, almost half of the non-Dutch immigrants to the Netherlands came
from just five countries: Turkey, Morocco, Surinam, Netherlands Antilles
and Indonesia. These migration patterns are perfectly aligned with the ar-
gument made by Fassmann and Reeger.
From the adaptation phase to a new initial phase?
After the transformative phase, there was indeed in the Netherlands a stage
of adaptation. However, in the 1990s, the percentage of the five major im-
migrant groups steadily declined to less than 25 per cent of the foreign-born
immigrants. Large groups of asylum seekers came to the Netherlands, espe-
cially in the period 1990-2000. Today, there are nearly 60 immigrant groups
of at least 4,000 to 5,000 persons in the Netherlands. The total number of
different nationalities in the Netherlands is around 180. The new immigrant
groups come from countries to which the Netherlands has had rather lim-
ited political or economic ties, such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran, Poland, the
former Soviet Union and the former Yugoslavia. Migrants from the former
Yugoslavia, for example, are now the fifth main migrant group in the
Netherlands. There are also a number of smaller migrant groups from
Somalia, Ghana, Egypt, Vietnam, Pakistan and Hong Kong. Steven
Vertovec makes similar observations about Britain in his recent work on
‘super-diversity’. In the 1950s and 1960s, almost all migrants in Britain
came from colonies or former colonies or Commonwealth countries. Today,
migrants come from practically every country in the world. The city of
London harbours people from some 180 countries (Vertovec 2007: 1029).
The same is true for Dutch cities such as Amsterdam, Rotterdam and The
Hague. Amsterdam and The Hague are among the 25 cities with the largest
number of foreign-born residents in the world (Samers 2010: 31).
Another fundamental development is the rise in labour migration from
CEE. According to the official migration and population figures of Statistics
Netherlands, around 4,500 CEE workers moved to the Netherlands in 2003.
In 2008, 26,000 immigrants from CEE countries came to the Netherlands,
primarily from Poland, Bulgaria and Romania. As a result of this immigra-
tion, the number of CEE nationals officially residing in the Netherlands in-
creased more than sixfold since 1996, from just over 10,000 in 1996 to
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
93

nearly 65,000 in 2009.1 Within this category, the Poles make up a clear ma-
jority (De Boom, Weltevrede & Engbersen 2009).
Apart from the migrants who settle officially in the Netherlands, there is
a large category of labour migrants who do not appear in the official popu-
lation statistics, because they do not or cannot register in the Municipal
Personal Records Database (Gemeentelijke Basisadministratie Persoons-
gegevens, GBA). Figures from the Employee Insurance Agency (UWV)
show that, in December 2008, there were 87,000 employees from CEE
countries working in the Netherlands who were not listed in the GBA.2 In
addition, there were around 7,000 employees of Polish-German nationality
and approximately 7,700 entrepreneurs from one of the CEE countries in
the Netherlands who were not registered in the GBA. Accordingly, the
number of CEE workers in the Netherlands at the end of 2008 who were
not listed in the GBA – and therefore not included in the official popula-
tion figures of Statistics Netherlands – was estimated at more than
100,000. If we add these 100,000+ labour migrants not registered in the
GBA to the nearly 65,000 migrants listed in the GBA, the number of CEE
nationals residing in the Netherlands on 1 January 2009 was approximately
165,0003 (De Boom et al. 2009). Nobody foresaw that so many migrants
from Poland would migrate to the Netherlands, or even earlier to rather
new destination countries like the UK or Ireland (Black et al. 2010). In
other words, migration theory, with its strong emphasis on historical em-
beddedness and path dependency, faces difficulties explaining these new
pathways of migration and settlement.
4.3
The invisibility of current flows of labour migration
How should we evaluate the current temporary, circular forms of labour
migration from CEE? As the case of the Netherlands shows, contemporary
labour migrants are often not registered in official migration statistics as
compiled by national statistical bureaus, the United Nations or Eurostat.
The missing aspects of these ‘liquid’ forms of migration can be illustrated
with official Eurostat data on the inflow of nationals from CEE countries
into four ‘old’ EU member states (Austria, Germany, the Netherlands and
the UK). These data show a steep increase in all the selected countries, but
the figures do not capture the rise in temporary labour migration from CEE
countries (Figures 4.2). The UK offers a clear example. The data of the
Workers Registration Scheme (WRS) – which does not include the self-
employed – show that between May 2004 and December 2006, 328,000
Poles, 55,000 Lithuanians, 52,000 Slovakians and smaller groups from
Latvia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Estonia and Slovenia were registered
(Bauere, Densham, Millar & Salt 2007).4 These numbers do not seem to
match the official inflow data.
94
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

Figures 4.2
Inflows of nationals from CEE countries in Germany, Austria, the
Netherlands and the UK, 2000-2008
Germany
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Austria
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Source: Eurostat (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
population/data/database)
Moreover, the OECD data for Spain and Italy – two new immigration
countries – do not provide reliable information on the inflow of migrants
from Romania, though this is one of the largest migrant populations.
According to OECD (2008: 278) sources, more than 500,000 Romanian
migrants were in Spain in early 2007. Romanian sources state that there
are about 968,000 legal Romanian migrants living in Italy, while in Spain
that number is 770,000 (Romania Libera 5 April 2010) out of a total of
roughly 2 million Romanians living abroad. The Spanish and Italian
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
95

figures are rather low with respect to the inflow of Romanian migrants (see
Figures 4.3). The precise nature of contemporary forms of temporary mi-
gration is difficult to capture with the current measurements of flows.
Large groups of migrants are unrepresented or underrepresented in the
available migration statistics because they are not obliged to register if they
work and live for short periods of time in the destination country. This sit-
uation is a consequence of the current migration regimes involving open
borders for new EU citizens due to the EU enlargements in 2004 and
Figures 4.2
(continued)
Netherlands
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
UK
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Source: Eurostat (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
population/data/database)
96
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

2007. The same is true for illegal migration. Irregular migrants are often
absent from the official statistics. However, their absence is not a conse-
quence of open borders, but of closed borders (Engbersen & Broeders
2009; Düvell 2006; CLANDESTINO 2009).
It seems crucial to take the migration regime contexts into consideration.
The earlier migrant workers, the so-called guest workers, arrived in a peri-
od when national borders were still very real and significant. This is no
longer the case for the labour migrants from CEE countries after the EU
Figures 4.3
Inflows of nationals from CEE countries in Spain and Italy, 2000-2008
Spain
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Italy
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
200,000
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Poland
Czech/Slovak Republic, Hungary, Baltic States, Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Source: Eurostat (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
population/data/database)
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
97

enlargements of 2004 and 2007. This disappearance of EU borders contrib-
utes strongly to contemporary forms of liquid migration. It is much easier
to travel back and forth for labour migrants from CEE countries to Western
European countries than in the past. The enlargement of the EU has led to
a blurring of the boundaries between international and internal labour mi-
gration (King & Skeldon 2010: 1621).
4.4
Liquid migration
The concept of liquid migration is inspired by Zygmunt Bauman’s work
(1999, 2005) on liquid modernity (Engbersen, Snel & De Boom 2009).
Central to the notion of liquidity is the idea that ‘thick’ and stable social
institutions (class, family, labour, community, neighbourhood and nation-
state) are transforming into more flexible, ‘thin’ institutions (see also
Zijderveld 2000). Migration has always been strongly embedded in pat-
terns of family, community, local labour markets and the nation-state
(Portes & Sensenbrenner 1993; Portes 1995; Torpey 1998). These institu-
tions are still crucial to understand the strategies and opportunities of
groups of migrants. However, current labour migrants from Poland, for
example, have more freedom and liberty to develop their own migration
trajectories than in the pre-EU enlargement period with its restrictive West
European migration regimes. The borderless zone created by the EU has
weakened the monopoly of nation-states to regulate and prescribe move-
ments of people. Another changing institution is the family. There is a
well-documented literature on the importance of family networks and loy-
alties that explains the centrality of the family in the field of migration.
However, today we also witness migrants from CEE who are able to devel-
op rather individualised migration patterns. Their stay abroad is not aimed
at supporting family members at home. They are strongly focused on their
own careers. The first findings of a Dutch study show that more than 50
per cent of the 650 respondents from Poland, Bulgaria and Romania did
not send any money to their relatives in their home country (Snel, Burgers,
Engbersen, Ilies, Van der Meij & Rusinovic 2010; Burgers, Van de Pol,
Snel, Engbersen, Ilies, Van der Meij & Rusinovic 2011). Individualisation
processes have made the family less dominant as an ‘engine of immigra-
tion’ (Massey & Philips 1999). In other words, the transformation of insti-
tutions like the nation-state and the family, together with more advanced
communication technologies, has changed migration patterns in contempo-
rary European societies and has made labour migration trends less predict-
able. Liquid migration has six ideal typical characteristics (Table 4.1).
The first characteristic is the temporary nature of a stay abroad.
Substantial numbers of migrants do not settle permanently, but move back
and forth from their source country to receiving countries (circular and
98
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

pendulum migration) or move to other destination countries. Many stay
very briefly, while others opt for a medium-term or longer-term stay.
However, the temporary nature of residence – which often goes hand in
hand with non-registration – contributes to the invisibility of liquid migra-
tion. The circularity of liquid migration resembles, to some extent, the cir-
cular forms of migration as described in the work by Douglas Massey on
Mexican-United States migratory flows in the 1980s (Massey, Alarcon,
Durand & Gonzalez 1986). However, there are also other migrant groups
such as students and highly skilled migrants who develop forms of career
migration. Their ambition is to capitalise on their foreign education, lan-
guage proficiency and work experience in their home country to achieve
upward social mobility. The temporary nature of migration means that
many labour migrants reside in temporary accommodation settings (hostels,
pensions, barracks, holiday camps) and that they occupy a marginal posi-
tion in the receiving country.
A second dimension is that liquid migration is predominantly labour mi-
gration. Particular groups of ‘economic’ asylum seekers, refugees and stu-
dents can also be regarded as labour migrants. All these groups aim to earn
money or to invest in their education in order to better their economic
Table 4.1
Ideal typical dimensions of liquid migration
1 Settlement: Temporality of migration and stay
– Temporary migration
– Temporary settlement; semi-integration in destination country
2 Type of migration: Labour migration
– Labour migrants
– Categories of asylum seekers, refugees, student migrants
3 Status: legal immigration status
– Regular migration
– Work permit holders (Romania and Bulgaria)
4 Destination: Multiplicity and multidirectionality of movements
– Multiple receiving countries
– New receiving countries
5 Family: Individualised life strategy
– Individualised forms of migration
– First-generation pattern
6 Migratory habitus: Intentional unpredictability
– No definite migration aspirations
– Open options
Source: Own design
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
99

position. Liquid migration is a typical first-generation phenomenon.
However, some migrants will settle and may bring spouses over.
A third dimension is that migrants have a legal immigration status.
Liquid migration is regular migration. However, some migrants that have
legal residential status still need work permits in order to obtain access to
the labour market. If they do not have a work permit, they become irregu-
lar workers. However, once the current ‘transition period’ ends – in which
restrictions are currently imposed on workers from Bulgaria and Romania
– these migrants will have free access to European labour markets.
Another relevant category consists of students. Many of them are not al-
lowed to stay in the country after completing their studies. If they do stay,
they become illegal migrants. Thus, some categories of migrants have tem-
porary legal residence status (students), while others may face the problem
of irregular work. These categories show that legal status itself is a fluid
classification that may change over time (Ruhs 2007).
A fourth dimension of liquid migration is that international migration
flows have become more unpredictable. Some categories of labour mi-
grants work and reside in well-established destination countries, while
others have moved on to new destination countries. Liquid migration partly
ignores the political and economic factors that shaped migration flows in
the past. The Polish migration flows to Ireland and the United Kingdom –
and then to the Netherlands – are a clear example of this. Labour migrants
react and adapt to evolving opportunities in the labour markets of different
European countries.
A fifth dimension of liquid migration concerns the role of family.
International migration has always been encouraged and facilitated by fam-
ily networks (Tilly 1990; Massey et al. 1986). Households develop strat-
egies to maximise the household income. These classic forms of migration
rely on the solidarity between generations and on extended family patterns.
Grandparents take care of the children when one or both parents go abroad
to earn money for the family. In addition to this classic pattern, however,
new patterns emerge that are much more individualised. These more indi-
vidualised patterns are the logical consequences of the changing nature of
family ties (Beck & Beck-Gernsheim 2002). These ties are becoming loos-
er, not only in Western but also in CEE societies (Ornacka & Szczepaniak-
Wiecha 2005). Furthermore, people are postponing marriage and childbear-
ing to a later age. Many contemporary labour migrants are unmarried and
have few or no family obligations (Snel et al. 2011). They go abroad to try
their luck and do not have specific obligations to support relatives in their
home country (Eade, Drinkwater & Garapich 2006).
The relatively autonomous position of labour migrants is facilitated by
the demand for their labour skills, especially in secondary labour markets
and – in the case of CEE migrants – because of the disappearance of internal
EU borders (free movement). Their social position and the migration field in
100
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

which they strategically operate generate a specific migratory habitus of ‘in-
tentional unpredictability’ (Eade et al. 2006). Some migrants have no clear
ambitions or ideas concerning the future. Their options are wide open. They
go to new destination countries without clear-cut aspirations of investing
money in their home country or of settling in the receiving country. This mi-
gratory habitus reflects the more individualistic ethos of non-married labour
migrants who are less bound by family obligations and also less restricted
by borders and local labour markets than previous generations of migrants.
The fluid nature of East-West migration emphasises the contrasts be-
tween the so-called guest worker migration of the 1960s and 1970s and
contemporary migrant workers from the CEE countries, who do not settle
permanently in the receiving countries where they work but – at least until
now – tend to return to their home countries. Workers go home when the
job is finished and they return when necessary or are available on demand
when certain work is to be done (Grabowska-Lusińska & Okólski 2009).
A crucial difference between both episodes of international migration is
the institutional context. The earlier migrant workers, the so-called guest
workers, arrived in a period when national borders were still very real and
significant. When asked why the guest workers from this period stayed in
the destination countries despite their often firm intention to return, migra-
tion researchers point out the significance of national borders. According
to Saskia Sassen, there was a significant increase in the permanent foreign-
resident population in Western Europe when borders were closed in 1973-
1974. Sassen writes (1999: 143):
[…] this growth might not have occurred if the option of circular
migration had existed. Much migration has to do with supplementing
household income in countries of origin; given enormous earnings
differentials, a limited stay in a high-wage country is sufficient.5
Because it was impossible to move repeatedly between sending and receiv-
ing countries, many migrants decided not to return but instead to have their
families come over. This was the beginning of the permanent settlement of
the former guest workers who were consequently not ‘guests’ anymore.6
The current labour migration from Eastern to Western Europe takes place
in a different institutional constellation, that is, in a context in which na-
tional borders – at least within the EU – have lost their significance. East-
West migration is strongly labour-motivated – like the guest worker migra-
tion trends in the 1960s and 1970s – but nowadays workers have more op-
portunities to come and go as they choose. However, the other factors con-
tinue to be of relevance.
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
101

4.5
An elective affinity between demographic-economic factors
and migration control
The central point in our argument is that ‘old’ immigration countries in
Europe are confronted with ‘new’ fluid forms of labour migration. There
are indications that current migration patterns differ from the dominant mi-
gration patterns of the twentieth century. Several studies – quantitative as
well as ethnographic and anthropological – indicate more fluid forms of
migration that bear resemblance to the circular migration of the nineteenth
century, but cover longer distances and go to more diverse destination
countries (Moch 1992; Grabowska-Lusińska & Okólski 2009). To under-
stand these forms of labour migration, the four main drivers of labour mi-
gration as discussed by Fassman and Reeger have to be taken into account:
1) demographic factors; 2) economic growth; 3) segmentation of developed
labour markets into a primary and a secondary sector; and 4) modes of reg-
ulation concerning international migration. It is especially the specific
interaction between these drivers that explains the rise of liquid migration.
One could also speak of a Wahlverwandtschaft (an elective affinity) be-
tween demographic-economic factors and the fading of borders within the
enlarged EU (Weber 2002). Unintentionally, this has contributed to the
large flows of labour migration from the East to the West.
New research designs are needed to document these flows, because the
current administrative data are inadequate. These flows may also require
adoption of new policy by the state. The temporary stay of many new
labour groups requires a new flexible structure (in terms of housing,
healthcare, education and integration) that can deal effectively with new
patterns of ‘lasting temporality’ (Grzymała-Kazłowska 2005). At present,
in many European countries improvised solutions are being devised to ac-
commodate labour migrants from CEE.
Notes
1
These figures are based on a count of Polish, Hungarian, Czech, Slovakian,
Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Slovenian, Bulgarian and Romanian nationals listed
in the GBA. The number of CEE workers registered in the GBA greatly depends on
the definition applied. Based on nationality, nearly 65,000 CEE nationals were living
in the Netherlands on 1 January 2009. On the same reference date, the GBA con-
tained 90,000 persons who had been born in one of the CEE countries. This means
that the number of CEE workers when measured by country of birth is 25,000 high-
er than when measured by nationality. In particular, these are CEE workers who
have lived in the Netherlands for some time and have acquired Dutch nationality.
2
Not all employees worked throughout the month of December, which means that
the number of employees on a specific reference date is lower. Based on the not en-
tirely reliable start and end dates, the number of CEE workers not registered in the
102
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

GBA for whom wage tax was paid as of 15 December 2008 has been calculated at
81,400.
3
Furthermore, there are CEE workers who are not listed in the GBA and do not ap-
pear on other registers, for instance, because they are working through mala fide
agents. No reliable estimate can be given of the size of the latter group.
4
The WRS data give no indication of the duration of employment or if and when a
return home might have occurred (Bauere et al. 2007: 8).
5
The same argument has been put forward by Alejandro Portes with respect to
Mexico-US migration flows: ‘Today, the U.S. Border Patrol is the second largest
arms-bearing agency of the federal government, next to the armed forces them-
selves. The huge expenditure of dollars in this policy has not succeeded in topping
the unauthorized flow, but has succeeded in keeping it bottled up on the American
side of the border. Contrary to the prior pattern of cyclical migration, where Mexican
workers commuted back and forth across the border, those who, at present, manage
to cross into the United States do not return to their countries, given the difficulties
of repeating the journey. Instead, they bring their families along. As a consequence
of its supposedly rational policy, the United States now has in its midst an under-
ground poor and vulnerable population numbering about twelve million’ (Portes
2010: 46-47).
6
There were also other reasons, such as: i) changing plans of migrants as a conse-
quence of the life cycle; ii) economic recessions in the home country; iii) the integra-
tion of migrant workers into welfare systems; iv) legal protection securing residence
status and the right to live with families (Castles 2006).
References
Bauere, V., P. Densham, J. Millar & J. Salt (2007), ‘Migrants from Central and Eastern
Europe: Local geographies’, Population Trends 129: 7-19.
Bauman, Z. (2005), Liquid life. Oxford: Polity Press.
Bauman, Z. (1999), Liquid modernity. Oxford: Polity Press.
Beck, U. & E. Beck-Gernsheim (2002), Individualization: Institutionalized individualism and
its social and political consequences. London: Sage.
Black, R., G. Engbersen, M. Okólski & C. Panţîru (eds.) (2010), A continent moving west?
EU enlargement and labour migration from Central and Eastern Europe. IMISCOE
Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Burgers, J., S. van de Pol, E. Snel, G. Engbersen, M. Ilies, R. van der Meij & K. Rusinovic
(2011), Arbeidsmigranten uit Polen, Bulgarije en Roemenië in West-Brabant: Sociale leef-
situatie, arbeidspositie en toekomstperspectief. The Hague: Nicis Institute.
Castles, S. (2006), ‘Guest workers in Europe: A resurrection?’, International Migration
Review 40: 741-766.
CLANDESTINO (2009), ‘Irregular migration: Counting the uncountable. Data and trends
across Europe’. http://clandestino.eliamep.gr; http://irregular-migration.hwwi.net.
Cornelius, W., T. Tsuda, P.L. Martin & J.F. Hollifield (eds.) (2004), Controlling immigration:
A global perspective. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
De Boom, J., A. Weltevrede & G. Engbersen (2009), Migration and migration policies in the
Netherlands 2008: Dutch SOPEMI report 2008. Rotterdam: Risbo.
Drinkwater, S., J. Eade & M. Garapich (2009), ‘What’s behind the figures? An investigation
into recent Polish migration to the UK’, in R. Black, G. Engbersen, M. Okólski & C.
Panţîru (eds.), A continent moving west? EU enlargement and labour migration from
Central and Eastern Europe. IMISCOE Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
University Press.
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
103

Düvell, F. (ed.) (2006), Illegal immigration in Europe: Beyond control? Houndmills: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Eade J., S. Drinkwater & M. Garapich (2006), Class and ethnicity: Polish emigrants in
London. Research Report for ERSC, CRONEM, University of Surrey.
Engbersen, G. & D. Broeders (2009), ‘The state versus the alien: Immigration controls and
strategies of irregular immigrants’, West European Politics 32 (5): 867-885.
Engbersen, G., J. van der Leun & J. de Boom (2007), ‘The fragmentation of migration and
crime’, in Crime and justice: A review of research, 389-452 (Special issue on crime and
justice in the Netherlands). Chicago: Chicago University Press Crime and Justice Series.
Engbersen, G., E. Snel & J. de Boom (2009), ‘ “A van full of Poles”: Liquid migration from
Central and Eastern Europe’, in R. Black, G. Engbersen, M. Okólski & C. Panţîru (eds.),
A continent moving west? EU enlargement and labour migration from Central and
Eastern Europe, 115-140. IMISCOE Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I. & M. Okólski (2009), Emigracja ostatnia? Warsaw: Wydawnictwo
Naukowe Scholar.
Grzymała-Kazłowska,
A.
(2005),
‘From
ethnic
cooperation
to
in-group
competition:
Undocumented Polish workers in Brussels’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 31
(4): 675-697.
King, R. & R. Skeldon (2010), ‘Mind the gap! Integrating approaches to internal and interna-
tional migration’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 36 (10): 1619-1646.
Massey, D.S., R. Alarcon, J. Durand & H. Gonzalez (1986), Return to Aztlan: The social
process
of
international
migration
from
Western
Mexico.
Berkeley/Los
Angeles:
University of California Press.
Massey, D.S. & J.A. Philips (1999), ‘Engines of immigration: Stocks of human and social
capital in Mexico’, Social Science Quarterly 81 (1): 33-48.
Moch, L. & P. Moch (1992), Moving Europeans: Migration in Western Europe since 1650.
Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Muus, P. (2004), ‘The Netherlands: A Pragmatic approach to economic needs and humanitar-
ian considerations’, in W. Cornelius, T. Tsuda, P.L. Martin & J.F. Hollifield (eds.).
Controlling immigration: A Global perspective, 262-280. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
OECD (2009), International migration outlook. Special focus: Managing labour migration be-
yond the crisis. Paris: OECD.
Ornacka, K. & I. Szczepaniak-Wiecha (2005), ‘The contemporary family in Poland: New
trends and phenomena’, Journal of Family and Economic Issues 26 (2): 195-225.
Portes, A. (1995), The economic sociology of immigration: Essays on networks, ethnicity, and
entrepreneurship. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Portes, A. & J. Senssenbrenner (1993), ‘Embeddedness and immigration: Notes on the social
determinants of economic action’, American Journal of Sociology 98 (6): 1320-1350.
Portes A. (2010), ‘Reflections on a common theme: Establishing the phenomenon, adumbra-
tion, and ideal types’, in C. Calhoun (ed.), Robert K. Merton: Sociology of science and
sociology of science. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ruhs, M. (2007), Changing status, changing fortunes? The impact of acquiring EU status on
the earnings of East European migrants in the UK, mimeo. Oxford: COMPAS.
Samers, M. (2010), Migration. London and New York: Routledge.
Sassen, S. (1999), Guests and aliens. New York: The New Press.
Snel, E., J. Burgers, G. Engbersen, M. Ilies, R. Van der Meij & K. Rusinovic (2010),
Arbeidsmigranten uit Bulgarije, Polen en Roemenië in Rotterdam: Sociale leefsituatie, ar-
beidspositie en toekomstperspectief. The Hague: Nicis Institute.
Tilly, C. (1990), ‘Transplanted networks’, in V. Yans-McLaughlin (ed.), Immigration reconsid-
ered: History, sociology, and politics, 79-95. New York: Oxford University Press.
104
GODFRIED ENGBERSEN

Torpey, J. (1998), ‘Coming and going: On the state monopolization of the legitimate “means
of movement” ’, Sociological Theory 16 (3): 239-259.
Vertovec, S. (2007), ‘Super-diversity and its implications’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 29 (6):
1024-1054.
Weber, M. (2002), The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism: New translation and in-
troduction by S. Kalberg. Los Angeles: Blackwell Publishers.
Zijderveld, A. (2000), The institutional imperative: The interface of institutions and networks.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
MIGRATION TRANSITIONS IN AN ERA OF LIQUID MIGRATION
105


5
Immigrants, markets and policies in
Southern Europe
The making of an immigration model?1
João Peixoto, Joaquín Arango, Corrado Bonifazi,
Claudia Finotelli, Catarina Sabino, Salvatore Strozza and
Anna Triandafyllidou
5.1
Introduction
Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain have in common two long episodes of
strong emigration – during the first period of globalisation and after World
War II – and they now share comparable types of foreign immigration.
During the first period of globalisation, in the second half of the nineteenth
century and before World War I, these countries made an important contri-
bution to intra-European migration and to settlement migration in North
America and South America. After World War II, they were among the
main suppliers of the growing economies of Western and Northern Europe.
Currently, they are experiencing a significant inflow of foreigners. In a rel-
atively short time span, Southern Europe underwent its migration transi-
tion, becoming one of the most important areas of attraction on the conti-
nent (Bonifazi 2008). According to the available statistics, the number of
foreign immigrants in this area can be estimated as ranging from between
950,000 and 1.3 million in 1991 to between 8 million and 10 million in
the period 2006-2007. This is a seven- to eight-fold increase in just fifteen
years.
Despite some dissimilarities that stem from the different histories of
these countries, their diverse social and economic characteristics and their
specific cultural and colonial links to other geographical areas, many rea-
sons for the growth of foreign immigration were similar across all four of
them. It is worth mentioning several notable economic trends in recent dec-
ades: the improvement in living standards and educational levels of the na-
tive youth, both of which increased labour expectations; the persistence of
significant informal economies and of segmentation processes in the labour
markets; the effects of low fertility rates on labour supply; and the overall

limitations of Mediterranean welfare systems, which are largely unable to
provide for their populations’ evolving needs, including those attributable
to the ageing process. Furthermore, the political and economic transitions
in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) intensified the push forces into this
area. While the gradual incorporation of most of those countries into the
European Union migration system resulted in a relaxing of visa policies,
labour migration from that area had been de facto tolerated even before the
EU enlargement. This increased availability of foreign workers matched
the growing needs of Southern European labour markets.
Engaging in a comparative analysis of immigration experiences in
Southern European countries is not a novel exercise. Since the early 1990s,
the many similarities in timing and other characteristics of immigration in
these countries led to the frequent collaboration of researchers and policy-
makers in order to discuss the common trends. During a period that culmi-
nated at the turn of the century, numerous articles, books and special edi-
tions of journals were released (see e.g. King & Rybaczuk 1993; Iosifides
& King 1996; Baganha 1997; Baldwin-Edwards 1997; King & Black
1997; Baldwin-Edwards & Arango 1999; King, Lazaridis & Tsardanidis
2000; King 2002; Arango 2003; Ribas-Mateos 2004; Ritaine 2005; and,
more recently, King & Thomson 20082 and González-Enríquez & Trian-
dafyllidou 2009). Many of these works designated these new immigration
experiences as a Southern European or Mediterranean ‘model of immigra-
tion’ (King 2000), which differed in several ways from the model that pre-
dominated in other European host countries during the second half of the
twentieth century, when the Fordist type of capitalism was dominant.3
After the turn of the century, academic interest in drawing comparative
analyses between the Southern European countries somewhat subsided.
This is rather surprising, since the bulk of the inflows into Southern
Europe occurred mostly after the late 1990s. Indeed, the framework and
underlying immigration factors remained much the same as they had been
before. But during the new century, some of the characteristics of the in-
flows changed, several new policies were enacted and the overall outcomes
of migration, including immigrant integration, varied. There thus exists a
clear need to update the comparative exercises carried out previously. This
is one of the objectives of this chapter.
Furthermore, it is important to understand the particular position of
Southern European countries in the European international migration sys-
tem when compared to the ‘old’ or ‘mature’ immigration countries in
Northern and Western Europe and to the ‘recent’ or ‘future’ immigration
countries in CEE. As discussed in chapters 1 and 2 in this volume, the dif-
ferent timings of the migration transition – meaning the process by which
countries change their migration status from net out-migration to in-migra-
tion – depend on a broader economic and social framework, thus impacting
differently
over
immigrants’
modes
of
labour
incorporation,
social
108
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

integration, public attitudes and immigration policy. In certain respects, the
southern context has been unique, resulting from its specific moments of
transition and structural similarity, whilst in other respects it shares the
traits and dilemmas of its predecessors and, most probably, its followers.
The sections of this chapter are organised as follows. First, a detailed
analysis of flows and stocks of foreign immigration will be set forth.
Second, as a result of the centrality of labour demand variables in explain-
ing immigration in this context, special attention will be devoted to immi-
grants’ labour market incorporation. Third, the endemic presence of irregu-
lar migration in these countries will be described, together with its
explanatory factors (including the informal economy and inadequate regu-
lation) and policy attempts to regulate it. Next, other aspects of immigra-
tion policy will be examined, including labour recruitment, control and in-
tegration
policies.
Finally,
some
general
considerations
and
final
conclusions will be drawn, displaying the main similarities, explaining fac-
tors and overall position of Southern Europe compared to other European
host countries.
5.2
Flows and stocks of foreign immigration
It is well known that data on international migration are collected in differ-
ent statistical sources and that, even when they are taken from the same
type of source, they are not always comparable over time and between
countries. The specific features of national legal systems have a great im-
pact on data. In the Southern European case, the endemic character of
irregular migration adds to the difficulty of immigration’s measurement.4
5.2.1
Flows and stocks of foreign immigration
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, according to the available
sources, immigration exhibited a spectacular upsurge in Italy and above all
in Spain (Figure 5.1). The Spanish trend is the most impressive. The data
of the Padrón Municipal de Habitantes, the municipal population registry,
which also include irregular migrants, show continuous and regular growth
in foreign inflows since 1996. The volume of this growth is amazing, as in
only twelve years the size of the inflow increased by a factor of 55: from
17,000 arrivals in 1996 to 921,000 in 2007.
The growing share of foreign immigration within the total inflow (for-
eigners and nationals) signals its increasing importance in the Southern
European countries (Figure 5.1). In Italy, since 1996 this share has ex-
ceeded 80 per cent of the total inflow and is now estimated at 92 per cent;
in Spain it has been over 90 per cent since 2000 and reached 96 per cent
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
109

in 2007. It is worth considering that, until the early 1990s, nationals were
still almost half of the total inflow entering these two countries.
The evolution of the number of foreigners in the four countries since the
1980s can be evaluated using stock data from population censuses, popula-
tion registers and permits to stay or residence permits (Table 5.1).5
Regardless of technical differences, all the available information indicates
that, between 1991 and 2007, the presence of foreign citizens has increased
remarkably in all four countries. The pace of this growth, however, seems
to be much more rapid in Italy and – above all – in Spain as compared to
Greece and Portugal. In Italy, in particular, data indicate that the number of
regular immigrants grew from some hundred thousand in 1991 to between
2.4 and 3.4 million in 2007. Consequently, the share of foreigners within
the total population also increased from about 1 per cent to 4-6 per cent.
The estimated number of foreigners reaches 4.3 million, or 7.2 per cent of
the total population living in Italy, if non-resident regular immigrants and
illegal immigrants are also taken into consideration (Blangiardo 2009).
Figure 5.1
Immigration of foreign citizens from abroad: Italy, Portugal1 and Spain,2
1990-2007 (absolute values and percentages of foreigners in the overall
immigration)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
Thousand
a. Absolute values
Portugal
Spain
Italy
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
% 
b. % of foreigners  
Italy
Spain
1 Data refer only to solicitac¸o˜es de autorizac¸a˜o de resideˆncia (autorizac¸o˜es de
permaneˆncia concedidas and vistos de longa durac¸a˜o concedidos pelos postos
consulares are not considered).
2 Data for 1996 are not perfectly comparable with those for earlier years due to a
reform of the Padrón Municipal.
Sources: Italy: ISTAT, Anagrafi comunali; Portugal: Serviço de Estrangeiros e
Fronteiras (SEF) – Ministério da Administração Interna; Spain: INE, Padrón
Municipal.
110
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

Table 5.1
Foreign population according to different sources in the Southern
European immigration countries around 1991, 2001 and 2007 (absolute
values in thousands and percentages of total population at the end of the
year or the census data)
Country/categories
Absolute values (in thousands)
% of total population
1991
2001
2007
1991
2001
2007
Italy
Permits to stay holders1
649
1,448
2,415
1.1
2.5
4.1
Residents2
356
1,335
3,433
0.6
2.3
5.8
Estimate of total
foreign population3
1,002
2,460
4,328
1.8
4.3
7.2
Spain
Permits to stay holders4
361
1,109
3,979
0.9
2.7
8.6
Residents (census)5
353
1,572
…
0.9
3.8
…
Residents of Padrón
(total foreign population)6
…
1,978
5,221
…
4.8
11.3
Greece
Permits to stay holders7
149
…
696
1.5
…
6.3
Residents8
166
762
884
1.6
7.0
7.9
Estimate of total
foreign population9
…
…
1,092
…
…
9.8
Portugal
Legal residents and
holders of visas10
…
351
446
…
3.4
4.2
Residents11
107
233
402
1.1
2.2
3.8
Estimate of total
foreign population12
…
…
496
…
…
4.7
1 Permits to stay collected by Ministero dell’Interno and revised by ISTAT; the last data is
referred at the end of 2006
2 Census data as of 24 October 1991 and 21 October 2001; 2007 municipal population
registers data (Anagrafi comunali)
3 For 1991 and 2001: our evaluations from ISTAT data and estimates of irregular migrants in
Blangiardo and Tanturri (2006); for 2007: Blangiardo (2009)
4 Tarjeta o autorizacio´n de residencia
5 Census data as of 1 March 1991 and 1 May 2001
6 Data of Padrón Municipal, including illegal foreigners
7 Last data is end 2005
8 Census data as of 14 March 1991 and 18 March 2001; 2007: Eurostat estimation
9 Triandafyllidou and Maroufof (2008) estimation april 2008
10 2001 value is the sum of residence permits and permits to stay; 2007 value is the sum
of residence permits, extended permits to stay (autorizac¸a˜o de permaneˆncia prorrogada),
granted long-term visas (visto de longa durac¸a˜o concedido) and extended long-term visas
(visto de longa durac¸a˜o prorrogado)
11 Census data as of 16 March 1991 and 12 March 2001; 2007 data on residence permits
(estatuto legal de residente – autorizac¸o˜es de resideˆncia)
12 Legal residents, holders of visas and estimate of irregular immigrants (Lusa 2008)
Sources: Own elaboration from national statistical sources
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
111

The increase recorded for the stocks of foreigners in Spain is even more
marked. Permit-to-stay holders and usual residents, who numbered less
than 400,000, grew to almost 4 million and over 5.2 million, respectively.
The latter value includes also illegal migrants. The percentage of foreigners
in the Spanish population grew from less than 1 per cent in 1991 to 8.6
per cent and 11.3 per cent, respectively, for the two groups in question.
High levels – in terms of percentage – of immigrants within the total popu-
lation were recorded in Greece as well, with 7.9 per cent of residents and
9.8 per cent of total immigrants, including legal and estimated illegal pre-
sences. The number of regular foreigners in Greece’s case was around
900,000, while the stock reached almost 1.1 million if irregular migrants
are included. In Portugal, legal foreign immigration was almost 450,000,
or around 4.2 per cent of the total population. These values would increase
to 500,000 and 4.7 per cent, respectively, if an estimate of irregular immi-
grants was added.
By and large, labour migration and family migration have constituted
the two main flows entering Southern Europe in the last 25 years.
Southern European countries, generally speaking, do not seem to be coun-
tries of asylum and do not attract a large number of foreign students.
Statistical evidence drawn from different sources, including the national
census and registers of permits to stay and of residence permits, confirms
these characteristics.
The main reasons for migration (work and family reunion) have a signif-
icant effect on the demographic structure of immigration flows. In fact, the
first working-age cohorts (20-39 years old) generally accounted for the ma-
jority of all immigrants, while the share of the youngest population (less
than twenty years old) usually fluctuated around 20 to 30 per cent of the
total. The immigration of foreigners aged 60 or older accounted for a negli-
gible share of total arrivals in Italy, while the percentages recorded in
Spain and Portugal are higher, likely attributable to the relevance of retire-
ment migration into these two countries.
The gender structure of foreign immigration flows has been relatively
balanced in recent years. In Italy and Portugal, women have generally pre-
dominated in the current decade, while in Spain their share of the total has
oscillated between 45 and 48 per cent. However, this statistic can reflect
deep imbalances in the gender composition of the different national groups,
in some cases in favour of men and in other cases in favour of women.
5.2.2
Main nationalities and their evolution
The evolution of foreign immigration in terms of area of origin is charac-
terised by an increase in the size and proportion of immigration from CEE
countries and from the Third World, and a corresponding reduction in the
percentage from developed countries, despite its increase in absolute terms
112
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

(Table 5.2a, b). Alongside these two main common trends, the situation
presents important and interesting differences between the Southern
European countries. In fact, each country has a specific area of attraction,
usually as a result of its geographical position, its history, its colonial herit-
age (if it exists) and its cultural and linguistic links with other countries.
Italy is probably the country where that collection of factors has been
the least important. The proportion of foreigners from More Developed
Countries (MDCs) fell from 32.7 per cent of the total in 1991 to 5.9 per
cent in 2007. At the same time, immigration from CEE countries exhibited
an extraordinary increase: from the period 1991-2007 it increased 30.2-
fold, totalling more than 1.6 million and representing 47 per cent of the im-
migration total. There was also a strong but lesser-marked increase in im-
migration from developing countries, rising from 186,000 in 1991 to 1.6
million in 2007, and signalling a reduction from 52.3 to 47 per cent of the
total. In the current decade, there is a clear prevalence of Romanians,
Albanians and Moroccans, as well as a gradual stabilisation of many other
previously numerous communities.
In Spain and Portugal, the level of immigration from MDCs has always
been higher than in Italy, as a result of the greater significance of retire-
ment migration. In 2007, it still accounted for 22.2 per cent of the total in
Spain and for 24.8 per cent in Portugal. In these two countries, immigra-
tion from CEE is less significant than in Italy, although Romanians have
become the biggest immigrant community in Spain, and Ukrainians consti-
tute the third-largest immigrant community in Portugal. The main charac-
teristic of the Spanish migration model is the large inflow from Latin
America. The tightening of the United States’ immigration policies after 9/
11 probably contributed to directing the flows caused by the economic cri-
ses that troubled several Latin American countries to Europe (Pellegrino
2004). Linguistic and cultural bonds with the region due to Spain’s colo-
nial past probably constituted the main factors for migrants’ choosing
Spain as a preferred destination.
As regards Portugal, a marked increase in immigration from the CEE
countries has appeared in the last decade. Until the end of the 1990s, immi-
gration flows into the country were mostly reflective of its colonial past
and had developed a specific migration ‘system’, unified by the Portuguese
language.6 The reasons for this ‘Eastern revolution’ are probably related to
Portugal’s EU membership and to the enlargement of the European migra-
tion system. The largest immigrant groups in the country are from Cape
Verde, Brazil and Ukraine.
Some basic facts distinguish Greece’s recent migratory trends from those
observed in the rest of Southern Europe. First, a dramatic increase in the
immigrant population has occurred despite a great number of ‘administra-
tive deportations’ (2.2 million in the period 1992-2001), carried out with
the intention of dissuading immigrant settlement. Forced circular migration
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
113

Table 5.2a
Foreign resident population by geographical areas1and main countries of citizenship, Southern European immigration countries, 1991,
2001 and 2007 (absolute values in thousands and percentages by citizenship and of females) (Greece and Italy)
Main countries
of citizenship
Greece
Main countries
of citizenship
Italy
Number
(thousands)
% by citizenship
% females
Number
(thousands)
% by citizenship
% females
1991 Census
1991 Census
Total
167.3
100.0
46.4
Total
356.2
100.0
47.1
MDCs
77.7
46.4
54.4
MDCs
116.5
32.7
59.3
CEE
49.8
29.8
37.8
CEE
53.5
15.0
48.9
LDCs
39.8
23.8
41.6
LDCs
186.2
52.3
38.9
Albania
20.6
12.3
29.7
Morocco
39.9
11.2
19.0
Cyprus
14.7
8.8
48.6
Germany
22.7
6.4
60.8
US
13.9
8.3
50.9
Former Yugoslavia
17.1
4.8
46.3
Russian Federation
12.9
7.7
49.5
Tunisia
16.7
4.7
21.9
Turkey
11.1
6.6
51.1
France
15.8
4.4
64.0
2001 Census
2001 Census
Total
762.2
100.0
45.5
Total
1,334.9
100.0
50.5
MDCs
83.9
11.0
56.6
MDCs
180.9
13.5
63.9
CEE
577.4
75.8
45.2
CEE
436.7
32.7
50.9
LDCs
100.9
13.2
37.8
LDCs
717.3
53.7
46.9
Albania
438.0
57.5
41.3
Morocco
180.1
13.5
39.8
Bulgaria
35.1
4.6
60.4
Albania
173.1
13.0
43.7
Georgia
22.9
3.0
57.0
Romania
74.9
5.6
53.5
Romania
22.0
2.9
43.4
Philippines
54.0
4.0
61.1
US
18.1
2.4
51.5
Former Yugoslavia
49.3
3.7
46.8
114
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

2005 Permits to stay2
2007 Population registers (Anagrafe)
Total
692.4
100.0
37.7
Total
3,432.7
100.0
50.4
MDCs
..
..
..
MDCs
201.1
5.9
59.9
CEE
605.0
87.4
38.5
CEE
1,614.9
47.0
54.4
LDCs
87.4
12.6
31.9
LDCs
1,616.7
47.1
45.3
Albania
481.7
69.6
31.4
Romania
625.3
18.2
52.9
Bulgaria
44.0
6.4
65.2
Albania
401.9
11.7
44.7
Romania
25.4
3.7
47.2
Morocco
365.9
10.7
40.8
Ukraine
19.8
2.9
81.7
China
156.5
4.6
47.3
Pakistan
15.8
2.3
1.2
Ukraine
132.7
3.9
80.4
1 MDCs include North America, Japan, Israel, Oceania and other countries of Europe, excluding former socialist countries; CEE includes former socialist
countries of Europe and Turkey; Less Developed Countries (LDCs) include Africa, Latin America and Asia (except Japan and Israel).
2 Citizens of MDCs are not considered because of their strong underestimation (only 3,569). In addition, the register accounted for only 3,366 people under
age fifteen (less than 0.5 per cent of the total).
Sources: Own elaboration from national statistical sources.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
115

Table 5.2b
Foreign resident population by geographical areas1and main countries of citizenship, Southern European immigration countries, 1991,
2001 and 2007 (absolute values in thousands and percentages by citizenship and of females) (Portugal and Spain))
Main countries
of citizenship
Portugal
Main countries
of citizenship
Spain
Number
(thousands)
% by citizenship
% females
Number
(thousands)
% by citizenship
% females
1991 Census
1991 Census
Total
106.6
100.0
50.4
Total
353.4
100.0
51.1
MDCs
43.2
40.6
52.0
MDCs
219.8
62.2
52.5
CEE
2.3
2.1
50.7
CEE
4.0
1.1
48.0
LDCs
61.1
57.3
49.3
LDCs
129.6
36.7
48.9
Cape Verde
15.7
14.7
45.5
UK
53.6
15.2
52.5
France
13.7
12.9
53.6
Germany
34.0
9.6
53.2
Brazil
13.5
12.7
53.0
Morocco
31.4
8.9
38.7
Angola
9.4
8.8
54.8
Portugal
27.8
7.9
51.0
Venezuela
8.5
7.9
46.6
France
24.2
6.9
58.0
2001 Census
2001 Population registers (Padrón)
Total
232.7
100.0
45.8
Total
1,977.9
100.0
47.0
MDCs
64.1
27.5
50.7
MDCs
541.3
27.4
49.4
CEE
20.5
8.8
23.5
CEE
187.8
9.5
44.8
LDCs
148.2
63.7
46.8
LDCs
1,248.8
63.1
46.3
Angola
37.0
15.9
49.1
Morocco
307.5
15.5
32.9
Cape Verde
33.1
14.2
48.7
Ecuador
259.5
13.1
50.7
Brazil
31.9
13.7
46.8
Colombia
191.0
9.7
57.6
Guinea-Bissau
15.8
6.8
37.3
UK
128.1
6.5
50.6
France
15.4
6.6
54.1
Germany
113.8
5.8
50.3
116
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

2007 Legal residents (SEF)
2007 Population registers (Padrón)
Total
401.6
100.0
45.3
Total
5,220.6
100.0
46.8
MDCs
99.7
24.8
46.9
MDCs
1,160.0
22.2
46.8
CEE
79.2
19.7
41.9
CEE
1,180.3
22.6
47.3
LDCs
222.7
55.5
45.8
LDCs
2,880.3
55.2
46.6
Cape Verde
61.1
15.2
44.9
Romania
729.0
14.0
46.3
Brazil
55.7
13.9
52.8
Morocco
644.7
12.3
36.7
Ukraine
34.2
8.5
38.6
Ecuador
420.1
8.0
50.8
Angola
30.4
7.6
46.3
UK
351.9
6.7
49.2
UK
23.6
5.9
47.2
Colombia
280.7
5.4
55.6
1 MDCs include North America, Japan, Israel, Oceania and other countries of Europe, excluding former socialist countries; CEE includes former socialist
countries of Europe and Turkey; Less Developed Countries (LDCs) include Africa, Latin America and Asia (except Japan and Israel).
2 Citizens of MDCs are not considered because of their strong underestimation (only 3,569). In addition, the register accounted for only 3,366 people under
age fifteen (less than 0.5 per cent of the total).
Sources: Own elaboration from national statistical sources.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
117

was a common pattern for Albanians. Second, one national group
(Albanians) represent about 70 per cent of the whole foreign presence. No
similar level of prevalence of nationals from a single source country is
found in the other three Southern European countries considered here.
More generally, the proximity of the sending countries distinguishes the
Greek migration experience, as even other important immigrant groups
(Bulgarians and Romanians) come from neighbouring countries. Finally,
Greece is the Southern European country most often sought out by refu-
gees (especially Iraqis and Afghans arriving from Turkey). Initially consid-
ered only as a country of transit, Greece has become more and more attrac-
tive to asylum seekers, especially as other EU countries restricted asylum
policies.
5.3
Immigrants and the labour market
5.3.1
The strength of labour demand
Economic immigration has long been the main channel of entry and even-
tual residence of foreign immigrants in Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
Together with the age profile of immigrants, this contributes to the fact that
the employment rate of foreign immigrants is high compared to other
Northern and Western European host countries. According to OECD
(2008) data for foreign- and native-born populations in 2006, immigrants
in Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain exhibit higher employment rates than
natives. This is the case for both male and female immigrants. Generally,
however, the unemployment situation for foreigners is relatively less fa-
vourable than it is for natives. Vulnerability to unemployment also seems
to be lower for immigrant men than for women. Recent evidence suggests
that the over-representation of immigrants in unemployment statistics
mostly occurs in periods of economic recession (Martin 2009).
The strong association immigration has with the labour market in
Southern Europe results from a number of factors. From an economic point
of view, these include periods of rapid economic expansion (often resulting
from an injection of EU funds); an economic fabric largely based in la-
bour-intensive sectors; the seasonal character of many industries (such as
agriculture and tourism); the non-transferability of many of the fast-grow-
ing industries (activities such as construction and services cannot be delo-
calised); the high segmentation of the labour market; the increase in flexi-
ble labour arrangements; and the importance of the informal economy.
These factors correspond to a combination of country-specific characteris-
tics and general traits of the post-Fordist context.
One of the most impactful factors is the informal economy. The extent
of informal arrangements has been growing in all post-Fordist economies,
but their longer histories in Southern Europe have made the region’s
118
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

economies more prone to informality. A study by Friedrich Schneider and
Robert Klinglmair (2004) confirms that the relevance of the informal econ-
omy is a common characteristic of Southern European countries, where its
volume far exceeds those of other OECD countries. The authors estimated
that the size of the shadow economy in the period 2002-2003 was about
28.3 per cent of GDP in Greece, 26.2 per cent of GDP in Italy and 22.3
per cent of GDP in Portugal and Spain. Since foreigners are over-repre-
sented in this sector, it has typically provided a privileged route of entry
for labour migrants, regular and irregular (Baganha 1998; Reyneri 1998;
Mingione & Quassoli 2000; Fakiolas 2000).
From a social point of view, the native population’s living standards and
educational levels have increased in recent decades – largely coinciding
with women’s emancipation – and natives began refusing to work in less
desirable jobs (King, Lazaridis & Tsardanidis 2000). In addition to fulfill-
ing these roles, immigrants have been supplying services that have often
not been available in the weak welfare regimes of Southern European
countries. That is, their welfare systems provide little direct assistance and
thus rely heavily on family members to care for the young, the elderly and
others in need of assistance. To alleviate this burden, families have begun
relying on immigrants to fulfil tasks such as housekeeping, babysitting and
caring for the elderly (Sciortino 2004). In sum, constraints related to the
welfare state have contributed to the strength of labour demand in these
countries.
Demographic factors such as low fertility rates, high life expectancy and
the related ageing of the population have also contributed to this situation.
On the one hand, a shrinking population is linked to a diminished labour
supply. On the other, the amount of care-related work is increasing as a re-
sult of the population’s ageing. It can therefore be reasonably foreseen that
quantitative labour shortages and the demand for care-related services not
only will continue but will exhibit significant growth as well.
5.3.2
Main occupational sectors and working conditions
The economic incorporation of foreign immigrants in Southern Europe
often
occurs
in
low-skilled
jobs
and
under
precarious
conditions.
Immigrants are often employed in a few specific sectors, usually in less
stable, less paid and less protected jobs (the so-called 3D jobs: dirty, dan-
gerous and demeaning), which correspond to the least-protected parts of a
highly segmented labour market (the secondary labour market, in dual
labour market theory terms). For all Southern European countries, data for
economic sectors indicate that immigrants are usually employed in the
service sector (mainly domestic work, retail trade, hotels and restaurants),
construction, manufacturing and agriculture.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
119

According to OECD data on foreign-born employment in the period
2005-2006 (OECD 2008), the construction sector is quite important in all
four countries, representing 29.1 per cent of the total foreign-born employ-
ment in Greece, 19.7 per cent in Spain, 14.8 per cent in Portugal and 14.2
per cent in Italy. Mining, manufacturing and the energy sector are particu-
larly relevant for Italy, where they together represent 23.6 per cent of total
foreign-born employment, known to be concentrated in the Central and
Northern industrial regions. By contrast, the same sectors are less important
in Greece (15.4 per cent), Portugal (13.8 per cent) and Spain (13.0 per cent).
The service sector (mainly wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants
and domestic work) is also an important recruiter of immigrants in all four
countries. Hotels and restaurants account for 14.2 per cent in Spain, 10.2 per
cent in Greece, 8.7 per cent in Italy and 8.2 per cent in Portugal. Households
(domestic services) account for 13.9 per cent in Greece, 13.3 per cent in
Spain, 10.4 per cent in Italy and 4.9 per cent in Portugal (although these data
are decidedly under-evaluated). Finally, employment in agriculture is also
considerable, although its significance has been declining in recent years:
data for the period 2005-2006 show that, of total foreign-born employment,
the agriculture and fishing sector account for 6.2 per cent in Greece, 5.6 per
cent in Spain, 3.5 per cent in Italy and 2.0 per cent in Portugal.
Immigrants’ overqualification also seems to be a general trend in these
countries. The lack of employment opportunities in their trades forces mi-
grants to accept jobs that often do not correspond to their qualifications.
Comparative ratios show that immigrant overqualification, as compared to
that of the native population, is substantial in the countries of Southern
Europe (OECD 2006). There are differences among immigrant groups,
since educational levels vary by nationality. It is mainly in the case of
Eastern European immigrants that there is a considerable mismatch be-
tween educational level and type of work.
Closely related to these employment patterns, the working conditions of
most immigrants are poor. This applies to, among other factors, salaries
and contractual arrangements. Immigrants tend to earn less than the native-
born. In all countries, temporary work has been expanding over the years.
The probability of getting a temporary job is also greater for immigrants
than for the native population. Temporary work is often seen as one meth-
od for satisfying certain labour shortages, especially low-skilled ones, with-
out admitting large numbers of workers into sectors that may eventually be
subject to significant structural change. This reality reflects the greater pre-
cariousness that immigrants have to face in the labour market. According
to OECD data, the share of temporary jobs among immigrants is nearly 45
per cent in Spain and almost 30 per cent in Portugal, i.e. respectively 20
and 16 percentage points more than for the native population (OECD
2006: 58).
120
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

Finally, as regards complementarity or substitution/competition with na-
tives’ employment, the former is by far the most prevalent. This has
already been well established by former comparative studies on immi-
grants’ insertion into Southern European labour markets. For example,
Emilio Reyneri and Maria Baganha (2001: 49) stated that:
[...] in segmented labour markets, such as those of the Southern
European countries, migrant workers are in competition only with
marginal sectors of the domestic labour supply and/or in narrow oc-
cupational areas [...]. Conflicts between migrants and the local pop-
ulation only seldom concern labour market problems.
5.4
Irregular migration and regularisation processes
5.4.1
The size and determinants of irregular stocks
The challenge of irregular immigration affects several countries in Europe.
However, it is in Southern Europe that the number of irregular migrants is
particularly high.7 Since the 1990s, irregular migration has been perceived
as a chronic disease of Southern European migration regimes. It would
likely be no exaggeration if we affirmed that most foreigners now living
legally in Southern European countries experienced a significant period of
irregularity before getting their first residence permit. For this reason, esti-
mation of the size of irregular migration became a priority for national
governments and the European institutions. Admittedly, estimating irregu-
lar foreign population is not an easy task, though there have been efforts to
provide reliable estimates of irregular foreigners. The frequent regularisa-
tion processes carried out in almost all Southern European countries, for
instance, provide reliable figures about the presence of irregular migrants.
In addition, various other research groups have provided additional esti-
mates based on other available sources.
In Spain, based on information provided by the Padrón Municipal regis-
ter, Joaquín Recaño and Andreu Domingo (2005) tried, quite successfully,
to estimate irregularity before the regularisation of 2005.8 Similar efforts
have been made by other Spanish researchers such as, for instance, Alonso
Pajares (2006), Lorenzo Cachón (2007) and Héctor Cebolla and Amparo
Gonzalez (2008). Most of these researchers agreed that there had been
about 900,000 irregular migrants before the 2005 regularisation. According
to Cebolla and Gonzalez (2008), the irregularity rate reached its peak in
2003, when 53 per cent of the foreign population was estimated to be
irregular. The percentage decreased after the 2005 regularisation and the
entry of Romania and Bulgaria into the EU.
In Italy, there have been several attempts to estimate the number of
irregular migrants (Table 5.3). The estimates provided by Gian Carlo
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
121

Blangiardo (2009) suggest a very high level of irregularity at the end of
the 1990s and a decrease afterwards. Things changed significantly after the
2002 regularisation and the entry of Bulgaria and Romania into the EU in
2007. The impact of the European enlargement worked as a de facto regu-
larisation in the case of Romanian immigrants. However, according to
more recent figures, the number of irregular migrants has been increasing
again.
Table 5.3
Estimates of immigrants and irregular migrants in Italy
Author1
Year
Immigrants
Irregular migrants
(thousands)
thousands
%
Natale (1986)
1985
523-725
97-299
19-41
Birindelli (1990)
1990
824
140
17
ISTAT (1991)
1990
1,144
623
55
Blangiardo (1997)2
1995
833-912
344-423
41-46
Natale and Strozza (1997)
1995
1,146
431
36
Blangiardo (1998)2 3
1998
982-1,101
176-295
18-27
Blangiardo (2006)2 4
2005
3,357
541
16
Blangiardo (2008)
2007
3,982
349
9
1 Unless stated otherwise, values at beginning of year
2 Only citizens of CEE and Third World countries
3 15 April
4 1 July
Sources: Strozza (2004) and some of the authors indicated in the table.
Recent estimates of the irregular migrant presence in Greece suggest
numbers close to 200,000. More specifically, Anna Triandafyllidou and
Michaela Maroufof (2008) estimate the number of irregular migrants to be
at 167,000; Theodore Lianos and his co-authors (2008) suggest that irregu-
lar migrants in Greece range between 172,000 and 209,000; and Thanos
Maroukis (2009) arrives at an estimate of 205,000 irregular migrants living
in Greece in 2007. In Portugal, official institutions have recently provided
an estimate of irregular migration levels, suggesting a number of 50,000
(Lusa 2008).
The presence of irregular migrants in Southern European countries has
often been explained by the existence of weak external controls, by the
countries’ inexperience with immigration and by geographic positions that
favour clandestine entries (Baldwin-Edwards 1999). A phenomenon like ir-
regular migration, however, cannot be explained through unilateral cause-
effect relationships. As a matter of fact, the question of irregularity is part
of a more general analysis of the mechanisms of international migration.
Irregularity is brought about, first of all, by the intersection of immigration
regulations with large migration flows, and reflects what Douglas Massey
(1999) has called the ‘post-modern’ paradox between global forces and
122
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

restrictive policy rules. In this respect, irregular migration is the product of
several factors, according to what could be summarised as an ‘equation of
irregularity’ based on the intensity of the flows, restrictive regulations, the
attractiveness of the informal economy, geographic proximity, the quality
of controls and the activities of the smuggling industry (Arango 2005). All
these aspects have been particularly important for the development of ir-
regular migration systems in Southern Europe.
As will be elaborated in the next section, Southern European admission
policies were characterised by a high degree of restrictiveness and inflexibil-
ity that hampered effective controls of the flows. As a consequence, they
have been unable to craft or enforce efficient regulation, despite having
acknowledged the necessity of foreign labour. The informal economy acts
as a strong magnet for irregular migrants, and becomes an increasingly im-
portant element within the development of irregular migration systems
(Reyneri 1998). That is why internal labour market controls are imbued with
a particular significance in the struggle against irregular migration. As a
matter of fact, the size of the informal economy corresponds to the weakness
of labour market controls in all four of the Southern European countries.
Along with the pull factor posed by the informal economy, the presence
of irregular migrants has clearly been bolstered by the geographic position-
ing of Southern European countries and their difficulties controlling their
maritime borders. The increase of migration flows into Southern Europe
coincided with the necessity of protecting common European borders after
the coming into force of the Schengen Agreement.9 Their relative lack of
experience in dealing with inflows and exposed sea borders prompted a
certain degree of mistrust of the Southern European member states, which
was also encouraged by the media effect of ‘boat people’ arriving on their
coasts. Smuggling also played a role. Smuggling networks in Spain have
been very active and flexible. In the last couple of years, they have shifted
their main routes from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Canary Islands, due to
more intensive controls in the Mediterranean area. In Italy, networks seem
to be particularly active on the Southern coasts, exploiting the Libyan
route, because of the Spanish authorities’ efforts to control the Moroccan
channel. In the case of Greece, smugglers are active at sea and land bor-
ders, ranging from small informal networks to several more mafia-like or-
ganisations. Almost everywhere, smuggling networks seem to be flexible
organisations that are able to adapt very quickly to the defensive strategies
adopted by the nation-states (Pastore, Monzini & Sciortino 2006; Coslovi
2007; Carling 2007).
However, most evidence suggests that irregular immigration in Southern
Europe usually begins with overstaying and not with a clandestine entry
(see e.g. ENI-survey 2008 and Pastore et al. 2006). Where this is the case,
several favourable visa conditions come into play. Today’s visa policies
and their effects are not a consequence of national decisions, but rather of
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
123

European policies, which identify the countries whose citizens need a visa
to enter the Schengen space. However, visa policy is also embedded in the
interests of each country and the migration systems in which they are
involved. Some countries might thus be more generous or liberal than
others because of economic and historical ties with a sending country.
Most irregular migration systems in Portugal consist, for instance, of over-
stayers proceeding from the PALOP countries, Eastern Europe and Brazil.
Furthermore, the existence of the Schengen space allows ‘false tourists’ to
move around Europe with a visa obtained by the foreign representation of
one EU member state, a process often fuelled by smuggling networks. This
was for example the case of Ukrainian immigrants who obtained their visas
from Germany and subsequently moved to Italy, Spain and Portugal, where
they could find a job in the construction and domestic service sectors
(Finotelli & Sciortino 2006).
Finally, irregular migration in Southern Europe has been perceived
favourably by the native population and administration. Indeed, living as
an irregular is significantly easier in Southern than in Northern Europe. In
most Southern European countries, irregular migrants have access to com-
pulsory education and basic health services. Nevertheless, irregular mi-
grants remain in a precarious position and represent a challenge to the con-
trol capacity of the state.
5.4.2
Regularisations as ex post regulation instruments
The regularisation of irregular immigrants is, of course, not a Southern
European peculiarity. Many European countries had to resort to a regular-
isation at least once in their migration history. However, there are few
doubts that the majority of such processes were carried out in Southern
Europe (De Bruycker & Apap 2000).10 For this reason, regularisations
have often been considered proof of the Southern European ‘public ambi-
guity’ towards irregular migration and for the Southern incapacity to con-
trol migration (Brochmann 1993; Baldwin-Edwards 1999).11 As a matter
of fact, the lack of efficient recruitment procedures turned regularisations
into the most useful way to ‘repair’ a posteriori the structural mismatches
of most Southern European migration regimes (Arango & Jachimowicz
2005). Since the 1980s, six regularisation processes have been instituted in
Spain, while the Italian and Portuguese governments carried out five regu-
larisations in the same period.12 In Greece, regularisations are a more re-
cent phenomenon, since the first one was executed in 1998, followed by
two others in 2001 and the period 2005-2006 (Table 5.4).
Regularisations have come to represent, both at the national and at the
international level, a very controversial issue, one whose necessity is
downplayed by the majority of the political parties. Nevertheless, in past
years, regularisations were not linked to a particular government majority
124
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

in all Southern European countries. Both left- and right-wing governments
carried out various regularisations in all countries (González-Enríquez &
Triandafyllidou 2009). Moreover, regularisation processes in each country
exhibit a certain degree of periodicity, though all of them were touted as
exceptional ‘one-time-only’ measures by the national governments. In the
absence of effective recruitment systems, they soon became part of the reg-
ulation system, used to ‘repair’ the lack of an efficient migration policy.
Italy and Spain regularised the highest number of irregular migrants, not
only in all of Southern Europe, but also as compared to other European
countries (Table 5.5). In Spain, about 1.2 million foreigners have been reg-
ularised since 1986, and half of them after the regularisation of 2005 –
which was, without a doubt, the most successful regularisation ever carried
out in the country. Italy’s case is similar. Irregularity increased after the
surge in the inflows between 1998 and 2002 and the largest number of
people was hence regularised in 2002.
Table 5.4
Overview of regularisation dates in Southern European migration
regimes, 1985-2007
Spain
Italy
Greece
Portugal
1985
1986
-
1992-1993
1991
1990
-
1996
1996
1995
-
2001
2000
1998
1998
2003
2001
2002
2001
2004
2005
(2006)
2005-2006
(2007)
Source: Own elaboration
Table 5.5
Results of regularisation processes in Southern Europe
Years
Italy
Spain
Greece
Portugal
1985-1990
322,626
34,832
-
1991-1995
244,492
109,135
39,166
1996-2000
217,124
221,748
370,000 (white card)
220,000 (green card)
35,082
2001-2007
634,728
(470,000)1
811,049
183,8332
1 Number refers to the ‘decree on flows’ of 2006 that worked as a de facto or ‘undeclared’
regularisation of irregular immigrants who were already living in the country (Finotelli &
Sciortino 2009).
2 Data refer only to the 2001 regularisation, while data about the 2003 and 2004
regularisations and the 2007 ongoing process are very scarce.
Source: Own elaboration
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
125

Assessing the effects of regularisation processes is not a simple task, as
there have not been enough empirical studies to provide an adequate
answer. Nevertheless, some studies conducted in Italy and Spain uncovered
some positive aspects. Given the restrictive and often inadequate effects of
migration legislation, regularisations are likely to have allowed the legal
inclusion and stabilisation of a large part of foreign residents, despite the
inherent insecurity of the residence permits that were issued. Since 1986,
1.4 million immigrants received their residence permits through a regular-
isation process in Italy. According to Massimo Carfagna (2002) and
Blangiardo (2004), the majority of immigrants regularised in Italy retained
their legal status afterwards. Furthermore, it seems that the number of those
who lost their residence permits and applied for several regularisation proc-
esses is rather insignificant. The case of Spain seems to be quite similar, as
regularisations contributed to the inclusion of almost half of the foreign
population (Arango & Finotelli 2009). Furthermore, recent studies carried
out to assess the effects of regularisation processes in Spain demonstrate
that such processes could serve to reduce the irregularity rate (Recaño &
Domingo 2005; Pajares 2006; Cachón 2007; Cebolla & Gonzalez 2008;
Arango & Finotelli 2009). There seem to be no analogous research results
in Portugal and Greece. In Greece, however, the general assumption is that
the number of reapplications in each process is rather high, since the legal
status obtained in the various regularisations is lost rapidly.
Nevertheless, asserting that regularisations were able to ‘stabilise’ a large
part of the foreign population in most Southern European countries does
not mean they are a panacea against irregularity. All in all, regularisations
do not substitute for an efficient immigration policy. They remain a regula-
tion tool a posteriori, and there is no doubt that national governments can-
not tackle the issue of irregular migration without seriously improving their
migration policies. Real progress against irregularity can only be made if
each national migration regime acts on the elements that factor heavily in
the equation of irregularity. For this reason, both the Spanish and the
Portuguese governments considered their most recent regularisations to be
necessary and exceptional decisions to ‘clean up the state’ before carrying
out wider legislative reforms of their migration regimes. In both countries,
‘stigmatised’ regularisation processes have been substituted by discrete and
individual regularisation forms.13 These important policy changes break
with the mechanisms of the past and seem to be related to, among other
factors, the improvement of the labour recruitment policies and control sys-
tems in recent years.
126
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

5.1
Admission and integration policies
5.5.1
Labour migration policies
During the first years of Southern European immigration history, Greece,
Italy, Portugal and Spain developed a set of legislation more focused on
administrative issues related to entry and residence than on the concept of
effective regulatory instruments. The development and improvement of im-
migration laws of that type was one of the requirements that Greece,
Portugal and Spain had to meet, like Italy at that time, for their European
membership or prospects of membership in the EU. More sophisticated
regulation and control mechanisms would mostly be enacted after the early
1990s, when massive inflows began to occur in some of these countries:
first Italy and Greece, then Spain and Portugal.
The intensification of immigration flows, the awareness of an unmet de-
mand for labour and the volume of irregular migration contributed to the
development of several mechanisms of labour recruitment. As part of the
broader objective of regulating the labour market, these mechanisms con-
stituted an attempt to formulate an economic migration management policy
that would allow for the legal admission of labour immigrants and the
crackdown of irregular migration. As described above, these instruments
paralleled the enactment of several regularisation schemes. Despite their
tentative character and many failures, it can be argued that some of those
policy initiatives were novel, especially in the EU context. In a sense, they
were precursors of the EU’s later statement on the need for immigration in
the European economies. For example, it was only in 2000 that the then
EU Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs, António Vitorino, stated
that ‘the zero immigration policies of the past 25 years are not working’,
urging for ‘new legal ways for immigrants to enter the EU’ (quoted after
Martin, Martin & Weil 2006: 74-75).
The legal channels of immigrants’ labour recruitment differed across
time and from country to country, though at least part of the rationale be-
hind them could be considered similar. Whether they were invitation
schemes, quota systems or shortage lists, they were designed to regulate
future labour immigration and avoid the need for further regularisations.
These systems were usually based on labour market needs (domestic skill
and labour shortages) and on labour market tests (or checks), which gave
preference to natives and other resident citizens to fill a job vacancy. As
the recurrent increase of irregular immigration confirms, the regulating ef-
fect of these policies has been negligible.
When considered in detail in each Southern European country, the proc-
ess of constructing labour admission policies is lengthy and cumbersome.
In the early stages, a system of individual nomination or invitation of im-
migrants was coupled with the principle of labour market tests, whereby
the native, the EU and the legal third-country nationals’ resident workforce
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
127

would be protected and given priority in employment. In the mid-1980s,
Spain was the first to introduce a labour recruitment procedure coupled
with a labour market test system. The Foreigners Bill of 1985 allowed the
hiring of migrants who submitted a nominal request to the general regime
known as the Regímen General. However, the bureaucratic procedure to
hire a migrant was very complex and most employers preferred employing
their workers irregularly. In 1986, Italy also introduced a nominal request
procedure and a labour market test system – neither of which was success-
ful. The rule soon turned out to be too restrictive to deal with actual in-
flows. A system based on an invitation scheme known as metaklisi has
been in place in Greece since 1991, and the requirement to protect local
workers has also been enacted (Emke-Poulopoulou 2007). This policy for
labour migration, still in place today, is a rather complex one and its results
have been far from initial expectations.
In a later stage, systems based on labour market quotas (or their equiva-
lent) were common to all Southern countries. Italy (1990)14 and Spain
(1993) were the first to introduce this kind of system, followed by Greece
(2001) and Portugal (2001). In Italy in 1990, a new law (Martelli law) in-
troduced the principle of immigrant inflow control (the ‘intended number’,
numero programmato) and, in 1995, a limited number of quotas was intro-
duced. The Consolidation Act of 1998 on immigration and the status of
foreigners (the Turco-Napolitano Law) and its amendment in 2002 im-
proved the system. Every year, the Italian government, with one or more
decrees, had to set the maximum quota of foreigners allowed to enter. The
number was to be proportional to the needs of the Italian labour market
(the necessary data was provided by the Ministry of Labour) and to the res-
idence permits already issued for family reunification or for reasons of
temporary social protection. The recruitment of foreign workers within this
legal framework never worked properly. It was mainly used to regularise
immigrants who were already living and working in the country.
In Spain in 1993, along with the system of nominal requests, the govern-
ment introduced labour entry quotas known as contingente. The immigra-
tion quotas were published yearly by the Ministry of Labour, after consul-
tations with the trade unions and employer associations. Again, the
contingente never turned into an effective policy regulation instrument and
came to be used to legalise irregular migrants already living in Spain.
Other problems existed in the Spanish labour recruitment approach, such
as poor communication between the central and the autonomic government
(Aparicio & Roig 2006) and the fact that the contingente and the nominal
request system constituted ‘blind’ recruitment tools that did not take into
account that an employment relationship usually begins on the basis of
trust and mutual knowledge.15
Greece and Portugal followed this ‘quota trend’ in 2001. The Greek
Immigration Law of 2001 established an administrative procedure for the
128
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

issuing of stay permits for the purpose of employment, based on a plan
crafted each year by the Organisation for the Employment of the Labour
Force (OAED), which outlined the domestic labour market needs per sec-
tor and area. The system was improved in 2005, although the underlying
principle was the same. Nevertheless, the main problem of the Greek ap-
proach lay in the metaklisi system, a procedure that remained extremely
complex and time-consuming. In particular, long waiting periods are disad-
vantageous to small firms, which, more than other businesses, need quick
and flexible entry policies.16 In Portugal in 2001, a system of quotas for
immigrant recruitment following a report on domestic labour shortages was
also created. The number of visas was to match the job vacancies detected
in various economic sectors (the quotas), according to a report drafted an-
nually by the Institute of Employment and Vocational Training (IEFP). The
system was a complex, bureaucratic and largely ineffective procedure and
has not helped in the fight against irregular immigration.
Taking all these labour recruitment policies together, it is clear that their
degree of restrictiveness and their complex administrative requirements
were unfit for dealing with the high demand for labour and vast immigrant
supply, and they were overall ineffective at regulating inflows and limiting
irregular immigration. Given these constraints, regularisation policies often
became a type of last resort for regulating the immigrants’ insertion into
the labour market.
Because of the inefficacy of these systems, some countries have pro-
foundly changed their labour immigration policies in recent years in order
to develop more efficient systems to meet the labour market needs. Spain
is the most advanced country in this respect. In 2004, concurrent with the
announcement of the large regularisation of 2005, the Spanish government
approved a new Regulation Act to make the recruitment procedure of
labour immigrants more flexible. The regulation re-established de facto the
possibility of hiring foreign workers in their countries of origin through a
nominal offer in the Regímen General. As in all immigration host coun-
tries, the employment of a foreign worker following these kinds of proce-
dures still depends on a previously conducted labour market test. To make
the recruitment easier, every three months the ‘Catalogo de trabajos de difi-
cil cobertura’ (‘Catalogue of hard-to-fill positions’) is published, specifying
the types of jobs for which there are usually no available candidates (be
they Spanish citizens or from other EU countries). For these jobs, no
labour market test is required. If an employer is looking to fill a vacancy
listed in this catalogue, he or she can immediately begin the recruitment
procedure.
The contingente remains another important admission channel in Spain.
Furthermore, new regulations have introduced the ‘entry visa for job
search’. The purpose of this type of visa was to promote further flexibility
within the recruiting procedures. However, the ability to apply for such a
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
129

visa was restricted to a limited number of sectors, such as the domestic
sector. Very few visas have been issued for this purpose since the approval
of the regulation. Finally, Spain is involved in a series of bilateral agree-
ments with various sending countries, which are effective in providing
long- or short-term workers to the Spanish labour market. However, the re-
cent economic crisis affecting the country has not permitted a full testing
of these measures.
5.5.2
Control policies
Migration control policies developed quickly in the Southern European
countries in reaction to relatively massive initial inflows into Italy and
Greece (in the late 1980s and early 1990s), followed by Spain and
Portugal (from the late 1990s onward). Border and internal control policies
developed to at least some extent due to pressure from the EU, which
insisted that Southern European countries should stop being an easy route
for irregular migrants to travel into Northern and Western Europe. There
are other, more substantive factors, however, that have largely shaped the
practices and policies of migration control in the region. These include the
geographical morphology of these countries, their strategic position on
Mediterranean migration pathways (and Portugal on the Southern portion
of the European Atlantic coast), the operation of smuggling networks, the
countries’ lack of previous immigration experience and their large informal
economies, which provide abundant irregular employment opportunities
for immigrants.
Moreover, all four countries are important tourism destinations, which
make strict border controls more difficult to implement – especially during
peak tourism seasons. At the same time, some of these countries’ prospec-
tive immigrants (in Spain and Portugal in particular) are or have been ex-
empted from visa requirements because of their Latin American or Luso-
speaking origins. Finally, vast amounts of irregular migration take place
throughout the Schengen space. For example, as seen above, many Eastern
European immigrants cross the continent using Schengen tourist visas in
order to get through the Pyrenees to Spain and Portugal. These facts make
border enforcement very difficult in practical terms.
Adding to the difficulties of any border control mechanism, Southern
European countries have long sea borders along the Mediterranean. Tiny
islands like Lampedusa between Sicily and North Africa, the Greek islands
of Chios and Lesvos in the Aegean Sea and the Canary Islands in the
Atlantic have become hubs for dinghies and other types of illegal small
boat traffic, caused by desperate irregular immigrants from Asia and
Africa. Despite the sophisticated technological equipment being used by
border control authorities, intercepting all such arrivals poses significant
difficulties. The importance of these particular migratory phenomena has
130
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

been felt acutely since 2006, as there has been a dramatic and unexpected
increase in irregular migrant arrivals from sub-Saharan Africa and Asia to
the southern coasts of Europe.
The Canary Islands in the Atlantic, which are a part of Spanish territory,
have long been a preferred target destination for thousands of irregular mi-
grants sailing off the shores of Mauritania and Senegal for week-long jour-
neys to Tenerife. Their numbers have fluctuated significantly, from 4,000
in 2001 to over 30,000 in 2006 (a so-called ‘crisis year’ for the Canary
Islands-EU sea border) and falling again to approximately 12,000 in 2007
(Spanish Ministry of Interior data). During the same period (i.e. since
2000), the number of arrivals at the Strait of Gibraltar started at between
13,000 and 14,000 in the period 2001-2002, and then fell to half of that
during the following years (thus fluctuating around 7,000 per year). The
inversion of the trend at the Strait of Gibraltar is attributed mainly to the
operation of the SIVE, the integrated border control system put in place by
the Spanish government, as well as to the building of a militarised border
around Ceuta and Melilla, the two Spanish enclaves in Morocco (Carling
2007).
The second most numerically significant destination in 2006 was the
tiny island of Lampedusa, south of Sicily. Lampedusa receives between
15,000 and 20,000 irregular immigrants each year,17 mainly sub-Saharan
Africans setting off from the Libyan coast (and more recently from Algeria
and Tunisia) aboard large fishing boats or other sea vessels. The relative
success of sea border control by Italian authorities is well illustrated by the
almost total cease in crossings of the Adriatic in the new century (Pastore
et al. 2006).
Finally, the islands of the Aegean Sea near Greece are preferred target
destinations for irregular Asian immigrants (Afghans, Iraqis, Syrians, etc.)
who seek to enter Europe through Turkey. They cross the narrow straits
from the Turkish mainland onto the islands of Mytilini (Lesvos), Rhodes,
Samos, Chios, or even some smaller islands like Leros. The Greek coast-
guard and police forces intercepted nearly 9,000 people in 2007 and over
15,000 persons in 2008.
Migration across the EU’s southern sea borders is, in total numbers, rela-
tively small. Adding up the numbers referred to previously, in 2007 ap-
proximately 50,000 irregular migrants crossed the border, in 2006 it was
45,000, and in 2005 it was under 30,000. Considering that the EU-27 are
home to some 2.8 million to 6 million irregular migrants,18 that the EU-15
(excluding Greece) received a total of 2.6 million legal immigrants in 2004
(according to OECD data) and that the EU-27 have a total population of
486.5 million, it becomes evident that this amount of irregular migration is
only a tiny fraction of overall irregular flows and stocks. It is indeed a
rather small number in the overall population of the EU as well as in the
overall immigrant population of the EU. The nature of migration across
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
131

sea borders, however, imbues it with a sort of ‘spectacular’ news value: ar-
rivals are dramatic, small boats sometimes capsize or sink near the shore
and immigrants (including pregnant women and children) often die in their
attempts to reach EU territory.19
Although the sea borders are a major concern for the Southern EU mem-
ber states, the EU’s external south-eastern land border is also a priority
area. Land border controls mostly affect Greece and, to a lesser degree,
Italy. The northern and north-eastern land borders have presented a major
challenge to Greek migration control authorities since the early 1990s.
Greece has been the target of irregular immigration flows because of its
northern mountainous border with Albania, Bulgaria and Turkey. Italy ex-
perienced problems with the control of its border with Slovenia during the
1990s, including both irregular migration control and the management of
visas (citizens of the former Yugoslavia or Albania would go to Slovenia
and apply there for a visa to enter Italy as tourists). Nevertheless, land bor-
ders cannot be said to present too major a challenge for the Southern
European countries, as they have largely internal EU borders and thus, in-
creasingly, no borders at all (because of their participation in the Schengen
no-internal-border area).
With regard to internal controls, all four Southern European countries
have practised random public controls in efforts to stem irregular migra-
tion. In Greece, these controls were particularly frequent during the 1990s,
and targeted mostly Albanian immigrants. In the early to mid-1990s, mas-
sive deportations – mainly of Albanian citizens – became common police
practice. However, internal control policies in recent years have given more
emphasis to actions targeting informal work. In Spain, since the regularisa-
tion of 2005, state authorities have prioritised labour inspections as a
means of combating irregular migration. Spain’s strategy has been three-
pronged: border management has improved, irregular migrants who live in
the country have been given the opportunity to legalise their stay and work
and labour market inspections have been intensified. In Greece, Italy and
Portugal, plans are in place to better control the informal economy and
combat informal work, in general, but labour inspection mechanisms re-
main under-resourced and, to a certain extent, ineffective (Maroukis 2009;
Pastore 2008). Moreover, in all four countries, dominant work areas like
domestic services (cleaning and caring for families) are – by their very na-
ture – hard to control and, as a result, it is improbable that informal work
control policies can effectively regulate these sectors through labour
inspections.
Finally, external control policies have been increasingly focused on
cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries. Readmission agree-
ments have been signed between Greece and Albania, Bulgaria and Turkey
(Protocol of Readmission), and there are local cooperation agreements on
the Greek-Macedonian (FYROM) border. Spain and Italy have signed
132
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

readmission and mutual cooperation agreements with several countries,
including Morocco (Spain), Albania and Tunisia (Italy). The implementa-
tion of the Protocol of Readmission between Greece and Turkey is far from
satisfactory, but Moroccan, Albanian and Tunisian authorities have been
more cooperative.
Overall, the approach to enforcement of external controls has changed
since the 1990s. Southern European countries do not seek to protect their
borders from the inside – or rather not only from the inside. They aim to
act in concert with major neighbouring sending or transit countries, provid-
ing programmes of seasonal migration and development aid in exchange.
In sum, there seems to be limited purposeful coordination between exter-
nal and internal border controls as well as within the overall policy for
managing migration flows and stocks. Border control efforts have been
increasing throughout recent years, despite the fact that, within the last ten
years, all these countries have enacted more than one large regularisation
programme. While government authorities are aware that migration cannot
be stopped as long as dramatic socio-economic inequalities persist between
sending and receiving countries, they do not have an effective plan for
managing migration. Their control policies appear to be, to a certain extent,
detached from regularisation, management and integration policies, indeed
seeking to accomplish a Sisyphean task.
5.5.3
Integration and citizenship policies
All the Southern European countries developed their integration policies in
response to the arrival and settlement of relatively large numbers of mi-
grants in a relatively short period of time. Although it is an exaggeration to
claim that they are still ‘new’ host countries – since their experience dates
back to the early 1990s – it is also important to note that migration to
Southern Europe took place in the post-Cold War era, largely without plan-
ning and without a legal framework. Migrants did not arrive at a period of
the manufacturing industry’s expansion – they found jobs mainly in the
service sector and, in particular, in the secondary labour market, notably at
jobs that were underpaid and of low prestige and precarious conditions.
These general socio-economic conditions framed the process of immigrant
integration and the policies of integration that Southern European countries
have since developed.20
Italy, the first Southern country to experience significant immigration in
the late 1980s, developed its first integrated migration policy, which in-
cluded issues of immigrant integration and political participation, in 1998.
Greece and Portugal crafted their first comprehensive immigration laws
including the issues of integration in 2001, and Spain did so in 2000.21
During this last decade, all four countries have developed a set of
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
133

integration policies tackling the issues of health, housing, education and
socio-economic assistance to migrants.
There are important differences between the four countries as regards the
public administration structures that manage welfare policies. In Spain and
Italy, these policies apply to regions (Comunidades Autonomas in Spain)
and municipalities, and there are hence different policies and practices in
different regions. In Spain, migrants are concentrated in the two largest
cities (Barcelona and Madrid), in the regions along the Mediterranean coast
and in the two archipelagos. The regional and municipal authorities in the
respective regions have, over time, developed plans for the social integra-
tion of migrants, and their social services have responded to the needs of
these new populations as well. In Italy, too, regions with large immigrant
populations in the north, north-east and in the centre are known for provid-
ing welfare assistance to legal migrants and their families, including hous-
ing, welfare allowances and other services (see Zincone 2000a, 2000b).
In Greece and Portugal, the national plans for integration are adminis-
tered in a more centralised way than in Spain and Italy. In Greece, these
plans for integration have often suffered from partial implementation and a
lack of continuity. In Portugal, the early creation of the ACIME, later
renamed ACIDI,22 guaranteed some continuity within the policies and im-
proved immigrants’ integration prospects. This institution’s role was to act
as a go-between, facilitating communication between the government and
immigrants and ensuring that the latter’s rights were respected and their
needs attended to. According to several sources, the role of ACIDI in
structuring the civic sphere for migrant representation and participation and
promoting socio-economic integration policies at the local and national
level has been crucial (Teixeira & Albuquerque 2005; see also Niessen,
Huddleston, Citron, Geddes & Jacobs 2007).23
In all four countries, EU initiatives and European Social Fund pro-
grammes have been valuable and given opportunity to immigrant organisa-
tions and other NGOs, as well as municipalities and universities, to pro-
mote the social and economic integration of immigrants. Indeed, European
Social Fund programmes and the more recent European Integration Fund
for the Integration of Third-Country Nationals have been instrumental in
creating synergies, mobilising resources, even reorganising public adminis-
tration offices, all with a view to providing services to migrant commun-
ities. On the whole, the outcome of these programmes has been positive,
although their structural effect on the socio-economic integration of for-
eigners is limited. As seen in a previous section, migrants in Southern
Europe mostly take on jobs in lower segments of the labour market.
Moreover, they remain largely in poor housing and are often the targets of
negative stereotyping by the media (King, Lazaridis & Tsardanidis 2000;
Ribas-Mateos 2004).
134
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

With regard to citizenship policies, Southern European countries have
generally restrictive approaches. In Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal, until
2006 third-country nationals had to reside in the country for at least ten
years in order to apply for naturalisation (six years now in Portugal; two
years in Spain for some nationalities). In Italy and Greece, citizenship poli-
cies have been applied in a restrictive manner, leading to very low numbers
of naturalised citizens (about 11,000 cases per year in Italy, mainly as a
result of marriage to an Italian citizen, and about 50 cases a year in
Greece). In the latter, applications from citizens of neighbouring countries
have routinely been rejected during the past two decades, even when appli-
cants satisfied all the requirements for naturalisation and even when they
were married to a Greek citizen.
Naturalisation laws in all four countries are often contingent on ethnic
descent. Naturalisation is easy if one has Greek, Spanish, Portuguese or
Italian ancestors even two generations back (i.e. in a grandparent). By con-
trast, legally residing immigrants find it much harder to become naturalised
even after ten years of residence. In most countries, preference is given to
people who are of the same ethnic descent (Greece) or who can prove an-
cestry, as well as to individuals who come from former colonies (Latin
American countries for Spain and Luso-speaking countries for Portugal).24
As regards the second generation, provisions vary. They are on the
whole more generous than naturalisation policies in three out of the four
countries (with the exception of Greece). However, second-generation pro-
visions in Southern Europe fall short of becoming effective integration
mechanisms for the children of immigrants. They often seem to perpetuate
the distinction between ‘native’ and ‘foreigner’, without taking into ac-
count that children born in a country or who arrived at pre-school age in
that country have completed all their education and have been socialised
into the local and national norms and habits. It is thus questionable to treat
them as foreigners.
All of these elements considered, the process of immigrant integration in
Southern European host countries has taken place mainly through labour
market insertion and at the personal or family level, through informal and
personalised social networks, and with the help of third sector organisa-
tions. In other words, this slow process of piecemeal integration has had
less to do with formal integration policies in these countries and related
state structures, including welfare services, education services and other
social agencies – Portugal being a partial exception. Although the impor-
tance of integration policies is not to be underestimated, a situation exists
in Southern Europe whereby immigrants find their local niches in life and
work, initially even without papers, and quickly adopt (or are forced to
adopt) the local customs and, through personal relations with natives, man-
age to take part in the local networks of clientelistic relations. These net-
works generally structure both the labour market (e.g. the process of
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
135

finding employment or improving one’s work position) and interaction
with the state in Southern Europe. The role of immigrants’ associations
and other NGOs, including ones linked to the Catholic Church, has also
helped in the process. Immigrants’ lives are of course made easier when
appropriate integration policies (such as access to housing, health care,
schooling) are provided in their cities and towns of residence.
Generally speaking, Southern European countries have developed a reac-
tive, rather than proactive, framework for immigrant integration. Policies
and practices have been more developed at the regional and local levels
than the national level. The third sector, mostly involving immigrant asso-
ciations and NGOs, has played an important part in assisting immigrants
and integrating them in their chosen societies of settlement. However, for-
mal policies of integration, including those for overall social and political
integration and citizenship acquisition, have, to date, exhibited significant
deficits that need to be addressed in the near future.
5.6
General considerations and concluding remarks
This comparative study of the Southern European countries – Greece, Italy,
Portugal and Spain – and their immigration experiences confirms the exis-
tence of numerous similarities within this framework, which counter-
balance the role of significant differences; a set of common explanatory
factors; and a similar position within the broader context of the European
migration system (see chapters 1 and 2 in this volume). As suggested in
the initial chapters of this volume, there are reasons to believe that
Southern Europe is the most homogeneous context regarding migration
flows within Europe. The more relevant similarities and explaining factors
are the following.
First, the evolution of migration flows has been quite similar in all four
countries. Each one has had important emigration experiences to date.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the migration transition took place. Emigration
decreased, return migration increased (only to decline later) and foreign im-
migration rose as well. Over a short period of time, these countries went
from net emigration to net immigration – though the timing and rhythm of
inflows were not identical. Foreign immigration was manifest in all these
countries during the 1980s, but the bulk of the movements varied, depend-
ing mostly on contextual factors. In Greece, most of the inflows occurred
during the 1990s; in Italy and Portugal, during the early 2000s; and in
Spain, throughout the new century until the recent economic recession. At
the same time, emigration has not ceased completely. The most exceptional
case is that of Portugal, where immigration decreased and emigration
resumed in the first decade of the new century, almost reversing the previous
migration balance. There is thus certainly an identifiable, long-term
136
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

transition process that brings countries from situations of net emigration to
net immigration in Southern Europe. However, as the volatility of inflows
and the particular case of Portugal may confirm, any model of migration
evolution with linearity prevailing – the best example of which being the
‘mobility transition’ model (Zelinsky 1971)25 – would be both inaccurate
and imprudent. A theory based on a rigid sequence of migration stages (see
chapter 1 in this volume) thus warrants further scrutiny.
Second, despite a considerable variation in the national origin of immi-
grants, their demographic characteristics are very similar. Most inflows
have comprised young adults who either directly targeted the labour market
or came within the framework of family reunion (although many of the
latter also inserted themselves rapidly in the labour market). This demo-
graphic profile explains why the immigrants’ offspring are only now
becoming visible. The most significant exception to this age profile –
although not exceedingly significant, in relative terms – is the case of re-
tirement migration coming mainly into Spain and Portugal from developed
EU countries. In terms of gender, immigration is, in general, balanced –
although some imbalances emerge upon closer inspection of certain flows
and certain nationalities.
Third, the labour market insertion of immigrants exhibits many com-
monalities. In all four countries, both male and female immigrants have
high employment rates – a fact that confirms the labour-oriented nature of
most inflows. Immigrants are mostly concentrated in the same economic
sectors: construction, manufacturing (mainly in Italy), hotels and restau-
rants, retail trade, domestic work and agriculture (except in Portugal). In
many of these sectors, immigrants benefit from the seasonal nature of some
activities – namely, tourism and agriculture. Data analyses confirm that
newly arrived migrants are mainly absorbed into the least protected seg-
ments of the labour market, those that are normally rejected by natives.
Migrants are also often overqualified for the jobs they perform, due to their
relatively high educational backgrounds. Finally, they are commonly over-
exposed to precarious labour arrangements, including temporary contracts
and unemployment risks.
Fourth, migration policies exhibit some similarities in terms of their gen-
eral evolution and objectives, but many differences also result from differ-
ing institutional contexts. The core resemblances are attributable to the
similar path adopted by most of their policy approaches. All four countries
first began to deal with administrative norms related to the entry and resi-
dence of foreigners, mainly as a result of EU accession requirements in the
cases of Greece, Portugal and Spain. They then sought stricter controls and
rigorous enforcement when inflows began to increase. Over time, they
devised ways to manage labour migration, especially when immigration
became widespread, and used procedures that varied from invitation
schemes to labour quotas. In later stages, they developed approaches to
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
137

integration, whether at the national, regional or local level. And finally, in
every case, the Southern European countries sporadically engaged in regu-
larisation processes in order to regulate ex post what they were unable to
regulate ex ante. The timing and concrete expression of these policy initia-
tives were, however, very different from country to country, and reveal
specific institutional structures and a particular political context.
Fifth, integration outcomes are generally limited, although prospects
vary from case to case. Substantial evidence confirms that, aside from rap-
id insertion into the labour market, much needs to be done in order to
achieve successful integration. The labour insertion process itself is also
confined to the least protected and least desired segments of the labour
market, leading to what may be termed a situation of structural exclusion
(Calavita 2005). However, increases in the duration of stays (many immi-
grants face harsh working conditions in earlier stages, only to later enjoy
upward mobility (Chiswick 1978)), insertion into social networks (either of
fellow foreign citizens, other foreigners or of nationals) and support from
third sector organisations and other sources of political assistance have led
and may continue to lead to situational improvement.
The questions to be asked are as follows: Why have all these processes
evolved like this, and why did similarities arise so frequently among the
Southern European countries? Moreover, why does the immigration experi-
ence in Southern Europe differ so markedly from the one of the ‘old’
European host countries? A set of explanatory variables can thus be added
into the discussion.
The first factor has to do with the timing of inflows. Despite differences
in rhythm and the inherent non-linearity of the migration process, it can be
argued that all Southern European countries bear the same historical im-
print in their immigration experience. To use other terminology, they are
affected by the same ‘generation effect’ (see chapter 2 in this volume).
They all have witnessed periods of strong immigration growth and have
had to deal with their outcomes after the 1980s – a period characterised by
deindustrialisation, liberalisation of the labour markets and deregulation of
all advanced economies. This means that the regulation of migration – i.e.
the enactment of effective recruitment and control policies – and the pre-
vention of integration deficits would always be of utmost difficulty, as
recent immigration trends within many other global contexts confirm.
The second factor is related to the migration cycle. In all Southern
European cases, immigration flows are relatively recent and display a simi-
lar demographic pattern. Most of the inflows comprise young adults. Only
now are the immigrants’ offspring beginning to be statistically significant,
either by means of ‘1.5 generation’ immigrants (children who arrived early
in their lives) or second-generation immigrants (children born in the host
countries). In this way, Southern European countries are all affected by the
same ‘age effect’ (see chapter 2 in this volume). The impacts of immigrants
138
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

on the welfare system are still generally positive (they are net contributors,
since they are mostly absorbed into the labour force, but this may change
in the future) and the integration-related issues that pertain to second-gener-
ation immigrants are only now coming to the fore (and they will ultimately
challenge the prospects for integration).
The third factor is labour demand. In all Southern European countries,
low fertility and demographic ageing are responsible for a shortage of
labour force, leading to diminishing emigration and increasing immigration
(see chapter 1 in this volume). Moreover, a vast labour-intensive economic
sector exists in these countries: it is sometimes linked to traditional activ-
ities or to new types of demand. This is the case of agriculture, construc-
tion, some manufacturing industries, hotels and restaurants (often related to
tourism) and domestic work. In all these sectors, foreign manpower substi-
tutes for native manpower – as is exemplified by the case of domestic
work, a sector which has long been in existence, but which is now affected
by a decreasing native labour supply. During recent decades, job creation
in these sectors was vast, a phenomenon due to the high rates of economic
growth during part of this period. The strong labour demand for immi-
grants is also related, in many ways, to the extent of the informal economy.
Although informal arrangements are now part and parcel of all advanced
economies, comparative studies show that Southern European countries are
among those with higher levels of informality. This is a key contextual
consideration to be made in explaining the endemic presence of irregular
immigrants.
The fourth factor results from socio-economic structures or regimes (see
chapter 2). One of the main variables is the type of welfare state. Although
there is no consensus about what a ‘Southern European’ type of welfare
entails, there are a number of commonalities. The ‘conservative model’
adopted by some authors (Esping-Andersen 1990; Sciortino 2004) attrib-
utes many welfare obligations directly to families, does not include the
direct provision of all welfare services (using instead the principle of mon-
etary transfers to the households) and protects the already employed exten-
sively. The ‘Southern European model’ adopted by other authors (Ferrera
1996) stresses the importance of private-public partnerships and clientel-
ism. All these traits, some of which are not specific to these countries, help
explain the demand for immigration in some sectors (for example, given
the rapid demographic ageing, caring for the elderly within the household
is a fast-growing immigration recruitment sector) and the segmentation of
the labour market (leading to the co-existence of protected and non-
protected segments). If we add to all this the difficulties faced by law
enforcement in Southern European states, we can also explain the wide-
spread acceptance of informal and irregular situations that are common to
natives and foreigners alike.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
139

Another important element of the socio-economic regimes is the organi-
sation of civil society. Again, this helps explain some immigration and pol-
icy trends. The growing presence of women in the labour market explains
part of the immigrant recruitment trends for the domestic and care sector.
Increased levels of education and, more generally, social expectations
among the domestic youth explain their shunning of the bottom sectors of
the labour market. The work of several NGOs demonstrates the support
given to immigrants and the improvement of their integration prospects,
even in the absence of adequate governmental policies. The importance of
the Catholic Church in all countries, but Greece also, demonstrates the
strength of the pro-immigrant coalition. The presence of active trade unions
is a relevant variable, since it is directly related to the co-existence of well-
protected sectors of the labour force and the comparatively less protected
‘immigration jobs’ (although unions have sometimes played a dual role, as
they also have campaigned for immigrants’ rights). The power of individu-
al employers and employers’ organisations explains the frequent use of
irregular workforce, labour exploitation and lobbying for pro-immigration
policies. All these elements are linked to the modes of immigrants’ incor-
poration into society and, also, to the making of immigration policies
(Zincone 2006). Last but not least, integration into the EU is an obvious
factor directly constraining national immigration policies.
The fifth factor involves the dominant public perceptions and attitudes
towards immigrants. Here again some similarities arise between the
Southern countries, although differences seem to prevail. The importance
of this factor is linked to the practical acceptance of immigrants in daily
life, which affects their integration prospects, as well as to the role of polit-
ical parties, which often makes immigration a decisive politicised element
in modern democracies. Public opinion seems generally divided in
Southern European countries. Some indicators confirm the public accept-
ance of immigration, while others suggest fear and concern. Past colonial
and historical links, specific languages and culture, and various stereotypes
add to the complexity already inherent in this field, making it impossible
to generalise the situations of different countries and immigrant groups. All
in all, perceptions and attitudes constitute a dependent and an independent
variable – as occurs with other factors mentioned earlier. They evolve in a
dynamic way, affecting and being affected by other variables.
In sum, it can be argued that a Southern European model of immigration
does exist, as was supported by research during the 1990s and early 2000s
(see e.g. King 2000). This model encompasses many similar traits, factors
and outcomes, although specific national frameworks make a difference.
Looking at the national level, for example, the various timings and charac-
teristics of inflows have been accompanied by various timings and charac-
teristics of immigration policies. A point that must be stressed is that this
model is dynamic in the sense that new dimensions are continuously
140
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

arising (for example, the second generation), new social frameworks are
built (for example, evolving social attitudes) and new policies are enacted.
An issue that merits further investigation is the effect of the current eco-
nomic recession on migration trends (Martin 2009). It is well known that
previous recessions have reshaped the world map of migration, and unex-
pected outcomes could now arise in the Southern European context.
Another issue deserving scrutiny is the possibility of this model being en-
larged to other newly expanding economies in Europe, such as Ireland and
Finland (as well as other Southern European countries, including Malta,
Cyprus and Slovenia (see King & Thomson 2008)).
Compared to the other groups of immigration countries examined in this
book, the Southern European experience seems to be rather different from
the ‘old’ immigration countries. The timing of inflows, the position in the
migration cycle, the level and type of labour demand, the socio-economic
structures, the public perception and the immigration policies are all signif-
icantly different in those contexts. Among other consequences, these differ-
ences seem to limit the prospects for a common policy approach, including
a common EU policy – despite the long-term accumulated efforts in this
direction (see chapters 11 and 12 in this volume). However, it may be
argued that part of the framework in which immigration took place in the
South is similar to the one involving the ‘recent’ or ‘future’ immigration
countries in CEE. This is the case, for example, of the new type of inflows
in the globalisation era and the overall trend for deregulation. In this sense,
some traits of the Southern experience may replicate to the East, adding to
the overall constraints that result from a common EU membership.
Notwithstanding national and contextual singularities, immigration has
always constituted a major source of social change in Europe. This was
also the case of Southern Europe. In recent years immigrants, native popu-
lations, civil society and governments have struggled to adapt to a new
environment, which is now structural and will influence many years to
come. Immigration became part and parcel of Southern European societies.
While immigrants struggled to make a living in this new environment,
local populations and institutions sought a way of dealing with immigra-
tion and its consequences. In a sense, it was not only immigrants who were
looking for Southern Europe. It was also Southern Europe looking for
itself.
Notes
1
This chapter results from the work carried out by the IDEA Southern European re-
search teams in 2007 through 2009. The group benefited from the overall discus-
sions of the project, intended to provide a comparison between North-Western,
Southern and Central and Eastern European immigration experiences. Further work
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
141

was based on a detailed comparison between the Southern cases, which culminated
in a workshop held in Lisbon in January 2009, where the first version of the current
chapter was discussed. Most of the source information and further details about
each country may be found in the national country reports elaborated during the
project: Triandafyllidou and Maroufof (2009) for Greece; Bonifazi, Heins, Strozza
and Vitiello (2009) for Italy; Sabino and Peixoto (2009) for Portugal; Arango and
Finotelli (2009) for Spain. Most of the work was carried out before the advent of the
global economic crisis in 2008.
2
The purpose of Russell King and Mark Thomson (2008) is to enlarge the scope of
the analysis to other Southern European countries, namely, Malta, Cyprus and
Slovenia.
3
The Fordist type of capitalism refers to the period characterised by mass production
and mass consumption that predominated in Western economies between the end
of World War II and the oil crisis of the mid-1970s. This period was characterised
by high rates of economic growth, mostly due to the manufacturing industry, stable
labour relations and state intervention in the welfare domain.
4
For the main sources on international migration in Southern Europe, see Cangiano
and Strozza (2008).
5
Estimates of total foreign population, including the illegal component, are reported
in some cases.
6
Most of the immigrants came from the former colonies in Africa (Paı´ses Africanos
de Lı´ngua Oficial Portuguesa, PALOP) and from Brazil.
7
Recent research on this phenomenon demonstrated that countries like Germany,
whose governmental authorities often denied the existence of irregular migration in
their country, have also had to deal with a certain degree of irregular migration (Alt
1999; Scho¨nwa¨lder, Vogel & Sciortino 2004).
8
The data used for this estimate did not take into account the ‘depuration’ process of
the municipal register and might contain a certain degree of overestimation.
9
The Schengen Agreement became operative in 1995 in Spain and Portugal and only
in 1998 in Italy and Greece.
10
Estimates indicate that since 1973 Western European countries have regularised
about 4 million immigrants, 3 million of them in Southern European countries
(Papadopoulou 2005; MPG/Weil 2004).
11
In 2005, the German and the Dutch governments, for instance, sharply criticised
the Spanish regularisation, fearing an ‘invasion’ of regularised immigrants from
Spain to other European countries and blaming the Spanish government for not
having informed the other EU member states in time about the process.
12
In Italy, we should add to the mentioned processes the special flows decree approved
in 2006, which enlarged the quota for 2006 up to the number of applications re-
ceived. The rationale behind this decision was a belief that most applications had
been filed for workers already living irregularly in Italy, so that the increase of the
contingent would work as a de facto regularisation programme. In Portugal, legisla-
tion approved in 2007 also allowed a special type of regularisation scheme, this time
based on an ongoing individual approach.
13
The Spanish Regulation Act of 2004 assumes the risk of a certain volume of irregu-
lar migration, introducing the arraigo, which is an individual regularisation and an
ongoing regularisation system. The Portuguese immigration law of 2007 contains
some mechanisms allowing the legalisation of formerly irregular situations. These
include, among others, stable labour activity and social integration indicators, such
as the attendance of basic education by children of immigrants already born in the
country.
142
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

14
The principle was set in 1990, although quotas would only be defined in 1995 and
enforced in 1998.
15
This aspect is even more important in the case of domestic service, where trust is
an essential condition for employment.
16
The agricultural sector seems to represent an exception.
17
Nearly 16,000 irregular migrants were apprehended upon arrival in Lampedusa in
2006. There were approximately 23,000 such arrivals during the first eight months
of 2008, while numbers seemed to rise in early 2009 as 2,120 people were inter-
cepted during the first two months of 2009, compared to 1,650 during the first two
months of 2008.
18
This estimate is provided by the CLANDESTINO research project database, pub-
lished on 20 February 2009 at http://clandestino.eliamep.gr/category/clandestino-
database-on-irregular-migration.
19
Both media attention to irregular arrivals by sea and the rising numbers of such ar-
rivals have led to the more active involvement of the FRONTEX agency in the patrol-
ling of the southern EU borders. Following the European Council Meeting on 14-15
December 2006, FRONTEX, together with member states in the region, was invited
to, as soon as possible, establish a permanent Coastal Patrol Network at their south-
ern maritime borders.
20
The following paragraphs only describe integration policies, not integration out-
comes. For a comprehensive view of immigrant integration patterns in Southern
Europe, see e.g. King, Lazaridis and Tsardanidis (2000) and VV.AA. (2004).
21
The first national integration plan in Spain dates back to 1994. It was, however,
barely effective.
22
The High Commissioner for Immigration and Ethnic Minorities was a governmen-
tal position created in 1996. It was the basis for the High Commission for
Immigration and Ethnic Minorities (ACIME) in 2002, which in 2007 was desig-
nated as the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue
(ACIDI).
23
www.integrationindex.eu.
24
The situation in Spain and Portugal is complex, since the law combines some traits
of restrictiveness and permissiveness. In Spain, the application for citizenship for
Latin Americans is possible after two years of legal residence. However, the two-year
criterion is not clearly related to ethnic descent: besides Latin America, citizens from
Portugal, Andorra, the Philippines and Equatorial Guinea may also apply after two
years. In Portugal, the law was modified in 2006, easing the residence constraints
for acquiring Portuguese citizenship by naturalisation and granting the same rights
to citizens coming from Portuguese-speaking and other countries. This has pro-
duced notable results, since the number of valid requirements to get citizenship al-
most quadrupled between 2007 and 2008, increasing from approximately 9,000 to
35,000.
25
Referred to in the Introduction of this volume.
References
Alt, J. (1999), Illegal in Deutschland: Forschungssituation zur Lage illegaler Migranten in
Leipzig. Karlsruhe: Von Loeper.
Aparicio Wilhelmi, M. & E. Roig Moles (2006), ‘La entrada por razones laborales y el trabajo
de los extranjeros: El progresivo desarrollo de un sistema ordenado de entrada laboral’, in
E. Aja & J. Arango (eds.), Veinte años de inmigración en España: Perspectivas júridicas
y sociológica (1985-2004), 145-174. Barcelona: CIDOB.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
143

Arango, J. (2003), ‘Is there a Southern European model of immigration?’, paper presented at
the European Population Conference, Warsaw, August 2003.
Arango, J. (2005), ‘La inmigración en España: Demografía, sociología y economía’, in R. del
Aguila (ed.), Inmigración: Un desafío para España, 247-273. Madrid: Pablo Iglesias.
Arango, J. & C. Finotelli (2009), ‘Past and future challenges of a Southern European migra-
tion regime: The Spanish case’, IDEA Working Papers 8 http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/
pliki/WP8_Spain.pdf.
Arango, J. & C. Finotelli (2009), ‘Spain’, in M. Baldwin-Edwards & A. Kraler (eds.),
Regularisations in Europe: Study on practices in the area of the regularisation of illegally
staying third-country nationals in the member states of the EU, 443-457. Brussels: Pallas
Publications.
Arango, J. & M. Jachimowicz (2005), ‘Regularization and immigration policy reform in
Spain’, in F. Heckmann & T. Wunderlich (eds.), Amnesty for illegal migrants? 79-88.
Bamberg: Europäisches Forum für Migrationsstudien.
Baganha, M.I. (ed.) (1997), Immigration in Southern Europe. Oeiras: Celta.
Baganha, M.I. (1998), ‘Immigrant involvement in the informal economy: The Portuguese
case’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 24 (2): 367-385.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1997), ‘The emerging European immigration regime: Some reflections
on implications for Southern Europe’, Journal of Common Market Studies 35 (4): 497-
519.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1999), ‘Where free markets reign: Aliens in the twilight zone’, in J.
Arango & M. Baldwin-Edwards (eds.), Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern
Europe, 1-15. London: Frank Cass.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & J. Arango (eds.) (1999), Immigrants and the informal economy in
Southern Europe. London: Frank Cass.
Birindelli, A.M. (1990), ‘Aspetti quantitativi della presenza straniera in Italia’, in Labos (ed.),
La presenza straniera in Italia. Rome: Edizioni Ter.
Blangiardo, G.C. (1997), ‘La dimensione quantitativa’, in ISMU (ed.), Secondo rapporto sulle
migrazioni, 1996. Milan: Franco Angeli.
Blangiardo, G.C. (1998), ‘Relazione di sintesi sugli aspetti quantitativi della presenza straniera
irregolare’, in Ministero dell’Interno (ed.), Relazione sulla presenza straniera in Italia e
sulle situazioni di irregolarità. Centro stampa microfilm.
Blangiardo, G.C. (ed.) (2004), L’immigrazione straniera in Lombardia: La terza indagine re-
gionale, Rapporto 2003. Milan: Franco Angeli.
Blangiardo, G.C. (2006), ‘La presenza straniera in Italia’, in ISMU (ed.), Undicesimo rapporto
sulle migrazioni 2005. Milan: Franco Angeli.
Blangiardo, G.C. (ed.) (2008), L’immigrazione straniera in Lombardia: La settima indagine
regionale. Milan: Osservatorio Regionale per l’integrazione e la multietnicità; Franco
Angeli.
Blangiardo,
G.C.
(2009),
‘Gli
aspetti
quantitativi
della
presenza
straniera
in
Italia:
Aggiornamenti e prospettive’, in Fondazione ISMU (ed.), Quattordicesimo rapporto sulle
migrazioni 2008. Milan: Franco Angeli.
Blangiardo, G.C. & M.L. Tanturri (2006), ‘La presenza straniera in Italia’, in G.C. Blangiardo
& P. Farina (eds.), Il Mezzogiorno dopo la grande regolarizzazione: Immagini e problem-
atiche dell’immigrazione, vol. III. Milan: Franco Angeli.
Bonifazi, C. (2008), ‘Evolution of regional patterns of international migration in Europe’, in
C. Bonifazi, M. Okólski, J. Schoorl & P. Simon (eds.), International migration in
Europe: New trends and new methods of analysis, 107-128. IMISCOE Research Series.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Bonifazi, C., F. Heins, S. Strozza & M. Vitiello (2009), ‘The Italian transition from an emigra-
tion to immigration country’, IDEA Working Papers 5 http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/
WP5_Italy.pdf.
144
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

Brochmann, G. (1993), ‘Control in immigration policies: A closed Europe in the making’, in
R. King (ed.), The new geography of European migrations, 100-115. London: Belhaven.
Cachón, L. (2007), ‘La experiencia internacional en regularizaciones extraordinarias de inmi-
grantes indocumentados: España en el modelo del Sur de Europa’, Madrid (unpublished
manuscript).
Calavita, K. (2005), Immigrants at the margins: Law, race, and exclusion in Southern Europe.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cangiano, A. & S. Strozza (2008), ‘Foreign immigration in Southern European receiving
countries: New evidence from national data sources’, in C. Bonifazi, M. Okólski, J.
Schoorl & P. Simon (eds.), International migration in Europe: New trends and new meth-
ods of analysis, 153-178. IMISCOE Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press.
Carfagna, M. (2002), ‘I sommersi e i sanati: Le regolarizzazioni degli immigrati in Italia’, in
A. Colombo & G. Sciortino (eds.), Stranieri in Italia: Assimilati ed esclusi, 53-91.
Bologna: Il Mulino.
Carling, J. (2007) ‘Migration control and migrant fatalities at the Spanish-African borders’,
International Migration Review 41 (2): 316-343.
Cebolla Boado, H. & A. González Ferrer (2008), La inmigración en España (2000-2007): Del
control de flujos a la integración de inmigrantes. Madrid: CEPS.
Chiswick, B. R. (1978), ‘The effect of Americanization on the earnings of foreign-born men’,
Journal of Political Economy 86 (5): 897-921.
Coslovi, L. (2007), ‘Brevi note sull’immigrazione via mare in Italia e in Spagna’. www.cespi.
it/PDF/mig-mare.pdf.
De Bruycker, P. & J. Apap (2000), ‘Les regularisations des étrangers illegaux dans l’Union
européenne’, Brussels.
Emke-Poulopoulou, I. (2007), Η Μετνστευτική Πρόκληση (The Migratory Challenge).
Athens: Papazisis.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990), The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fakiolas, R. (2000) ‘Migration and unregistered labour in the Greek economy’, in R. King, G.
Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in Southern Europe,
57-78. London: Macmillan.
Ferrera, M. (1996), ‘Il modello sud-europeo di welfare state’, Rivista Italiana Di Scienza
Politica 26 (1): 67-101.
Finotelli, C. & G. Sciortino (2006), ‘Looking for the European soft underbelly: Visa policies
and amnesties for irregular migrants in Germany and Italy’, in S. Baringhorst, J.F.
Hollifield & U. Hunger (eds.), Herausforderung Migration: Perspektiven der vergleichen-
den Politikwissenschaft, 249-280. Munster: LIT Verlag.
Finotelli, C. & G. Sciortino (2009), ‘The importance of being Southern: The making of poli-
cies of immigration control in Italy’, European Journal of Migration and Law 11 (2):
119-138.
González-Enríquez, C. & A. Triandafyllidou (2009), ‘Comparing the new hosts of Southern
Europe’, European Journal of Migration and Law 11 (2). Special issue.
Iosifides, T. & R. King (1996), ‘Recent immigration to Southern Europe: The socio-economic
and labour market contexts’, Journal of Area Studies 6: 70-94.
Istat (1991), ‘Gli immigrati presenti in Italia. Una stima per l’anno 1989’, Note e Relazioni 1,
Rome.
King, R. (2000), ‘Southern Europe in the changing global map of migration’, in R. King, G.
Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in Southern Europe,
1-26. London: Macmillan.
King, R. (ed.) (2002), ‘Migration into Southern Europe: New trends and new patterns’, Studi
Emigrazione/Migration Studies 39 (145). Special issue.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
145

King, R. & K. Rybaczuk (1993), ‘Southern Europe and the international division of labour:
From emigration to immigration’, in R. King (ed.), The new geography of European mi-
grations, 175-206. London: Belhaven.
King, R. & M. Thomson (2008), ‘The Southern European model of immigration: Do the cases
of Malta, Cyprus and Slovenia fit?’, Journal of Balkan and Near Eastern Studies 10 (3):
265-291.
King, R. & R. Black (eds.) (1997), Southern Europe and the new immigrations. Brighton:
Sussex Academic Press.
King, R., G. Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.) (2000), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in
Southern Europe. London: Macmillan.
Lianos, T., K. Kanellopoulos, M. Gregou, E. Gemi & P. Papakonstantinou (2008), Estimate of
the size of foreigners residing illegally in Greece. Athens: IMEPO. www.imepo.gr/docu-
ments/AENEAS_IMEPO_ RESEARCH_.2008_GR_000.pdf.
Lusa (2008), ‘Regularização ao abrigo da Lei de Estrangeiros “vai continuar”’, 4 April 2008.
www.acidi.gov.pt/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=2484.
Maroukis, T. (2009), ‘Greece’, research report prepared for the CLANDESTINO Project.
http://clandestino.eliamep.gr/category/irregular-migration-in-the-eu/country-reports.
Martin, P. (2009), ‘The recession and migration: Alternative scenarios’, International
Migration Institute Working Papers 13, Oxford.
Martin, P., S. Martin & P. Weil (2006), Managing migration: The promise of cooperation.
Laham: Lexington Books.
Massey, D. (1999), ‘International Migration at the dawn of the twenty-first century: The role
of the State’, Population and Development Review 25 (2): 303-322.
Migration Policy Group (MPG) (with the assistance of P. Weil) (2004), ‘Managing irregular
migration’, Policy Brief 4.
Mingione, E. & F. Quassoli (2000), ‘The participation of immigrants in the underground econ-
omy in Italy’, in R. King, G. Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress?
Migration in Southern Europe, 27-56. London: Macmillan.
Natale, M. (1986), ‘Fonti e metodi di rilevazione della popolazione straniera in Italia.
Contributi del dibattito in corso e nuovi elementi conoscitivi’, Studi Emigrazione 23: 82-
83.
Natale, M. & S. Strozza (1997), Gli immigrati stranieri in Italia: Quanti sono, chi sono, come
vivono? Bari: Cacucci Editore.
Niessen, J., T. Huddleston, L. Citron, A. Geddes & D. Jacobs (2007), Migrant integration pol-
icy index. Brussels: British Council and Migration Policy Group.
OECD (2006), International migration outlook, Annual Report. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2008), International migration outlook, Annual Report. Paris: OECD.
Pajares, M. (2006), La inserción laboral de la población inmigrada en Cataluña: Efectos del
proceso de normalización 2005. Barcelona: Ceres (Estudis 15).
Papadopoulou, A. (2005), ‘Regularisation programmes: An effective instrument of migration
policy?’, Global Migration Perspectives 33.
Pastore, F. (2008), ‘Modes of migration regulation and control in Italy’, in J. Doomernik &
M. Jandl (eds.), Modes of migration regulation and control in Europe. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Pastore, F., P. Monzini & G. Sciortino (2006), ‘Schengen’s soft underbelly? Irregular migra-
tion and human smuggling across land and sea borders to Italy’, International Migration
44 (4): 95-119.
Pellegrino, A. (2004), Migration from Latin America to Europe: Trends and policy challenges.
Geneva: International Organization for Migration, Migration Research Series 16.
Recaño, J. & A. Domingo (2005), ‘Factores sociodemograficos y territoriales de inmigración
irregular en España’, paper presented at the XXV International Population Conference,
Tours, 18-23 July 2005.
146
JOÃO PEIXOTO ET AL.

Reyneri, E. (1998), ‘The role of the underground economy in irregular migration to Italy:
Cause or effect?’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 24 (2): 313-331.
Reyneri, E. & M. Baganha (2001), ‘Migration and the labour market in Southern Europe’,
IMIS-Beiträge 17: 33-53.
Ribas-Mateos, N. (ed.) (2004), Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 30 (6). Special issue.
Ritaine, E. (ed.) (2005), L’Europe du Sud face à l’immigration: Politique de l’Étranger. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.
Sabino, C. & J. Peixoto (2009), ‘Immigration, the labour market and policy in Portugal:
Trends and prospects’, IDEA Working Papers 6 http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/
WP6_Portugal.pdf.
Schneider, F. & R. Klinglmair (2004), ‘Shadow economies around the world: What do we
know?’, IZA Discussion Paper 1043, Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labour.
Schönwälder, K., D. Vogel & G. Sciortino (2004), ‘Migration und Illegalität in Deutschland’,
AKI-Forschungsbilanz 1, Berlin.
Sciortino, G. (2004), ‘Immigration in a Mediterranean welfare state: The Italian experience in
a comparative perspective’, Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis 6 (2): 111-129.
Strozza, S. (2004), ‘Estimates of illegal foreigners in Italy: A review of the literature’,
International Migration Review 38 (1): 309-331.
Teixeira, A. & R. Albuquerque (2005), ‘Active civic participation of immigrants in Portugal’,
POLITIS Project Report. www.politis-europe.uni-oldenburg.de/9812.html.
Triandafyllidou, A. & M. Maroufof (with the collaboration of M. Nikolova) (2009)
‘Immigration towards Greece at the eve of the 21st century. A critical assessment’, IDEA
Working Papers 4 http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP4_Greece.pdf.
Zelinsky, W. (1971), ‘The hypothesis of the mobility transition’, The Geographical Review 61
(2): 219-249.
Zincone, G. (ed.) (2000a), Primo rapporto sull’integrazione degli immigrati in Italia.
Bologna: Il Mulino.
Zincone, G. (ed.) (2000b), Secondo rapporto sull’integrazione degli immigrati in Italia.
Bologna: Il Mulino.
Zincone, G. (2006), ‘The making of policies: Immigration and immigrants in Italy’, Journal
of Ethnic and Migration Studies 32 (3): 347-375.
IMMIGRANTS, MARKETS AND POLICIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE
147


6
The Southern European ‘model of immigration’
A sceptical view
Martin Baldwin-Edwards
6.1
Introduction
Chapter 5 in this volume details a Southern European ‘model of immigra-
tion’ across Portugal, Spain, Italy and Greece with five empirical similar-
ities and five structural or causal patterns. This line of theoretical thinking
continues a tradition attempting to identify, variously, an immigration poli-
cy regime (Baldwin-Edwards 1991, 1997), immigrants’ location within a
‘southern’ capitalist economy (King & Konzhodic 1995; King & Black
1997; Baldwin-Edwards & Arango 1999) or within southern societies
(Iosofides & King 1999) or more generally a ‘southern model’ of immigra-
tion (Baldwin-Edwards 1999; King 2000). It is perhaps ironic that as one
of the participants in these earlier analytic developments, I should now
advocate scepticism about the utility or even validity of such a model. To
this end, I adopt a critique of the specifications of the framework advo-
cated by João Peixoto et al. in the previous chapter. I also suggest some
missing variables that, in my view, should be central to such an explana-
tory framework. The inclusion of these variables not only reveals major
differences across the Southern European region, but also casts doubt on
some of the empirical assumptions underlying the common framework. I
conclude with some thoughts on the relevance of the important hypotheses
advanced by Joaquín Arango in chapter 2.
6.2
The explanatory framework
This section examines each of the five structural commonalities that make
up the framework proposed for the common Southern European pattern.

6.2.1
Evolution of migration flows into the four countries
As countries of emigration in the post-war period, it is indeed true that all
four had a ‘migration turnaround’, as originally identified in the model pro-
posed by Russell King, Anthony Fielding and Richard Black (1997). What
is not so clear is a similarity of migration flows. The ISOPLAN estimates
of immigrant presence in the late 1980s had already put Greece as the lead-
ing per capita recipient at 2.8 per cent of total population, followed by Italy
at 2.6 per cent and Spain at 2.0 per cent (Werth & Korner 1991). The year
1991 saw massive irregular inflows from Albania into Greece and, to a
much lesser extent, Italy. It was not until the turn of the century that com-
parable flows arrived in the other countries; yet, Greece was the last of the
four actually to pass an immigration law (1991) and to initiate regularisa-
tion of irregular immigrants (1997). The differences between the four coun-
tries have increased in recent years, with immigration into Portugal dimin-
ishing and emigration resuming, while Greece has had continued irregular
inflows both from Albania and also via its eastern borders. Merely in terms
of per capita immigration levels, it is now difficult to find comparability in
the different national patterns, in contrast to the situation a decade ago.
6.2.2
Demographic characteristics of immigrants
Chapter 5’s authors posit a similarity of the main demographic characteris-
tics of immigrants, notwithstanding vastly differing nationalities: most
notably, the prevalence of young adults is specified. An exception is noted
in the case of European Union retirement migrants in Spain and Portugal.
It is true that the Southern European countries show a younger age profile
than those in the North, with more than 60 per cent of their known immi-
grant populations aged 15-44. Nevertheless, there are different trends: Italy
has apparently had a decline in the young working-age bracket, from 70
per cent in 1991 down to 62 per cent in 2007. Greece, Portugal and Spain
continue to increase their share of that age group, reaching around 65 per
cent in the latest data. Italian data also show that its increasing immigrant
age cohort of 45-59 is around 55 per cent female, unlike Spain and
Portugal where it is under 50 per cent and Greece where it is 51 per cent.
In the child age cohort 0-14, Italy has a very high proportion, amounting
to 19 per cent of its immigrants, whereas Spain has only 14 per cent.
These data suggest that Italy is in a more advanced phase of the migration
transition, with family formation and the second generation appearing more
prominently. This suggestion is reinforced by the observation of differing
gender balances of immigrants, with Italy at 50.4 per cent female and the
others at 46 to 47 per cent; this is also partially explained by the greater
importance in Italy of older female migrants assisting with care of the
elderly.
150
MARTIN BALDWIN-EDWARDS

6.2.3
Labour market insertion
Although crude employment rates suggest that the southern countries are
very different from the EU average, with very high participation of immi-
grants in the labour market, detailed data from the Labour Force Survey
suggest more complex patterns. The role of immigrants in the different
labour markets shows a rather different picture for Portugal, where tradi-
tionally high native participation rates – especially of women – are accom-
panied by lower levels of immigration and a smaller increase in the educa-
tional levels of younger age cohorts (Domingo & Gil-Alonso 2007).
OECD data on employment also suggest a different pattern for Portugal,
where immigrants are over-represented in several sectors (education, social
services and administration) and not apparently in agriculture or manufac-
turing, as in the other three southern countries (OECD 2008a: Table I.10).
Looking at the phenomenon of ‘overqualification’, the OECD (using its
2000 census database) places Greece, Spain, Sweden, Italy and Denmark
as the countries with the highest rates of overqualified immigrant workers
(32% to 22%) with Portugal at 17 per cent (OECD 2008b: Chart 6.1).
Ethnic entrepreneurship and self-employment also appear to have very dif-
ferent extents across the four southern countries, with similar rates between
immigrants and natives in Spain and Portugal, but a very low rate in
Greece and a high one in Italy (Baldwin-Edwards 2002: 14). Although
there are some commonalities of labour market role and especially the sig-
nificance of the informal economy, immigrants across the entire EU are
concentrated in construction, services and domestic work: these are hardly
defining features of the southern economies’ utilisation of immigrant la-
bour. In particular, Portugal appears not to fit the Mediterranean pattern
well at all.
6.2.4
Evolution of immigration policies
Aside from a common pattern of dependence on post hoc regularisation of
irregular migrants as the main mechanism for immigration recruitment
(Baldwin-Edwards & Kraler 2009), it is not clear that there is so much
resemblance in policy. The requirements of Schengen clearly shaped the le-
gal texts of all southern countries, especially in the absence of traditions of
immigration management (Baldwin-Edwards 1997), but the underlying ob-
jectives do not appear to have been identical. Spain and Portugal followed
a fairly open policy towards immigrant recruitment; Italy from 1998 to
2002, had innovative policies on migration for job-seeking (Pastore
2008a); Greece passed its 1991 law explicitly to prevent migration flows
and to facilitate mass deportations (Baldwin-Edwards & Fakiolas 1999).
Subsequent developments saw some convergence towards restrictionism –
which, in the Italian case, one commentator associates explicitly with
THE SOUTHERN EUROPEAN ‘MODEL OF IMMIGRATION’
151

centre-right governments (Pastore 2008b). Such a policy linkage did not
occur in the case of Greece, where the 2001 law – despite the introduction
of a theoretical labour invitation scheme by a centre-left government – had
no practical consequences for the recruitment of labour migrants.
A more detailed examination of specific aspects of migration manage-
ment is needed to assess ‘immigration policy’. These sub-areas of policy
include labour recruitment, management of political asylum, family migra-
tion and family reunification, regularisations, deportations and expulsions,
residence permit policies, access to sub-areas of the labour market, policies
for the integration of immigrants, access to citizenship, inter alia. Such an
examination is rarely performed, yet is the only valid mechanism by which
immigration policies can be compared. Without having the time or space
here to carry out such a procedure, I feel confident in asserting that Greece
is an outlier of the model proposed, that Portugal is also a poor fit, with
some considerable similarities between Spain and Italy notwithstanding
some important differences.
6.2.5
Integration outcomes
Despite several decades of immigration management, it is indeed the case
that policies for the integration of migrants are poorly developed in
Southern Europe (Vermeulen 2004; Baldwin-Edwards 2004a). Equally,
measurement of outcomes is rarely made and policies are difficult to evalu-
ate. Nevertheless, some patterns can be observed. First, where there is a
tradition of local state management (as in Spain and Italy), policies for im-
migrant welfare and social integration are frequently to be found, although
they are non-uniform and uncoordinated (Zincone 1999; Zincone &
Caponio 2006). Such policies are only now being developed in Greece,
and only in Athens. Secondly, the Migration Policy Group has repeatedly
carried out evaluations of legislation and policies relevant to the integration
of migrants, with fairly consistent results over a number of years (MPG
2007). The 2007 report ranked Greece at position 25 (out of 28), while
Portugal is second, Italy seventh and Spain tenth. The 2010 report (MIPEX
2011) raised Greece to sixteenth place, leaving Portugal at second, Italy
eighth and Spain tenth. However, MIPEX does not measure outcomes but
policy developments, and Greece’s higher ranking was achieved on the
basis of legislation for voting rights and citizenship acquisition: these have
now been blocked by the Supreme Administrative Court of Greece for al-
leged non-conformity with the constitution. In reality, little progress has
been made.
Thus, again we can find Greece to be an outlier of the model, Portugal
looking a little different from Spain and Italy, and fairly strong similarities
between Italy and Spain.
152
MARTIN BALDWIN-EDWARDS

6.3
The ‘missing’ variables
To interpret both commonalities and differences, Peixoto et al. offer five
‘explanatory variables’: timing of inflows, stages of the migration cycle,
type of labour demand, socio-economic structures or regimes and indige-
nous perceptions of immigration. These variables actually partially repeat
the points made in sections 6.2.1, 6.2.2 and 6.2.3, while offering structural
differences across the region as an independent variable to account for na-
tional differences in policies and policy outcomes. I am not convinced of
the intellectual validity of this approach: either there are enough structural
similarities between the countries, or there are not.
Some specific structural differences are actually central to both policy
creation and outcomes. Among these, I would include the points outlined
in the following sections.
6.3.1
The role of local governance in policy development and
implementation
This appears as a crucial factor, especially in managing access of both reg-
ular and irregular migrants to healthcare and social services. The highly
devolved political structures of Italy and Spain have produced outcomes
more able to facilitate the integration of immigrants, although with great
regional variation across the country. Portugal and Greece are reliant on
national political initiatives, with Portugal living up to the challenge and
Greece essentially failing to implement any meaningful policy.
6.3.2
The lack of a common experience of immigration across the region
The relative magnitudes of this have already been discussed in section
6.2.1; here, I address some major qualitative differences. Spain and Italy
show enough similarity to be taken together; Portugal, until 2002, had
almost exclusively post-colonial immigrants (Baganha 2009) with very dif-
ferent implications for their reception. In the 1990s, Greece experienced
several waves of Albanian mass irregular immigration, resulting in
Albanians forming some 70 per cent of the immigrant population; this had
serious implications relating to national identity and security, owing to
Greece’s
difficult
modern
Balkan
history
(Baldwin-Edwards
2004b;
Baldwin-Edwards & Apostolatou 2008). Thus, Portugal and Greece have
had very different experiences of immigration from those of Spain and
Italy.
THE SOUTHERN EUROPEAN ‘MODEL OF IMMIGRATION’
153

6.3.3
The role of NGOs and civil society
Although there is a common short history of NGOs in Southern Europe,
there is one major player – the Catholic Church. Along with CARITAS,
this has had an important effect on both practical support and social legiti-
mation of immigrants in Portugal, Spain and Italy. In Greece, on the other
hand, the Orthodox Church has no support system for immigrants (despite
its massive wealth) and has played almost no role in promoting social
acceptance of immigrants. The little social support for immigrants in
Greece comes mostly from international organisations such as Médecins
du Monde, IOM, UNHCR, amongst others, or from self-help immigrant
NGOs. Thus, Greece stands again as a complete misfit in the Southern
European paradigm.
6.3.4
The role of political ideology and political parties in immigration
policy development
As was pointed out in section 6.2.4, Italian immigration policies have ex-
hibited innovation and openness during centre-left periods of governance,
and closedness and increasing problems of irregularity during centre-right
periods. The same observation might also be made of Spanish policy, par-
ticularly with its more recent innovative policies. In the case of Greece,
policies passed under previous socialist administrations more closely
resemble those of the centre-right administrations in Spain and Italy,
reflecting the relatively minor role of political ideology in immigration pol-
icy and the more substantive one of bureaucratic traditions and interests
(Baldwin-Edwards & Fakiolas 1999). The recent blocking (on putative
constitutional grounds) of more progressive legislation in 2010 for the inte-
gration of immigrants confirms the unusual power of Greek bureaucracy
and courts vis-à-vis both central and local government. Thus far, the evi-
dence is clear that Greece is a misfit in the southern model on the basis of
this criterion, too.
6.4
Some conclusions
It remains an open question as to how broad a model should be in order
that it might have utility. The older literature naturally found the common-
alities of Southern Europe to be a convincing framework of analysis; some
of these are still pertinent, such as the size and weak regulation of (infor-
mal) employment. However, as Southern European countries have accumu-
lated more experience and techniques for the management of migration,
they have progressed from the relatively simple model that was implied in
154
MARTIN BALDWIN-EDWARDS

the older literature. With this progression, structural differences have be-
come more important, with increasing dissimilarity of outcomes.
Arango in this volume (chapter 2, section 2.2.1) posits some important
theoretical considerations concerning the grouping of countries. First, the
‘age effect’. Here, he emphasises the major difference between a society
composed of individual labour migrants and one consisting of families and
communities. The evidence is clear that family grouping in Southern
Europe has been extensive for over a decade. Thus, 54 per cent of immi-
grants in Greece were living in nuclear family arrangements according to
the 2001 Census, with Albanians in Athens at 67 per cent (Baldwin-
Edwards 2008: 12-14); in Spain in 2007, 56 per cent of immigrants were
recorded as living in such arrangements, with another 33 per cent in vari-
ous quasi-family units and only 11 per cent as individuals or in multi-
member households (INE 2009: Table 2.7). Similar patterns seem to pre-
vail in Italy and Portugal, although data are hard to find for any country.
Thus, we can question the claim that immigration into Southern Europe is
simple labour migration. Even data on the second generation are rarely col-
lected, with one estimate for Greece of 220,000 (20 to 30 per cent of immi-
grant stocks) making newspaper headlines (Baldwin-Edwards 2008: 38).
The ‘generation effect’, hypothesis number two in section 2.2.2, focuses
on the initial experience of immigration, leaving an imprint that shapes the
dominant approach to migration management. Certainly, this is very rele-
vant when examining the different experiences of immigration across the
region. Another distinctive feature, not previously mentioned, is the trau-
matic ‘exchange of populations’ between Greece and Turkey of 1922: else-
where, I argue that it is this that has shaped contemporary political and
popular perceptions of migration in Greece (Baldwin-Edwards & Aposto-
latou 2008).
Hypothesis number three in section 2.2.3 suggests that the experience of
forerunners exerts a marked influence on the behaviour of newcomers to
the immigration phenomenon. This hypothesis is in line with much theory
on policymaking – policy importation, policy imitations, transfers, etc.
However, there is scant empirical evidence to sustain it in the case of
Southern Europe. Certainly, the requisites of Schengen and the EU were
adopted in all the countries under consideration (Baldwin-Edwards 1997):
however, these are primarily legal in form and do not necessarily shape all
policy. Indeed, there is no EU policy on labour migration and national
management of that has been idiosyncratic and not derived from northern
practices. Equally, regularisations have emerged apparently endogenously
(Baldwin-Edwards & Kraler 2009), while those areas of EU weak regula-
tion, by means of directives, have hardly been readily embraced. In partic-
ular, family rights and long-term residence permits are poorly managed
across much of Southern Europe, although with Greece being the worst
case.
THE SOUTHERN EUROPEAN ‘MODEL OF IMMIGRATION’
155

Finally, hypothesis number four in section 2.2.4, looking at structural
characteristics, may turn out to be the most important. This – along with
hypothesis number two – actually explains the highly divergent grouping
of the traditional receiving countries of Northern Europe. It seems that it
will also explain, in a near-identical manner, the increasingly diverging pat-
terns across Southern Europe. Despite the major differences between North
and South, perhaps there is actually far more in common at an analytical
level than we had at first imagined.
References
Baganha, M. (2009), ‘Portugal’, in H. Fassmann, U. Reeger & W. Sievers (eds.), Statistics
and reality: Concepts and measurements of migration in Europe, 263-279. IMISCOE
Reports Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (2008), ‘Immigrants in Greece: Characteristics and issues of regional
distribution’, Mediterranean Migration Observatory Working Paper 10, Athens. www.
mmo.gr.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (2004a), ‘Immigration, immigrants and socialisation in Southern
Europe: Patterns, problems and contradistinctions’, in C. Inglessi, A. Lyberaki, H.
Vermeulen & G. J. van Wijngaarden (eds.), Immigration and integration in Northern ver-
sus Southern Europe, 11-24. Athens: Netherlands Institute in Athens.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (2004b), ‘Albanian emigration and the Greek labour market’, South-
East Europe Review 7(1): 51-66.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (2002), ‘Southern European labour markets and immigration: A struc-
tural and functional analysis’, Mediterranean Migration Observatory Working Paper 5,
Athens. www.mmo.gr.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1999), ‘Where free markets reign: Aliens in the twilight zone’, in M.
Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.), Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern
Europe. London: Routledge.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1997), ‘The emerging European immigration regime: Some reflections
on implications for Southern Europe’, Journal of Common Market Studies 35 (4): 497-
519.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1991), ‘Immigration after 1992’, Policy and Politics 19 (3): 199-211.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & J. Arango (eds.) (1999), Immigrants and the informal economy in
Southern Europe. London: Routledge.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & R. Fakiolas (1999), ‘Greece: The contours of a fragmented policy re-
sponse’, in M. Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.), Immigrants and the informal econo-
my in Southern Europe, 186-204. London: Routledge.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & K. Apostolatou (2008), ‘Ethnicity and migration: A Greek story’,
Migrance 31: 5-17.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & A. Kraler (eds.) (2009), REGINE: Regularisations in Europe.
Amsterdam: Pallas.
Domingo, A. & F. Gil-Alonso (2007), ‘Immigration and changing labour force structure in the
Southern European Union’, Population 4 (62): 709-727.
INE (2009), Encuesta nacional de inmigrantes 2007. Madrid: Institution Nacional de
Estadística.
King, R. (2000), ‘Southern Europe in the changing global map of migration’, in R. King, G.
Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in Southern Europe,
1-25. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
156
MARTIN BALDWIN-EDWARDS

King, R. & I. Konzhodic (1995), ‘Labour, employment and migration in Southern Europe’,
Research Paper 19, Geography Laboratory, University of Sussex.
King, R., A. Fielding & R. Black (1997), ‘The international migration turnaround in Southern
Europe’, in R. King & R. Black (eds.), Southern Europe and the new migrations, 1-25.
Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.
Iosofides, T. & R. King (1999), ‘Socio-spatial dynamics and exclusion of three immigrant
groups in the Athens conurbation’, in M. Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.),
Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern Europe, 205-229. London: Routledge.
MIPEX (2011), Migrant integration policy index. www.mipex.eu/countries.
MPG (2007), Migrant integration policy index. Brussels: British Council and Migration
Policy Group.
OECD (2008a), International migration outlook 2008 edition. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2008b), A profile of immigrant populations in the 21st century. Paris: OECD.
Pastore, F. (2008a), ‘Report from Italy’, in J. Doomernik & M. Jandl (eds.), Modes of migra-
tion control and regulation in Europe, 105-128. IMISCOE Reports Series. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Pastore, F. (2008b), ‘The Italian migratory laboratory: Promises, failure and lessons for
Europe’, paper prepared for the seminar ‘Migration and European labour market transfor-
mations’, Paris, 3 July 2008, Policy Network.
Vermeulen, H. (2004), ‘Models and modes of immigrant integration… and where does
Southern Europe fit?’, in C. Inglessi, A. Lyberaki, H. Vermeulen & G.J. van Wijngaarden
(eds.), Immigration and integration in Northern versus Southern Europe, 1-10. Athens:
Netherlands Institute in Athens.
Werth, M. & H. Korner (1991), ‘Immigration of citizens from third countries into the southern
member states of the EEC’, Social Europe supplement 1/91: 1-134.
Zincone, G. (1999), ‘Illegality, enlightenment and ambiguity: A hot Italian recipe’, in M.
Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.), Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern
Europe, 43-82. London: Routledge.
Zincone, G. & T. Caponio (2006), ‘The multilevel governance of migration’, in R. Penninx,
M. Berger & K. Kraal (eds.), The dynamics of international migration and settlement in
Europe. IMISCOE Joint Studies Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
THE SOUTHERN EUROPEAN ‘MODEL OF IMMIGRATION’
157


7
Framing the Iberian model of labour migration
Employment exploitation, de facto deregulation and
formal compensation
Jorge Malheiros
7.1
Introduction
As mentioned in the Introduction to this volume and particularly in chapter
5, the two Iberian nations, Portugal and Spain, have experienced a transi-
tion from emigration to immigration countries since the 1980s. This proc-
ess has occurred during a specific moment of the political and economic
evolution of both countries, marked, on the one hand, by the consolidation
of their democratic regimes and their integration with the European Union
and, on the other hand, by significant economic growth. This growth can-
not be dissociated from the dynamics of the construction and public works
sectors, nor from the expansion of family consumption and investment,
which (especially at the beginning of this period) benefited greatly from
European funding. The status of ‘immigration countries’ was symbolically
and de facto reached at the very beginning of the first decade of the
twenty-first century, when the number of foreigners settled in both coun-
tries grew exponentially.1
The policy process framing this relatively rapid transition of the Iberian
states to immigrant receiving countries has been considered casuistic and
fragmented (Baganha & Marques 2001; Costa 2003) and has often been
labelled as permissive and weakly regulated. As mentioned by Joaquín
Arango (2005) and António Vitorino (2007: 23), for some Northern
European politicians and public officials, their transition has even repre-
sented a danger for the whole EU due to the ‘promotion’ of irregular
migration supposedly associated with the successive immigrant regularisa-
tions that took place in the second half of the 1980s. However, authors such
as Martin Baldwin-Edwards (1999) remarked that the reactive and frag-
mented Southern European (and therefore Iberian) immigration policies
were in line with the dominant local regulation scheme and its associated

economic model, marked by an extensive informal economy and low wages
in many sectors (Reyneri 1999; Baganha 1998).
Taking into consideration this last assumption, this chapter will try to
demonstrate how Portugal and Spain have developed a low regulation im-
migration model that has contributed to supporting the relatively high levels
of economic growth in both countries (1991-2001 in Portugal; 1995-2007
in Spain) and that was well adjusted to the specific features of the Iberian
‘proxy’ of neo-liberalism implemented in a society characterised by practi-
ces marked by familiarism, informality and traditionalism. This low regula-
tion immigration model rests on three pillars that sustain immigration policy
components using a sequential logic: i) strong imports of workers mostly
for the unskilled labour market (involving irregular status and exploitation);
ii) regularisation a posteriori (ex post adjustment); and iii) formal social
compensation in terms of relatively extensive citizenship rights (according
to European standards), particularly in the labour market domain.
Using both statistical and descriptive techniques, we will demonstrate
how Spanish and Portuguese immigration flows and policy measures com-
bined to produce this model that, despite sharing various features with the
Italian and Greek cases, comprehends some distinctive characteristics. By
emphasising these original elements, we assume that the Iberian model of
labour migration is a specific variant of the Southern European migration
model discussed in chapter 5.
7.2
Discussing the model’s premises: International migration
and the neo-liberal project
In an active market economy, labour migration tends to largely self-regu-
late. This is especially true where the accumulation regime incorporates
principles of free market extension, limited state intervention and high in-
ternational dependency and/or interdependency levels, understood within
the framework of contemporary economic globalisation. The period
between the early 1980s and the late years of the first decade of the
twenty-first century has been dominated by a rationale that assumes ‘open,
competitive and unregulated markets, liberated from all forms of state in-
tervention, represent the optimal mechanism for economic development’
(Brenner & Theodore 2002: 2). This neo-liberal ideology was germane to
the aggressive policies of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan and also
Portuguese Prime Minister Cavaco Silva, which aimed to dismantle and
replace Fordist-Keynesian elements in the early 1980s, but also to the
softer projects of Tony Blair (in Britain), Adolfo Gonzaléz (in Spain) and
José Sócrates (in Portugal), which assumed a sort of compromise between
a somewhat regulated market and the maintenance of standards through so-
cial policies, often through strategies involving private-public partnerships.
160
JORGE MALHEIROS

In fact, even in the apparent sunset of neo-liberalism that has occurred with
the international financial and real estate market crisis beginning in 2008,
the anti-crisis strategies that have been implemented involve the pernicious
use of the state-market relationship to support the regeneration (or at least
the survival) of the neo-liberal accumulation regime. According to this log-
ic, public finances should cushion the losses of private enterprises in the fi-
nancial sector, but once equilibrium is re-established, the principles of
broad free market rules, low regulation and supply-side economics should
be reinstated.
Considering the neo-liberal framework of the 1980s and 1990s, with its
signature of free markets and globalised economy, it would be no surprise
to see a corresponding increase in the volume of international migration or
some deregulation of migration flows. In fact, both processes have
occurred, but their growth has been less than one would expect if the neo-
liberal utopia had fully materialised. According to the United Nations, the
estimated number of international migrants in the world grew from 82 mil-
lion in 1975 to 155 million in 1990 and to 195 million in 2005, and the
stock of international migrants in the world population reached a value of
2.6 per cent in 2000, after a period of systematic increase over the two pre-
vious decades (Özden, Parsons, Schiff & Walmsley 2001).2 In addition,
migrant trafficking attained an unprecedented scale and the number of
irregular immigrants reached, in 2006, an estimated high of over 16 million
in OECD countries, of which 11 million were in the United States (Passel
2006) and about 4 million in Europe (Malheiros 2009). However, over ap-
proximately the same period, the world stock of foreign direct investment
increased seventeen-fold3 and between 1985 and 2005, international trade
experienced average annual growth of 7.5 per cent (UNCTAD).
These figures show that labour markets have internationalised less than
capital markets, but have nevertheless increased their internationalisation
levels in the neo-liberal period. During this period, developed nation-states
have facilitated capital and goods circulation (through tax reduction, toler-
ance towards tax havens and subsidies to attract foreign capital), but have
also imposed restrictions on human mobility. However, if neo-liberalism is
more about capital and competitiveness than about people and solidarity, it
still requires labour for economic accumulation.
Although we may identify some contradictions in capital interests
between the free circulation of people and state policy measures imposing
constraints on international migration, this is more apparent than real. On
the one hand, the neo-liberal project incorporates contradictions that result
from its construction within the nation-state matrix, namely, the need to
protect the state and its nationals through mechanisms such as border con-
trol or the introduction of reserve schemes in the labour market to protect
the recruitment of nationals. On the other hand, the success of the free mar-
ket requires the introduction of coercive regulatory schemes capable of
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
161

promoting competitiveness, privatisation and commodification, such as
individual evaluation, highly bureaucratic assessment forms that feed the
needs of financial and consultancy firms, the externalisation of former pub-
lic services in crucial citizenship domains such as security and health and
the demise of collective work contracts.
Due to the fact that labour market segmentation involving new gender
(and ethnic) divisions of labour as well as temporary forms of recruitment,
either formal or informal, is crucial to the functioning of the neo-liberal
orthodoxy, an effective (or potential) systematic supply of foreign workers
has become essential. Because the need for foreign workers in developed
countries is segmented and responds to economic conjunctures, mecha-
nisms aiming to regulate international migration tend to be selective, espe-
cially targeting highly skilled migrants (those who feed the specific needs
of the speculative and ‘creative’ financial services and IT sectors of
advanced economies). In addition to these, immigrants also fill gaps in
low-skilled sectors, particularly those characterised by seasonality (e.g.
agriculture) or by limited potential for geographical mobility (e.g. the lei-
sure industry, tourism, construction and public works and domestic serv-
ice). Due to the high mobility of capital compared to labour, most remain-
ing low-skilled sectors are relocating towards less-developed economies,
benefiting from abundant labour and low wages.
All things considered, the regulation of international migration contrib-
utes to ensure labour market segmentation and flexibility in developed
countries, making possible the regular recruitment of a contingent of work-
ers who are channelled into specific sectors, facilitating the reduction of
production costs and weakening labour protection (recruitment is on a tem-
porary basis, contracts are short-term or very short-term and citizenship
rights are often limited). Nevertheless, this process is far from perfect.
Frequently, state regulation of international migration does not match the
needs of the free market due to factors such as the protection of national
interests, pressure from religious and civil society institutions and issues of
human rights in a post-national context (Soyzal 1996; Martiniello 2000). If
this mismatch seriously affects the accumulation dynamics of some sectors,
alternative processes assert themselves and phenomena such as irregular
migration expand. Nevertheless, if the accumulation regime calls, immi-
grants tend to arrive regardless of regulatory constrains.
The Iberian variant
As Neil Brenner and Nik Theodore (2001) mention, neo-liberalism cannot
be found in a pure and unique form. Instead, neo-liberal projects ‘are
always introduced within politico-institutional contexts that have been
moulded significantly by earlier regulatory arrangements, institutional prac-
tices, and political compromises’.
162
JORGE MALHEIROS

The development of neo-liberal projects in Iberian countries has taken
place in a specific political and economic context that, despite national dif-
ferences, was marked in the 1980s by the consolidation of democratic
regimes, adherence to the EU and the inflow of significant funds aiming to
promote development through processes such as the expansion of infra-
structure and vocational training. After the economic crisis of the 1970s
and early 1980s, both countries experienced a high level of economic
growth that, during the 1990s, was above EU and OECD averages (Table
7.1). In consequence, a process of convergence of the economies of
Portugal and Spain with the EU average took place in this period: accord-
ing to Eurostat, in 1997, their GDP per capita in PPS4 was, respectively,
76.1 and 93.3 per cent of the EU average; in 2002, these values had risen
to 77 and 100.5 per cent. Whereas in 2002 the Portuguese economy started
to show signs of contraction that continued in following years, Spain sus-
tained its growth until 2008, when it was hit by the financial and real estate
market crisis (Table 7.2).
Table 7.1
Yearly GDP per capita growth rate, 1991-2001
Countries and regions
Yearly growth rate (%)
Spain
2.2
Portugal
2.6
Italy
1.4
Belgium
1.9
Germany
1.2
US
2.1
EU-15 average*
1.7
OECD countries
1.7
Highly developed economies
1.7
* Except Ireland and Luxembourg
Source: UNDP Human Development Report (2003)
Table 7.2
Real GDP growth rate
Country
Yearly growth rate (%)
2002
Average 2002-2008
2008
Spain
2.7
3.0
0.9
Portugal
0.8
0.8
0.0
Italy
0.5
0.8
-1.0
Belgium
1.4
2.0
1.0
Germany
0.0
1.3
1.3
US
1.8
2.3
0.4
EU-15
1.2
1.8
0.5
EU-27
1.2
2.0
0.8
Source: Eurostat
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
163

Throughout this period of expansion, immigration to Portugal and Spain
has attained unprecedented levels through very significant growth rates
(Figures 7.1 and 7.2), revealing the strong tie between immigration and
economic dynamics in Iberian countries due to the labour market insertion
of these immigrants mainly in low-skilled sectors such as construction and
public works, commerce, domestic service and agriculture (the last more in
Spain than in Portugal).
Figure 7.1
Evolution of the stock of legal foreigners in Portugal, 1974-2008
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
400,000
450,000
500,000
1974
1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
Asia
Latin America
North America
Africa
Europe
Sources: INE; Serviço de Estrangeiros e Fronteiras (various years)
Figure 7.2
Evolution of the stock of legal foreigners in Spain, 1992-2006
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
5,000
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
Thousands
Sources: OECD Trends in International Migration (2003) and OECD International
Migration Outlook (2008)
164
JORGE MALHEIROS

This strong external recruitment of immigrants, which involved new origin
countries from the late 1990s to the early 2000s – namely, Ukraine,
Romania, Bulgaria and Moldova – was crucial to remedy the labour defi-
cits in the aforementioned sectors, a demand that could not be met by an
ageing population with increasing education levels and corresponding
social expectations that could only be satisfied by skilled jobs or, in the
Portuguese case, by emigration.
However, this inflow of foreign workers, while crucial to cover specific
labour market gaps, is also fundamental to the economic competitiveness
of both countries, within the principles of their specific variant of the neo-
liberal project.
It is important to underline that the economic growth of Portugal and
Spain in the 1990s and early 2000s was supported by, among other things,
the expansion of the speculative financial sector and its engagement with
public works and the filière of construction (production-promotion-final
consumption), two sectors with high profitability. The first has benefited
from the modernisation process of the two countries that received signifi-
cant inflows of EU funds in the 1980s and the 1990s, and the second from
the expansion of consumption levels among families stimulated, partly
through public policies, to invest in assets such as home ownership.
Growth rates in housing construction in Portugal and Spain in the 1980s
and 1990s were among the highest in Europe, despite the relative slow-
down between the 1980s and 1990s (IHRU 2001). As a result of this proc-
ess, which continued in Spain in the first decade of the twenty-first cen-
tury, a value of 10.41 new dwellings built per 1,000 inhabitants was
registered in this country in 2000, the second highest in the EU, after
Ireland (Alonzo 2002). Although qualitative housing shortages for deprived
families, including immigrant ones, can be identified in both countries, in
2001, Portugal and Spain registered a number of dwellings per family (in-
cluding vacant dwellings and second homes) of 1.38 and 1.44, respec-
tively, well above the European average (IHRU 2008). This expansion in
the consumption of new houses, involving a high proportion of second
homes,5 has been supported by public policies geared towards home own-
ership (through public support for mortgages and the removal or reduction
of new housing taxes) that accompanied the orientation of the banking sec-
tor towards real estate and housing.6 This process, which increased debt
levels in the construction sector to around 70 per cent of GDP in both
countries in 2005 (IHRU 2008), is related to the patrimony-based traditions
of Iberian societies, which display, together with Ireland and Greece, the
highest percentages of home ownership in Europe (over 70 per cent).
While in the past, access to real estate and housing was achieved via frag-
mented semi-informal and informal strategies such as the acquisition of
land lots in the informal market of the urban peripheries, in the 1960s and
1970s such an access progressively became the domain of the formal
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
165

market in the subsequent decades, where financial institutions play a major
role.
The constant influx of foreign workers into the construction sector made
an important contribution to its profitability and success in the two decades
previous to the structural crisis that began in 2008. In addition, it also fu-
elled the family-conscious and heritage-based Iberian traditions, facilitating
the deregulation of the housing market, contributing to increase the finan-
cial responsibilities of young families and limiting the direct intervention
of public authorities in the social housing sector. This was kept at a rela-
tively residual level by targeting only the most deprived groups through
the promotion of re-housing processes, as in the case of the Portuguese
slum clearance programme PER, launched in 1993. Immigrants ensured
the necessary labour supply and contributed to sustaining salaries in the
construction sector (Pereira 2010), a situation that has facilitated the accu-
mulation of gains particularly in Spain, where housing prices rose signifi-
cantly between the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s. In addition, swift growth
in the number of immigrants in the first years of the twenty-first century in
both countries, but particularly in Spain, has increased housing demand
and may help to soften the negative impacts – such as the pressure to re-
duce prices – of the present housing and real estate crisis.
Public works and construction are not the only sectors where the pres-
ence of immigrants has played a key role. In market agriculture (especially
in Spain) as well as in the hospitality and service industry and retail trade,
a sector dominated by small enterprises that, according to OECD data, has
seen greater growth than in other advanced economies, the entry of immi-
grant workers, often irregularly, helps to circumvent the stringency of work
regulations and also to sustain an accumulation process based on labour,
i.e. low wages.
Finally, the high rate of participation by female immigrants in the
Iberian domestic sector – the other side of the gender segmentation process
that has been observed in the construction/public works sector – (Ribas-
Mateos 2000; Pereira 2010) enables the control of reproduction costs and
facilitates the maintenance of ‘welfare society’ systems based on family
and kinship networks and services (Santos 1995) that contribute to the re-
duction of public investment in domains such as care for the elderly and
young children.
7.3
A three-step model of labour migration: Features and
implications
Having clarified the role of immigrants in the development of the Iberian
form of neo-liberalism in the 1990s and 2000s, it becomes fundamental to
understand how economic interests and immigration policies work together
166
JORGE MALHEIROS

to produce a specific model of recruitment, labour incorporation and inte-
gration of foreign workers.
As we previously mentioned, Spain and Portugal, especially, have labour
markets characterised by relatively low wages compared to the former EU-
15 countries (Figure 7.3). In addition, labour-intensive and capital-intensive
sectors coexist (King, Fielding & Black 1997), a situation that has helped
to polarise wages in societies with high levels of inequality (particularly
Portugal) when compared to other developed countries. Because the transi-
tion to advanced service societies took place later in these nations, and par-
ticularly in Portugal, the issue of polarisation is not just the result of the
symbiotic labour relation between highly skilled services (e.g. software
creation, banking, design) and undifferentiated occupations (e.g. industrial
cleaning, retail trades sellers, call centre assistants) in the context of the
post-Fordist society, as Saskia Sassen (1996) and other researchers have
shown. It is also a consequence of the slow modernisation of certain seg-
ments of industry and service, where employers continued to adopt defen-
sive strategies, often based on low-skilled work and labour exploitation.
Figure 7.3
Minimum wages in selected countries
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
Euros
Source: Venn (2009)
Low wages and inequality have to be understood in the framework of a la-
bour market characterised by a high level of formal rigidity. In effect, the
late transition to democracy in the 1970s, along with corporatism and legal
support based on the French tradition, explains this formal inflexibility
(Figure 7.4) in terms of the difficulty of hiring and firing as well as rigidity
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
167

in terms of working hours. Despite the evolution towards greater flexibility
and precariousness introduced by recent changes in labour regulations, the
Iberian nations were still among the OECD members with the highest lev-
els of employment protection in 2009 (Venn 2009).
Figure 7.4
Rigidity of employment index (0-100) in selected countries, 2009
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Index (0-100)
Source: www.doingbusiness.com (World Bank Group 2009)
Because progressive changes towards flexibility have been slow, Iberian
entrepreneurs have developed different strategies to affect labour protection
and weaken labour market ties. These include the increase of temporary
contracts, a limited transition from fixed-term contracts to permanent
employment (OECD 2004) and the wide use of informal employment. In
fact, Portugal and Spain share with other Southern European countries rela-
tively large informal economies, both in terms of employment and GDP
(Figure 7.5).
Thus, in this specific and somewhat contradictory context, common ele-
ments of neo-liberalism such as limited direct public intervention (as in the
case of the housing sector), transfer of activities to the private sector and
progressive labour market deregulation and flexibility are combined with
features of the tradition of Latin Europe that involve formal rigidity anch-
ored in corporatism and the French legal tradition, and patrimony-based
practices that facilitate the affirmation of free markets and a culture of eco-
nomic informality. Labour immigration here plays a particular role, assum-
ing specific contours that may be summarised in a three-step model involv-
ing irregular migration and labour market exploitation, followed by ex post
regularisation and finally formal compensation in terms of citizenship
rights.
168
JORGE MALHEIROS

Figure 7.5
Percentage of shadow economy in the GDP of selected countries, 2001-
2002
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
%
Source: Schneider (2002)
In concrete terms, a very significant number of the labour migrants who
entered Portugal and Spain between the early 1990s and the mid-2000s
have done so irregularly (Table 7.3). This form of recruitment made it pos-
sible to overcome the lengthy formal immigration processes in both coun-
tries7 as well as the application of restrictive immigration laws based on
mismatched quota systems in the early 2000s. In addition, irregular migra-
tion has ensured the existence of a large contingent of workers available
for unskilled work in various sectors, whose vulnerability supports the
flexibility and precariousness that established local workers avoid through
formal regulations and collective bargaining. Despite various changes in
the immigration laws of both countries since the early 1990s, we agree
with Antonio Izquierdo-Escribano (2002) that the immigration panorama in
Spain is basically the result of the needs and actions of private entrepre-
neurs, sustained a posteriori by public regulation. In the case of Portugal,
the changes introduced in the law in 1993, following the first extraordinary
Table 7.3
Regularisations of immigrants in Portugal and Spain
Year of regularisation
Number of concessions
of authorisation *
Portugal
1992/1993, 1996, 2001, 2003 and 2004
275,000
Spain
1986/1987, 1991, 1996, 2000, 2001 and 2005
1,100,000
* These concessions do not correspond to regularised people because in several cases the
regularised people return to irregularity (because the permits attributed become out of date
or the job that justified the permit attribution is lost) and have to regularise themselves
again in the next regularisation process.
Sources: Izquierdo (2002); Arango and Jachimowicz (2005); Levinson 2005
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
169

regularisation,
still
incorporated
a
paradigm
of
‘zero
immigration’
(Carvalho 2009) in contrast with the Portuguese economy’s growing need
for low-skilled labour. Despite the influence of the securitisation lobby
over immigration regulations, the implementation of a restrictive policy did
not prevent the entry of an increasing number of irregular migrants into
Portugal, ensuring both the availability of labour and the conditions re-
quired by entrepreneurs.
After the changes introduced in the Portuguese immigration act of 1998,
immigration policy followed an economic trend, progressively attempting
to incorporate entrepreneurs’ interests. Although bureaucratic recruitment
procedures were kept intact by the 1998 and 2001 legal reforms, excep-
tional mechanisms of regularisation were introduced that were particularly
comprehensive in the later reform. Throughout this period the government
did not increase the systems of control over irregular migration and froze
the volume of expulsions at a relatively low level, and the procedures were
in line with the interests of economic agents, particularly in the growing
construction and public works sector (Carvalho 2009). Even the legal
reform introduced in 2003, which expressly incorporated the rhetoric (and
the practice) of integrationism, did not challenge the association between
the flow of irregular immigrants and national labour market needs
(Carvalho 2009).
All things considered, the inflow of immigrants to Spain and Portugal
was clearly generated by the needs of the labour markets not only in quan-
titative terms, but also in qualitative ones. The immigrants’ irregularity en-
abled a quick entrance in the labour market – namely, in its informal seg-
ments – and ensured the necessary flexibility to overcome stringent work
regulations and helped to sustain low wages. Within this framework, irreg-
ularity and potential labour market exploitation are linked, with massive ex
post regularisations as a mechanism that ensures (temporary) rights to im-
migrant workers, responding to the demands of certain sectors of society
(Catholic organisations, left-wing parties, immigrants’ associations) and
acts as a necessary release of social tension.
The uncontrolled growth of irregular immigrant workers in the labour
market has two potentially negative social and political consequences.
Internally, if unsatisfied labour market needs are met by irregular immi-
grants who then continue to arrive and start to compete effectively with
national workers, particularly with established ones, anti-immigrant and
xenophobic feelings tend to grow to levels that disturb social peace and po-
litical order, and institutions such as trade unions tend to increase pro-regu-
larisation claims. Externally, as far as EU member states are concerned, the
excessive number of irregular migrants in Iberia has been seen as a danger
because they could then easily enter – due to the reduction in internal bor-
der controls – the societies and labour markets of most developed
European countries. It may be argued that extraordinary regularisations
170
JORGE MALHEIROS

have actually been explicitly criticised by the politicians and civil servants
of some Northern and Central EU countries based on the argument that these
procedures were stimulating irregular migration, a process that could have
impacts all over Europe. However, we can interpret these declarations more
on the side of political rhetoric than effective politics, not only because the
circulation
of
non-EU
Eastern
European
citizens
(e.g.
Ukrainians,
Moldavians or Romanians previous to 2007) who migrated to Spain or
Portugal has been facilitated by countries such as Germany, but also because
effective EU principles and legislation on the promotion of case-by-case reg-
ularisations,8 forced return9 and increasing workplace inspections10 were
only approved in 2008 and 2009. This means that only when evidence of
the economic downturn had started to show clearly in Southern European
countries, including Portugal and Spain, did the EU promote legislation aim-
ing to harmonise procedures fighting irregular migration and make public
recommendations against extraordinary massive regularisations. In other
words, while the first two steps of the model (irregular entry and massive ex
post regularisations) served the economic interests of the Iberian countries
and also of Greece and Italy within its specific version of neo-liberalism, the
EU and even some Northern European politicians continued to criticise them
for their incomplete rhetoric of statements and principles. Once the neo-lib-
eral project started to present signs of crisis, mechanisms to restrict the entry
of irregular foreign workers, to prohibit extraordinary regularisations and to
send back those made redundant were actively promoted.
In addition to the two aforementioned pillars, it is important to mention
that this migration model includes a third element: the attribution of exten-
sive formal citizenship rights within the rubric of immigrant integration. In
fact, Portugal and Spain have developed, since the second half of the 1990s,
integration policies based on an extensive ‘equal rights’ principle that has
been provided through legal devices that tend to award foreigners rights
identical to those of nationals in the majority of citizenship domains, with
the partial exception of the political ones. In order to implement some of
these rights, integration services have been created at the national, regional
and local levels, under the responsibility, the supervision or the guidance of
the High Commission for Integration and Intercultural Dialogue in Portugal
and the General Directorate for the Integration of Immigrants in Spain.
As a result of these active integration policies, Portugal and Spain have
risen to top positions in the Migrant Integration Policy Index (MIPEX),11
particularly in the labour market domain, where immigrants are eligible for
most jobs soon after their arrival, can start businesses on their own and are
offered a relatively large range of training and language courses (especially
in Portugal) (Table 7.4). In addition, workers’ security and employment
rights are fully ensured to immigrants in both states (Nissen, Huddleston,
Citron, Geddes & Jacobs 2007).
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
171

Despite the positive character of these measures, empirically confirmed by
the position of Portugal and Spain in the MIPEX, they somehow play a
compensatory role in the Iberian immigration policy. On the one hand,
these measures compensate immigrants for the vulnerability and exploita-
tion they have undergone during their period of irregularity and also for
the potential de facto labour market exploitation they still can face after
their regularisation (it is important to remember that control mechanisms
and bureaucratic procedures tend to be less effective than some ex ante
regulatory devices, such as diversification of migration channels or the
introduction of visas for work searching in destination countries). On the
other hand, public authorities ensure, through this policy, fundamental citi-
zenship rights to immigrants, respecting the principles of a democratic state
and alleviating some potential social tension. However, these positive inte-
gration mechanisms are only seen in response to the ‘irregularity route’,
and often only ensure de jure and not substantive rights.
7.4
Final considerations
As mentioned in the previous two chapters, the scientific arguments for the
existence of a distinct Southern European migration model were presented
to academia in the second half of the 1990s and stress a set of common
factors that supposedly explain the immigration landscapes of Greece,
Italy, Spain and Portugal, as well as the mechanisms responsible for the
transition from emigration to immigration observed in these four countries
(King & Iosifides 1996; King, Fielding & Black 1997; Baldwin-Edwards
1999; King 2000). Among these, the existence of internally unsatisfied
labour demand in several labour-intensive sectors such as construction,
hospitality and service industry, domestic work and agriculture, as well as
the significant dimension of the informal sector, emerged as explanatory el-
ements for the need for foreign labour. The less regulated migration con-
text of these countries and its post-industrial character contrasted with the
North-Western European migration model of the 1950s and 1960s, framed
by Fordist-Keynesian principles (see chapter 2 in this volume). Finally,
Table 7.4
Value of MIPEX index and position of selected countries in the EU-27
group, 2006-2007
Country
MIPEX global
MIPEX labour market
Portugal
79/100 (2nd)
90/100 (2nd)
Spain
61/100 (10th)
85/100 (4th)
Italy
65/100 (7th)
90/100 (2nd)
EU-15 average
60/100
64/100
Source: MIPEX (2006-2007)
172
JORGE MALHEIROS

issues such as the similarity of the socio-demographic features of the immi-
grants (young adults oriented towards the unskilled segments of the labour
market) or of policy responses to the management of flows (tolerance to-
wards irregular entry, the importance of ex post mass regularisations, and
the prevalence of reactive policies), are also underlined in the Southern
European immigration model.
If the common patterns identified, as well as the explanatory power of
their logical combination, has led some authors to consider that the model
continues to be valid (Arango, Bonifazi, Finotelli, Peixoto, Sabino, Strozza
& Triandafyllidou 2009; chapter 5 in this volume) and others to use it as a
reference for other cases (King & Thompson 2008), the arguments pre-
sented in this text highlight two caveats.
First, beneath the general similarities identified, a set of specific ele-
ments have to be considered, such as the over-representation of construc-
tion and public works both in the economic dynamics and in the labour
market incorporation of immigrants in Spain and Portugal. In addition,
similar policy options may correspond, in some cases, to different policy
strategies in the matter of migration. For instance, when Spain and
Portugal introduced, in the period 2004-2007, a set of mechanisms ena-
bling case-by-case regularisations in their immigration laws,12 these had
the purpose of better controlling migration through the adjustment between
entry processes and access to a formal legal status. In the case of Italy, the
introduction of an identical mechanism has been conceived as part of a
more restrictive immigration policy. Finally, if we incorporate in the immi-
gration model the third pillar regarding the nature of integration options,
differences between Southern European countries become even clearer. For
instance, the compensation strategy resulting from the extension of citizen-
ship rights in the cases of Italy, Spain and particularly Portugal is not appli-
cable in the situation of Greece.13 Distinct political cultures, perceptions of
identity and notions of ‘us’ and ‘the other’ may contribute to explain the
different evolutionary paths of migrants’ integration regimes.
Second, the Southern European migration model is largely the product of
a specific variant of neo-liberal regimes, characterised by familiarism, patri-
mony-based traditions and informal relations that developed between the
1980s and the first decade of the 2000s in Iberia and eventually in Italy.
Thus, the proposed model is only applicable if the features supporting a giv-
en accumulation regime are dominant in that particular historical moment.
In other words, the Southern European migration model and its Iberian var-
iant are structurally dependent on specific variants of the neo-liberal regime.
Given this, we should now ask what will happen to this three-stage im-
migration model, where economic interests are followed by reactive policy-
making, now that several elements that used to sustain neo-liberal regimes
are threatened by the present economic crisis. No single and clear answer
can be provided to this question. However, the need to import unskilled
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
173

labour will continue to decline or at least will maintain its 2009 level, well
below that of the early 2000s given several structural changes in the econo-
my, such as the likely end of the construction/public works engine; the
continuing diffusion of technologies even in the service sector; and the
contraction of some labour-intensive segments of manufacturing and agri-
culture due to firm relocation to cheaper regions or increased technology
available for ‘soil renewal’ and international production transfer. On the
contrary, the need for immigrant care workers will continue and eventually
increase due to the swift ageing process of Portugal and Spain. Because
the care sector is highly feminised, this process may change the gender bal-
ance of immigration, leading to a predominance of women migrants. In ex-
ceptional periods of strong public works growth (e.g. the construction of
the new Lisbon Airport around the period 2015-2020), temporary recruit-
ment of male foreign workers may take over women’s predominance.
If this reduction in the need for immigrants and recomposition of flows
effectively occur in Iberia, two extreme regulation routes could result. The
first corresponds to an adjusted version of the three-stage immigration
model, but with a stronger and more effective restrictive approach that
privileges security, migration control and the eventual loss of the rights
already achieved. The tolerance towards irregular entry will be more lim-
ited, but will continue, particularly at times of higher need for low-skilled
workers. Regularisations will be more discrete (an adjustable and somehow
flexible case-by-case perspective), eventually discretionary, and forced
return will be the option pushed by governments.
The second approach involves a diversification of flows based on a con-
tinuous and efficient dialogue with labour market actors (entrepreneurs,
trade unions, some immigrant organisations), an assumed reduction in ordi-
nary migration costs (in terms of bureaucracy, length of procedures, etc.)
and the development of positive international cooperation in matters of mi-
gration. In this case, the orientation of immigrants towards regular channels
would potentially help reduce irregular migration, and forced return proc-
esses as well as the withdrawal of immigrants’ rights would become com-
plementary elements of the policy and not central issues. Naturally, due to
the embeddedness of these immigration models in the framework of differ-
ent accumulation regimes, this second hypothesis could only materialise if
the present type of Iberian neo-liberalism evolved towards a different
regime, one that effectively counters real estate speculation, property-based
traditions and labour exploitation, and which, moreover, champions more
efficient forms of public regulation. Eventually, the nation-state scale may
not be sufficient to sustain a new and fairer immigration policy based on
cooperation and respect for the rights of immigrant workers and their fami-
lies. Demands for a more global regulation of financial circuits and mar-
kets, put forward by some heads of state of the G7 and the G20 in the past
174
JORGE MALHEIROS

two years, should effectively be put into practice and clearly be extended
to the regulation of international migration flows.
Notes
1
In Portugal, the number of legal foreigners grew from approximately 190,000 in
1999 to about 350,000 in 2001; in Spain the values changed from 800,000 in
1999 to more than 1.6 million in 2003.
2
It is worthwhile to mention that the increase in the volume of international mi-
grants in the 1960s and 1970s was rather modest when compared to the values of
subsequent decades and has even led to a reduction in the weight of the stock of in-
ternational migrants in the total world population (Ozden et al. 2001).
3
According to UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics 2009, the world FDI stock passed from
USD 705 billion in 1980, to 1,942 billion in 1990 and to 12,404 billion in 2005.
Although these values are in current prices, their enormous increase clarifies the
trends of globalisation of financial markets.
4
PPS stands for purchasing power standard.
5
In 2001, the percentage of secondary homes in the total volume of dwellings was
placed between 15 and 20 per cent in both countries, the highest values of the EU
(IHRU 2008; Alonzo 2002).
6
For instance, in the period 1997-2004, the percentage of housing loans in the total
volume of credit attributed by Spanish banks had risen from 40 to 54 per cent
(Alonzo 2002).
7
According to Jorge Malheiros (2008), the legal recruitment of a foreign worker
could take more than four months in Spain and in Portugal.
8
Only in the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum of 17 June 2008 has the
European Council explicitly recommended the use of case-by-case regularisations in-
stead of general regularisations.
9
Directive 2008/115/EC, approved on 16 June 2008 and published on 16 December
of the same year.
10
Directive 2009/52/EC, approved on 19 February 2009 and published on 18 June of
the same year.
11
MIPEX, developed under the responsibility of the Migration Policy Group and the
British Council, comprehends a set of indicators that measure the integration poli-
cies of EU-27 countries, Switzerland, Norway and Canada in six domains: labour
market access, family reunion, long-term residence, political participation, access to
nationality and anti-discrimination.
12
Royal Decree 2393/2004 of 30 December, published on 7 January 2005, which es-
tablishes the regulation of the Organic Law no. 4/2000 of 20 November
(Foreigners’ Law), changed by the Organic Law no. 14/2003 of the 20 November
(Spain) and Law no. 27/2003 from 4 July (Portugal).
13
As far as MIPEX is concerned, Greece occupies one of the last positions, clearly be-
low the EU-25 average. This shows that integration of foreign citizens in Greece,
measured by the extension of formal citizenship rights, is much less accomplished
than in the cases of Italy and the two Iberian countries (Nissen et al. 2008).
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
175

References
Alonzo, R.R. (2002), ‘La política de vivienda en España desde la perspectiva de otros mode-
los europeos’, Boletin Ciudades para un Futuro mas Sostenible 29. Madrid: Instituto Juan
de Herrera. http://habitat.aq.upm.es/boletin/n29.
Arango, J., C. Bonifazi, C. Finotelli, J. Peixoto, C. Sabino, S. Strozza & A. Triandafyllidou
(2009), The making of an immigration model: Inflows, impacts and policies in Southern
Europe,
IDEA
Working
Papers
9,
www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP_9_Southern_
countries_synthesis.pdf.
Arango, J. & M. Jachimowicz (2005), Regularizing immigrants in Spain: A new approach.
Washington, D.C.: Migration Policy Institute.
Baganha, M.I. & J.C. Marques (2001), Imigração e Política: O caso português. Lisbon:
Fundação Luso-Americana.
Baganha, M.I. (1998), ‘Immigrant involvement in the informal economy: The Portuguese
case’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 24 (2): 367-385.
Baldwin-Edwards, M. (1999), ‘Where free markets reign: Aliens in the twilight zone’, in M.
Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.), Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern
Europe, 1-15. London: Frank Cass.
Brenner, N. & N. Theodore (2002), ‘Cities and the geographies of actually existing neoliberal-
ism’, in N. Brenner & N. Theodore (eds.), Spaces of neoliberalism: Urban restructuring
in North America and Western Europe, 2-32. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Carvalho, J. (2009), A política de imigração do estado Português entre 1991 e 2004. Lisbon:
ACIDI.
Costa, P.M. (2004), Políticas de imigração e as novas dinâmicas da cidadania em Portugal.
Lisbon: Instituto Piaget.
Iosifides, T. & R. King (1996), ‘Recent immigration to Southern Europe: The socioeconomic
and labour market contexts’, Journal of Area Studies 6: 70-94.
Izquierdo-Escribano, A. (2002), ‘Panorama de la inmigración en España en al alba del siglo
XXI’, Mediterrâneo Económico 1: 247-264.
King, R. (2000), ‘Southern Europe in the changing global map of migration’, in R. King, G.
Lazaridis & C. Tsardanidis (eds.), Eldorado or fortress? Migration in Southern Europe,
1-26. London: Macmillan.
King, R., A. Fielding & R. Black (1997), ‘The international migration turnaround in Southern
Europe’, in R. King & R. Black (eds.) Southern Europe and the new immigrations, 1-25.
Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.
King, R. & M. Thomson (2008), ‘The Southern European model of immigration: Do the cases
of Malta, Cyprus and Slovenia fit?’, Journal of Balkan and Near Eastern Studies 10 (3):
265-291.
Malheiros, J. (2008), ‘Irregular migration in OECD member states: Nature, profiles and poli-
cies: An overview’, unpublished research paper.
Martiniello, M. (2000), ‘Citizenship of the European Union’, in T.A. Aleinikoff & D.
Klusmeyer (eds.), From migrants to citizens, 342-380. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.
Nissen, J., T. Huddleston, L. Citron, A. Geddes & D. Jacobs (2007), Migrant integration poli-
cy index. Brussels: British Council and Migration Policy Group.
Özden, Ç., C. Parsons, M. Schiff & T. Walmsley (2001), The evolution of global bilateral mi-
gration, 1960-2000. http://siteresources.worldbank.org.
Passel, J.S. (2006), Estimates of the size and characteristics of the undocumented population.
Washington, D.C.: Pew Hispanic Center.
Pereira, S. (2010), Trabalhadores de origem africana em Portugal: Impacto das Novas Vagas
de Imigração. Lisbon: Colibri.
176
JORGE MALHEIROS

Ribas-Mateos, N. (2000), ‘Female birds of passage: Leaving and settling in Spain’, in F.
Anthias & G. Lazaridis (eds.), Gender and migration in Southern Europe: Women on the
move, 173-195. New York: Berg.
Reyneri, E. (1998), ‘The mass legalization of migrants in Italy: Permanent or temporary emer-
gence from the underground economy?’, in M. Baldwin-Edwards & J. Arango (eds.),
Immigrants and the informal economy in Southern Europe, 83-104. London: Frank Cass.
Santos, B.S. (1995), ‘Sociedade-Providência ou Autoritarismo Social?’, Revista Crítica de
Ciências Sociais 42: I-VII.
Sassen, S. (1996), ‘New employment regimes in cities: The impact on immigrant workers’,
New community 22 (4): 579-594.
Schneider, F. (2002), The size and development of the shadow economies of 22 transition and
21 OECD countries. Bonn: IZA.
Soysal, Y. (1996), ‘Changing citizenship in Europe: Remarks on postnational membership and
the national state’, in D. Cesarani & M. Fulbrook, Citizenship, nationality and migration
in Europe, 17-29. London: Routledge.
Venn, D. (2009), Legislation, collective bargaining and enforcement: Updating the OECD em-
ployment indicators, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers no. 89.
Paris: OECD.
Vitorino, A. (2007), ‘Intervenção’, in Seminarios Palhavã, La inmigración en Europa: Una
visión ibérica, 23-24. Lisbon: Embajada de España.
FRAMING THE IBERIAN MODEL OF LABOUR MIGRATION
177


8
Patterns of immigration in the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Poland
A comparative perspective1
Dušan Drbohlav2
8.1
Introduction and conceptual framework
International migration in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe
(CEE) is not a new phenomenon. Nevertheless, as late as the beginning of
the 1990s, it began evolving into a more important topic for scientists and
researchers, who started to look at international migration movements from
various angles and perspectives. A missing key component, however, was
a more systematic comparative perspective that could anchor the issue
within a broader conceptual and theoretical framework (see also the
Introduction in this volume). These very aspects were a primary focus of
the IDEA project, which sought to compare the migratory experience of
three groups of countries – Western European, Southern European and
CEE – using the perspective of the IDEA conceptual framework and its
key concepts within the European migration cycle (see chapters 1, 2 and 3
in this volume). By making use of the historical experience Western
Europe has had in migration developments, one can more aptly identify
the positioning of the CEE countries within the migration cycle and, more
specifically, within its transition phases. It then becomes possible to make
detailed observations of similarities and differences, both within the region
and relative to the concept.
The underlying premise of the migration cycle concept is that, in the
course of time, and in step with modernisation processes overall, European
countries undergo a migration transition process from countries of emigra-
tion to countries of immigration. During this cycle, countries experience
specific phases (see chapter 3). The main drivers of these developments
are perceivable in the demographic and economic developments of both
sending and receiving countries, as well as in the paradigms of migration
and migration control policies (Fassman & Reeger 2008). A general condi-
tion sine qua non is that of a democratic regime (with open borders and

free market economy), under which a migration transition can freely take
place. The transition from an emigration country to an immigration country
is typically composed of several characteristic stages. These stages differ in
the features of the migration flow itself, by the socio-economic circumstan-
ces in the sending and receiving countries and by the transformation of the
dominant migration regime (see chapters 1 and 3; also Fassman & Reeger
2008). Furthermore, there is an additional assumption that ‘young’ – mean-
ing more recent – immigration countries go through more or less similar
phases or stages within the migration cycle as did the ‘old’ immigration
countries two or three decades previously. The migration cycle’s three dif-
ferent phases follow the chronology of a preliminary phase, a transition
phase and an adoption phase (see chapter 3); or in another possible under-
standing, a preliminary stage, a take-off stage, a stagnation stage and a ma-
ture stage (Fassman & Reeger 2008).
So, at what point in the migration cycle are the CEE countries (with
their past and current migratory patterns) – represented here by Poland,
Hungary and the Czech Republic – and what conditions apply to their po-
sitions? What common features do they share and, on the other hand, in
which aspects do they differ? Can one ‘coherent trajectory’ be identified
for the given CEE countries and their going through the migration cycle?
Put forward here is the question of uniformity or particularity of CEE
countries’ migration characteristics vis-à-vis others. These are the main
questions and issues that are tackled in this chapter, which is based on an
extensive synthetic report for Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic3
(see Grabowska-Lusińska, Drbohlav & Hars 2011). An essential compo-
nent of the approach adopted here is not only to provide a descriptive com-
parison, but also to give an explanation of what causalities factor in a giv-
en country’s position within the migration transition process.
As compared to the two other European regions evaluated in this book
(chapters 3 and 5), CEE countries lag significantly behind in their passage
through the migration cycle – in other words, in their shift from emigration
to immigration status. We depart from the presumption that the CEE coun-
tries, despite having entered the migration transition phase at the same time
in the early 1990s (thus having in common the age and generation effects,
as defined in chapter 2), exhibit significant differences, for many reasons
which will be described in the following parts of this chapter. These differ-
ences are apparent in their migration patterns, as they have assumed
slightly different positions within the transition phase. Nevertheless, the
CEE countries still fit the pattern of early migration transition. They seem
to be, for a variety of reasons, positioned along the path from very early
migration transition stages (as is the case of Poland) to proper transition
stages (as is the case of Hungary and the Czech Republic, especially).
What makes the CEE countries unique vis-à-vis other European regions
is their shared heritage of enduring more than 40 years of communist rule
180
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

(CEE communist governments constructed very restrictive migration re-
gimes). This period instilled in the societies many negative tendencies that
affected, in addition to many other areas, that of migratory conditions (e.g.
tolerance of undeclared work, corruption) (see ‘features of an economy of
shortage’ in Kornai 1980). Another characteristic shared by these countries,
which, importantly, has a noticeable impact on the generation effect (see
chapter 2) they experience, is that in 1989 they underwent revolutionary
changes reintroducing them into the ‘continental migration system’ from
which they had been previously isolated by the Iron Curtain (Bonifazi,
Okólski, Schoorl & Simon 2008).
The current democratic period began with a profound transformation
process, from centrally planned economies to prosperous democratic sys-
tems – coupled with free-market economies. Overall migratory behaviour
was quickly normalised vis-à-vis the developed democratic world. Thus,
the CEE countries opened their borders and soon received both transitory
migrants and migrants who decided to remain for longer periods. The
transformation from communist regimes to democratic systems appears to
have had a crucial impact on migration patterns in the CEE countries.
There was, however, no universal pattern and no specific mechanism
underlying that complex transformation. Due to their different histories,
varied economic heritages – which they acquired during the communist era
– and the various policies they developed during their respective transfor-
mation processes, the outcomes of each transformation are different, at
least to some extent. In the past, the CEE countries followed different mod-
els of centrally planned economies. Whereas the economy of (what was at
that time) Czechoslovakia was very close to a classical centrally planned
model, Hungary and Poland’s economies represented particular kinds of
free-market and command-type economy amalgamations. This especially
became the case with the introduction, in Hungary, of market-oriented re-
forms in the late 1960s, and in Poland with the development of a ‘natural’
economy, limited instances of entrepreneurship and the early introduction
of market-oriented reforms (Dorenbos 1999).
Thus, at the inception of their deep societal transformations (and before
they entered the migration transition period), the three countries differed in
terms of their economic situations. Whereas in Hungary and, to a lesser ex-
tent, the Czech Republic, the final decade of the socialist era and centrally
planned economy could be characterised as a period of stagnation, in
Poland there was decidedly a period of significant economic crisis (espe-
cially after martial law was introduced in 1981), with a rapid decline in
real wages, high rate of inflation, a reduction in social benefits and imports
and a decrease in consumption. All the countries, however, embarked on
transformation processes with their labour markets in a rather confusing
state characterised by full employment, labour misallocation and pseudo-
labour shortages.
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
181

Robust changes in the economic system during the transformation period
led to a shift from an excess demand for labour and over-employment to
surpluses of labour and job shortages. Unemployment emerged as a new
phenomenon and started growing, while newly functioning market forces
contributed to a selection of workers. Simultaneously, the transformation
brought about a reallocation of labour across enterprises, occupations, sec-
tors and regions (with high regional variance) (Dorenbos 1999). In the
course of the transformation (depending on which stage was reached) ‘new
spaces’ (new attraction poles) in the CEE countries and their economies
appeared. These spaces served as important destinations for new labour mi-
grants and new inflows of workers from third countries – mainly from
less-developed Eastern European countries (mostly Ukraine or Romania)
or those located farther east (chiefly Vietnam and China). In these source
countries, modernisation processes that led to intensive economic transition
and transformation processes were delayed, and labour markets were un-
able to absorb redundant local labour forces.
All in all, the results of the complex transformation period in each of the
CEE countries have been equally significant and far-reaching. They are al-
so related to a period of rapid economic growth in the 1990s and those
CEE countries’ incorporation into western political, economic and security
institutional structures.4
8.2
Historical experience: Migration patterns up to 1990s
When describing existing migration patterns, an overview and explanation
of historical contexts becomes necessary. There are two main kinds of
processes that have significantly influenced current migration patterns: geo-
political shifts (accompanied by administrative redrawing of state borders)
and population migration. Accordingly, both the commonalities and the
particularities of the countries within this region were, to some extent, al-
ready cultivated long before revolutionary changes of the late 1980s.
Prior to World War I, migration processes in the three CEE countries
discussed here had many similar features, stemming mainly from the fol-
lowing two factors: relative delays in European-style modernisation and
the multiethnic character of political entities to which those countries be-
longed. In fact, since the middle of the nineteenth century, all the CEE
countries saw huge emigration losses – despite efforts to control the out-
flow. The main destination countries were located throughout Western
Europe and Northern America, but varied according to who was on the
move (see e.g. Nugent 1995).5
After World War I, the development of migration patterns in the CEE
countries can be separated into four specific periods:6 a) up to 1939 (dis-
mantling of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, establishment
of new
182
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

independent states, economic emigration combined with some return mi-
gration); b) 1945-1989 (the post-World War II rearrangements and the rule
of the communist regime); c) 1990-2004 (a period of democratisation and
incorporation into western institutions); and d) after 2004 until now (acces-
sion to the EU). For a more detailed overview of migration in the period
1945-2004, see chapter 1. This sort of division is particularly suitable be-
cause of the fact that the time periods differ significantly from each other
in socio-economic, political and geopolitical ways and, perhaps as a result,
in migration mobility patterns. One of the key factors differentiating these
periods, which at the same time contributes to the similarities shared by
the CEE countries (at least in the first two periods), is precisely that of net
migration patterns. Obviously, during the first two periods all three coun-
tries experienced emigration rather than immigration. As late as 1989, after
more than 40 years under communist rule, revolutions erupted and brought
relative freedom to the societies – new political and, consequently, eco-
nomic structures and regimes were established. For migration movements,
this meant that the three countries quickly began deviating from the old
communist model characterised by almost complete isolation. They slowly
became transit and migration destination countries, and Hungary and the
Czech Republic, especially, evolved into net immigration countries.
The following sections will describe selected migration patterns related
to the first two periods (until 1989), the impacts of which can still be seen
today. As far as geopolitical and administrative changes are concerned,
Czechoslovakia7 and Poland8 were established as sovereign political enti-
ties in 1918 (freeing themselves from the Austro-Hungarian monarchy and,
in the case of Poland, also from the German Empire and the Russian
Empire). Hungary also became a sovereign state but, as a result of the
peace Treaty of Trianon in 1920, its territory was significantly reduced as
compared to that belonging to the Hungarian kingdom. Consequently,
more than 30 per cent of ethnic Hungarians found themselves outside of
Hungary (mainly in Romania, Slovakia, Serbia and Ukraine), which was
an important influencing factor for the post-1989 immigration patterns into
Hungary (Drbohlav 2011).
Some other historical events and contexts – important for understanding
the entirety of the situation in the field of migration and ethnic composition
– are worth elaborating. First, massive involuntary population movements
continued after the end of World War II, particularly in Poland, and ended
in 1948. They resulted in population resettlements (mostly forced move-
ments based on ethnic grounds) and returns of prisoners or fugitives of
war. Nevertheless, in 1948, with the advent of the Cold War, most or all of
these movements were interrupted. This abrupt discontinuation of compa-
triots’ resettlements led to renewed eruptions of these movements later
(e.g. massive family reunion migration in Poland in the mid-1950s).
Secondly, at the very end of the 1940s – when migration movements in the
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
183

Communist bloc were heavily controlled and restricted – a widespread eth-
nic homogenisation took place. It was exacerbated by policies of ethnic
cleansing between 1945 and 19479 (e.g. nearly all Germans living in CEE
countries were deported to Germany; and population exchanges occurred
between Hungary and Czechoslovakia as well as Poland and the Soviet
Union). Thirdly, political upheavals – which took place in Hungary in
1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1948 and 1968 as well as in Poland in the peri-
od 1980-1981 – led to huge waves of emigration. As a result, large diaspo-
ras were established or significantly strengthened in key destination coun-
tries (chiefly in Western Europe and North America) (Grabowska-Lusińska
& Okólski 2009; Drbohlav 2011).
Differences between Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic also ex-
isted during the communist era. In contrast to Czechoslovakia and, to a
lesser extent, Hungary, which both suffered from a shortage of labour,
Poland exhibited a continuous excess of labour. Shortly after World War II,
the regions of the present Czech Republic that were heavily hit by deporta-
tions of the German ethnic minority were partly resettled, mostly via inter-
nal immigration (specifically of the Czechs and Slovaks). Moreover, after
1960, the Czech lands received a steady influx of temporary migrant work-
ers from Poland, Vietnam10 and other socialist countries. On the other
hand, Poles (unlike the Czechs and Hungarians) were involved not only in
labour migration related to temporary employment (e.g. in Czechoslovakia
or Hungary), but also, especially in the 1980s, in petty trade activities per-
formed under the guise of tourism. Both Czechoslovakia and Hungary
were major destinations for circulating Polish petty traders (Drbohlav
2011).
8.3
Current migration patterns
As already mentioned, since the late 1980s, all three countries have under-
gone a deep political and socio-economic transformation, which has been ac-
companied by a profound transformation of migration patterns – albeit of
different pace and volume. The dismantling of communist regimes resulted
in the opening of formerly closed and heavily controlled state borders, which
led, in turn, to a reshaping of European migration patterns. International mo-
bility between ‘Eastern’ and ‘Western’ Europe increased significantly,
though the previous predictions of massive immigration movements to
Western Europe were not fulfilled. This is due to many simultaneously oc-
curring factors. They include stringent migration regulations and controls;
limited labour market opportunities in Western European countries; rapid
improvement in the socio-economic situations of certain post-communist
countries; and an overall increase in migration between the CEE countries
themselves (Zlotnik 1999; Wallace & Stola 2001; Kaczmarczyk & Okólski
184
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

2005). As a result, a new international migration space emerged in CEE,
characterised by its own sending and receiving countries, specific categories
of migrants and particular dynamics and directions of flows. The Czech
Republic and Hungary were quickly transformed to transit and destination
areas. Poland, on the other hand, has been characterised by high rates of emi-
gration, accompanied by the circular mobility of foreign nationals and only
modest immigration levels (e.g. Korys 2004).
Before making academic use of migration figures, the reliability of mi-
gration statistics must be discussed. Generally speaking, there tends to be a
marked under-registration of migration movements, as well as an incom-
patibility of migration-related definitions over time11 and across the coun-
tries in question. The overall quality of statistical data seems to be, in
many instances, related to the volume of immigration. Thus, Czech migra-
tion statistics are thought to be better developed than Polish statistical data
on migration – which is, by contrast, perceived as highly unreliable and
incomplete (Hars 2011). In all likelihood, the most important data-related
shortcoming (common to all three CEE countries) is the under-registration
of emigration flows, a reality that seriously limits the possibility of further
analysing net migration as an integral variable.
The problem of low-quality emigration-related statistics is of special im-
portance in the case of Poland, which has recently been an important
source
country
for
many
other
EU
receiving
countries
(see
e.g.
Triandafyllidou 2006). The official emigration statistics suggest that only
20,000 to 25,000 emigrants have left the country each year since 2000
(with the exception of some 47,000 in 2006 (see Kępińska 2007).
However, a more accurate and realistic picture, one of an entirely different
scale, is provided by Izabela Grabowska-Lusińska and Marek Okólski
(2009), who determined that, within the period 2004-2006, about 950,000
persons left Poland (for a stay abroad of more than two months).
Due to the various data-related deficiencies so far described, and in
accordance with the analytical focus being placed on the immigration side
of the ‘migration coin’, only immigration statistics will be discussed (see
Figure 8.1).
Although drawing an apt comparison is somewhat problematic, since the
early 1990s, a continuous inflow of long-term immigration – albeit of dif-
ferent ‘rhythms’ – has been observable in each country. Whereas immigra-
tion to Hungary already peaked in 1990, when thousands of ethnic
Hungarians (mainly from Romania) came into the country (Hars 2009), a
rapid decline ensued in the period 1992-1994. A steep increase in immigra-
tion from 2001 onwards clearly separates the Czech Republic from the oth-
er two countries. This boom, aside from the aforementioned statistical
changes, was triggered mainly by a favourable economic situation and
growing labour demand, which was chiefly supplied by immigrants from
post-Soviet countries (Ukraine, Russia, Moldova), Slovakia, Vietnam or
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
185

Mongolia (Drbohlav, Lachmanova-Medova, Cermak, Janska, Cermakova
& Dzurova 2009; Drbohlav, Medova, Cermak, Janska, Cermakova &
Dzurova 2010). Immigration to Poland has been quite stable over time,
although a slight growth was recently observed. This could be attributed to
favourable economic developments, which could be, in turn, the result of
an increase not only of foreigners (from Ukraine, Germany or Belarus), but
also of Polish return migrants (Górny, Grabowska-Lusińska, Lesińska &
Okólski 2009). In the case of Poland, a particular type of short-term migra-
tion (which is not reflected in Figure 8.1), known as ‘incomplete migra-
tion’ (Okólski 2001, 2004), has also arisen and, for a long time, even do-
minated as a type of labour mobility. These short-term movements (usually
lasting only several weeks) are typical of post-Soviet (namely Ukrainian)
migrants engaging in irregular economic activities (petty trade and/or em-
ployment) in Poland, while maintaining their family lives in their home
country (Grzymała-Kazłowska & Okólski 2003, 2010).
Figure 8.1
Migration inflows to the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, 1989-
2007
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Inflow of immigrants, persons
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Notes: In 2001, there was a change of statistical definition of population. Besides
foreigners with permanent residence on the Czech territory, the Czech statistics
started to also include asylum seekers and foreigners staying in the country with
a visa for more than 90 days whose length of stay exceeded one year.
Hungary: Data include foreigners holding a long-term residence permit (valid for
up to one year), foreigners who have been residing in the country for at least one
year and who currently hold a long-term permit; data are presented by actual
year of entry (whatever the type of permit when entering the country).
Poland: Data include the number of permanent and ‘fixed-time’ residence
permits issued.
Source: Hars (2011)
186
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

The trends described are partly reflected by migrant stocks (see Figure
8.2). This time, the Czech data series is without major disruption (or
changes in definition). The number of registered foreigners in the Czech
Republic has gradually grown over time (with the exception of 2001, when
a worldwide economic crisis, beginning in the late 1990s, along with appli-
cation of restrictive migration measures, seemed to derail growth). Since
2004, migration growth has even accelerated: in the new millennium, the
number of foreigners has almost doubled. In 2007, it reached 394,000, rep-
resenting more than 3 per cent of the population (Drbohlav et al. 2009).
There is, unfortunately, no data series on migrant stocks in Poland – the
only reliable information comes from the 2002 Census and predicts about
75,000 foreigners (who remained in Poland more than two months).
Figure 8.2
Migrant stocks in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, 1993-2007
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
400,000
450,000
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Number of foreigners, persons
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Notes: Czech Republic: Foreigners with permanent residence permits (until
2006: permanent residence gained after ten years of residence, however shorter
for family members; since 2006: after five years); foreigners with long-term
residence (prior to 2000: foreigners with permits for a stay of over 180 days;
since 2000: generally meaning foreigners with visas for a period exceeding 90
days and with long-term residence permits).
Hungary: Settlement permit prior to 2002: after five years; following 2002: after
three years of stay (with proof of residence and subsistence, shorter for family
reasons) and for up to one year (drop in Hungarian data between 2000 and
2001 due to data correction).
Poland: Only 2002 Census data are available. Polish residence permit databases
do not allow for the differentiation between the stocks and flows of the migrant
population at any given time.
Source: Hars (2011)
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
187

A recent increase in migrant stock is also visible in Hungary (in 2007 it
was some 175,000 persons). In sum, especially in the years following their
EU accession, the Czech Republic and Hungary entered a new period of
intense migrant population growth.
Migrant populations in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic come
mainly from neighbouring and/or former post-Soviet republics. Some long-
distance migrants – namely, those from China and Vietnam – also factor
among the most numerous migrant groups in these countries. In all three
countries, an important segment of citizens from the developed EU-15
states and the United States (Hars 2011) is also present.
Since the mid-1990s, the most sizable migrant groups in the Czech
Republic are those comprising citizens of Ukraine, Slovakia, Vietnam,
Russia and Poland. Whereas the numbers of Slovak and Polish citizens
have not changed much since the mid-1990s (in 2007 they reached 68,000
and 21,000, respectively), figures of those from Ukraine (127,000 in
2007), Vietnam (51,000 in 2007) and Russia (23,000 in 2007) increased
twofold as compared to levels in the mid-1990s. The largest ‘Western’ mi-
grant groups originate from Germany and the US (Drbohlav et al. 2009).
The main source country of migrants in Hungary is neighbouring Romania
(with the majority of migrants being ethnic Hungarians). Romanian mi-
grants clearly outnumber other foreign communities (in 2007 they repre-
sented nearly 50 per cent of the migrant stock figure). Other significant
groups are migrants from Ukraine, Serbia, Germany and China (Hars
2009). According to the 2002 Census results, the largest migrant groups in
Poland came from Ukraine (some 12,000 persons), Germany, Russia,
Belarus and Vietnam (Górny et al. 2009).
Clearly, the main purpose of immigration to the CEE countries is for
work (or economic activities, in general) and the related family reunifica-
tion. In 2006, work and opening small businesses were the main migration
purposes of nearly 50 per cent of the migrant stock in the Czech Republic
(according to the reasons provided on residence visas and permits)
(Drbohlav et al. 2009). Similarly, a high share (50 to 60 per cent) of new
and renewed resident permits issued between 2002 and 2006 in Hungary
stated purposes of employment. The share of self-employment – including
entrepreneurship – fluctuated around 1 to 10 per cent, and family reunifica-
tion reasons were also around 13.8 per cent (Hars 2009). The main purpose
of immigration to Poland was structurally somewhat different, with family
reasons topping the list (40 per cent of migrants). About 30 per cent of mi-
grants indicated work-related reasons, and some 20 per cent came for edu-
cational reasons (Górny et al. 2009).
Consequently, the age structure of migrant populations in the CEE coun-
tries skews rather young, and resembles a traditional labour migrant model
with a dominant ‘productive age’ cohort (see also chapter 5). About 85 per
cent of the migrant populations in all three countries are younger than 65
188
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

years of age. When we compare migrant population’s age structure with the
structure of total population in the given countries, the proportion of chil-
dren as well as persons aged 65 or more is much smaller than that of the to-
tal population. While in the Czech Republic and Hungary migrants aged be-
tween 25 and 40 dominate the migrant stock, the Polish migrant population
is slightly older, with the main age groups ranging between 40 and 64 (Hars
2011). The migrant population in the Czech Republic is dominated by men
(they amounted to about 60 per cent in the period 2001-2007), which is an-
other characteristic of the traditional labour migrant model. The share of
women in Hungary and Poland is equal to that of men (Hars 2011).
Although foreign workers dominate the migrant stocks, they represent a
rather small segment of the total labour force in Poland (0.1 per cent) and
Hungary12 (1.5 per cent), and are slightly more numerous in the Czech
Republic (3.6 per cent),13 demonstrating a high growth dynamic (see
Figure 8.3).
What is the migrants’ labour market position? Despite varying levels of
labour demand and/or migrant labour supply among the countries in ques-
tion, their structures seem to be similar in all three. In Hungary and the
Czech Republic, legally employed migrants work mainly in the construc-
tion services and manufacturing sectors. There is also a rather small but
important segment of labour migrants – professionals who arrive from oth-
er developed countries (mainly the EU-15) and who are chiefly involved in
more intellectually demanding jobs. By contrast, legal migrants in Poland
are mostly concentrated in this ‘more qualified’ sector (trade, education,
etc.). This difference in types of migrant employment between the CEE
countries is somewhat deceptive, however, as in Poland the construction,
agriculture, trade and service sectors are also ‘migrant labour sectors’, but
these migrant workers are typically irregular (Drbohlav 2011). Indeed,
irregular migrant labour is a common migration feature of all three coun-
tries, in fact, of the whole EU, too (chapter 5 in this volume or Düvell
2006). As is the case in Poland, irregular migrant workers in Hungary and
the Czech Republic are also employed in the secondary labour market,
which is characterised by labour-intensive, poorly paid jobs14 (see Cermak
& Dzurova 2008). Especially since the 1990s, Poland has become known
for the short-term mobility of post-Soviet foreigners, accompanied by
irregular, cross-border petty trade (see incomplete migration mentioned ear-
lier in this section) (Okólski 2001, 2004). This is a phenomenon that has
never arisen in the Czech Republic, and only to some extent in Hungary
(Drbohlav 2011). The irregular employment of foreigners and, generally,
the size of the irregular migrant population in CEE countries is considered
significant, although estimates do differ (from some 40,000 to 300,000 in
the Czech Republic, about 100,000 in Hungary and from 80,000 to
200,000 in Poland) (Drbohlav et al. 2009; Hars 2009; Górny et al. 2009).
Typically, irregular labour migrants in the CEE countries arrive (usually
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
189

with tourist visas) from the same sending regions as legal migrants (from
economically less developed countries, for the most part). Although a sig-
nificant number of irregular migrant workers participates in the shadow
economy, the ‘grey labour market’ in CEE countries is, to a much larger
extent, occupied by the domestic labour force (Drbohlav 2011).
There is an additional and very specific segment of the foreign popula-
tion: asylum seekers. Since the early 1990s, asylum seekers have used the
CEE countries – especially the Czech Republic and Hungary – as primary
destinations to submit an application. Until the early 2000s, their numbers
fluctuated from between 5,000 to 10,000 a year in Hungary and the Czech
Republic, though have as of late dropped significantly to some 2,000 or
3,000 annually (Hars 2011). Poland, on the other hand, has experienced a
growth only recently, with numbers ranging from 7,000 to 8,000, mainly
comprising Chechens (Górny et al. 2009). The share of ‘successful’ asylum
Figure 8.3a
Employment of foreign workers in the Czech Republic, Poland and
Hungary, 1993-2007: Stock of foreign workers 1990-2007
0
50
100
150
200
250
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
Foreign labour, 1,000 persons
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland 
Notes: Czech Republic: Work permit holders and registered Slovak workers until
2003; as of 2004, foreigners registered at labour offices (i.e. third-country
employees usually with a work permit obligation versus EU, EEA and Switzerland
nationals with no work permit obligation). Data excludes trade licence holders.
Hungary: Work permit holders until 2004; as of 2004, work permits, green card
holders and registrations.
Poland: National Labour Office and Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.
Source: Hars (2011)
190
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

seekers – that is, those given asylum – in all three CEE countries has been
very low (e.g. some 2.5 per cent in the Czech Republic for the period
1994-2007 (see Horakova 2008)), presumably due to many unfounded ap-
plications for asylum, submitted by economic migrants (mostly in transit).
8.4
Determinants of migration
This section focuses on migration drivers: key factors that impel the migra-
tion transition process. These drivers were identified (and subsequently
tested) based on the experience of Western European countries – the so-
Figure 8.3b
Employment of foreign workers in the Czech Republic, Poland and
Hungary, 1993-2007: Share of foreign workers in per cent of total
labour force 1992-2007
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
Share of foreign labour, %
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Notes: Czech Republic: Work permit holders and registered Slovak workers until
2003; as of 2004, foreigners registered at labour offices (i.e. third-country
employees usually with a work permit obligation versus EU, EEA and Switzerland
nationals with no work permit obligation). Data excludes trade licence holders.
Hungary: Work permit holders until 2004; as of 2004, work permits, green card
holders and registrations.
Poland: National Labour Office and Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.
Source: Hars (2011)
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
191

called mature immigration countries within the migration cycle (chapter 3).
Discussed here are step-by-step, structural factors including geopolitical,
economic and demographic variables, along with other contextual factors
(including historical patterns of migration, etc.). Most of the attention will
be devoted to economic factors, which seem to be decisive in explaining
immigration patterns in the CEE region. The economy and, more specifi-
cally, the demand for labour have also been confirmed as the most impor-
tant migration drivers for ‘old’ immigration countries such as Germany or
Austria (see chapter 3).
The role of economic transformation processes in the 1990s was a par-
ticularly crucial factor in triggering immigration flows to the CEE coun-
tries. We attempt to identify here the specific economy-related factors that
are the most important for explaining immigration to the countries in ques-
tion. A direct relationship between the economic situation (at a macro-
level) and immigration has already been proven in the Czech Republic (see
more in Drbohlav et al. 2009). In fact, it is only in the Czech case that the
demand side matched the foreign supply side – a circumstance that seems
to be a key precondition for robust immigration. In Poland, this ‘demand-
supply harmony’ arose only recently (after Poland joined the EU). To some
extent, these conditions have been the result of the continuous and inten-
sive emigration of Poles abroad.15 Under these conditions, the demand for
foreign labour force has increased significantly. Even this synergy, how-
ever, has not been enough to trigger massive immigration into the country
– immigration levels into Poland are still rather low. In Hungary, due to its
somewhat different economic path and structure, the demand for labour
has been rather low; the growth of the economy in Hungary can in fact be
characterised as a jobless growth.16
There are also important labour market deficiencies in CEE that function
as strong (‘pull’) factors to attract a foreign labour force. Among these
deficiencies are: mismatches between the demand and supply of domestic
labour; natives’ low motivation to take on certain jobs; high labour costs;
limited occupational and geographical (internal spatial) mobility; and, of
chief significance, the widely tolerated practice of undeclared work. It ap-
pears that all these pull factors play an important role in all three countries
(see more in Drbohlav 2011).
To further elucidate the role of undeclared work, one must take stock of
the fact that there has been a persisting tolerance of informal business prac-
tices and undeclared work in the CEE countries since the time of the com-
munist economic system (e.g. Renooy, Ivarsson, Van der Wusten-Gritsai &
Meijer 2004; Fassmann 2008). This tolerance goes hand in hand with ex-
isting robust informal economies (chiefly composed of domestic workers)
that consequently incentivise irregular migration into CEE countries (see
also Reyneri 2002; Arango, Bonifazi, Finotelli, Peixoto, Sabino, Strozza &
Triandafyllidou
2009).
Previous
estimates
have
put
the
extent
of
192
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

undeclared work (as a percentage of GDP) in the CEE countries at 9 to 10
per cent in the Czech Republic, 14 per cent in Hungary and 18 per cent in
Poland at the turn of this century (see Renooy et al. 2004). More notewor-
thy than the figures themselves is the fact that the phenomenon of unde-
clared work and its social tolerability are widespread throughout all social
strata and regions of the CEE countries (Drbohlav 2011).
The demographic situation of the CEE countries constitutes another ma-
jor migration driver (see the Introduction and chapter 3), although its im-
portance has only recently been acknowledged. In recent years, like many
other developed European countries, the CEE region has suffered from
several demographic problems. They originate in the ageing process (low
fertility levels, growing life expectancy), diminishing population levels and
gradually declining economically active segments of population (see
Eurostat 2009). In contrast to past developments, the role of migration in
shaping the demographic situation (vis-à-vis fertility and mortality patterns)
will probably increase in significance in the CEE region. Thus the most
important effects upon labour markets remain to be seen17 (see e.g.
Eurostat 2009; Bijak, Kupiszewska & Kupiszewski 2008). All in all, the
demographic situation has become – and will likely continue to be – an
important factor that triggers immigration in a variety of ways. For exam-
ple, this may happen directly through growing demand for labour and
spontaneous migration movements and indirectly through various state
recruitment policies that seek to saturate the weakening pool of domestic
human resources. In all likelihood, these new challenges will cause coun-
tries to reassess their established economic and social policies, such that
they will seek to resist such developments. The Czech Republic was the
earliest of the CEE countries to launch programmes for recruiting foreign
labour force: the first was instituted as early as 2003, followed by a second
in 2009 (see Drbohlav et al. 2009, 2011). Poland and Hungary have also
recently started engaging in such activities, at least in the form of public
proclamations and debates (see Lesińska, Stefańska & Szulecka 2011).
Two major events (and important additional migration drivers) have also
significantly changed the geopolitical situation in the three CEE countries
and had a tremendous impact upon migratory realities. The first was the
breakdown of the entire eastern Communist bloc at the very end of the
1980s. The second was the accession of the CEE countries to the EU on 1
May 2004. Other important country-specific geopolitical developments
have also influenced migration realities. Poland has been demonstrating its
national interests by trying to maintain special close and friendly relation-
ships with eastern neighbouring countries (Ukraine, Russia and Belarus)18
(Górny et al. 2009). Particular historical developments (as described in the
previous section) have led to a situation in which large pools of co-ethnics
reside in countries bordering Hungary; these pools serve as dominant sour-
ces of Hungarian immigration. These ethnic patterns have had an important
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
193

impact on the migratory situation and policies of contemporary Hungary
(Hars 2009). The Czech Republic also has very special geopolitical links to
Slovakia. More than 70 years of shared history within one Czechoslovak
state – as well as significant cultural and linguistic similarities – have been
key factors driving the liberalisation of migration admission and labour pol-
icies towards Slovakian migrants in the Czech Republic between 1993 and
2004 (Drbohlav et al. 2009).
Migration policies are an important contextual factor within the migra-
tion cycle (see chapter 3); the rest of this section includes a discussion of
their relevance.
Last but not least, there are other (perhaps less important) contextual
migration factors of note as CEE countries move through their respective
migration cycle phases. Namely, historical backgrounds, historical migra-
tion patterns and migrants’ own social networks have all served to frame
the migration transition process. Due to heavily controlled migration move-
ments during the communist era, the previously established migration net-
works and family or community-specific systems were disrupted. On the
other hand, some trainees, workers and students who arrived in the CEE
countries during the socialist era became ‘embryos’ of further immigrant
inflows in the 1990s (e.g. the Vietnamese community in the Czech
Republic and Poland). In Hungary, as previously indicated, ethnic ties were
a key factor behind Hungarian immigration patterns (Drbohlav 2011).
Interestingly, public attitudes towards migration issues and immigrants –
which might have been thought to wield influence as another contextual
migration factor – have not played a significant role in influencing migra-
tion flows. To date, that is, no evidence in the CEE context has been
found.
Finally, factors lying behind state borders cannot be overlooked. Certain
‘push’ factors – namely, political and socio-economic conditions in sur-
rounding or otherwise significant migration source countries are of particu-
lar importance (Fassmann & Reeger 2008). Of note are recently modernis-
ing eastern regions – countries of the former Soviet Union and some Asian
countries such as Vietnam and China – that have been sending out their
labour forces to the CEE region.
8.5
Migration policies
Migration policies constitute an important contextual factor within the mi-
gration cycle and the migration transition process (chapter 11 in this vol-
ume). Their impact upon migratory realities and trends in the CEE region
is illustrated by two key examples. First, especially in the first half of the
1990s, it was not migration policies, but the lack thereof (‘migration non-
policies’, as it were, which were typical of very liberal approaches) that
194
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

contributed significantly to large immigration inflows, especially in the
case of the Czech Republic. Second, a common pattern for all three coun-
tries is that gaps in migration policies have served as pull factors used flex-
ibly by migrants, e.g. by ‘masked’ asylum seekers or ‘hidden employment’
engaged in by holders of trade licenses (more on this in Grabowska-
Lusińska et al. 2011).
Obviously, there are other common features shared by these countries,
especially in the post-revolutionary era of the last two decades. Migration
policy development is one such area. At the beginning of the 1990s, all the
countries in the CEE region missed out on the experience of natural labour
immigration19 and its management. Although they started from scratch and
were situated in different contextual environments, the migration policies
of the countries in question gradually developed in similar ways. There are
three main stages of migration policy development in Poland, Hungary and
the Czech Republic (based on Lesińska et al. 2011). The first stage, from
1989 to the early 1990s, is that of institutionalisation and the birth of the
legal system. The second stage, from the late 1990s to 2004, is character-
ised by stabilisation and harmonisation with EU standards. The third stage,
since 2004, is one of consolidation of the migration regime.
An analysis of Polish, Hungarian and Czech migration policy develop-
ments reveals that policymakers from CEE states followed the traditional
process (developed by the EU and Western countries) of conceptualisation
and subsequent implementation of migration policies. In other words, all
three countries drew inspiration from the more mature and experienced im-
migration countries, both in terms of perceptions of immigration as well as
management models for migration inflows (a sort of learning process has
occurred, as specified in hypothesis 3 in chapter 2 by Arango this volume);
moreover, ‘the paradigms of migration and control policies’ are considered
to be among the most important drivers within the migration transition
process (see Fassman & Reeger 2008). Of the three countries, Czech mi-
gration policies have evolved into the most ‘mature’ in terms of the formu-
lation of a migration doctrine, the implementation of particular policies to
encourage the inflow and settlement of foreigners (Lesińska et al. 2011).
There is also one pattern characteristic of policymaking principles in all
three countries (and, to some extent, one which is still valid in the present-
day) – that can be described as the ‘power of discretion’. This means that
the administration, rather than precisely formulating rules that require com-
pliance, set forth policies that enable officials to use their own discretion.
Another aspect shared by the CEE countries is the Europeanisation of
their respective migration policies, as the EU exerted significant influence
in many migration policy areas (except for naturalisation and repatriation
policies) (chapter 11). Moreover, a similar institutional reality developed in
all three countries over time: namely, institutional responsibilities for immi-
gration issues are divided among several bodies, with a key coordinating
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
195

role played by the Ministry of the Interior. This body alone plays the domi-
nant role in migration policymaking. The institutional system is highly cen-
tralised: only a rather marginal influence is exerted at the lower level (re-
gional and local) by the administration on migration or integration issues.
With the exception of the Czech Republic, the same is valid for the role of
NGOs. Special bodies (such as inter-ministerial committees or interdepart-
mental groups), dealing exclusively with the migration issue or related
areas, have only recently been established. Their main goal is to declare
and formulate long-term strategies for migration policies (migration doc-
trines) and to coordinate the activities of a variety of institutions that focus
on immigration and the integration of immigrants into their host societies
(Lesińska et al. 2011).
Another common aspect is the low importance, or even the non-exis-
tence, of a state integration policy (especially in Poland and Hungary).
Krystyna Iglicka and Okólski (2005) characterise integration measures in-
stituted in the CEE countries as catering only to small, specific immigrant
groups, or else as applying only to limited aspects of integration. It seems
clear that the integration of immigrants is still not perceived as a top prior-
ity for states in the CEE region, although relevant policies have recently
begun being implemented (in the Czech Republic) or drafted (in Poland
and Hungary).
Indeed, the issue of immigration comes up very rarely in political or
public discourse in the CEE countries in question (chapter 11), which is
one clear symptom of a rather immature transition phase within the whole
migration cycle (see chapter 3). Many challenges involving migration or
immigration are either not discussed or else discussions remain highly bu-
reaucratic, without engaging the broader public. Neither the process of
drafting legal acts concerning migration, nor establishing related institu-
tions are, with few exceptions, accompanied by any extensive political de-
bate. On the contrary, political debates seem to be confined to technicalities
and have historically taken place exclusively within the state’s administra-
tion. In particular situations, selected interest groups – including NGOs,
employer or labour unions – have publicly announced their points of view
on immigration – but, generally speaking, there appear to be low levels of
politicisation of the migration topic, with only ‘bureaucratic’ concerns pre-
vailing (Lesińska et al. 2011).
Although the three countries share many similar aspects in terms of mi-
gration policy development, as previously noted, crucial differences also
exist. More specifically, Czech migration policies seem to be distinct from
the policies of Poland and Hungary in that the country has achieved a more
mature policymaking stage (Lesińska et al. 2011). So, what are the key dif-
ferences among the three countries or rather, what separates the Czech
Republic from the other two?
196
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

It would appear that the Czech migration policy was the only one in ex-
istence when quickly changing migratory realities began stimulating prog-
ress in the migration policy field. In other words, internal impulses were
crucial for migration policymaking. By contrast, in Hungary and Poland,
migration policies have developed in response to external pressures. That
is, policies have mostly followed the EU harmonisation process. To some
extent, it is a logical consequence of the more modest immigration inflows
into Hungary and the very small inflows into Poland (as well as their char-
acteristics, including fluidity and circularity). These sorts of realities do not
create the necessary push for policymakers to be especially active in the
field of migration management. It only happened, to some extent, to be the
case in the Czech Republic, which hosts hundreds of thousands of immi-
grants (Lesińska et al. 2011; Drbohlav et al. 2010).
The Czech Republic also clearly represents the ‘most mature’ case in our
comparative CEE framework in terms of formulating its migration doctrine.
The basic policy principles and objectives related to international migration
were already announced by the Czech government in 2003.20 Although
they are criticised by some experts as being very general and vague and as
having no real impact upon migration policy, the process of their conceptu-
alisation is still more developed as compared to Poland and Hungary. The
Czech government also launched proactive migration recruitment measures
and, consequently, implemented specific activities to encourage the inflow
of immigrants (and their admission to the labour market as well as, to some
extent, their settlement. The country has also been active in developing its
integration policy. Overall, more systematic and more goal-oriented ap-
proaches are characteristic of migration policies in the Czech Republic. It is
worth mentioning here, however, that Poland and Hungary also engage in
more ‘systematic’ activities in terms of migration management: policies to-
wards co-ethnics and their repatriation systems are two such examples.
Still, neither Hungary nor Poland has a single document in which a migra-
tion doctrine is clearly set forth. These countries’ migration strategies could
be only deduced from other sources, such as various (mostly unpublished)
documents and policymakers’ statements (Lesińska et al. 2011).
While the Czech Republic has more proactively encouraged labour and
settlement migration (even through small-scale programmes), Poland and
Hungary opted for different strategies. They accepted rather short-term
immigration from neighbouring countries and supported the settlement of
narrowly defined groups – of co-ethnics, above all. In recent years, the sit-
uation has changed slightly; the issue of actively recruiting foreign labour
has begun being debated in all three countries. In addition, some more lib-
eral rules of admission of foreigners to national labour markets have re-
cently been introduced. These activities seem to be propelled by the desire
to fill gaps in labour markets, where there is a growing demand for foreign
labour. The Czech Republic again leads the group with the launch of two
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
197

projects, i.e. a 2003 pilot project for attracting skilled migrant workers and
encouraging them to settle in the country and a 2009 green card project for
recruiting new labour. Each of these targeted both high- and low-qualified
immigrants from selected countries (Drbohlav et al. 2009). Poland and
Hungary appear to have a long way to go in order to catch up with the
Czech Republic’s activities in this field.
There is one final difference worth identifying: whereas, in Poland and
Hungary, small-scale regularisation programmes for selected groups of ir-
regular migrants have already been instituted, the Czech Republic has so
far never accepted such an idea (Lesińska et al. 2011).
8.6
Immigration impacts
Immigration is a complex phenomenon, one having both positive and neg-
ative impacts upon a host society. These impacts can, in turn, significantly
influence migration policy measures along with public attitudes towards
immigrants (chapter 2). They must therefore be elaborated further here.
This, however, is a deceptively complicated task. Many important impacts
are difficult to measure in terms of both a set of defined characteristics and
available data or statistics. Most importantly, though, only a short amount
of time has elapsed since significant volumes of international migrants be-
gan arriving in the CEE countries. The impacts of this kind of immigration
have not yet had enough time to develop and crystallise. The sheer number
of temporary and circular migration movements (especially in Poland) also
limits the integration of immigrants in the CEE countries in question.
Since these countries are currently going through a particular transition
phase within the migration cycle, it can be argued that their patterns of im-
migrant integration are still in the making.
The economic impacts of immigration are generally the most important
in all three countries. This reality springs from the fact that immigration in-
to the CEE countries is based predominantly on economic motives – most
migrants are workers who stay temporarily while becoming intensely in-
volved in the host country’s economy. Migrant populations’ common char-
acteristics include high economic activity rates – which typically outrank
the average levels of the domestic population – along with below-average
unemployment (Medova 2011).21 Consequently, immigrants in the CEE
countries evaluated here also exhibit only limited levels of consumption of
public services and welfare benefits. Finally, the foreign labour force in all
three countries also seems to constitute a supplement, rather than competi-
tion, vis-à-vis native workers (Drbohlav et al. 2009; Hars 2009; Górny et
al. 2009).22
Like many other developed European countries, the CEE countries have
also recently begun facing a process of population ageing (see e.g. Grant,
198
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

Hoorens, Sivadasan, Van het Loo, DaVanzo, Hale, Gibson & Butz 2004),
which will likely have serious economic and social impacts upon all soci-
eties. As has been shown many times in different regional contexts, how-
ever (see e.g. Bijak, Kupiszewski & Kupiszewska 2008), immigration as
such is not and cannot be a remedy for demographic ageing and for the
weakening of the labour force potential.23 Immigration inflows can only
contribute to the stabilisation of the total population size of individual
countries, provided that they are of a long-term or permanent nature.24
So far, the mostly temporary and recent migration movements into and
out of CEE countries have not yet led to immigrants’ integration, at least
not in ways and volumes known to mature immigration countries. Both the
integration processes of migrant populations and state integration policies
are still in infancy stages. Immigrants’ integration has thus far not posed
any major problems for the three societies, which is also probably why no
proper integration monitoring takes place in any of these countries. As a
matter of fact, it is only recently that immigrants’ second generations have
begun appearing: at the moment, this only being true for the Czech
Republic and partly also for Hungary (Medova 2011).
Some studies in the Czech Republic have suggested that the successful
inclusion of migrants into the Czech society is strongly connected to as-
similation models of integration (e.g. typically rejecting close ties of immi-
grants to their home countries and their adoption of the Czech lifestyle and
language). Accordingly, assimilation to the Czech lifestyle seems to be the
option preferred by the Czech public, as suggested by national opinion
polls (Drbohlav et al. 2009, 2010).
Integration outcomes in Hungary and Poland are even harder to assess,
as smaller immigration volumes and more short-term migration movements
occur in both countries. In Poland, temporary patterns of mobility prevail
(especially within the groups of post-Soviet citizens and ‘Westerners’) and
the traditional settlement and integration patterns are observable only in
the case of Vietnamese immigrants (Górny 2010). The integration of immi-
grants in Hungary is somewhat different, as the Hungarian ethnic origin of
most immigrants is a crucial factor. More specifically, the integration of
immigrants of ethnic Hungarian origin seems to be smoother than that of
other groups, especially due to their knowledge of the Hungarian language.
For other migrants, the distinctiveness of the Hungarian language repre-
sents a significant integration barrier (Medova 2011).
In all three CEE countries, the spatial distribution of migrants is uneven,
albeit with no large separated or segregated spatial concentrations of mi-
grant populations within cities or towns, as has been the case for mature
European immigration countries, not to mention the US. Nevertheless,
some ‘embryonic zones’ of these concentrations began appearing in Prague
and Budapest (Drbohlav et al. 2009; Hars 2009). Spatial distribution pat-
terns also seem to differ by individual immigrant ethnic groups and by
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
199

migrants’ statuses (meaning long-term or temporary versus permanent mi-
grants). It has been shown that capitals represent the most important
centres in which migrants are concentrated (Medova 2011). More specifi-
cally, Prague hosts about one third of all legally staying foreigners in the
Czech Republic, and the concentration of foreign permanent settlers in
Budapest has reached about 40 per cent (Drbohlav et al. 2009; Hars 2009).
On the other hand, the spatial concentration of migrants and permanent set-
tlers in Warsaw amounts to about 16 per cent (Górny et al. 2009). The
dominance of the capital city in migrant settlement patterns is thus lower
in Poland, which could be attributed to the overall character of the Polish
settlement structure, in which the dominance of the capital city (Warsaw)
is suppressed or subdued (see e.g. Weclawowicz 2001).
Finally, let us briefly touch upon the issue of immigrant naturalisation,
the host country’s granting of citizenship. For the three CEE countries ex-
amined here, it is evident that the numbers of naturalised immigrants
(Figure 8.4) mirror the state naturalisation policy more than anything else.
This is apparent, for example, in the Hungarian case (see Figure 8.4),
where the number of naturalised immigrants is manifold times higher than
it is in the Czech Republic, even though the Czech Republic received
many more immigrants in the same time period. The reason for this imbal-
ance is that most of the individuals naturalised in Hungary are immigrants
Figure 8.4
Naturalisations per year in the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary,
1993-2006
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
Naturalisations
Czech Republic
Poland
Hungary
Source: Medova (2011)
200
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

of Hungarian origin who can be made citizens on preferential terms (Hars
2009). However, in recent years the stock of naturalised persons in
Hungary has become more heterogeneous in terms of country of former
citizenship (or rather of ethnic origin). In addition, in the Czech Republic,
the stock of naturalised individuals also became more heterogeneous over
time as regards the former country of citizenship of naturalised migrants
(Medova 2011).
8.7
Conclusions
This chapter has mapped contemporary and historical migration patterns,
determinants of migration transition – including migration policies – and
the impacts of immigration in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland.
All these were evaluated using a comparative perspective and in accord-
ance with the conceptual framework suggested in chapters 1 through 3 of
this volume.
During the 1990s, all three countries underwent deep political, economic
and social transformation processes, from communist systems with planned
economies to democratic systems with free-market economies. Since the
mid-1990s, Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic have joined various
Western political, economic and security institutional structures. Simultane-
ously, transformations in migratory patterns have also taken place – the
CEE countries shifted from strict regimes with closed borders to standard
migration models. Although many similarities exist among them, the three
countries have nevertheless each had unique experience of international
migration process.
The resulting situation can be briefly summarised as follows: the Czech
Republic has high immigration levels and, at the same time, low levels of
native emigration, and is apparently the most attractive migration destina-
tion country of the CEE countries (see e.g. Drbohlav 2004a; Drbohlav et
al. 2010). Hungary also experiences positive net migration with low levels
of emigration. By contrast, Poland is characterised by high native emigra-
tion levels, rather low long-term immigration levels and frequent short-
term types of migration patterns. All three countries seem to be in the same
phase of the migration cycle or transition (chapter 1). They nevertheless
fall into different categories or stages within the transition phase. Whereas
Poland still seems to be in the very early stages, Hungary and the Czech
Republic, especially, have progressed much further along in the transition
process to becoming an immigration country. The differences among these
countries have their roots in historical patterns, different levels of socio-
economic development at the beginning of societal transformation periods,
the structure of the overall economy (including sectoral and educational
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
201

structures) and in the outcomes of the complex societal transformation
process.
The migration transition process by which countries shift into countries of
immigration is impelled by several important migration drivers. Economic
pull factors are by far the most important. Without successful economic (and
political) transformations – leading to developed free-market economies –
there would be no immigration. More specific economic drivers include
mismatches between the demand and supply of domestic labour, the natives’
reluctance to take on certain jobs, high labour costs, low internal spatial mo-
bility and, most importantly, the tolerated practices of undeclared work. In
order to trigger considerable immigration inflows there must be, among oth-
er things, an apt convergence between demand and supply (a condition that
the Czech Republic has already exhibited). In Poland, this harmony between
demand and supply has only recently begun to materialise and, to some ex-
tent, could be attributed to the continuous and intensive emigration of Poles
abroad (Anacka & Okólski 2010). Along with a strong economic perform-
ance, this harmony contributed to an increase of demand for foreign labour
in Poland. On the other hand, the Hungarian economic structure features a
rather low demand for migrant workers.
The demographic characteristics of the three countries (e.g. very low fer-
tility levels and growing life expectancies leading to population ageing) are
important migration factors whose impact and significance is certain to
grow. Even today they have begun influencing some of the migration poli-
cy measures aimed at recruiting a foreign labour force to make up for the
diminishing pool of domestic human resources.
The most important moment for all three countries – and not only from a
geopolitical perspective – was, first of all, the breakdown of the Communist
bloc in 1989 and, secondly, their accession to the EU in 2004. Within exist-
ing migration patterns, countries’ particular geopolitical interests are mani-
fest in their preferential attitudes towards certain countries (e.g. that of
Poles towards selected former post-Soviet countries, Hungarians towards
Romanian compatriots and the Czechs towards Slovakia).
Other important contextual determinants were also identified in this
chapter. Specifically, these included historical experience, migrant social
networks and migration policies. From a historical perspective, the three
countries were emigration countries until the onset of the 1990s transfor-
mation period. Since the conclusion of World War II, all three countries
have been ethnically homogeneous (Hungary even after World War I). This
homogeneity was further strengthened during the communist era, due to
the states’ very restrictive regimes (no ‘standard’ international migration
movements occurred). Despite this fact, a sort of labour immigration (in-
cluding workers, trainees and students) from distant developing communist
countries (under the pretext of ‘international aid’) took place, especially in
Czechoslovakia and, partly, in Hungary. The early immigration of the
202
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

Vietnamese to Czechoslovakia led to the subsequent establishment of a
strong migrant community after 1989.
Migration policies – or the lack thereof – also played an important role
in shaping migration patterns in the 1990s. The development of migration
policies was propelled by EU legislative harmonisation requirements, and
led to the creation of very similar institutions in each country: migration
policy management is thus centralised, with very limited involvement by
regional and local institutions. Another common feature is that migration
issues have not been visible to the government, political parties or the pub-
lic. Recently, though, more proactive and systematic approaches to migra-
tion policies have emerged – especially in the Czech Republic. Indeed,
only the Czech Republic (unlike Poland and Hungary) has designed a co-
herent migration policy framework, involving legal regulations, standard
practices and a well-defined organisational environment. The involvement
of NGOs in migration and integration issues also seems to be much more
extensive in the Czech Republic than in the other two countries.
All of the foregoing circumstances (determinants) have led to the crea-
tion of unique immigration realities for each of the CEE countries. As
previously mentioned, the Czech Republic hosts the largest pool of immi-
grants: in 2007, there were some 394,000 legally residing migrants, fol-
lowed by Hungary with some 175,000 migrants in the same year and fi-
nally Poland, which appears to be the least attractive immigration
destination country with about 75,000 migrants counted in the 2002
Census.
Current immigration inflows into the CEE countries are predominantly
labour-motivated. Legal labour migrants in the Czech Republic and
Hungary are mainly employed in the construction, service, hotels and res-
taurant and manufacturing sectors. These branches are also typical areas
for irregular migrants to work (in all the three countries). There is also a
rather rare but important type of legal labour migrants – that is, professio-
nals who arrive from other developed countries (mainly the EU-15) and
who are involved in more intellectually demanding jobs. Interestingly, in
Poland, it is these migrants who dominate the pool of legal foreign labour.
A very important conclusion can thus be drawn: namely, that foreign
labour in all three countries is complementary rather than competitive vis-
à-vis domestic workers.
Gainful employment as a principal motive and a common core of migra-
tory source countries (the CEE and post-Soviet countries, Vietnam and
China) are two features shared by the CEE countries being examined. By
contrast, one can find important differences in terms of immigrants’ lengths
of stay. Significant numbers of migrants stay for a long time (several
months) or permanently in the Czech Republic and Hungary, whereas in
Poland short-term stays (often related to circular mobility) are more
prevalent.
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
203

The impacts of immigration on the three countries have so far been most
apparent in the economic sphere, and have apparently not seriously af-
fected social and cultural relationships. Immigrants generally display high-
er economic activity rates and lower unemployment rates as compared to
domestic populations. In demographic, social, cultural and geographic
areas, the impact of immigration has so far been rather marginal. It has
been shown, however, that the capital cities of the Czech Republic, Poland
and Hungary are the major immigration hubs.
The integration of immigrants has not yet become a social problem,
likely because of the still rather low shares of immigrants and the tempora-
riness of their migration patterns. Integration measures are limited in the
CEE countries, though much more has been done in this field in the Czech
Republic than in the other two countries.
In sum, we have shown that, from a socio-economic, political, cultural
and migratory perspective, Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic all
belong to one distinctive group of countries: they exhibit more similarities
to one another and, at the same time, differ significantly from the other
two groups of Western and Southern European countries (see chapters 3
and 5). The CEE countries seem to have already entered the second phase
of the migration cycle, i.e. migration transition. Within this transition
phase, the countries each fall into unique transition stages, depending on
their net migration patterns, volume of immigration, prevailing types of mi-
gration (short-term versus long-term or permanent), the maturity of migra-
tion policies and practices and, finally and overall, their migration impacts.
If all these factors are considered together, one inevitably arrives at the
conclusion that the Czech Republic, followed by Hungary, are further
along on the path to becoming mature immigration countries, while Poland
lags significantly behind. One cannot derive other far-reaching conclusions
from this analysis of the given three CEE countries. However, this analysis
alone clearly indicates that right now it is rather difficult to justify one
‘more coherent transition model’ through which CEE countries go from
their emigration to immigration eras. Only time will tell whether some im-
portant differences will be washed down and CEE will finally appear as a
more homogeneous migratory region, sharing more similar and apparent
migratory features than it does now.
Notes
1
The IDEA project’s Czech team is grateful for support from the Ministry of
Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic, project no. MSM0021620831
‘Geographic Systems and Risk Processes in the Context of Global Change and
European Integration’.
2
This chapter could not have come together without the input of various people
whom I would like to recognise here as co-authors in a sense: Marek Oko´lski, Agata
204
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

Go´rny, Izabela Grabowska-Lusin´ska, Magdalena Lesin´ska, A´ gnes Ha´rs, Lenka
Medova, Zdene˘k Cˇerma´k, Eva Janska´, Dita Cermakova and Dagmar Dzurova.
3
Preliminary work on this synthesis report was done for the IDEA national reports
(see Drbohlav et al. 2009; Hars 2009; Go´rny et al. 2009).
4
Namely the OECD – the Czech Republic in 1995, Poland and Hungary in 1996,
NATO in 1999, the European Union in 2004, and the Schengen zone in 2007.
5
Poles, besides arriving in metropolitan areas such as Berlin, St. Petersburg, Kiev,
Moscow, Vienna and Paris, headed in great numbers for both Americas and indus-
trial centres of Germany. Hungarians mainly left their mother country for the US.
Czechs headed chiefly to metropolitan areas of the monarchy (Vienna), heavy indus-
trial centres of Western Europe located in France and Germany; North America; and
western parts of the Russian Empire.
6
The World War II period is not taken fully into account – migration processes were
heavily influenced by the war (for more on this, see e.g. Kosin´ski 1975).
7
Until 1938, Czechoslovakia was composed of the Czech lands, Slovakia and
Carpathian Ruthenia. After World War II, Carpathian Ruthenia was incorporated
into the USSR.
8
Poland was composed of parts of present-day Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine, but
was missing its present northern and western lands, which still belonged to
Germany at that time.
9
Poland continued ethnic displacement under the label of repatriation (or family re-
union) in the 1950s and 1970s.
10
Vietnamese trainees and workers who came during the socialist era established a
community that, after the Velvet Revolution, became a nucleus of a newly en-
trenched, strong Vietnamese immigrant group in the Czech Republic.
11
For example, in the Czech Republic, the definition of ‘immigrants’ (flow statistics)
has been significantly broadened since 2001. Earlier, only permanent movements
were counted. Since 2001, however, foreigners staying more than one year in the
country have been included in the flow statistics.
12
Unfortunately, Hungarian data fails to cover the EU-15 citizens who need neither
permits nor registration.
13
Besides foreign employees in the Czech Republic, there is also an important seg-
ment of foreign entrepreneurs (holders of trade licences). In 2007, there were some
69,000 of them (mostly Vietnamese retail traders). The total of economically active
migrant population hence represented 5.6 per cent of the total economically active
population in the Czech Republic (Drbohlav et al. 2009). Unfortunately, no data on
foreign trade licence holders are available for the other two countries.
14
The secondary labour market is generally characterised by comparatively low wages,
unstable and difficult working and living conditions, and a lack of reasonable pro-
spects for advancement (see e.g. Piore 1979).
15
There was, however, also a boom in infrastructural and other direct investments that
contributed to creating many new jobs.
16
The Hungarian economy has a job structure that resembles a more productive econ-
omy. Low-wage small enterprises or self-employed jobs are missing or have a charac-
ter of provisory, non-increasing family-based ones. The economy highly relies on
multinational firms with limited freedom of activity (Laki 1998; GKM 2007). Kristof
Tamas and Rainer Mu¨nz (2006) give a similar example for Sweden, explaining its
relatively low immigration despite the liberal immigration regime towards the EU-8.
17
For example, following again Eurostat (2009) data: in 2060, the ratio of persons
aged 65 and over to the number of persons aged 15 to 64 will grow almost four
times in the case of Poland, almost three times in the Czech Republic and a bit less
so in Hungary.
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
205

18
For example, Poland successfully delayed the date of introducing visas for its eastern
neighbouring countries’ citizens, which is clear evidence that not only EU require-
ments, but also national interests shape migration policy (Kicinger 2005).
19
Immigration in the communist era was directed and quite specific as compared to
what one could find in developed Western societies.
20
Nevertheless, the basic philosophy of integration policy was already formulated in
the very late 1990s and it was even preceded by basic integration measures regard-
ing refugees and compatriots, which were implemented in the beginning of the
1990s (Drbohlav et al. 2009).
21
One has to realise, though, that strict legal regulations often do not allow long-term
migrants who were made redundant to stay in the host country.
22
This is illustrated by the case of the Czech Republic, where foreign labour immigra-
tion in districts grows as unemployment falls and vice versa (see Drbohlav 2004;
Cesky statisticky urad 2006; Horakova 2006).
23
The replacement migration concept (United Nations Secretariat 2000) clearly shows
us, however, that immigration as such cannot stop demographic ageing (see also
Grant et al. 2004; Burcin, Drbohlav & Kucera 2005).
24
It is still a question, though, whether a sort of a traditional pattern of transformation
of temporary labour migration into permanent settlement (see e.g. Martin & Taylor
1995) will prevail in the CEE region, or a stabilisation and even strengthening of the
circular character of immigration flows in the context of migratory transnationalism
(e.g. Portes, Guarnizo & Landolt 1999) will take place.
References
Anacka, M. & M. Okólski (2010), ‘Direct demographic consequences of post-accession mi-
gration for Poland’, in R. Black, G. Engbersen, M. Okólski & C. Panţîru (eds.), A conti-
nent moving West? EU enlargement and labour migration from Central and Eastern
Europe, 141-164. IMISCOE-AUP Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press.
Arango, J., C. Bonifazi, C. Finotelli, J. Peixoto, C. Sabino, S. Strozza & A. Triandafyllidou
(2009), ‘The making of an immigration model: Inflows, impacts and policies in Southern
Europe’.
IDEA
Working
Papers
9,
www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP_9_Southern_
countries_synthesis.pdf.
Bijak, J., D. Kupiszewska, & M. Kupiszewski (2008), ‘Replacement migration revisited:
Simulations of the effects of selected population and labour market strategies for the
aging Europe, 2002-2052’, Population Research and Policy Review 27 (3): 321-342.
Bonifazi, C., M. Okólski, J. Schoorl & P. Simon (eds.) (2008), International migration in
Europe: New trends and new method of analysis. IMISCOE-AUP Research Series.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Burcin, B., D. Drbohlav & T. Kucera (2005), ‘Czech Republic population prospects in the
mirror of replacement migration concept’, Acta Universitatis Carolinae – Geographica
XL 40 (1-2): 47-67.
Cermak, Z., D. Dzurova (2008), ‘Pracovni a zivotni podminky nelegalnich migrantu v Cesku’,
in D. Drbohlav (ed.), Nelegalní ekonomicke aktivity migrantu: Cesko v evropskem kontex-
tu, 130-149. Prague: Karolinum.
Cesky statisticky urad (2006), Cizinci v regionech CR. Prague: Cesky statisticky urad/
Ministerstvo prace a socialnich veci CR.
Dorenbos, R. (1999), Labour market adjustments in Hungary and Poland. Groningen:
Graduate School in Systems, Organization and Management.
206
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

Drbohlav, D. (2011), ‘Determinants of migration’, in I. Grabowska-Lusińska, D. Drbohlav &
A. Hars (eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative analysis of the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Poland before and after joining the EU, 38-76. Saarbrücken: Lambert
Academic Publishing.
Drbohlav, D. (2004a), The Czech Republic: The times they are a-changing. European
Commission’s series ‘Migration trends in selected EU applicant countries’. Vienna:
International Organization for Migration.
Drbohlav, D. (2004b), ‘Migration trends in selected EU applicant countries, Volume II – The
Czech Republic, the times they are a-changing’, in European Commission, Sharing expe-
rience: Migration trends in selected applicant countries and lessons learned from the new
countries of immigration in the EU and Austria. Vienna: IOM.
Drbohlav, D., I. Grabowska-Lusińska, L. Medova, A. Hars & M. Lesińska (2011),
‘Conclusions’, in I. Grabowska-Lusińska, D. Drbohlav & A. Hars (eds.), Immigration
puzzles: Comparative analysis of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland before and
after joining the EU, 128-132. Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Drbohlav, D., L. Medova, Z. Cermak, E. Janska, D. Cermakova, D. Dzurova (2010), Migrace
a (i)migranti v Cesku: Kdo jsme, odkud prichazime, kam jdeme? Prague: SLON – socio-
logicke nakladatelstvi.
Drbohlav, D., L. Lachmanova-Medova, Z. Cermak, E. Janska, D. Cermakova & D. Dzurova
(2009), ‘The Czech Republic: On its way from emigration to immigration country’, IDEA
Working Papers 11, www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP11_Czech_Republic.pdf.
Düvell, F. (ed.) (2006), Illegal immigration in Europe. Beyond control? New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Eurostat (2009), Main tables. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/population/da-
ta/main_tables.
Fassmann, H. & U. Reeger (2008), ‘ “Old” immigration countries: Synthesis report’, IDEA
Working Papers 3, www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP3_Old_countries_synthesis.pdf.
Fassmann, M. (2008), ‘Charakter trhu prace na cerno a situace v Cesku’, in D. Drbohlav (ed.),
Nelegalní ekonomicke aktivity migrantu: Cesko v evropskem kontextu, 68-81. Prague:
Karolinum.
GKM (2007), A kis- es kozepvallalkozasok helyzete 2005-2006. Budapest: GKM.
Górny, A. (2010), ‘Conclusions’, in A. Górny, I. Grabowska-Lusińska, M. Lesińska & M.
Okólski (eds.), Immigration to Poland: Policy, employment, integration, 194-196.
Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Scholar.
Górny, A., I. Grabowska-Lusińska, M. Lesińska & M. Okólski (eds.) (2009), ‘Poland:
Becoming a country of sustained immigration’, IDEA Working Papers 10, www.idea6fp.
uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP10_Poland.pdf.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I. (2011), ‘Introduction and conceptual framework’, in I. Grabowska-
Lusińska, D. Drbohlav & A. Hars (eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative analysis of
the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland before and after joining the EU, 5-21.
Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I., D. Drbohlav & A. Hars (eds.) (2011), Immigration puzzles:
Comparative analysis of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland before and after join-
ing the EU. Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Grabowska-Lusińska, I. & M. Okólski (2009), Emigracja ostatnia?, Warsaw: Wydawnictwo
Naukowe Scholar.
Grant, J., S. Hoorens, S. Sivadasan, M. van het Loo, J. DaVanzo, L. Hale, S. Gibson & W.
Butz (2004), Low fertility and population ageing: Causes, consequences, and policy op-
tions. Santa Monica: The RAND Corporation.
Grzymała-Kazłowska, A. & M. Okólski (2010), ‘Amorphous population movements into
Poland and ensuing policy challenges’, in U.A. Segal, D. Elliot & N.S. Mayadas (eds.),
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
207

Immigration worldwide: Policies, practices, and trends. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Grzymała-Kazłowska, A. & M. Okólski (2003), ‘Influx and integration of migrants in Poland
in the early 21st century’, CMR Working Papers 50, www.migracje.uw.edu.pl/obm/pix/
050.pdf.
Hars, A. (2011), ‘Immigrant flows and stocks in Central and Eastern Europe: The Czech,
Hungarian and Polish experience’, in I. Grabowska-Lusińska, D. Drbohlav, A. Hars
(eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative analysis of the Czech Republic, Hungary and
Poland before and after joining the EU, 22-37. Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic
Publishing.
Hars, A. (2009), ‘Immigration countries in Central and Eastern Europe: The case of Hungary’,
IDEA Working Papers 12, www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP12_Hungary.pdf.
Horakova, M. (2008), ‘Mezinarodni pracovni migrace v CR’, Bulletin VUPSV 20. Praha:
Výzkumny ustav prace a socialnich veci VUPSV.
Horakova, M. (2006), Zahranicni pracovni migrace v Ceske republice dva roky po vstupu CR
do EU. Prague: Výzkumny ustav prace a socialnich veci VUPSV.
Iglicka, K. & M. Okólski (2005), ‘A Central European perspective’, in R. Süsmuth & W.
Weidenfeld (eds.), Managing integration: The European Union’s responsibilities towards
immigrants. Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Stiftung.
Kaczmarczyk, P., M. Okólski (2005), International migration in Central and Eastern Europe:
Current and future trends. United Nations Expert Group Meeting on International
Migration and Development. New York: United Nations, Population Division.
Kępińska, E. (2007), ‘Recent trends in international migration: The 2007 SOPEMI report for
Poland’, CMR Working Papers 29, www.migracje.uw.edu.pl/obm/pix/029_87.pdf.
Kicinger, A. (2005), ‘Between Polish interests and the EU influence: Polish migration policy
development 1989-2004’, CEFMR Working Paper 9/2005.
Kornai, J. (1980), Economics of shortage. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Korys, I. (2004), Volume III – Poland: Dilemmas of a sending and receiving country.
European Commission’s Migration trends in selected EU applicant countries series.
Vienna: International Organization for Migration.
Kosinski, L.A. (1975), ‘Interregional migration in East-Central Europe’, in A. Kosiński & R.
M. Prothero (eds.), People on the move. 277-291. London: Methen and Co.
Laki, M. (1998), Kisvallalkozas a szocializmus utan. Budapest: Kozgazdasagi Szemle
Alapitvany.
Lesińska, M., R. Stefańska & M. Szulecka (2011), ‘Development of migration policies of the
Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland – on the way towards maturity’, in I. Grabowska-
Lusińska, I., D. Drbohlav & A. Hars (eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative analysis
of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland before and after joining the EU, 77-115.
Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Martin, P.L. & J.E. Taylor (1995), Guest-worker programs and policies. Washington, D.C.:
The Urban Institute.
Medova, L. (2011), ‘Migration impacts’, in I. Grabowska-Lusińska, D. Drbohlav & A. Hars
(eds.), Immigration puzzles: Comparative analysis of the Czech Republic, Hungary and
Poland before and after joining the EU, 116-127. Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic
Publishing.
Nugent, W. (1995), ‘Migration from the German and Austro-Hungarian empires to North
America’, in R. Cohen (ed.), The Cambridge survey of world migration, 103-108.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Okólski, M. (2004), ‘Migration patterns in the Central and Eastern Europe on the eve of the
European Union expansion: An overview’, in A. Górny & P. Ruspini (eds.), Migration in
the
New
Europe:
East-West
revisited,
23-48.
Houndmills/Basingstoke/Hampshire:
Palgrave Macmillan.
208
DUŠAN DRBOHLAV

Okólski, M. (2001), ‘Mobilność przestrzenna z perspektywy koncepcji migracji niepełnej’, in
E. Jaźwińska & M. Okólski (eds.), Ludzie na huśtawce: Migracje między peryferiami
Polski i Zachodu, 31-61. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Scholar.
Piore, M.J. (1979), Birds of passage: Migrant labour and industrial societies. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Portes, A., L.E. Guarnizo & P. Landolt (1999), ‘The study of transnationalism: Pitfalls and
promises of an emergent research field’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 22 (2): 217-237.
Renooy, P., S. Ivarsson, O. van der Wusten-Gritsai & R. Meijer (2004), Undeclared work in
an enlarged Union. An analysis of undeclared work: An in-depth study of specific items.
Final report. Brussels: European Commission.
Reyneri, E. (2002), ‘Migrants’ involvement in irregular employment in the Mediterranean
countries of the European Union’, ILO International Migration Paper 41. Geneva: ILO
International Labour Organization.
Tamas, K. & R. Münz (with a contribution by E. Hönekopp) (2006), Labour migrants un-
bound? EU enlargement, transitional measures and labour market effects. Stockholm:
Institute for Futures Studies.
Triandafyllidou, A. (ed.) (2006), Contemporary Polish migration in Europe: Complex patterns
of movement and settlement. Washington, D.C.: The Edwin Mellen Press.
United Nations Secretariat (2000), Replacement migration: Is it a solution to declining and
ageing populations? New York: Population Division, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, United Nations Secretariat.
Wallace, C. & D. Stola (eds.) (2001), Patterns of migration in Central Europe. Houndmills/
New York: Palgrave.
Weclawowicz, G. (2001), ‘Transformation of large cities and urban centres in Poland:
Selected issues’, in J. Kitowski (ed.), ‘Spatial dimension of socio-economic transforma-
tion processes in Central and Eastern Europe on the turn of the 20th century’, in
Rozprawy i Monografie Wydziału Ekonomicznego Filii UMCS w Rzeszowie 22, 337-364.
Rzeszów: Wydział Ekonomiczny Filii UMCS w Rzeszowie.
Zlotnik, H. (1999), ‘Trends of international migration since 1965: What existing data reveals’,
International Migration 37 (1): 21-61.
PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC, HUNGARY AND POLAND
209


9
An uncertain future of immigration in Europe
Insights from expert-based stochastic forecasts for
selected countries
Arkadiusz Wiśniowski, Jakub Bijak, Marek Kupiszewski and
Dorota Kupiszewska
9.1
A research paradigm for the uncertain world
(Kupiszewski and Kupiszewska)
The theoretical underpinning of this volume is the analysis of changes in
migration patterns over time, discovering regularities and formulating a
theory describing the observed migration processes. Marek Okólski offered
such a theory in chapter 1. Migration forecasting allows for the extension,
albeit with a degree of uncertainty, of migration patterns into the future. In
an ideal and reasonably predictable world, it would be possible to use fore-
casts to identify the moment of transition from an emigration to an immi-
gration country for those countries that are in the transition phase. To do
so, the IDEA project team (see note 9 in Introduction) tried to introduce
some quantitative measure of the stage in the migration cycle and to devel-
op some kind of ‘trajectory’ on which each country could have been
located, depending on its migration system characteristics. However, opera-
tionalising the theory turned out to be an impossible task due to its long-
term perspective. Also posing a challenge were the irregularity of the mi-
gration processes involved, complexity and inherent differences in the his-
torical changes in migration observed in various countries (see chapter 2)
and uncertainty embedded in forecasting (see later in this section).
Substantial impact of historical and political processes (for example, the
demise of communism in Central Europe and the 2010-2011 revolts
sweeping Arab World countries), which have profound impact on migra-
tion flow counts, is impossible to account for in a theoretical framework,
although it is very apparent in statistics. This failure is not a surprise: Sture
Öberg and Babette Wils (1998) and Marek Kupiszewski (2002) noted that
theories of migration are always difficult, and very often impossible, to op-
erationalise and use for forecasting purposes.

Apart from purely theoretical considerations, migration forecasting
serves utilitarian purposes by supporting the formulation of migration poli-
cies. The authors of this chapter feel strongly that migration policies are
often formulated without a firm base of factual support and are rather pre-
dicated on qualitative information only. While chapters 3 through 8 present
data on past trends, this forecasting exercise is done in an effort to provide
some quantitative insight into the future and thus provide a better factual
basis for policymaking. The Bayesian forecasting method, implemented in
the IDEA project, allows for combining qualitative information with statis-
tical data. Moreover, it has an added bonus: very clearly showing how
much uncertainty is involved in the forecasts. As a consequence, it allows
for the formulation of alternative policies in case some extreme scenarios
are realised.
One of the central methodological problems of forecasting in general
and of demographic forecasting in particular is how to handle forecasting
error. In population forecasting, Nico Keilman (1990) specified several
types of possible sources of errors in deterministic population forecasts. If
we shift from thinking in terms of deterministic forecasts and forecasting
errors calculated ex post to considering some measure of forecasting uncer-
tainty1 calculated ex ante, as posited by the proponents of the stochastic
approach, the sources of forecast errors listed by Keilman could be inter-
preted as the sources of uncertainty of a forecast.
Even though the methodology of migration forecasting is much less de-
veloped than the methodology of population forecasting – as is clearly
demonstrated by Jakub Bijak’s (2010) study – we can attempt to create a
similar, but not identical list of sources of uncertainty in migration forecast-
ing. The forecasts of migration are uncertain because:
–
We cannot uniquely define the migration phenomenon.
–
We cannot measure migration precisely.
–
We do not know how migration depends on explanatory variables or
how to quantify the relationship.
–
We do not know how migration, or the determinants of migration, will
change in the future.
The key problems with the definitions of international migration include,
but are not limited to, the lack of international harmonisation and the
changes of definitions over time (see Kupiszewska & Nowok 2008;
Nowok, Kupiszewska & Poulain 2006; Nowok & Kupiszewska 2005). The
differences between the IDEA countries involve, among others, the dura-
tion of stay criterion used to determine which individuals are included in
the migration flow count. In particular, the following categories of migra-
tion flow statistics can be observed: changes of permanent residence (e.g.
in Poland), long-term migration for one year or more (e.g. the immigration
of non-European Economic Area citizens to the Czech Republic and
212
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

Hungary), short-term and long-term migration for more than x months (e.g.
three months in Austria) or changes of usual residence irrespective of the
duration of stay (e.g. in Spain).
The second source of uncertainty is the measurement of migration. The
problems related to measurement include, among others, underestimation
due to registration avoidance. This is probably the largest source of uncer-
tainty in migration statistics (for legal flows, especially emigration) and
applies to all the countries where population registers are the source of mi-
gration flow statistics. In addition, illegal migrants in the IDEA countries
are usually not included in official statistics, with the exception of Spain.
In France, immigration flow data are available for non-EEA citizens only,
while data on emigration flows are not available at all. Greece started to
provide data on immigration flows to Eurostat in 2007 (data on residence
permits issued in 2006). In the countries where data on total immigration
flows are available, some disaggregated statistics are sometimes missing,
for example, there is no data on immigration by country of previous resi-
dence in Hungary and France and no data until 2005 on immigration by
citizenship to Poland. Even if such disaggregated data are produced, there
is sometimes a problem of a large value in the ‘unknown’ category (e.g. a
large number of immigrants with unknown country of previous residence
in Austria).
Other problems include the delays in the production and publication of
statistics, differences in data published in various secondary sources and
the lack of relevant metadata. The numbers published in various sources
may be provisional or final, may or may not include administrative correc-
tions, may be produced using different methodologies or may cover differ-
ent categories of migrants (Kupiszewska & Nowok 2008; Nowok et al.
2006).
In explanatory models, where migration is modelled as a function of
exogenous variables, the randomness of the parameters of a forecasting
model itself or the uncertain relationship between the migration and exoge-
nous variables constitute a separate source of forecast uncertainty. In addi-
tion, problems with definitions and the measurement of the exogenous vari-
ables can be very similar to those specified above with respect to migration.
Finally, we have to deal with the last source of uncertainty, which is
closely linked with the lack of knowledge of future migration processes.
Migration is very volatile and can rise to extremely high levels or drop very
quickly, as shown by migration from Poland to Germany at the turn of the
1980s and 1990s and post-enlargement migration from new EU member
states to the United Kingdom and Ireland. These changes are dictated by
external factors, not usually accounted for in the forecasting models, such
as wars, significant political changes and modification of migration poli-
cies. If we look back to 1980 and inspect the forecasts of migration be-
tween the European states 25 years on (around 2005), we would – firstly –
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
213

have an incorrect set of states; no one at that time predicted the fall of the
Soviet Union and the creation of an independent Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia,
Ukraine and Moldova, not to mention the Central Asiatic Republics, and
the dissolution of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia – the latter in a violent
manner. Second, at that time nobody, expected the 2004 and 2007 enlarge-
ments of the European Union to accept, among others, ten new countries
formerly in the Communist bloc and such large-scale flows from new to se-
lected old EU member states after 2004. The discontinuity of demographic
processes is one of the main problems for migration forecasters.
The above considerations lead us to the conclusion that, as far as migra-
tion is concerned, we live in a very uncertain world and uncertainty is a
key factor shaping the development of migration processes. However,
many researchers and policymakers are under the illusion that the world is
predictable. In economics, Roman Frydman and Michael Goldberg (2007)
noted in their influential book that we are unable to precisely understand
and describe the future; therefore, forecasting error is a natural phenomen-
on. The authors made a plea for recognising the limitations of economic
knowledge. In demography, in parallel to economics, similar thinking has
developed, which aims to incorporate uncertainty – both as a concept and
as a quantifiable variable – into research, and in particular into forecasting.
Philip Rees and Ian Turton (1998) offered a simple classification of possi-
ble ways of dealing with uncertainty in population forecasting.
–
To ignore it by constructing a single variant population forecast and
pretending that uncertainty does not exist.
–
To incorporate it by constructing a multi-variant population forecast
(typically with central, high and low variants).
–
To create a stochastic forecast which allows for the provision of some
ex ante measures of uncertainty.
The solution to depart from deterministic population forecasts and devise a
forecast where the uncertainty of the results could be somehow quantified
– that is, stochastic forecasts of population – has been considered for well
over a decade. The methodology of such forecasts has been proposed by
Ronald Lee and Shripad Tuljapurkar (1994), Wolfgang Lutz, Warren
Sanderson and Sergey Scherbov (1996), Juha Alho and Bruce Spencer
(1997) and many others. Stochastic forecasts have been prepared for many
developed countries, but they are not yet part of the standard toolkit of
national statistical institutions and international organisations. However,
the development of the new sub-field was advanced enough to allow pio-
neers to write a monograph-cum-textbook (Alho & Spencer 2005).
Interestingly, the development of stochastic approaches in population
forecasting has led to a change in professional self-identification. Alho and
Spencer (2005: 3), quoting other prominent demographers, describe this
change in the following way: James Vaupel, they say, defined a demographer
214
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

as ‘someone who knows Lexis [diagram]’. Joel Cohen
defined a
demographer as ‘someone who forecasts population wrong’. Finally, Alho
and Spencer (2005) themselves define a statistical demographer as ‘someone
who knows Lexis, forecasts population wrong, but can at least quantify the
uncertainty’. While somewhat anecdotal, this change of definition shows the
evolution of modern demography; perhaps a similar process will arise in the
future in other social sciences.
The development of stochastic population forecasting had quite a limited
impact on the way the components of population change have been fore-
casted. As Bijak (2010) demonstrated, there were some attempts at model-
ling and forecasting migration using probabilistic and stochastic methods,
but this was not in existing mainstream research. Bijak (2010) proposed a
new methodology, in which Bayesian statistics was applied to produce
forecasts of international migration flows between Germany and three
European countries: Italy, Poland and Switzerland.
A methodology similar to the one proposed by Bijak, extended through
the application of the Delphi method to complement information on immi-
gration reported by national statistical offices, was used in the current
study. The forecasts were prepared for seven European countries: Austria,
the Czech Republic, France, Hungary, Italy, Poland and Portugal.2 The
forecasts concerned total immigration flows (nationals and foreign citizens
together), except for France, where immigration of foreigners was fore-
casted (in line with the data availability). In all cases, the definitions used
by national statistical offices in their demographic statistics were applied.
There were four reasons why immigration, rather than net migration,
was forecasted. First, the data concerning emigration (required to calculate
net migration) are less reliable than data concerning immigration, mainly
because people often do not report their departure, even if they register
their arrival at the destination. Second, the elicitation of knowledge through
the Delphi method was deemed to be easier when the questions referred to
immigration rather than to net migration. Moreover, it was expected that
using a variable referring to unidirectional flows (rather than a difference
of two flows, as is the case for net migration) would reduce the uncer-
tainty, which was expected to be (and was indeed) very large. Finally, from
the policy point of view, immigration is the variable that policymakers are
keen to look at, whereas net migration somehow blurs the picture from the
perspective of the receiving country. The methodology and results of this
study, presented in subsequent sections of the current chapter, are described
in more detail and in more technical terms in Bijak and Wiśniowski (2009,
2010).
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
215

9.2
Bayesian forecasting of migration: A methodological outline
(Wis´niowski and Bijak)
9.2.1
Why forecast migration?
Forecasting migration is a very difficult research task for the reasons out-
lined above, in particular, due to the lack of comprehensive migration theo-
ries and the lack of data, including short time series (Willekens 1994;
Kupiszewski 2002). On the other hand, migration forecasts with suitable
uncertainty assessments are crucial for obtaining credible population pre-
dictions, as well as for other policy and planning purposes.
It has to be noted that, in general, the primary aim of socio-economic
forecasting is not to predict the future with 100 per cent accuracy, as this is
impossible. The forecasters’ goal is rather to provide input in order to
guide the political decision-making process. Therefore, the key issue in the
forecasting process is not to offer a (what is improbable) point estimate of
the future values of some variables, but rather to provide a reliable, quanti-
tative assessment of the related uncertainty span. In the current study, this
was attempted by estimating predictive probability distributions (i.e. proba-
bility distributions of the future volumes of immigration flows). Such dis-
tributions are a way of illustrating how probable particular immigration
scenarios are in our view.
With these considerations in mind, we sought to provide forecasts of im-
migration into seven European countries up to the temporal horizon of 2025.
To do so, we relied both on quantitative data and on knowledge of country-
specific migration experts.
9.2.2
Forecasting methodology
Frans Willekens (1994) noted that the problems with the migration predic-
tions mentioned above call for including expert knowledge in the forecast-
ing exercise. The methodology that allows for a combination of subjective
expertise and hard data in a coherent and structured manner is the so-called
Bayesian approach, dating back to the theorem proposed by an eighteenth
century English statistician, Rev. Thomas Bayes (1763). This approach
allows for combining expert judgements or opinions, treated as ‘prior’
knowledge, with data.
The variables forecasted in the current study were immigration inflows,
both total and from up to three of the most important sources of immigra-
tion (countries of previous residence or – in the case of immigration to
France and Hungary – countries of citizenship). It should be noted that no
harmonisation of migration data was envisaged for the project. As a result,
the predictions of flows obtained for various countries were virtually in-
comparable. Rather than providing comparisons of the flows forecasted for
different countries, we concentrated on the consistency of the forecasted
216
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

immigration volumes and population stocks for a given country, within its
own demographic balance equation.
9.2.3
Statistical models
The statistical tools employed included the following simple time series
models.
–
For the total immigration flows: the autoregressive model (AR) of order
1, stationary (i.e. exhibiting stable characteristics over time) and, for
the sake of comparison, the so-called random walk with drift (not sta-
tionary). The models also allowed for the capture of the changing varia-
bility of migration (known as stochastic volatility).
–
For modelling the most important sources of immigration: vector autor-
egressive (VAR) models of order 1 were applied to log-ratio trans-
formed variables, ensuring the summation of the shares to the total.
–
Additionally, for assessing the impact of the selected demographic and
economic variables, VAR models of order 1 were used.
In general, the AR models assume that the number of immigrants in a giv-
en year depends on their number one year before and on some purely ran-
dom change that reflects all the uncertainty (on average, this change is
assumed to be zero). Generally, in an AR process, the number of immi-
grants in a given year is the sum of all these random components from the
very beginning of the process (in practice, it is the first observation in the
series). This specification allows us to describe three different patterns of
behaviour: stationary, non-stationary (random walk) and explosive.
In the case of a stationary AR process, the older the random component,
the less influence it has on today’s immigration flow. The expected value
of the immigration flow is then constant, which means that the process is,
on average, stable over time. Any shock (e.g. radical liberalisation of the
immigration policy) will change the number of immigrants only tempora-
rily (say, for a few years) and, in the long run, this number will return to
the average observed before the shock. Hence, the forecasting based on an
AR model is relatively precise. The addition of a trend term (e.g. linear,
logistic or logarithmic) introduces an increasing (or decreasing) determinis-
tic tendency along which the process develops.
In a random walk model (which is a special case of AR), all random
components have equal influence on today’s value. As a result, the process
is non-stationary, which means that it is unstable in time and the precision
with which we are able to predict the number of immigrants becomes
smaller with the forecasting horizon (e.g. such a model may be used to de-
scribe a situation where we are unable to predict the behaviour of immigra-
tion flows after a liberalisation of the policy in the long-run). A drift term
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
217

(i.e. a constant value added in each step) introduces increasing (or decreas-
ing) tendencies along which these characteristics hold.
The last possibility, as far as AR models are concerned, is the ‘explo-
sion’ of the process under study. In this scheme, the more distant the past
changes are, the more influence they have today. In the current application,
this would lead to the number of immigrants growing exponentially to
achieve very large values. After some period of time, the predicted values
would become simply implausible.
Finally, the VAR models are multidimensional generalisations of the AR
model, including not only the variable of interest (here, migration flow or
share of flow from a specified country), but also other variables, such as
the considered migration determinants or shares of flow from other coun-
tries. In the VAR models, the potential instantaneous and lagged relation-
ships among all the variables under study are analysed jointly.
9.2.4
Prior expert knowledge elicitation
Prior knowledge, a very important element of analysis in the Bayesian frame-
work, was obtained by means of a Delphi survey from country-specific
migration experts selected by the national teams participating in the IDEA
project.
The Delphi survey is a technique that acquires anonymous opinions and
judgements from selected respondents and provides a means of reaching
an informed consensus among them. Originally, the usual applications of
the Delphi survey involved forecasting. In the current study, we used it as
a tool for obtaining expert knowledge that served only as part of the input
into the model that produced the forecasts. One of the most important char-
acteristics of the Delphi survey is that the answers are obtained iteratively.
After each round, an anonymised statistical summary of the preceding
round is provided to the respondents. In the consecutive rounds, they can
reformulate their judgements and views and reach an agreement.
There are two major issues that require attention during preparation of
the Delphi survey: proper formulation of the questions and the selection of
the experts. The questions should take into account the hints provided by
cognitive psychology, so as to ensure correct interpretation and unambigu-
ous answers. Apart from this problem, two additional problems were iden-
tified in this study.
First, the questions relate to the characteristics of the immigration proc-
ess, and were then transformed into the characteristics of the models that
served as forecasting tools. It could have been the case, however, that the
underlying experts’ model – which led them to formulate such an opinion
– was different and could have brought about inconsistencies. The second
issue relates to the survey questions, which contain subjective probabilities.
The literature on the subject (see e.g. Kadane & Wolfson 1998; Rowe &
218
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

Wright 2001) points out that the respondents tend to perceive probabilities
as frequencies, and are also overconfident with respect to their beliefs. As
a result, they tend to provide exceedingly narrow uncertainty spans.
Inconsistent answers can be given to differently formulated questions. Yet
another issue is that the group of experts can sometimes comprise special-
ists untrained in statistics and hence unfamiliar with the terms and concepts
used for model formulation.
As far as the selection of experts is concerned, in order to avoid compli-
cations, their joint knowledge should be heterogeneous and should cover
various aspects of the problem. The group of experts should not be too
large or too small, according to J. Scott Armstrong (1985) and Gene Rowe
and George Wright (2001).
The anonymous survey in question here was made up of two stages.
Answers were obtained from between six and fourteen experts per country.
The survey was given to those with various professional backgrounds –
from demography, economics and sociology, to political science and law,
and public administration – thereby ensuring the heterogeneity of their
joint knowledge on migration. The questions focused on the characteristics
of immigration processes in the period between 2007 and 2025: namely,
trends, types of processes and variability, as well as the uncertainty of the
processes’ future developments. It should be stressed that there was no ex-
plicit question concerning the stage of the migration cycle of a particular
country, which was meant to largely emerge from the qualitative analysis
of the results.
The experts were also asked about the impact of economic variables
(GDP per capita growth and unemployment rates in the receiving countries)
and demographic variables (natural population growth rate and share of the
productive-age population in the receiving countries) on immigration.
Additionally, they were asked to identify three (in the case of Poland, two)
of the most important sources of immigration to their countries in the future.
The answers were transferred to a form required by the model (e.g. ex-
pressed as prior probability distributions or deterministic trends) and then
combined with data on immigration flows produced by the national statisti-
cal institutions (mostly available in the Eurostat database) in order to pro-
duce forecasts.
9.3
Bayesian forecasting of immigration: Results
(Wis´niowski and Bijak)
A key aim that accompanies the interpretation of Bayesian forecasting
results is measuring the change in expectations, as formulated in subjective
expert knowledge, due to quantitative and objective, yet still inherently
flawed data.
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
219

As far as the underlying forecasting model is concerned, the data exhib-
ited a clear preference for the non-stationary – and thus hardly predictable
– random walk process in most of the countries. This conclusion is in line
with that of several other studies (for more discussion, see e.g. Pijpers
2008).
The predictions are presented in terms of central tendencies (medians)
with uncertainty spans, which are based on symmetric quantiles of predic-
tive distributions. Hence, the 50 per cent ranges are based on the predictive
quantiles (lower and upper), the 80 per cent ranges on the quantiles of rank
0.1 and 0.9, and the 90 per cent ranges on the quantiles of rank 0.05 and
0.95. These uncertainty assessments reflect our conclusions, based on ex-
pert knowledge and statistical data, that future migration inflows will fall
within a given interval with a pre-defined probability. Of special note is
the fact that the probability of migration not being higher than the upper
values of the 50 per cent, 80 per cent and 90 per cent intervals is 0.75,
0.90 and 0.95, respectively.
9.3.1
Forecasting total immigration flows
Examples of quantile-based ex ante assessments of predictive uncertainty
for Poland and Italy are illustrated in Figure 9.1. The forecasts for Italy are
characterised by a relatively large level of uncertainty. The median expecta-
tions of immigration flows follow historically increasing tendencies: from
305,000 in 2005, to 370,000 in 2016, to 434,000 in 2025. Broad 50 per
cent intervals indicate large uncertainty levels inherent in the expected
future flows. The upper bound amounts to 839,000 people in 2016 and 1.4
million in 2025. These values should be thought of as only barely plausi-
ble. We thus advise forecast users to interpret such extreme values only as
an indication of orders of magnitude. There are two main reasons for such
high levels of uncertainty: first, the steadily increasing inflows of immi-
grants in the past; second, prior input into the models based on experts’ ex-
pectations of the explosive patterns of future immigration to Italy. These
factors, together with the data that were affected by regularisations in the
past, suggest that these outcomes should be considered an indication of the
extremely high levels of uncertainty surrounding future immigration
inflows.
Compared to Italy, the inflows forecasted for Poland are relatively mod-
erate and stable. The predictive median tendency indicates an increase in
permanent immigration to Poland from an initial 15,000 people in 2007, to
28,000 in 2016, to 53,000 people in 2025. The 50 per cent intervals are
relatively narrow, yet exhibit an increasing predictive uncertainty: between
16,000 and 54,000 people estimated to immigrate in 2016 and between
21,000 and 158,000 in 2025.
220
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

Figure 9.1
Immigration to Italy and Poland
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
Immigration to Italy: Forecast for 2006-2025
Observations   
90%       
80%       
50% (with median)   
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
Immigration to Poland: Forecast for 2008-2025
Observations   
90%       
80%       
50% (with median)   
Note: The frame indicates a ten-year forecast horizon.
Source: Data until 2006 (Italy) or 2007 (Poland): Eurostat and NSIs with own re-
calculations; forecast: own computations
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
221

The forecasts for the rest of the countries are presented later (left-hand
side, Figure 9.3). The general conclusion is that immigration flows are ex-
pected to increase in all the countries (in terms of the median variant).
Although uncertainty appears to be growing over time in all the cases, its
magnitude differs among different countries. The widest uncertainty spans
are observed for Austria, the Czech Republic and Italy, whereas the nar-
rowest ones are visible for France and Hungary. In all the cases – including
Italy and Poland though with the exception of Portugal – incorporating ex-
pert knowledge increased the uncertainty of the forecasts. This result may
stem from the fact that experts were knowledgeable about past events not
reflected by the data and, based on that knowledge, they formulated their
opinions and judgements for the future and thereby increased data-based
uncertainty.
9.3.2
Forecasts for the top source countries of immigration
Figure 9.2 presents the median forecasts of cumulative source country
shares (cumulative shares of migrants from countries of previous residence
within immigration totals), again for Italy and Poland. For the sake of
clarity, the uncertainty spans were omitted here. However, the predictive
uncertainty of the shares appeared to be so high that the analysis of differ-
ent combinations of quantile-based predictions became meaningless. The
forecasted numbers of migrants coming from major source countries are
conditional upon the median values of the predicted shares (presented in
Figure 9.2) and overall immigration volumes (presented in Figure 9.1).
For Italy, the three most important immigrant countries of origin were
Romania, Albania and Morocco. The available data series were very small,
covering only ten years (1995-2004). During the last observation year, out
of the total registered inflow of 415,000 people, 15 per cent came from
Romania (64,000), 9 per cent from Albania (37,000) and 7 per cent from
Morocco (31,000). According to the median forecasts, the share of inflows
from Morocco is projected to remain stable, at just below 8 per cent,
throughout the forecast horizon – which would correspond to 28,000 immi-
grants in 2015 and 34,000 in 2025. At the same time, the share of inflows
from Romania would rapidly decline to about 10 per cent and remain rela-
tively constant; while the inflow from Albania is thought likely to stabilise
at just around 12 per cent starting in 2008. In absolute terms, however,
these inflows would follow an increasing trend: from Romania, 38,000
people in 2015 and 45,000 in 2025; from Albania, 44,000 in 2015 and
52,000 in 2025.
For Poland, experts identified two of the most important sources of
future inflows as Ukraine (immigration) and the UK (return migration). In
2007, out of 15,000 immigrants newly registered for permanent residence,
777 people (5 per cent) came from Ukraine and 3,900 (26 per cent) from
222
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

the UK. The median forecasts, prepared on the basis of 1990-2007 data,
indicate that the share of immigrants from Ukraine would first increase to
10 per cent in 2008 and then exceed 11 per cent in 2013, only to decline
below 10 per cent in 2016 and to ultimately 6 per cent in 2025. Return mi-
gration from the UK would follow a similar pattern: from below 15 per
cent in 2008, to a peak of over 18 per cent in 2014, to below 17 per cent
Figure 9.2
Immigration to Italy and Poland, cumulative source country shares,
median forecasts
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
2019
2022
2025
Immigration to Italy: Source country shares, 1995-2025
Albania
Romania
Morocco
Rest
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
2020
2023
Immigration to Poland: Source country shares, 1993-2025
Rest
Ukraine
UK   
Notes: Italy data until 2004, forecast for 2005 to 2025
Rest refers to the rest of the world.
Source: Data until 2004 (Italy) or 2007 (Poland): Eurostat and NSIs with own
recalculations; forecast: own computations
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
223

in 2016, down to below 10 per cent in 2025. Both these trajectories are the
result of including experts’ opinions in the forecast. The shares for 2016
would correspond to 2,800 immigrants from Ukraine and 4,800 thousand
return migrants from the UK or around 28,200 immigrants altogether. For
2025, the respective numbers would amount to 3,300 for Ukraine and
5,100 for the UK, out of the total 53,100 permanent immigrants.
Figure 9.3 (see right-hand side) presents the forecasts of cumulative
source country shares for the other countries. As mentioned earlier, the pre-
dictive uncertainty levels were too high to draw any meaningful conclu-
sions from them. The forecasted shares are aligned with the trends sug-
gested by the experts. For instance, in Austria the future shares of
Figure 9.3
Immigration (left) and cumulative source country shares (right) for Austria, Czech
Republic, France, Hungary and Portugal
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1996
1998
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
2014
2016
2018
2020 2022 2024
Immigration to Austria: Source country shares, 1996-2025
Turkey   
Germany
Former Yugoslavia
Rest
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
1,000,000
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
Immigration to Austria: Forecast for 2008-2025
Observations   
90%       80% 
50% (with median)   
0
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
2020
2023
Immigration to Czech Republic: Source country shares, 1993-2025
Vietnam
Ukraine
Slovakia
Rest
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
1,000,000
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
Immigration to the Czech Republic: Forecast for 2008-2025
Observations   90%       80%       
50% (with median)   
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
2021
2024
Immigration to France: Source country shares, 1995-2025
China   
Morocco 
Turkey
Rest
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
Immigration to France: Forecast for 2006-2025
Observations   
90% 
80% 
50% (with median)   
224
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

immigrants arriving from former Yugoslav countries and from Turkey are
expected to increase. For France, an increase in the share of Chinese immi-
grants is predicted, as is the share of natives of Serbia and Montenegro in
inflows to Hungary.
9.3.3
Impact of economic and demographic variables
An analysis of the impact of additional economic and demographic varia-
bles demonstrates the emergence of a clear pattern. The two macroeconom-
ic covariates examined (GDP growth rates and unemployment rates in the
receiving countries) appeared to have hardly any influence on migration,
even when data were supported by expert judgement. The only exceptions
were economic growth in France (instantaneous impact) and Portugal (a
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
2019
2022
2025
Immigration to Hungary: Source country shares, 1992- 2025
Ukraine   
Serbia and Montenegro
Romania   
Rest
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
140,000
160,000
180,000
200,000
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
Immigration to Hungary: Forecast for 2007-2025
Observations
90%
80%
50% (with median)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
2019
2022
2025
Immigration to Portugal: Source country shares, 1992-2025
Guinea-Bissau
Cape Verde  
Brazil
Rest
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
Immigration to Portugal: Forecast for 2007-2025
Observations   
90% 
80% 
50% (with median)   
Notes: The frame indicates a 10-year forecast horizon (left), and the vertical lines
mark the end of the data series (right).
Sources: Eurostat and NSIs with own recalculations; forecast: own computations
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
225

one-year time lag). That result does not confirm the hypotheses of Heinz
Fassmann and Ursula Reeger, put forward in chapter 3. However, it should
be emphasised that our analysis concerned total immigration, not net mi-
gration, which was assumed to be influenced by GDP growth. Secondly,
unemployment rate was used in the forecasts as a proxy covariate for a
labour market situation and it might have not reflected the overall situation
of a given country. Alternatively, the impact of the labour market situation
could have been already captured by the demographic covariates, espe-
cially the productive-age population in the destination country. A tentative
conclusion might also be that the available data generally do not allow for
formal inferences to be drawn about the interrelations between immigration
and its two most important (e.g. according to Jennissen 2004) economic
determinants.
The impact of the two demographic variables (natural population growth
rates and the share of the productive-age population in the destination
countries) was significant in most cases, except for Portugal. For Austria,
significance applied to the lagging share of the productive-age population
only, while for the five remaining countries various combinations of lag-
ging and/or instantaneous influence of both demographic covariates were
found. A tentative conclusion is thus that the two demographic factors in-
deed play some role in shaping immigration flows.
Despite the explanatory potential of the demographic migration determi-
nants in this study, the conditional forecasts they helped generate remain
unsatisfactory from a policymaking point of view. In cases with the ‘best’
test results (France and Italy), the forecasts quickly reached implausible
values with high uncertainty spans. It thus seems that, even if the demo-
graphic covariates have a significant impact, the price to pay for including
them in the forecasts is extremely high predictive uncertainty.
In many cases, despite the variables’ significant impact on migration
inflows, the interpretation of the model parameters was counterintuitive.
This means that the positive outcomes of significance tests alone do not
guarantee reliable scenario-based predictions and that the latter need to be
considered with all due scepticism.
9.3.4
Migration cycle in the light of the forecasting exercise
It is difficult to draw a meaningful conclusion concerning confirmation or
disproval of the migration cycle stage of a given country, as put forth in
previous chapters, just by looking at the results of the forecasting exercise
presented above. There are two main reasons for that. The first and most
important is the exclusion from the analysis of the emigration flows from
the countries under study due to reasons described in section 9.1, primarily
the lack of data or their poor, even worse than for immigration, quality.
This
automatically
precludes
using
immigration
forecasts
alone
for
226
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

falsifying or validating the migration cycle theory outlined in previous
chapters. Hence, all results should be examined with caution, only as po-
tential symptoms indicating the possible position of a given country in the
cycle. Secondly, the differences between definitions of migrants in the
countries under study, the quality of the available data and their scarcity, as
outlined in section 9.1, additionally hampered comparisons between the an-
alysed countries.
Let us consider, for example, the case of Austria, an ‘old’ immigration
country. In chapter 3 of this volume, Fassmann and Reeger state that since
1994 Austria has been in the last stage of the cycle, i.e. the adaptation
phase. However, the results of the forecasting exercise do not seem to sup-
port that thesis unequivocally. The median trend of immigration is increas-
ing, reaching more than 200,000 migrants by 2025, with a very wide un-
certainty span. Should the adaptation phase hypothesis hold, this would
have to be balanced with increasing outflow (due to e.g. increased mobility
within Europe) in order to maintain the predicted stable net migration.
Another speculative explanation is a return to the initial stage of migration,
as suggested by Godfried Engbersen in chapter 4 in this volume.
The comparison of the four Southern European countries is hindered by
not having Greece and Spain in the analysis. For Italy and Portugal,
median tendencies and uncertainty spans (relative to the migration levels)
are similar. However, these two countries are distinct in their migration
context, as they apply different definitions of migrants and duration-of-stay
criteria, use different migration policies and have different colonial histor-
ies, as described in chapters 5 through 7. This further obstructs the compar-
ison of their position in the migration cycle.
In the case of ‘future’ immigrant countries – the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Poland – the results are ambiguous. All three share the same
source country of immigrants suggested by the experts: Ukraine. It may be
expected that flows from Ukraine will be largely comprised of labour
migration. This would be in line with the historic experiences of the ‘old’
migration countries, as stated by Okólski in chapter 1 and Joaquín Arango
in chapter 2 of this volume. On the other hand, there are many differences
between the results for these three countries, which show that there is a
considerable heterogeneity of migration patterns within this group.
In chapter 8 in this volume, Dušan Drbohlav concluded that the Czech
Republic and Hungary are in their transition period of the cycle, yet con-
siderably further on the path to becoming mature immigration countries
than Poland. This seems to be supported for Hungary, whose median
tendency is only slightly increasing with comparatively very narrow uncer-
tainty, suggesting the stability of future migrant inflows and relative ‘ma-
turity’ of the migration cycle. On the other hand, immigration to the Czech
Republic is characterised by increasing tendency and very wide uncer-
tainty. However, it should be noted that the data for this country were
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
227

subject to definitional change in 2001. Drbohlav’s conclusions concerning
Poland being at the early stage of the transition period of the migration
cycle seem to be approved by the experts. They suggested that flows
would start to increase even faster until around 2016, when the increase
would start to slow down and immigration will stabilise. It must be kept in
mind that forecasting for Poland was carried out using official data based
on the permanent duration of stay criterion. This might have precluded
from the analysis all temporary stay and labour migrants, i.e. liquid migra-
tion as outlined by Engbersen in chapter 4 and Drbohlav in chapter 8.
Moreover, interpolation of the recent post-enlargement emigration patterns,
as presented by Okólski in chapter 1, may prevail over even increasing im-
migration and further aggravate the positioning of Poland in the migration
cycle.
9.4
Conclusions
(Wis´niowski and Bijak)
The outcomes of the forecasting exercise carried out within the IDEA proj-
ect can be summarised as follows (for details, see Bijak & Wiśniowski
2009, 2010). First, migration appears to be a hardly predictable demo-
graphic process, strongly in accordance with previous research findings
(see e.g. Pijpers 2008). Moreover, assuming stationarity of immigration,
which is in fact a non-stationary variable, seems reckless from a methodo-
logical standpoint, as it can bring about very serious forecasting errors and
lead astray forecast users. A recent example is the study prepared for the
British Home Office (Dustmann, Casanova, Fertig, Preston & Schmidt
2003), in which the stationarity of the underlying model was assumed ex-
plicitly (Dustmann et al. 2003: 28, 68). The forecasted volumes of immi-
grants to the UK after the 2004 EU enlargement were underestimated by
more than an order of magnitude (see IPPR 2008).
Second, precise forecasting of the exact values of immigration flows is
virtually impossible, especially in light of the above. Predictive uncertainty,
however, can be accounted for by using the stochastic approach (Keilman
1990; Lutz et al. 2004). The randomness can then be quantified and ex-
pressed in probabilistic terms. It should be stressed that the stochastic
methodology of migration forecasting does not impact the nature of the
process itself. It simply addresses the fact that migration is difficult to pre-
dict. Consequently, the use of deterministic models is not a wholesale solu-
tion. Without an appropriate warning, it serves only to blur the picture, giv-
ing forecast users and decision makers the false impression that migration
can be predicted.
As for the subjective information obtained using the Delphi survey –
which served as an input for the forecasting models in the current study –
228
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

its impact on final outcomes was diverse. Expert knowledge appeared to
play a very important role in the estimation of the model parameters, espe-
cially with respect to the forecasts’ precision. Model selection, and thus de-
termining the very nature of the process, seemed almost completely unaf-
fected by the experts’ opinions. Given the prevailing selection of random
walk models – often independent from experts’ expectations – we argue
that the uncertain and barely predictable character of migration flows is not
just characteristic of a particular forecasting model, but also a fundamental
feature of migration. Again confirming earlier suggestions (e.g. Holzer
1959 or Keyfitz 1981), this implies that migration should be forecasted for
only a relatively short period: five to ten years at most. The uncertainty
and inherent unpredictability of migration flows grows over time, mainly
due to its non-stationary characteristics. Using horizons of more than a
decade into the future will necessarily lead to very broad uncertainty spans,
which will ultimately constitute a meaningless piece of information for
policymakers.
Finally, the impact of migration covariates proved to be difficult to
quantify. Due to the brevity of the time series and hardly predictable nature
of migration itself, the economic variables’ impact, if any, was very lim-
ited. On the other hand, despite the significant impact of demographic
covariates, in many cases the counterintuitive results of the parameter esti-
mation and subsequent largely meaningless forecasts rendered the interpre-
tation of the outcome dubious at best. It should be borne in mind that these
results may stem from the usage of an inexhaustive series of data or from
the narrow scope of measures chosen for the study. That is, the uncertainty
of the forecasts had at least three sources of uncertainty: of the migration
processes, of the covariates and of the interactions and interrelations among
them. These outcomes support earlier suppositions that additional, theory-
based determinants of migration – although extremely helpful in explaining
the processes ex post – are of very limited use when it comes to forecast-
ing (see Kupiszewski 2002). The results of the current study seem to indi-
cate that, while demographic factors play a significant role in shaping
migration processes, they simultaneously fail to contribute to more mean-
ingful and precise migration forecasts – even despite the very important
support of expert judgement.
The most important implication of the above conclusions for would-be
users of forecasting models is that migration is indeed a vastly uncertain
phenomenon. This may be seen as an undesirable feature. However, the de-
gree of uncertainty can nevertheless be quantified and evaluated using stat-
istical data and additionally enhanced by expert knowledge. This sort of
assessment is in itself an important piece of information for policymakers.
Migration forecasts such as the ones presented in the current study may
serve as an informational basis for political leaders and for informed and
rational migration policymaking, as outlined by Magdalena Lesińska in
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
229

chapter 11 in this volume. Their actions will strongly depend on the nature,
strategic objectives and constraints of a particular decision-making prob-
lem, as well as on their own preferences and views. A proper assessment
of the consequences of possible underestimation or overestimation of fu-
ture migration flows is crucial.
Our results should be viewed through the lens of the overall findings of
the IDEA project. In particular, and with respect to interpreting forecast
results, the phase of the migration cycle in a particular country, as
described in chapters 1 and 2, along with the specificities of the countries
belonging to one of the three groups (‘old’, ‘new’ and ‘future’ immigration
countries), should all be taken into account. However, it must be emphas-
ised that the forecasting concerned only immigration flows, which shows
only half of the picture of future migration, thus all results can only serve
as symptoms indicative of a country’s position in the migration cycle.
Data-related issues, such as differences in definitions and collection
schemes, regularisation programmes and the unending problem of estimat-
ing the number of illegal immigrants (see chapter 5), should also be ac-
knowledged. Moreover, identification and quantification of the migration
cycle in the forecasting exercise is affected by the definition of migrants in
the specific country, as well as the country-specific characteristics, eco-
nomic and demographic. Thus, formal comparisons between, for instance,
‘old’ and ‘future’ immigration countries were hardly possible.
As far as the impact of social, economic and demographic variables is
concerned, it should be borne in mind that their influence upon migration
may be subtle and not immediate. The ambiguous results and data-related
shortcomings described above, along with the uniqueness of the experien-
ces of the particular countries (e.g. in Central and Eastern Europe; see
chapter 8) indicate that the detection of these impacts and interrelations
can be strongly hampered, as, of course, can be future implications for mi-
gration movements.
Finally, the authors strongly recommend that forecast-based, mature mi-
gration policies should be crafted with extreme caution. The central ten-
dency (median) trajectories are well suited only for situations in which an
underestimation of future migration would entail the same costs as an over-
estimation of the same amount; they may not work well at all for other
decision-making scenarios or to inform other subjective priorities of migra-
tion policymakers. In some cases, the underestimation of future migration
inflows could be more costly than their overestimation, as, for example, in
assigning budgets to migrant integration programmes. In such cases, it
would seem rational to use the above-median variants, if only in order to
err on the side of caution. In other instances, however, overestimation can
be more problematic – as in the case of the inflows required to fill local la-
bour market shortages. The use of below-median forecast variants would
be recommended in these cases. Irrespective of which variants are used,
230
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

however, the level of predictive uncertainty must always be kept in mind.
Above all, researchers and policymakers, alike, must remember that simply
using the median (or any other) trajectories and treating them as universal,
deterministic predictions is both unwise and imprudent. They will almost
certainly never come true.
Notes
1
In this chapter, uncertainty will be understood as a state of not having enough
knowledge about a process or phenomenon now or in the future.
2
Forecasting migration was impossible for Greece, where no adequate migration data
exists. For Spain, the unavailability of a second round of the Delphi questionnaires
also rendered the forecasting exercise impossible.
References
Alho, J.M. & B.D. Spencer (2005), Statistical demography and forecasting. New York:
Springer.
Alho, J.M. & B.D. Spencer (1997), ‘The practical specification of the expected error of popu-
lation forecasts’, Journal of Official Statistics 13: 203-225.
Armstrong, J.S. (1985), Long-range forecasting (2nd edition). New York: John Wiley.
Bijak, J. (2010), Forecasting international migration in Europe: The Bayesian approach.
Springer Series on Demographic Methods and Population Analysis 24. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Bijak, J. & A. Wiśniowski (2009), ‘Forecasting of immigration flows until 2025 for selected
European countries using expert information’, IDEA Working Paper 7. www.idea6fp.uw.
edu.pl/pliki/IDEA_Working_Paper_No.7.pdf.
Bijak, J. & A. Wiśniowski (2010), ‘Bayesian forecasting of immigration to selected European
countries by using expert knowledge’, Forthcoming in Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series A 173.
Bayes, T. (1763), ‘An essay towards solving a problem in the Doctrine of Chances’,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 53: 370-418.
Dustmann, C., M. Casanova, M. Fertig, I. Preston & C.M. Schmidt (2003), ‘The impact of
EU enlargement on migration flows’, Home Office Report 25/03. London: Home Office.
Frydman, R. & M.D. Goldberg (2007), Imperfect knowledge economics: Exchange rates and
risk. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Holzer, J.Z. (1959), Prognoza demograficzna Polski na lata 1960-1975 wg województw
[Demographic forecast for Poland for 1960-1975 by voivodships]. Warsaw: PWG.
IPPR (2008), Floodgates or turnstiles? Post-EU enlargement migration flows to (and from)
the UK. London: Institute for Public Policy Research.
Jennissen, R. (2004), Macro-economic determinants of international migration in Europe.
Amsterdam: Dutch University Press.
Kadane, J.B. & L.J. Wolfson (1998), ‘Experiences in elicitation’, The Statistician 47 (1): 3-19.
Keilman, N. (1990), Uncertainty in national population forecasting: Issues, backgrounds,
analyses, recommendations. Amsterdam: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Keyfitz, N. (1981), ‘The limits of population forecasting’, Population and Development
Review 7 (4): 579-593.
AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE
231

Kupiszewska D. & B. Nowok (2008), ‘Comparability of statistics on international migration
flows in the European Union’, in J. Raymer & F. Willekens (eds.), International migra-
tion in Europe: Data, Models and Estimates, 41-71. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
Kupiszewski, M. (2002), ‘Modelowanie dynamiki przemian ludności w warunkach wzrostu
znaczenia migracji międzynarodowych’ [The role of international migration in the model-
ling of population dynamics], Prace Geograficzne 181. Warsaw: Institute of Geography
and Spatial Organization, Polish Academy of Sciences.
Lee, R. & S. Tuljapurkar (1994). ‘Stochastic population forecasts for the United States:
Beyond high, medium, and low’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 89:
1175-1189.
Lutz, W., W.C. Sanderson & S. Scherbov (1996), ‘Probabilistic population projections based
on expert opinion’, in W. Lutz (ed.), The future population of the world: What can we as-
sume today? Revised edition, 397-428. Laxenburg: IIASA; London: Earthscan.
Lutz, W., W.C. Sanderson & S. Scherbov (eds.) (2004), The end of world population growth
in the 21st century: New challenges for human capital formation & sustainable develop-
ment. London: Earthscan.
Nowok, B. & D. Kupiszewska (2005), ‘Official European statistics on international migration
flows: Availability, sources and coverage’, CEFMR Working Paper 5/2005.
Nowok, B., D. Kupiszewska & M. Poulain (2006), ‘Statistics on international migration
flows’, in M. Poulain, N. Perrin & A. Singleton (eds.), THESIM: Towards Harmonised
European Statistics on International Migration, 203-231. Louvain-la-Neuve: Presses
Universitaires de Louvain.
Öberg, S. & A.B. Wils (1992), ‘East-West migration in Europe: Can migration theories help
estimate the numbers’, Popnet 22: 1-7.
Pijpers, R. (2008), ‘Problematising the “orderly” aesthetic assumptions of forecasts of East-
West migration in the European Union’, Environment and Planning A 40 (1): 174-188.
Rees, P.H. & I. Turton (1998), Investigation of the effects of input uncertainty on population
forecasting. Paper for the 3rd International GeoComputation Conference, Bristol, UK, 17-
19 September.
Rowe, G. & G. Wright (2001), ‘Expert opinions in forecasting. Role of the Delphi
Technique’, in J.S. Armstrong (ed.), Principles of forecasting: A handbook of researchers
and practitioners, 125-144. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Willekens, F. (1994), ‘Monitoring international migration flows in Europe: Towards a statisti-
cal data base combining data from different sources’, European Journal of Population 10
(1): 1-42.
232
WIŚNIOWSKI, BIJAK, KUPISZEWSKI AND KUPISZEWSKA

10
Comments on ‘An uncertain future of
immigration in Europe’ by Wis´niowski et al.
Leo van Wissen
10.1
Introduction
Forecasting is not in the first place a technical exercise; rather, it involves
thinking methodically about the future. In so doing, we need to strategi-
cally leverage our knowledge and expertise of the migration process and
assess how our experiences in the past will (or will not) carry over into the
future. We have our own theories and models – sometimes intuitive, some-
times explicit – for doing so. In the end, we are obliged to quantify our
beliefs about the future – an undertaking that is, by its very nature, techni-
cal. In order to make this task of ‘projecting’ a scientific one, a framework
that integrates beliefs about the future with empirical evidence about the
past is necessary. The Bayesian approach advocated by Wiśniowski and
co-authors in chapter 9 of this volume is an example of an appropriate
framework for migration forecasting. The Bayesian method is intimately
related to forecasting. In fact, Bayesian forecasting is something of a mild
redundancy because forecasting is at the core of the Bayesian approach to
just about anything (Geweke & Whiteman 2006). Still, its application to
the complex undertaking of immigration forecasting is relatively new (for
one of the first attempts, see Gorbey, James & Poot 1999). Bijak (2008)
also provides a good introduction. The authors have covered new areas
with their approaches, and have set the stage for a fruitful new line of
thinking about forecasting in migration research. Without an abundance of
academic precedents, they sought to invent new ways of dealing with mul-
tiple complexities in the application. They have done so successfully, and
have tried to document these steps as diligently as possible. Nevertheless,
migration forecasting remains a difficult exercise involving many different
steps, including a series of Delphi rounds among country experts, statistical
modelling, interpretation, adjustments and forecasting.
For all these reasons, this is not just another forecasting exercise, but an
innovative new step. Its main innovative qualities can be found in the way
expert views and empirical evidence are combined to produce an ‘optimal’
forecasting model. It is an important contribution to the discussion of
whether and how to integrate expert opinions about the future into

quantitative trend-type models. The Bayesian method may be viewed as a
fundamental alternative approach or even as an epistemological shift in
statistical reasoning and forecasting. Bayesian forecasting involves apply-
ing conditions to what is known in order to make statements about what is
not known (Geweke & Whiteman 2006). It is a very elegant but at the
same time somewhat controversial and – as already noted above – undeni-
ably complex approach.
It is elegant because it explicitly acknowledges that subjective beliefs
about the process under study are important. In a way, it begins by asking:
What do you think a priori about the migration process? It then uses histor-
ical data to adjust these a priori beliefs and to estimate the key features of
the migration process: it is thus a mix of subjective beliefs – expert views
– and objective data. It is somewhat controversial, as the traditional statisti-
cal view is based exclusively on data: the frequentist approach. This
approach claims complete objectivity and distances itself from subjective
elements in the analysis. The Bayesian view, by contrast, is explicitly sub-
jective (Lancaster 2004).
Despite my esteem for the approach taken by Wiśniowski et al. and my
admiration for the way they have handled the many difficulties that crossed
their path, I have one serious objection to their approach: I do not agree
with the main statement that migration is hardly predictable. In my view, it
is too early to draw such a conclusion. I have a few doubts regarding this
point in their current application, and I have many serious doubts about the
aforementioned statement when it is intended as a general assessment with
wider applicability. In the next section, I make a number of objections that
call into question its validity.
10.2
Translating expert views into prior distributions regarding
the parameters of the forecasting model
Experts hold widely different views about the future developments of mi-
gration. In the Delphi questionnaire included as part of the methodology of
Wiśniowski et al., experts are asked various questions that need to be trans-
lated into beliefs about model parameters. These models will, in all likeli-
hood, not reflect the underlying theory or model of the expert. The transla-
tion of expert opinions into relevant prior beliefs in the form of probability
distributions of the parameters is not a trivial task. Although the researchers
found innovative means of making this translation, it remains questionable
whether this method allowed all relevant information about future migration
trends to be solicited from the experts. This is a difficult issue and by no
means one that is easily resolved, but it remains an important consideration:
if the measurement instrument is not valid, then the output of the Delphi
method will indeed increase forecast uncertainty rather than decrease it. It
234
LEO VAN WISSEN

is clear that much work remains to be done in this field in the future.
Nevertheless, I am convinced that there is still a world to win in this matter.
In my view, this strategy should lead to reducing forecasting uncertainty.
As a first step, it might be a good idea to confront the experts with the
first round of results, and ask them: Was this what you meant? They might
rethink their beliefs and – perhaps – a second round would lead to adjusted
views and more informative inputs (a learning exercise), which, all togeth-
er, could lead to less uncertainty in the predictions.
10.3
Beliefs about parameter distributions are correlated
A related, more technical point asks: Can separate distributions for each of
the parameters be constructed without taking account of the values of
another? The value or interpretation of one parameter may depend on that
of another. Expert opinions about the future are often shaped by a few
leading latent causal factors that determine a set of coherent and correlated
parameters. It appears as though the authors have treated them as inde-
pendent. By not taking into account the covariance structure among the
parameters, the variance of the prediction will necessarily be inflated.
10.4
The limited role of explanatory variables
I find it intriguing that economic variables do not come up as significant
factors driving immigration. There is a large body of literature that sug-
gests otherwise (see e.g. Jennissen 2004) and the authors are no doubt
aware of and familiar with this literature. It is possible that this literature is
more based on the North-Western European experience (the ‘old’ or ‘ma-
ture’ migration countries in IDEA’s terms) and uses longer time series as a
result. In this case, of course, we have a different set of countries and a
shorter time series. But it is my conviction that economic forces in relation
to long-term demographic trends are quite important in the long run. I also
believed, until recently at least, that including information about driving
forces in the forecast would result in better conditional forecasts – but this
is apparently not true here. I have two possible explanations for this: the
short length of the time series and the choice of countries in combination
with the time periods. In the chosen period, the countries in the project
underwent significant transitions: for the Eastern European countries, from
centralised to market economies, followed by their introduction into the
EU; for Southern and Western European countries, there were the conse-
quences of the Balkan Wars. It is therefore not a surprise that the common
structural driving factors of migration do not reveal themselves as very im-
portant. By including longer time series and other countries, different
COMMENTS ON ‘AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE’
235

results would have been likely. For instance, what would have been the
result if one had done this exercise for the Western European countries,
where the relation between economic determinants and immigration has
been firmly established? Is the inclusion of CEE countries into the EU not
a strong trigger of some form of economic convergence towards a Western
European economic model and therefore, in some sense, easier to predict?
This convergence issue is important, and certainly a necessary additional
consideration to make in this approach. Convergence of Eastern European
countries’ migration pattern to the Western European one certainly in-
volves a shift from emigration to immigration countries, a prediction firmly
grounded in the earlier chapters of the present volume.
10.5
The choice of the optimal model
In view of the empirical evidence, prior beliefs about models are changed.
The model is then chosen for the forecast that has the highest posterior
probability. In general, non-stationary models were favoured over station-
ary ones. In lay terms: models that show explosive growth or decline of
immigration are more the rule than models that show well-behaved trends
over time. Again, that could be due to the choice of countries in this partic-
ular period of time, which indeed revealed non-stationary trends. This need
not be universally true, however. Maybe migration is not easily predictable
in the short term, but it is in the long term.
Moreover, one of the points of criticism is that the Bayesian approach
and the use of the Bayes factor to choose between models generally favour
simpler models – such as the random walk model – over models that pro-
vide better explanations. If one opts for a random walk model, then the
large uncertainty in outcomes is almost a given by definition, because it is
cumulative.
10.6
The data problem
A final note about data. We all know that migration data have serious prob-
lems. The authors, who are specialists in this area, are well aware of them.
Nevertheless, the limited reliability of the data is a very serious problem
for arriving at accurate outcomes. Comparing matrices based on emigration
statistics and on immigration statistics reveals, for instance, that the number
of reported migrants from Poland to Germany differs by a factor of twenty
to 30, depending on whether you retrieve the data from Germany or
Poland. In the short term, nothing can be done about this, but it may be a
significantly influencing factor in drawing the conclusion that migration is
unpredictable. Let us first see if we can define and measure it consistently.
236
LEO VAN WISSEN

10.7
Final remarks
The main conclusion – that migration is hardly predictable – in my view,
is drawn too early. In this chapter, I have given a number of arguments for
why the situation is potentially not so bleak. The statement that migration
is hardly predictable is conditional on the choices that were made in this
analysis, yet the choices to make are not yet exhausted. Longer time series,
other countries, better explanatory models and perhaps alternate modes of
extracting useful information from experts are all necessary before this
conclusion can be drawn definitively.
Nevertheless, the study is a very important contribution to this discus-
sion. If it remains a true conclusion after my reservations have been dealt
with and discarded, then the implication is not only about migration fore-
casting, but also about population forecasting. Obviously we cannot expect
good population forecasts without good migration forecasts – so there is a
lot at stake here.
References
Bijak, J. (2008), ‘Bayesian methods in international migration forecasting’, in J. Raymer & F.
Willekens (eds.), International migration in Europe: Data, models and estimates, 255-
288. New York: Wiley.
Geweke, J. & C. Whiteman (2006), ‘Bayesian forecasting’, in G. Elliott, C. William, J.
Granger & A. Timmerman (eds.), Handbook of economic forecasting, vol. 1, 4-73.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Gorbey, S., D.S. James & J. Poot (1999), ‘Population forecasting with endogenous migration:
An application to trans-Tasman migration’, International Regional Science Review 22 (1):
69-101.
Jennissen, R. (2003), ‘Economic determinants of net international migration in Western
Europe’, European Journal of Population 19 (2): 171-198.
Lancaster, T. (2004), An introduction to modern Bayesian econometrics. Malden: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.
COMMENTS ON ‘AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION IN EUROPE’
237


11
Migration policy matters
A comparative analysis of policy recommendations
Magdalena Lesińska
11.1
The logic of policy recommendations based on research
projects
The process of formulating policy recommendations is based on the main
assumption that, among the main factors having an impact on migration
processes – including the labour market, development gaps, demographic
factors or international situations – a state’s migration policy falls among
the most influential. In other words, there exists a view that migration
flows could be to some extent regulated through political measures
(Brochmann & Hammar 1999; Boswell 2007; Cornelius, Tsuda, Martin &
Hollifield 2004; Hollifield 2000).
In order to improve our understanding of the creative role of the state
and its policies, a thorough analysis of the past and present status of migra-
tion processes in Europe is needed – one which includes their logic, course
and consequences. Every immigration country has its own unique charac-
teristics. What distinguishes one from the other is the country’s history and
tradition of immigration, the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of
its inflows and also the way the state reacts to the entry and settlement of
newcomers. Moreover, every country is part of a regional, European and
worldwide migration system. This means it is not only the national milieu
that has to be taken into account, but also the wider international context
(Gosh 2003; Lahav 2004).
Although the patterns of migration flows in Western, Southern and
Eastern Europe in ‘old’, ‘new’ and ‘future’ immigration countries (see the
Introduction and chapters 1 and 2 in this book) are hardly comparable in a
direct way, all the countries experience similar challenges and face similar
dilemmas related to controlling, managing and integrating newcomers.
Exchanging national experiences improves common knowledge and histor-
ical understanding of the migration cycle with an internal logic. Since the
cycle is experienced by every country, this information set is of priceless
value for all states, especially those at the preliminary stages of the cycle.

Policy recommendations, as a relevant component of scientific knowl-
edge, play a vital role in developing research-policy partnerships. Scientific
analyses should supply some value added, not only by providing reliable
data and expertise, but also by inspiring and supporting certain policy
developments. Researchers’ role is not only to shed a light on social proc-
esses, but also to provoke critical reflection among policymakers and to
propose alternative resolutions. Especially in the case of such an inten-
sively debated issue as immigration, the broad dissemination of knowledge
via open dialogue and using all available communication tools is more than
desired. Scientific results should be distributed broadly, including to non-
academic audiences (policymakers, civil society actors, public opinion
leaders) in the most accessible way and using direct channels of commu-
nication.
11.2
Background of formulation of migration policy
The formulation of migration policy requires, first and foremost, the con-
ceptualisation of a given state’s interests related to immigration. This
means submitting a set of key questions and finding a commonly accepted
response to at least some of them.
–
Does the state need or not need immigration (and why or why not)?
–
What kind of immigration is desired?
–
How can the desired inflows be recruited and how can undesired ones
be constrained?
–
How should the immigrants who are already in the country be dealt
with?
Political recommendations are formulated mostly for policymakers (repre-
senting, generally speaking, the state’s government and administration),
thereby putting the centre of gravity on the state and its functions. The rec-
ommendations presented here are the result of a thorough analysis of
migration processes in nine countries, representing three diverse levels of
maturity in the European immigration cycle and involving migration policy
and the management of human mobility.1 Immigrants, however, are not
one consistent or coherent group. To the contrary, innumerable typologies
describing particular migrating groups can be identified in the literature.
Injecting some order into analysing the logic and content of these migra-
tion policy recommendations, this chapter identifies two main groups of
immigrants that require action from the state, as follows:
–
Potential (expected) immigrants, including two different types: desired
(those who the state wants to come) and undesired (those who the state
does not want to come).
240
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

–
Real immigrants (who have already come), including two different
types: wanted (those who the state wants to stay) and unwanted (those
who the state does not want to stay).
These two groups require different approaches from states. The first re-
quires mechanisms of encouragement (such as special entry and recruit-
ment schemes) or discouragement (strict visa policies, restrictive rules of
admission to labour market). A similar set of policies applies to the second
group; according to the state’s categorisation of who is wanted and who is
unwanted, the first type is encouraged to stay, and the second is encour-
aged to leave the country.
The main aim of migration policy can thus be succinctly defined as reg-
ulating and controlling international migration flows according to state in-
terests. These are the imperatives in the formulation of migration policy.
However, any definition would be incomplete without taking into account
other points of view and interests of actors who take part in the entire proc-
ess: immigrants themselves, as well as transit or sending countries. This
suggests that policymakers constructing migration policies must also take
into consideration a wide set of factors, both internal (the national political
system, labour market, population characteristics, public opinion) and ex-
ternal (international law, geopolitical situations, relations with neighbouring
countries).
Following this line of reasoning, at least three main concerns should be
highlighted here as guidelines in migration policy development:
–
The interests of the host state (and its citizens) versus the interests of
newcomers.
–
The interests of the state versus the interests of other political entities,
such as neighbouring countries, source countries and the European
Union; indeed, the ability of the state to manage migration flows has al-
ways been limited by many factors that are, in fact, independent of and
uncontrollable by the state, including political crises or war and the
mass asylum inflows that can result.
–
Idealism versus pragmatism; this is especially noticeable in the case of
asylum integration policies, when consensus between the so-called hu-
man rights approach and other types of practical approaches (usually
advocated by policymakers) is sometimes difficult to achieve.
These also pose dilemmas that policymakers have to confront, but could
be treated as rationales for migration policy formation.
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
241

11.3
Immigration as a challenge
There are several commonalities within the logic underlying migration pol-
icies in every country, regardless of the level of maturity they may already
have reached. All destination countries are necessarily confronted with the
same migration-related challenges: they can be broken down into catego-
ries of pre- and post-immigration challenges.
The pre-immigration challenges are related to potential immigrants.
They most significantly affect the state’s interests related to labour market
needs, economic development, demographic situations, etc. Policymakers
attempt to respond to these challenges by implementing effective mecha-
nisms of admission and recruitment of selected groups, including high-
skilled or seasonal workers. The pre-immigration challenges also comprise
undesired migration inflows (first and foremost irregular ones) and the
state’s response via stricter border controls.
Post-immigration challenges, on the other hand, arise from the direct
and indirect effects of immigrants’ inclusion into, and functioning within,
the labour market and social fabric of a given destination country.
Integration policies are the key to counteracting the discrimination, margin-
alisation and social exclusion of newcomers, as well as weak social cohe-
sion, ethnic and cultural tensions and the irregular employment of
immigrants.
11.4
Towards mature migration policies
In accordance with the migration cycle concept dictating that particular
countries move forward from states of emigration to immigration – ulti-
mately evolving into ‘mature’ immigration states – the question for migra-
tion policy is: what do ‘mature’ migration policies entail? Insofar as it is a
final goal, what could ‘younger’ countries – those at a preliminary stage,
on their way towards maturity – learn from the ‘older’ and more experi-
enced states?
Following traditional approaches, an ideal policy should be:
–
Predictive and well-planned (based on a widely accepted long-term
strategy that defines the state’s interests and aims to achieve them via
migration policy).
–
Well-organised and coherent (supported by a legal framework that
serves as a normative basis and an appropriate bureaucratic structure
that ensures successful implementation).
–
Rational (based on a thorough analysis of all available data and infor-
mation sources, as well as the experiences of other countries).
242
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

–
Efficient (there should be a consistency between the intended objectives
and final outcomes of a given migration policy), which is the most
challenging criterion.
It is a difficult task (if it is possible at all) to evaluate migration policy ac-
cording to these ‘ideal’ characteristics. From a more practical point of
view, a basic condition seems to be of utmost importance – namely,
whether migration policy corresponds well with the actual state of affairs
and whether the demand for state intervention in regulating migration
flows is sufficiently met. Mature migration policy requires a broader con-
text analysis; geopolitical situation, other countries’ interests and influence,
international commitments have to be taken into account by policymakers.
A key pre-condition for designing ‘mature’ migration policies is having
access to reliable data on past and present immigration flows and stocks,
as well as certain immigration forecasts. Although there is a serious ‘fore-
casting uncertainty’ (see chapter 9 in this volume), this knowledge is nec-
essary to create a long-term political strategy in many areas: the economy,
labour market and demography, in particular. It is closely related to the
issue of developing research-policy partnerships in the field of migration,
as introduced at the beginning of this chapter.
11.5
Overview of policy recommendations
If a migration cycle is also to be considered a cycle of influencing via
teaching and learning processes, a key question is what countries at differ-
ent stages of development could learn from each other?
11.5.1
General lessons from western and southern countries
Immigration is an unavoidable and indispensable phenomenon, mostly for
demographic and economic reasons. However, there are two different per-
spectives for handling immigration: as a solution (to economic or demo-
graphic needs) and as a problem (as a threat to social cohesion, national
identity and security and welfare systems). Depending on which perspec-
tive prevails, the formulation of migration policy can be influenced
significantly.
The economic imperative rules migration policy dictates not only how
the state reacts, but also whether this reaction takes place at all. As Mirjana
Morokvasic observed, ‘most workers arrived not via the official recruit-
ment channels, but as tourists, as workers under “nominal contracts”, and
the authorities closed their eyes as long as the workers responded to the
immediate needs of the labour market’ (IDEA Policy Brief no. 2: 3).
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
243

The importance of the demographic argument is growing. Immigration
is necessary, or at least desirable, for stabilising labour forces and popula-
tion sizes in times of negative natural growth, low fertility and, as a conse-
quence, ageing and shrinking societies. It is not a time to question whether
we need immigrants at all, but rather the type and number should be
considered.
Qualified immigrants and demand-oriented proactive migration policies
should be given top priority as a result of the common awareness of the
competition for ‘qualified, talented and motivated’ immigrants (IDEA
Policy Brief no.1: 2). At the same time,
attracting the best should not be to the detriment of the countries of
origin, depriving them of their ‘brains’; neither should it imply ‘de-
skilling’, non-recognition or inadequate recognition of the creden-
tials and know-how of immigrants. (IDEA Policy Brief no. 2: 2)
Integration has to be treated as an issue of significant concern. Immigra-
tion has to be accepted as a permanent process, not as a temporary phe-
nomenon, and one with long-term consequences that very often lead to set-
tlement. The number of immigrants who have stayed in France, according
to various sources, is estimated to between 50 and 60 per cent. This might
mean that, for approximately half of all incoming immigrants, temporary
migration has transformed into long-term settlement (IDEA Policy Brief
no. 2). This requires offering ‘a clear life perspective for immigrants’ with-
in the destination country (IDEA Policy Brief no. 1: 2). Moreover, integra-
tion activities should be targeted not only at regular migrants, but also at
irregular ones, who are the most vulnerable to social exclusion and margin-
alisation (that is, irrespectively of their legal status, free access to basic
health care services and education for minors should be provided) (IDEA
Policy Brief no. 4 and 6).
The number of immigrants should be kept under control. Migration poli-
cy should define upper limits for immigration for certain periods of time.
These limits should depend on economic needs and the social acceptance
of immigrants (IDEA Policy Brief no. 1).
There is no interdependence between more restrictive policy and less im-
migration. The example of western countries is clear evidence that restric-
tive policies are largely ineffective and:
transform migration flows into business opportunities for traffickers
and smugglers. Illegal entries have not been stopped in spite of the
measures taken – rather, migrants tend to rely more and more on
professional intermediaries. (IDEA Policy Brief no. 2)
244
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

Immigration as well as migration policy need certain social acceptance by
the native population. There is a common fear against immigration in
receiving societies, especially in times of economic crisis, which effec-
tively influences migration policy. To achieve societal consensus and pub-
lic support, an information policy and a broad public debate is necessary;
it requires open and regular communication with the public opinion via a
variety of channels, including the media.
Irregular immigration and illegal employment require a complex ap-
proach and tackling root causes. The effective promotion of channels for
legal immigration is required in order to cope with economic demand and
counteract the complications posed by irregular inflows.
A few key issues enumerated above will be presented in detail in a later
section of this chapter.
11.6
Three key questions constituting the pillars of migration
policy
11.6.1 Question one: How should labour migration be managed?
Finding more flexible and effective admission rules and recruitment
schemes is the best response here. Immigration represents a long-term solu-
tion to unmet labour and skill needs in a national economy and, at the
same time, supports state development. The main challenge could be
articulated as follows: how should policies be designed in order to meet
the real demands of the labour market for foreign labour and match the de-
mand with immigration flows? This dilemma is also widely discussed at
the EU level.2
As mentioned previously, in all the countries there has been a demand,
albeit to varying degrees, for short-term labour migration. These types of
immigrants enter the country for limited periods of time in order to fulfil
labour shortages that usually result from economic growth. As was de-
scribed by Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger in their analysis of the case
of western countries:
foreign workers were supposed to behave like spinning tops on the
domestic labour market. They should come and go, if possible alone
and without families, and be very flexible both occupationally and
geographically. This would bring maximum benefits to Austrian
and German businesses while relieving society from fundamental
questions of integration, which were inevitable when labour mi-
grants began to settle. (IDEA Working Paper no. 3: 21)
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
245

However, the situation that arises when circular and short-term type immi-
gration transforms into settlement is usually out of state control – the ex-
ample of western countries in the 1960s and 1970s illustrates this
convincingly.
Over time, several mechanisms have been designed for legal recruit-
ment: quota systems (setting up labour quotas per economic sector fol-
lowed by a process of granting of work visas), a point system or shortage
lists. All of them, however, have some limitations and operate with ques-
tionable efficiency.
A commonly recurring recommendation is a call for effective monitoring
of labour market in order to overcome mismatches between market demand
and state regulations. The monitoring system should be well-grounded in-
stitutionally (not dependent on the political cycle), cohesive in task assign-
ments, effective in maintaining the flow of information between involved
partners/institutions, multi-level and systematic. The most important aim of
this sort of system would be not only to monitor the demand for a foreign
labour force in terms of its dynamics of inflow, scale and structure, but
also the fluctuations of the number of foreigners in the labour market and
the role of foreign workers – that is, whether they complement or substitute
the domestic labour. It thus would require an adequate, up-to-date and de-
tailed database of the shortages of and, consequently, the demand for for-
eign workers. The monitoring system should involve all the sectors of the
labour market, including domestic services.
As the example of the Southern European countries illustrates, recruit-
ment is an important but not sufficient migration control activity. The main
weakness of recruitment systems is that hiring procedures are very com-
plex and time-consuming (usually lasting several months), which is unac-
ceptable for seasonal employment in agriculture or small companies, where
quick
and
flexible
rules
of
entry
and
recruitment
are
necessary.
Additionally, there is the need to check on the availability of the local
workforce (in order to protect local workers), which also prolongs the time
needed for recruitment and makes the system more restrictive and inflexi-
ble. Some employers thus prefer an easier option and employ workers
irregularly.
Again, the southern countries’ experiences are worth discussing here.
The nominal request system introduced in the mid-1980s in Spain and
Italy turned out to be unsuccessful. In Greece, the invitation scheme was
implemented beginning in 1991
allowing immigrants to work in Greece, for a specific employer and
performing specific type of work, only if there is an available posi-
tion for them which cannot be filled by the Greek labour force or
the immigrant labour force that already resides in Greece. (IDEA
Working Paper no. 9: 37)
246
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

Moreover, the scheme was criticised for its restrictiveness. Similarly, sys-
tems based on labour market quotas, introduced as pioneering solutions
involving a system of annual quotas for economic migrants at all skill lev-
els, that were implemented in the beginning of the 1990s in Southern
European countries (such as the ‘programmed number’ or numero pro-
grammato in Italy or contingente in Spain) have never functioned as effec-
tive labour channels.
Quota systems were also criticised.
The large number of immigrants working in the low-paid, low-
skilled segments of the labour market in Italy are meeting a demand
for labour that the quota system has difficulty quantifying. This
means that the demand for labour is underestimated, specifically as
regards new migration flows, and so the maximum quota for annual
entries is also underestimated […]. Also considering that the direc-
tions and dimensions of the new immigration flows are constantly
changing, any predetermined estimate of the maximum quotas for
new entries that is used as a tool in planning and managing the
flows must take into account various new factors. In this way, the
quota mechanism should be a flexible instrument that can be cor-
rected as and when it is necessary. (IDEA Working Paper no. 5: 58)
The lesson to draw from the attempts to create an effective recruitment sys-
tem could be articulated as follows:
Taking all these labour immigration policies together, it is clear that
their degree of restrictiveness and their complex administrative re-
quirements were unable to deal with high labour demands and vast
immigrant supplies, thus being incapable of regulating inflows and
limiting irregular immigration. Moreover, it was the cause of the
continuity and large volume of irregular inflows. (IDEA Working
Paper no. 9: 40)
There is no ideal system; serious loopholes could be found in each of
them. In reality, employers officially recruit foreign workers and declare
hiring them in a particular occupation, then employ them in other roles
once the recruitment procedure has been concluded. Also worth noting is
that, very often, legal channels of entry have served to legalise irregular
migrants already staying in the country, rather than acting as a measure to
recruit new immigrants.
To overcome the weaknesses thus described and to improve the system
of legal recruitment, a few recent, rather successful initiatives are elabo-
rated here:
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
247

–
The list of vacant positions. In Spain, in order to facilitate the recruit-
ment process, every three months the Catalogo de trabajos de dificil co-
bertura is released. It contains information on positions that are not
filled by available workers (nationals or citizens of other EU countries).
The system allows an employer looking to fill a vacancy listed in this
catalogue to start a recruitment procedure immediately. Then the system
allows for ‘eluding the priority check of the labour market and repre-
sents, thus, a step forward in the conception of workable immigration
policies’ (IDEA Policy Brief no. 6: 2).
–
The system of an entry visa for ‘job search’. The aim of this type of
visa is to promote flexibility in the recruitment procedures. However,
the possibility to apply for such a visa is limited to a certain number of
employment sectors, such as the domestic sector. However, the visa for
job searches (according to Spanish experts) still has something of a
symbolic character, as it has been issued to a very limited number of
immigrants since its introduction.
–
‘Global contingent’ of labour needs (the report of total labour needs,
published every year) introduced in 2007 in Portugal. The system
includes an announcement of job vacancies abroad and the subsequent
issuance of visas.
This new framework represents an attempt to improve and make ef-
fective the issuance of residence and temporary visas for work pur-
poses. Foreign citizens have direct access to job offers through the
IEFP website, and there is also the possibility of direct contact be-
tween the potential candidates and the recruiters. (IDEA Working
Paper no. 9: 40)
Quota regulations need to be flexible and open for modification, according
to the necessities of the labour market during a given year.
–
Recruitment schemes based on bilateral agreements with sending coun-
tries to establish an effective system for providing long- or short-term
workers to the national labour market via specialised agencies.
11.6.2 Question two: How should irregular immigration be addressed?
The answer here is by controlling, regularisation and addressing root
causes. In all the countries, albeit to a different extent, irregular immigra-
tion has become a structural feature of migration regimes. It represents one
of the most important challenges for national governments. What system
factors rooted in the state’s regime reinforce irregular migration? A conclu-
sion drawn from a variety of analyses is clear on this point, singling out
the most important as follows: the existence of a shadow economy and a
common acceptance of its existence; the lack or excessive restrictiveness
248
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

of legal entry and recruitment procedures; weak administrative structures;
ineffective systems of labour market control; and the lack of transparent
regularisation schemes.
Taking migration histories into account, the best cases by which to ana-
lyse the problem of irregular immigration are the Southern European coun-
tries. Since the 1980s, there has been a dynamic increase in immigration
flows into these countries. Although the demand for foreign workers was
recognised by the state, legislation did not adapt to this trend and was still
characterised by ‘a high degree of restrictiveness and inflexibility, which
hampered effective programming of the flows’ (IDEA Working Paper no.
9: 28). Cumbersome admission rules, along with weak external controls, a
large informal economy (according to recent estimates around 20 per cent
of GDP, even more in Greece) and widespread social acceptance of infor-
mal employment are all factors that have contributed to a growing number
of irregulars in Southern European countries.
Special attention should be given here to the role of the informal econo-
my, which serves as a magnet for irregular employment. Its relatively large
size and particular structure facilitate immigrants’ flexibility and ‘invisibil-
ity’ in the labour market. The attractive qualities of unregistered employ-
ment are reinforced by widespread societal acceptance, relatively high non-
salaried costs of work and the time-consuming and complex administration
procedures required to register. The size of the shadow economy also cor-
responds to the weakness of labour market controls.
Irregular immigration is also one of the unintended consequences of ex-
cessively restrictive immigration policies. As the case of Italy and other
Mediterranean countries demonstrates, when a rather liberal system of
entries is restricted (as happened in response to pressure from Western
European countries that perceived the southern states as the backdoors for
entry into the EU) and there is high demand for foreigners’ work, more
and more immigrants will begin to use illegal means of accessing the terri-
tory and the labour market. The lesson seems to be that if the entry chan-
nels for labour migration underestimate the real needs of the national econ-
omy, irregular migration will increase.
There is a well-known catalogue of state actions taken against migration
irregularity. They can be divided into external (border controls, cooperation
with countries of origin) and internal (labour market controls, regu-
larisation).
The role of, and problems with, effective border control (especially in
the case of Spain, Greece and Italy) are well known. However, they cannot
be separated from an active presence in the countries of origin and ongoing
cooperation with their institutions. The case of the southern countries
shows that a traditional approach, based on a prioritisation of strict external
border control, must be modified in light of its inefficiency and, moreover,
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
249

completed with the addition of cooperation with neighbouring sending or
transit countries.
Especially valuable in migration control is the role of bilateral agree-
ments with sending countries. They represent a condition sine qua non for
reducing irregular immigration successfully. The state should provide a
legal alternative to illegal entries. Through bilateral agreements, privileged
entry quotas could be offered as compensation for the introduction of a visa
system. Bilateral agreements, as the Spanish example illustrates, have to be
connected with broader public campaigns against irregular migration, as
well as with the formation of an institutional framework of interstate coop-
eration (e.g. working groups with relevant authorities from destination and
sending countries). In 2006, the Spanish government introduced the two-
year Africa Plan. Its objective was to create a close system of cooperation
with several African countries in order to improve management of migra-
tion flows from Africa to Europe. The recent initiative of the Portuguese
government to open the Support Centre for Migrants in the Sending
Country in Cape Verde is also a good example. Bilateral agreements have
also been shown to be a precondition for effective expulsion processes
(most of the expulsions in Spain have been carried out via readmission
agreements) as well as voluntary returns.3
The immigration issue should be an integral part of neighbouring states’
policies at the national and the EU levels. Close cooperation between the
Mediterranean EU countries and Northern Africa Region on the migration
issue – within the framework of the EU neighbourhood policy – is another
example of good practice here. The immigration issue should also be high
on the political agenda in the eastern EU countries’ neighbourhood
policies.
Another important activity is internally controlling the labour market. In
recent years, in all the countries analysed, the number of inspections has
increased significantly, as actions are more frequently taken against infor-
mal employment. The effectiveness of such actions is questionable, though,
especially in the case of sectors traditionally recognised as immigrants’
niches (agriculture, petty trade and especially domestic work). It is implau-
sible indeed that any country could effectively regulate these sectors
through labour inspections. In the Southern European countries, an inter-
esting shift towards somewhat different incentives has taken place: for in-
stance, a tax relief for those who officially employ a babysitter or an eld-
erly person’s caregiver; or the introduction of flexible insurance schemes
for cleaners, construction workers and domestic servants who have more
than one employer. ‘They are able to register with the dependent employee
welfare fund under special conditions and hence both have affordable
insurance and retain their legal migration status’ (IDEA Working Paper no.
9: 47). These solutions could lead to the emergence of this sector from the
250
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

shadow economy. Overall, however, labour market inspections should be
also accompanied by wide public campaigns against informal work.
Regularisation programmes have become a measure used regularly by
Southern European countries (even if every subsequent regularisation pro-
gramme has been presented as an exceptional ‘one-time-only’ remedy).
‘The lack of efficient recruitment procedures turned regularisations into the
most useful way to ‘repair’ a posteriori the structural mismatches in migra-
tion policy’ (IDEA Working Paper no. 9: 30).
The structural weaknesses of regularisation processes are evident in the
case of Southern European countries. A high recognition rate is not a result
of success in stabilising and integrating the legalised population. The main
criticism was related to the short amount of time (usually one year) that a
residence permit obtained as a result of regularisation permitted – espe-
cially one that had to be renewed soon afterwards. As a consequence,
many of the regularised immigrants fell back into illegality as soon as their
residence permits expired. Another weak point stressed by the experts is
that mass regularisations can sometimes produce a ‘pull’ effect that, rather
than reducing the rates of irregularity, further attracts irregular migration
inflows.
The main conclusion to be drawn from analyses of mass regularisations
is that they are not an appropriate or effective instrument to be used in the
fight against irregular immigration (IDEA Policy Briefs no. 3, 5, 6). In
Spain and Portugal they have been substituted by a more discrete, individ-
ual and ongoing regularisation system. The introduction of individual and
permanent regulation schemes should be taken into consideration in all the
countries – but they should not be considered as a main tool, rather as a
correction mechanism to use alongside active policies and more effective
controls.
11.6.3 Question three: How can the eternal problem of integration be
solved?
Despite their manifold differences, in every country of immigration inte-
gration is treated as a priority, or at least is declared as such. There is, how-
ever, a disconnect between countries with active and developed integration
policies (most of the western and southern states; the Czech Republic also
could be included in this group), and those where integration policies are
just a set of initiatives limited to selected groups, such as refugees and re-
patriates, and have not even been the subject of any considerable debate
(the cases of Poland or Hungary) (IDEA Policy Briefs no. 8, 9).
Worth noting is that integration policy is significantly influenced by sev-
eral systemic characteristics of a state. Integration policy is focused mainly
on the areas of health services, housing, welfare schemes, education and
the labour market. It is therefore related to, and dependent on, the national
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
251

welfare system, which varies from country to country. Moreover, in federal
countries with high levels of decentralisation, as in Spain or Italy, the
regional and even municipal authorities have significant independence in
the implementation of particular policies. Overall, it seems to be a positive
solution for integration policies, in accordance with the principle of subsid-
iarity (which assumes that a political decision-making system should be
taken as close as possible to the governed to ensure that the decisions be
indispensable and respond well to their needs) and taking into account
diversity and the strong territorial dispersion of immigrants. Regional au-
thorities typically possess better knowledge about immigrants’ needs and
are thus better prepared to frame successful plans for social integration and
design a more appropriate structure of services. ‘The integration of immi-
grants is a policy area where a local approach is critical’ (IDEA Policy
Brief no. 2: 5). Moreover, ‘more attention should be paid to “organization-
al structures” that could deal with immigrants’ integration at regional and
local levels’ (IDEA Policy Brief no. 7: 3).
No one should be excluded from basic integration activities, even irregu-
lar immigrants. This group is even more vulnerable to social exclusion,
discrimination and marginalisation than others and cannot be deprived of
basic needs and rights. In this sense, the Southern European countries have
introduced a somewhat innovative approach: irregular migrants in Spain or
Italy have access to primary school and health provisions, just like
nationals.
The law also recognizes that the rights to healthcare and education
are fundamental human rights that must be guaranteed regardless of
a person’s legal status. Consequently, urgent hospital or other medi-
cal treatment is also available for foreigners without permits to stay,
as is the right to compulsory schooling for foreign minors. (IDEA
Working Paper no. 4: 6)
In order to plan integration initiatives more effectively, a solid understand-
ing of immigrants’ situations is required, along with facilitated communica-
tion between authorities and immigrants. The encouragement and assis-
tance of self-organising processes, as well as wide support of immigrants’
organisations, should also be one of the priorities of integration policy.
Here the role of European funds cannot be overestimated.
Indeed, European Social Fund programmes and the more recent
European Integration Fund for the Integration of Third Country
Nationals have been instrumental in creating synergies, mobilising
resources, even reorganising public administration offices with a
view to providing services to migrant communities. (IDEA Working
Paper no. 9: 50)
252
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

Information policy is also a key part and has a powerful impact on
integration processes, first and foremost by increasing national citi-
zens’ abilities to deal with diversity.
Stereotypes about migrants are often an obstacle to the implementa-
tion and success of immigration policies and integration pro-
grammes. An ever closer cooperation between the political agenda
and the media […] should be emphasized, as well as awareness-
raising campaigns for media on immigration issues. Furthermore, a
deeper knowledge on migration should be increased in order to
avoid disseminating false and negative images of immigrants.
(IDEA Policy Brief no. 5: 11)
Taking into account that immigrants, especially those of the first genera-
tion, appear trapped in the low-skill, low-paying sectors of the labour mar-
ket and are vulnerable to discrimination and inequality in wages, special
attention to anti-discriminatory measures should also be paid.4 A new sys-
tem of data collection pertaining to foreigners employed by companies
should be created, tasked also with serving as a system of monitoring dis-
criminatory practices towards foreigners. Such a system, which would
allow for gathering and managing data on foreigners’ presence on the
labour market and on any unlawful or reprehensible practices towards for-
eign workers, would constitute a basis for the creation and implementation
of adequate anti-discriminatory measures.
One of the most important anti-discriminatory measures is the avail-
ability and clarity of the information on what labour discrimination
means, what the consequences of it are, how to respond to it, where
to report cases of discriminatory acts, how to apply for compensa-
tion, where to find a competent legal advisor and support, etc.
Therefore, a proper information campaign addressed to employees
as well as employers is also required. Such a campaign should be
based on multicultural and human rights issues and would have edu-
cational, informative and preventive character. (Lesińska, Stefańska
& Szulecka 2010: 206)
Taking into account that freedom from labour discrimination is granted on-
ly to those foreigners who possess the legal entitlement to work, activities
aimed at detecting and solving the problems of serious discrimination of
foreigners working partly or fully in contradiction to immigration rules
should also be initiated. The introduction of anti-discriminatory measures
may make legal employment more desirable for immigrants.
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
253

11.7
What can be learned from migration policy analysis: Some
final thoughts
Several conclusions worth highlighting arise from this chapter’s analysis.
They mostly constitute a continuation of the catalogue of problems to cope
with on the way towards mature migration policies. For, despite the level
of maturity already reached by particular states in the migration cycle, the
conclusions presented below seem to be common to all of the countries ex-
amined. Many of these issues have their own rationale and accompanying
controversies, which I will describe briefly in turn.
11.7.1
Europeanisation of policy and its influence
The last several decades have marked a time of building the EU as a legal
and political entity. The process commonly called ‘Europeanisation’ refers
to the convergence of EU and national approaches in numerous areas.
Migration is also one of them, and the process of reorienting the direction
and shape of migration policy into a European one is currently taking
place. The chance for a real Europeanisation of migration policy is rooted
in the fact that all states share the same basic logic, which is based on
community interests. As the analyses included in this book demonstrate,
each state has similar interests and concerns related to immigration. Each
state faces the same set of challenges presented above. Pragmatism, not
idealism – namely, of being one European community – should be a push
factor towards greater cooperation.
Undoubtedly, one of the consequences of the whole process of
Europeanisation is the creation of a common general legal and political
framework, based on an obligatory acquis and a collection of recommenda-
tions and best practices – which all countries should follow (via an open
method of coordination introduced by the EU). For the new member states,
accession to the EU was a powerful determining impulse and brought
about an acceleration in the evolution of national migration policies.
Institutions and measures designed by more mature immigration countries
have been transposed, during the process of harmonisation with the EU, to
the newly acceding states. Initiatives related to integration have been very
much triggered by the recent developments in the EU ‘soft law’, particu-
larly the Common Basic Principles of Integration and the Commission’s
communication on the proposed Common Agenda for Integration of Third-
Country Nationals in the European Union, supported by the INTI
(European Fund for the Integration of Third Country Nationals as a financ-
ing instrument) and the Network of National Contact Points on Integration
(as an institutional structure established for exchanging and discussing best
practices). The role of Annual Reports on Migration and Integration, which
monitor the process of policy developments as well as provide a full
254
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

package of information on the establishment of the EU framework in these
matters, is also worth highlighting.
Also of note is a kind of synchronisation of ways of perceiving immigra-
tion. Western European states, as mature immigration regimes, have
emerged as the primary reference points for policymakers in other coun-
tries, especially the eastern ones. There, the public imagery of immigration
is perceived in a very ‘mature’ way, as a highly problematic issue. The fo-
cus is, first and foremost, on the problem of integration, potential conflicts
or the protection of state security and public order – even though none of
these phenomena has appeared in reality.
There is also a cost to Europeanisation. Even if a particular country
wishes to preserve its national interests and introduces innovative or inde-
pendent activities, the limits of self-determination established by the EU al-
ways have to be taken into account. Standardisation of rules has positive
sides, but could also restrain innovation: it is much easier to follow the
common tracks – checked and tested ones – than to experiment with new
paths and solutions. This trend is most noticeable in the case of the new
member states, which, first and foremost, analyse the political recommen-
dations of more mature countries. However, it must be emphasised once
more that Eastern European countries do not necessarily follow the same
paths within the migration circle.
11.7.2 Immigration as more of a public and less of an administrative issue
Mature migration policy – to be effective – requires legitimisation through
social consensus and public support. Immigration should be a subject of
broad debate, including not only representatives of administration, scholars
and experts, but also a wide range of social actors and the media.
There is a common negative image of immigration, which is noticeable
in western countries.
In the public imagery in France, the focus is more on immigrants as
social problems, on the ‘failure of their integration’, rather than on
positive outcomes of migration and on immigrants’ multiple and
outstanding contributions to social, cultural, economic, scientific
and political life. (IDEA Policy Brief no. 2: 4)
Therefore, there is an urgent need to combat negative myths resulting from
ignorance, visible also among policymakers. The ‘discourse of fear’
present in many countries of Europe should not be the only driver influenc-
ing public opinion. Immigration should be recognised and presented in a
more balanced way, not only as a threat, but also as a value and opportu-
nity. It must be stressed that human mobility is ‘a value in itself which cor-
responds to an increase in personal freedom’ and ‘with a migration and
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
255

integration policy conceptualised in a methodological, scrupulous way, the
benefits of migration will prevail’ (IDEA Policy Brief no. 1: 3).
In more mature countries, the immigration issue is picked up regularly
in times of political instability or public elections by politicians. As a
result, it has become a major debated issue, very often highly polarising
public opinion. On the contrary, in the case of Eastern European countries,
immigration is rarely visible in public discourse and, due to the rather
small scale of immigration, it is not a controversial issue at all.
What is also worth noting is that, if migration is not an issue of public
interest and a minor subject in political debates, it could have an important
effect on the way policy is implemented. The fact that migration is not a
controversial topic means, in practice, that there will be a lack or a very
limited number of public debates around the legal and political actions
undertaken by policymakers in this field. In the countries examined, the
process of wider consultation with representatives of the non-governmental
and academic sector on migration policy is rather limited. As a conse-
quence, the process of policy implementation could be easier and quicker;
however, it does not necessary mean that it would be more effective.
11.8
What kind of migration policy in the era of circular and
fluid migration? Lessons from Poland
Before they settle in another country, most people tend to circulate
between their place of origin and the country or countries of resi-
dence. Others, for different reasons, never settle, but commute for a
considerable portion of their lifetimes (‘settle in mobility’) before
‘returning’ or starting another move (multiple migrants). (IDEA
Policy Brief no. 2: 6)
The term ‘fluid migration’ was recently proposed to describe the phenom-
enon of inflow of the foreign nationals to Poland (see Górny, Grabowska-
Lusińska, Lesińska & Okólski 2010). The fluidity of migration means
‘being here and there’ and, at the same time, ‘deliberately keeping various
options open’ (mostly with respect to the labour market) (Engbersen, Snel
& de Boom 2010). Such migrants are characterised by a high level of flex-
ibility to change their country of residence and employment.
Many of those migrants live in transnational social spaces, sustain-
ing strong ties with both the country of origin and the country of
residence. Circulation, involving earning money in Poland and
spending it in the home country, seems a rational choice for mi-
grants originating from the neighbouring countries […]. At present,
256
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

the migrants’ social context – social relations and networks, which
migrants already have established in Poland – and migration policy
facilitate the development of a temporary, chiefly circular form of
immigration. (Lesińska, Stefańska & Szulecka 2010: 197)
Facilitating this kind of mobility – back-and-forth movements reinforced
by a modern economy and characterised by post-industrial flexibility and
insecurity – will be the greatest challenge for immigration states. Its man-
agement would require interstate and/or regional cooperation and could
imply multiple entry or long-term visas. It could also mean the free move-
ment of persons within the framework of regional integration processes or
that of their development of the regions of origin. It would also require
going beyond the traditional approach, understood as the state being able
to control migration via strict rules, and accepting the fact that the state is
only one body among a variety of actors in the process of human mobility.
As such, it has only limited power to influence modern mobility’s direc-
tions, patterns and numbers. The final lesson is that migration policy
should be more flexible than ever before in order to successfully respond
and to cope with the effects of contemporary immigration.
Notes
1
Policy recommendations included in this chapter are mainly based on content from
the IDEA project’s final products (2007-2009), comprising policy briefs, national
and regional reports and working papers prepared by eleven participating teams.
They are available on the project website (www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl).
2
See the ‘Green Paper on an EU approach to managing economic migration’ (COM/
2004/0811 final) or the ‘Policy Plan on Legal Migration Policy Plan on Legal
Migration’ [SEC(2005)1680], a search for the EU approach to labour migration and
the most appropriate form of common rules for admitting economic migrants from
third countries, as well as the Council Directive (2003/109/EC) concerning the sta-
tus of third-country nationals who are long-term residents.
3
See also Directive 2008/115/EC on common standards and procedures in member
states for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, which was very recently
adopted by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.
4
A strong legal foundation on anti-discrimination measures has been adopted at the
EU level; see Council Directive 2000/43/EC implementing the principle of equal
treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin and Council
Directive 2000/78/EC establishing a general framework for equal treatment in em-
ployment and occupation.
References
Boswell, C. (2007), ‘Theorizing migration policy: Is there a third way?’, International
Migration Review 41 (1): 101-126.
MIGRATION POLICY MATTERS
257

Brochmann, G. & T. Hammar (1999), Mechanisms of immigration control: A comparative
analysis of European regulation policies. Oxford/New York: Berg Publisher.
Cornelius, W., T. Tsuda, P.L. Martin & J.F. Hollifield (eds.) (2004), Controlling immigration:
A global perspective. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Engbersen, G., E. Snel & J. de Boom (2010), ‘ “A van full of Poles”: Liquid migration from
Central and Eastern Europe’, in R. Black, G. Engbersen, M. Okólski & C. Panţîru (eds.),
A continent moving West? EU enlargement and labour migration from Central and
Eastern Europe, 115-140. IMISCOE-AUP Research Series. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
University Press.
Górny, A., I. Grabowska-Lusińska, M. Lesińska & M. Okólski (eds.) (2010), Immigration to
Poland: Policy, employment, integration. Warsaw: Scholar.
Gosh, B. (ed.) (2003), Managing migration: Time for a new international regime. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hollifield, J. (2000), ‘The politics of international migration: How can we “bring the state
back in?” ’, in C. Brettell & J. Hollifield (eds.), Migration theory. Talking across disci-
plines, 137-185. New York/London: Routledge.
IDEA Policy Brief no. 1 (2008), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: The Austrian contribu-
tion’ (http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Austria_PB_1.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 2 (2008), ‘Policy oriented analysis: France’ (http://www.idea6fp.uw.
edu.pl/pliki/POES_France_PB_2.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 3 (2009), ‘Migration and migration policy in Greece. Critical review
and policy recommendations’ (http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Greece_PB_3.
pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 4 (2009), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: Italy’ (http://www.
idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Italy_PB_4.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 5, (2009), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: Portugal’ (http://www.
idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Portugal_PB_5.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 6 (2009), ‘Policy recommendations: Spain’ (http://www.idea6fp.uw.
edu.pl/pliki/POES_Spain_PB_6.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 7 (2009), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: The Czech
Republic’(http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Czech_PB_7.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 8 (2009), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: Poland’ (http://www.
idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Poland_PB_8.pdf).
IDEA Policy Brief no. 9 (2009), ‘Policy oriented executive summary: Hungary’ (http://www.
idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/POES_Hungary_PB_9.pdf).
IDEA Working Paper no. 3 (2008), ‘Old’ immigration countries: Synthesis report’ by H.
Fassmann & U. Reeger (http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP3_Old_countries_
synthesis.pdf).
IDEA Working Paper no. 5 (2009), ‘The Italian transition from an emigration to immigration
country’ by C. Bonifazi, F. Heins, S. Strozza & M. Vitiello (http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.
pl/pliki/WP5_Italy.pdf).
IDEA Working Paper no. 9 (2009), ‘The making of an immigration model: Inflows, impacts
and policies in Southern Europe’ by J. Arango, C. Bonifazi, C. Finatelli, J. Peixoto, C.
Sabino, S. Strozza & A. Triandafyllidou (http://www.idea6fp.uw.edu.pl/pliki/WP9_
Southern_countries_synthesis.pdf).
Lahav, G. (2004), Immigration and politics in the New Europe: Reinventing borders.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lesińska M., R. Stefańska & M. Szulecka (2010), ‘Migration policy considerations’, in A.
Górny, I. Grabowska-Lusińska, M. Lesińska, M. Okólski (eds.), Immigration to Poland:
Policy, employment, integration, 197-209. Warsaw: Scholar.
258
MAGDALENA LESIŃSKA

12
The evolving area of freedom,
security and justice
Taking stock and thinking ahead
Dora Kostakopoulou
Justice and Home Affairs cooperation in the European Union has evolved in
increasingly variable and unpredictable environments. Evolution and altered
conditions more often than not represent both an opportunity and a need for
initiating observations, reflection about the past and thinking ahead and bet-
tering what exists. This is, indeed, the case with the Area of Freedom,
Security and Justice (AFSJ) – that is, the institutional architecture that
emerged following the partial Communitarisation of the Justice and Home
Affairs pillar of the Maastricht Treaty (1993), which was agreed during the
1996
Intergovernmental
Conference
and
which
culminated
in
the
Amsterdam Treaty (in force as of 1 May 1999). A moment of reflection is
needed not only because the AFSJ is ten years old, but also because The
Hague Programme, successor to the Tampere Programme1 that laid down
the policy priorities in this domain and was agreed by the European Council
in November 2004, is about to expire.2 Preparations for its new five-year
successor, the Stockholm Programme, have been made and, in anticipating
the European Council’s meeting in December 2009, the European
Commission published a communication on ‘An Area of Freedom, Security
and Justice serving the citizen’ in June 2009 (Commission Communication
2009). The communication seeks to make the policy priorities of justice and
home affairs cooperation more balanced by stating explicitly that ‘the prior-
ity now has to be to put the citizen at the heart of this project’ (Commission
Communication 2009: 2).
Although the new ‘citizen-oriented’ approach is a welcome development
in light of the restrictive and security-based focus of discourse and policy
that prevailed since the adoption of The Hague Programme, the absence of
references to ‘Europe’s Others’ – that is, migrants, third-country national
border crossers, asylum seekers and refugees – is puzzling. In any case,
the communication outlines what the European Commission perceives to
be the major successes of member state cooperation during the last ten

years: the removal of controls at internal borders; the management of the
EU’s external borders in a coherent fashion; progress towards a common
policy on immigration – that is, the existence of ‘rules that make legal
migration fairer and easier to understand’; the adoption of an EU frame-
work on migrant integration; ‘stronger action being taken against illegal
immigration and human trafficking’; the establishment of partnership
agreements with third countries, mainly readmission and visa facilitation
agreements, designed to make ‘circular migration’ a reality (Commission
Communication 2009: 2-3); progress towards the establishment of a com-
mon European system of asylum; and the development of a common visa
policy. At the same time, the European Commission recognises that ensur-
ing the proper implementation of community law by the member states
remains a significant challenge.
It is true that the modus operandi of the AFSJ as well as the ensuing poli-
cy output have been successful, particularly if one takes into account the de-
ficiencies of the previous intergovernmental institutional framework (1993-
1999). Namely, the ineffectiveness of policymaking due to the prevalence of
unanimity, convention law-making and the unduly cumbersome five-tier de-
cision-making structure, the absence of clearly defined objectives, effective
parliamentary involvement and judicial supervision and the lack of enforce-
ment mechanisms (for a detailed discussion, see Kostakopoulou 2007).
But it is equally true that success is not merely a measure of juridico-
political output and of deepening member state cooperation in areas that
have traditionally been regarded as bastions of state sovereignty. Successful
cooperation cannot be measured only by its results; it must also be tested
on the merits of what has been agreed. In other words, success is also a mat-
ter of ensuring a policy’s conceptual coherence with the existing normative
framework as well as with other, equally important, policies. It also means
its capacity to provide credible and effective solutions to the problems at
hand. In assessing success in more substantive terms, one must identify
qualitative differences between the present and the past and indicators of
better regulation in the service of human needs. Measured against such an
ambitious yardstick, one cannot but conclude that the alleged successes in
the past ten years of the AFSJ have been relative. For instance, Frontex op-
erations have given rise to a number of concerns about the agency’s ac-
countability and the compatibility of its actions with human rights obliga-
tions under international and EU law and the directives that have been
adopted in the field of legal migration: namely, Directive 2003/86 on family
reunification; Directive 2003/109 on the status of long-term residents;
Directive 2004/114 on the conditions of admission of students, pupils, unre-
munerated trainees and volunteers; Directive 2005/71 on the admission of
third-country national researchers; and Directive 2009/50 on highly skilled
migrants. All these now need modification. It is widely acknowledged that
– despite the advantages of securing agreement on EU-wide minimum
260
DORA KOSTAKOPOULOU

albeit uniform standards (the United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark have
secured opt-outs) – the migration directives nevertheless contain a number
of restrictive clauses and fall short of the Tampere objective of ‘near equal-
ity’ for third-country national residents (European Council 1999).
The developing EU framework on integration, on the other hand, which
commenced
with
the
establishment
of National
Contact
Points
on
Integration in 20033 and the adoption of the Common Basic Principles on
Integration in 2004,4 has been shaped by the member states in ways that
accommodate not only their own migration rules and policy priorities in
this area, but also national conceptions of integration and neo-national nar-
ratives seeking to preserve social cohesion and the societies’ ‘national’ val-
ues (Carrera 2009). Predominant national approaches have managed to dis-
connect the issue of migrant integration from the principle of equal
treatment in socio-economic spheres, non-discrimination in the workplace,
society and service delivery and easy access to citizenship (Kostakopou-
lou, Carrera & Jesse 2009).
In so doing, they have aligned integration with migration control, restric-
tions in the admission and settlement of third-country nationals and the
preservation of the alleged homogeneity of national societies. Migrants’ en-
try, residence, settlement and access to citizenship are now conditional on
meeting integration requirements in almost all ‘old migration countries’
(Van Oers, Erboll & Kostakopoulou 2010). Naturalisation is premised on
successful performance in civic orientation tests (Belgium and France are
exceptions), and pre-existing language requirements have been tightened
and reinforced. Migrants are also required to attend language and civic ori-
entation courses and, in most cases, to sit integration tests in order to enter
and/or obtain permanent residence in the Netherlands, Austria, Denmark,
France, Germany, Luxembourg and the UK. Non-attendance of integration
courses affects their access to social benefits in Germany, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, France and the UK. More controver-
sially, since 2006, integration requirements and tests have ‘migrated’
abroad – that is, to (non-European) states of origin – as the Netherlands,
France, Germany, Denmark and the UK require third-country national
spouses seeking reunification to have adequate knowledge of the national
language and societal values. In Austria, France, Denmark and Luxem-
bourg, integration requirements are contained in integration contracts that
migrants have to sign in order to obtain a secure residence status (Van
Oers et al. 2010). Finally, the notion of circular migration gives rise to
fears that old guest worker programmes are being resurrected and that, de-
spite the emphasis on migrant integration and promoting ‘a Europe of
rights’ (Commission Communication 2009: 7), third-country nationals are
prevented from settlement and are merely submitted to utilitarian calcula-
tions and labour market needs.
THE EVOLVING AREA OF FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE
261

In sum, one cannot overlook the fact that the EU is at a crossroads as
far as migration and integration laws and policies are concerned. Further
work remains to be done in designing and implementing common juridico-
political frameworks that are coherent, normatively sound and effective in
policy terms. At this juncture, the IDEA project is envisaged to make a
timely and important contribution. It imports historical understanding and
conceptual coherence into the frames of regular and irregular migration
and supplies empirical rigour and policy recommendations that can be im-
plemented. Among its recommendations is the development of ‘a more
innovative, flexible and pro-active migration policy and responding to the
phenomenon of “fluid” migration as part of the EU acquis communautaire’
(chapter 4). An innovative and proactive migration policy would have to
be based on an alternative frame for migration. For, to arrive at a new
vision, one often needs to alter the ways in which an issue has been per-
ceived. This is not simply an issue of challenging hegemonic narratives
and establishing a counter-hegemony. The issue is rather one of choice,
and choice is a matter of reflection upon alternatives, upon their strengths
and weaknesses. As Heinz Fassmann and Ursula Reeger have argued in
this volume (chapter 3), it is perhaps time to view migration as a perma-
nent element – and not as an exception – in a globalising world. After all,
even before their transformation into homelands in the nineteenth century,
lands have always been receptors of people. In the nineteenth century,
there was an exodus of people from Europe to North and South America.
And, as Marek Okólski has noted in this volume (chapter 1), in the second
part of the twentieth century, Europe witnessed considerable migration:
post-war adjustment migration, migration related to labour recruitment, mi-
gration related to new globalisation, post-community migration and post-
enlargement migration. Furthermore, as Southern European countries have
become immigration countries and Central and Eastern European countries
are in ‘migration transition’, migration needs to be seen as a normal issue
– not a problem or a security threat to be dealt with through restrictive ad-
missions policies and a law-enforcement approach. Acknowledgment of
the ‘ordinary’ or ‘normal’ nature of migration, coupled with the abandon-
ment of the incorrect expectation that it is controllable (see chapter 3 in
this volume), can lead to qualitatively different migration policies. It will
certainly reduce the incoherence characterising the regulation of third-
country nationals’ entry into the EU using the existing category-by-cate-
gory approach5 and will simplify the administrative requirements for both
migrants and their employers.6
It may also expose the artificial boundaries between regular and irregular
(‘illegal’ in member states’ discourses and policies) migration and prompt
the readjustment of the sanctions-oriented approach pertaining to the latter.
As Elspeth Guild and Sergio Carrera (2009: 8) have recently argued:
262
DORA KOSTAKOPOULOU

[...] in the term ‘illegal’ itself we can perhaps find an answer. What
is needed is to change laws so that people do not fall into undocu-
mented statuses. If we analyse the legal measures that lead to people
being categorised as ‘illegal’ or undocumented, we may find a more
helpful approach.
João Peixoto et al. (chapter 5 in this volume) have also commented on
Southern European states’ willingness to remove undocumented migrants
from the artificially constructed domain of ‘illegality’ and to relax the
weight that traditionally has been attributed to states’ consent (or the lack
of it) in favour of more pragmatic considerations and individuals’ de facto
social membership due to their residence and (‘irregular’) employment in
the informal economy. However, as Peixoto et al. observe, regularisations
are ‘used to “repair” the lack of an efficient migration policy’. It is true that
irregular migration is a multi-variable phenomenon (Baldwin-Edwards &
Arango 1999). Magdalena Lesińska (chapter 11 in this volume) has suc-
cinctly noted them: the existence of a shadow economy and its generalised
acceptance by the population and the state, restrictive entry and recruitment
procedures, weak administrative structures and ineffective labour market
controls and the lack of a transparent regularisation scheme. As she ob-
serves with respect to ‘the new migration countries’, ‘special attention
should be given to the role of the informal economy which serves as a
magnet for irregular employment’, as well as to other relevant institutional
factors that create social realities. Understanding migration patterns better
and the role of the historical links between sending and receiving societies
and migrant networks (see, in particular, Drbohlav as chapter 8 in this vol-
ume) will also assist us in overcoming the simplicity of push-pull explana-
tions. Guild and Carrera (2009) have made this point convincingly. On the
basis of Eurostat’s statistics in December 2008, they show that although
unemployment was at 2.7 per cent in the Netherlands and 14.4 per cent in
Spain and statutory minimum wages were under E 300 per month in
Bulgaria and about E 1,570 per month in Luxembourg, the respective
movements of Spanish nationals to the Netherlands and Bulgarian nation-
als to Luxembourg were minimal.
In light of the foregoing, European migration law and policy require re-
adjustment. There is an urgent need to rethink the existing political frames
of migration and integration and to devise a coherent framework of migra-
tion governance that de-securitises migration, reflects international and
European legal commitments and takes sufficiently into account the specif-
icity of migration patterns in the ‘old’, ‘new’ and ‘future’ migration coun-
tries. In the quest for a new conceptual frame, the EU would have to pro-
mote the merits of a paradigm shift – namely, away from perceiving and
framing migration as a problem and/or a threat, to viewing it as a resource.
And it would also have to convince national electorates of the error of past
THE EVOLVING AREA OF FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE
263

approaches in this domain. To convince of error is simply to assist people
not only in understanding and valuing the past and present contributions of
non-national migrant labour to economic productivity, service delivery and
the vibrancy, innovation and dynamism of societies. It is also a matter of
recognising the facticity of human mobility – both inward and outward –
and the necessity of devising pragmatic, coherent and principled responses
to it in the twenty-first century.
Similarly, migrant integration should not be seen as a matter of imposing
additional conditions to entry and settlement, testing individuals’ resolve
and knowledge, imposing sanctions, causing hardship and placing hurdles
on the path to citizenship. Instead, it should be a matter of developing part-
nerships, fostering mutual respect and dynamic learning among citizens,
residents and newcomers, and promoting intercultural dialogue and plural-
ism in action.
The quest for coherence, on the other hand, might lead to the transcen-
dence of the multiple, variegated and conflicting conceptual and legal
frames with respect to intra- and extra-EU migration and integration. The
contrast between the template of internal mobility for the community
nationals, which is based on rights, non-discrimination and equal opportuni-
ties, on the one hand, and the migration template, which has been based on
restriction, discrimination on the grounds of third-country nationality and
less-than-equal opportunities, on the other, sheds ample light on the benefits
of inclusiveness, equal treatment and the making of migrant EU nationals
into the union’s citizens (Kostakopoulou 2001). The basic traits of the for-
mer are rights, uniform and equal treatment irrespective of nationality and
protection; the basic traits of the latter are restriction, control, conditionality,
national variations and law enforcement. The narrowing of the artificial dif-
ference between internal mobility and migration would make migration law
and policy more inclusive and rights-based. Its impact on integration law
and policy in the EU and the member states would also be significant; it
would require a non-discrimination-based and citizenship-driven approach
to migrant integration akin to that applying to the community nationals.
The European Commission’s communication has recognised the impor-
tance of treating existing obstacles as challenges to remaking European
migration and asylum policy, setting out a clear vision in this field and pro-
moting dialogue among all stakeholders at local, national and European
levels. Promoting a more integrated society – a Europe of solidarity – fea-
tures among the political priorities of the new Stockholm Programme. To
this end, the European Commission calls for a dynamic and comprehensive
migration policy which consolidates the global approach to migration and
displays responsibility and solidarity (see priority 5 in Commission
Communication 2009: 23ff.):
264
DORA KOSTAKOPOULOU

Immigration policy must be part of a long-term vision that empha-
sises respect for fundamental rights and human dignity. This policy
must also be designed to deal with increased mobility in a globalis-
ing world through emphasis on social, economic and cultural rights.
(Commission Communication 2009: 23)
In this respect, the European Commission wishes to see the consolidation
of a global approach to migration by making migration issues part of EU
external policy, promoting cooperation and dialogue with third-world coun-
tries and laying the foundations for additional initiatives on migration and
development as well as the development of ‘an innovative and coherent
framework’ (Commission Communication 2009: 23-24). A skeleton of the
latter has been furnished. It includes, among other things, ‘a common
framework in the form of a flexible admission system that will enable it to
adapt to increased mobility and the needs of national labour markets’; a
better analysis and assessment of migration issues (compare Lesińska’s
policy recommendation in chapter 11 of this volume); establishment of a
European platform for dialogue; and a ‘proactive policy based on a
European status for legal immigrants’ (Commission Communication 2009:
24-25). With respect to the last point, the resurrection of the Tampere man-
date is clear:
[...] to maximise the positive effects of legal immigration for the
benefit of all – the countries of origin and destination, host societies
and immigrants – a clear, transparent and equitable approach that re-
spects human beings is required. To do this, an Immigration Code
should be adopted to ensure a uniform level of rights for legal immi-
grants, comparable with that of Community citizens. (Commission
Communication 2009: 25)
An immigration code will bring to an end the present uneven, piecemeal
approach to legal migration and will be accompanied by the revision of the
family reunification directive and the support of member states’ integration
efforts through a joint coordination mechanism. Although, in my opinion,
the latter proposed initiative does not go far enough in the direction of re-
thinking integration law and policy, it is nevertheless the case that the ma-
jority of the communication’s proposals, coupled with its overall approach
to migration issues, are more consistent with the Tampere agenda. As such,
they represent a rupture from the restrictive, security-oriented and law-
enforcement approach of The Hague Programme.
In light of the preceding discussion, it seems to me that – given the fact
that mobility is an integral part of the European integration project and the
importance the EU has attributed to encouraging border crossings and
transborder relations – perceiving third-country national migration in
THE EVOLVING AREA OF FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE
265

negative terms and erecting impermeable borders to discourage border
crossings are counterproductive strategies. True, one cannot underestimate
the political obstacles that stand in the way of reform in the migration
field. However, the review of member states’ policies in this domain, as
undertaken by IDEA project participants, and evidence drawn from the
evolving AFSJ over the last ten years indicate that national executives’
fears about uncontrollable migration and its negative impact have been
greatly overblown. Such narratives have served as electoral devices for
eliciting public support and as ideologically driven excuses for the mainte-
nance of the status quo. But they have hardly offered any compelling rea-
sons to oppose the design of ‘a dynamic and fair migration policy’ in the
twenty-first century (Commission Communication 2009: 32). Hopefully,
the Stockholm Programme will lay down firm foundations for such policy.
The conundrum, of course, is how to reform migration regulations and
practices in ways that treat migrants and refugees as partners and promote
the positive effects of migration while working with and within national
statist systems that themselves are built on the exclusion and subordination
of outsiders. Fortunately, the European integration project contains the con-
ceptual and normative resources required in order to furnish a clear vision
for migration law and policy in the twenty-first century and to provide sol-
utions to the conundrum. After all, it has successfully done so with respect
to intra-EU mobility and the development of EU citizenship over the last
50 years.
Notes
1
The Tampere Programme was adopted by the heads of state and government on 15-
16 October 1999. It was based on four policy priorities, namely, partnerships with
migrants’ countries of origin, the creation of a common European asylum system,
fair treatment of third-world country nationals and the management of migration
flows.
2
The Hague Programme set the objectives to be implemented in the AFSJ for the
period 2005-2010.
3
Council Meeting 2455, Luxembourg, 14-15 October 2002.
4
Justice and Home Affairs Council Meeting 2618, 14615/04, 19 November 2004.
5
See Directives 2005/71 on the admission of third-country national researchers
([2005] OJ L289/15) and 2009/50 on highly skilled migrants ([2009] OJ L155/17).
6
See the commission’s proposal for a directive on a single application procedure for a
single permit for third-world country nationals to reside and work in the territory of
a member state and on common set of rights for third-world country workers legally
residing in a member state, COM (2007) 638 final, 23 October 2007.
266
DORA KOSTAKOPOULOU

References
Baldwin-Edwards, M. & J. Arango (eds.) (1999), Immigrants and the informal economy in
Southern Europe. London: Frank Cass.
Carrera, S. (2009), In search of the perfect citizen? The intersection between integration, im-
migration and nationality in the EU. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Commission Communication (2009), ‘An Area of Freedom, Security and Justice serving the
citizen: Wider freedom in a safer environment’, COM (2009) 262/4, Brussels, 10 June.
European Council (1999), ‘Presidency conclusions Tampere 15 and 16 October 1999’, SN
200/99, Brussels, 16 October.
Guild, E. & S. Carrera (2009), ‘Towards the next phase of the EU’s Area of Freedom,
Security and Justice: The European Commission’s
proposals for the Stockholm
Programme’, CEPS Policy Brief.
Kostakopoulou, D. (2001), Citizenship, identity and immigration in the European Union:
Between past and future. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Kostakopoulou, D., S. Carrera & M. Jesse (2009), ‘Doing and deserving: Competing frames
of integration in the European Union’, in E. Guild, K. Groenendijk & S. Carrera (eds.),
Illiberal, liberal states: Immigration, citizenship and integration in the EU, 167-186.
London: Ashgate.
Van Oers, R., E. Erboll & D. Kostakopoulou (2010), A redefinition of belonging? Language
and integration tests in Europe. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
THE EVOLVING AREA OF FREEDOM, SECURITY AND JUSTICE
267


Europe, a continent of immigrants
A conclusion
Marek Okólski
This volume has offered a comprehensive description of migration proc-
esses that take place in various parts of Europe. In particular, it has
attempted an in-depth inquiry into the phenomenon of European immi-
gration.
Analyses presented in the foregoing chapters have explicitly or implic-
itly referred to a common conceptual framework that implies the existence
of a pattern of migration typical of European countries, whose major char-
acteristic has been assumed to be the change of migration status from net
emigration to net immigration. It has also been assumed that such change
– concomitant with the relatively high intensity of international movements
of population – occurred (or was supposed to occur) independently in indi-
vidual countries in various periods of time. Thus, the processes related to
mass inflows of people to European countries, which are the main focus of
the volume, have been embedded in a very long-time perspective.
The volume has explored three basic hypotheses. The principal hypothe-
sis concerns the existence of a Europe-specific migration cycle. In one var-
iant of that cycle, it is assumed that European countries are subject to a
change from a predominance of the mass outflow of people (‘emigration
countries’) to a predominance of the mass inflow (‘immigration countries’).
It follows from the very nature of that hypothesis that, over a very long pe-
riod of time, in both types of countries international migration above all re-
flected, if not responded to, the prevailing regime of vital movement/repro-
duction of the population.
Another variant of the migration cycle (called interchangeably, and more
precisely, the ‘immigration cycle’) has been analysed more extensively.
This one implies the passing by ‘immigration countries’ of Europe through
different stages of immigration reality (characterised by, among other
things, different sizes and forms of inflows, a varying socio-demographic
and economic composition of immigrants, changing perceptions and atti-
tudes towards immigration and different immigration-related policies).
With each consecutive stage, the ‘immigration country’ becomes more

mature in terms of the cycle. The flows are more orderly. The composition
of migrants tends to converge with that of the native population. The immi-
grants more closely integrate into the host society. The mainstream of
migration policy shifts from preventive or restrictive measures to the com-
prehensive and sophisticated programmes that promote integration. In addi-
tion, the hypothesis assumes that countries that attain the status of ‘immi-
gration country’ later (e.g. ‘new’ immigration countries) imitate, at least to
some extent, experiences of the forerunners (e.g. ‘old’ immigration coun-
tries). This, in turn, would facilitate the convergence of immigration cycles
that individual European countries undergo.
It should be recalled that the first of cycle variants offered a very long-
time and rather general perspective, in which migration experiences of
practically all European countries could be accommodated. Its second var-
iant provided the authors with a tool suitable for an in-depth cross-country
analysis that would reveal both similarities and differences in becoming a
mature immigration country. Needless to say, the latter concept proved to
be especially useful for Europe’s ‘old’ immigration cases and of limited
use for ‘future’ immigration countries.
The second hypothesis directly stems from the first one. Its message is
that in order to become ‘immigration countries’, European countries had to
experience the migration transition. The transition was conceived as an
intermediate phase between the situation where the mass outflow over-
whelmed immigration and the situation which was characterised by a
growing preponderance of the inflow of people relative to the outflow.
This has served as a frame for this volume’s comparative analysis of
factors that shaped the process of becoming an ‘immigration country’, the
factors that were either country-specific or typical (similar) for all
European countries.
Finally, the third (and rather implicit) hypothesis, which has supple-
mented the analyses of real migration phenomena in this volume, suggests
that, in addition to similarities observed among European countries con-
cerning their transition into an ‘immigration country’, in the background
there emerged a process of convergence of migration policies, called
‘Europeanisation’. That process was believed to enhance similarities in mi-
gration transition.
What major conclusions ensue from the empirical verification of the hy-
potheses carried out by the authors in the consecutive chapters? In answer-
ing this question, I will try to be concise and, by necessity, selective.
The main hypothesis – concerning the historical change of the migration
status of an individual country from net emigration (‘emigration country’)
to net immigration (‘immigration country’) – was only partly confirmed. A
large majority of countries have already attained the status of immigration
country. In some European countries, as has been evidenced in the case of
Hungary and Poland, the change of the migration status is an ongoing and
270
MAREK OKÓLSKI

largely unfinished, if directed, process. Moreover, while in the long run the
tendency is clear, in the short run it displays divergences and strong sensi-
tiveness to shocks in the social milieu, mainly of a political and economic
nature. It is by no means a deterministic process and probably not a univer-
sal one. It suffices here to bring forward the example of Central and
Eastern European countries, where between 1950 and 1990 severe adminis-
trative controls imposed strong and lasting perturbations on the secular pat-
tern of migration. They, in turn, caused a counter-reaction and, in fact, a
further disturbance (albeit in the opposite direction) in the following years,
when migration ceased to be forcefully restricted. Another example is a
recent breakdown of the immigration trend and migrant integration policy
in several Western and Southern European countries under the influence of
economic crisis, which signalled a warning: the migration transition should
not be perceived as irreversible. The notion of the European pattern of mi-
gration – which assumes a clear linear tendency and predicts that latecom-
ers will follow in the footsteps of those countries that paved the way to the
status of mature immigration countries – should therefore be viewed with
caution. It should be considered a useful model, rather than a reflection of
reality.
The analyses presented in this volume, while to a large degree confirm-
ing the general tendency – the European migration cycle or pattern –
viewed from a very long-time perspective, shed new light on intra- and in-
ter-group differences. Those analyses reveal a great deal of diversity across
Europe, especially when it comes to a not-so-lengthy perspective and when
the stages of the immigration cycle are in focus.
‘Future’ immigration countries, those of Central and Eastern Europe, on
their way to completing the migration transition seem to deviate in many
ways from the pattern followed earlier by ‘new’ immigration countries.
The most striking difference is the former’s application of relatively severe
regulatory measures with respect to the inflow of foreign citizens and in
fact a striving towards suppression of immigration. From this follows
another significant dissimilarity – a seemingly relatively high proportion of
circular and short-term migrants in the total volume of inflow.
On the other hand, the southern (‘new’) immigration countries display
several distinctive features in their migration pattern relative to ‘old’ coun-
tries, i.e. those that belong to Western and Northern Europe. One of the
most important of them seems to be a relatively high level of irregularity
of the immigrants arriving or staying in the southern destinations. It mani-
fests itself most characteristically in a widespread irregular employment.
This, inter alia, stems from two specific and interplaying factors. Firstly,
the extent of the informal economy in those countries is generally greater
and, so to speak, socially more widely accepted than in western and north-
ern countries. Secondly, the recruitment of migrant workers in the South
was, as a rule, poorly institutionalised compared to ‘old’ immigration
EUROPE, A CONTINENT OF IMMIGRANTS
271

countries. The high degree of irregularity of the immigrants’ stay and em-
ployment prompted the southern countries to introduce vast and recurrent
programmes of regularisation that became a trademark of migration policy
common to that group of countries.
A relatively high proportion of female migrant workers constitutes
another distinctive feature of the southern countries. Unlike in the West
and North, the onset of mass immigration here coincided with a strong
activisation of the native female workforce (which was very small relative
to the western standard). Due to this, and a specific model of welfare state
that levies many welfare obligations on the family (and/or household), an
increased demand for predominantly female labour in the household sector
(e.g. related to elderly care) encouraged a relatively higher proportion of
women among the immigrants.
Not only does each of the three groups of European countries display its
own substantive specificity in following the European pattern of migration,
but prominent differences have also been observed between individual coun-
tries within each group. Among ‘old’ immigration countries, Austria, for in-
stance, significantly differs from France. Whereas in the group of the four
‘new’ immigration countries, Greece in many respects presents a distinct ex-
ception. Portugal and Spain, forming the ‘Iberian model’, visibly differ from
Italy. Among the ‘future’ immigration countries, the Czech Republic differs
strikingly from Hungary and Poland, which, in addition, are both equally in-
experienced in hosting immigrants and focus on different migration con-
cerns (and migration realities). Poland confronts the mass post-EU accession
outflow of people, while Hungary tackles the delicate matter of the
Hungarian minority living in neighbouring countries. Still, all countries
within each group possess most of the group-specific characteristics.
At the regional level within countries, we would certainly notice a num-
ber of important internal (intra-regional) differences in migration patterns.
In other words, the deeper we go in our analysis, the more diversity we
notice across the social space. Is this really surprising? Of course not. By
their very definition, social settings and social processes differ and, if they
are grouped or clustered, their variance is of both an inter-group nature and
an intra-group nature. By the same token, the inter- and intra-group varia-
tion noted in this volume does not impair the validity of the European
migration pattern as a tendency common and specific to countries of the
continent.
Irrespective of the assessment of similarities among the European coun-
tries with regard to the migration pattern and particularly to their experi-
ence of the immigration cycle, it might be argued that the degree of simi-
larity tends to be higher at the symbolic level and lowest at the level of
real phenomena. In all three groups of countries we observed the follow-
ing: a strong convergence concerning ways to prevent illegal immigration
and to protect migrants against discrimination; decisions on the kind of
272
MAREK OKÓLSKI

foreigner inflow to European countries that should be preferred; methods
to manage immigration; and a choice of models of immigrant integration
that should be recommended. This is reflected in ever more systematic and
orderly public debate and in manifestos and policy documents produced in
individual countries and by international organisations addressing the phe-
nomena in question. The convergence of migration patterns of different
countries seems to reflect a long-run process of learning and imitating. It
has been considerably accelerated and reinforced by the activities of EU in-
stitutions. Less resemblance was noticeable in the sphere of migration-re-
lated institutions and their activities (not to mention, the effectiveness of
those activities) in the immigrant-receiving European countries. Above all,
this was manifested in divergences, instability and inconsistencies of mi-
gration policy. As already suggested, the least degree of similarity is dis-
played by actual migration phenomena: specifically, their intensity, forms
and types of flows, the characteristics of migrants (country of origin, social
and demographic features) and their activities in host countries.
The inter- and intra-group differences in the migration pattern are deeply
embedded in historical contexts of immigration. As this volume has made
evident, those contexts vary across European countries and change over
time. The ‘cohort effect’ – the time of initiation of the migration transition
and circumstances specific to that time – proves of particular importance
here. Using the terminology of the present volume, ‘old’ countries began
the transition when their economies were overwhelmed by the Fordist
organisation of production. The post-Fordist system was blossoming at the
time of initiation of the transition in ‘new’ countries. Presently, the ‘future’
countries of immigration are entering their transition under circumstances
of the IT revolution. In addition, the historical contexts logically also bore
heavily and in a country-specific way on migration pattern characteristics
at each consecutive stage of the immigration cycle. The coincidence of the
initiation of the migration transition (and the first stage of the immigration
cycle) in Central and Eastern European countries and the IT revolution (be-
sides other reasons) meant that a considerable part of the early inflow of
foreigners to those countries took the form of liquid/fluid migration. Such
form was hardly observed when other groups of European countries expe-
rienced immigration at that stage. Of importance here is that migrants
adhering to that form of movement are believed to be less prone to stable
behaviours and settlement in the host country. On the other hand, the flows
typical for liquid migration appeared in ‘old’ countries at the very final
stage of the immigration cycle, which within the cycle concept might have
undermined or delayed the expected maturity of their migration regime.
The great complexity of the European migration pattern – so evident in
this volume – was highlighted by the inclusion of several viewpoints on
the same problem. This especially pertains to the analyses of the immigra-
tion cycle’s distinctness and pattern in southern countries, which were the
EUROPE, A CONTINENT OF IMMIGRANTS
273

main geographical focus. In effect, despite some controversies and different
emphases between authors of the various chapters, the analytical outcomes
were comprehensive and provided a wide comparative perspective. The va-
riety of analytical angles and scopes and the pluralism of interpretations
may be this book’s greatest asset.
All in all, this volume has not only contributed to the growing body of
knowledge on contemporary European migration, but in a systematic man-
ner it has also revealed and discussed the complexity of that phenomenon.
In its final chapters, focus fell on the limited manageability and even lesser
predictability of immigration. That part is far from conclusive; it was rather
meant to open new threads of thought and to fan scientific debate.
Last but not least, a short comment of a methodological nature seems
worthwhile. In this volume, a great number of facts or opinions have been
presented that are not consistent with the main hypothesis concerning the
European migration cycle or which might even be viewed as contradicting
it. According to one of cognitive stands, this might lead to the rejection of
the hypothesis. That, however, would have been the case if the present au-
thors aimed at its falsification.
It should be recalled, first of all, that the approach adopted in this vol-
ume is based on the methodology of longue durée, which deals with the
social processes in their complexity and entire ‘life’; a very lengthy, wide
contextual perspective was thus called for. Such is the conceptual frame-
work sketched in the Introduction chapter of the volume. However, the em-
pirical analyses in subsequent chapters referring to that framework do not
take a long view because the authors’ ultimate goal was a pragmatic one.
We hope to have provided other researchers and, most of all, policymakers
with useful clues – if not solutions – that could enhance further research
and promote understanding of contemporary European immigration and
possibly its more effective regulation.
In pursuing this task, we have striven to strengthen the evidence sup-
porting the very existence of a European migration pattern as a very long-
term tendency. To our best judgment, we have accomplished that.
274
MAREK OKÓLSKI

Contributors
Joaquín Arango, Center for the Study of Migration and Citizenship
(IUIOG), Complutense University of Madrid, Spain
arango@cps.ucm.es
Martin Baldwin-Edwards, Mediterranean Migration Observatory (MMO),
Panteion University, Athens, Greece
baldwin-edwards@migrationresearch.info
Jakub Bijak, Central European Forum for Migration Research (CEFMR),
Warsaw, Poland
j.bijak@soton.ac.uk
Corrado Bonifazi, Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies
(IRPPS), Rome, Italy
c.bonifazi@irpps.cnr.it
Dušan Drbohlav, Faculty of Science, Department of Social Geography
and Regional Development (DSG), Charles University in Prague, Czech
Republic
ddrbohlav@quick.cz
Godfried
Engbersen,
Sociology
Department,
Erasmus
University
Rotterdam, the Netherlands
engbersen@fsw.eur.nl
Heinz Fassmann, Regional Research and Spatial Planning Institute,
University of Vienna, Austria
heinz.fassmann@univie.ac.at
Claudia Finotelli, Center for the Study of Migration and Citizenship
(IUIOG), Complutense University of Madrid, Spain
cfinotel@cps.ucm.es

Theodora Kostakopoulou, Centre for European Law (CELS), University
of Southampton, United Kingdom
dora.kostakopoulou@manchester.ac.uk
Dorota Kupiszewska, Central European Forum for Migration Research
(CEFMR), Warsaw, Poland
d.kupisz@twarda.pan.pl
Marek Kupiszewski, Central European Forum for Migration Research
(CEFMR), Warsaw Poland
m.kupisz@cefmr.pan.pl
Magdalena Lesińska, Centre of Migration Research (CMR), University of
Warsaw, Poland
m.lesinska@uw.edu.pl
Jorge
Malheiros,
Institute
of
Geography
and
Regional
Planning,
University of Lisbon, Portugal
gatomaltes@netcabo.pt
Marek Okólski, Centre of Migration Research (CMR), University of
Warsaw, Poland
moko@uw.edu.pl
João Peixoto, Research Centre on Economic Sociology and the Sociology
of Organizations (SOCIUS), Lisbon, Portugal
jpeixoto@iseg.utl.pt
Ursula Reeger, Institute for Urban and Regional Research (ISR), Austrian
Academy of Science, Vienna, Austria
ursula.reeger@oeaw.ac.at
Catarina Sabino, Research Centre in Economic Sociology and the
Sociology of Organizations (SOCIUS), Lisbon, Portugal
socius@iseg.utl.pt
Salvatore Strozza, Institute for Research on Population and Social Policies
(IRPPS), Rome, Italy
strozza@unina.it
Anna Triandafyllidou, The Hellenic Foundation for European Foreign
Policy (ELIAMEP), Athens, Greece
anna.triandafyllidou@iue.it
276
EUROPEAN IMMIGRATIONS

Leo van Wissen, Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic Institute
(NIDI), The Hague, the Netherlands
l.j.g.van.wissen@rug.nl
Arkadiusz Wiśniowski, Central European Forum for Migration Research
(CEFMR), Warsaw, Poland
awisniowski@gmail.com
CONTRIBUTORS
277


Other IMISCOE titles
IMISCOE Research
Rinus Penninx, Maria Berger, Karen Kraal, Eds.
The Dynamics of International Migration and Settlement in Europe: A
State of the Art
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 866 8)
(originally appearing in IMISCOE Joint Studies)
Leo Lucassen, David Feldman, Jochen Oltmer, Eds.
Paths of Integration: Migrants in Western Europe (1880-2004)
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 883 5)
Rainer Bauböck, Eva Ersbøll, Kees Groenendijk, Harald Waldrauch, Eds.
Acquisition and Loss of Nationality: Policies and Trends in 15 European
Countries, Volume 1: Comparative Analyses
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 920 7)
Rainer Bauböck, Eva Ersbøll, Kees Groenendijk, Harald Waldrauch, Eds.
Acquisition and Loss of Nationality: Policies and Trends in 15 European
Countries, Volume 2: Country Analyses
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 921 4)
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig, Wiebke Sievers, Eds.
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 922 1)
Veit Bader
Secularism or Democracy? Associational Governance of Religious
Diversity
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 999 3)
Holger Kolb, Henrik Egbert, Eds.
Migrants and Markets: Perspectives from Economics and the Other
Social Sciences
2008 (ISNB 978 90 5356 684 8)
Ralph Grillo, Ed.
The Family in Question: Immigrant and Ethnic Minorities in
Multicultural Europe
2008 (ISBN 978 90 5356 869 9)

Corrado Bonifazi, Marek Okólski, Jeannette Schoorl, Patrick Simon, Eds.
International Migration in Europe: New Trends and New Methods
of Analysis
2008 (ISBN 978 90 5356 894 1)
Maurice Crul, Liesbeth Heering, Eds.
The Position of the Turkish and Moroccan Second Generation in
Amsterdam and Rotterdam: The TIES Study in the Netherlands
2008 (ISBN 978 90 8964 061 1)
Marlou Schrover, Joanne van der Leun, Leo Lucassen, Chris Quispel, Eds.
Illegal Migration and Gender in a Global and Historical Perspective
2008 (ISBN 978 90 8964 047 5)
Gianluca P. Parolin
Citizenship in the Arab World: Kin, Religion and Nation-State
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 045 1)
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig, Wiebke Sievers, Eds.
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe: Expanded and Updated Edition
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 108 3)
Cédric Audebert, Mohamed Kamel Doraï, Eds.
Migration in a Globalised World: New Research Issues and Prospects
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 1571)
Richard Black, Godfried Engbersen, Marek Okólski, Cristina Pantîru, Eds.
A Continent Moving West? EU Enlargement and Labour Migration from
Central and Eastern Europe
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 156 4)
Charles Westin, José Bastos, Janine Dahinden, Pedro Góis, Eds.
Identity Processes and Dynamics in Multi-Ethnic Europe
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 046 8)
Rainer Bauböck, Thomas Faist, Eds.
Diaspora and Transnationalism: Concepts, Theories and Methods
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 238 7)
Liza Mügge
Beyond Dutch Borders: Transnational Politics among Colonial Migrants,
Guest Workers and the Second Generation
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 244 8)

Peter Scholten
Framing Immigrant Integration: Dutch Research-Policy Dialogues in
Comparative Perspective
2011 (ISBN 978 90 8964 284 4)
Albert Kraler, Eleonore Kofman, Martin Kohli, Camille Schmoll, Eds.
Gender, Generations and the Family in International Migration
2011 (ISBN 978 90 8964 285 1)
Michael Bommes, Giuseppe Sciortino, Eds.
Foggy Social Structures: Irregular Migration, European Labour Markets
and the Welfare State
2011 (ISBN 978 90 8964 341 4)
Giovanna Zincone, Rinus Penninx, Maren Borkert, Eds.
Migration Policymaking in Europe: The Dynamics of Actors and Contexts
in Past and Present
2011 (ISBN 978 90 8964 370 4)
Blanca Garcés-Mascareñas
State Regulation of Labour Migration in Malaysia and Spain: Markets,
Citizenship and Rights
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 286 8)
Julie Vullnetari
Albania on the Move: Links between Internal and International Migration
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 355 1)
Bram Lancee
Immigrant Performance in the Labour Market: Bonding and Bridging
Social Capital
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 357 5)
Maurice Crul, Jens Schneider, Frans Lelie, Eds.
The European Second Generation Compared: Does the Integration
Context Matter?
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 443 5)
Christina Boswell, Gianni D’Amato, Eds.
Immigration and Social Systems: Collected Essays of Michael Bommes
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 453 4)

Ulbe Bosma, Ed.
Post-Colonial Immigrants and Identity Formations in the Netherlands
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 454 1)
Marek Okólski, Ed.
European Immigrations: Trends, Structures and Policy Implications
2012 (ISBN 978 90 8964 457 2)
IMISCOE Reports
Rainer Bauböck, Ed.
Migration and Citizenship: Legal Status, Rights and Political Participation
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 888 0)
Michael Jandl, Ed.
Innovative Concepts for Alternative Migration Policies: Ten Innovative
Approaches to the Challenges of Migration in the 21st Century
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 990 0)
Jeroen Doomernik, Michael Jandl, Eds.
Modes of Migration Regulation and Control in Europe
2008 (ISBN 978 90 5356 689 3)
Michael Jandl, Christina Hollomey, Sandra Gendera, Anna Stepien,
Veronika Bilger
Migration and Irregular Work In Austria: A Case Study of the Structure
and Dynamics of Irregular Foreign Employment in Europe at the
Beginning of the 21st Century
2008 (ISBN 978 90 8964 053 6)
Heinz Fassmann, Ursula Reeger, Wiebke Sievers, Eds.
Statistics and Reality: Concepts and Measurements of Migration in Europe
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 052 9)
Karen Kraal, Judith Roosblad, John Wrench, Eds.
Equal Opportunities and Ethnic Inequality in European Labour Markets:
Discrimination, Gender and Policies of Diversity
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 126 7)
Tiziana Caponio, Maren Borkert, Eds.
The Local Dimension of Migration Policymaking
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 232 5)

Raivo Vetik, Jelena Helemäe, Eds.
The Russian Second Generation in Tallinn and Kohtla-Järve: The TIES
Study in Estonia
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 250 9)
IMISCOE Dissertations
Panos Arion Hatziprokopiou
Globalisation, Migration and Socio-Economic Change in Contemporary
Greece: Processes of Social Incorporation of Balkan Immigrants in
Thessaloniki
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 873 6)
Floris Vermeulen
The Immigrant Organising Process: Turkish Organisations in Amsterdam
and Berlin and Surinamese Organisations in Amsterdam, 1960-2000
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 875 0)
Anastasia Christou
Narratives of Place, Culture and Identity: Second-Generation
Greek-Americans Return ‘Home’
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 878 1)
Katja Rušinović
Dynamic Entrepreneurship: First and Second-Generation Immigrant
Entrepreneurs in Dutch Cities
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 972 6)
Ilse van Liempt
Navigating Borders: Inside Perspectives on the Process of Human
Smuggling into the Netherlands
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 930 6)
Myriam Cherti
Paradoxes of Social Capital: A Multi-Generational Study of Moroccans
in London
2008 (ISBN 978 90 5356 032 7)
Marc Helbling
Practising Citizenship and Heterogeneous Nationhood: Naturalisations
in Swiss Municipalities
2008 (ISBN 978 90 8964 034 5)

Jérôme Jamin
L’imaginaire du complot: Discours d’extrême droite en France et
aux Etats-Unis
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 048 2)
Inge Van Nieuwenhuyze
Getting by in Europe’s Urban Labour Markets: Senegambian Migrants’
Strategies for Survival, Documentation and Mobility
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 050 5)
Nayla Moukarbel
Sri Lankan Housemaids in Lebanon: A Case of ‘Symbolic Violence’ and
‘Every Day Forms of Resistance’
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 051 2)
John Davies
‘My Name Is Not Natasha’: How Albanian Women in France Use
Trafficking to Overcome Social Exclusion (1998-2001)
2009 (ISBN 978 90 5356 707 4)
Dennis Broeders
Breaking Down Anonymity: Digital Surveillance of Irregular Migrants
in Germany and the Netherlands
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 159 5)
Arjen Leerkes
Illegal Residence and Public Safety in the Netherlands
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 049 9)
Jennifer Leigh McGarrigle
Understanding Processes of Ethnic Concentration and Dispersal:
South Asian Residential Preferences in Glasgow
2009 (ISBN 978 90 5356 671 8)
João Sardinha
Immigrant Associations, Integration and Identity: Angolan, Brazilian
and Eastern European Communities in Portugal
2009 (ISBN 978 90 8964 036 9)
Elaine Bauer
The Creolisation of London Kinship: Mixed African-Caribbean and White
British Extended Families, 1950-2003
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 235 6)

Nahikari Irastorza
Born Entrepreneurs? Immigrant Self-Employment in Spain
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 243 1)
Marta Kindler
A Risky Business? Ukrainian Migrant Women in Warsaw's Domestic Work
Sector
2011 (ISBN 978 90 8964 327 8)
IMISCOE Textbooks
Marco Martiniello, Jan Rath, Eds.
Selected Studies in International Migration and Immigrant Incorporation
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 160 1)




European Immigrations: Trends, Structures and Policy Implications is one of the few 
attempts to conceive of the ‘Old Continent’ as a common economic and cultural 
space of immigration. Europe’s post-enlargement states, too, are presented as having 
a high degree of social and political coherence. New empirical evidence underscores 
their common experience, while disclosing factors and trends underlying their 
respective migrations, particularly from Southern and Eastern Europe. Key threads 
are the long-term transition that countries undergo from net emigration to net 
immigration, as well as developments in migrant inﬂ ows, integration and policy.
Marek Okólski is founder and director of the Centre of Migration Research (CMR) at 
the University of Warsaw and professor at the University of Warsaw and the Warsaw 
School of Social Sciences and Humanities.
“T is book smartly conceptualises migration in diﬀ erent areas of Europe and oﬀ ers insightful theoretical models to 
understand past and recent trends.”
Tim Elrick, University of Toronto, Canada
“An impressive team of internationally acclaimed migration scholars expertly take stock of and debate Europe's latest 
round of migration trends... A rich blend of theory and empirical analysis.”
Russell King, Sussex Centre for Migration Research, University of Sussex, UK
“T e predominant focus on Southern and Eastern Europe enriches our understanding of European migrations as a 
complex and constantly evolving system of systems.”
Ferruccio Pastore, Forum of International and European Research on Migration, Turin, Italy
     
..
