INTERNATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION
2
Knowledge and Education as
International Commodities: The
Collapse of the Common Good
Philip G. Altbach
Philip G. Altbach is J. Donald Monan, SJ professor of higher education
at Boston College and director of the Center for International Higher
Education.
A
 revolution is taking place in education. Education
is becoming an internationally traded commodity.
No longer is it seen primarily as a set of skills, attitudes,
and values required for citizenship and effective
participation in modern society—a key contribution to
the common good of any society. Rather, it is
increasingly seen as a commodity to be purchased by a
consumer in order to build a “skill set” to be used in the
marketplace or a product to be bought and sold by
multinational corporations, academic institutions that
have transmogrified themselves into businesses, and
other providers. Nowhere is this trend more clearly
exemplified than in the current debate about GATS, the
General Agreement on Trade in Services, now taking
place internationally within the World Trade
Organization. The commodification of education will
have major implications for how we think about
schooling and the university, the ownership and
transmission of knowledge, and indeed the role of
citizenship in modern society. The implications are
immense, both for nations and for the globalization and
internationalization of education.
There are positives and negatives in this new
dispensation, just as there are in the broader globalization
agenda of which education is a part. Globalization is
probably both inevitable and unstoppable, and much of
it is positive as well. Yet there are many problems
associated with globalization, from environmental
degradation to growing inequalities within societies and
internationally. The problem with the current debate
about globalization is exactly the same as with
discussions of its educational implications—the pros see
only a bright future of economic integration, while the
cons focus only on the negatives. Neither has a balanced
vision that takes into account pitfalls and possibilities.
In the knowledge industries, of which education is
a central part, globalization is already a key feature. We
see implications in the growing use of the Internet for
communication as well as for the marketing of
knowledge products of all kinds, in the strengthening
of a global labor force of highly skilled personnel, in the
use of English as a widespread medium for scientific
communication and increasingly of advanced training
in many fields, and in other ways. Indeed, higher
education has been internationalized since the very
beginning of universities in medieval Europe, when there
was a common medium of instruction, Latin, and both
students and professors routinely moved from country
to country. Now, perhaps 2 million students study outside
their home countries, and a world market already exists
for faculty and researchers. The Internet has greatly
expanded the international flow of knowledge. One might
ask why higher education needs to be subject to the legal
strictures of the WTO when internationalization is taking
place anyway at a pace and under conditions generally
suited to the higher education community.
The challenge for us is to understand both the
context and the implications of the globalization of the
knowledge economy. My purpose here is to point to
some of the problems created or exacerbated by current
trends. The picture is certainly not entirely negative, but
a balanced perspective requires careful analysis of the
downside—viewpoints often not articulated in the rush
toward the global future.
 Underlying this discussion is a conviction that
education at all levels is not simply a commodity to be
bought and sold in the marketplace. An education
system provides the skills needed for economic success,
but it also builds the underpinnings of a civil society
and of national participation. An understanding of the
past, of culture, and of democratic values, among other
things, is part of education, and these elements cannot
be subsumed in some global marketplace. They are
integral to any society, and are part of the patrimony of
a people. Similarly, university-level basic research,
certain curricular offerings, and other elements of
academic work do not lend themselves easily to
commercialization. In other words, there are values of
the national and social common good that must be
protected and preserved in a globalized educational
environment. Protecting culture, intellectual
independence, and the values of a civil society are simply
not on the same level as free trade in automobiles or equal
access to markets for soybeans—or even to the other
service-related activities that are included in the GATS
agenda. To pretend that all intellectual “products” are
simply to be bought and sold on a commercial market is
an oversimplification that contributes to giving
globalization a bad name among growing segments of
the population. Ensuring that an accounting firm, for
example, has free access to international markets or that
software is not pirated is simply not the same as
protecting an educational system.
Some Potential Downsides
Maintaining standards or even accurate information in
a globalized academic environment is problematical.
Ensuring appropriate academic standards in a national
 International Issues

3
higher education system is a major challenge. The United
States and many other countries do this through accred-
iting systems that provide reasonably accurate informa-
tion concerning numbers of colleges and universities,
degrees offered, facilities available, and the like. It is dif-
ficult enough to ensure minimal standards, track the
growing number of “degree mills,” and in general to
maintain minimal standards at the national level—do-
ing so internationally seems unworkable. Not only
would data be difficult to obtain, but agreement on ap-
propriate standards is unlikely. The European Union’s
efforts to “harmonize” aspects of higher education in the
EU countries in order to create a “common currency” of
higher education are proving to be a major challenge—
even though the EU has considerable power and re-
sources to ensure compliance. Tracking academic
programs and degrees, not to mention maintaining qual-
ity standards, on a global basis is extraordinarily diffi-
cult. It is especially problematical when many of those
seeking to enter the global marketplace are motivated
by a desire to earn a profit rather than by an educational
mission.
We are at the beginning of the distance
revolution in higher education.
We are at the beginning of the distance revolution
in higher education. There are already a considerable
number of degree and training providers who use
information technology and distance methods to offer
programs. As IT becomes more sophisticated and the
curriculum better developed, distance offerings will
become more numerous. Already, “open universities”
using mainly distance means of course delivery enroll
well over 3 million students worldwide—the large
majority in the developing world. Seven out of the 10
largest distance learning institutions are in developing
countries. If national authorities are unable to exercise
significant control over institutions providing distance
higher education in their countries through national
accrediting arrangements, degree recognition, and
similar measures, quality control becomes impossible.
Open markets, at least in higher education, reinforce
the inequalities that already exist. If educational borders
are completely open, the strongest and wealthiest
education providers will have unrestricted access.
Countries and institutions that cannot compete will find
it difficult to flourish. This means that developing
countries and smaller industrialized nations will be at a
considerable disadvantage. Local academic institutions
will find it difficult to compete with providers that choose
to set up institutions in their country. Foreign providers
will focus on the most profitable segment of the market—
today including business and management studies,
information technology, and a few others— and leave
the rest to the local institutions. Such fields as the basic
sciences, requiring expensive laboratories and other
equipment and offering little immediate profit-making
potential, not to mention support for libraries, will be
ignored by the foreign providers.
There is a precedent for this. Several decades ago,
the major industrial nations with the support of
multinational publishers were able to tighten up
international copyright rules and open up national
publishing to the international market. What happened
is that in many developing and middle-income countries,
local publishers found it difficult to compete and were
purchased by the multinationals or went out of business.
While books continued to be supplied to local markets,
something was lost. The multinationals were especially
interested in the lucrative textbook market, largely
ignoring less profitable general publishing. The result
was that local publishers could not compete with the
multinationals in the textbook market and were unable
to afford to publish general books. Decisions concerning
what books to publish were sometimes made in Paris,
London, New York, or Amsterdam. Profits were exported
rather than being reinvested in the local market.
University-level textbooks were increasingly imported
from abroad rather than being produced locally. Valuable
expertise was lost. It is also the case that foreign capital
became available and that publishing standards were
sometimes improved. But the loss of independence and
autonomy was significant. Higher education will find
itself in exactly the same position—with its most
lucrative markets creamed off by the multinationals and
unable to afford to support the basic functions of the
universities.
While it can be argued that science is by its nature
international, higher education has a central role for
nations and societies that goes beyond science and
beyond training for specific careers. What may be
relevant for the United States in research or training may
be inappropriate or at least irrelevant for Ghana or China.
If countries no longer have the ability to control the basic
elements of the curriculum, the language of instruction,
the pedagogical philosophies, and other key elements
of the delivery of higher education much is lost. Further,
if the most profitable aspects of higher education, such
as management studies, are creamed off the top of the
academic enterprise by foreign providers, local
universities will be left with the least popular—and
profitable—fields of study. These institutions will find
it more difficult to compete and will be unable to offer a

INTERNATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION
4
full range of academic specialties. Further, they will have
neither the funds nor the infrastructures to engage in
scientific research—thus abandoning the research role
that is central to educating the best scientists and scholars
and leaving research in the hands of the wealthiest
universities in the major industrialized nations. In a way,
the profits that the rich universities may earn in the
developing countries can further strengthen their
research profile and contribute to the already existing
inequalities in research worldwide.
The New Neocolonialism
In the bad old days of the Cold War, much was made of
the efforts by the major powers to dominate the hearts
and minds of the world. The Soviet Union, the United
States, and others spent lavishly on student exchanges,
textbook subsidies, book translations, institution build-
ing, and other efforts to dominate the world’s academic
leaders and intellectuals. We are in an entirely new era
of power and influence. Now, multinational corpora-
tions, media conglomerates, and even a few major uni-
versities are the new neocolonialists—seeking to
dominate not for ideological or political reasons but
rather for commercial gain. The result is the same—the
loss of intellectual and cultural autonomy by those who
are less powerful. In the Cold War era, power politics
was the motivation. GATS helps to establish open mar-
kets for knowledge products of all kinds so that the new
neocolonialists will have unfettered access to world
markets. In a way, developing countries were better off
in earlier times—at least they could choose among feud-
ing superpowers and could, if they had the will, keep
external influences at bay without risking their entire
participation in the world economy.
The new neocolonialism works through the
knowledge providers who are selling a variety of
products on the world markets. These products include
academic programs of all kinds, offered as “twinning”
arrangements with local universities or business
enterprises, branch campuses offering degrees and
certificates from abroad, IT-based academic degrees,
corporate training programs, and a myriad of others.
There are some “high end” providers currently involved
in the international trade in training and certification.
These include, among others, the University of Chicago’s
business school in Spain, Pennsylvania’s Wharton School
initiative in Singapore, and several coalitions of Western
universities. There are many more lower prestige or
unknown academic institutions and companies in the
international educational marketplace offering
“products” of completely unknown quality and
relevance. All of these providers have one thing in
common—the profit motive. Academic collaboration,
intellectual exchange, and internationalization are
ancillary to the main purpose of the enterprise—money.
Often, the programs that are exported are “off the shelf”
offerings designed for students in the industrialized
countries. The relevance of such offerings for developing
countries is, at the very least, questionable because
education is not country neutral. Both pedagogy and
curricular content must take into consideration local
conditions, traditions, and  learning styles. Foreign
providers are often unwilling to spend the money
necessary to do this. While the new neocolonialism is
profit- rather than politics-driven, the end result is the
same. Countries and academic systems and institutions
in the developing countries become dependent on rich
and powerful foreign providers.
This is an argument against forcing those
who are less powerful to be subject to a
dramatically unequal marketplace.
What Is To Be Done?
This is neither an argument against the international-
ization of knowledge nor against collaboration. Inevi-
table inequalities between the well-established, wealthy,
and powerful universities of the North and the less-well-
endowed universities of the South are also recognized.
This is an argument against forcing those who are less
powerful to be subject to a dramatically unequal mar-
ketplace, one that will rob academic institutions and sys-
tems of the right to make decisions about curriculum,
quality standards, and a variety of other educational fac-
tors. It is an argument in favor of recognizing that edu-
cation in all of its many forms is not a simple commodity
but a central part of a culture and of a society and de-
serves to be treated differently than other parts of the
marketplace.
In reality, we are not doing too badly right now. The
heavy hand of GATS and the WTO is not needed in the
educational sphere. International educational
transactions of all kinds are at an all-time high. Some
countries, such as Singapore and Malaysia, have opened
their doors to foreign universities, but have done so on
their own terms. Others, such as Argentina, are seeking
to understand the impact of foreign providers and to
regulate them appropriately. China is slowly opening its
doors to overseas academic institutions and programs.
The United States is trying cope with adapting its well-
established accrediting system to American colleges and
universities offering programs overseas. Australia is
aggressively marketing its educational products
overseas. The European Union is moving toward the

5
harmonization of its divergent academic systems. An
unprecedented number of students travel abroad for
study, and there is a functioning global market for highly
educated personnel. The world is moving toward
internationalizing higher education by using the energies
of academe and responding to market needs. At the same
time, those on both side of the equation have the power
to shape educational transactions.
A new treaty that will have the power to force
countries with quite different academic needs and
resources to conform to strictures inevitably designed
to serve the interests of the most powerful academic
systems and corporate educational providers will only
breed inequality and dependence. Intellectual
globalization is alive and well now and does not need
the straitjacket of GATS and the WTO. We should be
moving toward a globalization based on equality rather
than a new neocolonialism.
Trade Creep: The Implication
of GATS for Higher Education
Policy
Jane Knight
Jane Knight is an associate faculty member at the Comparative, Interna-
tional and Development Education Centre, Ontario Institute of Studies
in Education, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor St. W., Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1V6, Canada. E-mail: <janeknight@sympatico.ca>.
T
he General Agreement on Trades in Service (GATS)
plus other regional trade agreements are testimony
to the increased emphasis on trade and the market
economy in this era of globalization. GATS is the first
legal trade agreement that focuses exclusively on trade
in services—as opposed to products. It is administered
by the World Trade Organization, a powerful organiza-
tion with 144 member countries. Education is one of the
12 service sectors covered by GATS. The purpose of
GATS is progressively and systematically to promote
freer trade in services by removing many of the existing
barriers. What does this mean for higher education?
 The current debate on the impact of GATS on higher
education is divided, if not polarized. Critics focus on
the threat to the role of government, the “public good,”
and the quality of education. Supporters highlight the
benefits that more trade can bring in terms of innovations
through new providers and delivery modes, greater
student access, and increased economic gain. The
purpose of this article is to discuss both the risks and
opportunities that GATS brings to higher education and
to identify some issues in need of further analysis.
Trade in Context with other Trends
Trade liberalization is firmly enmeshed with other is-
sues and trends in higher education, which complicates
the task of isolating the implications emanating from
trade alone. These trends include the growing number
of private for-profit entities providing higher education
opportunities domestically and internationally; the use
of information and communications technologies (ICTS)
for domestic and cross-border delivery of programs; the
increasing costs and tuition fees faced by students at
public and private institutions; and the need for public
institutions to seek alternate sources of funding, which
sometimes means engaging in for-profit activities or
seeking private-sector sources of financial support.
These trends are evident in both developed and, to
some extent, developing countries. How does the
existence of the GATS relate to these trends? While GATS
may contribute to a commercial approach to education
and lead to expanded use of electronic or distance
education, it cannot be held responsible for the
emergence of these trends. In fact, it is important to
acknowledge that the business side of transnational or
cross-border education was alive and well before the
advent of GATS. Supporters of more trade in education
services celebrate the existence of the GATS to maximize
the benefits of these new opportunities. Critics
emphasize the risks associated with increased trade—
believing that it leads to more for-profit providers,
programs of questionable quality, and a market-oriented
approach—which are seen to challenge the traditional
notion of education as a “public good.” The following
sections identify questions and issues that need to be
explored in terms of the impact of trade liberalization
and GATS on policy directions for higher education.
Student Access
Government and public education institutions have
keenly felt the responsibility of ensuring access to edu-
cation. In many, if not in most, countries this is a chal-
lenging issue as the demand for higher and adult
education is steadily growing, often beyond the capac-
ity of the country to provide it. This is one reason why
some students are interested in out-of-country educa-
tional opportunities, and more providers are prepared
to offer higher education services across borders.
When increased trade liberalization is factored into
this scenario, the question of access becomes
complicated. Advocates of freer trade maintain that
consumers, or students, can have greater access to a
wider range of education opportunities at home and
abroad. Nonsupporters of trade believe that access may
