 Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009, pp. 69–82
© Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa, 2009
(ISSN 0850-3907)
*  IRD (Institut de recherche pour le développement), 32 av. Henri Varagnat
93143 Bondy cedex FRANCE. E-mail: perouse@bondy.ird.fr.
Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War:
Lessons not Learned
Marc-Antoine Pérouse de Montclos*
Abstract
In African contemporary history, Biafra is not only remembered as one of the
worst humanitarian crises on the continent, but also as a tragedy that gave rise
to the concept of ingérence or the international responsibility to protect. Unfor-
tunately, the controversies about the impact of aid during the conflict have been
forgotten. Today, the humanitarian legend of Biafra celebrates the saving of
starving children and the birth of the famous NGO Médecins sans Frontières,
but it does not acknowledge the military impact of relief operations that helped
the secessionists continue the war for over a year after it was lost militarily. As
it prolonged the suffering of local populations, relief was a matter of discussion
during and just after the war. Since then, this strategic debate has been ‘lost in
translation’. This paper will argue that the contemporary idea of humanitarian aid
that advocates a right of intervention in order to save innocents confuses the
issue for at least two reasons. First, it leads us to think wrongly that Biafra gave
birth to the concept of an international responsibility to protect, something that
had existed previously. Secondly, it overshadows the dark side of humanitarian
aid, where international intervention often assists belligerents rather than civil-
ians, prolongs suffering, and poses new threats to national sovereignty.
Résumé
Dans l’histoire contemporaine de l’Afrique, on se souvient du Biafra comme
l’une des pires crises humanitaires sur le continent, mais aussi comme une tragédie
qui a donné naissance à la notion d’ingérence ou la responsabilité internationale
de protéger. Malheureusement, les controverses sur l’impact de l’aide durant le
conflit ont été oubliées. Aujourd’hui, la légende humanitaire du Biafra célèbre le
sauvetage d’enfants affamés et la naissance de la célèbre ONG Médecins sans

70
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
Frontières, mais elle ne reconnaît pas l’impact militaire des opérations de secours
qui ont permis aux sécessionnistes de continuer la guerre pendant plus d’un an
après qu’elle a été perdue sur le plan militaire. Alors qu’il prolongeait les souffrances
des populations locales, le secours fut un sujet de discussion pendant et juste
après la guerre. Depuis lors, ce débat stratégique a été « perdu à la traduction ».
Cet article soutient que la notion contemporaine de l’aide humanitaire, qui défend
un droit d’intervention pour sauver des innocents, complique les choses pour au
moins deux raisons. Tout d’abord, il nous amène à penser à tort que le Biafra a
donné naissance à la notion d’une responsabilité internationale de protéger,
quelque chose qui avait existé auparavant. Deuxièmement, il éclipse le côté som-
bre de l’aide humanitaire, où l’intervention internationale assiste souvent les
belligérants plutôt que les civils, prolonge la souffrance et pose de nouvelles
menaces à la souveraineté nationale.
Introduction
In African contemporary history, Biafra is not only remembered as one of
the worst humanitarian crises on the continent, but also as a tragedy that
gave rise to the concept of ingérence, or the international responsibility to
protect. Unfortunately, the controversies about the impact of aid during the
conflict have been forgotten. Today, the humanitarian legend of the Biafran
crisis focuses on the role of people like Bernard Kouchner, currently the
French Minister of Foreign Affairs, and the birth of the famous NGO Médecins
sans Frontières, which was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1999.
This stereotype does not acknowledge, however, the military impact of
relief operations that helped the secessionists to resist and carry on the
fighting. Port Harcourt fell into Nigerian hands one year after an independent
Republic of Biafra was proclaimed by Lt General Odumegwu Ojukwu in
May 1967. From then on, the secessionists were completely surrounded and
had no further access to the sea. From a military point of view, they were
finished. In Port Harcourt, they had lost the war rather than simply losing a
battle. Yet their fighting continued until January 1970 thanks to the support
of humanitarian organizations that provided vital supplies to the Biafran Army.
As it prolonged the suffering of local populations, relief was a matter of
discussion during and just after the war. Since then, this strategic debate has
been ‘lost in translation’. Nowadays, the heroic resistance of the Biafrans is
analyzed as a result of the disorganization of the Nigerian Army, the successful
tactics of the secessionists and/or the determination of a people struggling
for survival. The part played by humanitarian aid is reduced to the attempts
to break the blockade and to advocate a right of intervention in order to save
starving children. Such a vision confuses the issue for at least two reasons.
First, it lets us think wrongly that Biafra gave birth to the concept of an

71
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
international responsibility to protect. Secondly, it overshadows the dark
side of humanitarian aid.
The Responsibility to Protect and State Sovereignty: An Old Issue
Historically, the international concept of a responsibility to protect was not
born out of the Biafran crisis. It existed before, elsewhere and in other ways,
for instance, when the French Army invaded Lebanon to protect Christian
communities against their Druze oppressor in 1860. Backed by European
powers, such an intervention d’humanité was already linked to gunboat
diplomacy, as humanitarian interventions of today often have a military
component, from Afghanistan to D.R. Congo. Colonial motives were of
course different from operations that now aim to impose peace on behalf of
the international community. But humanitarian rhetoric was always an argu-
ment of foreign policy. Indeed, Africa was colonized under the pretext of
civilizing the continent and abolishing the slave trade (Verges 2001).
In this regard, the Biafran crisis was only a step towards the formalization
and modernization of the concept of the responsibility to protect. At the end
of the 1960s, the Cold War and the superpower rivalry did not allow the
United Nations to circumvent state sovereignties and to organize peace
enforcement operations without the consent of all. So humanitarian actors
had to rely on themselves and the media to break up the Nigerian blockade
against the secessionists. This kind of advocacy was not completely new.
The Boer War in 1901 had already been a major case for humanitarian relief
(Thompson 2002). According to Andrew Thompson, the amount of money
collected for the British in South Africa was even higher than the funds
raised by the Live Aid show during the famine in Ethiopia in 1985.1 Yet that
was for white victims only. The Ethiopians invaded by the Italian Fascists in
1936 or the Congolese at independence in 1960 got almost nothing. The real
innovation of the Biafran crisis was worldwide humanitarian mobilization for
Black Africans.
The mass starvation of Biafrans in 1968 thus played a crucial role. For
the first time, photographs of emaciated children started to circulate widely.
Humanitarian actors also became more vocal and campaigned against the
deadly Nigerian blockade. A young doctor of the Red Cross, Bernard Kouchner,
refused to keep silent and stay neutral. He violated the internal rules of the
ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross), which had the greatest
difficulties in being allowed to operate within the Biafran enclave. Horrified
by what he had seen, Kouchner went back to France, raised the issue to the
media and denounced what he called a genocide. The Biafrans, he said, were
starving, the international community was doing nothing about it and the
Nigerians forbade NGOs to deliver food to the secessionists. He believed

72
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
that the use of hunger as a weapon of war was indeed genocide, even if the
Igbo were not to be massacred after their defeat in 1970. For Kouchner and
many others, the Nigerian blockade represented a Muslim plot to finish the
pogroms of 1966 and eliminate a Christian people. The story was relayed by
the French secret service, which used the genocide propaganda to raise
support for the Biafrans in order to break up an Anglophone giant within
Francophone Africa (Glaser and Smith 2005:67). Such politicization of a
humanitarian crisis is a classic situation, and is reminiscent of the current
American rhetoric of genocide in Darfur to mobilize the international
community against the Sudanese Islamic military junta.
Humanitarianism and the Biafran Economy of War
From a media point of view, Biafra was a success story, the first major
famine to be addressed through media images of starving Africans, before
Ethiopia in 1984 or Somalia in 1992. But from a humanitarian point of view,
it was an operational disaster, a logistical nightmare and a political failure.
Professionals know that a fundamental dilemma of relief organizations is
that they help combatants while trying to assist war victims. Aid exacerbates
conflicts because it feeds militants, sustains their dependants, supports war
economies and provides legitimacy to belligerents (Lischer 2005:6). And all
of this happened in Biafra. Aid legitimized the struggle for independence of
Christian Igbo who were portrayed as victims of a genocide. It also helped
the rebels to be supplied with food and weapons. This was because humani-
tarian logistics in war zones usually follow the same routes and means of
transport as the military (Nordstrom 2004). Planes that supplied Biafra from
São Tomé carried both food and weapons. Other humanitarian hubs like
Peshawar for Afghanistan after 1980 or Lokichokio for southern Sudan after
1989 are also known to have provided ‘freedom fighters’ with fresh sup-
plies. Biafra was no exception to such a problem. The strategic contribution
of relief to the Biafran war economy was twofold: logistical and financial.
To start with, planes were a vital link to the outside world after the last
Biafran access to the sea, Port Harcourt, fell in May 1968. Humanitarian
organizations, especially the Catholic Caritas and the Scandinavian Protestant
Churches, were instrumental in setting up an air bridge from São Tomé.
Unlike the ICRC, they worked only on the Biafran side, so they did not have
to bother with the Nigerian Government. The Norwegian Church Relief, for
instance, decided to circumvent the Federal authorities because Lagos did
not allow it to supply the enclave and had diverted one of its food cargoes to
Santa Isabel, now the capital city of Equatorial Guinea.2 After a secret visit to
Lisbon, the organization’s general secretary, Elias Berge, began to send
provisions from the Portuguese island of São Tomé in the planes of an

73
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
American adventurer, Hank Wharton, who carried weapons for the Biafrans.
By loading food onto these planes whenever there was space available, the
Norwegian Church Relief opened itself to the charge of being involved in
arms-smuggling. But it justified the violation of the Nigerian airspace because
the blockade was an illegitimate weapon of war and could therefore be broken.
With its Danish, Swedish and Finnish counterparts, the Norwegian Church
Relief eventually participated in August 1968 in the creation of Nordchurchaid,
an ad hoc organization in collaboration with a company based in Reykjavik,
Flughjalp (‘Aid by Air’), to send food to São Tomé. From here, relief was
then transported to Biafra by a consortium of some thirty European and
American NGOs, the Joint Church Aid (JCA), which was nicknamed ‘Jesus
Christ Airlines’. Their clandestine planes flew by night in very difficult
conditions, and three of them were destroyed by Nigerian bombs. The
Norwegian Church Relief funded two million out of a total of seven million
dollars spent during these operations, which were joined in June 1969 by
secular organizations like Oxfam, Save the Children and the ICRC. Interestingly
enough, the ‘Jesus Christ Airlines’ was headed up from August until September
1968 by Carl-Gustaf Von Rosen, a Swedish count who was to rebuild the
Biafran Air Force in May 1969. Internal rules of Nordchurchaid did not
mention the prohibition of weapons, and the cargo included spare parts for
trucks that were supposed to deliver food within the enclave, but could also
transport troops (Lloyd 1972). The military support was obvious. To continue
receiving weapons and planes, the Biafrans had only one airstrip, at Uli, and
the JCA agreed to enlarge it to keep it operational, unlike the ICRC, which
refused to do so (Wiseberg 1974). At the end of 1969, the situation was so
dire that Odumegwu Ojukwu officially asked the relief agencies to supply his
army. During distributions, it became more and more difficult to protect
civilians from soldiers who tried to take food by force; aid workers had to
hire armed guards to protect their stores from looting (Cronje 1972).
The relief support to the enclave war economy was not only material, but
also financial. The secessionists lacked hard currencies because the
introduction of new banknotes by the Federal government in January 1968
rendered valueless the millions of old Nigerian pounds still in Biafran hands.
The creation of a Biafran pound was not a solution. It had no value outside
of the enclave. Printed in Portugal, it was a paper money only, for it would
have been too costly to mint and import coins. As a result, even Biafran
banknotes were scarce, while plastic tokens were used as ersatz coins. Within
the enclave, the population preferred to keep its cash at home because their
accounts had been frozen by the local authorities and they risked being
recruited by the military while going to the bank (Uche 2002). They tried to
save Nigerian coins which, unlike banknotes, were still used on the Federal

74
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
side and whose highest value was one shilling. With these coins, some
smugglers succeeded in crossing the frontlines and importing goods on the
black market.3 But the government of Odumegwu Ojukwu could not export
anything to gain hard currency. Because of the Federal blockade, oil revenues
did not materialize and no foreign private interests were willing to risk
purchasing rights to exploit Biafran mineral resources. In order to be allowed
to go inside the enclave, humanitarian organizations were the only ones to
buy the local currency, and they provided for free the necessary supplies
that fed the military.
Aid thus became crucial to prevent the collapse of the secession attempt.
The Commander of the Biafran Army, Alexander Madiebo, admitted that
they eventually lost the war because of a lack of money (Madiebo 1980). As
a matter of fact, relief and mission organizations were the primary source of
foreign exchange (£4.3 million), followed by the French secret service (£2
million) and donations from the Igbo diaspora overseas (£750,000), the Igbo
in Nigeria (£100,000) and various concerned citizens in the West (£100,000)
(Lindsay 1969). According to Odumegwu Ojukwu, ‘the only source of income
available to Biafra was the hard currency spent by the churches for yams
and garri’. His Chief of Military Planning, Mike Okwechime, confirmed that
‘financing the war was largely accomplished through private and humanitarian
contributions. Much was diverted from funds raised abroad. Those who
wished to make strictly humanitarian contributions could give to specific
agencies but those giving to Biafra often didn’t ask any questions, and the
money could be used to purchase arms on the black market’ (Stremlau 1977).
Out of $250 million of humanitarian aid to Biafra, it was estimated that 15
per cent was directly spent on military items. This was equivalent to the
amount of hard currency spent on weapons by the Nigerian Federal
Government during the whole of the war (Smilie 1985).
Lessons not Learned
Given its dubious deployment, the role of humanitarian aid became a matter
of controversy. During the conflict, two points of views clashed (Okpoko
1986). On one side, the British government argued that the most efficient
way to save lives was to shorten the war by letting the Nigerians win: inci-
dentally, this was also the position of Winston Churchill when he forbade
humanitarian aid to occupied Europe during the Second World War. On the
other side, charities alleged that to stop their airlift would result in millions of
deaths. But their position became irrelevant after the defeat of the Biafrans in
January 1970, for there was no effort to carry through a genocide against
the Igbos. It then appeared clear that the main funders of the JCA consortium,
namely the Catholic Caritas and the Protestant WCC (World Council of

75
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
Churches), were far from being neutral and had deliberately supported the
rebels. Worse, they had prolonged the suffering of the population. Critics
suggested that the initials WCC stood for ‘War Can Continue’. Yet the hu-
manitarian workers denied their strategic involvement and continued to claim
they were apolitical.4 Most of them refused to admit any responsibility in the
conflict. At best, an official of the WCC raised doubts about JCA ‘because
of its political effects … which include exposing the churches to charges of
prolonging the war and adding to the suffering of the people’.5 As we can
see, humanitarian actors were more concerned about their reputation than
about the military use of their aid.
Such an attitude is not peculiar to the Biafran crisis. In general, relief
organizations are reluctant to accept their wrongs and the political implications
of their work. ‘Aspiring to good,’ writes a specialist, ‘humanitarians too
often mute awareness that their best ideas can have bad consequences’
(Kennedy 2004). Regarding Biafra, relief workers considered they had done
their best. Some even minimized their strategic role. According to Dan Jacobs,
the secessionists did not need any humanitarian cover for their arms imports.
Planes loaded with weapons still landed at Uli when the ICRC and the churches
suspended their air bridge for a while (Jacobs 1987). Of course, it is true
that the secessionists would have tried to continue their struggle anyway,
with or without humanitarian aid. They had not needed any foreign support
to start fighting in 1967. From 1968 onwards, relief only strengthened their
capacity to resist and helped them to carry on the struggle for independence.
The basic argument was not that humanitarian aid alone could prolong conflicts.
The real issue was to know whether relief did more harm than good.
The problem was not restricted to Biafra, and was found again in Ethiopia
in the 1980s or Somalia and Southern Sudan in the 1990s (Pérouse de
Montclos 2001). Since the end of the Cold War, it is even possible that the
unwelcome side-effects of humanitarian aid became worse because
belligerents could not rely any more on military support from the superpowers
(DeMars 2002:206). In Liberia and Sierra Leone, combatants starved their
own population to attract relief and divert it (Hoffman 2004). In Rwandese
refugee camps in 1994, NGOs fed the criminals who had just committed
genocide. In the rest of D.R. Congo, relief was not only diverted by the
belligerents, it also sustained and exacerbated local corruption (Reed, Weiss
and Mubagwa 2004:38). Actually, the problem became so acute that authors
like Alex de Waal considered that ‘most humanitarian aid in Africa is useless or
damaging and should be abandoned’ (de Waal 1997). Others thought that, at
the very least, governmental and non-governmental organizations should be
ready to suspend their relief operations when their assets are looted, aid is
diverted by the combatants, humanitarian workers are kidnapped and they

76
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
realize they are doing more harm than good. Stephen Stedman and Fred Tanner,
for instance, recommended the development of standards that would allow
refugee agencies ‘to refuse to engage in situations that blatantly support warring
groups’. The United Nations High Commission for Refugees, they wrote,
should have in its arsenal the option of refusal […] and create a category of
forced evacuation or hostage-taking that will signal to the Security Council and
attentive public around the world that manipulation is occurring as it unfolds.
Crises could be divided into categories that would determine how to re-
spond, continue Stedman and Tanner:
If a refugee flight was considered a forced evacuation or hostage-taking,
then UNHCR’s obligations would be diminished, and the organization would
have a powerful tool for publicizing the manipulation (Stedman and Tanner
2003:185, 187).
In such a situation, the difficulty is to explain to the general public that
humanitarian aid can do more harm than good and that it is sometimes better
to stop it. Excessive media coverage and the politicization of relief do not
help in this regard, for states and NGOs risk being accused of doing nothing.
Because the humanitarian market is very competitive, aid is often imple-
mented for the audience rather than for the victims. As long as the show can
go on, private and governmental funders do not care much about its negative
impact. David Sogge explains:
Alleviating poverty and relieving victims of crisis, empowering community
groupings and women, and casting spotlights on chronic wrongs and
conflicts: these are among the main purposes private aid agencies set for
themselves. Many assume they are making good these claims. Funds have
been kept flowing on that promise. No agency seems to quit the field, and
more agencies professing such purposes enter it every year. Yet this may
reflect not the strength of performance, but one of greatest weakness: funding
is only poorly linked with actual outcomes – if it is linked at all. Agencies are
rewarded chiefly for spending and being active; they are almost never
punished when that spending and those activities come to nothing, or entail
unwelcome side-effects (Sogge 1996:16).
Theoretically, NGOs are supposed to stop their programmes when they can-
not prove a causal link between their work and an improvement of the situ-
ation (Spar and Dail 2002:4). The reality is quite different. In most cases,
NGOs quit the field for other reasons. According to a poll of 2,000-plus
individuals, one humanitarian worker out of five mentions being evacuated
because of insecurity (Buchanan and Muggah 2005). Lack of funding is
another factor. But in general, NGOs are quite reluctant to leave. Their ‘relief
culture’ explains this attitude. Historically, some of the most famous

77
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
humanitarian NGOs have precisely been founded to protest against military
blockades: Save the Children in Germany in 1919, Oxfam in Greece in 1942
or Médecins sans Frontières after Biafra in 1971. Today, they often protest
when governmental organizations threaten to stop aid because of a lack of
feasibility or political motives, as with the British DfID (Department for
International Development) in Sierra Leone (Marriage 2006:19). For hu-
manitarian workers, it is unethical to trade the saving of lives now for the
potential saving of lives in the future. Faced with a Catch-22 situation, some
argue that diverted aid is not likely to result in measurable development, yet
the recipient country would fail without continued donor support.
The hypothesis of such a school of thought is that foreign relief is
indispensable for the survival of the victims. Recipients would be incapable
of coping with their fate if not supported. Yet the problem remains that we
don’t really know if Africans would be better with or without emergency
aid. Relief organizations tend to ignore or even erode local capacities (Juma
2002). Regarding Biafra, we simply don’t know what the situation would
have been without the rescue operations. It is very possible that a longer
interruption of the humanitarian air bridge could have helped the Nigerian
Army to crush the rebellion sooner … and save hundreds of thousands of
lives instead of prolonging the conflict. This is exactly what the United States
and the United Kingdom did during the Second World War: Winston Churchill
was convinced that only a military victory could relieve suffering. He promised
‘sweat and blood’ and forbade aid to occupied Europe.
Relief and Social Responsibility
Because we cannot rewrite history, we have to admit our ignorance about
the ‘best’ humanitarian solution for Biafra. The fundamental problem of re-
lief organizations is that they do not even admit their political responsibility in
conflicts. As a result, they hardly acknowledge the possibility of stopping
their operations when they do more harm than good. In its Manual for
Practioners, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) devotes only three lines to the problem: ‘if non-compliance
with the agreements results in an operating environment which compro-
mises humanitarian security, consider, as a last resort, suspension of hu-
manitarian activities until a conductive … operating environment is re-estab-
lished’ (McHugh and Bessler 2006:82).
The Charter of the Sphere Project, an NGO initiative to create minimum
humanitarian standards, is as elusive. It acknowledges ‘that the attempt to
provide assistance in situations of conflict may potentially render civilians
more vulnerable to attack, or may on occasion bring unintended advantage
to one or more of the warring parties’. But it does not say how to minimise

78
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
such adverse effects and it does not set any benchmark to stop sending
relief. If we are to believe the fine wishes of this Charter, ‘it is the obligation
of warring parties to respect the humanitarian nature of such interventions’
(Sphere Project 2000). How to compel combatants to do so remains a mystery.
All sorts of phony arguments have been raised to condemn the possibility
of stopping rescue operations when they do more harm than good. In
Rwandan refugees camps in Zaire in 1994, for instance, some rationalized
that if the Hutu fighters did not receive aid, they would steal it from the
civilians. In other words, it was better to feed war criminals even if that
helped them to resume the genocide! The same line of argument was used
for military dictatorships like that of Siyad Barre in Somalia. Some authors
claimed that the reduction of aid at the end of the Cold War was a major
factor in the eruption of civil strife in the Horn of Africa (Laitin 1999).
According to David Laitin, it precipitated the fall of Siyad Barre because the
regime had no more resources to share in order to maintain its social base.
But such an analysis overshadows the other factors behind the civil war
in Somalia, such as clan divisions, drought and arms proliferation. Moreover,
the time frame did not confirm its conclusion: the opposition did not wait for
a reduction in aid flows before opting for armed struggle. On the contrary,
the troops of Siyad Barre bombed Hargeisa in 1988, when foreign assistance
was still very significant. At this time, humanitarian aid for the Somali refugees
of the Ogaden war of 1977 provided a major funding resource for the regime;
the UNHCR alone injected the equivalent of 40 per cent of the state budget.
Foreign assistance thus strengthened the dictatorship and delayed its fall.
After the departure of Siyad Barre in 1991, other authors then argued that
the diversion of aid by combatants supplied local markets, reduced food
prices and defused confrontation for scarce resources (Auvinen and Kivimäki
2000:219). Still, humanitarian aid also brought new motives of competition
and provoked conflicts for its control (de Waal 1994).
All in all, the fundamental issue is to assess the effects of relief in a war
economy. On one side, humanitarian organizations claim to have a major
impact on relieving suffering. On the other, they deny or minimize their
political role in sustaining conflicts. The contradiction is obvious. Regarding
southern Sudan, for instance, Oystein Rolandsen argued that the SPLA (Sudan
People’s Liberation Army) diverted little food after distribution, so it would
have been useless to threaten to stop aid in order to encourage the guerrillas
to protect civilians and to respect international humanitarian law (Rolandsen
2005:132). But the very same author drew attention to the strategic importance
of relief when the movement of John Garang lost its rear bases in Ethiopia in
1991 and had to rely on foreign assistance to feed its combatants within
southern Sudan.

79
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
Eventually, our ignorance of the real impact of relief should advocate a
principle of caution. Like transnational corporations, non-governmental and
governmental relief organizations need to exercise social responsibility in
war economies. They sometimes bribe corrupt leaders to gain access to
victims (Ewins 2006:87). And they directly assist combatants when they
provide means of transport and infrastructure such as airstrips. Roads built
by the British Save the Children Fund in Ethiopia in the 1980s, or by the
French ACTED (Agence d’Aide à la Coopération Technique et au
Développement) in Afghanistan in the 1990s, are known to have been used
by the military to reach remote areas and extend the fighting. From Burma to
Angola, Nigeria or Sudan, humanitarian organizations criticize oil companies
because they support dictatorships by paying taxes and allowing soldiers to
use their planes or their cars. Yet relief actors are faced with the same challenge.
As they follow the routes already used by troops and arms smugglers, they
raise a similar issue to the corporate problem of tax evasion and money
laundering, which point to the same offshore banking centres. In both cases,
the same logistical or financial channels have criminal and legal purposes.
Of course, foreign direct investment and humanitarian inputs do not carry
the same weight. Following the story of David and Goliath, public opinion
usually favours ‘small’ NGOs as against ‘big’ governments or ‘giant’
transnational corporations. Some authors thus argue that private voluntary
organizations do not have to be accountable because they are ‘poor’ and do
not bear the same responsibility as, say, Shell or the World Bank (Bendell and
Cox 2006:114). In other words, NGOs can criticize the lack of accountability
of transnational corporations and international financial institutions; yet they
do not need to be responsible to the communities they claim to help, empower
and represent. Such double standards are difficult to accept (Pérouse de
Montclos 2007). To have a charitable and non-profit motive does not exempt
humanitarian workers from their social responsibility. In war-torn countries,
the problem is even worse because it can contradict the aim of saving lives,
not to mention its potentially negative effects on state capacity and sovereignty,
which are even more essential to long-term security for local populations.
Notes
1. Organized by Bob Geldof, the lead singer of the Boomtown Rats, the Live Aid
concert gathered famous rock stars like Paul McCartney, Mick Jagger , Bob
Dylan, Elton John, Phil Collins and Crosby, Still, Nash & Young. Thanks to the
media, it raised a hundred million Euros in July 1985: a worldwide record before
the Asiatic tsunami of December 2004.

80
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
2. More details and references on foreign NGOs involved during the Biafran
crisis, from Oxfam to Norwegian Church Aid, are to be found in the database of
AidWatch: http://www.observatoire-humanitaire.org/.
3. Interestingly enough, such war profiteers did not suffer much when the
secessionists were defeated in 1970. Their wealth was accumulated in
merchandise and was not seized when a federal decree compelled the Biafrans
to exchange all their cash for a lump sum payment of twenty Nigerian pounds
per person. Cf. A. Harneit-Sievers, Axel and S. Emezue,(2000) ‘Towards a Social
History of Warfare and Reconstruction: The Nigerian/Biafran Case’, in I.
Amadiume and A. An-Na’im, eds., The Politics of Memory: Truth, Healing and
Social Justice, London: Zed Books, pp. 110–26.
4. This position was always contested by Lagos. As for the secessionists, they
also suspected some relief agencies of being Federal spies because many
Biafrans towns fell into Nigerian hands subsequent to the arrival of humanitarian
organizations in the area.
5. Off the record, the debate was of course different. Mike Yarrow (1978), an
American Quaker, reports that at a meeting in Rome on 8 November 1968, JCA
officials realized that providing food to the Biafrans could prolong the war and
involve more suffering.
References
Auvinen, J. and Kivimäki, T., 2000, ‘Somalia: The Struggle for Resources’, in W.
Nafziger, F. Stewart and R.Väyrynen, eds, War, Hunger, and Displacement,
Vol. 2: Case Studies, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bendell, J. and Cox, P., 2006, ‘The Donor Accountability Agenda’, in L. Jordan and
P. van Tuijl, eds, NGO Accountability: Politics, Principles and Innovations,
London: Earthscan.
Buchanan, C. and Muggah, R., 2005, Aucun répit sur les humanitaires : Etude de
l’incidence de la violence armée sur le personnel chargé de l’aide humanitaire
et du développement, Genève: Centre pour le dialogue humanitaire.
Cronje, S., 1972, The World and Nigeria: The Diplomatic History of the Biafran
War, 1967–1970, London: Sidgwick & Jackson.
DeMars, W., 2002, ‘Transnational NGOs: the Edge of Innocence’, in W. Nafziger
and R.Väyrynen, eds, The Prevention of Humanitarian Emergencies,
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
de Waal, A., 1994, ‘Dangerous Precedents ? Famine Relief in Somalia, 1991–1993’,
in J. Macrae and A. Zwi, eds, War and Hunger: Rethinking International
Responses to Complex Emergencies, London: Zed Books, pp. 139–59.
de Waal, A., 1997, Famine Crimes: Politics and the Disaster Relief Industry in
Africa, Oxford: James Currey.
Ewins, P. et al., 2006, Mapping the Risks of Corruption in Humanitarian Action,
London: Overseas Development Institute.
Glaser, A. and Smith, S., 2005, Comment la France a perdu l’Afrique, Paris: Calmann-
Lévy.

81
Pérouse de Montclos: Humanitarian Aid and the Biafra War: Lessons not Learned
Harneit-Sievers, A. and Emezue, S., 2000, ‘Towards a Social History of Warfare
and Reconstruction: The Nigerian/Biafran Case’, in I. Amadiume and A. An-
Na’im, eds, The Politics of Memory: Truth, Healing and Social Justice,
London: Zed Books, pp. 110-26.
Hoffman, D., 2004, ‘The Civilian Target in Sierra Leone and Liberia: Political Power,
Military Strategy, and Humanitarian Intervention’, African Affairs 103:211–26.
Jacobs, D., 1987, The Brutality of Nations, New York: Alfred A. Knopf,.
Juma, M. K., 2002, ‘The Political Economy of Building Local Capacity’, in M.K.
Juma and A. Suhrke, eds, Eroding Local Capacity: International
Humanitarian Action in Africa, Uppsala: Nordic Africa Institute, pp. 159–82.
Kennedy, D., 2004, The Dark Sides of Virtue: Reassessing International
Humanitarianism, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Laitin, D., 1999, ‘Somalia: Civil War and International Intervention’, in B. Walter
and J. Snyder, eds, Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention, New York:
Columbia University Press, pp. 146–80.
Lindsay, K., 1969, ‘How Biafra Pays for the War’, Venture: Journal of the Fabian
Colonial Bureau (London) 21(3): 26–7.
Lischer, S. K., 2005, Dangerous Sanctuaries: Refugee Camps, Civil War and the
Dilemmas of Humanitarian Aid, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Lloyd, H. et al., 1972, The Nordchurchaid Airlift to Biafra, 1968–70: An
Operations Report, Copenhagen: Folkekirkens Nodjaelp.
Madiebo, A., 1980, The Nigerian Revolution and the Biafran War, Enugu: Fourth
Dimension.
Marriage, Z., 2006, Not Breaking the Rules, Not Playing the Game: International
Assistance to Countries at War, London: Hurst.
McHugh, G. and Bessler, M., 2006, Humanitarian Negotiations with Armed
Groups: A Manual for Practitioners, New York: United Nations, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Nordstrom, C., 2004, Shadows of War, Violence, Power, and International
Profiteering in the Twenty-first Century, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Okpoko, J., 1986, The Biafran Nightmare: The Controversial Role of International
Relief Agencies in a War of Genocide, Enugu: Delta.
Pérouse de Montclos, M.-A., 2001, L’aide humanitaire, aide à la guerre ?,
Bruxelles : Complexe.
Pérouse de Montclos, M.-A., 2007, « La face cachée des ONG », Politique
internationale 116:347–68.
Reed, S., Weiss, H and Mubagwa, M., 2004, Evaluation of USAID’s Humanitarian
Response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2000–2004, Washington,
DC: U.S. Agency for International Development.
Rolandsen, O., 2005, Guerrilla Government: Political Changes in the Southern
Sudan during the 1990s, Uppsala: Nordika Afrikainstitutet.
Smillie, I., 1985, The Land of Lost Content: A History of CUSO (Canadian
University Service Overseas), Toronto: Deneau.

82
Africa Development, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1, 2009
Sogge, D., ed., 1996, Compassion and Calculation: The Business of Private
Foreign Aid, London: Pluto Press.
Spar, D. and Dail, J., 2002, ‘Of Measurement and Mission: Accounting for
Performance in Non-Governmental Organizations’, Chicago Journal of
International Law 3(1).
Sphere Project, 2000, Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster
Response, Oxford: Oxfam, online at: http://www.sphereproject.org.
Stedman, S.J. and Tanner, F., eds., 2003, Refugee Manipulation: War, Politics,
and the Abuse of Human Suffering, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Stremlau, J., 1977, The International Politics of the Nigerian Civil War, 1967–
1970, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Thompson, A., 2002, ‘Publicity, Philanthropy and Commemoration: British Society
and the War’, in D. Omissi and A. Thompson, eds, The Impact of the South
African War, New York: Palgrave, pp. 511–27.
Uche, C., 2002, ‘Money Matters in a War Economy: The Biafran Experience’,
Nationalism & Ethnic Politics 8(1):29–54.
Vergès, F., 2001, Abolir l’esclavage: une utopie coloniale: les ambiguïtés d’une
politique humanitaire, Paris: Albin Michel.
Wiseberg, L., 1974, ‘Humanitarian Intervention: Lessons from the Nigerian Civil
War’, Human Rights Journal 7(1): 61–98
Yarrow, M., 1978, Quaker Experiences in International Conciliation, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
