Asian management in the 21st century
Geert Hofstede
Published online: 16 May 2007
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract Contrary to popular opinion, the crucial elements of the management
process show strong continuity over time, but differ from one country to another, as
a function of the local culture. Recent research reveals fundamental differences in the
goals of business leaders from different societies. The article explores general
characteristics of Asian management as opposed to management elsewhere, and
what the study of Asian management and its cultural origins mean for the emerging
Asian multinationals and for the state of the art in management research worldwide
in the twenty-first century.
Keywords Asian management
About Europeans and Asians
As a contributor to the first two volumes of the Asia Pacific Journal of Management
(Hofstede, 1984a, 1984b), I was asked to write something for the Journal’s 25th
Anniversary Special Issue. I do this as a European, a visitor from the other side of
the same continent. Unlike our American or even our Japanese colleagues, I don’t
need an airplane or a boat to get to Asia. From my home in Holland, I can get to
Hong Kong by train—it is true, my wife and I once did it. This raises the question: if
we call Hong Kong East Asia, why not call Holland West Asia?
The distinction between Asia and Europe is historical rather than geographical. It
relates to the origin of the name Asia. The word has come a long way: we owe it to
the Phoenician sailors who 3,000 years ago lived in the present Lebanon and who
Asia Pacific J Manage (2007) 24:411–420
DOI 10.1007/s10490-007-9049-0
The author thanks Mike Peng (Editor-in-Chief) for his invitation and editorial suggestions.
G. Hofstede
University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands
G. Hofstede (*)
CentER for Economic Research, University of Tilburg, P.O. Box 90153,
NL-5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
e-mail: Hofstede@bart.nl

spoke a Semitic language related to present-day Arabic and Hebrew. The
Phoenicians at sea oriented themselves between esch and ereb, that is dawn and
dusk, or East and West; and this became Asia and Europa. Greek mythology then
turned Asia and Europa into goddesses. Europa was a beautiful girl who was
abducted by their senior god Zeus, who for the occasion had disguised himself as a
bull. Asia was either the wife or the mother of the titan Prometheus. Prometheus was
a mythical hero who managed to steal the fire from the gods and gave it to mankind,
enabling man to develop civilization and prosperity. So even in those old days the
name Asia was already associated with these desirable ends.
The Greeks also took the geographical distinction from the Phoenicians: Asia was
everything East of them, the present Turkey and beyond, and Europe everything
West of them, already in the fifth century B.C. Their distinction was inherited by the
Romans and subsequently by all Europeans who when they went out to discover the
world extended the name “Asia” to any land they found East of Turkey, all the way
to Indonesia and Japan.1
The continuity of management problems over time
The founding of an Asia Pacific Journal of Management (1983), and later of an Asia
Academy of Management (1998), raises the question to what extent management is
determined by geography: Is there an “Asian management” distinct from
management elsewhere? When the Academy was founded in 1998, a more common
question was to what extent management is determined by time: What would be new
about management in the twenty-first century? Most of the popular management
literature implicitly assumes that management problems change over time—one
should always follow the latest trends—but that they are universal across the world:
managing means the same anywhere, whether in North America, France, Brazil,
Russia, Thailand, or China. If Western management principles don’t work
somewhere, this is not the fault of the principles but of the people.
Against these alleged assumptions in the popular management press, I would like
to defend the opposite viewpoint: “That management problems basically have
remained and will remain the same over time, and that their solutions differ less from
period to period than from part of the world to part of the world, and even from
country to country.”2
What is management? I prefer a general definition: getting things done through
other people. Or more specifically: coordinating the efforts of people towards
common goals. The other people involved may be subordinates, clients, customers,
suppliers, authorities, or the public in general. Important is that management is
always about people. Jobs in which no other people are involved are technical, not
management.
1 This part is borrowed from my unpublished Keynote Speech at the Inaugural Conference of the Asia
Academy of Management, Hong Kong, December 28, 1998.
2 For more extensive arguments for my case, see Hofstede (1999).
412
G. Hofstede

Because management is always about people, it is part of the culture of the
society in which it takes place. Culture is the collective programming of the mind
which distinguishes the members of one group or category of people from another.
The title of my first 1984 contribution to APJM was “Cultural dimensions in
management and planning,” and its Abstract starts with the sentence “The nature of
management skills is such that they are culturally specific: a management technique
or philosophy that is appropriate in one national culture is not necessarily
appropriate in another” (Hofstede, 1984a: 81).
The core element in culture are values. Values are broad tendencies to prefer
certain states of affairs over other. They are about what is evil and what is good,
dirty and clean, immoral and moral, irrational and rational. Relationships between
people in a society are always affected by the values which form part of the
collective programming of people’s minds in that society. So management is subject
to cultural values. Cultural values differ among societies, but within a society they
are remarkably stable over time. This is why I claim that management, which is part
of culture, differs among societies but within societies is stable over time.
The historical continuity of the national component in management was
convincingly demonstrated by the French anthropologist Philippe d’Iribarne
(1989). He did in-depth interviews in three production plants of a French-owned
aluminum company, one in France, one in the USA, and one in The Netherlands.
The plants were technically identical, but interactions on the shop floor differed
dramatically. D’Iribarne in his book identified three different philosophies that
control the local management: honor in France, fair contract in the USA, and
consensus in the Netherlands. These philosophies represent patterns of thinking
distinguishable in the histories of these three societies for centuries. For France
d’Iribarne referred to the Ancien Régime (the seventeenth and eighteenth century
monarchy before Napoleon); for the USA to the heritage of the Pilgrim Fathers and
other seventeenth and eighteenth century immigrants; for The Netherlands to the
Dutch Republic of the seventeenth century.
But, you may object, the Pilgrim Fathers did not produce aluminum. Of course,
the technical content of the management process changed completely, and it keeps
changing today. Just think of the influence of electronic communication. However, I
insist that values are resilient against technology. Technology affects culture in
general and management in particular not on the basic level of values, but on the
more superficial level of practices. Practices change according to the needs of the
day and to the available resources, but they do not necessarily affect the underlying
values. Practices depend on your computer programs, but the purposes to which
these programs will be put depend on the values of the persons in front of the screen
who are children of their culture.
Therefore, management in the twenty-first century is not basically different from
management in the twentieth. In fact, similar management problems have existed as
long as human societies have existed. Examples of management problems, even if they
were not called that way, can be found all over the world literature, from the oldest
sources onwards. American business professor Karl Moore and historian David Lewis
(1999) have described the management of multinational businesses run by Assyrians,
Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans in the Mediterranean area between 1900 and 100 B.C.—
the problems they write about resemble those of modern globalizing companies.
Asian management in the 21st century
413

Differences in management problems across countries
To illustrate geographic differences in management, I will use two case studies, each
based on a great work from the world literature. The management problem in both
cases is the same: privatization of tasks. My first case is from China. Cao Xueqin’s
The Dream of the Red Chamber (Cao, 1980) was originally published around 1760.
It describes the rise and fall of two branches of an aristocratic family in Beijing, who
live in adjacent plots in the capital. Their plots are joined by a magnificent garden
with several pavilions in it (now memorized in the Prospect Garden Park in Beijing),
and the young, mostly female members of both families are allowed to live in them.
One day the management of the garden is taken over by one of the young women,
Tan Chun, who states:
“I think we ought to pick out a few experienced trustworthy old women from
among the ones who work in the Garden—women who know something about
gardening already—and put the upkeep of the Garden into their hands. We
needn’t ask them to pay us rent; all we need ask them for is an annual share of
the produce. There would be four advantages in this arrangement. In the first
place, if we have people whose sole occupation is to look after trees and
flowers and so on, the condition of the Garden will improve gradually year after
year and there will be no more of those long periods of neglect followed by
bursts of feverish activity when things have been allowed to get out of hand.
Secondly there won’t be the spoiling and wastage we get at present. Thirdly the
women themselves will gain a little extra to add to their incomes which will
compensate them for the hard work they put in throughout the year. And
fourthly, there’s no reason why we shouldn’t use the money we should
otherwise have spent on nurserymen, rockery specialists, horticultural cleaners
and so on for other purposes.” (Cao, 1980 [1760], Vol. 3: 69)
As the story goes on, the capitalist privatization—because that is what it is—of
the Garden is carried through, and it works. When in the 1980s Deng Xiaoping
allowed privatization in the Chinese villages, it amazingly also worked. It worked so
well that its effects started the present Chinese economic boom.
My second case is from Russia. Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy’s novel Anna Karenina
was published in 1878. One of its main characters is a landowner, Levin, whom
Tolstoy used to express his own views and convictions about his people. Until 1861
Russian peasants had been serfs tied to their lands and their lord. As serfs they had
been passive, only doing as they were told. Levin wanted to break this passivity by
dividing the land among his peasants in exchange for a share of the crops; but the
peasants only let the land deteriorate further. Here follows a quote:
“(Levin) read political economy and socialistic works ... but, as he had
expected, found nothing in them related to his undertaking. In the political
economy books ... he found only certain laws deduced from the state of
agriculture in Europe; but he could not for the life of him see why these laws,
which did not apply to Russia, should be considered universal ... Socialist
teaching told him that development along those lines leads to ruin. And neither
of them offered the smallest enlightenment as to what he, Levin, and all the
414
G. Hofstede

Russian peasants and landowners were to do with their millions of hands and
millions of acres, to make them as productive as possible for the common
good.” (Tolstoy, 1978 [1878]: 366–367)
Since the end of communism there have been years that the Russian lands produced a
record crop, but that part of it rotted away because there were no hands to harvest it.
Western experts have flocked into Russia to apply the same principles of political
economy which Tolstoy already found lacking—and not surprisingly they failed again.
What works in China—and worked two centuries ago—does not have to work in
Russia, neither in Tolstoy’s days nor today. I am not offering a solution. I only
protest against a naive universalism that knows only one recipe for managing
economic development, consisting in the approach supposed to have worked in the
authors’ own country, usually the USA. Different societies in the world have
different histories and they maintain different values: there is no one universal
human values system. Moreover, different societies have different resources and
meet different practical problems. Universal solutions to management problems do
not exist; they would presuppose one universal type of human being in one universal
type of society. But in history the rich and successful peoples of every period have
always believed that their solutions were universal, and up till the present day they
try to sell them to or impose them on others to whom the solutions do not apply.
Goals of business leaders from different societies
A classroom experiment in my evening MBA class at the University of Hong Kong
in 1995, repeated by colleagues in 15 other countries, showed striking differences in
the goals that part-time MBA students, with day-time jobs, attributed to their own
country’s business leaders (Hofstede, Van Deusen, Mueller, Charles, & the Business
Goals Network, 2002; Hofstede, 2004). We used a list of 15 possible goals,
developed in our Hong Kong class. In the overall average order of importance across
the countries growth, continuity and this year’s profits came on top. But MBA
students from different countries deviated in different ways from this overall
average. The relative ordering of goals within four of the countries (China,
Denmark, India, and the USA.) is listed in Table 1.
Table 1 shows dramatic country differences. Four of India’s top five goals are
among Denmark’s bottom five (family, continuity, wealth, and power). Three of
Denmark’s top five goals are among the bottom five in the USA (creating something
new, profits 10 years from now, and responsibility towards employees). Respecting
ethical norms comes top in China but among the bottom five in India. Short term
(this year’s) profits are among the top five in the USA only, and among the bottom
five in China. The table reads like a recipe for conflict in globalization projects in
which top management from one country tries to run businesses in another.
What is Asian management?
The key challenge for APJM and the Asia Academy of Management has been and
still is to make Asia-based contributions to the state of the art in global management
Asian management in the 21st century
415

research (Peng, 2007). Meyer (2006) signaled that “Asian management research
appears trapped between the apparently contradictory objectives of local relevance
and international publication.” Asian management scholars are still overwhelmingly
trained in the USA, and their work has to meet US standards if they want to publish
in international journals that really are US journals. This is a belated effect of one
rich and successful society believing that its solutions are universal and selling them
to the rest of the world. But we have entered an era in which ownership of global
businesses has spread wider than ever before, and this will in due time undoubtedly
change the market for management know-how as well.
If management is not universal, what is specific for Asian management? We have
to be careful in categorizing. Asia is not at all a homogeneous entity—it is as
heterogeneous as what is called the “West.” The term “Western” management
usually means US management. What French or Danish or British or Australian
authors write about management in their own society does not necessarily follow
American models. Within Asia, management is a very different process depending
whether we focus on China, India, Japan, or Iran, and sometimes we cannot even
generalize across different provinces within the same country. Are there any overall
qualifications that apply to Asian as opposed to Western management?
My own classification of national cultures used first four, now five dimensions
(Hofstede, 1980, 2001). The most evident difference between Asian countries on the
one side and Western European and Anglo countries on the other relates to the
dimension of Individualism versus Collectivism. Individualism stands for a society in
Table 1 Five relatively most and five relatively least important perceived goals (out of 15) ascribed to
successful business leaders in four countries.
China (1999)
India (1999)
Denmark (2004)
USA (1999)
Most important
Most important
Most important
Most important
Respecting ethical
norms
Family interests
Creating something new
Growth of the business
Patriotism, national
pride
Continuity of the business
Profits 10 years from now
Personal wealth
Power
Personal wealth
Honor, face, reputation
This year’s profits
Honor, face,
reputation
Patriotism, national pride
Staying within the law
Power
Responsibility tds
society
Power
Responsibility tds
employees
Staying within the law
Least important
Least important
Least important
Least important
Creating something
new
Staying within the law
Family interests
Profits 10 years from now
Game and
gambling spirit
Creating something new
Power
Responsibility tds
employees
This year’s profits
Responsibility tds
employees
Responsibility tds
society
Family interests
Personal wealth
Respecting ethical norms
Personal wealth
Continuity of the business
Staying within the
law
Game and gambling
spirit
Continuity of the
business
Creating something new
[Source] Based on research by Hofstede et al. (2002), after adding 2004 data from Denmark collected by
Mikael Søndergaard. Chinese data are from respondents studying in Australia and the USA but referring to
mainland Chinese business leaders.
416
G. Hofstede

which the ties between individuals are loose: everyone is expected to look after him/
herself and his/her immediate family only. Collectivism stands for a society in which
people from birth onwards are integrated into strong, cohesive in-groups, which
throughout their lifetime continue to protect them, in exchange for unquestioning
loyalty. Western countries all scored above average on individualism, with the USA and
Australia as the most individualist and Israel and Spain relatively least. Asian countries
all scored below average on Individualism—that is, they scored collectivist—with
China, Indonesia, Korea, and Pakistan relatively more and India, Japan, Iran, and the
Arab countries relatively less collectivist. The in-group to which people relate in most
cases is the extended family, but in Japan the employer fulfills part of the in-group role.
Worldwide there is a relationship between economic affluence and cultural
Individualism. Not only do wealthier countries score relatively more individualist,
but countries that became wealthier also became more individualist, a process we
have observed in recent years in economically successful countries of Asia such as
Japan, Korea, and Thailand. Old people, for example, are now less automatically
taken care of by their families than they used to be. Nevertheless, while affluence
thus increases Individualism, it does not make Asian countries as individualist as
Western countries. Western countries already were more individualist when they still
were quite poor themselves. So increasing affluence will reduce but not eliminate the
difference between Asia and the West in this respect.
The Collectivism versus Individualism distinction has profound implications for the
kind of management that is appropriate within a culture. The concept of “management”
itself was developed in Britain and the USA in the nineteenth century, two countries
already quite individualist in those days, and all theories of management that were
subsequently developed portray their individualist roots. They are based on assumptions
about the behavior of detached individuals. I know of no theories that deal with the role
of family or ethnic loyalties in management and organization, and this lack represents a
challenge for APJM and the Asia Academy of Management (Ahlstrom, Young, Chan,
& Bruton, 2004; Peng & Jiang, 2006; Yeung, 2006).
A second dimension on which Asian and Western cultures are opposed,
although not as strongly as on Individualism versus Collectivism, is Power
Distance (large versus small). Power Distance is the extent of inequality in a society:
I defined it as the extent to which the less powerful members of institutions and
organizations within a country expect and accept that power is distributed unequally.
I found Asian cultures to score relatively high on Power Distance, with Malaysia,
Philippines, and Indonesia higher and Japan, Pakistan, Taiwan, and Iran in the
middle of the scale. Among Western countries, the Latin countries (France, Belgium,
Spain, and Italy) score high to medium and the others medium to low. Power
Distance norms are transferred in parent–child relationships: they determine the role
of respect for authority in organizations. Large Power Distance cultures can also be
called respect cultures. Economic affluence relates inversely to levels of Power
Distance, but the relationship is not as strong as to Individualism. With increasing
affluence, power holders more and more need to justify themselves, as we have seen
happening in countries like Korea and Indonesia. This represents democratization,
but there is not one single way to democratize: the Latin countries in Europe also
have become democracies while maintaining the “respect” element in their cultures.
So I expect that Asian cultures with increasing affluence will democratize, but
Asian management in the 21st century
417

according to their own respect logic. Again, a role for APJM and the Asia Academy
of Management will be to fill this gap and to study excellent management in the
context of Asian respect relations (Chia et al., 2007). This includes the role of side
payments, because more people in respect cultures hold uncontrolled power, there is
more temptation in these cultures to use official power for unofficial personal gain
(Lee & Oh, 2007).
On two other dimensions, Uncertainty Avoidance and Masculinity versus Femininity,
I found Asian countries to differ just as much among one another as Western countries.
The fifth dimension owes its discovery to Asian minds. In the early 1980s, I met
Professor Michael Bond of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. We discussed to
what extent the results of cross-cultural research are influenced by the values not of
the respondents, but of researchers like ourselves. As at that time nearly all
researchers including us were Western, this might mean that questions specifically
relevant to Asian minds might not even have been asked. Bond found a creative
solution to this Western bias problem. He asked his Chinese colleagues to design a
questionnaire with a deliberate Chinese culture bias, which he called the Chinese
Value Survey (CVS) (Chinese Culture Connection, 1987). The CVS was translated
from Chinese into English and other languages, and administered to female and male
students in 23 countries around the world.
Statistical analysis of the results found dimensions of values significantly
correlating with Individualism–Collectivism, Power Distance, and Masculinity–
Femininity, but also a new dimension which Western questionnaires so far had not
revealed. Michael Bond called it Confucian Work Dynamism because both at the
positive and at the negative pole it reminded of teachings of Confucius: it opposed
future-oriented, dynamic Confucian values to present and past-oriented, static
Confucian values. As the dimension was based on the answers of students in a large
number of countries, most of whom had never heard of Confucius, I re-named it
Long Term versus Short Term Orientation (Hofstede & Bond, 1988).
Long Term Orientation means valuing, for example, persistence and thrift. Short
Term Orientation pole means valuing “face” and respect for tradition. This
dimension opposed many Asian countries to the rest of the world, in the sense
that the Asian countries scored long-term and the others medium or short-term. The
top long-term scorers were China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, and Korea. They
were followed by Brazil but then again by Asian countries: India, Thailand, and
Bangladesh. Asian countries on the short term side were the Philippines and
Pakistan. No Western countries scored more than medium-term; the USA, Britain,
and Canada scored short-term, as did the countries of Africa. Scores on the
dimension were strongly correlated with the countries’ economic success in the
period 1970–2000 (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005: 223). Countries scoring long-term,
in which the students said they valued thrift, in fact did have higher savings rates
than countries scoring short-term (Read, 1993). More savings meant more money for
productive investment. The management implications of this new dimension are
again a promising focus for APJM and the Asia Academy of Management.
The story of the Chinese Value Survey leading to the discovery of the fifth
dimension is an illustration of the importance of eliminating ethnocentric bias.
Another, more recent, example is found in the area of personality research. A
number of newer and older findings by Asian and European researchers suggest the
418
G. Hofstede

need for expanding the dominant five-factor model of personality traits, known as
the “Big Five,” with a sixth factor, Dependence on Others, in order to keep the
model culturally universal (Hofstede, 2007).
These examples show that researchers need their colleagues from other parts of
the world to cross the cultural limits of their own thinking. For escaping from the
cultural constraints in our own research, we therefore need to trade ideas across
borders. Ultimately, studying Asian research, such as that published in APJM, will
become as essential for Western colleagues as studying Western research is now for
Asian scholars (Lau, 2002; Peng, 2005, 2007).
Conclusion
My viewpoint that management problems remain the same over time, but that their
solutions differ from country to country is politically incorrect in an age in which business
is supposed to be globalizing. Global business looks for global management solutions.
But the diversity in business goals pictured in Table 1, and many stories of cultural
clashes, suggest that businesses are and will remain less global than some people think
they are, and less than their leaders would want them to be. Businesses have home
countries, and these play an essential role in their effectiveness and their corporate
identity (Carney, 2005). Supra-national organizations without a home country, like
various UN agencies, are not known for their efficiency and effectiveness.
More and more Asian countries are becoming the home of new global
corporations (Collinson & Rugman, 2007; Mathews, 2006). Japan and Korea led
the way, but their corporations mostly grew by “greenfield” expansion—founding
their own subsidiaries, which mitigates culture clashes. Now, Chinese and Indian
giants expand through acquisitions in Western countries, a much riskier strategy.
Former culture clashes between the West and the East are reversed, and Asian
managers will need cultural awareness training to understand their European and
American subordinates (Tung, 2005). This direction suggests another new focus for
APJM and the Asia Academy of Management.
References
Ahlstrom, D., Young, M. N., Chan, E., & Bruton, G. 2004. Facing constraints to growth? Overseas
Chinese entrepreneurs and traditional business practices in East Asia. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 21: 263–285.
Carney, M. 2005. Globalization and the renewal of Asian business networks. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 22: 337–354.
Cao, X. Q. 1980. The story of the stone (also known as The dream of the red chamber). Volume 3: The
warning voice. Translated by D. Hawkes. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books [Original
Chinese version published 1760].
Chia, H.-B., Egri, C., Ralston, D., Fu, P. P., Kuo, M. C., Lee, C., Li, Y., & Moon, Y. 2007. Four tigers
and a dragon: Values differences, similarities, and consensus. Asia Pacific Journal of Management,
24 (in press).
Chinese Culture Connection (a team of 24 researchers). 1987. Chinese values and the search for culture-
free dimensions of culture. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 18: 143–164.
Collinson, S., & Rugman, A. M. 2007. The regional character of Asian multinational enterprises. Asia
Pacific Journal of Management, 24 (in press).
Asian management in the 21st century
419

d’Iribarne, P. 1989. La logique de l’ honneur: Gestion des entreprises et traditions nationales. Paris: Seuil.
Hofstede, G. 1980. Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. 1984a. Cultural dimensions in management and planning. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 1: 81–99.
Hofstede, G. 1984b. National cultures revisited. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 2: 22–28.
Hofstede, G. 1999. The universal and the specific in 21st-century global management. Organizational
Dynamics, 28(1): 34–43.
Hofstede, G. 2001. Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations
across nations, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. 2004. Business goals and corporate governance. Asia Pacific Business Review, 10: 292–301.
Hofstede, G. 2007. A European in Asia. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 10 (in press).
Hofstede, G., & Bond, M. H. 1988. The Confucius connection: From cultural roots to economic growth.
Organizational Dynamics, 16(4): 4–21.
Hofstede, G., & Hofstede, G. J. 2005. Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind, 2nd ed. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Hofstede, G., Van Deusen, C. A., Mueller, C. B., Charles, T. A., & the Business Goals Network. 2002.
What goals do business leaders pursue? A study in fifteen countries. Journal of International Business
Studies, 33: 785–803.
Lau, C.-M. 2002. Asian management research: Frontiers and challenges. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 19: 171–178.
Lee, S.-H., & Oh, K. 2007. Corruption in Asia: Pervasiveness and arbitrariness. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 24(1): 97–114.
Mathews, J. A. 2006. Dragon multinationals: New players in 21st century globalization. Asia Pacific
Journal of Management, 23: 5–28.
Meyer, K. E. 2006. Asian management research needs more self-confidence. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 23: 119–137.
Moore, K., & Lewis, D. 1999. Birth of the multinational: Two thousand years of ancient business history,
from Ashur to Augustus. Copenhagen, Denmark: Copenhagen Business School Press.
Peng, M. W. 2005. From China strategy to global strategy. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 22: 123–
141.
Peng, M. W. 2007. Globalizing the Asia Pacific Journal of Management. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 24(1): 1–7.
Peng, M. W., & Jiang, Y. 2006. Family ownership and control in large corporations in Asia: The good, the
bad, the irrelevant. William Davidson Institute Working Paper 840, University of Michigan
(accessible from http://www.ssrn.com).
Read, R. 1993. Politics and policies of national economic growth. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Stanford
University.
Tolstoy, L. 1978. Anna Karenin. Translated by R. Edmonds. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books
[Original Russian version published 1878].
Tung, R. L. 2005. New era, new realities: Musings on a new research agenda . . . from an old timer. Asia
Pacific Journal of Management, 22: 143–157.
Yeung, H. W. 2006. Change and continuity in Southeast Asian ethnic Chinese business. Asia Pacific
Journal of Management, 23: 229–254.
Geert Hofstede (PhD, University of Groningen) is a Professor Emeritus of the University of Maastricht,
The Netherlands. Since the publication of his book Culture's Consequences (1980, 2001), he has been a
pioneer of comparative intercultural research; his ideas are used worldwide. A student-level book Cultures
and Organizations: Software of the Mind (1991, new edition 2005 with Gert Jan Hofstede) has so far
appeared in 17 languages. He is one of the most cited European authors in the Social Sciences Citation
Index. He is a Doctor Honoris Causa of four European Universities, a Honorary Fellow of the
International Association for Cross-Cultural Psychology, and a Fellow of the Academy of Management as
well as of the Center for Economic Research at the University of Tilburg. This is Professor Hofstede's
third contribution to APJM after Hofstede (1984a, 1984b). His website is www.geerthofstede.nl
420
G. Hofstede
