 
91
 
 
Template Revolutions:  
Marketing U.S. Regime Change in Eastern Europe 
 
 
Gerald Sussman and Sascha Krader 
Portland State University 
 
Keywords:  
propaganda, U.S. foreign policy, democracy, Eastern Europe, 
National Endowment for Democracy 
 
 
Abstract  
Between 2000 and 2005, Russia-allied governments in Serbia, Georgia, Ukraine, and (not 
discussed in this paper) Kyrgyzstan were overthrown through bloodless upheavals.  Though 
Western media generally portrayed these coups as spontaneous, indigenous and popular (‘people 
power’) uprisings, the ‘color revolutions’ were in fact outcomes of extensive planning and energy 
─ much of which originated in the West. The United States, in particular, and its allies brought to 
bear upon post-communist states an impressive assortment of advisory pressures and financing 
mechanisms, as well as campaign technologies and techniques, in the service of ‘democracy 
assistance’. Their arsenals included exit and opinion polling, focus groups for ‘revolutionary 
messaging’, and methods and training in ‘strategic nonviolent conflict’. Among the key foreign 
agents involved in the process of creating ‘transitional democracies’, as discussed in this study, are 
the United States Agency for International Development, the National Endowment for 
Democracy and its funded institutes, George Soros’s Open Society Institute, Freedom House, 
and the International Center on Nonviolent Conflict. These developments are conceived as 
aspects of the larger neoliberal program of opening the Eastern European region for commercial, 
strategic military, cultural, and political domination by the G-7 countries.  Four types of foreign 
assistance studied are: (1) political; (2) financial; (3) technical training; and (4) marketing 
(propaganda). 
 
 
Introduction 
The dissolution of Soviet power throughout the region of Central and Eastern 
Europe (CEE) and Central Asia excited a new kind of Western intervention, a ‘soft 
imperialism’ described in official lexicon as ‘democracy promotion’. In the late 1990s 
and into the next decade, Western mass media routinely represented the serial 
political upheavals that took place in Serbia, Georgia, Ukraine, and elsewhere in 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia as legitimate struggles of ‘people power’ democracy 
over tyranny. The Western allies, particularly the United States, actively encouraged 
political mobilisations in the region that sequentially deposed Slobodan Milošević in 
Serbia and Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia, and invalidated the election of Viktor  
______________________________ 
Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture © 2008 (University of Westminster, London), Vol. 5(3): 
91-112. ISSN 1744-6708 (Print); 1744-6716 (Online) 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
92
Yanukovych in Ukraine. Foreign electoral intervention was a means of politically 
engineering their replacement by pro-Western politicians who, in the name of 
democracy, presumably would carry out ‘reforms’ in concert with state and 
commercial interests of the United States, the European Union, the WTO, and 
NATO. 
 
By the time of the Milošević overthrow initiative in 2000, the State Department 
already had in place a ‘revolution template’,1 or what Beissinger (2006) calls a 
democracy ‘module’. The template began taking shape in the 1980s in Slovakia, 
Croatia, Romania, and Bulgaria and became for the whole Eurasian region a non-
militarist and cost-effective option for vanquishing left-wing and nationalist heads 
of state.2 So-called democracy assistance consisted of a fluid package of funding 
and other support mechanisms designed essentially around marketing principles to 
effect rapid regime change and political and economic ‘shock therapy’ in selected 
countries whose governments the State Department regarded as impediments to a 
global market-based political order. These efforts relied heavily on techniques and 
technologies of modern propaganda, largely drawn from U.S. political practice. 
(See Sussman 2005.) 
 
The principal institutional actors in U.S.’democracy promotion’ consist of the State 
Department, U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and the 
National Endowment for Democracy. NED was created in 1983 as a nominally 
private, Congressionally funded organization that would assume some of the 
regime change functions, but with more flexible and transparent means, as those 
used by the then discredited CIA. One of NED's founders told the Washington Post 
that ‘A lot of what we [NED] do today was done covertly 25 years ago by the 
CIA’. Relative openness was seen as a better formulation for pursuing U.S. 
national interests (Ignatius 1991). Democracy promotion in Central and Eastern 
Europe, starting with Poland and East Germany, became one of central tropes in a 
renewed U.S. effort by the Reagan administration to roll back the Soviet Union 
and Warsaw Pact alliance. 
 
This paper looks at the intervention of the Western powers, particularly the United 
States, in the ‘colour revolutions’ (a brand name drawn from oppositionist party 
emblems) of Eastern Europe (Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine in their chronological 
order).3 We discuss how a set of pretested, modular techniques and technologies 
have been employed as part of a template for fostering regime change. Although 
the government and media of the United States loosely used the terms 
‘dictatorship’ and ‘revolution’ to describe conditions in these countries, neither was 
a fair depiction. More accurately, they were and remain semi-authoritarian. And, as 
some have argued, even if the more militant groups intended more radical 
outcomes, they ended up being ‘failed revolutions’ (Beissinger 2006). 
 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
93
 
An early initiative of the U.S. Congress’s democracy assistance program, in 
anticipation of a post-communist Eastern Europe, was the 1989 legislation of a 
SEED (Support for East European Democracy) Act (22 U.S.C. 5421). This act, 
initially appropriating $938 million for Poland and Hungary, included funds, 
according to President Bush’s signing statement, for ‘economic stabilization, trade 
liberalization, Enterprise Funds to nurture private sector development, labor 
market reform, and enhanced environmental protection’. USAID described the 
‘enterprise funds’ under this act as a ‘public-private partnership [that] would 
facilitate well-functioning markets through a combination of investment and 
development activities’ (USAID 2000). Democracy was clearly conceived within 
the fundaments of market ideology. 
 
One of NED's first interventions within the Soviet orbit was in support of 
Poland’s anti-communist Solidarity movement. In Poland, as elsewhere in Central 
and Eastern Europe, NED was joined in the task of effecting regime change by its 
constituent party institutes, the International Republican Institute (IRI) and 
National Democratic Institute (NDI), together with the AFL-CIO’s Solidarity 
Center, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s Center for International Private 
Enterprise, USAID, the private, government-supported Freedom House, George 
Soros’s Open Society institutes, and other public and private institutions. (See 
Sussman 2006.) High profile emigrés from the CEE region, including Soros, and 
former secretaries of state Madeline Albright (board chair of NDI) and Zbigniew 
Brzezinski (NDI director) were prominent among the American regime change 
agents. All of them shared a visceral hostility toward communism.  
 
Since 1992, Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, and to a 
lesser degree southern Africa, have been declared the main targets of IRI and 
NDI. USAID acknowledges that its own willingness to fund this region has to do 
with ‘the significance of these regions to the United States’ (USAID 1999, 16, 17). 
It is not, therefore, simply internal democratic struggles in the world that draw the 
attention of the United States but rather, axiomatic to political realism, their 
relative importance in terms of long-term strategic objectives. The instability in 
Yugoslavia that led to its breakup starting in the early 1990s and continuing 
national, ethnic, and local political conflicts since then provided opportunities for a 
series of interventions by public and private foreign agencies engaged in the 
‘democracy promotion’ project. 
 
For ‘well-functioning markets’ to occur in Eastern Europe, a neoliberal governance 
structure would be a prerequisite, as would Western style electioneering that would 
facilitate its assumption of power. The challenge for the United States was 
discovering reliable ‘leadership’ that was prepared to abandon state ownership and 
social program residues of the socialist era. Overthrowing incumbent governments 
would require mobilisation of political dissidents around a single pro-Western 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
94
political candidate, close poll supervision, and sophisticated campaign propaganda 
techniques. One such effort, led by IRI, convinced Bulgaria's pro-Western parties 
in 1996 to rally behind a single politician, Petar Stoyanov. Together with NDI, IRI 
pursued the same approach in Romania (1997) and Croatia (1999), and in the case 
of Slovakia (1998), it required backing an anti-government coalition (MacKinnon 
2007, 30-33). These successful interventions paved the way for the spate of ‘colour 
revolutions’ that followed in Serbia, Georgia, Ukraine, and elsewhere.4 
 
 
Branding Revolution  
In reporting on Eastern Europe, Western media have fetishised the colour 
revolutions,5 helping to boost ‘shock therapy’ in opposition to socialist and 
economic nationalism in a heroic iconography of dissident political actions (Klein 
2007). Much of the colour revolution symbolism bears echoes of the American 
non-violent civil rights struggles and ‘flower power’ resistance to U.S. imperialism. 
Anti-government protest in the United States, however, never drew a comparable 
level of U.S. media sympathy, not to mention foreign intervention. Indeed, 
whereas the massive protests in the United States in the 1960s were home-grown 
(despite the FBI’s failed efforts to prove their Soviet origin), uprisings in Eastern 
Europe were never fully organic, nor were they, despite their portrayal, simply 
expressions of ‘people power’.  They were in fact foreign aided and to a significant 
extent foreign instigated. We found nothing in mainstream U.S. news reports that 
discussed this double standard.    
 
All of the countries under our purview have had shaky political institutions 
centered on dominating personalities. Indeed, the State Department offensive 
against such heads of states as Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia and Askar Akaev 
in Kyrgyzstan destabilised people who just a few years earlier were lionised by the 
U.S. government as post-communist liberators, faithful IMF supporters, and pro-
Western liberal democrats. Even Milošević had been touted by the CIA as ‘a force 
for stability’ in the early 1990s (MacKinnon 2007, 276). The successors to these 
official enemies, Koštunica, Saakashvili, Yushchenko, did little more to exercise 
democratic convictions than those they vanquished. Saakashvili ‘replaced 
“superpresidential” 
institutions 
with 
even 
more 
highly 
concentrated 
“hyperpresidential” ones,’ even attempting to ban all parties opposed to his pro-
Western policy agenda (Hale 2006, 312).6 Koštunica and Yushchenko failed to 
constrain pandemic corruption. 
 
Focusing on ‘democracy promotion’, we wish to deconstruct it as a term of 
propaganda in the employ of key state interests of the United States and the 
European Union -- not elaborated here but which include transnational economic 
integration, control over regional energy production and distribution, NATO 
membership and security initiatives, and the isolation of Russia. While Democrats 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
95
 
and Republicans offer the appearance of conflict in domestic politics, their 
international wings align very closely in efforts to break down political resistance to 
neoliberal restructuring in Eastern Europe and other countries undergoing 
‘transition’. Both sections of organized state power in the United States form parts 
of the ‘Washington consensus’ that an elitist, polyarchic, pro-Western political 
order is the appropriate corollary and necessary pre-condition for economic 
restructuring. 
 
There is a caveat to our critical observations. By no means do we see the post-
Soviet uprisings in Eastern Europe as simply foreign-orchestrated (‘made in the 
USA’) events. They did have local roots, based on residual resentments toward 
authoritarian power, corruption, limited intellectual freedom and economic 
opportunities, and other unfulfilled aspirations (including travel to the West) 
during the era of single (communist) party state socialism. (And much of this 
tension remains under the ‘revolutionary’ succession.) But at the same time, we 
find that the funding, advice, and general influence of powerful external agencies, 
particularly from the United States but also Western Europe, represent in many 
instances unwarranted intrusions, which forced at least short term outcomes 
designed for the preferences of the superpower and its allies. Foreign resources, 
opportunities, and symbolic forms of influence channel domestic talent, resources, 
and resistance movements into particular formations that would not otherwise 
occur.    
 
In a study of international foundations, Joan Roelofs (2003) has argued that 
elections can not be considered free when there are significant foreign financial 
and other forms of leverage that undermine some candidates or parties and 
empower others. Surveying four types of foreign intervention, we find there is 
indeed reason to be skeptical about the U.S. ‘democracy promotion’ and ‘freedom 
agenda’ and the legitimacy of the immediate political outcomes of the ‘colour 
revolutions’. Four types of foreign assistance that we studied are: (1) political; (2) 
financial; (3) technical training; and (4) marketing (propaganda). 
 
 
(1) The Political Template 
One of the keys to defeating what the United States considered an unworthy leader 
was the unification of the disparate opposition behind a single political candidate. 
NED's affiliated institutes, especially IRI and NDI, moved freely throughout 
Eastern Europe carrying this message of consolidation. The first template 
application was in Bulgaria in 1996, where NED and IRI ‘discovered’ that ‘NGOs 
could tilt an election in favor of America's preferred candidate’ (MacKinnon 2007, 
30) by unifying the opposition and then creating and funding exit polls. NDI 
contributed to this project by financing the Bulgarian Association for Fair 
Elections and Civil Rights to oversee exit polls that year (NDI, 2001). Exit polling 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
96
was next arranged in Romania in 1997 through support to the Pro Democracy 
Association (Pro Democracy Association 2004); Slovakia in 1998, where the IRI 
conducted a ‘parallel vote tabulation’; and Croatia in 1999, with USAID, NED, 
Freedom House, and other international financing of a poll watching group, 
Citizens Organized to Monitor Elections (GONG) (Jašić 2000; MacKinnon 2007, 
31-33).   
 
When Milošević looked vulnerable to election defeat in Serbia, NDI flew the 
Serbian opposition party leadership to Poland in the late 1990s to solicit advice 
from Polish party activists (Roelofs 2003, 186). The U.S. polling firm Penn, 
Schoen and Berland entered the picture and determined that the anti-communist 
constitutional lawyer Vojislav Koštunica was the most likely person to beat him 
(Dobbs 2000). Acting on this, U.S. secretary of state Madeline Albright and 
German foreign minister Joschka Fischer brought presidential contenders Belgrade 
mayor Zoran Djindjic and opposition party leader Vuk Draskovic to Budapest 
where the Serbian politicians were pressured to drop out of the race. IRI and NDI 
had issued similar counsel in Bulgaria and Romania, getting pro-Western leaders to 
defer to Washington’s preference (MacKinnon 2007, 31, 44).  
 
Youth movements and NGOs were also employed as couriers for regime change. 
Following the Serbian ‘bulldozer revolution’, several former foreign-trained 
members of the local Otpor student movement became traveling consultants on 
non-violent political tactics. The Serbians' trips to those countries were paid, 
respectively, by NED grantee Freedom House and Soros's Open Society Institute 
(MacKinnon 2007, 60, 67, 109, 110). Sensing another ‘colour revolution’ 
opportunity, Otpor advisors began working with Ukraine's opposition as early as 
2002 (Bransten 2004). 
 
In Georgia, and elsewhere in the region, polling ‘exposure’ was widely seen as 
helping to incite Shevardnadze’s overthrow. John Tefft, deputy assistant secretary 
of state for European and Eurasian affairs, argued at a hearing of U.S. House 
Committee on International Relations in December 2004 that the Bush 
administration’s bankrolling of exit polls in Georgia, Belarus, and Ukraine was 
designed to ‘help to expose large-scale fraud’. But as two voting specialists 
skeptically observe, this same concern, for obvious reasons, was not expressed by 
the U.S. government about exit polls a month earlier that found presidential 
contender John Kerry winning the popular vote in the American election 
(Freeman and Mitteldorf 2005), nor did they draw comparisons with Gore’s 
apparent and decisive victory, also based on exit polls, in Florida in the 2000 
presidential election. 
 
The Bush administration did not solely rely on exit polls to force Shevardnadze 
from power. In 2003, Republican Party troubleshooter, James Baker, was 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
97
 
dispatched by the White House to ‘advise’ his old acquaintance to give assurances 
that the upcoming presidential election would be ‘free and fair’, which is 
tantamount, in Mafia semiotics, to handing him a dead fish. Shevardnadze had 
been working on a plan to sell off part of Georgia’s energy grid to Russia, a move 
that much displeased the Bush administration (Democracy Now! 2003). 
Meanwhile, American advisors were persuading opposition leader Zurab Zhvania 
to cede the candidate spotlight to a tested World Bank advocate, Mikhail 
Saakashvili.  
 
In preparation for the 2004 Ukraine election, NDI pushed energy industry tycoon, 
Yulia Tymoshenko, Ukraine’s so-called ‘gas princess’, to ally herself with 
presidential candidate, Viktor Yushchenko instead of running against him 
(MacKinnon 2007, 118, 155). U.S. advisors and local opposition relied on exit polls 
not so much to guarantee clean elections but as a mechanism for instigating 
‘orange revolution’ protests. Anika Binnendijk and Ivan Marovic cite an internal 
memo written in April 2003 by Yushchenko's Our Ukraine in which his party 
discusses the importance of preparing a propaganda response to expected vote 
fraud: 
 
[The elections will] be a game without rules, unprecedented competition of 
informational, organizational, financial and administrative resources for the 
regime…we need allies and at least 500,000 active supporters (Binnendijik 
and Marovic 2006). 
 
The peripatetic American political consultant Dick Morris ‘admitted to a 
clandestine meeting in an unnamed Eastern European capital with Yushchenko's 
team, at which he advised them that a big exit poll … might … help to bring 
protesters out into the streets if the exit poll indicated obvious ballot fraud’ 
(Wilson 2006).7 Several local pollsters working on the ‘national exit poll’ were 
receiving Western assistance. These included the Razumkov Center, funded by 
NED and affiliated with Freedom House, and a think tank, the Democracy 
Initiatives Foundation, also a NED grantee as well as a recipient of other Western 
finance, which conducted a ‘national exit poll’ (Bandera 2006: McFaul 2006; NED 
2004). KIIS is another local opinion polling firm, with U.S.-trained leadership, 
which counts USAID, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, the U.S. State 
Department, and Coca-Cola among its former clients (Kiev International Institute 
of Sociology, no date). A Ukrainian NGO, Committee of Ukrainian Voters, which 
organized a parallel vote tabulation, had a working relationship with NDI 
(Committee of Ukrainian Voters, 2006; McFaul 2006). 
 
 
 
 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
98
(2) Financing Regime Change 
Financing is the mother’s milk of regime change, particularly for organising 
communications, media, and propaganda, staging protests, conducting poll 
watching, and managing the campaign of selected opposition candidates. With a 
commitment of $23 million in USAID spending towards the strategic objective of 
‘democratic transition’ in Serbia (with a population of 10 million) in 2000 (US 
Embassy in Yugoslavia 2002), the opposition was empowered and emboldened to 
contest the election and force Milošević from power. If there were any doubt 
about State Department objectives, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, its 
propaganda channel and website aimed at Central and Eastern Europe and Russia, 
was quite explicit. It declared that total U.S. government assistance to the anti-
Milošević Serbian student movement Otpor and the Democratic Opposition of 
Serbia was $10 million in 1999 and $31 million in 2000 (Bacher 2002).8 George 
Soros's Open Society Institute provided the opposition an additional unspecified 
pool of money (Corwin 2005).   
 
U.S. funding also supported ostensibly nonpartisan NGOs that were contesting 
Milošević's authority. One NGO, the Centre for Free Election and Democracy 
(CeSid), in fact worked hand-in-glove with the Democratic Opposition multiple 
political party alliance in Serbia (Cevallos 2001). CeSid was created by disgruntled 
anti-Milošević activists following the protests of 1996-1997 and was funded by 
Soros’s Open Society Institute and NDI, which trained its leaders in Bulgaria 
(MacKinnon 2007, 41, 44, McFaul 2005). On election day, each Serbian poll 
monitor was paid five dollars (U.S. Institute of Peace 2004), a little more than the 
average daily wage.9   
 
Other recipients of Western aid included the oppositionist Radio B92 (McClear, 
McClear, and Graves 2003, 19), the Association of Independent Electronic Media, 
which received NED funds for a campaign named ‘Rock for Change, Rock the 
Vote’, and the Belgrade Center for Human Rights, which also got a NED grant to 
‘encourage Serb academics, journalists and civic activists to participate directly in 
the formation of policy for the democratic political opposition’ (NED 2006).10 
NED has a link prominently featured on the Center’s web page. 
 
Georgia was next in line for the ‘revolution’ template. Following the Serbian 
revolt, one of CeSID's founders went to Georgia to help organize the International 
Society for Fair Elections and Democracy, another NDI- and Soros-funded exit 
polling body (MacKinnon 2007, 109).  The Wall Street Journal's Hugh Pope 
commented that in Georgia's 2003 ‘rose revolution’: 
 
[F]raudulent elections provided a greater catalyst for popular outrage than 
[NGOs and activists] expected…largely because of U.S. and NGO-funded 
exit polls broadcast on Rustavi-2 TV, which showed everyone how pro-

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
99
 
Shevardnadze parties had stolen the election (quoted in Anable 2005). 
 
Foreign funding for opposition entities in Georgia included a grant from the Open 
Society Institute, which paid members of the Serbian Otpor group to create and 
train the local Kmara youth group. Soros gave Kmara $350,000 as ‘start-up’ cash 
and was also a major benefactor of Rustavi-2 and the newspaper, 24 Hours 
(MacKinnon 2007, 109-110; Sussman 2006, 24).  
 
Soros’s Open Society Georgia Foundation’s Election Support Program backing for 
Kmara focused mainly on the development of crucial political campaign staples, 
including TV ads, flyers, educational materials, and related paraphernalia. This 
funding segment amounted to $175,000. Beyond this, both Soros and NED 
financed Georgia’s free trade-oriented Liberty Institute (Kandelaki and Meladze 
2007, 108, 112; NED 2007). Joining the effort to push Shevardnadze from power, 
the World Bank and International Monetary Fund suspended aid for Georgian 
development and revived their assistance program once Shevardnadze left office 
(Barker 2006).  
 
In Ukraine, the U.S. spent in 2004 alone about $34 million on regime change 
initiatives (U.S. Department of State 2004), while Soros pitched in about $1.6 
million in support of a local ‘Freedom of Choice’ NGO coalition and Ukraine's 
‘New Choice 2004’ (Wilson 2005, 184). The German Marshall Fund of the United 
States, Freedom House, and the Canadian International Development Agency 
together provided $130,000 for activist training (Kaskiv, Chupryna and Zolotariov, 
2007, 134). Foreign assistance also staked various get-out-the-vote programs, 
including ‘leaflet campaigns, street theatre, rock concerts, door-to-door campaigns, 
and karaoke shows’ (Freedom House 2005). The Center for Political and Legal 
Reforms, financed by various U.S. foundations, linked its website directly to 
Yushchenko’s home page ‘under the heading “partners”’, USAID brought the 
group to Washington, D.C. for three weeks of training in ‘political advocacy’ 
(Kelley 2004). 
 
The most strategic of the three countries, Ukraine's regime change initiative 
enjoyed more funding, foreign and domestic, including large contributions from 
local millionaires who opposed the Kuchma government, than either Serbia or 
Georgia (MacKinnon 2007, 171). (Ukraine, however, has almost five times the 
population of Serbia and nearly ten times that of Georgia.) And again, much like 
the way large corporations in the United States spread their campaign 
contributions to both major parties, Western organizations in Ukraine distributed 
funding to more than one opposition group. The pro-Yushchenko Pora (‘yellow’ 
faction) student movement was one recipient of USAID and other foreign groups’ 
support (Kaskiv, Chupryna, Bezverkha, and Zolotariov 2005); the more neutral-

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
100 
sounding voter education program under the group Znayu, was another (USAID 
2006).   
 
(3) Training: The Professionalisation of Dissent 
Planning for the overthrow of Milošević involved a highly coordinated effort by 
local and foreign agencies. A Western-funded international conference on Serbia's 
future was held in Bratislava in 1999, co-organized by the U.S.-based East West 
Institute and the Slovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The East West Institute is a 
conservative think tank whose honorary chairmen are George W. Bush and 
Helmut Kohl and whose purpose is ‘to help support the development of 
democracy and free enterprise in Central and Eastern Europe and Russia’ (Peace 
Direct 2005). Following the conference, a task force was organized to build 
connections between pro-Western Serbian entities and organizations in the 
international community, including the Council of Europe, the German Marshall 
Fund of the United States, and the European Parliament (Minić and Dereta 2007, 
89-90).  
 
Regional coalition-building, funded and overseen by foreign donor agencies, was 
part of a broader strategy to remove vestiges of the Russia-leaning old guard. 
America's Development Foundation, essentially a non-profit (oddly labeled an 
‘NGO’) under the wing of USAID, together with the State Department, NED, 
and other ‘democracy promotion’ groups, used USAID/Romania funds to start a 
program in 2000 called ‘Romanians for Serbian Democracy’, linking Serbian 
opposition NGOs with their Romanian counterparts (America's Development 
Foundation, 2007). 
 
Throughout the region, media training has been vital in pursuing U.S. foreign 
policy objectives and local regime change movements. During the 1990s, USAID’s 
media assistance to Eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics amounted to 
$175 million (Hoffman 2002). In preparation for Milošević's overthrow, the 
United States in 1999 was spending ‘more than $1 per Serb’ on media assistance 
(McClear, McClear, and Graves 2003, 14) as a way of destabilising the Serbian 
government.  As USAID explained: 
 
The goal of USAID’s Office of Transition Initiatives (USAID/OTI) was to 
fund programs and media outlets that could disseminate messages pushing 
immediate political change. USAID/OTI characterised its activities as 
‘pushing the reform agenda’ (cited in McClear, McClear, and Graves 2003, 
30). 
 
In Serbia, according to a local marketing professional, ‘every word of the 
opposition's one-minute and five-minute core political messages used by 
opposition spokesmen across the country was discussed with U.S. consultants and 
tested by opinion poll’. Anti-Milošević candidates and supporters ‘received 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
101 
 
extensive training on how to stay ‘on message,’ answer journalists' questions and 
rebut the arguments of Milosevic supporters’. Youth group activists with 
American-paid training were taught how to handle journalists (Dobbs 2000). 
Various U.S.-government media training grants were channeled through Freedom 
House, the International Research and Exchanges Board (IREX), Internews, and 
other American and local groups in Ukraine and Georgia (Mitchell 2006; U.S. 
Embassy in Ukraine, no date). 
 
Several Eastern European political groups involved in regime change used non-
violent organizing tactics adapted from the writings of a controversial American 
author on the subject, Gene Sharp. A former research professor at Harvard 
University, Sharp is the founder of a strangely named research center in Boston 
called the Albert Einstein Institute, which claims Gandhi as its inspirational 
mentor. In 2004, AEI printed 12,000 vernacular language copies of Sharp’s 
manifesto for non-violent regime change,11 From Dictatorship to Democracy, for the 
use of opposition forces in Ukraine (AEI 2004, 12).   
 
USAID and Freedom House additionally funded the publication and 
dissemination of 5,000 copies for the Eastern European region. Otpor adapted 
parts of Sharp’s earlier book, The Politics of Nonviolent Action, for a document they 
called the ‘Otpor User Manual’ (Bacher 2002). In the summer of 2000, the 
International Republican Institute brought Sharp’s AEI colleague, Robert Helvey, 
to Budapest to train Otpor in strategic nonviolence (U.S. Institute of Peace 
2000).12 Activists trained at this seminar then returned to Serbia, where they 
provided training in fear management and strategic nonviolence every week until 
the 2000 election (Miller 2001). The Ukrainian youth group Pora was said to have 
considered Sharp’s book their ‘bible’ (Strijbosch 2004).    
 
In Georgia, the U.S. assistance community claimed to be only indirectly supporting 
oppositional movements, such as through training for journalists and judges 
(USAID 2006). There were several options short of direct intervention, and 
Liberty Institute leader Levan Ramishvili credited US assistance with preparing a 
broad network of people to join Georgia’s ‘rose revolution’ (USAID 2006). As one 
example, U.S. and other foreign NGOs enabled Slovakian veterans of the civic 
action group ‘OK '98’ to visit and consult with Georgia's opposition forces to set 
the stage for the overthrow of Shevardnadze (Kandelaki and Meladze 2007, 106). 
And, as in Serbia, U.S. assistance programs largely excluded non-opposition forces. 
In total, the U.S. spent $2.4 million on Georgia's 2004 election (MacKinnon 2007, 
114). Regime change initiatives in that country drew additional financial support 
from the European Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe, and the Council of Europe (Herd 2005). 
 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
102 
Following the successful overthrow of Shevardnadze, David Dettman, NDI 
director in Kyiv, flew to Tbilisi to consult with the NDI's Georgia director to 
discuss whether a similar ‘revolution’ could happen in Ukraine. Dettman 
determined that it could and later helped organize training camps for the Ukrainian 
youth movement, run by Serbian Otpor activists and paid for by the British 
Westminster Foundation. (Otpor training camps in Ukraine would be subsequently 
bankrolled by Freedom House) (MacKinnon 2007, 172, 184). Georgian experts 
also arrived to assist the Ukrainian anti-Kuchma (and his designated successor, 
Yanukovych) rebellion. A former Georgian Liberty Institute official, Gigi 
Targamadze, visited Kyiv along with several Georgian Kmara youth activists, while 
Pora is said to have sent a contingent to Tbilisi for training (Anjaparidze 2005). 
The logistics were financed with U.S. assistance (MacKinnon 2007, 172). 
 
 
(4) Marketing the Revolution  
‘I did not think I should have paid serious attention to these young people running 
around with flags and making graffiti on the streets. I was wrong’. So spoke 
Eduard Shevardnadze, deposed president of Georgia (quoted in Kandelaki 2007). 
Shevardnadze, like Milošević before and Yanukovych after him, was unprepared 
for the modern mode of political propaganda and government displacement.   
 
In the West, Otpor’s anti-Milošević campaign was celebrated for its masterful 
marketing and branding techniques.13 The slogans that Otpor activists recited and 
spray painted on walls were first tested by opinion polls and vetted by American 
advisors. Otpor and Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS) spokespeople were 
taught how to handle journalists and ‘stay on message’.  DOS's marketing 
specialist, Milan Stevanovic, said of the instrumental uses of communication: ‘The 
foreign support was critical…this was the first campaign where our strategy was 
based on real scientific research’ (Dobbs 2000).  
 
Reasoning that brands were more powerful than even charismatic leadership, 
Otpor organizers enlisted twenty-odd revolving surrogates (Stefanovic 2000), who 
represented their organization with prepared logos and messages. As one of the 
Otpor leaders, Ivan Marovic, explained to National Public Radio’s Bob Garfield: 
 
In the 20th Century, branding was done by connecting a movement to the 
leader, so everybody remembers Lech Walesa or, or Nelson Mandela, or 
Mahatma Gandhi. In Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine, branding was done not 
by connecting to leaders. Leaders could have been blackmailed or bribed or 
even maybe killed. You can't do that with brands or ideas (Garfield 2004). 
 
A new mode of electioneering on behalf of Otpor came from the Serbian 
company Strategic Marketing (currently a joint venture with the American market 
research firm, A.C. Nielsen, and British PGM Consulting), ‘which ran a series of 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
103 
 
focus groups on behalf of the opposition coalition and the Otpor student 
resistance movement with financial support from Western democracy groups’. 
Strategic Marketing had the clear imprint of an American style ad campaign. Every 
one of Otpor’s and the other opposition groups’ pretested ‘core messages’ were 
designed to ‘sell’ regime change much in the same way that soft drinks are 
marketed. Srdan Bogosavljevic, CEO of Strategic Marketing, said ‘We approached 
the process with a brand to sell and a brand to beat…The brand to sell was 
Koštunica. The brand to beat was Milošević’ (Dobbs 2000). 
 
Otpor's black-and-white fist logo was graffitied on walls, printed on stickers, 
emblazoned on t-shirts, and copied by Georgia’s Kmara student  resistance group. 
USAID paid for 80 tons of stickers reading ‘Gotov je’ (He's finished), which young 
Otpor activists pasted on every available flat surface throughout Serbia (Dobbs 
2000). The American producers of a propaganda film about the fall of Milošević, 
‘Bringing Down a Dictator’, boasted that Otpor ‘became a ubiquitous brand-name, 
as familiar as Coca-Cola and Nike’ (Ackerman, DuVall, York, and Zimmerman 
2000). Otpor co-founder, Ivan Marovic, concurred: ‘Our idea was to use corporate 
branding in politics….The movement has to have a marketing department. We took 
Coca-Cola as our model’ (quoted in Traynor 2005). 
 
The Otpor trained youth movements in Georgia (Kmara) and Ukraine (Pora) 
repeated the marketing tactics in their own countries. Otpor activist Aleksandar 
Maric boasted: ‘We trained them [Ukrainian youth opposition] in how to set up an 
organization, how to open local chapters, how to create a 'brand,' how to create a 
logo, symbols, and key messages’ (quoted in Bransten 2004). Pora received 
$500,000 from Freedom House, while a Ukrainian opposition group, Znayu, was 
given $50,000 from Freedom House and $1 million from the U.S.-Ukraine 
Foundation to start a teaser-type advertising campaign in seventeen Ukrainian 
cities. ‘Znayu was one of our larger projects in terms of visibility, but it was really 
just a small part of our whole work’, commented an election specialist from 
Freedom House in Kiev, Juhani Grossman (MacKinnon 2007, 174).  
 
For Grossman, U.S. intervention in the political affairs of another country is fair 
game. If the United States helps Ukraine’s pro-Western free trade advocates 
Yushchenko and Tymoshenko to gain power, the rationale is that it’s just a matter of 
evening the score against alleged vote rigging by the nationalist leader Yanukovych. 
For the United States, the ends of the ‘revolutionary’ template are to secure openings 
in the region for expanded political, military, and economic opportunities; the means, 
involving clever uses of propaganda, resulted in short-term gains but in light of the 
backlash against democracy assistance overall in the region, possibly a long-term 
defeat of those objectives, particularly if the democratic standards of the most active 
donor country are at home in decline.  
 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
104 
 
 
 
Conclusion: Templates of Political Economic and Military Dominion 
There are certain core assumptions underlying the U.S. program of “democracy 
promotion’. We address here three of them. The first is that democracy consists of 
a set of universal, interchangeable, and transferable procedures that formulate a 
democratic transition. As in ‘shock therapy’, standard electoral practices under this 
assumption can be rapidly assimilated via training in any willing population. This 
would seem to suggest that democracy is ‘creationist’, not evolutionary in 
character. A democratic governing structure in this view can more or less be 
transplanted wholesale by a donor country and not require organic political and 
economic development rooted in specific contexts and changing, adaptive cultural 
mores and practices over time. In fact, the history of post-colonialism does not 
provide convincing evidence that Western institutional and procedural democracy 
transfers were effectively adopted by the new states of the Third World. The 
current unstable political conditions in Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine suggest that 
‘democracy promotion’ is no more successful in former communist-run states. 
 
A second, related assumption is the appropriateness of powerful foreign states to 
intervene politically, financially, culturally, institutionally, and often militarily to rid 
target countries of undesirable, ‘undemocratic’ leaders. The U.S. ambassador to 
Hungary during George Bush senior’s administration remarked in 1989: ''I'm open 
about supporting the opposition parties, including getting money for them from 
the National Endowment for Democracy’, and added, ‘I think we should be proud 
of it’ (Kamm 1989). This presumes a moral hierarchy within the international 
system, such that individual states or an association of states have the right of 
intervention at their choosing in order, presumptively, to defend the rights of 
people against brutal state violence or repression.  
 
Although such a principle does exist in international law (eg., conventions against 
genocide), it is rarely practiced; indeed, its antithesis, the avoidance of interference 
with the many states that routinely violate the 1948 Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights is commonplace. Existing political conditions in Eastern Europe 
may be far from the democratic ideal, but even USAID acknowledges that 
American political party practices would not satisfy the measure of democracy it 
seeks to export: ‘A strict standard of organizational democracy would not be met 
by either of the two major parties in the United States’ (USAID 1999, 39). This 
‘realist’ aspect of U.S. foreign policy has led to aggressive pursuit of regime change 
in socialist or nationalist states but has tended to leave unimpeded market 
economies that routinely violate fundamental human rights, including the 
repressive governing systems in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Pakistan, 
China, Singapore, and Kazakhstan, and many allied dictatorships in the recent past.  

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
105 
 
 
In the Eastern European ‘target of opportunity’ interventions, there is a decided 
bias in favor of certain economic, military, and strategic political objectives, which 
casts grave doubt on the democratic motives of the principal U.S. donor 
institutions. Of the $15.9 billion allocated by USAID  for its Support for East 
European Democracy and Freedom Support Act programs by 2003 in support of 
market democracies in the CEE region, 53% was targeted to economic reform and 
only 17% explicitly for democracy building (Rieffer and Mercer 2005, 398). The 
NATO arms market for the region in 1997 was worth ‘at least US$35 billion’, with 
an estimate of NATO arms sales to the CEE countries over the following 10-15 
years reaching as high as $125 billion. According to one study at the time: 
‘Prospective new [CEE] NATO countries are being pressured to purchase 
advanced weaponry that will not meet their legitimate security needs and that will 
instead jeopardise stability in the region’ (Ruecker 1997).  
 
To support such anticipated windfalls, it follows that placement of neoliberal, pro-
Western leaders in positions of state power would be indispensable, irrespective of 
their firm commitments to participatory democracy. More likely, as William 
Robinson (1996) suggests, the version of democracy implanted would be 
polyarchy, an elitist structure of access that minimises government regulation of 
external organizations and their local internationalist NGO counterparts and other 
local political and economic interest groups. In the eyes of U.S. state planners, 
democracy is defined in terms of capitalist markets and WTO trade rules. A U.S. 
National Security Strategy paper in 2002 declared that ‘The U.S. will use this 
moment of opportunity [post-9/11] to extend the benefits of freedom across the 
globe. We will actively work to bring the hope of democracy, development, free 
markets, and free trade to every corner of the world’ (cited in Kennedy and Lucas 
2005, 325).   
 
A third assumption is that where electoral intervention occurs, propaganda 
exercises, as forms of ‘soft power’, are legitimate forms of political information 
and education. The deployment of ‘revolutionary’ symbols and slogans, selected 
for their agitating and mobilising effects, financial support to local media outlets to 
stir up antagonism, and the foreign training of dissenters and professional 
organization of dissent are some of the stratagems in regime change initiatives. As 
local organizers readily admitted, marketing tactics were key to winning over their 
supporters. The use of Western-funded exit polls served as a catalyst for protest. 
On a broader front, the steady flow of anti-government reporting from the Voice 
of America, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, the BBC World Service, and other 
Western broadcasting media incited activists to take to the streets. One could add 
to the template the efforts of U.S. government and private foundation visitor 
programs for Eastern European politicians, journalists, students, academics, 
cultural and athletic performers, and others, which tend to animate their support 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
106 
for Western-oriented political, economic, and cultural institutional practices 
(Roelofs 2003).  
 
In the short term, Western intervention distorts rather than facilitates democratic 
change in Eastern Europe. In Ukraine’s 2007 parliamentary election, Viktor 
Yanukovych, the bête noire of the U.S. and E.U. in 2004, hired a Republican 
political consulting firm, led by Paul Manafort, to run his presidential campaign. 
His rival, incumbent president Viktor Yushchenko, had the services of Bill 
Clinton’s former pollster, Stanley Greenberg. When American campaign experts 
show up, corporate-financed politics and its neoliberal agenda can’t be far behind. 
 
 
Notes 
1 We consider terms such as “colour revolution,” “democracy promotion,” and similar 
lexicon as expressions of propaganda, with weak foundations in the real meaning of the 
radical social transformations that are implied in their historical usage.   
2 Beyond Europe, one of NED’s first successful tests of non-violent intervention occurred 
in the Philippines, where, in 1986, the United States withdrew support for the Marcos 
dictatorship and helped organize an election that would bring a pro-American, liberal 
democratic leader, Corazon Aquino, to power and force Marcos into exile. NED later came 
under greater scrutiny in Congress when it was found in 1989 to be surreptitiously funding 
Nicaraguan opposition candidate, Violeta Chamorro. Critics accused NED of partisan 
meddling, after which its leaders promised to restrict the organization to civil society-
building in the future (Conry 1993).  
3 We do not discuss the failed U.S./E.U. effort to overthrow the Lukashenko government 
in Belarus. It is likely that the country’s relatively stable economy, without the benefit of 
American neoliberal economic ‘shock therapy’ is why Lukashenko has retained legitimacy. 
However, Lukashenko has been banned from visiting the United States or any of the E.U. 
states. 
4 A U.S. plan of transporting activists from one nation to another to teach “revolutionary” 
electoral tactics may have started in 1997 when the NED arranged a Vienna meeting 
between Slovakia's oppositionist leader Pavol Demeš and veterans of Bulgaria's  recent pro-
Western elections. Demes returned home and designed “OK'98,” the Slovakian campaign 
which brought down Vladimir Mečiar. Demes next went on to train GONG, a Croatian 
NGO aimed overthrowing Franjo Tudjman (MacKinnon 2007, 31, 34). 
5 Portugal in 1976 underwent an anti-rightist uprising, branding it the “carnation 
revolution.” 
6 In May 2006, during a visit to Kazakhstan to secure oil routes that would bypass Russia, 
Dick Cheney praised the “political development” of that country, just one day after 
condemning the Russian government for using “intimidation” in its oil politics (Greenberg 
and Kramer 2006). 
7 American consultants are now central to Ukrainian politics. Andrew Wilson found that 
subsequent to the 2004 election, Ukraine’s “bigger parties hired fewer Russian political 
technologists and more US K Street consultants. I leave you to judge whether that is 
progress” (Wilson 2007). 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
107 
 
8 The IRI focused their efforts on Otpor, while NDI concentrated on opposition parties in 
Serbia (Dobbs 2000). $31 million may not seem like much, but Serbia has less than 10 
million people. That would be the equivalent of a nearly $1 billion (in year 2000 dollars) 
foreign contribution to an American national election. And that does not include other 
government and non-government sources of foreign spending.  
9 CeSid’s funding base read like a who’s who of the “democracy promotion” community: 
USAID, NED, NDI, IRI, Westminster Foundation, German Marshall Fund, Freedom 
House, Open Society Institute, and other Western public and private organizations (CeSid 
2007). The United States Institute for Peace provided some of the training for CeSID in the 
2000 Serbian election, and IRI prepared 400 election monitors, who then trained another 
15,000 monitors. The United States footed the entire bill (Dobbs 2000). 
10 Other grants on the NED website include a 2000 grant to the Student Union of Serbia to 
encourage "greater student involvement…for democratic reform" and a grant to the NDI 
to help the Alliance for Change publish a newspaper called "Changes." 
11 A distinction has to be made between the casually employed term “revolution” and 
regime change. A revolution is understood to involve a radical transformation of power 
constituents and of society as a whole, as in a class-based upheaval. 
12 Sharp is closely affiliated, through AEI, with two other non-violent regime change 
activists in Eastern Europe, Peter Ackerman and Robert Helvey. Ackerman, a former 
associate of Michael Milken at Drexel Burnham, founded the International Center for 
Nonviolent Conflict in 2002, became the chair of Freedom House in 2005, and served on 
the board of AEI. Helvey, a former Army colonel, was president of AEI from 2003-2005 
and was active as an advisor in Myanmar (as military attaché), Serbia (Otpor leadership 
training Otpor), and Iraq (working with political opposition to overthrow Saddam).  
13 Peter Ackerman, for example, while on the AEI board lauded the symbolic actions of 
Otpor in his made-for-television documentary, “Bringing Down a Dictator.” He later 
became more actively involved in the region through his strategic non-violent action 
training organization, the International Center on Nonviolent Conflict.  
 
 
 
References 
Ackerman, P. et al. (2000). ‘A force more powerful’ website: 
http://www.aforcemorepowerful.org/films/bdd/story/index.php. 
Accessed October 1, 2007 
Albert Einstein Institute (AEI) (2004). ‘Report on activities, 2000-2004’. Retrieved 
October 1, 2007 from http://www.aeinstein.org/organizations/org/2000-
04rpt.pdf 
America's Development Foundation (2007). ‘Highlights: Project summary for 
Romanians for Serbian democracy’. Retrieved October 22, 2007 from 
http://www.adfusa.org/content/highlight/detail/650/ 
Anable, D.  (2006, December) ‘Role of Georgia's media -- and Western aid -- in 
the Rose Revolution’.  The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 11 (3), 
7-43. 
Anjaparidze, Z.  (2005)  ‘Georgian advisors stepping forward in Bishkek’.  Eurasia 
Daily Monitor, March 25. Retrieved October 11, 2007 from 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
108 
http://www.jamestown.org/publications_details.php?volume_id=407&issu
e_id=3276&article_id=2369483  
Bacher, J.  (2002, Jul-Sept)  ‘Review: bringing down a dictator’.  Peace Magazine.  
Retrieved October 10, 2007 from 
http://archive.peacemagazine.org/v18n3p28.htm 
Bandera, S.  (2006, July)  ‘The role of the Internet and Ukraine's 2004 presidential 
elections.’  USAID Regional Mission for Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova. 
Retrieved October 11, 2007 from 
www.devassoc.com/pdfs%5CUkraineInternetStudy.pdf 
Barker, M. (2006) ‘Regulating revolutions in Eastern Europe: Polyarchy and the 
National Endowment for Democracy’. Znet (online edition of Z Magazine). 
November 1. Retrieved October 17, 2007 from 
http://www.zmag.org/content/showarticle.cfm?ItemID=11311 
Beissinger, M. R. (2006, Winter). ‘Promoting democracy: Is exporting revolution a 
constructive strategy?’ Dissent. Pp. 18-24 
Binnendijk, A. and Marovic, I. (2006)  ‘Power and persuasion: Nonviolent 
strategies to influence state security forces in Serbia’ (2000) and Ukraine 
(2004). Communist and Post-Communist Studies.39 (3). Online edition.   
Bransten, J.  (2004, December 20) ‘Ukraine:  Part Homegrown Uprising, Part 
Imported Production?’  Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.  Retrieved October 
9, 2007 from http://www.rferl.org/featuresarticle/2004/12/be8e5d97-
7eaf-404e-8e91-e21723ff74b6.html 
Cevallos, A.  (2001, August 6)  ‘Whither the Bulldozer?’  Nonviolent Revolution and the 
Transition to Democracy in Serbia. -- Elections Provide the Moment. United States 
Institute for Peace Special Report Number 72.  Retrieved October 9, 2007 
from http://www.usip.org/pubs/specialreports/sr72.html 
Committee of Ukrainian Voters.  (2006). ‘CVU is a partner in international 
projects’. March 28.  Retrieved December 2006 from 
http://www.cvu.org.ua/doc.php?lang=eng&mid=cooperation 
Conry, B (1993). ‘Loose cannon: The National Endowment for Democracy’. Cato 
Institute Foreign Policy Briefing No. 27. November 8. Retrieved 
September 20, 2007 from  http://www.cato.org/pubs/fpbriefs/fpb-
027.html 
Corwin, J.  (2005). ‘East: regime change on the cheap. Radio Free Europe/Radio 
Liberty’.  April 19. Retrieved June 7, 2006 from 
http://www.rferl.org/featuresarticle/2005/04/47268268-9e3d-414a-928d-
435ff4de8af2.html 
Democracy Now! (2003). ‘Saving President Bush: Send in James Baker’. Program 
transcript. December 8. Retrieved October 22, 2007 from 
http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=03/12/08/150250 
Dobbs, M.  (2000, December 11) ‘U.S. advice guided Milosevic opposition. 
Political consultants helped Yugoslav opposition topple authoritarian 
leader’. Washington Post Foreign Service.  Retrieved October 8, 2007 from 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
109 
 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/A18395-
2000Dec3?language=printer 
Freedom House (2005). ‘Freedom House supports voter education initiatives in 
Ukraine’. August 31. Retrieved October 9, 2007 from  
http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=115&item=35 
Freeman, S. and Mitteldorf, J. (2005, February 15)  A corrupted election.  In These 
Times.  Retrieved December 2006 from 
http://www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/1970/ 
Garfield, B. (2004)  ‘Revolution, Inc.’. On the media. Program of National Public 
Radio.  December 3. Transcript retrieved October 8, 2007 from 
http://www.onthemedia.org/yore/transcripts/transcripts_120304_revoluti
on.html 
Greenberg, I. and A. E. Kramer (2006). ‘Cheney, visiting Kazakhstan, wades into 
energy battle’. New York Times. May 6. Retrieved November 30, 2007 from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/06/world/europe/06cheney.html?pag
ewanted=1 
Hale, H. E. (2006). ‘Democracy or autocracy on the march?’ The colored 
revolutions as normal dynamics of patronal presidentialism’. Communist and 
Post-Communist Studies 39. Pp. 305-329. 
Herd, Graeme P.  (2005, March/April)  ‘Colorful revolutions and the CIS.  
'Manufactured' versus 'managed' democracy?’  Journal of Problems of Post-
Communism, Vol 52, No 2, p. 6. 
Hoffman, D. (2002, March/April). ‘Beyond public diplomacy’. Foreign Affairs. 81 
(2). Online edition.   
Ignatius, D. (1991). ‘Innocence abroad: The new world of spyless coups’. 
Washington Post. September 22. Online edition. 
Jašić, S. (2000). ‘Monitoring the vote in Croatia’, Journal of Democracy. 11 (4). Pp. 
159-168. 
Kamm, H. (1989). ‘Godollo Journal: How to disarm Hungary (hamburgers? 
tennis?)’. New York Times. October 4. Online edition.  
Kandelaki, Giorgi. (2007)  ‘Enough is enough?’.  Young Europeans for security 
website. (Denmark). Retrieved October 10, 2007 from http://www.yes-
dk.dk/YES/index.php?option=content&task=view&id=144&Itemid=169 
Kandelaki, G. and G. Meladze (2007). ‘Enough! Kmara and the Rose Revolution 
in Georgia’. In Joerg Forbrig and Pavol Demeš (Eds.), Reclaiming Democracy.  
Civil society and Electoral Change in Central and Eastern Europe. Pp. 101-
125.Washington DC: German Marshall Fund of the United States  
Kaskiv, V. et al. (2005).  ‘PORA – Vanguard of democracy.  A case study of the 
civic campaign PORA and the orange revolution in Ukraine. -- Campaign’s 
funding and resource supply’.  December 6. Retrieved October 9, 2007 
from http://pora.org.ua/eng/content/view/2985/325/ 
Kaskiv, V. et al. (2007): ‘It's time! PORA and the orange revolution in Ukraine. In 
Joerg Forbrig and Pavol Demeš (Eds.), Reclaiming Democracy.  Civil society and 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
110 
Electoral Change in Central and Eastern Europe. Pp. 127-151.Washington DC:  
German Marshall Fund of the United States  
Kelley, M. (2004).  ‘U.S. money has helped opposition in Ukraine’. San Diego Union-
Tribune. December 11. Retrieved October 24, 2007 from 
http://www.signonsandiego.com/uniontrib/20041211/news_1n11usaid.ht
ml 
Kennedy, L. and S. Lucas (2005). ‘Enduring freedom: Public diplomacy and U.S. 
foreign policy’. American Quarterly 57 (2). Pp. 309-333.  
Kiev International Institute of Sociology (no date). ‘Clients’. Retrieved October 24, 
2007 from http://www.kiis.com.ua/index.php?id=3&sp=1&lng=eng 
Klein, N. (2007). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. New York: 
 Henry Holt and Company. 
MacKinnon, M. (2007). The New Cold War: Revolutions, Rigged Elections, and Pipeline 
Politics in the Former Soviet Union. New York: Carroll & Graf Pub. 
McClear, R. et al. (2003, November) ‘U.S. media assistance in Serbia.  July 1997-
June 2002’.  USAID Bureau for Policy and Program Coordination.  
Retrieved October 4, 1007 from 
www.mcclear.net/Serbia%20Paper%20Final.pdf 
McFaul, M. (2005)  ‘Transitions from postcommunism’.  Journal of Democracy. 16.3, 
Pp. 5-19 
McFaul, M. (2006, May) ‘Importing Revolution: Internal and External Factors in 
Ukraine's 2004 Democratic Breakthrough’. CDDRL Working Papers.  
Retrieved October 11, 2007 from 
http://fsi.stanford.edu/publications/importing_revolution_internal_and_e
xternal_factors_in_ukraines_2004_democratic_breakthrough/ 
Miller, C. (2001, Oct-Dec.)  ‘The Albert Einstein Institution visits Serbia’.  Peace 
Magazine.  Retrieved October 11, 2007 from 
http://archive.peacemagazine.org/v17n4p14.htm 
Milnić, J. and M. Dereta,.  (2007)  ‘Izlaz 2000: An exit to democracy in Serbia’.  In 
Joerg Forbrig and Pavol Demeš (Eds.), Reclaiming Democracy.  Civil society and 
Electoral Change in Central and Eastern Europe. Pp. 79-99. Washington DC:  
German Marshall Fund of the United States 
Mitchell, L. A. (2006, Autumn). ‘Democracy in Georgia since the Rose 
Revolution’. Orbis 50 (4). Pp. 669-676 
National Democratic Institute (2001, May). NDI Worldwide website. 
http://www.ndi.org/worldwide/cee/nonpartelect/nonpartelect.asp. 
Accessed October 1, 2007.  
National Endowment for Democracy (NED) (2004) ‘Grantee spotlight:  the 
Democratic Initiatives Foundation’.  Retrieved December 2006 from  
http://www.ned.org/grants/04programs/spotlight-eurasia04.html, 
National Endowment for Democracy (NED) (2006)  ‘2000 grants: Central and 
Eastern Europe.’  Retrieved October 4, 2007 from 
http://www.ned.org/publications/00annual/grants-cee.html 

Sussman and Krader, Template revolutions… 
 
 
111 
 
National Endowment for Democracy (NED) (2007) ‘Description of 2004 grants:  
Eurasia – Georgia’.  Retrieved October 9, 2007 from  
http://www.ned.org/grants/04programs/grants-eurasia04.html#Georgia  
Peace Direct website (2005). East West Institute, Serbia/Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia. Retrieved November 16, 2007 from  
 
http://www.peacedirect.org/resources/case-
studies/wpw/eastwestinstitute.html 
Pro Democracy Association website (2004). Retrieved October 5, 2007 from   
 
http://www.bridge-
democracy.org/partners/romania/pro_democracy_association 
Robinson, W. I. (1996). Promoting Polyarchy: Globalization, US intervention, and 
Hgemony. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Rieffer, B. and K. Mercer (2005, October). ‘US democracy promotion: The Clinton 
and Bush administrations’. Global Society 19 (4). Pp. 385-408. 
Roelofs, J. (2003). Foundations and Public Policy: The Mask of Pluralism. Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press 
Ruecker, K. (1997, July). ‘Mlitary bildup in Central and Eastern Europe: NATO 
mmbership for sale’ BASIC (British American Security Information 
Council). Occasional Papers on International Security Policy, No. 22. 
Retrieved November 21, 2007 from: 
http://www.basicint.org/pubs/Papers/BP22.htm  
Stefanovic, N. (2000, May 13) ‘What is Otpor?  Fist in the eye of the regime’. 
Vreme Magazine.  Retrieved October 10, 2007 from http://www.ex-
yupress.com/vreme/vreme72.html 
Strijbosch, M. (2005). ‘Ukraine: The revolution will not stop’. Radio Netherlands. 
November 25. Transcription retrieved October 11, 2007 from 
http://www.radionetherlands.nl/currentaffairs/region/easterneurope/ukr0
41125 
Sussman, G. (2005). Global Electioneering: Campaign Consulting,Ccommunications, and 
Corporate Financing. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Sussman, G. (2006, December). ‘The myths of “democracy assistance”: U.S. 
political intervention in post-Soviet Eastern Europe’.  Monthly Review, Pp. 
15-29. 
Traynor, I. (2005, June 6)  ‘Young democracy guerrillas join forces’.  The Guardian.   
Retrieved October 1, 2007 from www.nonviolent-
conflict.org/PDF/GuardianDemocracyGuerrillas.pdf 
USAID (1999, April). Center for Democracy and Governance. ‘USAID political 
party development assistance’. Washington, D.C.: USAID  
USAID (2000). ‘The enterprise funds’. Retrieved August 12, 2007 from   
http://www.seedact.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id
=6&Itemid=7 

Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 5(3) 
 
 
112 
USAID. (2006, January) ‘USAID frontlines democracy: Rose Revolution’.  
Retrieved from 
http://www.usaid.gov/press/frontlines/fl_jan06/democracy.htm  
U.S. Department of State.  (2004, September) ‘U.S. assistance to Ukraine - fiscal 
year 2004’.  Retrieved October 9, 2007 from 
http://www.state.gov/p/eur/rls/fs/36503.htm. 
U.S. Embassy in Ukraine (no date). ‘Media development resources’. Retrieved 
October 15, 2007 from 
http://kiev.usembassy.gov/assistance_media_development_resources_eng.
html 
US Embassy in Yugoslavia. (2002). ‘USAID’s transition office closes its doors’.  
November 12. Retrieved October 4, 2007 from 
http://belgrade.usembassy.gov/archives/press/2002/021112.html 
U.S. Institute of Peace (USIP).  (2000, December)  ‘Strategic nonviolent action key 
to Serbia's revolution’.  Peace Watch.  Retrieved October 10, 2007 from 
www.usip.org/peacewatch/pdf/pw1200.pdf 
U.S. Institute of Peace (USIP). (2004) ‘An overview of U.S. Institute of Peace 
activities to promote democracy and minority rights in Serbia-Montenegro 
and Kosovo’.  
http://www.usip.org/congress/testimony/2004/0317_serwer_questions.ht
ml, accessed October 4, 2007 
Wilson, A. (2005)  Ukraine's Orange Revolution.  New Haven and London:  Yale 
University Press.   
Wilson, A. (2006)  ‘Ukraine's Orange Revolution, NGOs, and the role of the 
West’.  Cambridge Review of International Affairs. 9 (1). Online edition.  
Wilson, A. (2007). ‘After the Orange Revolution: The nature of Post-Soviet 
democracy in Ukraine and Russia’. Lecture, University of Cambridge. 
February 23. Retrieved December 19, 2007 from: 
http://ukraineanalysis.wordpress.com/2007/03/09/after-the-orange-
revolution-an-article-by-andrew-wilson/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
