5 2 8 
THE AMEBICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
rected by footnotes of the Editor, leaving the original text undisturbed. 
Professor Wilson also contributed an admirable introduction on "Henry 
Wheaton and International Law," and a "Sketch of the Life of Richard 
Henry Dana, Jr.,'' and supplied a chronological list of editions and trans-
lations of Wheaton's 
Elements. 
On the numerous happy occasions when the undersigned was fortunate to 
have the privilege of working with Professor Wilson, he frequently met 
many of his former students. Without fail each and every one of them 
spontaneously expressed his affection and admiration for his former teacher. 
Even in Manchuria where our paths crossed at Mukden in the summer of 
1929,1 was met at the railway station by a delegation of his former Japanese 
and Chinese students, who proudly informed me they had a surprise for me 
at the hotel, where I found Professor Wilson waiting. Although he could 
not stay the march of time in years, he remained young in thought and 
action. 
Every year of the summer sessions at Ann Arbor and Montreal 
he personally drove his automobile both ways to the meetings, accompanied 
by Mrs. Wilson. 
He took pleasure in entertaining his friends at dinner in 
a variety of interesting places. During the summer, when not otherwise 
occupied, he lived the life of a country squire at his summer home in Ver-
mont, around which he gradually acquired more land and built homes for 
his children and grandchildren. 
It was the happy place of his honeymoon 
which he later purchased and, with his wife, developed into a haven of 
family gathering, rest and recreation. 
The world in which George Grafton Wilson moved is better off because he 
was a part of it. 
His reputation for sincerity of purpose, calm judgment, 
fidelity to duty, abilities par excellence, and, above all, his fatherly sym-
pathy, will live in the hearts and minds of thousands of young men and 
women whom he started and guided on their careers. His loss is felt in 
more circles of associations and friendships than most men have been 
vouchsafed to form, and he retained them throughout a lifetime slightly 
less than a decade short of a century. 
GEORGE A. FINCH 
Editor-in-Chief 
BELLUM JTTSTUM AND BEIXUM LEGALE 
In 1914 and long before the right of every sovereign state to go to war was 
recognized by the practice of states and by the overwhelming majority of 
writers, war, the "ultima 
ratio regum," served in the primitive interna-
tional community a double purpose: a method of self-help to enforce a right, 
in the absence of international courts with compulsory jurisdiction, and a 
method of self-help to change the law, analogous to internal revolution, in 
the absence of an organ of international legislation in the true sense of this 
term. 
In this century the old helium justum doctrine, which played so great a 
role in the literature from the times of St. Augustine to Vattel, was, first, 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EDITORIAL COMMENT 
529 
historically re-studied in great detail.1 After the first "World War, even 
attempts at the revival of this doctrine were made: it was asserted that this 
doctrine is a norm of positive international law, often coupled with the 
further assertion that recent developments in international organization 
constitute a return to this doctrine. 
These assertions, however, are not 
tenable in law, but are only political ideologies or the consequence of a 
theoretically incorrect analysis. 
While Catholic international lawyers, such as Mausbach and Cathrein, 
retained the traditional concept of helium justum, the revival was inspired 
by very different motives in other writers. Louis Le Fur,2 an adherent of 
Catholic natural law, used the doctrine as a political instrument to prove 
the Treaty of Versailles to be a justa pax in the beginning struggle over the 
revision of this treaty. 
Leo Strisower 3 could in his book state with the ut-
most sincerity that he was not inspired by political motives. His approach 
was wholly ethical, a consequence of his basic philosophical conviction that 
law is a part of ethics. But exactly for this reason his argumentation is 
moral rather than legal. 
Hans Kelsen, the bitter antagonist of natural 
law, became the principal champion of the doctrine of bellum justum, which 
he felt compelled to defend for wholly logical reasons: If war cannot be 
interpreted either as a delict or as a sanction against a delict, then it is no 
longer possible to consider international law as law at all. But in his most 
recent treatment * he does not decide whether this doctrine is a norm of 
positive international law, and states forcefully the grave objections against 
the workability of this doctrine. 
That this doctrine was not positive law in 1914 and long before, seems 
settled;B even in earlier times it was hardly ever a norm of positive interna-
i See, apart from monographs on St. Augustine, St. Thomas, Victoria, Suarez, Gentili, 
Grotius and others, the following works: A. Vanderpol, Le droit de la guerre 
juste 
d'apris 
les theologiens 
et les canonistes 
du Moyen-Age 
(1911); idem, La 
doctrine 
scholastique du droit de la guerre (1919) ; G. Salvioli, II concetto della guerra giusta 
negli 
scrittori anteriori a Grotius (1915) ; P. Yves de la Briere, "Les droits de la juste 
victoire 
selon la tradition 
des theologiens 
catholiques," 
Bevue Generale de Droit 
International 
Public, Vol. XXXII 
(1925); idem, "Les 
etapes de la tradition 
theologique 
concemant 
le droit de la guerre juste, ibid., 1937, pp. 129 ft.; idem, Le droit de juste guerre (Paris, 
1938); V. Beaufort, La guerre comme instrument 
de secours ou de punition 
(The Hague, 
1933); Eegout, La doctrine de la guerre juste de St. Augustin 
a nos jours d'apres 
les 
theologiens et canonistes catholiques 
(1935); Kipp, Moderne Probleme des 
Kriegsrechts 
in der Spatscholastile 
(1935) ; J. von Elbe, " T h e Evolution of the Concept of Just War 
in International L a w , " this JOURNAL, Vol. 33 (1939), pp. 665-688. 
i"Guerre 
juste et juste pave," 
Revue Generale de Droit International 
Public, Vol. 
XXVI (1919), pp. 9-75, 268-309, 349-405. 
3 Der Krieg und die Vdlkerrechtsordnung 
(Vienna, 1919). 
* H. Kelsen, General Theory of Law and State (1945), pp. 331-338. 
He is followed by 
P. Guggenheim, Lehrbuch des Volkerrechts, 
Vol. I, pp. 590-593. 
s Naturally, an ethical and political critique of a concrete war has always existed; the 
ethical critique of the positive law, whether municipal or international, is socially in-
dispensable. 
For, as the Romans said, Non omne quod licet, 
honestum. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

530 
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
tional law.6 It is of Catholic origin, anchored in natural law, a theological, 
not a legal concept. 
That is proved by its content as well as by its historical 
origin. 
The early Church under the pagan Roman Empire took a strictly 
pacifist attitude, an attitude preserved even today by some Protestant sects. 
It was the anti-state attitude of the early Christians which led to their perse-
cution. 
The Romans of the Empire had long ceased to believe in Roman 
mythology; many foreign cults were not only tolerated in imperial Rome, 
but some of them were extremely fashionable among the "elite." 
The 
Romans further failed entirely to understand the transcendental importance 
and future of Christianity; for them the Christians were no more than an 
insignificant Jewish sect. 
The persecutions were not directed against a 
religion, but against what would be called today a "subversive movement." 
But when, with Constantine, Christianity became the official religion of 
the orbis t err arum, when Christian persecutions were followed by those of 
the pagans, the Church had naturally to revise its attitude toward the Em-
pire. 
In this connection the purely theological problem arose: How can a 
Catholic participate in a war, without committing a sin ? It was a theological, 
not a legal problem. 
To this theological problem St. Augustine gave the 
answer: He can do so, provided the war is just. 
Transforming the formal 
criterion of the ancient Roman jus fetiale into the substantive criterion of 
objective, intrinsic justice of the cause of war, he created this doctrine, which 
was later elaborated by other theologians, consolidated by St. Thomas of 
Aquinas, Victoria, Suarez and others, and secularized, divorced from its 
Catholic soil, by Gentili, Grotius and their successors. 
In its purity the doctrine is wholly an ethical one. There must be an 
objectively just cause of war, waged by the authority of the prince, and he 
must be inspired by the "recta intentio." 
Even the prince who has a just 
cause of war, can make an unjust war, if he acts from wrong motives, such 
as territorial aggrandizement or elimination of the enemy as a competitor in 
the future. 
And, if all these are fulfilled, the war can still cease to be 
just, if the prince imposes an "in just a pax." 
Thus Victoria lays down that 
the victor in a just war can impose upon the vanquished only conditions 
proportionate to the wrong committed, must always act with moderation and 
Christian modesty, and never has the right to ruin the vanquished enemy as 
a nation. 
Just war is, therefore, a reaction against a wrong,7 a procedure either in 
tort (restitution, reparations, guarantees) or in criminal law (punishment, 
sanctions).8 
« See also A. Nussbaum, " J u s t War—a Legal Concept?" Michigan Law Review, Vol. 
42 (1943-44), pp. 453-479. 
'Thus Victoria: "Uniea 
est et sola causa justa inferendi 
bellum injuria 
aceepta"; 
Grotius: "Causa 
justi belli suscipiendi 
nulla alia esse potest nisi 
injuria."' 
8 Thus, e.g., Cayetano: "Habens 
justum 
bellum gerit personam 
judicis 
criminaliter 
procedentis.'' 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EDITORIAL COMMENT 
531 
The helium justum doctrine presupposes, therefore, the continuance of 
war and distinguishes between objectively just and unjust wars. If all the 
conditions of a just war are fulfilled, just war can be either a war of self-
defense against the "inJustus aggressor" or a war of execution to enforce 
one's right. 
In both cases it makes no difference whether the just war is, 
from a military point of view, waged defensively or offensively, nor is the 
factor who resorts to war first, decisive. 
This doctrine in its purity, even if it might have been or were a norm 
of positive international law, would be practically valueless because of the 
grave objections against its workability. 
This very circumstance forced 
later writers to develop the doctrine in such a way as to deform it. 
1. There are no objective criteria between "just" and "unjust" wars. 
If the just war is one of self-defense, it is just, if directed against a present 
or imminent unjust attack. 
When is an attack in a concrete case unjust? 
Gentili went so far as to call just wars even preventive wars, wars "which 
anticipate dangers, not premeditated, but probable or possible." 
In a 
war of execution to enforce a right, the right and its violation need defi-
nition. 
2. Who is to decide in an objective way, which belligerent has a just cause 
and who is the "inJustus aggressor"? 
This decision must be left to each 
state itself, a consequence which, as Verdross states, deforms the helium 
justum doctrine. Hence, even the classic doctrine distinguished between 
''absolute'' and''relative,'' 9 between'' objective'' and'' subjective'' justice. 
Therefore, war can be subjectively just on both sides, Gentili's 
"helium 
justum ex utraque parte"; the same is proclaimed by Guggenheim today. 
Hence, practically every war is just, a doctrine identical with the traditional 
freedom of a state to resort to war. 
Sociological jurists therefore go so 
far as to see in this doctrine, which "invites subjectivism and abuse by State 
practice," nothing but a" "degeneration into a mere ideology of power 
politics."10 
Many other problems arise:" What of a belligerent who joins a war 
only in the last moment to participate in the advantages of victory? 
Or 
who changes sides during the course of the same war ? Or who, with regard 
to partial wars constituting the same world war, has a just cause in one 
partial war, but is an "injustus 
aggressor" in others ? The two world wars 
have given examples for all these hypotheses. 
3. There is, further, the gravest objection that war is not an adequate 
means of enforcing the law: the "injustus 
aggressor" may be the victor. 
That is why Cayetano advises the prince not to go to war, even if he has a 
e One belligerent can have a just cause, whereas the other has a "still more just" cause. 
io Thus G. Schwarzenberger, "Jus Pacis ae Belli," this JOURNAL, Vol. 37 (1943), pp. 
46(M77, at p. 465. 
ii See Antonio Truyol y Serra, '' Crimenes de guerra y derecho natural,'' 
Bevista 
Espanola de Derecho International, Vol. I, No. 1 (1948), pp. 45-73. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

532 
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 
just cause, if he has not also the moral certainty of victory. 
Suarez' prob-
abilism asks, at least, for the probability of victory. 
These statements show 
the radical deficiency, the "tragic confession of the negligible practical 
range of the classic bellum justum doctrine." 12 
Eecent developments through the League of Nations, Kellogg Pact and 
United Nations, here mentioned as representative of the newer trend, do 
not constitute a return to the classic helium justum doctrine.13 
First, it must be emphasized that these treaties, as well as writers such as 
Strisower and Kelsen, are in a fundamental point different from the classic 
doctrine. 
They understand by the term "wrong" exclusively a violation 
of positive international law, whereas the classic doctrine means by "wrong" 
a violation both of positive and of natural law.14 
A just war can be waged 
to enforce not only a positive, but also a natural right, e.g., the natural 
right of commerce. It is exactly by the enforcement of this natural right 
that Victoria ultimately justifies the conquest of America. 
Thus just war 
is given a double function: enforcement of law and enforcement of justice; 
law and justice need not be identical. 
The League of Nations Covenant did not abolish war, but discriminated 
between different wars. 
The basis of distinction was not, as in the classic 
doctrine, between just and unjust wars, but between legal and illegal wars. 
The concept of bellum legale replaced the concept of bellum justum. 
The 
illegality of resort to war was not a function of the intrinsic injustice of the 
cause of war, but of the breach of a formal, procedural requirement. 
Hence, 
a legal war could have been waged even between Members of the League by 
a state which had no just cause of war, whereas a state which fully had a 
just cause of war could have been guilty of resorting to an illegal war. 
This 
is a very different thing from the bellum justum doctrine. The military 
"action commune" under Article XVI was a sanction in a truly legal sense, 
not against the "injustus 
aggressor" but against an illegal belligerent who 
had "resorted to war in disregard of his covenants under Articles XII, 
XIII or XV." 
The Kellogg Pact, if taken at its surface value, could not constitute a 
return to the classic doctrine, as it did not distinguish between wars, but 
renounced war completely as an instrument of national policy. But the 
admitted legality of self-defense and the delegation to each state of the right 
to be the only judge to determine whether the conditions of self-defense exist, 
make this Pact practically only a restatement of general international law. 
12 Ibid., at p. 60. 
is See Verdross, op. cit.; Alf Eoss, Constitution of the United Nations (New York, 
1950), pp. 140-141; W. Schatzel, "Friede 
und Gerechtiglceit," 
Die Friedenswarte, 
Vol. 
50, No. 2 (1950), pp. 97-107. 
i* This essential distinction is pointed out in Josef L. Kunz, Kriegsrecht 
und Neu-
tralitatsrecht 
(Vienna, 1935), p. 2, note 3, and in A. Verdross, VbTkerrecht 
(Vienna, 
1950), p. 339. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EDITORIAL COMMENT 
533 
Compared with the classic doctrine, war is also renounced as a war of exe-
cution to enforce a right. 
Experience had shown that the Covenant and the Kellogg Pact, because 
of the aura of uncertainty hovering around the legal concept of "war," 
made it possible to wage "wars in disguise." 
Hence, the United Nations 
Charter, in making great progress from the point of view of legal technique, 
replaced the concept of " w a r " by that of the "threat or use of force." 
The Charter, therefore, distinguishes between legal and illegal use of force; 
the distinction is again based on the legality, not on the intrinsic justice of 
the cause. Use of force is, generally speaking, forbidden; but under 
Article 51 force can legally be used against an "armed attack," "until the 
Security Council has taken the necessary measures." If the Security 
Council is paralyzed by the veto, we are back to general international law. 
On the other hand, the military measures which can be decided by the 
Security Council are, contrary to Article XVI of the Covenant, not neces-
sarily sanctions in a juridical sense.15 
Furthermore, these new developments have hardly been able to avoid the 
grave objections which have been stated above against the helium 
justum 
doctrine.16 
Eoscoe Pound has stated that a primitive and weak law wants, first of all, 
to establish peace, i.e., absence of violence, and to guarantee the status quo. 
It puts peace above justice, whereas the intrinsic justice of the cause was 
the heart of the classic doctrine. 
This emphasis on security, more than 
justice, can be seen in recent developments. 
The Kellogg Pact renounces 
war, the Charter forbids the use of force—except in self-defense—without 
giving the states as a substitute the compulsory peaceful settlement of inter-
national conflicts, without guaranteeing the enforcement of their rights, 
without creating a workable procedure of peaceful change, without a guaran-
tee that United Nations force will be brought to bear not only against an 
illegal aggressor, but also against a state which, without using force, does 
not fulfill an international obligation, without guarantee that, if such force 
is exercised by the United Nations, its use will be reasonably assured of 
success. 
Two world wars and the fear of more catastrophic wars have made the 
avoidance of war more important than the achievement of justice. 
The 
first aim in the preamble of the United Nations Charter is "to save suc-
ceeding generations from the scourge of war.'' 
The first purpose in Article 
1 is not to achieve and maintain justice, but to "maintain international 
peace and security." 
Again, we are faced with the antinomy between the 
two juridical values of security and justice. 
Security is the lower, but 
" H. Kelsen, The Law of the United Nations (London, 1950), pp. 732-739; Alf Boss, 
op. eit., p. 141. 
is See Eobert W. Tucker, ' ' The Interpretation of War,'' The International Law 
Quarterly (London), Vol. 4, No. 1 (1951), pp. 11-38. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press

534 
THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL/ LAW 
most basic value. "La securiie d'abord," as the French thesis ran after 
the first World "War; only then the intrinsic settlement of conflicts; here lies 
the difference between Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, between, within 
the Pan American orbit, the Rio Treaty and the Pact of Bogota. First to 
establish security is the philosophy of recent developments, in the conviction 
that security is the indispensable pre-condition of later achieving justice. 
This philosophy may be wholly justified, but it is not the philosophy under-
lying the helium justum doctrine. 
JOSEF L. KUNZ 
THE HUMAl* RIGHTS COMMISSION AT THE CROSSROADS 
The Commission on Human Rights is engaged in a valiant struggle to 
carry forward the banner raised in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights.1 The "common standard of achievement" proclaimed in that 
Declaration was to be advanced, according to its terms, by teaching and 
education and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure 
the universal and effective recognition and observance of basic rights and 
freedoms. 
In attempting to obtain acceptance at this time of a universal 
covenant for national guarantees of basic civil and political rights, the Com-
mission appears to us to have reached and passed a crossroads at which it 
should have stopped, looked and listened. 
It should now, in our opinion, 
return to the crossroads and consult anew the compass of human experience. 
It was inevitable that the proposal of a covenant limited to civil and 
political rights would meet opposition from those who, on motives good, bad 
or mixed, demand equal guarantees for social, cultural and economic rights. 
It was inevitable that questions of great difficulty would arise with respect 
to the enforcement of national guarantees of even a limited group of basic 
rights in the constituent states of federal unions. The long discussions by 
which the proposed Covenant has been brought to the present stage may 
possibly be regarded as a part of the processes of teaching and education 
envisaged in the Universal Declaration. 
The Covenant itself, even if it is 
accepted in some form, cannot be regarded as a progressive measure to 
secure observance of human rights and freedoms. 
The compass of human experience, which the Commission should consult 
in charting a new course, points to the methods which another international 
body has followed with success, over a period of thirty years, with respect to 
a significant part of the problem of human rights. 
The International 
Labor Organization, now one of the specialized agencies of the United 
Nations, was established in 1919 for the purpose of improving the conditions 
of labor throughout the world. 
It has pursued that purpose constantly by 
drafting and procuring the adoption of conventions and recommendations 
on one small subject after another, by recording the actual performance of 
iSee Supplement to this JOURNAL, Vol. 43 (1949), p. 127. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2194549 Published online by Cambridge University Press
