Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
93
UDC: 316.334.56:005.56:711
DOI: 10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2014-25-01-002
Received: 26 Jul. 2013
Accepted: 10 Feb. 2014
Aidan CERAR
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contribu‑
tive participation
Participation in spatial planning has been studied exten‑
sively in the past decades, but many cases of spatial plan‑
ning have nonetheless seen a gap between decision‑mak‑
ers and local residents. This is why participation in spatial 
planning has become a classic research question of many 
urban planning–related sciences. The greatest focus has 
been on cases of participation that present some kind of 
reaction to plans or actions, whereas far less attention has 
been given to cases of participation based on initiatives 
and the search for new content for underused or decay‑
ing areas. Such cases usually start with initiatives for the 
new use of particular places and often result in physical 
changes to these places. This article defines various types 
of local initiatives, and it especially studies the distinction 
between reactionary and contributive local initiatives and 
relates them to the notion of community. The article is 
based on an analysis of two particular cases. The differ‑
ences in these two cases represent a foundation for the 
article’s conclusions, which emphasises the potentials for 
stimulating contributive participation. The conclusion in‑
cludes recommendations for the spatial planning system 
to become more open to participation in terms of revi‑
talising underused spaces because such space has been 
increasing during the economic downturn. The complex 
and inefficient system of spatial planning is turning away 
many creative initiatives.
Key words: participation, local initiatives, urban regen‑
eration, community.

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
94
A. CERAR
1	 Introduction
The concept of participation gained importance in spatial 
planning after the Second World War. An important landmark 
was the ninth International Congress of Modern Architec‑
ture (CIAM) and the subsequent search for new practices in 
architecture, which included withdrawal from the technocratic 
approach to spatial planning and the transformation of the role 
of the omniscient architect. Consequently, greater emphasis 
has been laid on participative urbanism (Chasin, 2011). Mod‑
ern spatial planning has often resulted in uses of space that 
have significantly differed from the planned ones (Uršič, 2008) 
and, moreover, modern spatial planning has often triggered 
opposition and resistance from the public  (Čerpes, 2011). 
Consequently, experts have focused on more systematic anal‑
ysis of including participation in spatial planning. The main 
aim has been to democratise spatial planning, which was in 
line with the political changes in the developed world as an 
increasing number of countries adopted a democratic politi‑
cal system. Such a system usually joins a representative and 
direct democracy, combined with formalised participation as 
some kind of corrector of the representative model. Democ‑
ratisation of spatial planning was related to reducing the gap 
between planners or decision‑makers on the one hand and the 
public or local residents on the other. Related to this, there 
have been attempts to analyse participation by distinguish‑
ing different types by scale, based on the influence that the 
participants had on decision‑making. Sherry Arnstein (1969) 
has pointed out types of participation and nonparticipation. 
Types of participation have been divided into three areas: 
nonparticipation, tokenism and citizen power. The scale has 
eight levels; the lowest one is manipulation and the highest 
one is citizen control. Specific methods of participation and 
their potentials have also been analysed (see Sinclair, 1977). 
Both of these studies of participation have focused more on 
the top‑down aspect of participation. Techniques of participa‑
tion have primarily been analysed from the point of view of 
the planner, with an emphasis on the potential of including 
the results in spatial planning by city officials, decision‑makers 
and planners. It could be argued that explaining participation 
in this manner is insufficient because some local participation 
practices are never linked with the local decision‑makers; for 
example, cooperation between neighbourhood residents in 
improving the quality of public space or publicly accessible 
privately owned space within a neighbourhood. This would 
present a shift from definitions of participation as established 
by political science, which define participation as a commu‑
nication process between residents and decision‑makers (see 
Lavtar, 2007). In my case I tend to define participation as 
involvement of an individual in social processes, which is more 
in line with the sociological definitions of participation. This 
article is founded on the following definition: diverse, specifi‑
cally undefined activities at the neighbourhood level that seek 
to improve the neighbourhood  (Filipovič Hrast  & Dekker, 
2009). The concept of participation has often been divided 
into formal and informal participation. Sometimes authors 
have used the terms vertical and horizontal participation, and 
bottom‑up and top‑down have also been used (see Mlinar 1973; 
van Beckhoven & van Boxmeer, 2007; Foster‑Fishman et al., 
2009; Pek Drapal & Drevenšek, 2001; Blakeley & Evans, 2008; 
Bizjak, 2012). These distinctions deal with the more or less 
same method of dividing participation into sub‑concepts that 
are often related to participation as required by law (formal, 
top‑down) and participation not required by law (informal, 
bottom‑up; see Bizjak, 2012).
It is mostly the public and the local community that have been 
highlighted as dealing with institutions in relation to planning 
matters. The public probably refers to a community of stake‑
holders because the term local community usually refers to a 
community of more or less interlinked local residents. Such 
an understanding of a local community might be rooted in 
Toennies’ concept of Gemeinschaft,[1] referring to a strongly 
tied community of individuals that meet each other often, trust 
each other and are similar in specific characteristics (Mlinar, 
1973; Brint, 2001; Filipovič, 2007). There has also been ex‑
tensive research on which conditions allow participation in 
spatial planning (e.g., Larrsen et al., 2004), and which tech‑
niques facilitate planned interventions. It has been concluded 
that local communities generally try to participate when they 
are somehow attached to the place in question. This raises 
the following question (see Jones, 2003; Mathers et al., 2008) 
about the motives for participation: if the motives are individ‑
ual and pragmatic, do people become involved because there 
is an aim they want to achieve, and should this therefore be 
explained as an instrumental action? If so, the decision to par‑
ticipate at the individual level would be based on comparison 
of costs and potential benefits of the specific participation. 
However, analysing participation in such a manner rarely pro‑
vides unambiguous conclusions, particularly if the residents of 
a certain locality become involved at the local level, whereas 
in another place local residents do not become involved, nei‑
ther as individuals nor as a community, even though certain 
disagreements have been expressed in relation to the planned 
intervention (see also Gans, 1962; Granovetter, 1973). Analy‑
sis of specific case studies has highlighted the limitations of 
explaining participation as an instrumental action and, because 
of that, two new concepts have been incorporated into re‑
searching participation: social capital and community. A simple 
definition of social capital explains it as capital that is based 
on social ties and on norms and trust (Putnam, 2000). I avoid 
defining “community” because the concept of the community 
has often been analysed within sociological theory; moreo‑
ver, many established sociologists have explained the concept; 

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
95
for example, Ferdinand Toennies, Emile Durkheim, Benedict 
Anderson, Louis Wirth, Amitai Etzioni, Pitirim Sorokin, and 
many others. Thus a particular definition of the community 
is avoided. It is sufficient for the further development of this 
article to note that a community is a crowd of more or less 
interlinked individuals. The number of ties linking these indi‑
viduals matters because there could only be one tie (residing 
in a particular neighbourhood, for example) or a commuta‑
tion of several ties  (residing in a particular neighbourhood, 
similar lifestyle, profession, religion, etc.). Pitirim Sorokin and 
Carle Zimmerman have defined a community in a similar man‑
ner  (1929; cited in Mlinar, 1973). Some attention has also 
been focused on the duration of these ties.
This article mostly focuses on selected local case studies, on 
which the conclusions are based. These offer a contribution to 
the local system of spatial planning, but are universal enough 
to provide a contribution to research on participation in 
spatial planning at a more general, transnational level. That 
represents a contribution to the theoretical understanding of 
participation in spatial planning. The topic of participation 
was selected for this research because it has been noted that 
participation should be further developed in order to link it 
with potential cases of urban regeneration. The importance of 
including local residents in urban regeneration has often been 
argued (e.g. Križnik, 2008; Ho et al., 2012). In Ljubljana, the 
most important issue is probably regeneration of the housing 
developments built in the second half of the twentieth century, 
as claimed by Dejan Rebernik (2002). Slovenian housing de‑
velopments are characterised by fragmented individual owner‑
ship of the housing stock, which is a consequence of laws from 
the early 1990s. Therefore regeneration would not be possible 
without intensive inclusion of the residents (i.e., the owners 
of the flats), which means that a step forward is needed in 
participative spatial planning in terms of urban regeneration. 
Therefore the following research questions were deliberately 
formed in a loose manner:
• Which factors stimulate participation in spatial plan‑
ning?
• How do these factors influence the form of the partici‑
pation?
• How did the changes at the level of community forma‑
tion affect participation in spatial planning?
• What is the relationship between social capital and par‑
ticipation, or what types of ties link participants in local 
initiatives?
• Are there any obstacles at the system level (in the local 
and transnational sense) that could be noted as a set‑
back in the development of local initiatives that aim at 
place‑making in terms of decayed urban areas?
The research questions have been formed in a loose manner 
deliberately in order not to limit inductive reasoning. The 
research does not seek to confirm  (or reject) any particular 
hypothesis, but to inductively develop new theses or substan‑
tial theories. This is what the research methods are based on.
2	 Theoretical premises
2.1	 The meaning of social capital in participation 
in spatial planning
The role of social capital in spatial planning or in place‑making 
has often been emphasised. Mainly it has been claimed that 
the level of social capital correlates with the probability of 
the participative practice at the neighbourhood level  (Do‑
cherty et al., 2001; Leilevendt, 2004; Hays & Kogel, 2007). 
Those neighbourhoods in which the connectedness between 
residents is stronger, as well as the attachment to the neigh‑
bourhood, could be described as neighbourhoods with strong‑
er social capital. Most authors tend to agree on the correlation 
between participation and social capital; however, the divi‑
sion between the bonding and bridging form of social capital 
has been noted as important. Bonding social capital could be 
linked to homogenous communities in which the members 
are strongly connected (the Gemeinschaft type of community), 
whereas bridging social capital stands for heterogeneous indi‑
viduals connected with weaker ties (Woolcoc, 1998, cited in 
Bull & Jones, 2006). Participation (in the political sense of 
meaning) is primarily a result of the bridging type of social cap‑
ital (see Gans, 1962); that is to say, a consequence of the weaker 
ties that embrace a greater number of individuals (Granovet‑
ter, 1973). Similarly, participation has been linked with the 
notion of community. Primarily a transition from a rural to 
urban community has been discussed in this relation (Wirth, 
1939). The urban way of life has often been perceived as a 
threat to the traditional definition of the community because 
an individual in an urban, industrialised society did not need 
a community affiliation for his survival (see Inglehart & Wel‑
zel, 2005). Therefore an individual could afford not to be a 
member of any community, which is believed to impose a nega‑
tive influence on political participation  (see Putnam, 2000) 
because mobilisation of unconnected individuals is far less 
likely. However, this should not be understood in the sense 
that local communities are meaningless in urbanised society; 
a sense of local community has been developed in some neigh‑
bourhoods, particularly in neighbourhoods in which residents 
are linked through workplace and residence; that is to say, 
older working‑class neighbourhoods (Križnik, 2008). To sum 
up, participation is more likely if local community members 
cooperate and communicate among themselves. On the other 
hand, an outside threat can stimulate social capital at the local 
level, even though the community members have not cooper‑
ated significantly before (Sennet, 2002). In such cases, anger 
and opposition represent a link connecting the members of 
the local community. With all this in mind, it makes sense to 
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
96
analyse participation from the social capital point of view, and 
in relation to the presence of a threat at the local level, in order 
to highlight the differences between various local initiatives. 
However, these variables may be less useful when analysing 
local initiatives that are not rooted in the perception of an 
outside threat.
Analysis of participation as a reaction to a particular threat has 
mainly been related to the above understanding of the con‑
cepts of community and social capital, whereas participation as 
a contributive component of place‑making has been far less re‑
searched. At this point I posit two new concepts, contributive 
and consumptive participation in spatial planning, which were 
introduced by Zdravko Mlinar (1973). Contributive participa‑
tion refers to contribution to a group or community in order 
to profit from particular goods or services from this group or 
community. Consumptive participation refers to participation 
in place‑making that is based on fulfilling the specific needs 
of an individual through participation in a community. This 
article modifies Mlinar’s theory because the preliminary study 
that was carried out before the actual research began mainly 
pointed to a slightly different bifurcation of participative 
practices. The first form is a reaction to a particular perceived 
threat, whereas the second represents a search for (and imple‑
mentation of) a new use of underused spaces and places (the 
distinction between place and space will not be expanded; the 
basic distinction that links a space to instrumental functions 
and a place to reflective scenery (Hočevar, 2000) is sufficient 
for this article). These spaces cannot be linked to any specific 
threat or, to put it differently, communities that participate 
in the transformation of these spaces do not perceive these 
threats as relevant. Because Mlinar’s manner of distinguishing 
two types of participation is most in line with my bifurcation, 
Mlinar’s term contributive participation is used throughout the 
article because the respective type of participation represents 
a contribution of community to the place‑making process in 
terms of underused or decayed spaces. Participation that refers 
to a reaction by the local community has been referred to as 
reactionary local initiative[2] because it represents a reaction to 
a particular outside threat. Explaining the differences between 
these defined two forms of participation is the main topic of 
this article.
2.2	 The potentials of contributive participation 
in place‑making
Reactionary local initiatives are a consequence of a threat by 
which a local community is mobilised. According to Marx‑
ist thinkers (see Harvey 2008, 2012), a perceived threat has 
often been linked with investments; that is to say, capital. It 
has been argued that a surplus of capital has often been in‑
vested in real estate development projects in order to provide 
accumulation of capital and potential profits, to put it simply. 
Therefore urbanisation has been presented as a process of capi‑
tal absorption. In line with this, a growth coalition has often 
been formed (see Molotch, 1976, 1988). If local residents or 
the local community that has used and/or identified with the 
particular space has not seen their own interest in the project 
initiated by the growth coalition, they might form a local ini‑
tiative that opposes the implementation of the project. This 
presumption could be tested in a local manner if the amount of 
local initiatives before and after the crisis were noted, presum‑
ing that the diminishing purchasing power and demand would 
result in a lower amount of real estate developments. Obvi‑
ously, such comparisons are impossible because a methodologi‑
cally reliable and valid overview of local initiatives does not 
exist. Moreover, periodical overviews (every few years) would 
be needed in order to enable the comparison. However, con‑
cluding from Marxism, the number of reactionary local initia‑
tives should have dropped because of the diminishing level of 
demand that would cause a drop in the amount of investments 
in the real estate project. Furthermore, this would influence a 
drop in traditional urban regeneration projects, and because 
of the diminished purchase power the demand for flats and 
retail space would decrease, and so would the demand for the 
office space as a result of a shrinking economy. This has been 
confirmed by the decrease in building permits in Slovenia. The 
number of building permits issued has decreased significantly 
since 2006; for example, in 2006 43% more permits were is‑
sued than in 2011.[3] Consequently, urban regeneration pro‑
jects, developed in a bottom‑up manner, have become more 
important in terms of place‑making.
At this point, a cultural change theory (see Inglehart & Wel‑
zel, 2005) is incorporated into the article. It has been claimed 
that post‑industrial society is supposed to favour self‑expressive 
values. This would be a consequence of specialisation, higher 
level of education, greater emphasis on creativity and the in‑
creased complexity of post‑industrial society. In line with this, 
there has been increased elite challenging behaviour and more 
spontaneous and specific social actions. That could be further 
developed into local initiatives that are based on self‑expressive 
values and the creativity of their members. This would result 
in physical or spatial transformations of a specific place. As a 
result, the social factors on which reactionary and contributive 
participation are based are theoretically explained.
3	 Methodology
This article is based on research that was carried out for a doc‑
toral dissertation. In the article only the main methodological 
issues are explained. A qualitative method rooted in a grounded 
theory (GT) approach was used in the research. Even though 
GT is an entire research model (see Kavčič, 2012), it has been 
A. CERAR

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
97
adapted in this research in a manner that fits the domain and 
aims of this research. There has been a withdrawal from early 
forms of GT in which an inductive approach was excessively 
emphasised. That would have been less appropriate in my case 
because quite some research has already been carried out in 
relation to participation in place‑making, which should not 
be overlooked. In doing so, the possibility of forming conclu‑
sions that had already been made before would hypothetically 
increase. GT as a research method does not seek to confirm 
or reject any particular hypothesis. Quantitative measurements 
could also not be argued as among the aims of GT. The aim of 
GT is to develop new theories that contain meaningful charac‑
teristics of specific research phenomena. Matic Kavčič (2012: 
7) noted that “This defines concepts analysing the conditions 
in which actions and interactions through which these phe‑
nomena are expressed occur. Consequences of these phenom‑
ena are described as well.” In addition, a local context was 
selected for study because one of my research goals was to apply 
the conclusions to the local spatial planning system. Moreover, 
it was not aimed at positing universally valid theories. The 
goal was to contribute to potential urban regenerations[4] with 
new findings, which was the main reason for selecting GT. 
Therefore precisely set hypotheses that would be confirmed 
or rejected through the research were avoided. Instead, loose‑
ly formed research questions were set and further developed 
throughout the study by forming ad‑hoc hypotheses that were 
set by constantly combining an inductive and deductive re‑
search approach, meaning that a kind of abduction was the 
case, which is the usual approach of GT. The deductive part is 
a theoretical introduction followed by the development of sen‑
sitising concepts: reactionary and contributive participation in 
spatial planning. Sensitising concepts are a kind of guideline 
for researchers by which a domain of the research is defined. 
Afterwards, the categories of the research are formed, based on 
the theory studies and case studies. The categories were threat, 
expectations, structural possibilities and social capital. In addition 
to the theoretical part that I have already explained, in which 
sensitising concepts and consequently categories were formed, 
the research was also carried out the case studies and provided 
foundations for the final conclusions. Two case studies were se‑
lected, based on the sensitising concepts and noted categories. 
Both cases could strongly be associated with (at least some of) 
the categories. The selection was content‑based. The first case, 
the Fond houses, could be associated with the category called 
“threat”. The second case, Tabor, could be associated with the 
category of “structural possibilities”. Both cases are located in 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
In the research on the selected cases­ – that is to say, two local 
initiatives – potential interviewees were theoretically selected. 
Theoretical sampling is the most usual part of GT and involves 
deliberate selection of the subsequent interview units, based on 
knowledge and information already gathered (Kavčič, 2012). 
The interviewing ended when saturation occurred, at the single 
case level. In the first case, the interviewing started with local 
residents that were most deeply involved in organising the lo‑
cal initiative, then with local residents that did not take part 
in the local initiative and afterwards with residents that were 
against the local imitative; at the end, residents of the sur‑
rounding neighbourhoods were interviewed. The second case 
was addressed in a similar manner; first individuals involved 
in the local initiatives were interviewed, then local residents, 
afterwards individuals linked with the local initiative that did 
not reside in the area and so on. Because the importance of 
the municipality and its relationship with the selected local 
initiatives was pointed out in both cases, two interviews were 
carried out with the representatives of the urban planning de‑
partment and section for citizens’ initiatives.
The data gathered through interviews were analysed by cod‑
ing. First open coding took place in order to define concepts, 
then axial coding was performed and the process of coding 
ended with selective coding. The concepts were linked into 
substantial theories on which the conclusions were founded.
4	 Results
4.1	 First case: Fond houses
Fond houses is a neighbourhood in Ljubljana close to the 
Bežigrad Sports Park. The history of the neighbourhood has 
been well analysed by Nataša Žlender  (1987). The houses, 
which are actually small apartment blocks, were built in the 
1930s by the railway company fund. In the Fond houses, which 
are named after the railway fund, about 125 families and some 
additional individuals initially resided. What they had in com‑
mon was a link with the Yugoslav railways. This tie became 
less significant after a while, but even so the railways employed 
more than half of the neighbourhood residents in the years 
after the Second World War. There was a cooperative within 
the railways at that time that helped its employees find hous‑
ing. The process of building the Fond houses was governed 
by a board, which was divided into an administrative board 
and supervisory board. Apartments in different locations were 
offered and often a main reason for choosing an apartment in 
Fond houses was based on a garden belonging to an apartment 
in the Fond houses. The land where the gardens were decreased 
as time went by. Because of this, the gardens were repartitioned 
in order to provide gardens for every apartment. The reparti‑
tioning created a high level of solidarity among the residents.
The selection of the Fond houses case was based on the assump‑
tion that it represents a rather classic case of local mobilisation 
triggered by a threat to the real estate value or to the quality of 
life. The mobilisation was triggered by a plan for the Bežigrad 
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
98
stadium renovation to be organised as a private‑public part‑
nership in which the Municipality of Ljubljana and a private 
investor would have had a joint role. The main trigger for local 
mobilisation was a plot that the city invested in public‑private 
partnership. The ownership of the plot was discussed, but that 
is not the subject of this article. The research showed that the 
gardens are the main community place within the neighbour‑
hood from a historical perspective. In the past, building on 
that plot had been considered, but was never implemented. 
The local residents formed some kind of local opposition to‑
wards the respective plans, but my interviews did not show 
that the previous opposition significantly influenced today’s 
practices. The threat that was perceived in recent years not 
only influenced the mobilisation of local residents, but also 
significantly influenced the links between them in a positive 
manner. The level of cooperation in the neighbourhood was 
much higher after the threat. Exhibitions and picnics were 
organised, and also mutual help based on solidarity, such as 
when digging through the gardens. One could posit that an 
outside factor – for example, a threat – influenced the level of 
social capital. However, the social capital that was witnessed 
in the case of the Fond houses has been astonishingly strong 
in terms of strength of the ties. The community itself has also 
been strongly interlinked. The links between the residents are 
based on a historically strongly linked community. The indig‑
enous residents were linked between themselves through their 
work with the railways, and women through taking care of the 
house and work in the gardens, and the children attended the 
same primary school (Žlender, 1987). In the interviews it was 
pointed out that connectedness diminished as time went by; 
however, an outside threat, planned renovation of the stadium, 
revitalised it. Therefore it could be claimed that there had been 
a high level of (latent) bonding social capital. That the form 
of the social capital was bonding social capital was concluded 
from information from people that had recently started renting 
an apartment in the neighbourhood or that resided on nearby 
streets. They did not take part in the events organised at the 
neighbourhood level because they did not feel that they were 
community members. During my research the history of the 
neighbourhood was often emphasised as rather important. It 
could be reckoned that the local initiative was founded on the 
historical characteristics of the neighbourhood’s function. One 
of the aims of the local initiative was a revitalisation of the 
neighbourhood management structure that was in use decades 
ago. Members of the local initiative encountered opposition 
in a growth coalition that includes the investor and several 
institutions, which is in line with the Marxist critique of spatial 
planning (e.g., Molotch, 1976, 1988). Their activities mostly 
focused on finding a way of bringing the planned renovation 
of the stadium to a standstill in this manner. The pace of the 
local initiative was in line with the actions of the local institu‑
tions in charge of spatial planning. The members’ expectations 
vary, but in general their position is that it is difficult for lo‑
cal initiatives to influence spatial planning in Slovenia. The 
expectations of the members of the local initiatives in which 
they participate were rather ambiguous, as concluded from 
the interviews. However, residents that have been involved in 
the local initiative at a more significant, deeper level have high 
expectations for the potential success of the initiative. Despite 
this, even these residents felt strongly about the lack of struc‑
tural possibilities for local initiatives to influence the planning 
process. This power could be acquired by outstanding effort 
and endeavour, as was noted in the interviews. The residents 
based such statements mostly on their own experiences.
The way some of the residents were informed of the redevel‑
opment plan could be argued to be important. Some of them 
only realised that there was a redevelopment planned when 
they saw a plot where gardens had already been fenced off 
by construction workers. As the interviews pointed out, this 
diminished the possibilities for dialogue between the investors 
and the residents.
4.2	 Second case: Tabor Park
Tabor Park is located on the eastern side of the centre of 
Ljubljana, between the Tabor Gym, the Park Hotel and a lo‑
cal church. One of the prevailing characteristics of the Tabor 
area is a concentration of arts and culture institutions; for 
instance, the Museum of Contemporary Art, the Slovenian 
Ethnographic Museum, the National Museum of Slovenia, 
Bunker Productions and so on. There are several subculture 
institutions in the area as well, particularly on the northern 
part of Metelko Street, where an autonomous social cultural 
centre is located. Most of the local arts and culture institu‑
tions are incorporated in the Tabor cultural quarter initiative. 
Mostly residential buildings are located in the area, alongside 
some public institutions, schools, a student residence, a home 
for the elderly, hotels and hostels. In addition, a significant 
presence of cultural and creative industries has been noted in 
Figure 1: Local community in the gardens of the Fond houses (source: 
Internet 1).
A. CERAR

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
99
the area, particularly in the northern part of the neighbour‑
hood (Žaucer et al., 2011). Socioeconomic analysis makes less 
sense in the case of Tabor because the neighbourhood is rather 
heterogeneous, with luxury apartments alongside older houses 
and apartment buildings. Because there are new buildings in 
the area, a process of gentrification could be claimed. A signifi‑
cant portion of local residents resides in the area temporarily. 
This is mostly a consequence of the student residence and the 
home for the elderly (Žaucer et al., 2010).
In terms of the local initiative for Tabor Park, it is obvious 
that it was not triggered by any kind of threat. Even though 
the park was obviously decaying and unattractive to residents, 
before the revitalisation process started the local residents did 
not perceive this as a threat, at least not in a manner that would 
have mobilised them.[5] It could be argued that the level of 
connectedness between the local residents was not particularly 
high; the residents were not deeply affiliated with the neigh‑
bourhood and there was no such thing as a closely connected 
local community at the neighbourhood level. By focusing on 
social capital, in case of the local initiative this does not neces‑
sarily seem to deal with residency in the area. Socialising in the 
park and identifying with it was not directly related to resid‑
ing in the area. Therefore the theory of social capital was not 
particularly helpful in terms of explaining the local initiative, 
unless the theory was shifted to the community level in relation 
to NGOs. The local initiative was based on the network that 
links different NGOs,[6] which could all somehow be related 
to creativity and culture.[7] The park revitalisation process was 
based on incorporating different communities in the process, 
at least in terms of providing the event in the park. Basically, 
it is about different creative communities that organise events 
in the park or take part in these events. People that take part 
in the events organised by local initiatives in the park are not 
necessarily from the area. Local residents that use the park 
often meet people in the park that do not reside in the area. 
From all of this I conclude that the local initiative was based on 
a weak network of communities, which is why it is rather easy 
to participate in the local initiative. That could also be relevant 
for involvement in the events in the park. Therefore the case 
of Tabor deals with a local initiative, which, in contrast to the 
initiative from the Fond houses, was not so focused on local 
residents only, but was based on the network of communities 
that are linked by lifestyle characteristics and creativity. This 
was expressed in my research.
The initial expectations of the local initiative were based on 
cases of urban revitalisation from foreign cities. Perhaps it 
would be more appropriate to say that foreign cases func‑
tioned as an inspiration. People less affiliated in the initiative 
expressed slight surprise in relation to the success of the local 
initiative because they had not been used to such cases in Lju‑
bljana. Later, the local initiative of Tabor Park became some 
kind of inspiration for other local initiatives across the city.
Institutional support for the local Tabor Park initiative was also 
analysed. It could be argued that a couple of European projects 
were important sources of initial support because they enabled 
the NGOs involved to support a local initiative. However it 
was noted that the local initiative had no direct contact at the 
municipal and sub‑municipal levels that would have enough 
decision‑making and policymaking power at the local level. 
This does not mean that the local initiative was not supported 
by the Municipality of Ljubljana, which did support the initia‑
tive, as did the centre borough and some national institutions. 
The emphasis is on the lack of a contact point with the mu‑
nicipal institutions and the consequence is that the local initia‑
tive had to deal with many administrators and decision‑makers 
that operate within the institutions. This results in a complex 
environment with many administrative obstacles that local 
initiatives must deal with, which consequentially averts part 
of the potential contributive participative practices. The main 
NGO involved in the local initiative  (ProstoRož) has been 
dealing with place‑making related issues for quite some time 
now and is therefore experienced enough to know well how 
to establish a relationship with an appropriate institution and 
has some knowledge about the local spatial planning system.
It was pointed out above that there is significant potential in 
organisations that could link local administration and institu‑
tions on the one hand and local initiatives and engaged indi‑
viduals on the other. Often other local initiatives contacted the 
NGO most involved in the Tabor case in order to cooperate 
in revitalising other localities. The individuals interviewed also 
contacted the NGO and not the municipal institutions, even 
in the case of matters that are controlled by the municipality. 
Based on that, I posit that organisations that would represent 
a contact point for local initiatives have significant potential in 
stimulating contributive participation. In my research I point‑
ed out that a significant share of creative individuals or com‑
munities did not realise their initiatives because they did not 
Figure 2: Event in Tabor Park, Surprise Fair (photo: Matjaž Tančič).
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
100
know who to contact, and at the same time they anticipated 
facing a bureaucratically complex system when implementing 
the initiative. This was pointed out by many interviewees that 
participated in the Tabor Park local initiative, even though 
they resided elsewhere. In the localities where they resided they 
did not take an active part in local community matters. One 
of the reasons is they did not have any acquaintances in the 
localities where they reside.
5	 Discussion
In my discussion I posit that local initiatives could be formed 
without an outside threat; that they can be grassroots networks 
by different communities. This is based on the case noted 
above and is a deviation from the notion that perception of 
a threat and a high level of social capital at the neighbour‑
hood level stimulate participation (see Larrsen et al., 2004). 
However, my findings are in line with theories that analysed 
cultural changes in relation to postmodern society and noted 
an increase in spontaneous, specific issue‑related social activi‑
ties (Inglehart & Welzel, 2005). However, this did not present 
a diminishment of the importance of a threat and its potential 
in triggering local initiatives in a particular locality. As pointed 
out by Richard Sennet, a threat is a factor that has the poten‑
tial to stimulate the development of a communal identity, but 
there are forms of participation that have developed regardless 
of an outside threat. A similar conclusion was posited by Jim 
Diers (2006), who claimed people have a tendency to stay away 
from the traditional form of participation but are interested 
in new forms of community activity at the same time. This 
cannot be explained by the social capital theory or by local 
community notions or points of view because, as pointed out 
in the Tabor case, the local community is not necessarily a 
community of local residents, but could be a community that is 
somehow linked to or identifies with a particular urban place, 
in the case above with Tabor Park. Therefore the traditional 
notion of a local community could not be argued in this case 
in which the notion of community has been defined as much 
more postmodern, which could be differentiated from the con‑
cept of a modern community by its temporariness and the 
voluntariness of its members. Membership in the community 
could not be claimed as ascribed, but as chosen in this case. 
This is in line with theories dealing with the notion of the com‑
munity in postmodern society (e.g. Bauman, 2001). However, 
the case analysed pointed out that even postmodern communi‑
ties could be linked to particular localities. Raimondo Stras‑
soldo (1990) has reckoned that localism, which was always an 
important element of daily life, has not merely vanished, but 
has transformed into new localism. New localism can be argued 
as a voluntary choice of an individual that should not be taken 
as obvious, in contrast to the local rootedness of traditional 
society. New localism is less demanding and burdensome in 
terms of the ties between community members. To sum up, 
the second case analysed shows that it is not only the local 
communities that participate in place‑making, but it could also 
be other communities that are connected between themselves 
by a similar lifestyle and identification with a particular space. 
This has raised a new question of different urban populations. 
Guido Martinotti (1996) noted four urban populations: in‑
habitants, commuters, city users and metropolitan businessmen. 
If the definition above were shifted to the communities in‑
volved in the Tabor Park case (I refer to actively and passively 
involved communities here), then Tabor Park could be related 
to Martinotti’s theory. City users can be involved in a par‑
ticipative practise or, so to speak, local initiative, and could 
therefore contribute to a higher quality of life in a specific 
locality. This means that city users are not necessarily a wind 
in the sails of urban gentrification, particularly if the presence 
of the city users is not disturbing for the local residents. Such 
conflicts have been noted before; Jon May analysed them in 
the case of London (1996). Even in case of local participation, 
a conflict is possible between residents and citizens from else‑
where, which was researched by Jonathan Lepofsky and James 
Fraser (2003). The authors point out cases in which commu‑
nities (or individuals) identify themselves by participation in 
place‑making in localities that are not their place of residency. 
These could also be professional community builders whose 
lifestyle includes being globally oriented and somehow place‑
less, but who participate in bottom‑up practices (Lepofsky & 
Fraser 2003). Therefore their goals might be opposite from the 
goals of local residents (Lepofsky & Fraser 2003). In the Tabor 
Park case, this would mean a conflict of interests between lo‑
cal residents and those involved in the local community, but 
another context was pointed out in my research. The local 
residents claimed that they actually liked the presence of the 
city users in the area where their lived. Often it was impos‑
sible for them to differentiate between residents and city us‑
ers, which indicates that the local community is interlinked 
with weak ties. This notion could be argued as important if 
related to theories that connect social capital with local par‑
ticipation, which has been argued by many authors to date (e. 
g. Marschall, 2001; Lepofsky & Fraser, 2003; Leileveldt, 2004; 
Hays & Kogl, 2007; Márquez, 2011; Cirman et al., 2013).
Social capital in the case of the Tabor Park local initiative could 
much more easily be related to weak ties than to strong ties. 
The role of weak ties can be more decisive than that of strong 
ties in local participation. Weak ties enable larger networks 
and therefore greater mobilisation of resources (Granovetter, 
1973). This notion is even more useful for the article if it is re‑
lated to Richard Florida’s idea that creative individuals are sup‑
posedly part of a so‑called creative class, meaning individuals 
A. CERAR

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
101
with creative occupations (see Florida, 2004; Egedy & Kovacs, 
2010; Kozina, 2014). Florida argues that creative individuals 
seek communities connected by weaker ties because they make 
fewer demands on the individual and are consequently easier 
to fit into because such communities limit an individual less. 
Similar issues have been noted by Herbert Gans (1969), who 
noted cases of communities linked by strong ties that were 
abandoned by the creative communities because they were the 
first that felt limited in such communities. It has been noted in 
my research that a significant share of individuals involved in 
a local initiative were involved in creative occupations, which 
is in line with Florida’s notions. At the same time, the Tabor 
Park case confirms that a local initiative does not have to be 
rooted in the local community but could be rooted in local 
communities. Therefore a local initiative could provide virtual 
and physical contact between different communities, which 
then transforms itself into a social network composed of dif‑
ferent communities, which is, up to some point, in line with 
the theory of communities posited by Sorokina and Zimmer‑
mana (1929, cited in Mlinar 1973). These local communities 
are linked to the decision‑makers and institutions dealing with 
the spatial planning through the NGO, which is in charge of 
the local initiative. This did not surprise me  (the potentials 
of NGOs as links between communities and institutions) be‑
cause the public has no resources  (knowledge, for instance) 
or human resource potentials (Bizjak, 2012). The potentials 
of NGOs involved in regenerating housing developments has 
also been noted by other authors (e.g., Ploštajner et al., 2003; 
Filipovič Hrast & Dekker, 2007).
The first case analysed, the case of Fond houses, seems to be 
more of a classic case of local participation. It is a consequence 
of an outside threat and is based on a high level of social 
capital. The social capital is based on stronger ties, which is 
typical of older neighbourhoods in which local residents are 
connected though labour and residency. This type of connect‑
edness could be labelled an imagined one (e.g. Križnik 2008, 
2009). This claim is based on Benedict Anderson’s concept 
of the imagined community (1983, cited in Brint, 2001), but 
adds that imagined communities do have a genuine impact 
on the relationships between the members of these communi‑
ties (Križnik 2008, 2009). In the case of Fond houses, it was 
about the imagined community that was based on the latent 
social capital that was revitalised by an outside threat. The 
genuine impact in the Tabor case was expressed in local mo‑
bilisation in the form of a local initiative. However, it should 
be noted that Fond houses was not a traditional working‑class 
neighbourhood because the indigenous residents were socially 
mixed even though the residents were linked by strong ties. A 
significant level of solidarity between the residents was pointed 
out in the interviews and frequent socialising at the neigh‑
bourhood level on a daily basis as well. In forming the local 
initiative, social capital played an important role: a local initia‑
tive was founded on the remnants of the social capital from 
the previous decades which the initiative has restructured. It 
is not just the bonding social capital that has been involved 
in the local initiative – even though it was most important. 
Bridging social capital was important for the activities of the 
local initiative in terms of links with significant experts living 
outside the neighbourhood but linked with the residents. That 
enabled the local initiative to acquire information relevant for 
their activities (e.g., legal opinions). The distinction between 
working‑class and middle‑class participation practices has of‑
ten been based on the relationship between bonding and bridg‑
ing social capital because the lower classes often lack this kind 
of social capital (see Gans, 1969; Marchal, 2001).
In terms of community, in the case of Fond houses it could 
not be claimed that the overlap was complete, but it was at 
least considerable. The community of gardeners seemed im‑
portant because they were most directly faced by the threat. 
The community of gardeners significantly overlapped with the 
community of local residents. The gardens were the main space 
for socialising in the neighbourhood. Therefore it could be 
argued that the case was not a local community, but several 
local communities between which the relationships might 
have been tense. However, the community linked with the 
gardens is most significant within the neighbourhood and is 
well interlinked.
In the case of Fond houses, the stage of including the resi‑
dents in the planning process seems important, referring to 
the late introduction of formal participation. It has been ar‑
gued by Igor Bizjak that the landlords’ negative attitude was 
not unusual in terms of public hearings in relation to spatial 
plans (2012). On the other hand, it has been argued by some 
authors that shortening the procedures and related exclusion 
of the public from the early stages with an explanation that the 
public is the factor that prolongs the procedures has actually 
resulted in prolonged procedures and has increased the gap 
between the citizens and institutions  (see Peterlin  & Cerar, 
2011). Only the result is presented to the public at public 
hearings, meaning that the public does not know about the 
process of attaining the result and has a lack of knowledge 
about the planning process (see Bizjak, 2012). This presented 
an additional factor in terms of mobilisation, as was pointed 
out in the interviews. Simultaneously, the initiative expressed a 
high level of organisation and motivation in terms of preserv‑
ing the plot where the gardens are located as a greenfield. It 
has been claimed that the initiative would accept another use 
but would not negotiate building on the plot. Table 1 shows 
the differences between the local initiatives.
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
102
Table 1: Emphasised differences between the local initiatives analysed
Domain of activity / local  
initiative
Fond houses
Tabor Park 
Social capital
Members linked by strong ties. 
Members linked by weak ties.
Reason for establishment
Perceived outside threat: stadium  
redevelopment. 
Goal of revitalisation of the neighbourhood, consequen-
tly the park. The implementation was stimulated by the 
funds available at that time. 
Relationship with appropriate 
institutions dealing with  
spatial planning
Obvious gap between institutions and local 
initiative. Clear opposition. 
Local initiative searches for a contact point within the 
institutions; success varies. Occasionally it acquires some 
kind of a support. Weak horizontal cooperation between 
the municipal departments was noted.
Structure of local initiative
Local initiative structured from representatives 
of houses and coordination board. Some kind 
of representative body of local residents. 
Network of involved communities. One of the NGOs is in 
charge and has the role of a coordinator. 
Use of formal methods of 
cooperation with institutions 
Public hearings and participation in formal 
procedures related to planned redevelopment. 
Participation in (project) calls at the local and (trans)natio-
nal level with an intention of acquiring funds for activities 
related to the park revitalisation.
Legitimisation
Legitimised with formal examination of  
positions of local residents. 
Research on views and preferences of local residents be-
fore start of revitalisation; a sample of the residents. Based 
on that, the park was selected as a potential revitalisation 
locality.
Self‑assessment
Interviews show that the success of the local 
initiative went beyond the initial expectations 
of those involved. 
Interviews show that the success of the local initiative 
went beyond the initial expectations of those involved.
Formalisation
Local initiative not formalised. 
Some of the communities/organisations involved are for-
malised, but the local initiative as a whole has not been 
formalised.
Support among local  
initiatives
The interviews show a significant level of  
support. There are some that oppose the 
initiative, but they are rare. 
The interviews show a significant level of support among 
the local residents. There is a local organisation that has 
opposed the particular activities related to park revitalisa-
tion, but that organisation has been isolated.
Active involvement in local 
initiative
Some of the local residents are actively  
involved. Often they are the representatives 
of particular houses. The research shows that 
most of them have a garden on the plot that 
is a part of the redevelopment plan. Most of 
those involved are local residents. 
Most communities that take part in the park revitalisation 
program could be noted as actively involved; however 
there are also individuals from the area that are involved. 
Often it is about individuals and communities linked with 
creative professions. Residency in the neighbourhood is 
not directly linked with participation in the local initiative; 
a significant share of those actively involved do not reside 
in the area. Most of these people have no direct experien-
ce with participation in the area where they reside.
Passively involved in local 
initiative
Mostly local residents; significant share of 
people residing in the neighbourhood. 
Local residents, citizens and people from other cities as 
well. Local residents are enthusiastic about sports events 
in the park (mostly during the week) whereas people from 
elsewhere mostly visit the park on the weekends when 
the special events take place. 
Type of active participation in 
local initiative
Local residents most often participate after 
personal contact with individuals that are 
more involved in the local initiative. Mostly it 
is local residents. 
Most often they make contact with the main NGO invol-
ved. Local residents that would like to hold public events 
in the park would also contact the NGO. 
Communication with local 
initiative
Most important personal communication with 
individuals more involved in the local initiative 
and communication through announcements 
on bulletin boards located in each house. 
Personal communication seems to be important, whereas 
the bulletin board in the park mostly reaches local resi-
dents. Social media also seem to be most important.
Aims of the initiative
Preservation of the plot as a greenfield. Over 
the course of time, another aim was set: to 
revitalise the local community and increase 
the level of participation of the community in 
managing the neighbourhood. 
The main aim was revitalisation of Tabor Park with an 
emphasis on bottom‑up involvement of the community. 
The long‑term goal was to stimulate an increase in local 
initiatives.
A. CERAR

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
103
6	 Conclusion
The main aim of this article was not to confirm or reject my 
hypothesis, but to enable inductive reasoning with a loosely 
stated hypothesis. Therefore it could be concluded that par‑
ticipation in spatial planning is often triggered by the follow‑
ing main factors: perception of a threat, expectations of re‑
sults, structural possibilities and a high level of social capital. 
A threat mostly triggers reactionary participation, whereas 
well‑developed structural possibilities might stimulate the de‑
velopment of contributive participation. The expected results 
seem important for an individual’s motivation to participate, 
although this was less emphasised in my research findings than 
the other factors. Participation can be stimulated by a high 
level of social capital, but it is impossible to posit a direct con‑
clusion in which the role of social capital is explained. Social 
capital could also be a consequence of a perceived threat. Even 
a low level of social capital at the local level might stimulate 
participative practice. For instance, from the case of Tabor 
Park it could be speculated that the low level of social capital 
between the local residents generated a local initiative that 
aimed to revitalise the park. If the level of social capital were 
higher, then the city users’ population could be perceived as 
intruders by the local community.
In my conclusion I posit that a method of including participa‑
tion in the system of spatial planning influences the propor‑
tion between reactionary and contributive participation. If a 
system (i.e., structural possibilities) is not favourable for par‑
ticipation, then the share of reactionary participation would 
be higher whereas the contributive participation share would 
be diminished. A system that is not favourable for participa‑
tion is a system in which a community hardly has influence on 
spatial planning, or participation is burdened by a high level of 
bureaucracy and is very time‑consuming. In such a system, the 
result of the participative practice would be quite unpredict‑
able. Those involved in reactionary participative practice have 
a greater motivation because the perceived threat represents 
a potential setback for their quality of life. That is why those 
affected would choose to participate, even though they are 
aware that potential success is not very likely. Therefore they 
would take a risk because the perceived threat has the potential 
to diminish the quality of life or negatively affect real estate 
prices in a certain locality. On the other hand, participants in 
contributive practices are not initiated by a threat, but by an 
opportunity to seek new uses for decaying spaces. These kinds 
of local initiatives are often rooted in the creativity of particular 
communities and therefore do not have such a strong motive 
as reactionary initiatives. Therefore they give up significantly 
faster than initiatives if support in spatial planning institu‑
tions fails or the initiatives do not find an appropriate contact 
point (on the institutional side) that could contribute to imple‑
menting the initiatives’ aims. Based on this, I posit that changes 
in the spatial planning system could stimulate contributive lo‑
cal initiatives in spatial planning if a greater level of efficiency 
and predictability were adopted in terms of absorbing local 
initiatives. This raises the question of potential contact points 
for local initiatives within the institutions. If these are not close 
enough to the communities and deal with greater territorial 
entities or suffer a lack of political power, they are not able to 
support contributive participation. New political bodies were 
formed in some cities with the intention of reducing the dis‑
tance between them and the people, meaning that the new 
institutions operated at the neighbourhood level (see Musso 
et al., 2006). Excessive centralisation of the city management 
affects the flexibility of the administration, which results in less 
efficient resolution of urban issues (see Bačlija, 2011). There is 
significant potential in NGOs in terms of bridging between 
local communities and decision‑makers  (or policy makers). 
Development of such practice in the case of Ljubljana would 
demand certain modifications in terms of the city budget be‑
cause the city budget would have to make some funds available 
for local initiatives or NGOs that cooperate with local initia‑
tives. This would present the possibility of earmarking part 
of the budget in cooperation with local initiatives. This is a 
form of participatory budgeting, so to speak. In such cases, the 
role of the institution is to ensure a level of legitimacy of local 
initiatives in the localities that present their focus because it is 
not necessary for the initiators to reside in the area. It could 
be that the initiators are from communities identifying with a 
particular place. This is why it would make sense to check the 
legitimacy of their activities and plans among local residents.
The bottom line of this article is that bottom‑up place‑making 
needs a contact point from the top down, or else a reduction 
of participation or reactionary participation is likely. Reaction‑
ary participation is a form of local communities’ reactions to 
established plans or projects. As in times of the economic 
downturn a decrease in development projects has been noted, 
and on the other hand there was an increase in decayed areas, 
and so a systematic stimulation of development of contribu‑
tive participation in place‑making makes sense. Potentials of 
contributive participation lie in searching for new content for 
public spaces and for private spaces that are publicly accessi‑
ble (see Jankovič Grobelšek, 2012); for example, spaces within 
Slovenian housing developments built in the second half of 
the twentieth century. These developments are in need of re‑
generation because of their age. The ownership of apartments 
is private and fragmentised, and therefore top‑down regenera‑
tion would not be possible in the first place. The owners have 
not been participating in regeneration of the public spaces; 
their involvement has been limited to the apartment level, 
or possibly to the refurbishment of an apartment block (Cir‑
man et al., 2013). A system that would stimulate local initia‑
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
104
tives’ potentials and NGOs in terms of management of public 
spaces within the developments could be a first step in the 
renewal of (public spaces) in large housing developments in 
Ljubljana. No policy has been adopted on regeneration of 
housing developments at the national or municipal level in 
Slovenia (see Ploštajner et al., 2004).
This last notion represents a reversion to the initial sensitis‑
ing concepts: reactionary and contributive participation. The 
cases noted indicate that both local initiatives contain elements 
of reactionary and contributive participation. In the case of 
Fond, a contributive potential of a local initiative was gradually 
developed. In case of Tabor Park, local residents sometimes 
contact the NGO in charge of the initiatives in the case of 
complaints, or would contact them, not the municipality, if 
they had a reason.
Aidan Cerar 
Regional Development Agency of the Ljubljana Urban Region, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
E-mail: cerar.aidan@gmail.com
Notes
[1] Ferdinand Toennies (1957, cited in Brint, 2001) has defined a commu-
nity in terms of a division between a traditional rural community (Ge‑
meinschaft) and modern urban community (Gesellschaft). The main 
characteristics of the Gemeinschaft would be similar lifestyle, strong ties 
and a small number of individuals involved. A Gesellschaft would be 
related to diverse lifestyle, weak ties and a large number of individuals.
[2] Local initiative is a term based on the term civic initiative. Civic has 
been replaced with local because these initiatives could be linked to a 
particular locality.
[3] For more information, see: http://www.stat.si/novica_prikazi.
aspx?id=4608.
[4] The term regeneration has been used because it combines a concept 
of physical renewal with economic and social aspects (Couch, Fraser & 
Percy, 2003).
[6] Before the local initiative started to deal with the Tabor Park revitali-
sation, research was implemented. The focus was on the wishes and 
opinions of the local residents. The selection of the park as a revitalisa-
tion area was based on this research. According to my information, the 
author was Matjaž Uršič.
[7] Mostly ProstoRož and Bunker Productions were involved, and also 
the Institute for Spatial Policies in the initial stages.
[8] The individuals involved were linked by their profession: creative 
professions. In that relation, the findings are to some extent in line 
with the findings of Richard Florida on the creative class (2002, 2005). 
However, it should be noted that the creative class concept has been 
ambiguous and widely criticised as a concept. Because social stratifi-
cation is not an issue addressed in this article, I do not deal with the 
critics I mentioned.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Marjan Hočevar from the University of Lju-
bljana, Faculty of Social Sciences. I would also like to thank to Tadeja 
Zupančič (Faculty of Architecture) and Matjaž Uršič (Faculty of Social 
Sciences).
References
Arnstein, S. R. (2000) A ladder of citizen participation. In: Le Gales, P. & 
Stout, F. (eds.) The city reader, pp. 240–252. London, Routledge.
Bačlija, I. (2011) Urban management in a European context. Urbani izziv, 
22(2), pp. 137–146. DOI: 10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2011-22-02-006
Bauman, Z. (2004) Liquid modernity. Cambridge, Backwell.
Bizjak, I. (2012) Improving public participation in spatial planning with 
Web 2.0 tools. Urbani izziv, 23(1), pp. 112–124. DOI: 10.5379/urbani-
izziv-en-2012-23-01-004
Blakeley, G. & Evans, B. (2008) It’s like maintaining a hedge, constraints 
on citizen engagement in community regeneration in east Manchester. 
Public Policy and Administration 23(1), pp. 100–113.
Brint, S. (2001) Gemeinschaft revisited: A critique and reconstruc-
tion of the community concept. Sociological Theory, 19(1), pp. 1–24. 
DOI: 10.1111/0735-2751.00125
Bull Cento, A. & Jones, B. (2006) Governance and social capital in urban 
regeneration: A comparison between Bristol and Naples. Urban Studies, 
43(4), pp. 767–786. DOI: 10.1080/00420980600597558
Čerpes, I. (2011) Razvoj sodelovanja javnosti pri načrtovanju posegov v 
prostor. AB Architect’s Bulletin, 188–189, pp. 70–72.
Chasin, N (2011) Architecture from the fabric of life itself: Team 10 
and the pre-history of participation urbanism, AB Architect’s Bulletin, 
188–189, pp. 64–69.
Cirman, A., Mandič, S. & Zorič, J. (2013) Decisions to renovate: Identify-
ing key determinants in central and eastern European post‑socialist 
countries. Urban Studies. DOI: 10.1177/0042098013482509
Couch, C., Fraser, C. & Percy, S. (2003) Urban regeneration in Europe. 
Oxford, Blackwell Science.
Egedy, T. & Kovacs, Z. (2010) Budapest: A great place for creative indus-
try development? Urbani izziv, 21(2), pp. 127–138. DOI: 10.5379/urbani-
izziv-2010-21-02-006
Diers, J. (2006) Neighbor power, building community the Seattle way. 
Seattle, University of Washington Press.
Docherty, I., Goodlad R. & Paddison, R. (2001) Civic culture, community 
and citizen participation in contrasting neighbourhoods. Urban Studies, 
38(12), pp. 2225–2250. DOI: 10.1080/00420980120087144
Drapal Pak, D., Drevenšek, M. & Drapal, A. (2004) Odnosi z lokalnimi 
skupnostmi. Ljubljana, GV Založba.
Filipovič, M. (2007) Družbena kohezija in soseska v pozni moderni. Lju-
bljana, University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Sciences.
Filipovič Hrast, M. & Dekker, K. (2009) Old habits die hard? Neighbour-
hood participation in post‑WWII neighbourhoods in Slovenia and the 
Netherlands. Cities, 26(3), pp. 148–157. DOI: 10.1016/j.cities.2009.03.002
Florida, R. (2002) The rise of the creative class. New York, Basic Books.
Florida, R. (2005) The flight of the creative class. New York, Harper Col-
lins.
A. CERAR

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
105
Foster‑Fishman, P., Pierce, S. J. & Van Egeren, L. A. (2009) Who 
participates and why: Building a process model of citizen par-
ticipation. Health Education & Behaviour, 36(3), pp. 550–569. 
DOI: 10.1177/1090198108317408
Granovetter, M. S. (1973) The strength of weak ties. American Journal of 
Sociology, 78(6), pp. 1360–1380. DOI: 10.1086/225469
Gans, H. J. (1962) The urban villagers: Group and class in the life of Ital‑
ian‑Americans. New York, Free Press.
Harvey, D. (2008) The right to the city. New Left Review, 53, pp. 23–40.
Harvey, D. (2012) Kratka zgodovina neoliberalizma. Ljubljana, Studia 
Humanitatis.
Hays, A. R. & Kogl, M. A. (2007) Neighborhood attachment, social 
capital and political participation: A case study of low and moderate 
income residents of Waterloo, Iowa. Journal of Urban Affairs, 29(2), 
pp. 181–205. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9906.2007.00333.x
Ho, D. C. W., Yau, Y., Law, C. K., Poon, S. W., Yip, H. K. & Liusman, 
E. (2012) Social sustainability in urban renewal: An assessment of 
community aspirations. Urbani izziv 23(1), pp. 125–139. DOI: 10.5379/
urbani-izziv-en-2012-23-01-005
Hočevar, M. (2000) Novi urbani trendi. Prizorišča v mestih – omrežja med 
mesti. Ljubljana, University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Sciences.
Inglehart R. & Welzel, C. (2005) Modernization, cultural change and 
democracy. The human development sequence. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
Internet 1: www.iztepac.net (accessed 18 Feb. 2014).
Jankovič Grobelšek, L. (2012) Private space open to the public as an ad-
dition to the urban public space network. Urbani izziv, 23(1), pp. 101–
111. DOI: 10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2012-23-01-003
Jones, S. P. (2003) Urban regeneration’s poisoned chalice: Is there an 
impasse in (community) participation-based policy? Urban Studies, 
40(3), pp. 581–601. DOI: 10.1080/0042098032000053932
Kavčič, M. (2012) Utemeljena teorija: kratek vpogled v epistemološka 
izhodišča in predstavitev t. i. grounded theory In: Frane, A., et al. (eds.) 
Kvalitativno raziskovanje v interdisciplinarni perspektivi, pp. 163–177. 
Ljubljana, Institute for Developmental and Strategic Analysis.
Kozina, J. (2014) Razporeditev ustvarjalnosti v izbranih občinah Ljubljan‑
ske urbane regije. Ljubljana, Regional Development Agency of Ljubljana 
Urban Region.
Križnik, B. (2008) Kulturni okvir preobrazbe mest, lokalni odzivi na 
globalne izzive (primer Barcelone in Seula). Doctoral thesis. Ljubljana, 
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Sciences.
Križnik, B. (2009) Lokalni odzivi na globalne izzive: kulturni okvir preo‑
brazbe Barcelone in Seula. Ljubljana, University of Ljubljana, Faculty of 
Social Sciences.
Larsen, L., Harlan, L. S., Bolin, B., Hachet, J. E., Hope, D., Kirby, 
A. et al. (2004) Bonding and bridging, understanding the relationship 
between social capital and civic action. Journal of Planning Education 
and Research, 24(1), pp. 64–78. DOI: 10.1177/0739456X04267181
Lavtar, R. (2007) Sodelovanje prebivalcev v slovenskih občinah. Par‑
ticipacija prebivalcev pri odločanju o javnih zadevah na lokalni ravni v 
Sloveniji. Maribor, Institute for Local Government and Public Procure-
ment Maribor.
Lelieveldt, H. (2004) Helping citizens help themselves, neighborhood 
improvement programs and the impact of social networks, trust, and 
norms on neighborhood‑oriented forms of participation. Urban Affairs 
Review, 39(5), pp. 531–551. DOI: 10.1177/1078087404263601
Lepofski, J. & Fraser, J. C. (2003) Building community citizens: Claiming 
the right to place‑making in the city. Urban Studies, 40(1), pp. 127–142. 
DOI: 10.1080/00420980220080201
Márquez, F., (2011) Santiago: Modernisation, segregation and urban 
identities in the twenty‑first century. Urbani izziv, 22(2), pp. 86–97. 
DOI: 10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2011-22-02-002
Marschall, M. J. (2001) Does the shoe fit? Testing models 
of participation for African-American and Latino involve-
ment in local politics. Urban Affairs Review, 37(2), pp. 227–248. 
DOI: 10.1177/10780870122185271
Martinotti, G. (1996) The new social morphology of cities. Management of 
Social Transformations – MOST. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Organization.
Mathers, J., Perry, J. & Jones, S. (2008) Exploring resident (non)participa-
tion in the UK New Deal for Communities Regeneration Programme. 
Urban Studies, 45(3), pp. 591–606. DOI: 10.1177/0042098007087336
May, J. (1996) Globalization and politics of place: Place and identity in 
an inner London neighbourhood. Transactions of the Institute of British 
Geographers, 21(1), pp. 194–215. DOI: 10.2307/622933
Mlinar, Z. (1973) Sociologija lokalnih skupnosti. Ljubljana, Faculty of 
Sociology, Political Science and Journalism.
Molotch, H. (1976) The city as a growth machine: Toward a political 
economy of place, University of California, Santa Barbara. American 
Journal of Sociology, 82(2), pp. 309–335. DOI: 10.1086/226311
Molotch, H. (1988) Strategies and constraints of growth elites. In: Cum-
mings, S. (ed.): Business elites and urban development: Case studies and 
critical perspectives, pp. 25–47. Albany, State University of New York 
Press.
Musso, A. J., Weare, C., Oztas, N. & Loges, W. E. (2006) Neighborhood 
governance reform and networks of community power in Los An-
geles. The American Review of Public Administration 36(1), pp. 79–97. 
DOI: 10.1177/0275074005282586
Peterlin, M. & Cerar, A. (2011) Načrtovanje mesta “od spodaj.” AB Archi‑
tect’s Bulletin, 188–189, pp. 33–39.
Ploštajner, Z., Černič Mali, B. & Sendi, R. (2004) Large housing estates in 
Slovenia. Utrecht, Utrecht University, Faculty of Geosciences.
Putnam, R. (2000) Bowling alone. The collapse and revival of American 
community. New York, Simon & Schuster.
Rebernik, D. (2002) Urbano‑geografsko proučevanje blokovskih‑stano-
vanjskih sosesk kot element urbanističnega planiranja. Dela, 18, 
pp. 463–475.
Sennett, R. (2002) The fall of the public man. New York, Penguin Books.
Sinclair, M. (1977) The public hearing as a participatory device: Evalu-
ation of the IJC experience. In: Sewell, D. W. R. & Coppock, J. T. (eds.) 
Public participation in planning, pp. 125–122. London, John Wiley & 
Sons.
Strassoldo, R. (1990) Lokalna pripadnost in globalna uvrstitev. 
Družboslovne razprave, 7(10), pp. 64–79.
Uršič, M. (2008) Arhitektura bolečine – izkustvo bolečine in uveljav-
ljanje telesu neprilagojenih družbenoprostorskih estetskih praks. 
Družboslovne razprave, 57(34), pp. 59–77.
Van Beckhoven, E. & van Boxmeer, B. (2007) Resident participation In: 
Van Kempen, R., Knorr‑Siedow, T. & Tosics, I. (eds.) Regenerating large 
housing estates in Europe: A guide to better practice, pp. 61–70. Utrecht, 
Utrecht University.
From reaction to initiative: Potentials of contributive participation

Urbani izziv, volume 25, no. 1, 2014
106
Van Kempen, R., Murie, A., Knorr‑Siedow, T. & Tosics, I. (2007) Regener-
acija velikih stanovanjskih sosesk v Evropi. Ljubljana, Urban Planning 
Institute of the Republic of Slovenia.
Wirth, L. (1938) Urbanism as a way of life. The American Journal of 
Sociology, 44(1), pp. 1–24. DOI: 10.1086/217913
Žaucer, T., Cerar, A., Peterlin, M. & Žlender, V. (2010) Participacijska in 
organizacijska izhodišča za celovito urbanistično prenovo v Stari Ljubljani. 
Ljubljana, Institute for Spatial Policies.
Žaucer, T., Uršič, M., Očkerl, P., Marn, T. & Peterlin, M. (2011) Potentials 
of creative regeneration. Ljubljana, Regional Development Agency of 
Ljubljana Urban Region.
Žlender, N. (1987) Fondove hiše: Bivalna kultura prebivalcev železničarske 
kolonije s poudarkom na predvojni dobi. Ljubljana, Edvard Kardelj Uni-
versity of Ljubljana, Faculty of Art, Department of Ethnology.
A. CERAR
