 Global University Rankings and the Mediatization of 
Higher Education 

 Palgrave Studies in Global Higher Education 
 Series Editors:  Roger King , School of Management, University of Bath, UK;  Jenny 
Lee , Centre for the Study of Higher Education, University of Arizona, USA;  Simon 
Marginson , Institute of Education, University of London, UK;  Rajani Naidoo , 
School of Management, University of Bath, UK 
 This series aims to explore the globalization of higher education and the impact 
this has had on education systems around the world, including East Asia, Africa, 
the Middle East, Europe and the US. Analyzing HE systems and policy, this series 
will provide a comprehensive overview of how HE within different nations and/
or regions is responding to the new age of universal mass higher education. 
 Titles include : 
 Michael Dobbins and Christoph Knill 
 HIGHER EDUCATION GOVERNANCE AND POLICY CHANGE IN WESTERN 
EUROPE 
 International Challenges to Historical Institutions 
 Christof Van Mol 
 INTRA-EUROPEAN STUDENT MOBILITY IN INTERNATIONAL HIGHER 
EDUCATION CIRCUITS 
 Europe on the Move 
 Lý Trần, Simon Marginson, Hoàng Ðỗ, Quyên Ðỗ, Trúc Lê, Nhài Nguyễn, Thảo 
Vũ, Thạch Phạm and Hương Nguyễn 
 HIGHER EDUCATION IN VIETNAM 
 Flexibility, Mobility and Practicality in the Global Knowledge Economy 
 Zinaida Fadeeva, Laima Galkute, Clemens Mader and Geoff Scott ( editors ) 
 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND QUALITY ASSURANCE IN HIGHER 
EDUCATION 
 Transformation of Learning and Society 
 Maria Yudkevich, Philip G. Altbach and Laura E. Rumbley ( editors ) 
 ACADEMIC INBREEDING AND MOBILITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 Global Perspectives 
 Palgrave Studies in Global Higher Education 
 Series Standing Order ISBN 978–1–137–34814–2  Hardback 
 ( outside North America only ) 
 You can receive future titles in this series as they are published by placing a standing order. 
Please contact your bookseller or, in case of difficulty, write to us at the address below with 
your name and address, the title of the series and the ISBN quoted above. 
 Customer Services Department, Macmillan Distribution Ltd, Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire RG21 6XS, England 

 Global University Rankings 
and the Mediatization of 
Higher Education 
 Michelle  Stack 
 University of British Columbia, Canada 
Palgrave
macmillan

 © Michelle Stack 2016 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2016 978-1-137-47594-7
 All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
 publication may be made without written permission. 
 No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
 save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
 permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
 Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. 
 Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
 may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
 The author has asserted her right to be identified as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 First published 2016 by 
 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
 registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
 Hampshire RG21 6XS. 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010. 
 Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world. 
 Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
 the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries. 
ISBN 978-1-349-56207-7
ISBN 978-1-137-47595-4 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137475954
 This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
 managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing 
 processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the 
 country of origin. 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
    Stack, Michelle, 1967–
    Global university rankings and the mediatization of higher education / 
Michelle Stack, University of British Columbia, Canada.
      pages cm—(Palgrave studies in global higher education)
    Includes index.
    1. Universities and colleges – Ratings and rankings. 2. Education, Higher – 
Marketing. I. Title.
LB2331.62.S72 2015
378—dc23 
2015025929 

 To David Perry, my spouse, who has stuck with me through 
four degrees, tenure and promotion, and various trials and 
tribulations. Thank you for the “care and feeding of your aca-
demic,” your sense of humor and commitment to a more equi-
table and just world. Thank you also for reminding me, when 
needed, what a privilege it is to be paid to teach and learn from 
committed and brilliant students, work with insightful and 
wise colleagues, and do research I’m passionate about. 

This page intentionally left blank

vii
 Contents 
 Acknowledgments  
 x 
 Glossary  
 xii 
 Introduction 
 
 1 
 
 What does it mean to be ranked? 
 
 3 
 
 What is mediatization? 
 
 4 
 
 Book overview 
 
 5 
 1  The Spectacle of Global Rankings 
 
 8 
 
 Becoming an economic, ranked citizen  
 8 
 
  Adapting/acquiescing to media logics  
 11 
 
  Corporatization and technologies of visibility  
 12 
 
  Closed clubs: a typology of visibility  
 13 
 
   University rankings as index of economic strength 
 
 15 
   Rankings and constructing empires and spheres 
of influence 
 16 
 
   Conclusion  
 18 
 2  Seeing Is Believing: University Websites 
 
 19 
 
 Boundary workers 
 
 21 
 
 Promotion through branded partnerships 
 
 23 
 
 Website politics 
 
 25 
  The intricacies of branding: conveying lifestyle and 
landscape  
 26 
 
 The hyper-real university 
 
 28 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 29 
 3  Who Is Watching the Watchdogs? The Business 
of Rankings  
 31 
 
 The Big Three  
 34 
 
  The academic ranking of world universities (ARWU) 
 
 34 
 
 QS and Times Higher Education 
 
 36 
 
 QS-THES 
 
 36 
 
 QS 
 
 37 
 
  Products and spin-off products 
 
 39 

viii Contents
 
 The Times Higher Education Ranking 
 
 41 
 
 The databases used by the Big Three 
 
 43 
  Movement of people across ranking organizations 
and sectors  
 45 
 
  Representation and equity 
 
 48 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 49 
 4  Visualizing Excellence: The Times Higher 
Education Ranking  
 51 
 
 Website design 
 
 51 
 
 The 2011–2012 THEWUR 
 
 52 
  “Analysis”: popular demand and the rise and fall 
of universities 
 
 52 
 
 Reputation 
 
 55 
 
 Thomson Reuters and its many products, 2011–2012 
 
 56 
 
 Branding THEWUR in 2014–2015 
 
 59 
 
 Learning from Walmart 
 
 62 
 
 Advice for a price 
 
 66 
 
 Implied responses to critiques  
 67 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 68 
 5  Mediatization and University Websites 
 
 70 
  How are university websites similar and different across 
different contexts?  
 71 
 
 What to analyze? 
 
 72 
 
 Canada 
 
 73 
 
   University of Toronto and University of British Columbia 
  74 
 
 China 
 
 76 
 
   Tsinghua University and Peking University homepages 
 76 
 
 India  
 78 
    The Indian Institute of Science and Indian Institute 
of Technology  
 79 
 
 South Africa  
 81 
 
   Wits and University of Cape Town homepages 
 
 82 
 
 The United Kingdom  
 85 
 
  Oxford and Cambridge 
 
 85 
 
 The USA 
 
 87 
 
  Caltech, MIT and Harvard homepages 
 
 88 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 89 
 
 Absences 
 
 91 
 
 Smoothing over the contradictions 
 
 92 

Contents ix
 6  Boundary Workers: University Public Affairs Workers  
 94 
 
 Public affairs as boundary work 
 
 95 
 
 Branding and reputation 
 
 98 
 
 Strategic planning 
 
 103 
 
 Inclusion and exclusion 
 
 105 
 Conclusion 
 
 110 
 
 Branding and boundaries 
 
 112 
 
 Can we go beyond rankings? 
 
 113 
 
 What can be done? 
 
 115 
 
 Connecting research and activism for education  
 117 
 Appendix 1 Research Design, Methodology and 
Researcher’s Perspective 
 
 119 
 Appendix 2 Biographies for Rankers and IREG Advisory 
Board Members 
 
 128 
 Notes 
 129 
 Bibliography 
 
 131 
 Index 
 145 
  

x
Acknowledgments 
 The work of academics is sometimes represented as solitary, but ideas, 
encouragement and mentorship are dependent on the generosity of 
others, and many people have shown me great generosity. The University 
of British Columbia (UBC) where I work is on unceded and ancestral 
lands of the Musqueam First Nation. I am thankful to the Musqueam 
for being so welcoming and generous in educating settlers and visitors 
including me about their territory. 
 Thankfully, many years ago André Mazawi and I started our jobs at 
UBC on the same day. He has been a steadfast friend and exceptional 
mentor and spent many hours discussing this book with me. Thank 
you to Suher Zaher-Mazawi who was the indexer for this book and 
a wonderful friend. Thank you to David Coulter who went over the 
final draft of this manuscript and provided extensive and exceptionally 
helpful assistance. I am also thankful to David for predictably asking 
“what makes for a good and worthwhile education?” It is a foundational 
question that often gets forgotten. I also owe special thanks to Mary 
Lynn Young for her mentorship and friendship, as well as for being a 
great editor and for compassionately prodding me to write this book. I 
would like to thank Deirdre Kelly for her mentorship and for inviting me 
to her class to present the chapter on the Times Higher Education rank-
ings. Quinn Kelly, thank you for your valiant attempts to teach me how 
to draw comics and keep me grounded in a reality that does not involve 
rankings. I am grateful to Jo-Ann Archibald for the profound teachings 
she so generously shares on Indigenous ways of thinking about know-
ledge and responsibility. 
 Thank you to Leticia Pamela Garcia and Yu Guo, who with aplomb 
collected website data and coded it; to Hong Lai (Catherine) for early 
discussions about the ARWU rankings based on her graduating paper 
and to the senior staff members of public affairs who took time out of 
their busy schedules to share their expertise with me. 
 I would like to thank Shauna Butterwick, whom I admire as a scholar 
and activist and who always has such generosity in providing feedback 
and great accessories, too! Just as I was in danger of becoming compla-
cent Hartej Gill arrived. I thank her for her courageous challenges to 
institutional injustice and her invitation to join with others to advocate 
for a better world. Thank you to Michelle Pidgeon, who first invited me 

Acknowledgments xi
to present at a higher education conference on my initial work around 
rankings, which eventually led to this project. 
 I would like to thank Don Fisher for always providing encouragement 
and places to present my work for feedback, in particular UBC’s Center 
for Higher Education and Training; Chris Gratham, doctoral student and 
also a professor, for providing the impetus to read more about HE and 
markets – he also got me thinking about the metaphor of choreography 
in understanding policy; and Ali Abdi, for his helpful feedback on my 
concluding chapter. 
 Thank you to Amy Benson Brown, an amazing editor, for helping me 
figure out what I really wanted to say in this book; to Alison Mustard, an 
amazingly efficient and accurate transcriptionist; to Andrew James and 
Eleanor Christie from Palgrave Macmillan for approaching me to write 
a book and for keeping me on track to complete this book in a timely 
manner. 
 Thank you to Shan Hongxia for joining me on a writing retreat and 
for her generosity in sharing ideas, food and humor; I look forward to 
having more time for walks and tea. I would also like to thank Tamam, 
Sobhi, Kenza and Maleekah for their friendship and for the delicious 
creation of my favorite Vancouver restaurant – Tamam Fine Palestinian 
Restaurant. 
 Thank you to Frank and Danse Williams for sharing their talents as 
carvers and reminding me, as Danse says, “In my culture if you stop 
learning you are dead”. 
 Special thanks to Candis Callison and Kathryn Gretsinger for their 
thought-provoking conversations about communicating academic 
research to diverse audiences. 
 Last but least, thank you to Claire Theaker-Brown, Maureen and Diane 
Brown for being a long-standing, and at times long-suffering, fabulous 
cheerleading squad. I am grateful to my mother, Yvette Stack, for encour-
aging me to be skeptical of things that seemed too good to be true and 
to do my own research. 
 I of course take all responsibility for any errors in the following work .
 

xii
 Glossary 
 ARWU 
 Academic Ranking of World Universities, also called 
the Shanghai Ranking. It was the first of the “Big Three 
rankings.” 
The Big Three refers to the ARWU, QS and THEWUR rankings. 
 BRICS 
 Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. THEWUR and 
QS developed a separate BRICS ranking. 
Elsevier owns Scopus, ScienceDirect, and a number of journals. 
 HEI 
 Higher Educational Institutions 
 IREG 
 International Ranking Expert Group – was formed to 
evaluate and certify rankings. The IREG advisory includes 
representatives from major rankings, academics and 
consultants . 
 ISI 
 Institute for Scientific Information was a citation manage-
ment system developed by Eugene Garfield in the 1960s. It 
was bought by Thomson in 1992 and became Thomson ISI; 
now it is called the Web of Science. It is part of Thomson 
Reuters’ suite of intellectual property and business products. 
 QS 
 Quacquarelli Symonds was founded in 1990. Nunzio 
Quacquarelli is the managing director of QS. The company 
provides software services to universities for monitoring 
and benchmarking, as well as consulting services; they 
have a number of products related to business education, 
including a world MBA tour. 
 Scopus 
 Owned by Elsevier, this is a large citation index used for 2014–
2015 Times Higher Education ranking and other rankings. 
 Shanghai Consultancy is associated with the ARWU ranking. 
 THES 
 The Times Higher Education Supplement is owned by TES. 
 THEWUR  The Times Higher Education World University Rankings, 
sometimes referred to as THE ranking or THES ranking. 
 TPG  Capital owns TES and has $70.2 billion of capital under its 
management. (1) 

Glossary xiii
TSL Education Group Ltd owns TES Connect, THEWUR. http://www.
bloomberg.com/profiles/companies/8393052Z:LN-tsl-education-
group-ltd.
 WOS 
 Web of Science, previously called Web of Knowledge. It 
is owned by Thomson Reuters and is a citation indexing 
service; it continues to be used by a number of rankings to 
determine the research productivity ranking of universities. 
 
