©  Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 
(2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Section Articles
How institutions moderate the effectiveness  
of regional policy: A framework and research  
agenda
Johannes Glückler*, Regina Lenz*
Abstract: This paper develops a research agenda toward the systematic in-
clusion of institutions into the analysis of regional policy effectiveness. Departing 
from the commonly shared observation that formal rules of regulation and policies 
not always lead to the intended outcomes, we argue that institutions are crucial 
mediators of the workings of regulation and regional policies in specific geograph-
ical contexts. By defining institutions as stable patterns of interactions based on 
legitimate mutual expectations (Bathelt and Glückler, 2014), we open analytical 
scope for analyzing the multiple relations between regulated rules and regular so-
cial practice. Hence, we build on Helmke and Levitsky’s (2004) conception of the 
interdependencies between regulation and institutions, and extend their heuristic 
into a dynamic framework at the regional scale on how to pursue what we call 
institutional policy-making.
JEL Classification: O17; P48; R58; Z18.
Keywords: Institutions; regional development; institutional policy-making; rela-
tional economic geography; policy-effectiveness.
Resumen: El artículo desarrolla una agenda de investigación orientada a la 
inclusión sistemática de las instituciones en el análisis de la efectividad de la 
política regional. A partir de una observación comúnmente compartida de que 
las reglas formales de regulación y las políticas no siempre conducen a lograr los 
resultados perseguidos, se argumenta que las instituciones constituyen media-
dores cruciales de los trabajos de regulación y de política regional en contextos 
geográficos específicos. A partir de definir las instituciones como estructuras es-
tables de interacciones basadas en las mutuas expectativas legitimizadas (Bathelt 
y Gluckler, 2014), se abre un campo analítico para analizar las múltiples relacio-
nes entre reglas reguladas y prácticas sociales regulares. A partir de ello y sobre 
la concepción de Helmke y Levitsky (2004) sobre las interdependencias entre 
255
*  Economic Geography Group, Institute of Geography, Heidelberg University, Germany.
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to the guest editor of this special issue, Juan-Ramón Cuadrado-
Roura, as well as to Henry Farrell, Michael Handke, Kevin Morgan, José-Luis Sánchez-Hernández and 
two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions on earlier versions of the manuscript.

256  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
regulación e instituciones se extiende su contenido en un marco dinámico a es-
cala regional sobre cómo llevar a cabo lo que nosotros llamamos policy-making 
institucional.
Clasificación JEL: O17; P48; R58; Z18.
Palabras clave: instituciones; desarrollo regional; policy-making institucional; 
geografía económica relacional; eficiencia de las políticas.
1.  Introduction
The persistence of regional disparities in the structure and dynamics of economic 
development, as well as the limited transferability of allegedly successful growth 
models have been central challenges for theories of regional economic development. 
One major finding has been the realization that regional disparities in growth can nei-
ther be fully explained by external incentives nor by endogenous, knowledge-based 
approaches, exclusively (Rodríguez-Pose, 2013). Instead, more and more significance 
is being attributed to the impact of social institutions on economic development. This 
insight has been encouraging extensive research over the last 20 years, analyzing 
the conditions for institutions, as well as their effects. A veritable institutional turn 
(Martin, 2000) has become preeminent in many disciplines of the social sciences, 
such as in economic geography (Storper, 1997; Gertler, 2010; Storper, 2011; Rodrí-
guez-Pose, 2013), economics (Williamson, 1985; Hall and Jones, 1999; Rodrik et 
al., 2004; Acemoglu et al., 2014), organization science (Barley, 1990; Whitley, 1992; 
Zilber, 2011) and political science (March and Olsen, 1984; Helmke and Levitsky, 
2004; Farrell, forth.). 
The proliferation of research on institutions across these and other disciplines 
has led to a considerable polysemy of the meaning of the term «institution». This 
diversity implies several challenges for institutional research more generally, and 
for regional research, in particular (Colyvas and Powell, 2006; Bathelt and Glückler, 
2014). On the one hand, advances in our understanding of the empirical antecedents 
and consequences of institutions are closely tight to the very concept of institution 
and thus tend to be conflated when associated with only either implicit or all-en-
compassing concepts of institutions. The heterogeneous use of the concept, in turn, 
has made it arduously difficult to integrate the findings into a coherent institutional 
framework. On the other hand, the precise roles of institutions in regional develop-
ment are still little understood. Though often celebrated as the sine-qua-non factors 
making a difference for regional trajectories, institutions have hardly been unpacked 
from the black box of regional analysis. Instead, their importance is often inferred 
from an increasing inappropriateness of traditional explanations for regional devel-
opment. As long as institutions are hidden in the residual factor of regional growth 
equations (Rodríguez-Pose, 2013), we have not yet understood how institutions are 
actually related to both the effects on regional development and to the effectiveness 
of regulation and regional policy. 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  257
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
This paper both proposes a framework and a research agenda that include institu-
tions and institutional dynamics into the analysis of regional policy effectiveness. We 
argue that institutions are crucial mediators of the workings of regulation and regional 
policies in specific regional contexts. Thus, institutions can be the answer to the ques-
tion, why the formal rules of regulation and policies not always lead to the intended out-
comes. Building on a relational perspective (Bathelt and Glückler, 2011), we first give 
a short review of institutional research in various disciplines. We then briefly review 
the predominant concepts of institutions and define institutions as stable patterns of 
interaction based on legitimate mutual expectations (Bathelt and Glückler, 2014). This 
conception opens analytical scope for studying the interdependencies between regula-
tion and institutions for which we draw on the framework by Helmke and Levistky 
(2004). In extension of their approach, we adopt a dynamic and territorial perspective to 
develop a framework of how to elaborate on what we call institutional policy-making.
2.  Taking stock of institutional research 
There is neither place nor is it the purpose of this paper to offer a comprehensive 
appraisal of the vast body of research on the relation between institutions and econom-
ic development. Instead, we would like to offer a perspective of major commonalities 
within and differences between two broad approaches, which we distinguish according 
to whether research focuses on the antecedents or outcomes of institutions. Research 
that focuses on the social and economic effects of institutions contributes to what 
we call institutional theories, whereas research focusing on how institutions emerge, 
change and are sustained adds to what we define as theories of institutions (Table 1):
Table 1.  Analytic approaches in institutional research
Antecedent
Outcome
Non-institutional
Institutional
Non-institutional
Non-institutional theory
Theory of institutions  
(2.2)
Institutional
Institutional theory (2.1)
Institutional theory  
of institutions (2.2)
2.1.  Institutional Theories
Institutional theories focus on the social and economic effects of institutions 
which are seen as conditioning frames for social actions, thereby potentially contrib-
uting to regional path dependencies (Martin and Sunley, 2006). Economics, political 
science and economic geography are prominent disciplines within this approach, see-
ing institutions mostly as either the rules or players of the game (North, 1990). A key 
interest is to determine «good institutions» that facilitate socio-economic develop-
ment in order to generalize them into action models. While facing the difficulty of op-

258  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
erationalizing and measuring institutions adequately (Robinson, 2013; Shirley, 2013; 
Voigt, 2013), such studies are often based on quantitative and comparative research 
designs (Farole et al., 2011) that analyze the enabling or constraining effects of dif-
ferences in rules and regulations. They suggest, for instance, that a country’s growth 
and development depend on the existence of property rights (Galiani and Schargrod-
sky, 2010; Acemoglu et al., 2014), rule of law (Duquet et al., 2014), or specific mech-
anisms of allocation and distribution (Di Tella et al., 2007), labor market conditions 
and political systems (Glaeser et al., 2004). Research on varieties of capitalism (Hall 
and Soskice, 2001; Streeck and Thelen, 2005; Hall and Thelen, 2009), on national 
innovation systems (Cooke et al., 1997; Morgan, 2004; Asheim and Gertler, 2006), 
and on social systems of production (Hollingsworth and Boyer, 1997; Hollingsworth 
and Müller, 2002) is equally concerned with the effects of institutional conditions on 
economic outcomes. Assuming a systemic character, these approaches try to include 
“all parts and aspects of the economic structure and the institutional set-up affecting 
learning, searching, exploring” (Lundvall, 1992: 12).
Not only on the national, but also on the regional and urban levels, this stream 
of research investigates into what kinds of institutional arrangements facilitate eco-
nomic development (Amin, 1999; Huggins, 2016), i.e. the «institutional quality» 
needed (Revilla Diez et al., 2016). Apparently objective measures such as the Euro-
pean Quality of Government Index are used, for instance, to quantify and compare 
the perceived quality of government at the regional level within the European Union, 
to map its interregional variation (Nifo and Vecchione, 2013; Charron et al., 2014, 
2015), and its effects on economic prosperity.
Given its particular research motivation, institutional theory is inherently teleological: 
it focuses predominantly on the effects of institutional variables on social and economic 
outcomes and seeks to identify «good» institutions that are conducive for economic pros-
perity. This is not a problem per se, but it involves at least two challenges. First, due to the 
instrumental logic underlying the analysis of institutional effects on economic growth, 
the meaningful conceptualization of institutions is sometimes sacrificed in favor of «styl-
ized facts» (Clark, 1998) and tangible quantitative assessments. Examples are abundant: 
surveys on trust in strangers and the strength of norms of civic cooperation (Knack and 
Keefer, 1997), ratings of perceived quality of government (Nifo and Vecchione, 2013), 
reported fear of failure in entrepreneurship (Vaillant and Lafuente, 2007), or the number 
of voluntary organizations per inhabitant (Laursen et al., 2012). Second, even once seem-
ingly «good institutions» are identified, institutional theories have not much to say about 
how institutions are actually built or reproduced in other contexts. This theoretical limita-
tion, requires an additional body of research which explores the processes of emergence, 
creation, maintenance and change of institutions.
2.2.  Theories of Institutions
Instead of focusing on their effects, theories of institutions treat institutions as the 
dependent variable themselves. They seek to understand the conditions and processes 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  259
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
of their emergence, change or maintenance. In contrast to earlier studies on the dif-
fusion of institutions (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; Tolbert and Zucker, 1983) and on 
external shocks as triggers of institutional change —such as environmental changes, 
the introduction of new laws, incentives or technologies (Barley, 1990; D’Aunno et 
al., 2000; Ahmadjian and Robinson, 2001)— more recent studies focus on the endog-
enous quality of institutional change by attributing greater influence to actors, like the 
ability to either reproduce or modify the institutional bases that at the same time condi-
tion their actions (Seo and Creed, 2002; Lounsbury and Crumley, 2007). This mutual 
influence of structure and individual or collective, as well as intended or unintended 
agency is expressed and analyzed, for example, by the institutional work and institu-
tional logics approaches (Thornton et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2013; Zilber, 2013).
Research in the fields of organization studies (Munir and Phillips, 2005; Sudda-
by and Greenwood, 2009), economic history (Greif, 1993), and some approaches 
to game theory (Greif and Laitin, 2004; Aoki, 2007) have shown that institutional 
change can happen unintentionally (Smets et al., 2012) or be the result of the pur-
poseful action of «institutional entrepreneurs» (DiMaggio, 1988; Maguire, et al., 
2004; Crouch, 2005; Munir and Phillips, 2005). Depending on the context, the key 
actors of institutional change can be located in the center (Phillips and Zuckerman, 
2001; Greenwood and Suddaby, 2006) or in the periphery of an organizational field 
(Leblebici et al., 1991; Haveman and Rao, 1997; Kraatz and Moore, 2002; Maguire 
et al., 2004; Glückler, 2014) which can itself be either emerging or already estab-
lished (Greenwood and Suddaby, 2006). 
Theories of institutions are often non-teleological, and instead put much emphasis 
on theorizing the quality of institutions and the manifold processes of institutionaliza-
tion in carefully observed contexts of micro-social practice. Sometimes, however, the 
often qualitative and case study-based research leads to rather fuzzy and all-inclusive 
definitions of institutions. At least two challenges emerge from this stream of research: 
First, although the advances in understanding processes of institutional change have 
been substantial, there is still much to be learned about the mechanisms conducing this 
change, the role that stakeholders take in it and the contingent conditions that enable 
or constrain the operation of these mechanisms. Secondly, since the majority of re-
search on theories of institutions has been conducted outside geography, the geograph-
ical dimension of institutionalization has been overly neglected: To what extent are 
institutions spatially bound and, if so, what are the mechanisms that lead to regionally 
specific institutions as well as to interregional differences in institutional practices?
A preliminary conclusion of these two lines of research points to some research 
gaps and the need for research in at least three directions: First, as has been shown 
in the brief review above, institutional theories as well as theories of institutions are 
incomplete with regard to an endogenous understanding of how institutions emerge, 
sustain and change as well as how they affect related institutional and economic out-
comes. An inclusive and endogenous theory of institutional change will thus have to 
integrate knowledge about the antecedents and consequences of institutions into what 
we define as «institutional theories of institutions» (Table 1). This task, however, is 
not at the focus of this article and must be left to future research. 

260  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Secondly, and as a prerequisite for such a theoretical endeavor, any institutional 
approach needs to be explicit and sufficiently precise about its very concept of insti-
tution to make meaningful contributions to empirical analysis and normative prac-
tice. Only when clearly defined and conceptually operated for empirical observation 
can diverse institutional approaches compare and connect their findings with a larger 
institutional framework (Bathelt and Glückler, 2014). In the next section, we first ap-
praise two well-established uses of the term institution before we turn to an alterna-
tive, relational understanding of institutions. We endorse a relational perspective to 
adopt an understanding of institutions as legitimate mutual expectations enacted in 
stable patterns of social interactions. 
Thirdly, and at the heart of the research agenda outlined in this article, a relational 
perspective distinguishes between institutions on the one hand and the realm of pre-
scriptive rules and regulation on the other. This invites for a more explicit theoriza-
tion of the moderating role of institutions on the effectiveness of regulation and also 
regional policy-making. The framework that we develop hereafter is dedicated to the 
systematic analysis of the manifold interdependencies between regulation and insti-
tutions in search of unpacking the contextual nature of policy fit and failure (Bathelt, 
2006; Bathelt and Glückler, 2011; Glückler and Bathelt, 2017). Our research agen-
da, then, aims to offer a framework for analyzing the interaction of regulation (and 
policy-effectiveness) and institutions that invites and inspires future research toward 
concepts of institutional policy-making.
3.  Institutions characterize how the game is actually played 
3.1.  Organizations: Players of the game
Many studies have employed institutions to denote the particular role of orga-
nizations in economic development, for example trade associations, public bod-
ies, research facilities, or political organizations (Evans, 1985; Keating, 2001; 
Greco, 2004; Jones and Gordon, 2004; Goodwin et al., 2005). This perspective 
has been helpful to recognize the important role that organizations play in pro-
curing services which would otherwise be absent and which may be useful in 
facilitating cooperation, compliant behavior, rule of law, charity, solidarity, etc. 
The perspective of institutions as organizations can be found in studies of devel-
opment and international relations, as well as at the regional level. Approaches 
such as «institutional thickness» (Amin and Thrift, 1995) and the «associational 
economy» (Cooke and Morgan, 1998) have elaborated on the beneficial effects of 
connectedness, close collaboration and on the support facilitated by intermedi-
ary organizations such as business associations, public research organizations, 
vocational schools, chambers of commerce, and public authorities. However, an 
excessive creation of intermediary organizational entities may raise the necessary 
effort to coordinate them appropriately, and to try to avoid parallel structures, and 
unhealthy competition among them (Magro et al., 2014; Morgan, 2016). We argue 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  261
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
that organizations should not be conflated with institutions (Bathelt and Glückler, 
2014) because the very decisions and actions of organizations are grounded on 
institutions themselves. In line with North (1990), we argue that organizations 
are collective actors or players of the game whose action is itself structured by 
institutions.
3.2.  Regulation: Rules of the game
Much of the empirical work done in institutional theory refers to institutions as 
the rules of the game (North, 1990), i.e. in the sense of consciously built formal or 
prescriptive rules, e.g. property rights, contracts, or patent laws (Acemoglu et al., 
2006; Huggins, 2016). However, as decades of development cooperation and well-
intended reforms can tell, bringing different regions to the same level of develop-
ment cannot simply be done by introducing «good» institutions, i.e. supposedly 
beneficial laws and regulations. Research in regional governance, for instance, 
laments the lack of enterprise cooperation despite of years of incentivizing this 
kind of networking (Cooke and Morgan, 1998; Parrilli et al., 2010). Regulatory 
incentives to cooperate need not lead to the institutionalization of cooperation in 
real innovation behavior. In fact, a rule that is introduced on the national level can 
lead to very different outcomes at sub-national levels, depending on what kinds of 
regional institutions it interacts with. Hence, regulation and institutionalized in-
teraction are two different analytical concepts. Therefore, we distinguish between 
prescriptive rules and institutions. Often, the perspective of institutions as regula-
tion includes both formal and informal components (North, 1990; Rodríguez-Pose 
and Storper, 2006; Gertler, 2010). In doing so, this literature explicitly refers to 
habits, norms and conventions as informal institutions because they are unwrit-
ten, socially shared regularities in social realms, and deviance implies sanctions 
outside the «official» channels, for example through social ostracism and disap-
proval (Salais and Storper 1992; Farrell and Knight, 2003; Helmke and Levitsky, 
2004). While we agree that the latter are institutions, we find it inconsistent to treat 
prescriptive rules (regulation) as enacted institutions. The actions of individual or 
collective actors may or may not follow prescriptive rules, despite the risk of sanc-
tions. Instead, practices are said to be institutionalized if they are widely accepted 
and enacted by actors in specific situations. Formal rules and regulation may influ-
ence the institutionalization of such practices, but they leave scope of action, and 
may even be meaningless with regard to daily practice. Hence, studying the codi-
fied, formal regulation to us means studying «not-yet institutions» (Bathelt and 
Glückler, 2014).
3.3.  Stable interaction orders: How the game is actually played
In contrast to the players (organizations) and the rules (regulation) of the game, 
we view institutions as how the game is actually played differently in different con-

262  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
texts, but consistently across recurring situations. Rather than being the prescrip-
tive rules which may or may not be put into practice, institutions are the relatively 
stable patterns of interaction which are based on legitimate and mutual expectations 
across similar social contexts (Bathelt and Glückler, 2014). Hence, rather than being 
regulated prescriptions codified on paper, institutions are regular patterns of real in-
teraction. The defining prerequisites of an institution —namely the mutually shared 
expectations about legitimate alternatives for interaction which are guaranteed by 
sanctions in case of deviance— resonate, among others, with the French approach 
of the économie des conventions, where conventions are defined as practices that are 
bound together through mutual expectations (Storper and Salais, 1997; Sánchez et 
al., 2010).
With regard to economic development, institutions can be understood as untraded 
interdependencies (Storper, 1997). Due to their contextual emergence they are not 
tradable, they can neither be bought nor licensed —as opposed to tangible assets, 
financial capital or codified knowledge. Despite their crucial role in hindering or 
facilitating innovation and regional growth, institutions are not imitable (Asheim and 
Gertler, 2006) and therefore difficult to transfer into other contexts (Dunford et al., 
2016). Institutions, thus, are of priceless value or a great burden for social and re-
gional contexts. 
This also shows that institutions are context-specific, and one general institu-
tional blueprint, for example cooperation, can become manifest in rather different 
legitimate interaction orders in different contexts (Barley, 1990), or in different 
regions within the same national context. Actors have an implicit knowledge about 
these behavioral expectations, even when not currently exerting them (Hodgson, 
2006). However, institutions can only be observed either in their transformation 
into action in specific situations (Jones and Murphy, 2010) or in the explicit omis-
sion of observable practice. For example, the agreement not to attract qualified staff 
from competitors or other firms in spatial vicinity is characterized by the deliberate 
absence of action.
Now that institutions are defined as stable patterns of interaction in real social 
contexts, the concept serves as a moderator between the micro level of social in-
teraction and the macro level of normative orders (Jessop, 2001). Both levels af-
fect the formation and change of institutions while at the same time being affected 
by them. Institutions are continuously transformed in simultaneous processes of 
downward and upward causation (Bathelt and Glückler, 2014): At the micro lev-
el, continuous social interaction reproduces existing institutional patterns. At the 
same time, this everyday practice is itself a source of deviant behavior that may 
transform into legitimate new institutions when repeated in similar situations and 
becoming increasingly accepted (Hall and Thelen, 2009). This recursive loop of 
practices reproducing existing institutions while at the same time challenging them 
through deviant practices is a source of upward causation. At the macro level, in 
turn, the imposition of prescriptive rules in the form of codified laws, directives, 
norms, codes of conduct etc. affects institutions in a contingent process of down-
ward causation (Figure 1). 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  263
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Figure 1.  The intermediate role of institutions in policy-making
Although policies are developed on purpose either to protect or change existing 
behavior, their effect on actual social practices is moderated by existing institutional 
patterns in each social context. Rules and regulations, thus, come to be used in ways 
other than intended or designed originally (Thelen, 2004; Streeck and Thelen, 2005). 
This line of argument is supported by comparative empirical research that illustrates 
how the convergence of formal policies, such as the regulation of money laundry in 
the U.S. and the Netherlands, leads to very different and even opposite effects in ob-
served social practice (Unger and van Waarden, 2009). While both regulation and the 
practice of organizations or individual actors can be empirically observed (Figure 1, 
dotted boxes), institutions remain an abstract phenomenon. Institutions can only be 
known through the observation of repeated patterns of interaction in similar situa-
tions and are thus read out of practice. Just as a grammar explicates the regularities 
of speech do institutions describe the legitimate patterns of social interaction (Gid-
dens, 1984).
As long as the inimitability of institutions and the contingency of their effects 
in other contexts holds true, researchers in regional development will need to under-
stand the processes of evolving, creating, maintaining, and transforming institutions 
in regional context. Moreover, it will be necessary to theorize the relation between 
institutions and new, exogenous rules introduced into institutional contexts by means 
of regulation and regional policies. It is here where we identify a major research gap: 
Since policies do not always have the intended social outcomes (e.g. Morgan, 2016), 
we argue that institutions moderate the effects of regulation on social practice and 
economic outcomes, and that any policy-making will be contingent on its institution-
al fitness in a specific regional context (Bathelt, 2006; Glückler and Bathelt, 2017). In 
what follows, we will outline an analytical framework on how to unpack the mutual 
effects and interrelatedness of institutions and regulation. This framework is meant to 
open a research agenda that includes institutions into the analysis of regional policy-

264  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
making and policy-effectiveness in order to be able to develop an «institutional» 
policy making that aims at either building on or changing not only behavioral prac-
tices, but their underlying institutional foundation (see Figure 1).
4.  The relation between institutions and regulation
Now that regulation and institutions have been conceptually distinguished, there 
is analytical scope for the analysis of the ways in which they mutually affect each 
other. The theoretical variety of interactive effects between regulation and institu-
tions ranges between convergent and divergent effects on social practice, and offers 
an important starting point for the conception of institutional policy-making. In what 
follows, we build on the basic idea of Helmke and Levitsky (2004) to systematically 
consider the ways in which regulation and institutions affect each other. In their 
article, Helmke and Levitsky (2004) explore the relationship between formal institu-
tions (i.e. formal rules) on the one hand, and informal institutions on the other, which 
they define as “socially shared rules, usually unwritten, that are created, communi-
cated, and enforced outside of ofﬁcially sanctioned channels” (Helmke and Levitsky, 
2004: 727). Their typology defines four kinds of informal institutions depending 
on whether formal institutions are enforced effectively or ineffectively and whether 
their interactions with informal institutions produce convergent or divergent social 
outcomes. Hence, they distinguish complementary, accommodating, substitutive 
and, finally, competing informal institutions (Table 2) and illustrate corresponding 
empirical cases at the level of national politics such as electoral regulations and 
practices.
Table 2.  Typology of informal institutions (Helmke and Levitsky, 2004: 728)
Outcomes
Effective formal institutions
Ineffective formal institutions
Convergent
Complementary
Substitutive
Divergent
Accommodating
Competing
Though being helpful for the original distinction between informal and formal in-
stitutions and the outcomes of their various interactions, this typology needs to be re-
vised and extended to serve as an appropriate framework for the regional analysis of 
institutional policy-making (Figure 2). According to the relational approach and the 
concept of institution as a stable pattern of interactions adopted here, we first revise 
the terminology and replace informal institutions with the term institution and formal 
institution with the term regulation. The effectiveness of rule-making (regulation) is 
linked to its degree of enforcement, i.e. the resources and efforts involved in monitor-
ing and sanctioning rule infringement. As one aspect of incentivizing and support-
ing economic development by public bodies, we include policies in the concept of 
regulation. Second, we extend Helmke and Levitsky’s (2004) typology by adding an 
explicitly dynamic perspective. As we have argued already above (Figure 1), not only 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  265
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
prescriptive rules have an effect on people’s behavior, but, vice versa, institutions 
also shape the performance of regulation and may thus limit, strengthen or mediate 
its effects to various degrees (Simmie et al., 2014). For designing and evaluating 
policies and regulations, it is crucially important to distinguish whether policy inter-
ventions (new rules) are made in response to given institutions or whether and how 
institutions change or emerge in response to incumbent regulations. Consequently, 
our framework distinguishes two dynamic sequences for each of the four interactions 
between institutions and regulation, depending on whether (effective or ineffective) 
regulation responds to an existing set of (convergent or divergent) institutions or, vice 
versa, whether an institution emerges in response to a given regulation. In sum, we 
define four types of interactions between institutions and regulation, where for each 
interaction we further distinguish the temporal sequence of interaction (Figure 2). In 
what follows we empirically seek to scale the framework down to the level of regions 
as a subnational territorial scale, and present illustrative case examples for each of the 
subtypes of our extended framework.
Figure 2.  A dynamic perspective on the interactions of regulation and institution
Rule-
substituting
institution
Rule-
competing
institution
Rule-
reinforcing
institution
Institution-
reinforcing
rule
Institution-
circumventing
rule
Enforced rule
REINFORCEMENT
SUBSTITUTION
CIRCUMVENTION
COMPETITION
Non-enforced rule
Convergent
Divergent
Institution
Regulation
(Institution-
substituting
rule)
Institution-
competing
rule
Rule-
circumventing
institution
4.1.  Reinforcement
The first relation is one of mutual reinforcement. In this case, effectively enforced 
regulation is supported by institutions which help reproduce formal rules in real so-
cial practice. Working toward the same goals, institutions do not only exist in parallel 
to regulation, but can fill in gaps or loopholes left by regulation or not covered by 

266  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
policies without violating their overall goal (Helmke and Levitsky, 2004). Depending 
on the direction of the influence, we distinguish between two cases: Rule-reinforcing 
institutions and institution-reinforcing rules.
An institution-reinforcing rule means that an effective rule is introduced to an 
already existing set of institutions aiming for the same results, thus «formalizing» the 
institutions. This can be seen, for example, in the comparison between the willing-
ness of Dutch and US American firms to take the risk of innovating (van Waarden 
2001). Despite the fact that the legal system in the Netherlands is more effective in 
reducing uncertainty for entrepreneurs, US firms are more likely to take risks. Van 
Waarden (2001) concludes that this can only be explained if one acknowledges that 
risk-averse cultures also produce more risk-averse entrepreneurs and give themselves 
more uncertainty-reducing policies. 
Another example of how existing institutions on the regional level can facilitate 
regulation can be seen with regard to the introduction of the cluster policy in the 
Spanish Basque Country. Having a legacy of collective organization in cooperatives 
(OECD, 2007), and being highly specialized in a few main industrial sectors, as well 
as strongly relying on its endogenous efforts for lack of investment from abroad 
(Morgan, 2016), the Basque Country was more receptive than other regions to the 
successful introduction of cluster policies, and more recently, to smart specialization 
strategies (OECD, 2007; Aranguren et al., 2016).
The reverse, rule-reinforcing institutions, can be seen in the case of the changed 
attitudes toward sexual harassment at the work place since the corresponding anti-
discrimination law was passed in Iowa in 1964. Here, introducing and enforcing a 
rule has changed attitudes and has created new supporting institutions. As Bilz and 
Nadler (2014) point out, «citizens’ expectations» about how they are entitled to be 
treated at work have clearly changed over the last three decades, ever since courts be-
gan recognizing sexual harassment as discrimination” (Bilz and Nadler, 2014: 243). 
Specifically, their case shows public outcry after a court had approved the dismissal 
of a female employee because of the jealousy of her boss’ wife. While this kind of 
behavior would have been tolerated or accepted some decades ago, people today are 
much more sensitive toward this topic and expect to be treated equally and profes-
sionally.
By being aware of, and taking into account positive local conditions, policies can 
strengthen already existing regional competences and cumulatively reinforce path-
dependencies. By acting in accordance with already existing legitimate behavioral 
expectations, a policy becomes an institutional policy (Figure 1).
4.2.  Circumvention
A second theoretical interdependence is to be identified if enforced regulation co-
exists with divergent institutions. This happens either when an effective rule is made 
against an existing institution, or when a divergent institution emerges in response to 
an enforced rule. The latter is a case of rule-circumventing institutions, i.e. behavior 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  267
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
that is incentivized by rules but that alters their effects. These institutions are favored 
and enacted by actors who dislike the outcomes of regulation or policies, but feel 
unable to change them. They are fostered by lax enforcement of rules and policies, 
which helps to reconcile different interests. Exceptions are tolerated in order to keep 
up the intended outcome as a whole. By finding a way to modify their effects, actors 
might even help to perpetuate given policies (Helmke and Levitsky, 2004).
An example of this can be seen at the level of a single organization in the study 
of Bensman and Gerver (1963) about the use of a forbidden tool for wing assembly 
—the tap— at an air plane factory in New York. The tap is a hard steel screw that 
when inserted into a nut can cut new threads over the original threads of the nut. In 
the case of the air plane factory, “[t]he use of the tap is the most serious crime of 
workmanship conceivable in the plant. A worker can be summarily fired for merely 
possessing a tap” (Bensman and Gerver, 1963: 590). Despite these explicit rules, 
however, the majority of workers did possess and use the tap in their daily work. If 
these rule violations were detected, they were not sanctioned; rather, different levels 
of authorities such as the foremen, the plant quality and Air Force inspectors, knew 
about the practice of using the tap and unofficially tolerated it for the sake of getting 
the work done in time and according to the business targets. In addition, the differ-
ent ranks and positions had institutionalized interaction orders that both purposively 
helped oversee the use of the tap (what you don’t know won’t hurt you) and that 
educated workers on how and when to use the tap appropriately. Such an interaction 
order included all status groups in the firm and thus enabled mutually legitimate 
expectations about how to jointly get the job done, irrespective of corporate law. 
It remains a normative question whether rule-circumventing institutions are evalu-
ated as sources of policy failure or sometimes as acceptable deviance in pursuit of 
a consistent higher goal, in the case of Bensman and Gerver (1963): to get the job 
done adequately. 
The reverse case, an enforced rule made against a divergent institution, can be 
seen in the case of sanctioning anti-poaching agreements between competitors of 
certain industry branches. These institution-circumventing rules are characterized 
by regulation that goes against certain institutions by effectively enforcing the rules 
when detecting deviant behavior. In 2010, for example, the US Department of Justice 
opened a case against high-tech companies because of their illegal agreement to not 
recruit each others’ employees (Kirchgaessner and Menn, 2010). Despite violating 
antitrust laws and going against both free competition and employees’ job and salary 
opportunities (Lindsay and Santon, 2012), these firms had created divergent institu-
tions (illegal, but legitimate between them) trying to circumvent these rules. Contrary 
to institution-competing rules (see below, 4.4), however, the rules were effectively 
enforced once the institutions were discovered, and anti-poaching agreements were 
stopped: Settlement agreements were put in place for five years prohibiting compa-
nies “from engaging in anticompetitive no solicitation agreements” and fees had to 
be paid (U.S. Department of Justice, 2010). 
Since regulation often leaves loopholes and is never fully complete, the above 
cases demonstrate that this does not necessarily have to be a bad thing as long as the 

268  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
circumventing institutions work toward the same goals and lead to their better ac-
complishment. Such an understanding resonates with what Unger and van Waarden 
(2009) advocate as «risk-based regulation»: Deviation from the strict sense of the 
rule may be seen as breaking codified rules, yet the actual intentions and social out-
comes of deviant practice may well comply with the higher common goal. An institu-
tional policy-understanding, thus, would grant some scope for interpretation on how 
regulated norms are actually achieved in specific contexts.
4.3.  Substitution
If regulation is missing or not properly enforced, we can observe institutions 
developing in response to an ineffective or absent rule, in our terminology rule-sub-
stituting institutions. Aiming for the same goal, institutions can sometimes achieve 
what regulation or policies fail to do (Helmke and Levitsky, 2004). In China, for 
instance, the institution of guanxi substitutes for an unstable legal and regulatory 
support (Xin and Pearce, 1996). Making personal connections and trusting on part-
ners is more important for doing business than open competition; it is not regarded 
negatively, but rather as a sign of being loyal, especially since governmental support 
is lacking.
Individual actors or whole industries might even have incentives to regu-
late themselves in order to preempt governmental regulation, for example in the 
form of codes of conduct, «voluntary environmental agreements» of industries, 
or environmental performance standards (Heritier and Eckert, 2008). This kind 
of legitimate institution-building in a local economy can be seen, for example, in 
the case of the whale watching industry in Victoria, a city on Vancouver Island 
off the Canadian west coast (Lawrence and Phillips, 2004). After commercial 
whale watching had gained momentum and the number of operators had steadily 
been increasing in the 1980s, concerns about the harassment of the whales came 
up and «the basic concern was to avoid regulation by instituting a set of volun-
tary guidelines» (p. 701) covering different aspects from accessing the harbor 
to limiting the number of boats allowed around whales at the same time. Since 
there was no regulation (yet), whale watching operators themselves established 
a pattern of legitimate expectations on how to coordinate and mutually behave in 
their activities. 
The reverse case, institution-substituting rules, is not empirically valid because 
it is unlikely that a rule that is in accordance with existing ways of behaving would 
be non-enforced. In both cases it is likely that there is no need to create regulation, if 
only to formalize existing and well-working social institutions in order to maintain 
the status quo. Self-regulation in various degrees plays an important role here, either 
voluntarily, because of the threat of governmental regulation, or because of pressures 
of multinational supplier-client relationships (Christmann and Taylor, 2001). Thus, 
this field offers a fruitful ground for focusing on institutional dynamics and for the 
co-working of policy makers and institutional theorists.

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  269
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
4.4.  Competition
In this final case, institutions and ineffective regulation are at odds with each oth-
er, i.e. they differ with regard to their incentives and outcomes (Helmke and Levitsky, 
2004). Two cases can be distinguished: institution-competing rules (a rule is made 
against an existing institution and remains ineffective) and rule-competing institu-
tions (institutions emerge in divergence to an ineffective rule).
The first case, the introduction of institution-competing rules, can be found in 
the context of development cooperation, where well-meant policies are designed by 
donor countries and implemented in developing countries. However, when such poli-
cies do not recognize regional specificities and prevailing institutions, policies are 
doomed to fail. One regional example for this can be seen in the application of the 
so-called «Nucleus Approach» in a development project in the leather sector of Dha-
ka, Bangladesh. The Nucleus Approach is based on the idea of cooperation between 
entrepreneurs, and their willingness to discuss their problems and to jointly look 
for solutions in working groups. Having had worked successfully in other countries 
and sectors, this approach could not meet the expected goals in its implementation 
in Dhaka’s leather sector because of the prevailing institutions of non-cooperation. 
There was mutual distrust between the tanners who were expecting others to make 
use of their experiences without telling their own. Despite incentives to change their 
attitude toward this, the tanners sanctioned the project’s wrong expectations by not 
attending the group meetings and by continuing their business as usual after the pro­
ject had ended (Lenz, 2013). 
In comparison, rule-competing institutions, i.e. divergent institutions emerging 
as a response to the introduction of an ineffective rule, can be seen with regard to the 
introduction of a new anti-corruption regulation in the construction sector of Eastern 
Indonesia (Tidey, 2013). In 2008, a new regulation was passed that was supposed to 
fight corruption in bidding competitions and to make the competitive tendering pro-
cedure better verifiable by adhering to formalities on paper because «if what is visible 
and tangible appears to be in line with the rules, then there is no “proof” to support 
anticorruption investigations» (Tidey, 2013: 186). Until then, there was less adminis-
trative documentation and bidders were bribing officials to be awarded the contract. 
After the new regulation was implemented, public officials made sure to adhere to 
formalities in every detail. But the adherence to official rules did in fact not erase 
corruption —it just changed the way it was done: Instead of accepting bribes for giv-
ing the project to a particular bidder, public officials were now accepting bribes for 
making sure the application forms were in order. As a consequence of that, the most 
competitive offers could be disqualified in case of minor failures to form adherence.
These cases not only show that there is no universal «right» policy, and that a 
policy working well in one context might be a misfit in another context, but they 
also serve as a good example for policies that solely aim for changes in isolate prac-
tices rather than the institutional patterns of interactions. While succeeding in erasing 
«direct» bribes, the behavioral practices were changed in the way that bidders and 
officials were now documenting the process. That is, people complied with the new 

270  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
rule, yet the rule missed its overall goal. This is because it did not change the under-
lying mutual behavioral expectations of all actors involved, nor the ultimate goal of 
winning the bid. One practice got exchanged for another, without touching their un-
derlying institutional base. Thus, policies are incomplete if they only aim at practice 
change and leave the more substantial institutions untouched. 
5.  Conclusion and implications for research
We close by inviting scholars of regional research to acknowledge the critical 
role of institutions for context-specific policy-making, as well as for the analysis of 
the effectiveness of regional policies with regard to their intended effects (Bathelt, 
2006; Lehmann and Benner, 2015; Dunford et al., 2016; Morgan, 2016; Glückler and 
Bathelt, 2017). Our major argument has been to move from an atomistic perspective 
of regulating single practices to a relational perspective of institutional policy-mak-
ing. Institutional policy-making identifies and responds to the underlying patterns of 
stable interactions in which single practices are embedded. Such a perspective of in-
stitutional policy-making is conducive to cumulatively reinforcing existing strengths 
in a regional economy, such as cluster policies, but also to successfully taking a turn 
for the better in regions suffering allegedly bad institutions such as nepotism, corrup-
tion, non-cooperation etc.
Taking an institutional perspective on policies can also help to overcome the so-
called «innovation gap» (Parrilli et al., 2010; Glückler and Bathelt, 2017), as well as 
the limited compatibility or missing impact of regional development plans and poli-
cies (Kitching et al., 2015). As we have argued in this paper, formal rules and regula-
tion may influence the institutionalization of actors’ behavior in given situations, but 
they leave much scope of action, and may even be meaningless with regard to daily 
practice (Greenwood et al., 2008; Bathelt and Glückler, 2014). In turn, the concept 
of institutions may answer the question of how regulation and policies that aim to 
change practices sometimes fail to have their intended effects. To move a step further 
in our understanding of the intricate relation between regulation and institution, we 
have built on Helmke and Levitsky (2004) to suggest a more detailed and dynamic 
framework that systematically characterizes the mutually convergent and divergent 
effects among regulation and institutions. Moreover, we have detailed a number of 
examples of how policies may get either reinforced, substituted or circumvented, and 
even competed by institutions. 
Our typology of theoretical linkages is suggested as an analytical framework to 
detect policy challenges and to promote an understanding of policy-making that is 
sensitive to institutions and their spatio-temporal contextuality. We should distin-
guish two types of policies according to what they are aiming for: one, where policies 
are introduced to change atomistic practice while ignoring their institutional embed-
dedness, the other where policies are directly implemented to change the underlying 
institutions (Figure 1). A good example for the latter is the Tostan program operating 
in Senegal, which is trying to abolish the practice of female genital cutting. In 1999, 

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  271
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Senegal introduced a law making it illegal to practice female genital cutting, but 
rather to please Western values than out of the belief of doing the right thing. While 
this kind of top-down approach can be seen as too coercive, the Tostan program tried 
to address the issue on a more deep-rooted level (Shell-Duncan et al., 2013). Instead 
of aiming for a superficial and temporal change in behavioral practice —by impos-
ing the «better» practice of non-cutting— they inform people more generally about 
health topics and human rights to let them make up their mind on their own. In addi-
tion to these «nudges», they acknowledge that rules or policies cannot easily change 
single practices that are embedded into institutionalized traditions, and therefore aim 
at the long-term change of these underlying institutions. To achieve this, they need to 
change each other’s behavioral expectations and fear of sanctions: people try to com-
ply with others’ expectations and will only change their behavior if they can credibly 
expect others to do the same, which is why they publicly vow to refrain from genital 
cutting in the future (Bicchieri and Mercier, 2014). Since 1997, the program has 
achieved that more than 5,000 communities in Senegal have made such public decla-
rations (Shell-Duncan et al., 2013). This example also illustrates again the potential 
for regional specificities in the interaction between institutions and regulation. While 
the introduction of a law on national level did not change people’s behavior, the more 
profound work of Tostan was able to achieve some changes in certain regions.
In pursuing a perspective of institutional policy-making, important questions lie 
ahead of us: To what extent are institutions spatially bound and reproduced? To what 
extent are institutions interwoven into other institutions, thus raising their hysteresis 
against change? How can «good» institutions be leveraged for successful support 
policies of innovation, entrepreneurship, and qualification but also for regional wel-
fare, enduring employment, environmental sustainability and social solidarity? Are 
some of the relationship types outlined above more prevalent in some territories than 
others based on the effectiveness of rule enforcement? For example, are substituting 
and competing relationships more likely to be found in developing economies while 
reinforcing and circumventing ones are easier to achieve in more advanced econo-
mies? How can adverse practices which are based on «bad» institutions be actively 
transformed into «good» and socially desired institutions? What role do power and 
hierarchy play in this process, and how can policy-making be adjusted to change 
institutions rather than isolate practices? 
Answers to all these questions presuppose a micro-social and process under-
standing of social interaction and institutionalization. Recent research criticizes the 
fact that institutions are left vague when it comes to their specific modes of action 
(Dellepiane-Avellaneda, 2010). As long as the statement that «institutions matter» 
is not substantiated by explanations, institutions continue to be treated as «deus ex 
machina» (Tomaney, 2013) and will remain a truism that explains regional differenc-
es solely by the very existence of institutions (Rafiqui, 2009). This is why a greater 
focus needs to be put on the mechanisms of the process of institutional change. Only 
by making these mechanisms visible can the effects of institutions be understood, 
as well as the possibility of their political malleability. An explicitly micro-social 
process perspective is needed in order to clarify the ambivalence of the relationship 

272  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
between action and action-restraining or action-enabling structures (Hodgson, 2006; 
Boxenbaum, 2014).
Concretely, this means to identify local conditions and all stakeholders involved 
in a given practice and situation. It needs to be clear on which incentives individual 
behavior is based: is it guided by official rules, or are people following behavioral 
expectations that deviate from official rules? Only by identifying the underlying 
guidelines that really influence behavior can we see the starting point for institu-
tional change, and can ultimately contribute to an endogenous «institutional theory 
of institutions» which explains institutional effects by institutional mechanisms 
themselves.
6.  Bibliography
Acemoglu, D., Gallego, F. A., and Robinson, J. A. (2014): «Institutions, human capital, and 
development», Annual Reviews of Economics, 6, 875-912.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. A. (2005): «Institutions as a fundamental cause 
of long-run growth», in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, 
vol. 1A, Amsterdam, Elsevier, 386-472.
Ahmadjian, C. L., and Robinson, P. (2001): «Safety in numbers: Downsizing and the deinsti-
tutionalization of permanent employment in Japan», Administrative Science Quarterly, 46, 
622-54.
Amin, A. (1999): «An institutionalist perspective on regional economic development», Inter-
national Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 23, 365-78.
Amin, A., and Thrift, N. (1995): «Institutional issues for the European regions: From markets 
and plans to socioeconomics and powers of association», Economy and Society, 24, 41-66.
Aoki, M. (2007): «Endogenizing institutions and institutional changes», Journal of Institu-
tional Economics, 3, 1-31.
Aranguren, M. J., Morgan, K., and Wilson, J. (2016): «Implementing RIS3: The case of the 
Basque Country», Cuadernos Orkestra 2016/2017.
Asheim, B. T., and Gertler, M. S. (2005): «The geography of innovation: Regional innovation 
systems», in J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery and R. R. Nelson (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of 
Innovation, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 291-317.
Barley, S. R. (1990): «The alignment of technology and structure through roles and networks», 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 61-103.
Bathelt, H. (2006): «Geographies of production: Growth regimes in spatial perspective 3 - To-
ward a relational view of economic action and policy», Progress in Human Geography, 
30, 223-236.
Bathelt, H., and Glückler, J. (2011): The Relational Economy. Geographies of Knowing and 
Learning, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
—  (2014): «Institutional change in economic geography», Progress in Human Geography, 
38, 340-363.
Bensman, J., and Gerver, I. (1963): «Crime and punishment in the factory: The function of 
deviancy in maintaining the social system», American Sociological Review, 28, 588-598.
Bicchieri, C., and Mercier, H. (2014): «Norms and beliefs: How change occurs», in M. Xeniti-
dou and B. Edmonds (eds.), The Complexity of Social Norms, Heidelberg, Springer, 37-54.
Bilz, K., and Nadler, J. (2014): «Law, moral attitudes, and behavioral change», in E. Zamir and 
D. Teichman (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Behavioral Economics and the Law, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 241-267.

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  273
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Boxenbaum, E. (2014): «Toward a situated stance in organizational institutionalism: Contri-
butions from French pragmatist sociology theory», Journal of Management Inquiry, 23, 
319-323.
Charron, N., Dijkstra, L., and Lapuente, V. (2014): «Regional governance matters: Quality of 
government within European Union member states», Regional Studies, 48, 68-90.
—  (2015): «Mapping the regional divide in Europe: A measure for assessing quality of gov-
ernment in 206 European regions», Social Indicators Research, 122, 315-346.
Christmann, P., and Taylor, G. (2001): «Globalization and the environment: Determinants of 
firm self-regulation in China», Journal of International Business Studies, 32, 439-458.
Clark, G. L. (1998): «Stylized facts and close dialogue: Methodology in economic geography», 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 88, 73-87.
Colyvas, J., and Powell, W. W. (2006): «Roads to institutionalization: The remaking of bound-
aries between public and private science», Research in Organizational Behavior, 27, 305-
353.
Cooke, P., Gomez Uranga, M., and Etxebarria, G. (1997): «Regional innovation systems: Insti-
tutional and organisational dimensions», Research Policy, 26, 475-491.
Cooke, P., and Morgan, K. (1998): The Associational Economy: Firms, Regions, and Innova-
tion, Oxford, New York, Oxford University Press.
Crouch, C. (2005): Capitalist Diversity and Change: Recombinant Governance and Institu-
tional Entrepreneurs, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
D’Aunno, T., Succi, M., and Alexander, J. A. (2000): «The role of institutional and market 
forces in divergent organizational change», Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 679-703.
Dellepiane-Avellaneda, S. (2010): «Review article: Good governance, institutions and eco-
nomic development: Beyond the conventional wisdom», British Journal of Political Sci-
ence, 40, 195-224.
Di Maggio, P. J. (1988): «Interest and agency in institutional theory», in L. G. Zucker (ed.), 
Institutional Patterns and Organizations: Culture and Environment, Cambridge, Ballinger 
Publishing, 3-21.
Di Tella, R., Galiani, S., and Schargrodsky, E. (2007): «The formation of beliefs: Evidence from 
the allocation of land titles to squatters», The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 209-241.
Dunford, M., Aoyama, Y., Campolina Diniz, C., Kundu, A., Limonov, L., Lin, G., Liu, W., 
Park, S. O., and Turok, I. (2016): «Area development and policy: An agenda for the 21st 
century», Area Development and Policy, 1, 1-14.
Duquet, S., Pauwelyn, J., Wessel, R. A., and Wouters, J. (2014): «Upholding the rule of law in 
informal international lawmaking processes», Hague Journal on the Rule of Law, 6, 75-95.
Evans, P. B. (ed.) (1985): Bringing the State Back In, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Farole, T., Rodríguez-Pose, A., and Storper, M. (2011): «Human geography and the institutions 
that underlie economic growth», Progress in Human Geography, 35, 58-80.
Farrell, H. (forthc.): «The shared challenges of institutional theories: rational choice, historical 
institutionalism and sociological institutionalism», in J. Glückler, R. Suddaby and R. Lenz 
(eds.), Knowledge and Institutions (Knowledge and Space, vol. 13), Berlin, Springer.
Farrell, H., and Knight, J. (2003): «Trust, institutions, and institutional change: Industrial dis-
tricts and the social capital hypothesis», Politics & Society, 31, 537-566.
Galiani, S., and Schargrodsky, E. (2010): «Property rights for the poor: Effects of land titling», 
Journal of Public Economics, 94, 700-729.
Gertler, M. S. (2010): «Rules of the game: The place of institutions in regional economic 
change», Regional Studies, 44, 1-15.
Giddens, A. (1984): The Constitution of Society. Outline of the Theory of Structuration, Cam-
bridge, Polity Press.
Glaeser, E. L., La Porta, R., Lopez de Silane, F., and Shleifer, A. (2004): «Do institutions cause 
growth?», Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271-303.

274  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Glückler, J. (2014): «How controversial innovation succeeds in the periphery? A network per-
spective of BASF Argentina», Journal of Economic Geography, 14, 903-927.
Glückler, J., and Bathelt, H. (2017): «Institutional context and innovation», in H. Bathelt, P. 
Cohendet, S. Henn and L. Simon (eds.), The Elgar Companion to Innovation and Knowl-
edge Creation: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar.
Goodwin, M., Jones, M., and Jones, R. (2005): «Devolution, constitutional change and eco-
nomic development: Explaining and understanding the new institutional geographies of the 
British state», Regional Studies, 39, 421-36.
Greco, L. (2004): «An institutionalist approach to redundancies in the chemical industry: The 
cases of Teesside (UK) and Brindisi (Italy)», European Urban and Regional Studies, 11, 
141-155.
Greenwood, R., and Suddaby, R. (2006): «Institutional entrepreneurship in mature fields: The 
big five accounting firms», The Academy of Management Journal, 49, 27-48.
Greenwood, R., Oliver, C., Sahlin, K., and Suddaby, R. (2008): «Introduction», in R. Green-
wood, C. Oliver, K. Sahlin and R. Suddaby (eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organizational 
Institutionalism, London, Sage Publications Ltd., 1-46.
Greif, A. (1993): «Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The 
Maghribi traders’ coalition», American Economic Review, 83, 525.
Greif, A., and Laitin, D. D. (2004): «A theory of endogenous institutional change», American 
Political Science Review, 98, 633-652.
Hall, P. A., and Soskice, D. (2001): Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of 
Comparative Advantage, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hall, P. A., and Thelen, K. (2009): «Institutional change in varieties of capitalism», Socio-
Economic Review, 7, 7-34.
Hall, R. E., and Jones, C. I. (1999): «Why do some countries produce so much more output per 
worker than others?», The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83-116.
Haveman, H., and Rao, H. (1997): «Structuring a theory of moral sentiments: Institutional and 
organizational coevolution in the early thrift industry», The American Journal of Sociology, 
102, 1606-1651.
Helmke, G., and Levitsky, S. (2004): «Informal institutions and comparative politics: A re-
search agenda», Perspectives on Politics, 2, 725-740.
Heritier, A., and Eckert, S. (2008): «New modes of governance in the shadow of hierarchy: 
Self-regulation by industry in Europe», Journal of Public Policy, 28, 113-138.
Hodgson, G. M. (2006): «What are institutions?», Journal of Economic Issues, 40, 1-25.
Hollingsworth, J. R., and Boyer, R. (eds.) (1997): Contemporary Capitalism: The Embedded-
ness of Institutions, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hollingsworth, J. R., and Müller, K. H. (eds.) (2002): Advancing Socio-Economics: An Institu-
tionalist Perspective, Lanham, Rowman & Littlefield.
Huggins, R. (2016): «Capital, institutions and urban growth systems», Cambridge Journal of 
Regions, Economy and Society 9, 443-463.
Jessop, B. (2001): «Institutional re(turns) and the strategic-relational approach», Environment 
and Planning A, 33, 1213-1235.
Jones, A., and Murphy, J. T. (2010): «Theorizing practice in economic geography: Founda-
tions, challenges, and possibilities», Progress in Human Geography, 35, 366-392 
Jones, M., and Gordon, M. (2004): «Regional spaces, spaces of regionalism: Territory, insur-
gent politics and the English question», Transactions of the Institute of British Geogra-
phers, 29, 433-452.
Keating, M. (2001): «Rethinking the region: Culture, institutions and economic development in 
Catalonia and Galicia», European Urban and Regional Studies, 8, 217-234.
Kirchgaessner, S., and Menn, J. (2010): «Tech firms agree to halt anti-poaching deals», Fi-
nancial Times, 25 September 2010. Website: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-de-

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  275
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
partment-requires-six-high-tech-companies-stop-entering-anticompetitive-employee. Ac-
cessed: 13 July 2016.
Kitching, J., Hart, M., and Wilson, N. (2015): «Burden or benefit? Regulation as a dynamic 
influence on small business performance», International Small Business Journal, 33, 130-
147.
Knack, S., and Keefer, P. (1997): «Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-
country investigation», The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1251-1288.
Kraatz, M. S., and Moore, J. H. (2002): «Executive migration and institutional change», The 
Academy of Management Journal, 45, 120-143.
Laursen, K., Masciarelli, F., and Prencipe, A. (2012): «Regions matter: How localized social 
capital affects innovation and external knowledge acquisition», Organization Science, 23, 
177-193.
Lawrence, T. B., Leca, B., and Zilber, T. B. (2013): «Institutional work: Current research, new 
directions and overlooked issues», Organization Studies, 34, 1023-1033.
Lawrence, T. B., and Phillips, N. (2004): «From Moby Dick to Free Willy: Macro-cultural 
discourse and institutional entrepreneurship in emerging institutional fields», Organiza-
tion, 11, 689-711.
Leblebici, H., Salancik, G. R., Copay, A., and King, T. (1991): «Institutional change and the 
transformation of interorganizational fields: An organizational history of the U.S. radio 
broadcasting industry», Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 333-363.
Lehmann, T., and Benner, M. (2015): «Cluster policy in the light of institutional context: A 
comparative study of transition countries», Administrative Science, 5, 188-212.
Lenz, R. (2013): «Endogenous growth in the development context: Assessing the nucleus ap-
proach in the Bangladeshi tannery sector», Spaces Online, vol. 11, 2013-03, Toronto and 
Heidelberg: www.spaces-online.com.
Lindsay, M., and Santon, K. (2012): «No poaching allowed: Antitrust issues in labor markets», 
Antitrust, 26, 73-77.
Lounsbury, M., and Crumley, E. T. (2007): «New practice creation: An institutional perspective 
on Innovation», Organization Studies, 28, 993-1012.
Lundvall, B.-A. (1992): National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and 
Interactive Learning, London, Pinter. 
Magro, E., Navarro, M., and Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M. (2014): «Coordination-mix: The hid-
den face of STI policy», Review of Policy Research, 31, 367-389. 
Maguire, S., Hardy, C., and Lawrence, T. B. (2004): «Institutional entrepreneurship in emerg-
ing fields: HIV/AIDS treatment advocacy in Canada», The Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 47, 657-679.
Martin, R. (2000): «Institutional approaches in economic geography», in E. Sheppard and T. J. 
Barnes (eds.), A Companion to Economic Geography, Malden, Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
77-94.
Martin, R., and Sunley, P. (2006): «Path dependence and regional economic evolution», Jour-
nal of Economic Geography, 6, 395-437.
Meyer, J. W., and Rowan, B. (1977): «Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth 
and ceremony», American Journal of Sociology, 83, 340-363.
Morgan, K. (2004): «The exaggerated death of geography: Learning, proximity and territorial 
innovation systems», Journal of Economic Geography, 4, 3-21.
—  (2016): «Collective entrepreneurship: The Basque model of innovation», European Plan-
ning Studies, 24, 1544-1560.
Munir, K. A., and Phillips, N. (2005): «The birth of the “Kodak Moment”: Institutional entre-
preneurship and the adoption of new technologies», Organization Studies, 26, 1665-1687.
Nifo, A., and Vecchione, G. (2013): «Do institutions play a role in skilled migration? The case 
of Italy», Regional Studies, 48, 1628-1649.

276  Glückler, J., Lenz, R.
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
North, D. C. (1990): Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press.
OECD (2007): Competitive Regional Clusters: National Policy Approaches, Paris, OECD.
Parrilli, M. D., Aranguren, M. J., and Larrea, M. (2010): «The role of interactive learning 
to close the “innovation gap” in SME-based local economies: A furniture cluster in the 
Basque Country and its key policy implications», European Planning Studies, 18, 351-370.
Phillips, D. J., and Zuckerman, E. W. (2001): «Middle status conformity: Theoretical restate-
ment and empirical demonstration in two markets», American Journal of Sociology, 107, 
379-429.
Rafiqui, P. S. (2009): «Evolving economic landscapes: Why new institutional economics mat-
ters for economic geography», Journal of Economic Geography, 9, 329-353.
Revilla Diez, J., Schiller, D., and Zvirgzde, D. (2016): «Doing business in Ukraine: Multi-
national companies in the trap of regional institutions?», Environment and Planning C: 
Government and Policy, 34, 638-655.
Robinson, J. A. (2013): «Measuring institutions in the Trobriand Islands: A comment on Voigt’s 
paper», Journal of Institutional Economics, 9, 27-29.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. (2013): «Do institutions matter for regional development?», Regional 
Studies, 47, 1034-1047.
Rodríguez-Pose, A., and Storper, M. (2006): «Better rules or stronger communities? On the 
social foundations of institutional change and its economic effects», Economic Geography, 
82, 1-25.
Rodrik, D., Subramanian, A., and Trebbi, F. (2004): «Institutions rule: The primacy of institu-
tions over geography and integration in economic development», Journal of Economic 
Growth, 9, 131-165.
Salais, R., and Storper, M. (1992): «The four “worlds” of contemporary industry», Cambridge 
Journal of Economics, 16, 169-193.
Sánchez, J. L., Aparicio, J., and Alonso, J. L. (2010): «The shift between worlds of production as an 
innovative process in the wine industry in Castile and Leon (Spain)», Geoforum, 41, 469-78.
Seo, M.-G., and Creed, W. E. D. (2002): «Institutional contradictions, praxis, and institutional 
change: A dialectical perspective», The Academy of Management Review, 27, 222-247.
Shell-Duncan, B., Wander, K., Hernlund, Y., and Moreau, A. (2013): «Legislating change? 
Responses to criminalizing female genital cutting in Senegal», Law and Society Review, 
47, 803-835.
Shirley, M. M. (2013): «Measuring institutions: How to be precise though vague», Journal of 
Institutional Economics, 9, 31-33.
Simmie, J., Sternberg, R., and Carpenter, J. (2014): «New technological path creation: Evi-
dence from the British and German wind energy industries», Journal of Evolutionary Eco-
nomics, 24, 875-904.
Smets, M., Morris, T., and Greenwood, R. (2012): «From practice to field: A multilevel model 
of practice-driven institutional change», Acedamy of Management Journal, 55, 877-904.
Storper, M. (1997): The Regional World: Territorial Development in a Global Economy, New 
York, Guilford Press.
—  (2011): «Why do regions develop and change? The challenge for geography and econom-
ics», Journal of Economic Geography, 11, 333-346.
Storper, M., and Salais, R. (1997): Worlds of Production: The Action Frameworks of the Econ-
omy, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.
Streeck, W., and Thelen, K. (2005): Beyond Continuity: Institutional Change in Advanced Po-
litical Economies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Suddaby, R., and Greenwood, R. (2009): «Methodological issues in researching institutional 
change», in D. Buchanan and A. Bryman (eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organizational 
Research Methods, Thousand Oaks: London, Sage Publications Ltd, 176-195.

How institutions moderate the effectiveness of regional policy: A framework and research agenda  277
Investigaciones Regionales – Journal of Regional Research, 36 (2016) – Pages 255 to 277
Thelen, K. (2004): How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, Brit-
ain, the United States and Japan, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Thornton, P. H., Ocasio, W., and Lounsbury, M. (2012): The Institutional Logics Perspective: A 
New Approach to Culture, Structure and Process, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Tidey, S. (2013): «Corruption and adherence to rules in the construction sector: Reading the 
“bidding books”», American Anthropologist, 115, 188-202.
Tolbert, P. S., and Zucker, L. G. (1983): «Institutional sources of change in the formal structure 
of organizations: The diffusion of civil service reform, 1880-1935», Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 28, 22-39.
Tomaney, J. (2013): «Region and place I: Institutions», Progress in Human Geography, 38, 
131-140.
U.S. Department of Justice (2010): «Justice Department Requires Six High Tech Companies 
to Stop Entering into Anticompetitive Employee Solicitation Agreements. Justice News, 
24 September 2010.». Washington, D.C.: The United States Department of Justice. Web-
site: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-requires-six-high-tech-companies-
stop-entering-anticompetitive-employee. Accessed: 13 July 2016.
Unger, B., and van Waarden, F. (2009): «How to dodge drowning in data? Rule- and risk-based 
anti money laundering policies compared», Review of Law and Economics, 5, 953-985.
Vaillant, Y., and Lafuente, E. (2007): «Do different institutional frameworks condition the in-
fluence of local fear of failure and entrepreneurial examples over entrepreneurial activ-
ity?», Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 19, 313-337.
van Waarden, F. (2001): «Institutions and innovation: The legal environment of innovating 
firms», Organization Studies, 22, 765-795.
Voigt, S. (2013): «How (not) to measure institutions», Journal of Institutional Economics, 9, 
1-26.
Whitley, R. (1992): «The social construction of organizations and markets: The comparative 
analysis of business recipes», in M. Reed and M. Hughes (eds.), Organizations: New Direc-
tions in Organization Theory and Analysis, Newbury Park, Sage Publications Ltd, 120-143.
Williamson, O. E. (1985): The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Rela-
tional Contracting, New York, Free Press.
Xin, K. K., and Pearce, J. L. (1996): «Guanxi: Connections as substitutes for formal institu-
tional support», Academy of Management Journal, 39, 1641-1658.
Zilber, T. B. (2011): «Institutional multiplicity in practice: A tale of two high-tech conferences 
in Israel», Organization Science, 22, 1539-1559.
—  (2013): «Institutional logics and institutional work: Should they be agreed?», in M. Louns-
bury and E. Boxenbaum (eds.), Institutional Logics in Action, part A, Bingley, Emerald 
Group Publishing Ltd, 77-96.
