Book Review	
  vol. 40(1) Jan/Apr 2018	 185
Contexto Internacional
vol. 40(1) Jan/Apr 2018
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0102-8529.2017400100009
Book Review
The Global Making of Policing: Postcolonial Perspectives
João Fernando Finazzi*
Hönke, Jana and Markus-Michael Müller. 2016. 
The Global Making of Policing: Postcolonial 
Perspectives. New York: Routledge. 182pp.
Policing executed by one State in another’s territory and the international training of po­
lice and military forces of foreign countries are not a new phenomenon in history. Since 
the first decades of the twentieth century, the USA and other great powers have resorted 
to these practices as part of their foreign policy, especially in the US relation with the 
rest of the Western hemisphere. Besides these outstanding transnational characteristics 
of the way that policing practices are developed and executed around the world, there is 
still a significant gap in the literature about police and policing, which is restricted to the 
fields of disciplinary studies such as criminology or public security. In a general way, these 
perspectives see policing practices as something that do not cross borders: they are un­
derstood as particular or ‘national’ forms, circumscribed to a given locality in which their 
global or transnational dimensions are often ignored.
However, more recently, some publications have emerged with the aim to point to an 
understanding of policing practices that takes in account a broader international reality. 
Situated among these is the compilation of articles organised by Jana Hönke (University 
of Edinburgh) and Markus-Michael Mülller (Freie Universität Berlin) that comprise The 
Global Making of Policing.
The book is the result of a series of panels and discussions in different international 
congresses since 2010. In it, the main challenge and novelty is both methodological and 
in terms of ‘phenomenon circumscription’, which means that it intends to shed light on 
the constitutive global nature of contemporary policing. In other words, the aim of the 
researchers is to grasp not only the relations between States regarding the police, but the 
transnational exchange of knowledges and policing practices that cross-cut a given foreign 
policy. That is because its main line is the search to expose the paths of what came to be 
understood as the global making of policing, using interdisciplinary conceptual tools that 
*	
San Tiago Dantas Postgraduate Programme in International Relations (UNESP/UNICAMP/PUC-SP), São 
Paulo-SP, Brazil; jffinazzi@yahoo.com.br. ORCID iD 0000-0001-8986-8858.

186	
 vol. 40(1) Jan/Apr 2018	
Finazzi
try to overcome established knowledge frontiers such as Anthropology, Sociology, Politi­
cal Science, International Relations, History and Geography.
According to Hönke and Mülller, this making is characterised as a historical process 
that doesn’t only have generalities that go beyond the local specificities of each State and 
region but also is constituted in the encounter among these various patterns of policing. 
Thus, the focus is no longer the nation-state understood as a closed unity belonging to an 
international system and is instead directed to the flows and mutual influences among the 
diverse stages that different social actors that execute policing practices in loco exercise on 
each other.
This approach intends to move away from mainstream studies about the international 
making of policing, according the authors. To them, the dominant bibliography has hid­
den the fact that policing is globally co-constituted, suggesting the existence of a ‘diffusion­
al center’ of practices and a periphery (or post-colony, to use their vocabulary) composed 
of ‘passive receivers’. In this mainstream literature, powers such as the United States and 
Europe are seen as a core center from where main policing practices and knowledges are 
created and then exported to the rest of the world. Thereby, the book intends to evidence 
the opposite. Its focus is the way in which the actors and stages such as Gaza or Rio de 
Janeiro, taken at first glance as subaltern and passive, are instead inserted in the global 
making of policing. Thus, the works in the book highlight the experiments, improvements 
and learning processes that occur in the periphery, contrasting with the established main­
stream texts about policing and international relations.
It doesn’t mean, however, that the definition of policing used by Hönke and Mülller is 
not controversial. To the authors, it is the institutions, practices, technologies and ways of 
knowledge that have the objective to establish a power of regulation and to take coercive 
measures to guarantee the security and well-being of a community. So, the concept used 
here prioritises different aspects of the one appointed by thinkers such as Michel Foucault 
or, more recently, Mark Neocleous (cited by Bilgin, chapter 10). While Foucault (2008) or 
Neocleous (2000) in general focus on the fabrication of the bourgeois social order and the 
productive function that policing exercises by disciplining and creating a behaviour that 
is useful for capitalist accumulation, Hönke and Müller understand policing only as an 
exclusive, repressive force.
On the other hand, one of the main merits of the work is the attempt to use a multi­
disciplinary approach, present in three analytical perspectives suggested by the authors to 
study the policing in a transnational or global scale. The first, called ‘laboratory’, prioritises 
the situations in which new policing technologies are developed and tested. These occur 
in contexts where ‘common sense’ supposes that policing needs to be made different than 
that within the central States. According to Hönke e Mülller, these methods would be 
transferred through a ‘national security economy’: a circuit of consumers and producers 
of policing practices, knowledges, and products. A second perspective assumes that the 
global making of policing is not based only in a ‘North-South’ or ‘center-periphery’ axis, 
but is also ‘South-South’, among the very same States that constitute the global periphery, 
such as Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Guatemala, India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh. The last 

Book Review	
  vol. 40(1) Jan/Apr 2018	 187
perspective compounds a way to analyse the policing that resembles the ethnographic 
method developed in anthropological studies. Here, the priority is to know how policing 
is made, performed, acted and formatted by multiples actors and their day-to-day prac­
tices that pass through State frontiers, such as the role played by specialists and academics 
in the negotiation and construction of ‘patterns practices’ of policing.
It’s by this prism composed of multiple perspectives that the different analyses are 
constructed throughout the work. They are as apparently diverse as the function exercised 
by the US occupation of the Philippines in the consolidation of the internal surveillance of 
the USA (Alfred McCoy, chapter 2); the fundamental role played by Gaza and Israel in the 
global making of policing, as a testing laboratory (Stephen Graham and Alexander Baker, 
chapter 3) as much as a ‘transmission belt’ of social control technologies (Leila Stockmaar, 
chapter 4); the relations between the pacification efforts exercised at the same time in 
the slums of Rio de Janeiro and Port-au-Prince (Markus-Michael Müller, chapter 5); the 
alignment between the Colombian State and the US government’s interests in a repressive 
way to deal with illicit drugs and the construction of a expertise between security forces 
(Arlene Tickner, chapter 6); the policing of the Tamil diaspora in the UK (Mark Laffey and 
Suthaharan Nadarajah, chapter 7); the global exchange and flows among British officers 
(Georgina Sinclair, chapter 8); the international construction and training of the Afghan 
police (Lars Ostermeier, chapter 9); and the epistemological challenges in grasping the 
global making of policing (Pinar Bilgin, chapter 10).
Although the book has the potential to deepen the knowledge about the theme and 
to allow new ways to approach it by overlapping fragmented perspectives that intertwine, 
the reader many times will find some difficulties in advancing her or his readings, as she 
or he encounters some terms and concepts that don’t receive due treatment before an ad­
vance is made in the reflection. Important words such as ‘post-colony’, ‘liberalism’, or its 
opposite ‘illiberalism’, may appear and be used sometimes without an objective meaning 
that facilitates its correct apprehension. This means that, if, on one hand, the mosaic made 
by many references allows the multiplication of the understanding about the theme, then 
on the other handthis bricolage shows some incoherence and contradictions that tend to 
impair the full logical direction of the arguments.
Once these barriers are passed, however, there is no doubt that this work is an im­
portant reference to think about a phenomenon of increasing relevance, not only because 
of the vast quantity of data and empirical material, but also because it shows alternative 
analytical keys and tools that produce a richer picture, and therefore more complete, of 
the global making of policing.
References
Foucault, Michel. 2008. Segurança, Território, População. São Paulo: Martins.
Neocleous, Mark. 2000. The Fabrication of Social Order: a Critical Theory of Police Power. London: 
Pluto Press.

About the Author
João Fernando Finazzi holds a MA degree and is a PhD candidate in International Rela­
tions at the San Tiago Dantas Postgraduate Programme in International Relations (UN­
ESP/UNICAMP/PUC-SP), Brazil. He currently holds a research grant by the National 
Institute of Science and Technology for the Study of the United States (INCT-INEU) and 
is also a member of the Research Group on International Conflicts (GECI/PUC-SP). His 
research interests focus on the transnational dimension of contemporary conflicts, peace­
building operations, policing, and US foreign policy. For his doctoral thesis, he is cur­
rently studying the conflictual dynamics of Port-au-Prince (Haiti) as an empirical case.
Received on 11 September 2017, and approved for publication on 21 December 2017.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
