Chapter 1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings
and Propositions
Reinhard Mechler, Elisa Calliari, Laurens M. Bouwer, Thomas Schinko,
Swenja Surminski, JoAnne Linnerooth-Bayer, Jeroen Aerts, Wouter Botzen,
Emily Boyd, Natalie Delia Deckard, Jan S. Fuglestvedt,
Mikel González-Eguino, Marjolijn Haasnoot, John Handmer,
Masroora Haque, Alison Heslin, Stefan Hochrainer-Stigler, Christian Huggel,
Saleemul Huq, Rachel James, Richard G. Jones, Sirkku Juhola,
Adriana Keating, Stefan Kienberger, Sönke Kreft, Onno Kuik,
Mia Landauer, Finn Laurien, Judy Lawrence, Ana Lopez, Wei Liu,
Piotr Magnuszewski, Anil Markandya, Benoit Mayer, Ian McCallum,
Colin McQuistan, Lukas Meyer, Kian Mintz-Woo, Arianna Montero-Colbert,
Jaroslav Mysiak, Johanna Nalau, Ilan Noy, Robert Oakes,
Friederike E. L. Otto, Mousumi Pervin, Erin Roberts, Laura Schäfer,
Paolo Scussolini, Olivia Serdeczny, Alex de Sherbinin, Florentina Simlinger,
Asha Sitati, Saibeen Sultana, Hannah R. Young, Kees van der Geest,
Marc van den Homberg, Ivo Wallimann-Helmer, Koko Warner
and Zinta Zommers
Abstract The debate on “Loss and Damage” (L&D) has gained traction over the
last few years. Supported by growing scientiﬁc evidence of anthropogenic climate
change amplifying frequency, intensity and duration of climate-related hazards as
well as observed increases in climate-related impacts and risks in many regions, the
E. Calliari · L. M. Bouwer · T. Schinko · S. Surminski · J. Linnerooth-Bayer · J. Aerts ·
W. Botzen · E. Boyd · N. D. Deckard · J. S. Fuglestvedt · M. González-Eguino · M. Haasnoot ·
J. Handmer · M. Haque · A. Heslin · S. Hochrainer-Stigler · C. Huggel · S. Huq · R. James ·
R. G. Jones · S. Juhola · A. Keating · S. Kienberger · S. Kreft · O. Kuik · M. Landauer ·
F. Laurien · J. Lawrence · A. Lopez · W. Liu · P. Magnuszewski · A. Markandya · B. Mayer ·
I. McCallum · C. McQuistan · L. Meyer · K. Mintz-Woo · A. Montero-Colbert · J. Mysiak ·
J. Nalau · I. Noy · R. Oakes · F. E. L. Otto · M. Pervin · E. Roberts · L. Schäfer · P. Scussolini ·
O. Serdeczny · A. de Sherbinin · F. Simlinger · A. Sitati · S. Sultana · H. R. Young · K. van
der Geest · M. van den Homberg · I. Wallimann-Helmer · K. Warner · Z. Zommers
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria
R. Mechler (B)
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria
e-mail: mechler@iiasa.ac.at
R. Mechler
Vienna University of Economics and Business, Vienna, Austria
© The Author(s) 2019
R. Mechler et al. (eds.), Loss and Damage from Climate Change, Climate Risk
Management, Policy and Governance, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72026-5_1
3

4
R. Mechler et al.
“Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage” was established in 2013
and further supported through the Paris Agreement in 2015. Despite advances, the
debate currently is broad, diffuse and somewhat confusing, while concepts, meth-
ods and tools, as well as directions for policy remain vague and often contested.
This book, a joint effort of the Loss and Damage Network—a partnership effort by
scientists and practitioners from around the globe—provides evidence-based insight
into the L&D discourse by highlighting state-of-the-art research conducted across
multiple disciplines, by showcasing applications in practice and by providing insight
into policy contexts and salient policy options. This introductory chapter summarises
key ﬁndings of the twenty-two book chapters in terms of ﬁve propositions. These
propositions, each building on relevant ﬁndings linked to forward-looking sugges-
tions for research, policy and practice, reﬂect the architecture of the book, whose
sections proceed from setting the stage to critical issues, followed by a section on
methods and tools, to chapters that provide geographic perspectives, and ﬁnally to a
section that identiﬁes potential policy options. The propositions comprise (1) Risk
management can be an effective entry point for aligning perspectives and debates,
if framed comprehensively, coupled with climate justice considerations and linked
to established risk management and adaptation practice; (2) Attribution science is
advancing rapidly and fundamental to informing actions to minimise, avert, and
address losses and damages; (3) Climate change research, in addition to identifying
physical/hard limits to adaptation, needs to more systematically examine soft limits
to adaptation, for which we ﬁnd some evidence across several geographies globally;
(4) Climate risk insurance mechanisms can serve the prevention and cure aspects
emphasised in the L&D debate but solidarity and accountability aspects need further
attention, for which we ﬁnd tentative indication in applications around the world; (5)
Policy deliberations may need to overcome the perception that L&D constitutes a
win-lose negotiation “game” by developing a more inclusive narrative that highlights
collective ambition for tackling risks, mutual beneﬁts and the role of transformation.
Keywords Science · Policy · Practice · Climate justice · Limits to adaptation
Climate risk management · Transformation
1.1
Understanding and Reviewing the Evidence
for Advancing Science and Policy
The debate on Loss and Damage (L&D)1 has gained traction over the last few years.
Although the discourse started already during the establishment of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in the early 1990s with
a proposal by the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) on compensation and
1In this chapter and in the book throughout, we will use the plural form and lowercase letters (‘losses
and damages’) to refer broadly to (observed) impacts and (projected) risks, and the capitalized
singular form (‘Loss & Damage’) where reference is made to the policy debate.

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
5
insurance for losses due to sea-level rise (INC 1991), it took about 20 years, alongside
increasing evidence and public awareness of climate change impacts and risks as
collated prominently in reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), for it to be recognised at the institutional level. In 2007 UNFCCC’s 13th
Conference of the Parties (COP 13) in Bali ﬁrst broadly considered means to address
Loss and Damage, yet only in 2012 at COP 18 in Doha did Parties for the ﬁrst time
decide to consider institutional arrangements to address L&D, which in 2013 led
negotiators at COP 19 to establish the “Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss
and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts” (WIM) (UNFCCC 2013). In
2015 at COP 21, the Paris Agreement established a separate article on L&D endorsing
the Mechanism (UN 2015) (see Fig. 1.1). Since its establishment, the WIM, whose
Executive Committee has devised work programmes to inform the deliberations, has
been subject to intense debate. While some consider it a distinct building block of
negotiations under the UNFCCC alongside mitigation and adaptation, others suggest
that it is supposed to be an integral part of the negotiations under climate change
adaptation. The implications and ﬁnal directions for this Mechanism, which will
undergo review in 2019, are, however, largely unclear.
The debate currently is broad, diffuse and somewhat confusing, while concepts,
methods and tools, as well as directions for policy remain vague and contested. Over
the last few years, research has been requested to provide actionable input and has
increasingly become active. Scholarship has started to provide evidence on losses
and damages in vulnerable countries (Warner and van der Geest 2013), coined and
critically examined deﬁnitions, the rationale and plural perspectives on the discourse
(Verheyen and Roderick 2008; James et al. 2015; Van der Geest and Warner 2015;
Vanhala and Hestbaek 2016; Boyd et al. 2017), employed applicable methods and
models (Gall 2015; Birkmann and Welle 2015; Schinko and Mechler 2017), reviewed
roles for justice and equity considerations (Huggel et al. 2016a; Roser et al. 2015;
Wallimann-Helmer 2015), spent due attention on non-economic losses (Serdeczny
et al. 2017; Tschakert et al. 2017; Wewerinke-Singh 2018a), supported crafting of
policy and governance options (Pinninti 2013; Page and Heyward 2017; Mechler and
Schinko 2016; Crosland et al. 2016; Biermann and Boas 2017) and examined the role
of legal responses to L&D (Mace and Verheyen 2016; Mayer 2016; Wewerinke-Singh
2018b).
Many gaps remain, not the least in terms of communication across the science-
policy interface. Analysts and observers, including the authors of this book, have
argued that these gaps have hampered understanding and progress towards effective
policy formulation, as well as practical implementation. As we demonstrate in this
book, a more strongly evidence-based dialogue is desirable and feasible, and we
see a number of promising options for instilling more coherence into the debate and
foster alignment with other policy agendas, particularly with regard to climate change
adaptation (CCA), current international efforts on disaster risk reduction (DRR), as
well as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
This book thus aims at providing insights into the L&D discourse by highlighting
state-of-the-art research from multiple disciplines as well as policy contexts related to
L&D. It articulates the multiple concepts, principles and methods relevant for L&D,

6
R. Mechler et al.
Fig. 1.1 Evolution of the Loss and Damage discourse under the UNFCCC. Source UNFCCC (2018)

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
7
including those that have only recently become available. As such, this volume is
the ﬁrst comprehensive outcome of the Loss and Damage Network, a partnership
effort by scientists and practitioners, which includes members from more than 40
institutions around the globe. Aimed at informing research, policy, practice and the
interested public, this book:
• discusses the political, legal, economic and institutional dimensions of L&D,
• introduces normative and ethical questions central to the discourse,
• highlights the role of climate risks and climate risk management,
• presents salient case studies from around the world,
• identiﬁes practical and evidence-based policy and implementation options, and
thus
• supports the science-policy dialogue and possible future directions of the L&D
discourse, both under and outside the Paris Agreement.
The volume overall is organised into ﬁve sections: Sect. 1 sets the stage with
key concepts and insights regarding trends in impacts and risks, while Sect. 2
presents critical issues that increasingly are shaping the policy discourse. In
Sect. 3, methods and tools for research and practice are reviewed in terms of
their applicability, Sect. 4 presents place-based evidence and insights on losses
and damages as well as any soft and hard limits across geographies, and ﬁnally in
Sect. 5, policy options and other actions for the L&D discourse are discussed. This
introductory chapter further elaborates on the evolution of the discourse, presents key
concepts of relevance and salience that arise from the book, shortly summarises the
individual chapters, and concludes by outlining a number of propositions that link
relevant ﬁndings to forward-looking suggestions for research, practice and policy.
1.2
Evolution of the Policy Discourse
Formal and informal deliberations regarding “dangerous” climate-related risks and
sharing the burdens (including justice considerations) associated with responses to
climate change have been fundamental for shaping the climate debate since the
beginning (see also chapter by Calliari et al. 2018; see Fig. 1.1). Science, in particu-
larasreportedbytheIPCCassessments,hashadamajorimpactonpolicyformulation
and decisions as part of the UNFCCC (see Fig. 1.2). Given the ultimate objective
as stipulated by the UNFCCC in 1992 “to prevent dangerous anthropogenic inter-
ference with the climate system” (UN 1992, Art. 2), the focus of the UNFCCC was
originally–and continues to predominantly be–on climate mitigation responses. The
ﬁrst discussions about L&D were initiated by the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS) in the early 1990s with due linkages to mitigation. During the negotiations
that led to adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992, AOSIS proposed the establishment
of, what they called, an international insurance scheme–also referred to by some
as a compensation fund–to be supported by mandatory contributions from industri-
alised parties on the basis of their gross national product and relative greenhouse gas
emissions (INC 1991).

8
R. Mechler et al.
Fig. 1.2 Co-evolution of climate change research reported by the IPCC and the UNFCCC process. Source IPCC 2018

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
9
The scheme was intended to compensate small island- and low-lying developing
nations for climate-related impacts from sea-level rise (Linnerooth-Bayer et al. 2003;
AOSIS 2008; see the chapters by Schäfer et al. 2018 and Linnerooth-Bayer et al.
2018). While the proposal was eventually dropped, discussions on compensation
and insurance as a means to address the adverse effects of climate change prevailed
with expert workshops convened in 2003 and 2007 on the basis of COP decisions
5/CP 7 and 1/CP 10 and COP13 started to consider means to address Loss and
Damage (Mace and Verheyen 2016).
In 2008, AOSIS submitted an expanded version of the 1991 proposal to the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-
LCA). This Multi Window Mechanism to Address Loss and Damage from Climate
Change Impacts in Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and other developing
countries particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change comprised three
interdependent components: (1) insurance; (2) rehabilitation/compensation; and (3)
risk management (AOSIS 2008). The idea of an “international mechanism addressing
risk management and risk reduction strategies and insurance related risk sharing and
risk transfer mechanisms” was reiterated a year later in the AOSIS proposal for a
Copenhagen Protocol (UNFCCC 2009).
After losses and damages were mentioned in the 2007 Bali Action Plan (UNFCCC
2007), the 2010 Cancun Adaptation Framework (UNFCCC 2010) initiated formal
UNFCCC activities on the issue with the establishment of an ad hoc work programme
(UNFCCC 2011). The latter was meant to advance technical work on L&D in three
thematic areas over the course of 2011 and 2012: (1) assessing the risk of L&D and
the current knowledge on the same; (2) proposing a range of approaches to address
L&D from both extreme and slow onset events, taking into consideration experience
at all levels; and (3) determining the role of the Convention in enhancing the imple-
mentation of approaches to address L&D (UNFCCC 2012). Since its inception, the
work programme has conducted several calls for submissions asking parties (national
government representatives) and observers (other organisations attending UNFCCC
meetings) for input on speciﬁc questions. These calls gave parties, observers and
non-admitted organisations the opportunity to lay out their views on thematic issues,
institutional questions, governance arrangements and suggestions on how to take the
L&D work programme forward.
As part of the Doha Climate Gateway in 2012, the Parties decided to establish
institutional arrangements to address L&D at COP 19. This laid the groundwork for
the creation of the WIM, that is charged to “address loss and damage associated
with impacts of climate change, including extreme events and slow onset events, in
developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate
change” (UNFCCC 2013, para 1). COP19 also established an Executive Committee
(ExCom) to guide the implementation of functions of the WIM through an initial
2-year work plan. A distinct L&D article in the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC 2015,
Article 8) at COP 21 meant further recognition for L&D and the WIM, and arguably,
institutional anchoring within the UNFCCC architecture.
The action areas for work under the WIM have been broad and diverse, ranging
in scope and focus. Action areas include considering particularly vulnerable coun-

10
R. Mechler et al.
tries, populations and ecosystems, dealing with both slow- and sudden-onset events,
and paying particular attention to non-economic losses. Policy areas include con-
sideration for resilience, recovery and rehabilitation efforts, migration, displacement
and mobility, as well as ﬁnancial instruments including insurance. The work plan is
intended to integrate also with other on-going work under the UNFCCC, such as on
ﬁnance and technology.
Fundamental to this book, and the climate policy debate in general, has been the
concept of comprehensive risk management including transformational approaches.
The mandate of the WIM includes enhancing understanding of and promoting both
short- and medium-term risk management, including risk analysis, risk reduction,
risk transfer and risk retention. Furthermore, the WIM is to consider transformational
approaches that help to build and strengthen the long-term resilience of countries and
communities (UNFCCC 2016, Decision 3/CP.22). Since the establishment of the
WIM, the ExCom has met several times and has transitioned from its initial 2-year
work plan to a 5-year rolling work plan. Achievements and the WIM will ofﬁcially
be reviewed at COP 25 in 2019.
Recent non-climate policy developments, such as the compact on Sendai
(UNISDR 2015), the SDGs (UN 2015), as well as the Nansen Initiative on Displace-
ment (nanseninitiative.org) and its follow-up, the Platform on Disaster Displacement
(Displacement Solutions 2015) provide potential opportunities to increase under-
standing of and respond to growing climate-related risks, including L&D. However,
these approaches and preliminary actions are scattered across several sectors and
actors, and their relevance to L&D has not yet been systematically evaluated with lit-
tle exchange between research and policy. In addition, attention to L&D in research
and policy has tended to focus heavily on only a few aspects, such as insurance.
Broader reﬂection, particularly on the different dimensions of L&D decision-making
has been largely lacking.
While it is difﬁcult to summarise the different strands of the discourse(s), it may
be argued that essentially three issues have been highlighted with varying levels of
emphasis over time:
1. Burden sharing for the costs of managing climate impacts and risks (losses and
damages) including compensation arrangements.
2. Awareness regarding the sensitivity and limitations of human and natural systems
to climate change, and the need to respond with stringent climate mitigation
policies for limiting warming to 1.5 °C or 2 °C.
3. Support for further risk reduction and risk management interventions for enhanc-
ing climate change adaptation and building climate resilience.
Some observers have suggested that there has been a shift in the debate away from
“harmful wrongdoing” (1.) to mostly considering support for risk and climate insur-
ance mechanisms (3.) (see Serdeczny and Zamarioli 2018). While indeed, insurance
mechanisms have been given substantial attention, it seems that the debate overall
has become more comprehensive and the three discursive lines rather exist in parallel
offering potential to be further aligned as delineated in this book (see also Mechler
2017).

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
11
1.3
The Research Perspective: Deﬁnitions and Concepts
1.3.1
Deﬁning Losses and Damages
Many of the issues associated with the L&D discourse are controversial, and given
the various perspectives on what exactly L&D might refer to, it is unsurprising
that there is no ofﬁcial UNFCCC deﬁnition for “Loss and Damage.” There are,
however, some aspects of L&D that have been relatively widely accepted. UNFCCC
documentation consistently states that L&D refers to climate-related impacts and
risks from both sudden-onset extreme events, such as ﬂooding and cyclones, and
slow-onset events, including sea level rise, glacial retreat, desertiﬁcation, and others
(UNFCCC 2013, 2015). Some analysts have also made a distinction between losses
associated with irreversibility, for example, fatalities from heat-related disasters or
the permanent destruction of coral reefs, while damages are referred to as impacts
that can be alleviated or repaired, such as damages to buildings (Boyd et al. 2017).
Another useful distinction, which has been adopted by many authors (including in
this book), was made by Verheyen and Roderick (2008) between avoided, unavoided
and unavoidable losses and damages (see Table 1.1).
Avoided losses and damages are those that have been and will be avoided by
DRR and CCA. Unavoided impacts and risks are and will not be reduced due to
socio-economic constraints and trade-offs (ﬁnance, governance, political economy).
These unavoided losses and damages are also called residual impacts and risks in the
literature (Warner and van der Geest 2013) and are characterised by limits imped-
ing avoidance and reduction. Losses and damages can be material (i.e., physical) or
immaterial, as well as economic (measurable in ﬁnancial or economic terms) and
non-economic, with some overlap between these categories (Schäfer and Balogun
2015; Serdeczny 2018). Many consider the L&D discourse to deal particularly with
losses and damages “beyond adaptation” and limits to adaptation, that is, unavoided
or unavoidable impacts that go beyond adaptation potentials (Verheyen and Roderick
2008; van der Geest and Warner 2015). While adaptation opportunities and barriers
Table 1.1 Classifying losses and damages
Avoided
Unavoided
Unavoidable
Avoidable losses and damages
that can and will be avoided
by climate change mitigation
and/or adaptation measures
Avoidable losses and damages
that are and will not be
addressed by further
mitigation and/or adaptation
measures, even though
avoidance would be possible.
Financial, technical and
political constraints, as well as
case-speciﬁc risk preferences
narrow down the adaptation
space
Losses and damages that
cannot be avoided and adapted
to through further mitigation
and/or adaptation measures,
for instance impacts from slow
onset processes that have
kicked-off already, such as sea
level rise and melting glaciers
Classiﬁcation further developed based on Verheyen and Roderick (2008)

12
R. Mechler et al.
are enablers/disablers for adaptation planning and implementation, adaptation limits
have been deﬁned by Klein et al. (2014) as loci at which adaptation actions can no
longer guarantee key actor objectives or system’s needs can no longer be achieved in
the presence of intolerable risks (Dow et al. 2013). These limits can be hard (meaning
adaptive technologies and actions are not physically feasible), or soft (technology
and/or important socio-economic trade-offs affect priorities today, yet there is poten-
tial for overcoming limits in the future) (see also chapter by van den Homberg and
McQuistan 2018).
1.3.2
Loss and Damage in the Context of Climate
and Disaster Risk Management
In L&D discussions, risk management approaches have received increasing attention.
Climate risk management has become the widely accepted methodological frame-
work for assessing potential impacts and devising strategies for adaptation. The IPCC
(2014a, p 5.) deﬁnes risk as:
The potential for consequences where something of value is at stake and where the outcome
is uncertain, recognizing the diversity of values. Risk is often represented as probability of
occurrence of hazardous events or trends multiplied by the impacts if these events or trends
occur. Risk results from the interaction of vulnerability, exposure, and hazard.
IPCC’s Special Report on Extreme Events (SREX 2012) and the IPCC 5th Assess-
ment Report (IPCC 2014b) deﬁne climate risk management (CRM) as an integrative
Fig. 1.3 Risk as a function of hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Sources IPCC (2012, 2014a)

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
13
Fig. 1.4 The risk concept as applied to sudden-onset and slow-onset processes. Source Huggel
et al. (2016a)
framework for understanding and addressing climate-related risks (see Fig. 1.3).
CRM broadly may be deﬁned as comprehensively reducing, preparing for, and
ﬁnancing climate-related risk, while tackling the underlying risk drivers, includ-
ing climate-related and socio-economic factors (Schinko et al. 2016). Climate risk
management can build on expertise developed in DRR and CCA research and prac-
tice. Firstly, it considers climate risk as a function of hazard (and any climate-related
changes), exposure and vulnerability; secondly, it gives proper attention to variability
and probability (low frequency vs. high frequency events), calling for probabilistic
risk analytical approaches; and thirdly, it accounts for differences in risk perception
and the various types of outcomes.
In principle, this climate risk concept can be applied to sudden-onset events and
slow-onset climate-related processes unfolding over timescales from hours to days
(landslides,storms,ﬂoods)toweeksandmonths(droughts,heatwaves),toyears(sea-
level rise and impacts), and decades (glacial shrinkage) (see Fig. 1.4). In practice, risk
analysis has so far usually been applied to phenomena lasting from hours to months.
Whileriskanalysisisakeypolicytoolforclimateriskmanagement,includingdealing
with unavoided losses and damages, it cannot effectively address those impacts that
are irreversible and permanent.
1.4
A Broadening Research Landscape–Chapter
Summaries
Over the last few years research on L&D has grown in number and focus. In this
section, we summarise some of the most relevant ﬁndings from the various book
chapters providing a review of key topics addressed in the book. Building on fore-
words by policy makers and negotiators from developing (Dawn Pierre-Nathoniel
of the Small Island State of Saint Lucia) and developed countries (Ingrid-Gabriela

14
R. Mechler et al.
Hoven of Germany), the book is divided into ﬁve sections, for which we shortly
summarise the respective chapters.
1.4.1
Setting the Stage: Key Concepts, Challenges
and Insights
The chapter on the Ethical Challenges in the Context of Climate Loss and Dam-
age by Ivo Wallimann-Helmer, Lukas Meyer, Kian Mintz-Woo, Thomas Schinko
and Olivia Serdeczny sets out the main types of justice and ethical challenges rel-
evant to the L&D debate. The authors argue that a clear differentiation between
mitigation, adaptation policy domains and L&D policy is important to understand
the normative implications of L&D. They show why distributive and compensatory
justice perspectives are of key relevance to capture all ethical entitlements stemming
from adaptation needs and the materialisation of L&D. Of particular importance, the
chapter presents a distributive justice perspective for understanding ethical implica-
tions of L&D in the short- to medium-term, arguing that L&D can be understood as
undeserved harm demanding redistribution to even out this unfairness.
Laurens M. Bouwer in his contribution on Observed and Projected Impacts
from Extreme Weather Events: Implications for Loss and Damage presents
the current knowledge on observed and projected impacts, and risks from extreme
weather events in light of anthropogenic climate change. Research on the subject
has focused on three key drivers: changes in extreme weather hazards due to natu-
ral climate variability and anthropogenic climate change, changes in exposure and
vulnerability, and any implemented risk reduction efforts. Studies currently iden-
tify increasing exposure as the dominant driver, through growing populations and
increases in assets at risk. The chapter further elaborates on how residual weather-
related losses (i.e., impacts after implemented risk reduction and adaptation) have not
yet been attributed to anthropogenic climate change. The author holds that globally
increasing asset exposure will lead to increases in risk, yet presents evidence that vul-
nerability has declined; thus, it appears there is potential for reducing risks through
DRR and adaptation. At country scale, and particularly for developing countries, the
evidence points towards increasing risk, indicating the need to signiﬁcantly upgrade
climate risk management efforts and international support. This stage-setting chapter
thus shows the challenges in understanding global trends in losses and damages,
impacts, and risks from disasters in light of climate change.
Thomas Schinko, Reinhard Mechler and Stefan Hochrainer-Stigler build on the
discussions on ethics and trends in impacts and risks. In their chapter on the Risk
and Policy Space for Loss and Damage: Integrating Notions of Distributive and
Compensatory Justice with Comprehensive Climate Risk Management they
ask whether a policy framework can be developed around a broad notion of risk
to identify a distinct L&D policy space. The authors see ample potential in align-
ing comprehensive climate risk analytics with distributive and compensatory justice

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
15
considerations alongside principles of need and responsibility linked to risk-based
actions. Building on the ﬁndings of the trends and ethics chapters, the authors develop
a policy proposal arguing for international support for needs-based comprehensive
climate risk management. At the same time, they also propose to include action on
liabilities attributable to anthropogenic climate change and associated impacts. They
identify a policy space composed of, what they call curative and transformative
measures. Transformative measures are measures that go beyond the standard tool-
box of risk management, also involving actions that change fundamental systems’
attributes. Curative action would be triggered through the identiﬁcation of unavoided
and unavoidable losses and damages attributed with relatively high conﬁdence to cli-
mate change (examples are impacts linked to sea-level rise and glacial retreat; see
IPCC 2014a). Presenting and going beyond a public ﬁnance application, the authors
maintain that the broad risk and justice approach developed may be applied to other
highly contested L&D issues such as migration and the preservation of cultural her-
itage, as discussed elsewhere in the book.
1.4.2
Critical Issues Shaping the Discourse
A number of issues have been critical for shaping the discourse. Importantly, the
role of attribution has been in the limelight. The chapter on Attribution: How is it
Relevant for Loss and Damage Policy and Practice? by Rachel A. James, Richard
G. Jones, Emily Boyd, Hannah R. Young, Friederike E. L. Otto, Christian Huggel
and Jan S. Fuglestvedt provides an overview of the state of scientiﬁc evidence linking
losses and damages to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, and takes a criti-
cal look at the relevance of this science for L&D policy and practice. The authors’
point of departure is a consideration of the existing understanding and perceptions
of attribution among policy-makers and observers to L&D discussions. Following
several years of research into stakeholder perspectives on attribution and L&D, they
ﬁnd that attribution is often associated with responsibility and blame, and therefore,
some might prefer to avoid discussions of attribution. Yet, as the authors argue, attri-
bution science itself is not about responsibility, but rather is a scientiﬁc investigation
of causal links between elements of the earth system and society. The chapter there-
fore outlines available research into the causal connections between anthropogenic
climate change and L&D from a climate science view focused on changes in hazard,
but also from a risk research view that examines the drivers of exposure and vulnera-
bility. The chapter closes with an examination of potential applications of attribution
research, highlighting its importance to inform practical actions to avert, minimise
and address L&D.
As mentioned, the L&D debate has been strongly shaped by political rationale.
Elisa Calliari, Swenja Surminski and Jaroslav Mysiak’s chapter on the Politics of
(and behind) the UNFCCC’s Loss and Damage Mechanism reviews political
science research and takes an international relations view on the L&D discourse
to enhance understanding of current negotiation processes. It also points out ways

16
R. Mechler et al.
forward for research and policy. Adopting a multi-faceted notion of power drawing
on neorealist, liberal and constructivist schools of thought, the authors examine the
structuralist paradox in L&D negotiations in light of the fact that smaller parties to
the convention have been able to successfully negotiate key milestones with stronger
parties. The authors emphasise the relevance of discursive power for L&D decisions.
Framing L&D in ethical and legal terms has been important to developing standards
shared and agreed upon beyond the UNFCCC context, including basic moral norms
linked to island states’ narratives of survival and the reference to international cus-
tomary law (see also the ethics chapter by Wallimann-Helmer et al. 2018). Looking
forward, they however argue that a change in narrative may be conducive to truly
achieve collective action on L&D as an issue of common concern countering the risk
of the policy debate becoming a win-lose negotiation “game.”
Legal actions on climate change have been proliferating in recent years. Flo-
rentina Simlinger and Benoit Mayer explore the current status of debate around
Legal Responses to Climate Change Induced Loss and Damage. The discussion
reviews the legal literature, scoping out the spectrum of potential legal actions on
L&D including key challenges and possible directions for further research. The dis-
cussion broadly examines private and public climate change litigation with examples
from around the world. It also lays out how human rights issues have been applied
in international law with a view towards L&D. As one focus, the authors examine
the applicability of the no-harm principle in climate change. This principle, which
has long been applied in international law, requires states to refrain from activities
that have potential to cause signiﬁcant transboundary harm, and to prevent actors
within its jurisdiction from carrying out such activities. The chapter, furthermore,
presents legal actions with relevance for L&D negotiations. A synopsis of the various
legal responses to L&D highlighting their premises, speciﬁc challenges and proposed
remedies, provides a succinct summary of the discussion.
Non-economic Loss and Damage (NELD) is a distinct theme in the work plan of
the Loss and Damage Executive Committee (WIM Excom). The chapter on Non-
economic Loss and Damage and the Warsaw International Mechanism by Olivia
Serdeczny starts by providing a deﬁnition of NELD as climate-related material- and
non-material impacts, risks to well-being, and assets and goods not commonly traded
in the market. Examples comprise loss of cultural identity, sacred places, as well as
humanhealthandlives.Initialanalysisshowsthatthetwomaincharacteristicsofnon-
economic values are their context-dependence and incommensurability. The author
suggests that these attributes need to be preserved and respected when considering
measures to avoid the risk of NELDs as part of comprehensive risk management
approaches. Addressing NELDs in a central mechanism under the UNFCCC requires
substantial understanding of the permanently lost values and their functions for those
negatively affected.
Studies of L&D from climate change have focused strongly on human systems
and tended to overlook the mediating role of ecosystems and the services ecosys-
tems provide to society. This is a signiﬁcant knowledge gap as losses and damages
to human systems often result from permanent or temporary disturbances to ecosys-
tems services caused by climatic stressors. The chapter on the Impacts of Climate

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
17
Change on Ecosystem Services and Resulting Losses and Damages to People
and Society written by Kees van der Geest, Alex de Sherbinin, Stefan Kienberger,
Zinta Zommers, Asha Sitati, Erin Roberts and Rachel James advances understand-
ing of the impacts of climatic stressors on ecosystems in light of the implications
for losses and damages to people and society. The chapter develops a conceptual
framework for studying the complex relations, which is applied to a case study of
multi-annual drought in the drylands of the West-African Sahel. This case study
exhibits the complexity of causal links between climate change, climate variability
and speciﬁc weather and climate events leading to losses and damages, including
warming, multi-decadal drought, and ﬂooding. The authors conclude the chapter by
advising against the oversimpliﬁcation of causality and suggest that governance and
natural resource management should be given attention in future research and policy
discussions.
How do we understand displacement and resettlement in the context of climate
change? Alison Heslin, Natalie Delia Deckard, Robert Oakes and Arianna Montero-
Colbert’s contribution on Displacement and Resettlement: Understanding the
Role of Climate Change in Contemporary Migration presents challenges and
debates in the literature on climate change impacts and the growing global ﬂow of
people. The authors position their discussion within the literature on environmental
migration, presenting associated deﬁnitions, forms of environmental migration and
ways to measure the movement of people. The literature on the reception of migrants
and migrant resettlement is also presented. The discussion is contextualised through
a selection of cases where the environment plays a role in displacing populations,
including sea level rise in Paciﬁc Island States, cyclonic storms in Bangladesh, deser-
tiﬁcation in West Africa, and deforestation in South America’s Southern Cone. The
examples highlight the complex set of losses and damages incurred by population
displacement in each case.
1.4.3
Research and Practice: Reviewing Methods and Tools
The chapter on the Role of the Physical Sciences in Loss and Damage Decision-
Making by Ana Lopez, Swenja Surminski and Olivia Serdeczny elaborates on con-
tributions that physical climate science can make to improve decision-makers’ under-
standing of climate-related losses and damages. For climate science both the present
and future are of relevance when estimating actual and potential losses and damages
associated with climate change. For both timescales climate science seeks to under-
stand those aspects that determine the climate-hazard, including the links between
human induced changes in climate and climate variability, the probability of occur-
rence of extreme meteorological events (e.g., rainfall), and the resulting hazards
leading to losses and damages (e.g., ﬂood). The chapter reviews the approaches used
to assess this component of risk. Particular attention is paid to the identiﬁcation of
sources of uncertainty and the potential for providing robust information to support
decision-making. As the authors demonstrate, uncertainty does not imply policy

18
R. Mechler et al.
inaction. To this end, they present tools and approaches developed in the context of
CCA and DRR, which, as the authors show, are also of relevance for L&D.
Understanding all components of impacts and risks is crucial for considering fur-
ther policy actions. Wouter Botzen, Laurens Bouwer, Paolo Scussolini, Onno Kuik,
Marjolijn Haasnoot, Judy Lawrence and Jeroen Aerts present approaches for Inte-
grated Disaster Risk Management and Adaptation aimed at informing L&D pol-
icymakers. Insights provided refer to how risk management and adaptation options
interact with options discussed in the L&D debate (such as insurance), as well as
how L&D-related activities may support risk reduction and adaptation in vulner-
able communities and countries. The authors particularly focus on outlining how
risk management can help people and societies to adapt to the increasing impacts of
weather-related disasters in relation to anthropogenic climate change. The perspec-
tive established is one of holistic risk management comprising state-of-the-art risk
assessment methods, socio-economic evaluations of risk management and adaptation
options—including household-scale risk reduction strategies and insurance schemes
for residual risk. The method of adaptation pathways is presented as an innova-
tive contribution for coping with uncertainty in the timing and intensity of climate
change impacts. Case studies on Jakarta, Ho Chi Minh City, Mexico, Bangladesh,
Netherlands, New Zealand and Germany illustrate each of these topics with concrete
insight.
Laura Schäfer, Koko Warner and Sönke Kreft’s contribution on Exploring and
Managing Adaptation Frontiers with Climate Risk Insurance follows a similar
veinastheadaptationpathwayspropositiondiscussedabove.Theauthorssuggestthat
climate insurance, a key focus of policy discussion and implementation, may serve as
an entry point and tool for exploring adaptation frontiers, which are closely linked to
the concept of limits and deﬁned in the literature as a “transitional space between safe
and unsafe domains” (Preston et al. 2014). Introducing climate risk insurance (also
covered in the chapter by Linnerooth-Bayer et al. 2018), the authors propose three
routes through which an insurance focus may contribute to this exploration. The ﬁrst
route provides an action-focussed framework for signalling the magnitude, location,
and exposure to climate-related risks, as well as on any actual and potential adapta-
tion limits. The second route supports actors in moving away from adaptation limits
by improving ex-ante decision making, incentivising risk reduction and reducing
uncertainty around climate-resilient development, while the third route helps actors
to stay within the tolerable risk space by facilitating ﬁnancial buffering as part of risk
ﬁnancing approaches. The authors also highlight that insurance-based approaches
are not a silver bullet, and suggest that these are effectively embedded in a com-
prehensive climate risk management framework integrating other risk-reduction and
management strategies (for a similar point, see the chapter by Wallimann-Helmer
et al. 2018).
Unsurprisingly, climate ﬁnance has been a hot topic for the L&D debate and has
been receiving a lot of emphasis in current policy dialogue (in 2018 it is the focus
of the so-called Suva Dialogue under the UNFCCC informing potential actions on
ﬁnance leading up to the WIM review in 2019). The evidence base is, however,
almost non-existent and there are very few empirical and model-based estimates

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
19
of L&D ﬁnance needs. Anil Markandya and Mikel González-Eguino present what
we can learn about possible L&D ﬁnance needed from an economic angle in the
chapter on Integrated Assessment for Identifying Climate Finance Needs for
Loss and Damage: A Critical Review. This economic perspective presents and
critically reviews a methodological approach that builds on economic rationality for
modelling market-based and monetised risks, and actual and perceived trade-offs
between investment into income-generating actions, climate mitigation and adapta-
tion. Speciﬁcally, the authors present estimates using Economic Integrated Assess-
ment Modelling (EIAM), which calculates economically optimal responses to cli-
mate change mitigation and adaptation in terms of maximising welfare (GDP) a
few decades into the future. Interpreting modelled residual damages as unavoided
losses and damages, a number of implications emerge from the analysis. The authors
emphasise that uncertainties are very large and any meaningful projections of resid-
ual damages in the medium to long term are currently not feasible. Furthermore,
residual damages are found to strongly vary by region as well as by climate scenario.
Overall, the chapter ﬁnds residual damages to appear signiﬁcant under a variety of
models, and for a range of climate scenarios for both developing and developed
countries.
1.4.4
Geographic Perspectives and Cases
Many chapters in this volume contextualise their discussions and ﬁndings with exam-
ples of place-based insight. The section on geographic perspectives and cases focuses
strongly on local experience in relation to L&D. Small Island Developing States
(SIDS), being highly vulnerable to climate change due to, among others impacts, sea-
level rise and associated consequences, started the discussion on L&D and are very
vocal in the debate. John Handmer and Johanna Nalau localise the global debate by
focusing on Paciﬁc SIDS in their contribution on Understanding Loss and Damage
in Paciﬁc Small Island Developing States. Speciﬁcally, the authors provide com-
mentary regarding the risk and options space (as discussed in Schinko et al. 2018
and Mechler and Schinko 2016) in the Western Paciﬁc SIDS context, particularly in
Vanuatu, where many of the livelihood activities are subsistence-based, reliant on the
current climate and its variability, and already seriously disrupted by extreme weather
events. As the authors show, for some low-lying island states climate change poses
an existential threat, and the region is increasingly recognised as one that is most
immediately vulnerable to potential mass migration and relocation due to climate
change. The authors thus ﬁnd the options-policy space for SIDS very constrained as
demonstrated through evidence on soft (intolerable risk) and hard limits (irreversible
high-level risk). The authors conclude with a proposal to mainstream L&D aspects
into sectoral policies and strategies in Paciﬁc SIDS in order to better manage the soft
limits and understand any hard limits that could affect vulnerable communities.
Migration and displacement driven by climate-related impacts and risks is a reality
in the Paciﬁc and other regions. The chapter on Climate Migration and Cultural

20
R. Mechler et al.
Preservation: The Case of the Marshallese Diaspora by Alison Heslin expands
that conversation by addressing the consequences of the relocation of Marshallese
Islanders on their cultural heritage, an important component of NELD. The low-lying
islands of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, with little capacity to withstand
even minor increases in sea level and tides, are an important case in point, as its
population is faced with relocation in the immediate future. Interestingly, nearly a
third of the population already lives outside of the Marshall Islands, beneﬁtting from
visa free entry into the United States. This provides an evidence base for helping to
anticipate future challenges faced by those who will be displaced by rising sea levels.
The study draws on data from interviews with migrants from the Marshall Islands
regarding accounts of life in the United States and identiﬁes challenges (differences in
livelihoods,familystructures,foodhabits,etc.),aswellasopportunities(betteraccess
to various forms of employment, improved healthcare and cultural preservation in the
midst of the Marshallese diaspora). The study closes by laying out how understanding
the means through which Marshallese migrants maintain cultural traditions and the
challenges they face can help to address potentially irreversible, but in this case,
avoidable losses of cultural traditions in the event of mass displacement from these
small islands.
Suggestions have increasingly been brought forward regarding the potential for
partnerships between public and private sectors and civil society for devising and
implementing options that manage critical climate-related risks at scale. But how are
such models and partnerships organised? What can be learned from existing activities
and how can learning be upscaled? The chapter Supporting Climate Risk Manage-
ment at Scale: Insights from the Zurich Flood Resilience Alliance Partnership
Model Applied in Peru and Nepal by Reinhard Mechler, Colin McQuistan, Ian
McCallum, Wei Liu, Adriana Keating, Piotr Magnuszewski, Thomas Schinko and
Finn Laurien reports on the learnings from one such partnership, the Zurich Flood
Resilience Alliance–a multi-actor partnership launched in 2013 to enhance commu-
nities’ resilience to ﬂoods at local to global scales. The chapter presents learnings
from two cases where ﬂood risk, ampliﬁed by climate change, has been eroding liveli-
hoods leading to some soft limits. In the Karnali and Koshi river basins in Nepal,
communities are facing rapid on-set ﬂash ﬂoods during the monsoon season that, in
the absence of appropriate early warning technology, have led to severe loss of life
and assets. In the Rimac and Piura river basins in Peru, the wellbeing of communities
in the absence of effective preparedness has been severely affected by low probability,
but high impact El Niño episodes. Options to overcome these impacts have included
identifying novel evacuation routes and emergency plans, the development of ﬂood
brigades, and supporting communities to interact with local governments on DRR
planning. This critical examination of the experience across geographies and scales
leads the authors towards suggestions for identifying novel organisational, funding
and support models involving NGOs, researchers and the private sector, side by side
with public sector institutions.
The Arctic is a “laboratory” of physical transformation, where climate change
is happening about two times faster than the global average; there is high evidence
that meltwater from Arctic sources accounts for 35 percent of the current global

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
21
sea level rise. Local impacts are of relevance as well, particularly those on social
systemsandresponses.Arcticcommunitieshavehadtoseekwaystodealwithrapidly
changing environmental conditions that are leading to social impacts such as through
outmigration, similar to the experience in the global South. Yet, the international
debate on L&D has not sufﬁciently addressed the Arctic region so far. In their chapter
on Loss and Damage in the Rapidly Changing Arctic Mia Landauer and Sirkku
Juhola provide the ﬁrst such research contribution reviewing the literature to show
what impacts of climate change are already visible in the Arctic. The authors present
a literature review with local cases to provide empirical evidence of climate losses
and damages in the region. Particularly, they show that there is solid evidence and
examples of outmigration and relocation. In addition to the implications of Arctic
losses and damages for the international debate, the authors suggest a need for new
governance mechanisms and institutional frameworks to tackle losses and damages
in this quickly changing region.
1.4.5
Policy Options and Other Response Mechanisms
for the L&D Discourse
Theﬁnalsectionofthebookdealswithpolicyoptionsandotherresponsemechanisms
relevant to L&D. The chapter by Masroora Haque, Mousumi Pervin, Saibeen Sultana
and Saleemul Huq on Towards Establishing a National Mechanism to Address
Loss and Damage: A Case Study from Bangladesh reports on innovative efforts
that are underway to establish a national mechanism that addresses losses and dam-
ages in Bangladesh–a highly climate-vulnerable country which, at the same time, is
one of the forerunners in comprehensive risk management. Bangladesh has a history
of well-established DRR policies involving institutions at national and sub-national
levels, as well as political and regulatory institutions. Furthermore, the country has
been one of the ﬁrst to establish a National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA),
which has led to the Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan. Loss and
Damage is currently not explicitly addressed, yet particularly the work area on com-
prehensive Disaster Management provides an entry point with activities underway
or planned on insurance, as well as on tackling climate migration and displacement.
Taking explicit account of L&D is the main gap in Bangladesh’s adaptation and DRR
policy framework, and thus the motivation behind the plans is to set up a legislative,
institutional and policy-related mechanism to address climate-induced losses and
damages.
As presented by Florentina Simlinger and Benoit Mayer, legal actions on climate
change are proliferating. The contribution by William Frank, Christoph Bals and
Julia Grimm on the Case of Huaraz: First Climate Lawsuit on Loss and Damage
against an Energy Company before German Courts reports on the ﬁrst climate
litigation lawsuit in Germany and the ﬁrst speciﬁcally on L&D. The case has been
brought forward by the plaintiff, Saul Luciano Lliuya of the city of Huaraz in the

22
R. Mechler et al.
Andes nestled just below the Palcacocha glacial lake. Global warming has led to dan-
gerous increases in the lake’s volume, increasing the risk of a glacial ice avalanche.
Such an avalanche would cause an outburst ﬂood from the lake potentially leading to
massive destruction and loss of life. As a precedent, in 1941 an outburst ﬂood killed
more than 5,000 people in Huaraz. Saúl Luciano Lliuya’s climate lawsuit, brought
forward with support from the German NGO Germanwatch in 2016 against the Ger-
man energy company RWE, seeks support from the company to make a contribution
to risk measures that avoid such a glacial lake ﬂood, proportional to the company’s
share in historical CO2 emissions (about 0.5% overall). The case, dismissed in the
ﬁrst instance, has since been accepted by a higher regional court in Germany after
an appeal, and is now (mid 2018) in the midst of the evidentiary stage.
Much of the L&D debate has focused on climate risk insurance as a possible
response mechanism. This policy response is explored by JoAnne Linnerooth-Bayer,
Swenja Surminski, Laurens M. Bouwer, Ilan Noy and Reinhard Mechler in Insur-
ance as a Response to Loss and Damage? The chapter reﬂects on recent evidence
and questions whether insurance instruments can serve the prevention and cure inten-
tions of the WIM and the Paris Agreement, in terms of reducing climate-related risk
and providing an equitable response to L&D from weather extremes in developing
countries. The chapter lays out the forms and functions of insurance for climate-
related extremes and emphasises the substantial beneﬁts as well as the substantial
costs of both micro-insurance programs and regional insurance pools for provid-
ing post-disaster relief and reconstruction. Notwithstanding the actual and potential
beneﬁts, the authors ﬁnd that absent signiﬁcant intervention in their design and imple-
mentation, insurance mechanisms as currently implemented, will likely fall short of
fully serving the preventive and curative aspirations of developing country parties
to the WIM. The authors emphasise the importance of burden-sharing, as insurance
is generally loaded with an expense and risk margin in addition to the proﬁt margin
for commercial insurance. The chapter, while advising caution about relying largely
on market solutions to provide insurance for fulﬁlling the prevention and cure aspi-
rations, thus emphasises the criticality of international and public intervention in
climate risk insurance provision.
Technology plays a critical role in coping with climate impacts and risks so that
adaptation limits are not further breached. Yet, vulnerable communities dispropor-
tionally impacted by climate change, often cannot beneﬁt from existing technology.
Those engaging in the L&D debate have only very recently sought dialogue with
discussions on technology, such as under the UNFCCC. The chapter Technology for
Climate Justice: A Reporting Framework for Loss and Damage as part of Key
Global Agreements by Marc van den Homberg and Colin McQuistan examines how
technology can shape limits to adaptation and how international reporting on tech-
nology (in)justice as part of key global agreements may help. The authors develop
a technology-reporting framework with components of access, use and innovation,
which is consequently applied via the example of transboundary early warning sys-
tems deployed in South Asia. They ﬁnd that for vulnerable countries only a limited
set of state-of-the-art technologies is available, and the reality of capacity and funding
gaps means only the bare minimum, largely copycat types of technology, is utilised.

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
23
Similar to the ethics chapter, the authors thus argue that more attention to distributive,
compensatory and procedural climate justice principles in terms of distributing tech-
nology, building capacity and providing ﬁnance is sorely needed to widen the access,
use and innovation of the technology spectrum available to developing countries. The
authors ﬁnally suggest to include technology for climate justice in the Adaptation
Communications, and making reporting mandatory on actual and expected impacts
of L&D measures.
1.5
From Findings to Propositions for the Loss
and Damage Debate
The book chapters cover speciﬁc issues showing the wide variety of research on
L&D, as well as the many interconnections, shared concepts, tools and methods. In
this section, we align some of the key ﬁndings and suggestions for moving forward.
We identify ﬁve key propositions that, as we assert, hold potential for providing a
roadmap for further ‘grounding’ the so far highly political debate. The propositions
are essentially cross-cutting and reﬂect the architecture of the book in terms of con-
sidering insights from the various sections (setting the stage, critical issues, methods
and tools, cases, policy options). The propositions each build on relevant ﬁndings that
then inform suggestions for an actionable element to be taken forward by research,
policy and practice.
Proposition 1 Risk management is an effective entry point for aligning perspectives
and debates. Framed comprehensively, coupled with climate justice considerations
and linked to established risk management practice, it may help to identify a distinct
policy space for Loss and Damage.
The L&D debate has been polarised between those advocating for compensation
for actual losses and damages, and others suggesting support for tackling future risks
by (further) employing disaster risk management and climate insurance solutions.
While L&D remains a political concept developed during the UNFCCC negotiations,
it has (some of) its technical roots in risk management, which can be built upon to
identify a joint and distinct policy space (see chapters by Schinko et al. 2018; Botzen
et al. 2018; van den Homberg and McQuistan 2018).
Risk management brings along established practices for dealing with extreme
events and any trends therein, and thus may provide an operational framework with
a tested set of methods and tools (see Bouwer 2018; Botzen et al. 2018). Yet, a
broader perspective on climate risk research and policy appears sorely needed. In
its 5th Assessment Report (IPCC 2014b), the IPCC laid the foundations for such a
perspective by broadly deﬁning climate-related risks and the potential (as well as
limits) for adaptation to key risks faced by geographic regions both today and in the
future, characterised by scenarios of aggressive or business-as-usual mitigation and
adaptation. This perspective requires to take into account non-economic losses and

24
R. Mechler et al.
damages (NELD) suchas tohumanhealthandlives, but alsolosses of cultural identity
and sacred places. The issue of NELD, which has garnered substantial attention in the
discourse, but is generally not accounted for in standard DRR approaches, implies
a need for well considering its two main characteristics, context-dependence and
incommensurability (Serdeczny 2018).
Understanding and acting on climate risks is intricately linked to justice and eth-
ical considerations. Justice and fairness issues have played a key role in the climate
change policy and academic discourse since the beginning of the UNFCCC pro-
cess–most prominently through the distributive justice principle of “common but
differentiated responsibilities” (UNFCCC 1992). These considerations also come
into play when contemplating issues of compensatory justice due to the unequal dis-
tribution of historical and current greenhouse gas emissions, the adverse distribution
of impacts between the global North and South, and the understanding that climate
change is projected to lead to unavoidable and potentially irrecoverable losses and
damages (chapter by Wallimann-Helmer et al. 2018). Building on risk and justice
principles, Schinko et al. 2018 propose a distinct L&D policy action space that can
be identiﬁed by aligning a needs-based, distributive justice perspective, proposing
support for transformative climate risk management beyond adaptation possibilities,
with a compensatory justice perspective which upholds considerations for curative
options for liabilities attributable to anthropogenic climate change (see also Mechler
and Schinko 2016).
Interestingly, both types of principles and policy actions are already seeing some,
if incipient, attention today. Transformative risk management is increasingly debated
in the L&D discourse, and involves issues such as offering alternative livelihoods to
those that are being affected (e.g., switching from smallholder farming to service sec-
tor employment) and assisting with voluntary migration where needed. Options under
this rubric exhibit substantial overlap with interventions of disaster risk reduction
and adaptation, yet may be focussed further on avoiding and managing intolerable
risks that touch on hard and soft limits. Insurance applications, a mainstay of policy
attention, e.g., through the G20/V20 InsuResilience initiative (InsuResilience 2017),
can in principle be a useful entry point for tackling transformation; yet, caution must
be exercised about commercial insurance products that place the full burden on the
most vulnerable. Premium support in the form of subsidies and technical assistance
can potentially transform insurance into a mechanism that meets the aspirations of
the L&D discussions. Insurance options furthermore hold additional potential by
serving as a concept and tool for exploring the magnitude and locations of adapta-
tion frontiers, “socio-ecological system’s transitional … operating spaces between
safe and unsafe domains” (Preston et al. 2014) (see chapters by Schäfer et al. 2018
and Linnerooth-Bayer et al. 2018).
Complementing transformative risk management, largely appropriate for sudden-
onset impacts and risks, with efforts for dealing with slow-onset events, the space for
curative measures overlaps to some extent with demands for compensation, which
have been ruled out by the Paris Agreement, but not from the debate in general
(see chapters by Simlinger and Mayer 2018; Schinko et al. 2018). In addition to
policy proposals in the domain of insurance, essentially a pre-arranged compensation

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
25
mechanism for any losses and damages funded by premium payments of those at-risk,
via a climate attribution-triggered capitalisation mechanism (see proposition 4), the
most advanced ideas in the context of curative measures have been articulated with
regard to support for involuntary climate-induced displacement and forced migration.
A climate displacement facility is being discussed under the WIM and proposals for
approaches to address climate-induced displacement have been made (e.g., through
the Nansen Principles on Climate Change and Displacement (NRC & IDMC 2011)
and the Peninsula Principles on Climate Displacement within States (Displacement
Solutions 2015).
Identifying the ﬁnancial costs associated with such a distinct risk and policy L&D
space is currently extremely difﬁcult–particularly as the remit of action has not been
concretised. There are some limited studies extrapolating from estimates of climate
impact and adaptation costs. If L&D is framed as dealing with residual impacts
after adaptation, models using economic optimality reasoning calculate impact and
option costs in the billions of US dollars; yet, as Markandya and González-Eguino
(2018) ﬁnd, there is currently low conﬁdence regarding damage costs, cost of adap-
tation and residual impacts. Beyond ﬁnance considerations, the risk management
approach to L&D—if framed comprehensively (with associated principles, methods
and tools)—may indeed embrace some of the other salient perspectives of the dis-
course, such as those emphasising burden sharing and the limits to adaptation, and
thus help to constitute a systematic platform for future work of the WIM and beyond
(see chapter by Lopez et al. 2018).
Proposition 2 Attribution science is advancing rapidly, leading to increased under-
standing of the causal connections between emissions, climate, human systems, and
Loss and Damage. While the science has often been associated with responsibility
and blame, its aim is to analyse drivers of change fundamental to informing actions
to minimise, avert, and address loss and damage.
Climate change attribution research originally focused on examining drivers of
observed changes in global temperature. Attributing losses and damages is much
more complex and requires investigating how anthropogenic greenhouse gases
(GHGs) inﬂuence many other climatic variables apart from global temperature, as
well as their inﬂuence on the oceans, cryosphere, biosphere, and human systems on
a range of timescales. It also requires a comparison of the inﬂuence of anthropogenic
emissions on hazards, with other potential drivers (for example land use change, and
aerosols), as well as drivers of exposure and vulnerability. Therefore, this is not only
a question for climate scientists, but requires integration of research from a number of
scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Researchers are stepping up to this grand challenge and have made
rapid advances, particularly in a new ﬁeld of climate change attribution research
focusing on single extreme weather events. This now allows statements to be made
about how anthropogenic emissions have inﬂuenced the likelihood or magnitude of
speciﬁc heatwaves, heavy rainfall events, wind storms, and droughts. Several recent
event attribution studies have also demonstrated the inﬂuence of GHG emissions
on the probability of monetary losses from ﬂooding and loss of life from cold- and
heat-related events (see chapter by James et al. 2018).

26
R. Mechler et al.
The evidence base on climate impacts is growing. As summarised in IPCC’s AR5,
impacts of climate change have been observed on all continents and across all oceans.
There is high conﬁdence that worldwide glacial retreat, permafrost thawing, and mass
bleaching of coral reefs can be mainly attributed to climate change (IPCC 2014a).
Yet, impacts to human systems and speciﬁc events are much harder to assess due to
multifactorial causation, and in particular, since vulnerability reducing actions have
been employed in many locations and for many weather-related hazards (see chapters
by Bouwer 2018; Lopez et al. 2018). Therefore, despite the advances, it may never
be possible to generate a complete inventory of L&D attributable to anthropogenic
emissions. In addition to the uncertainties inherent in the attribution problem, a lack
of robust time series data in many hot spot locations hinders progress in research
and risk management (Huggel et al. 2016b). Thus, policy-advisors and negotiators
should not expect the emergence of fully conclusive evidence regarding the inﬂuence
of climate variability and change on speciﬁc incidences of losses and damages and,
in particular, should not expect the strength of evidence to be equivalent between
events and between countries.
Some of the most frequently discussed applications of attribution science for L&D
have been made in relation to liability and legal responses. Attribution research is
relevant to private and public administration litigation as well as to breaches of
customary international law—the no-harm principle (see chapter by Simlinger and
Mayer 2018). In the case of litigation before a national or international court or tri-
bunal, legal cases are faced with a myriad of technical difﬁculties, particularly what
concerns the issue of causality. Litigation requires diligence to prevent or minimise
harm, as well as considering the indirect consequences of harmful wrongdoing in
addition to direct impacts, which are normally considered in litigation. Thus, the case
of Lliuya versus RWE, which is currently (mid 2018) in the evidentiary stages after
having been admitted to a higher regional court in Germany, is exemplary in two
regards. It is considered the ﬁrst case on L&D in Germany and elsewhere, as several
tort-based cases have been rejected by, for example, courts in the USA. It also inno-
vatively seeks remuneration for risk management efforts to be undertaken to avoid
future, irreversible risk (loss of life) associated with glacial lake outburst ﬂooding
affected by glacial retreat attributed with high conﬁdence to anthropogenic climate
change (see chapter by Frank et al. 2018). Given the many technical difﬁculties to
be addressed, for legal actions overall, it may be interesting to consider working
with a so-called modiﬁed general causation test—as has been done successfully for
other risk classes, such as tobacco, nuclear risk etc. (see chapter by Simlinger and
Mayer 2018). This would mean focusing on proving that GHG emissions are gener-
ally capable of causing damages and that a causal link between action and damage
is probable. Such a rationale would render the requirement to attribute a speciﬁc
climatic event to the emissions of a speciﬁc person or entity unnecessary. Therefore,
a lack of attribution evidence may not necessarily be a limiting factor in some legal
responses. Overall, attribution research has the potential for much broader applica-
bility. It has an important role to play in helping to understand losses and damages,
including through the quantiﬁcation of risks; investigating the relative importance of
different drivers of change; and identifying timescales on which signiﬁcant impacts

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
27
of climate change emerge in different regions of the world. All of these applica-
tions are fundamental to informing actions to address, avert and minimise losses and
damages.
Proposition 3 Climatechangeresearchhasfocusedonunderstandingphysical/hard
limits to adaptation, but less so on the soft limits, which are strongly shaped by social
processes. Applying a multiple lines of evidence framework, we ﬁnd that soft limits to
intolerable risk are already being breached in several geographies globally. Climate
change is a key factor, yet exposure growth and vulnerability dynamics particularly
need attention for a comprehensive understanding.
While research on adaptation limits is still in its infancy, the L&D debate has
had some focus on adaptation limits, which have been deﬁned as points beyond
which actors’ objectives are compromised by intolerable risks. Adaptation research
has focused on how climate-related hazards lead to hard adaptation limits, that is,
where no adaptive technologies and actions are feasible anymore (see also chapter
by van den Homberg and McQuistan 2018). Soft adaptation limits, characterised
by a lack of options and concurrent socio-economic trade-offs, have received less
attention. In addition, empirical research on losses and damages has only recently
started to consider the mediating role of ecosystems and their services provided
to society (van der Geest et al. 2018). Notably, a very recent volume co-edited by
Johanna Nalau, an author in this book, provides a ﬁrst comprehensive overview
of research and experience on adaptation limits (see Filho and Nalau 2018). As
one methodological contribution along a multiple lines of evidence approach, risk
analysisshowsawayforwardforidentifyinghardandparticularlysoftlimits.Starting
with risk identiﬁcation for assessing risks in monetary and/or non-monetary terms,
the process of risk evaluation examines the ability of agents (households, private and
public sectors) to respond to risk leading to qualiﬁcations and quantiﬁcations of risk
(in)tolerance.
The cases presented in this volume provide a multiple lines of evidence approach
for considering any actual or potential adaptation limits. The research documented
in the book has generated evidence that poor and vulnerable people and communities
already persist at the edges of these boundaries and limits. Overall, the case studies
in this book report multiple instances where soft and hard adaptation limits are (at
risk of) being breached. Climate change is generally a key factor, yet other drivers
and constraints also need to be understood and addressed. In addition, observed vul-
nerability dynamics imply that adaptation and building resilience lead to reductions
in vulnerability.
Paciﬁc Island states are particularly vulnerable to sea level rise, high tides, and
salinisation, but also to droughts. Some communities experience seasonal food short-
ages, and malnutrition is common, indicating that part of the Paciﬁc (as discussed
for the state of Vanuatu) is already at or near the tolerable/intolerable interface. As a
result, relocations and some resettlement are already occurring or planned (Handmer
and Nalau 2018). As people move, understanding the means through which SIDS
migrants maintain cultural traditions and the challenges current migrants face can

28
R. Mechler et al.
help address potentially irreversible, but avoidable, losses of cultural traditions in the
event of mass displacement as analysed for the Marshall Islands (Heslin 2018).
Faced with the increasing impacts of climate change and recognising that gains
in development and poverty alleviation are severely hampered by climate change,
the government of Bangladesh is planning to set up a national L&D mechanism
to support those that have already incurred signiﬁcant losses and damages beyond
adaptation (Haque et al. 2018). Flood climate risk management case studies on
Nepal, India, Bangladesh and Peru show limits to adaptation due to inadequate
transboundary governance, insufﬁcient devolution of mandates and funding to lower
administrative levels, as well as inadequate access to and use of technology (chapters
by Mechler et al. 2018b; van den Homberg and McQuistan 2018).
A case study on the Sahel and the semi-arid drylands of East Africa discusses
how climate variability and change have affected primary productivity and food
production as supporting and provisioning ecosystem services. Losses and damages
reported in this context are livestock losses, food insecurity, displacement, cultural
losses (including traditional livelihood systems), and ﬁnally, conﬂict related to these.
The case also shows that oversimpliﬁcation must be avoided in a context of multiple
risk factors, including the governance or management of natural resources. Examples
for risk factors presented are a lack of investment in water-related infrastructure, gaps
in access to agricultural technology, barriers to pastoralists’ freedom of movement,
or lack of health care services, which have also contributed to increasing losses and
damages (van der Geest et al. 2018).
Migration, particularly if forced, is an example of “beyond the limits of adapta-
tion.” Contextualising migration as multifactorial, a selection of cases including sea
level rise in Paciﬁc Island States, cyclonic storms in Bangladesh, and desertiﬁca-
tion in West Africa, as well as deforestation in South America’s Southern Cone,
presents instances of migration driven by climate change and variability, as well as
other factors (Heslin et al. 2018). The Arctic case on relocation and outmigration
provides examples of instances “beyond adaptation” due to institutional, political,
organisational and jurisdictional factors hindering implementation of adaptation to
climate impacts, thus leading to losses and damages (Landauer and Juhola 2018).
Proposition 4 Insurancemechanisms canonlyservethepreventionandcureaspects
emphasised in the L&D debate if they are made affordable with support from outside
the insurance pool, and if they are purposefully designed to encourage or prescribe
risk reduction. While their applications are limited to sudden onset events, insurance
instruments canhelptoexploreadaptationfrontiers, inwhichmanyfactors, including
technology, play a role.
Climate insurance has been one of the foci of debate on L&D and the WIM
work plan. Recent experience, however, shows that insurance instruments can only
serve as a risk-reducing and equitable response to losses and damages from weather
extremes in developing countries if they are designed to explicitly reward risk-
reducing behaviour and if they are supported by those outside the insurance pool.
Commercial insurance is based on the principle of mutuality, according to which the

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
29
insured participate in a disaster pool according to their risk class and pay a risk-based
premium. Thus, the commercial insurance approach, unless subsidised or otherwise
supported, does not share risk beyond the at-risk insured community.
This stands in contrast to most micro-insurance and regional insurance pools,
which for the most part receive substantial support from the international community.
Support appears to be increasingly based on the concept of solidarity, consistent with
thehumanitarianprinciplesunderlyingdevelopmentassistance,andnotonattribution
or responsibility for climate change impacts experienced by vulnerable countries. A
common challenge with the solidarity principle, which features subsidies and other
support to reduce premiums, is its failure to incentivise policyholders to reduce
their risk. In meeting this challenge, international ﬁnancial institutions, development
agencies and other donors will need to reconcile the contending equity and preventive
objectives in their support of climate insurance programs.
Two examples of insurance instruments serving the poor, the African R4 micro-
insurance program and the African Risk Capacity (ARC) regional insurance pool,
combine these goals. Neither is a commercial insurance enterprise; neither is fully
characterised by risk-based premiums underlying the principle of mutuality; and both
are highly subsidised. The R4 program’s success has largely been attributed to its
close connection with public safety net programs in the participating countries, while
ARC requires member governments to develop disbursement plans to ensure that the
most vulnerable parts of the population beneﬁt from the macro scheme. Moreover,
ARC’s innovative Extreme Climate Facility (XCF) program may additionally bring
in the concept of accountability, motivated by a perceived ethical or legal obligation
for compensating those experiencing climate-attributed losses and damages, linked
to changes in observed extreme weather in the region (Linnerooth-Bayer et al. 2018).
In general terms, insurance is a pre-arranged compensation mechanism for losses
incurred and can be offered by both private and public actors. Public relief or catastro-
phe funds serve a similar function, while neither collecting premiums nor (typically)
estimating risks. Many countries in the world have contingency funds to support
victims of disasters. In Bangladesh, there is debate on whether to set up a national
mechanism that would reimburse climate-related losses incurred by farmers and
households that go beyond their adaptation possibilities (for example, if ﬂooding
pushes people to leave their homesteads or drought renders farming not proﬁtable)
(Haque et al. 2018).
In such a context, insurance in a wider sense (including national compensation
pools) may innovatively be used as a navigational tool for exploring the adaptation
frontiers (broad loci around adaptation limits). Such exploration may involve: (i) sig-
nallingthemagnitude, location, andexposuretoclimate-relatedrisks andcases where
adaptation limits are approached or breached; (ii) supporting actors to move away
from adaptation limits through improved ex-ante decision making and incentivising
risk reduction and adaptation by creating a more certain environment for decisions
on climate resilient development; and (iii) enabling actors with access to appropriate
risk ﬁnancing measures to remain in the tolerable risk space. One proposition is thus
to embed climate insurance and other related instruments in a comprehensive climate

30
R. Mechler et al.
risk management approach accompanied by other risk reduction and management
strategies in international cooperation programs and projects (Schäfer et al. 2018).
Proposition 5 Policy deliberations have exhibited characteristics of a win-lose
negotiation “game.” A more inclusive narrative highlighting collective ambition,
mutual beneﬁts and the role of transformation can point a way forward.
The L&D discourse has exhibited strong ethical and legal undertones appealing
to standards shared or agreed beyond the UNFCCC context, such as demanding
redistribution for harm via international customary law. While it is useful to prove
the need for action on L&D by appealing to moral standards recognised by both
contending parties in international arenas, a change of narrative may be conducive to
achieving collective action and to avoid turning the issue into a win-lose negotiation
“game” (chapter by Calliari et al. 2018).
With evidence that climate impacts and risks are also strongly affecting industri-
alised countries directly (e.g., Arctic) and indirectly (e.g., through migration), it may
be fruitful to frame the debate in terms of the beneﬁts that acting on adaptation and
its possible limits and failures could bring for developed countries. Considerations
could range from working towards more resilient global supply chains to gaining
support for climate displacement and refugees. Exploring mutual gains would con-
tribute to bolstering collective action on an issue of common concern, as well as to
elevate and better integrate L&D into other climate negotiation agenda items, such
as capacity building, technology and the global stocktake.
A general and joint entry point is the SDG agenda, essentially supporting UN
member states’ transformation around a set of global developmental goals. The
SDGs, passed in 2015, constitute a universal set of 17 goals and 169 targets deﬁning
development aspiration and ideally, collective transformation for all signatory coun-
tries (UN 2015). The SDG debate casts an integrated and unifying perspective on
development. Integrated—as it requires a synergistic look across these broad devel-
opment goals, and unifying—as it involves all signatories (Dodds and Donoghue
2016). Risk is fundamental in many regards. There are down-side risks (disasters
and climate-related impacts as at the heat of the L&D discourse), which are explic-
itly and implicitly mentioned in many of the SDGs. The need for and beneﬁts of
up-side risk taking through increased investment into the socio-economic develop-
ment objectives is another one of the cross-cutting issues.
Transformative risk management, which, as we argue, should be one of the pillars
of the L&D policy space, thus may be one of those issues of common concern
(Schinko et al. 2018). Innovative polycentric science-society partnership models
are springing up to support the implementation of transformative risk management
options that manage critical disaster risks “on the ground”. Evidence from hotspots,
not only has potential to inform better development policies, but may also support
actions in industrialised countries facing similar issues (Mechler et al. 2018b). The
role of technology is crucial in this context, as it shapes risks and limits to adaptation
and risk management. Yet, access in developing countries is constrained. National
hydrological and meteorological services in developing countries, for example, are

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
31
limited in their possibilities to improve the spatial and temporal resolution of ﬂood
forecasts. This is because these countries lack the funding and capacity necessary to
use state-of-the-art technology (i.e., computing power, advanced hydrological and
meteorological models) and acquire or collect more granular data, such as digital-
elevation-model data. In addition, the poor and the vulnerable can often not beneﬁt
from early warning/early action information due to the digital divide.
As an area of future work, progressive levels of innovation and technology are
required to lead from incremental to transformative change, where the UNFCCC’s
Technology Mechanism can play a more prominent role (van den Homberg and
McQuistan 2018). The WIM Executive Committee may innovatively consider an
assessment of technologies from a climate justice perspective, which means rethink-
ing access, use, innovation, ﬁnance, and (bottom-up) governance mechanisms from
the perspective of the poor and vulnerable.
Enabling joint learning regarding technologies (and other means of implemen-
tation) for buffering against high-level risks is necessary for understanding how to
overcome soft and avoid hard limits. This may be appealing for developed and devel-
oping countries sharing similar exposure and risk, where limits to adaptation need
attention (e.g., in the Arctic, mountain areas with glacial retreat, etc.). A joint narra-
tive will be needed to support and incentivise the requisite transformation of energy
generation, consumption, but also adaptation efforts across the globe. An improved
understanding of actual and potential “dangerous interference with the climate sys-
tem” at risk management scales and across geographies may indeed be a decisive
enabler.
1.6
Conclusions
The book has been a joint effort of the Loss and Damage Network that brings together
scientists and practitioners from more than 40 institutions around the globe to inform
the L&D debate. Offering a detailed overview of the multiple facets of knowledge
emerging on the topic of L&D, the volume is a ﬁrst comprehensive review of the
state of play regarding the science, political debate, practice as well as any policy
proposals seeing or looking for implementation. The WIM is now well into its 5-year
work plan, and after COP23 in Bonn, the ﬁrst climate summit chaired by a small
island state (Fiji), the WIM stands to deliver on its various workstreams. In 2018, one
focus is on the role of ﬁnance in supporting actions to address L&D, for which the
so-called Suva expert dialogue was carried out in mid-2018 to project a way forward.
This and other activities will inform the review of the WIM by the UNFCCC Parties
during sessions of the subsidiary bodies in 2019, leading to proper review at COP25
in Rio. As we demonstrated, the science has matured, and interest in the issues is
increasing. The IPCC has started to pick up on the discussion and considers L&D
in its 1.5 °C report published in October 2018, in special reports on oceans and the
cryosphere, and land, as well as in its 6th Assessment Report due in 2022.

32
R. Mechler et al.
Further work is to be done, ideally in close collaboration with policy advisors,
negotiators, civil society, private- and public-sector representatives and, particularly,
those vulnerable people and communities around the world that are actually and
potentially affected by climate-related impacts and risks. The partners in the Loss
and Damage Network stand ready to further contribute to the debate and help to
identify actions to avert, address and minimise Loss&Damage.
References
Forewords
Pierre-Nathoniel D (2018) Perspective from St. Lucia. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Sur-
minski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods
and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp v–vi
Hoven I-G (2018) Perspective of Germany. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S,
Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp vii–viii
Book Chapters (In Sequential Order)
Mechler R, et al (2018a) Science for loss and damage. ﬁndings and propositions. In: Mechler R,
Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate
change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 3–37
Wallimann-HelmerI,MeyerL,Mintz-WooK,SchinkoT,SerdecznyO(2018)Theethicalchallenges
in the context of climate loss and damage. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S,
Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 39–62
Bouwer LM (2018) Observed and projected impacts from extreme weather events: implications for
loss and damage. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds)
Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham,
pp 63–82
Schinko T, Mechler R, Hochrainer-Stigler S (2018) The risk and policy space for loss and damage:
integrating notions of distributive and compensatory justice with comprehensive climate risk
management. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss
and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp
83–110
James RA, Jones RG, Boyd E, Young HR, Otto FEL, Huggel C, Fuglestvedt JS (2018) Attribution:
how is it relevant for loss and damage policy and practice? In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T,
Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods
and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 113–154
Calliari E, Surminski S, Mysiak J (2018) The Politics of (and behind) the UNFCCC’s loss and
damage mechanism. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J
(eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer,
Cham, pp 155–178

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
33
Simlinger F, Mayer B (2018) Legal responses to climate change induced loss and damage. In:
Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from
climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 179–203
Serdeczny O (2018) Non-economic Loss and damage and the Warsaw international mechanism. In:
Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from
climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 205–220
van der Geest K, de Sherbinin A, Kienberger S, Zommers Z, Sitati A, Roberts E, James R (2018)
The impacts of climate change on ecosystem services and resulting losses and damages to people
and society. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss
and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp
221–236
Heslin A, Deckard D, Oakes R, Montero-Colbert A (2018) Displacement and resettlement: under-
standing the role of climate change in contemporary migration. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko
T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, meth-
ods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 237–258
Lopez, A, Surminski S, Serdeczny O (2018) The role of the physical sciences in loss and damage
decision-making. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds)
Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham,
pp 261–285
Botzen W, Bouwer LM, Scussolini P, Kuik O, Haasnoot M, Lawrence J, Aerts JCJH (2018) Inte-
grated disaster risk management and adaptation. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski
S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 287–315
Schäfer L, Warner K, Kreft S (2018) Exploring and managing adaptation frontiers with climate
risk insurance. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss
and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp
317–341
Markandya A, González-Eguino M (2018) Integrated assessment for identifying climate ﬁnance
needs for loss and damage: a critical review. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S,
Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 343–362
Handmer J, Nalau J (2018) Understanding loss and damage in Paciﬁc Small Island developing states.
In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage
from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 365–381
Heslin A (2018) Climate migration and cultural preservation: the case of the Marshallese diaspora.
In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage
from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 383–391
Mechler R, McQuistan C, McCallum I, Liu W, Keating A, Magnuszewski P, Schinko T, Szoenyi
M, Laurien F (2018b) Supporting climate risk management at scale. Insights from the Zurich
ﬂood resilience alliance partnership model applied in Peru & Nepal. In: Mechler R, Bouwer
L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change.
Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 393–424
Landauer M, Juhola S (2018) Loss and damage in the rapidly changing arctic. In: Mechler R,
Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate
change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham, pp 425–447
Haque M, Pervin M, Sultana S, Huq S (2018) Towards establishing a national mechanism to address
loss and damage: a case study from Bangladesh. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski
S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 451–473
Frank W, Bals C, Grimm J (2018) The case of Huaraz: ﬁrst climate lawsuit on loss and damage
against anenergycompanybefore Germancourts.In: MechlerR,BouwerL,SchinkoT,Surminski
S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 475–482

34
R. Mechler et al.
Linnerooth-Bayer J, Surminski S, Bouwer LM, Noy I, Mechler R (2018) Insurance as a response to
loss and damage? In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds)
Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy options. Springer, Cham,
pp 483–512
van den Homberg M, McQuistan C (2018) Technology for climate justice: a reporting framework for
loss and damage as part of key global agreements. In: Mechler R, Bouwer L, Schinko T, Surminski
S, Linnerooth-Bayer J (eds) Loss and damage from climate change. Concepts, methods and policy
options. Springer, Cham, pp 513–545
Other References
AOSIS (2008) Proposal to the AWG-LCA multi-window mechanism to address loss and damage
from climate change impacts. 1–8
Biermann F, Boas I (2017) Towards a global governance system to protect climate migrants: taking
stock. In: Mayer B, Crepeau F (eds) Research handbook on climate change, migration and the
law. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK, Northampton, MA, USA, pp 405–419
Birkmann J, Welle T (2015) Assessing the risk of loss and damage: exposure, vulnerability and risk
to climate-related hazards for different country classiﬁcation. Int J Global Warming 8(2):191–212
Boyd E, James RA, Jones RG, Young HR, Otto F (2017) A typology of loss and damage perspectives.
Nat Clim Change 7:723–729
Crosland T, Meyer A, Wewerinke-Singh M (2016) The Paris agreement implementation blueprint:
a practical guide to bridging the gap between actions and goal and closing the accountability
deﬁcit (Part 1). Environ Liability 25:114–125
Displacement Solutions (2015) Annual Report. http://displacementsolutions.org/ds-annual-report-
2015. Accessed 23 May 2017
Dodds F, Donoghue D (2016) Negotiating the sustainable development goals: a transformational
agenda for an insecure world. Routledge, Milton Park, UK
Dow K, Berkhout F, Preston BL, Klein RJT, Midgley G, Shaw MR (2013) Limits to adaptation.
Nat Clim Change 3:305–307. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1847
Filho LW, Nalau J (2018) Limits to climate change adaptation. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany
Gall M (2015) The suitability of disaster loss databases to measure loss and damage from climate
change. Int J Global Warming 8(2):170–190
Huggel C, Bresch D, Hansen G, James R, Mechler R, Stone D, Wallimann-Helmer I (2016a)
Attribution of irreversible loss to anthropogenic climate change. In: EGU General Assembly
Conference Abstracts, p 8557
Huggel C, Stone D, Eicken H, Hansen G (2016b) Reconciling justice and attribution research to
advance climate policy. Nat Clim Change 6:901–908
INC (1991) Vanuatu: Draft annex relating to Article 23 (Insurance) for inclusion in the revised
single text on elements relating to mechanisms (A/AC.237/WG.II/Misc.13) submitted by the
Co-Chairmen of Working Group II
InsuResilience (2017) Joint statement on the InsuResilience Global Partnership. 14 November 2017.
Bonn
IPCC (2012) Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adapta-
tion. A special report of working groups i and ii of the intergovernmental panel on climate change.
In: Field CB, Barros V, Stocker TF, Qin D, Dokken DJ, Ebi KL, Mastrandrea MD, Mach KJ,
Plattner G-K, Allen SK, Tignor M, Midgley PM (eds). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, and New York, NY, USA
IPCC (2014a) Summary for policymakers. Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnera-
bility. Part A: global and sectoral aspects. contribution of working group II to the ﬁfth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ,

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
35
Mach KJ, Mastrandrea MD, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, Estrada YO, Genova RC, Girma
B, Kissel ES, Levy AN, MacCracken S, Mastrandrea PR, White LL (eds) Cambridge University
Press. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp 1–32
IPCC (2014b) Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part A: global and
sectoral aspects. contribution of working group ii to the ﬁfth assessment report of the intergov-
ernmental panel on climate change. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ, Mach KJ, Mastrandrea
MD, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, Estrada YO, Genova RC, Girma B, Kissel ES, Levy AN,
MacCracken S, Mastrandrea PR, White LL (eds) Cambridge University Press. United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, Cambridge, p 1132
IPCC (2018) The IPCC and the Sixth Assessment cycle. IPCC: Geneva, Switzerland. http://ipcc.c
h/pdf/ar6_material/AC6_brochure_en.pdf
James R, Otto F, Parker H, Boyd E, Cornforth R, Mitchell D, Allen M (2015) Characterizing loss
and damage from climate change. Nat Clim Change 4:938–939
Klein R, Midgley GF, Preston BL, Alam M, Berkhout F, Dow K, Shaw MR (2014) Adaptation
opportunities, constraints, and limits. In: Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnera-
bility. part a: global and sectoral aspects. Contribution of working group II to the ﬁfth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel of climate change. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ,
Mach KJ, Mastrandrea MD, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, Estrada YO, Genova RC, Girma B,
Kissel ES, Levy AN, MacCracken S, Mastrandrea PR, White LL (eds). Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp 899–943
Linnerooth-Bayer J, Mace MJ, Verheyen R (2003) Insurance-related actions and risk assessment
in the context of the UNFCCC. Background paper for UNFCCC workshop on insurance-related
actions and risk assessment in the framework of the UNFCCC, 11–15 May 2003, Bonn, Germany
Mace MJ, Verheyen R (2016) Loss, damage and responsibility after COP21: All options open for
the Paris Agreement. Rev European Commun Int Environ Law 25:197–214. https://doi.org/10.1
111/reel.12172
Mayer B (2016) The relevance of the no-harm principle to climate change law and politics. Asia
Paciﬁc J Environ Law 19:79–104. https://doi.org/10.4337/apjel.2016.01.04
Mechler R (2017) Climate policy: transparency for loss and damage. Nat Clim Change 7:687–688
Mechler R, Schinko T (2016) Identifying the policy space for climate loss and damage. Science
354(6310):290–292
Mechler R, Bouwer LM, Linnerooth-Bayer J, Hochrainer-Stigler S, Aerts JCJH, Surminski S,
Williges K (2014) Managing unnatural disaster risk from climate extremes. Nat Clim Change
4:235–237. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2137
Norwegian Refugee Council/Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (NRC/IDMC) (2011) The
Nansen conference: climate change and displacement in the 21st Century, 7 June 2011. http://
www.refworld.org/docid/521485ef4.html. Accessed 23 May 2018
Page EA, Heyward C (2017) Compensating for climate change loss and damage. Polit Stud
65(2):356–372
Pinninti KR (2013) Climate Change Loss and Damage. Econ Leg Found. Springer, Berlin
Preston B, Dow K, Berhout F (2014) The climate adaptation frontier. Sustainability 5(3):1011–1035
Roser D, Huggel C, Ohndorf M, Wallimann-Helmer I (2015) Advancing the interdisciplinary dia-
logue on climate justice. Clim Change 133:349–359
Schäfer L, Balogun K (2015) Stocktaking of climate risk assessment approaches related to loss and
damage. UNUEHS Working Paper, No. 20. United Nations University Institute of Environment
and Human Security: Bonn, Germany
Schinko T, Mechler R (2017) Applying recent insights from climate risk management to opera-
tionalize the loss and damage mechanism. Ecol Econ 136:296–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ec
olecon.2017.02.008
Schinko T, Mechler R, Hochrainer-Stigler S (2016) A methodological framework to operationalize
climate risk management: managing sovereign climate-related extreme event risk in Austria.
Mitig Adapt Strat Glob Change. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-016-9713-0

36
R. Mechler et al.
Serdeczny O, Zamarioli L (2018) Loss and damage ﬁnancing must push beyond market-based
measures. Climate Analytics January 29, 2018. http://theenergymix.com/2018/01/29/loss-and-d
amage-financing-must-push-beyond-market-based-measures/
Serdeczny O, Waters E E, Chan S (2017) Non-economic loss and damage in the context of climate
change (Discussion Paper 3/2016). Bonn, Germany, German Development Institute (DIE)
Tschakert P, Coauthors (2017) Climate change and loss, as if people mattered: values, places, and
experiences. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev Clim Chang 8:e476. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.476
UN (1992) United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. United Nations, New York
UN (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development, A/RES/70/1
UNFCCC (2007) Decision 1/CP.13, Bali Action Plan, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2007/6/Add.1
UNFCCC (2009) Ideas and proposals on the elements contained in paragraph 1 of the Bali Action
Plan
UNFCCC (2010) Decision 1/CP.16, The Cancun agreements: outcome of the work of the
ad hoc working group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention, UN Doc
FCCC/CP/2010/7/Add.1
UNFCCC (2012) Decision 3/CP.18, Approaches to address loss and damage associated with climate
change impacts in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change to enhance adaptive capacity, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2012/8/Add.1
UNFCCC (2013) Decision 2/CP.19, Warsaw International Mechanism for loss and damage associ-
ated with climate change impacts, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1
UNFCCC
(2015)
Decision
1/CP.21,
Adoption
of
the
Paris
Agreement,
UN
Doc
FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1
UNFCCC (2016) Decision 3/CP.22, Warsaw international mechanism for loss and damage associ-
ated with climate change impacts, UN Doc FCCC/CP/2016/10/Add.1
UNFCCC (2018) Loss and damage: Online guide. Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/ﬁle
s/resource/Online_guide_on_loss_and_damage-May_2018.pdf
UNISDR (2015) Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015–2030, A/CONF.224/CRP.1.
http://www.unisdr.org/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf. Accessed 31 Mar 2015
Van der Geest K, Warner K (2015) Editorial: loss and damage from climate change: emerging
perspectives. Int J Global Warming 8(2):133–140
Vanhala L, Hestbaek C (2016) Framing climate change loss and damage in UNFCCC negotiations.
Global Environ Politics 16:111–129. https://doi.org/10.1162/GLEP_a_00379
Verheyen R, Roderick P (2008) Beyond adaptation—the legal duty to pay compensation for climate
change damage. WWF-UK, Climate Change Programme discussion paper, p 2008
Wallimann-Helmer I (2015) Justice for climate loss and damage. Clim Change 133:469–480
Warner K, Van der Geest K (2013) Loss and damage from climate change: local-level evidence
from nine vulnerable countries. Int J Global Warming 5:367. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJGW.201
3.057289
Wewerinke-Singh M (2018a) Climate migrants’ right to enjoy their culture. In: Behrman S, Kent
A (eds) Climate refugees: beyond the legal impasse? Earthscan/Routledge: Abingdon. UK and
New York, NY, USA
Wewerinke-SinghM(2018b)Stateresponsibilityforhumanrightsviolationsassociatedwithclimate
change. In: Sébastien D, Sébastien J, Alyssa J (eds) Routledge handbook of human rights and
climate governance, Routledge, Abingdon, UK and New York, NY, USA

1
Science for Loss and Damage. Findings and Propositions
37
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.
