24/04/17 09:36
Feminist Judgments in International Law | Völkerrechtsblog
Page 1 of 4
http://voelkerrechtsblog.org/feminist-judgments-in-international-law/
BLOG
 
SERVICE
 
COMMUNITY
 
ABOUT
!
LOVEDAY HODSON
LOVEDAY HODSON — TROY LAVERS
TROY LAVERS —  24 April, 2017
 Print
  " 0  
!  "  #  $
FEMINIST CRITIQUES OF INTERNATIONAL COURTS
SYMPOSIUM
Feminist Judgments in International
Law
The Idea of the Feminist Judgments Projects
A feminist critique of international courts can confront the lack of representation and
inclusion of women as well as women’s lack of access to courts and the justice system.
However, any critique of International Courts would be limited without a critical analysis
of their output, the all important judgment! Instead of performing the usual academic
critique of where the judgment was lacking in some analysis or form, another way to start
this critique is through a total re-writing process of the judgment from a feminist
perspective.
Feminist Judgments Projects all started in Canada with a frustrated and creative group of
legal academics and activists rewriting six judgments from the Supreme Court of Canada;
since then, feminist judgments projects have spread like wild ﬁre in various domestic
jurisdictions. From the UK to Australia, New Zealand, Ireland the USA, and India, re-
written judgments are providing alternatives to landmark judgments. We decided to take
this phenomenon to International Law, and formed a large group of academics and
activists who tackled various international judgments and decisions. With over 50 people
involved and 14 chambers re-writing judgments, the end result will be a fascinating new
body of re-imagined international law judgments.
The Project
As such, the Feminist International Judgment Projects is a unique venture in which legal
scholars have emerged from their usual academic pursuits and collaborate in the ‘real
world’ task of (re)writing key international judgments from a feminist perspective. In our
project, the participants worked in groups similar to a chamber and had to thrash out
what their ‘feminist judgment’ would be for their particular case. In departing from
academic convention and exploring the possibilities and limitations to be found in the
collaboration and compromise of writing judgments, rather than focus on individual
viewpoints, participants had their perspectives constantly challenged.
Chambers also had to compose an introduction to the judgment that would road map the
differences between the original and re-written judgments for the reader; following the
judgment, the chamber have been asked to reﬂect on the process in its entirety, allowing


24/04/17 09:36
Feminist Judgments in International Law | Völkerrechtsblog
Page 2 of 4
http://voelkerrechtsblog.org/feminist-judgments-in-international-law/
the reader glimpses into the chamber’s process and the challenges faced in the re-
writing process.
The Judgments
The rules were simple: no sources could be used that were not available at the time the
original judgment was delivered, and chambers had to follow the rules of the particular
court they were re-writing a judgment from. There are many different courts and
tribunals involved in the project, for example:
France v. Turkey, Permanent Court of International Justice
Germany v. Italy, International Court of Justice
Reservations to the Genocide Convention, International Court of Justice
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. UK and USA, International Court of Justice
Gomez-Limon v. INSS; Court of Justice for the European Union
Comunidad Indígena Xákmok Kásek v. Paraguay, Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Kell v. Canada, Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
ABC v. Ireland, European Court of Human Rights
Goodwin v. UK, European Court of Human Rights
Leyla Sahin v. Turkey, European Court of Human Rights
Ruusunen v. Finland, European Court of Human Rights
Opuz v. Turkey, European Court of Human Rights
The Prosecutor v. Lubanga Dyilo, International Criminal Court
Prosecutor v. Brima, Kamara and Kanu, Special Court for Sierra Leone
The Results and Impact
The judgments cover a range of interesting and valuable topics as women’s reproductive
rights, freedom of religion, a women’s right to property, gender identity and the female
child soldiers’ experience in conﬂict. However, importantly, judgments also cover issues
and topics that may not speciﬁcally relate to women or have an obvious feminist agenda.
The original Lotus case is a good example of this: renamed the Bozkurt case in our
collection of judgments, the chamber reframes the story of the collision between the
Lotus and the Bozkurt ships differently and revisualised the meaning of the concept of
sovereignty in international law. Other judgments on more traditional topics also offer
fertile ground for a feminist re-write for example, the provisional measures application
by Libya fearing economic sanctions from the US and UK after the Lockerbie plane crash.
This case opens a discussion on potential review of a Security Council Resolution and the
use or misuse of power in international organisations. Several chambers referred to the
context of the political situation of their particular case in outlining their judgment,
context was seen as important for telling the story and remembering the people involved
in the case. Other important topics such as the limits of treaty reservations and the
extent of state immunities can, through feminist insight, be re-written to expose a

24/04/17 09:36
Feminist Judgments in International Law | Völkerrechtsblog
Page 3 of 4
http://voelkerrechtsblog.org/feminist-judgments-in-international-law/
different and fascinating insight into these topics.
Overall these judgments, to be published by Hart, provide a forum in which feminist legal
scholars can engage in a meaningful way with (and challenge) patriarchal values and
inequalities that are engrained in international legal norms, methodologies and
principles. It allows for an active, imaginative – even playful – response to those
structural biases, while at the same time demanding the author (the judge) to provide a
concrete response and alternative to them. Although other projects precede us that have
involved the re-writing of judgments in some form, this project is unique not least in so
far as it depends upon a collaborative methodology.
Promoting Feminist Scholarship
A feminist international judgments project is both timely and relevant. Feminists are
increasingly at the forefront of critical international legal scholarship; in practice,
however, feminists’ work has arguably failed to make an impact on mainstream
international law and in judicial thinking. International Law is an area notoriously
dominated by male perspectives and a number of feminists have expressed concern
about the silencing of feminist voices in international law. This project raises to the
challenge of adopting innovative approaches in order to address this omission. The re-
writing of judgments demonstrates in meaningful ways possible alternatives to the
structural inequalities of traditional international law.
Troy Lavers and Loveday Hodson are both Associate Professors in Law at the University of
Leicester. They jointly co-ordinate the Feminist International Judgments Project and are
Convenors of the European Society of International Law’s interest group on Feminism and
International Law.
Cite as: Troy Lavers/Loveday Hodson, “Feminist Judgments in International Law”,
Völkerrechtsblog, 24 April 2017, doi: 10.17176/20170424-092937.
ISSN 2510-2567
Tags: European Court of Human Rights, International Courts, International Criminal Law, Legal imagination
Print
Facebook
Twitter
Email
No Comment




Related
Symposium: Feminist Critiques of
International Courts
Feminism and the International
Criminal Court – still an issue?
Let Not Triepel Triumph
17 April, 2017
In "Feminist Critiques of
International Courts"
19 April, 2017
In "Feminist Critiques of
International Courts"
23 December, 2014
In "Symposium"
PREVIOUS POST
Feminism and the International
Criminal Court – still an issue?
#
NEXT POST
This is the most recent story.

24/04/17 09:36
Feminist Judgments in International Law | Völkerrechtsblog
Page 4 of 4
http://voelkerrechtsblog.org/feminist-judgments-in-international-law/
Leave a reply
Logged in as ajv2016. Log out?
SUBMIT COMMENT
 Notify me of follow-up comments by email.
 Notify me of new posts by email.
Copyright © 2016 · | ISSN 2510-2567 | Impressum & Legal
%
!
&
