New Femininities

Also by Rosalind Gill
THE GENDER-TECHNOLOGY RELATION (with Keith Grint)
TECHNOBOHEMIANS OR THE NEW CYBERTARIAT
GENDER AND THE MEDIA
SECRECY AND SILENCE IN THE RESEARCH PROCESS (with Róisín Ryan-Flood)
Also by Christina Scharff
REPUDIATING FEMINISM (forthcoming)

New Femininities
Postfeminism, Neoliberalism 
and Subjectivity
Edited by
Rosalind Gill
and
Christina Scharff

Introduction, selection and editorial matter © Rosalind Gill 
and Christina Scharff 2011
Preface © Angela McRobbie 2011
Individual chapters © Contributors 2011
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified as the authors of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2011 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing 
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the 
country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2011  978-0-230-22334-9
ISBN 978-1-349-30851-4             ISBN 978-0-230-29452-3 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9780230294523

For Angela McRobbie


vii
Contents
Acknowledgements 
ix
Preface 
xi
Notes on Contributors 
xvi
Introduction 
1
Rosalind Gill and Christina Scharff
Part I Sexual Subjectivity and the Makeover Paradigm
1  Pregnant Beauty: Maternal Femininities under Neoliberalism 
21
 
Imogen Tyler
2  The Right to Be Beautiful: Postfeminist Identity and 
Consumer Beauty Advertising 
37
 
Michelle M. Lazar
3  Spicing It Up: Sexual Entrepreneurs and The Sex Inspectors 
52
 
Laura Harvey and Rosalind Gill
4  (M)Other-in-Chief: Michelle Obama and the Ideal of 
Republican Womanhood 
68
 
Lisa Guerrero
5  Scourging the Abject Body: Ten Years Younger and Fragmented 
Femininity under Neoliberalism 
83
 
Estella Tincknell
Part II Negotiating Postfeminist Media Culture
6  Are You Sexy, Flirty, Or A Slut? Exploring ‘Sexualization’ and 
How Teen Girls Perform/Negotiate Digital Sexual Identity on 
Social Networking Sites 
99
 
Jessica Ringrose
7  ‘Feminism? That’s So Seventies’: Girls and Young Women 
Discuss Femininity and Feminism in America’s Next Top Model 
117
 
Andrea L. Press
8  Media ‘Sluts’: ‘Tween’ Girls’ Negotiations of Postfeminist 
Sexual Subjectivities in Popular Culture 
134
 
Sue Jackson and Tiina Vares

viii Contents
 9  Is ‘the Missy’ a New Femininity? 
147
 
JongMi Kim
Part III Textual Complications
10  Of Displaced Desires: Interrogating ‘New’ Sexualities and 
‘New’ Spaces in Indian Diasporic Cinema 
161
 
Brinda Bose
11  Notes on Some Scandals: The Politics of Shame in Vers le Sud 
173
 
Sadie Wearing
12  The Limits of Cross-Cultural Analogy: Muslim Veiling and 
‘Western’ Fashion and Beauty Practices 
188
 
Carolyn Pedwell
Part IV New Femininities: Agency and/as Making Do
13  Through the Looking Glass? Sexual Agency and 
Subjectification Online 
203
 
Feona Attwood
14 Reckoning with Prostitutes: Performing Thai Femininity 
215
 
Jin Haritaworn
15  Migrant Women Challenging Stereotypical Views on 
Femininities and Family 
230
 
Umut Erel
16  Negotiating Sexual Citizenship: Lesbians and 
Reproductive Health Care 
246
 
Róisín Ryan-Flood
Part V New Feminisms, New Challenges
17  The New German Feminisms: Of Wetlands and Alpha-Girls 
265
 
Christina Scharff
18  The Contradictions of Successful Femininity: Third-Wave 
Feminism, Postfeminism and ‘New’ Femininities 
279
 
Shelley Budgeon
19 Skater Girlhood: Resignifying Femininity, Resignifying Feminism 
293
 
Dawn H. Currie, Deirdre M. Kelly and Shauna Pomerantz
20  Will These Emergencies Never End? Some First Thoughts about 
the Impact of Economic and Security Crises on Everyday Life 
306
 
Gargi Bhattacharyya
Index 
321

ix
Acknowledgements
This collection started life as an ESRC seminar series entitled New 
Femininities? We are grateful to Jane Arthurs, Ann Phoenix, Merl Storr, 
Estella Tincknell and Valerie Walkerdine who jointly organized the pro-
gramme of talks with us, as well as to everyone who presented their work 
and made the seminars the stimulating, enjoyable and productive occasions 
they were. We would also like to formally acknowledge our gratitude to 
ESRC for award number RES 451 26 0783 as well as to a follow-up award 
from British Academy reference SG-43703.
The chapters presented here are all original pieces of work, prepared spe-
cifically for this volume. We would like to express our appreciation to all 
the contributors for what we believe is a collection of outstandingly inter-
esting and challenging essays that struggle to ‘think’ and understand the 
contours of gender, sexuality, race, class and neoliberalism in this contra-
dictory moment. Without exception, the contributors have been a delight 
to work with, and have made the process of editing far easier than it might 
have been. We would also like to thank Alice Gavin and Chloe Preece for all 
their assistance with editing and preparing the manuscript and Christabel 
Scaife, Catherine Mitchell and their team at Palgrave for all their support. 
Our thanks also go to Joanne Kalogeras for her insightful comments on the 
introduction to this volume. We would also like to express our huge grati-
tude to Ana Sofia Elias for all her hard work on the Index, and to the team 
at Newgen for everything they did ‘behind the scenes’.
In addition, we each have people we would like to thank individually. 
Ros would like to thank colleagues, family and friends for their mix of sup-
port, good humour and intellectual sustenance – in particular Andy Pratt, 
Bruna Seu, Róisín Ryan-Flood, Shani Orgad, Stephanie Taylor, Gail Lewis, 
Meg Barker, Clare Hemmings, Imogen Tyler, Hazel Johnstone, Laura Harvey, 
Lynda Preston and Tom and Katarina Gill. She would also like to thank 
Christina for being such a pleasure to work with in preparing this volume, 
taking a long-standing intellectual collaboration to new levels of collegiality 
and friendship.
Christina would like to thank her colleagues for their intellectual and 
personal support, particularly Clare Hemmings, Sadie Wearing, Hazel 
Johnstone, Maria do Mar Pereira, Patrizia Kokot, Jonathan Dean, Natasha 
Marhia, Carolyn Pedwell, Marina Franchi, Amy Hinterberger, Deborah 
Finding, Joanne Kalogeras, and Rebekah Wilson. Her thanks also go to her 
friends Charles Jandreau, Leena Crasemann, Katharina Gnath, Olga Jugov, 
Nele Kirchner, Ana Hozyainova, Sarah Jones, Hyo Yoon Kang, David Saha, 
Eddie Cass, Sheila Cass as well as Maria Hoffmann-Lüning and Gisela Zenz. 

x Acknowledgements
Her special thanks go to her family – Anna Georgi, Philipp Scharff, Tim-
Owe Georgi, Christiane Scharff-Woelfing, Mae Georgi, Ada Georgi, Luisa 
Scharff, and her parents Heidi Scharff and Jörg Scharff. Christina really 
enjoyed working on this volume with Ros Gill, who she would like to thank 
for being such an inspiring, and supportive, colleague and friend.
Finally, both of us would like to express our admiration, affection and 
respect for Angela McRobbie who is, in our view, the leading figure working 
in this field, and a feminist intellectual whose scholarship has consistently 
taught us, challenged us and inspired us. In recognition of her enormous 
contribution to feminist cultural studies we would like to dedicate this book 
to Angela McRobbie.

xi
Preface
It gives me enormous pleasure to provide some words as a preface to this 
volume, and I regret that questions of space make it impossible for me to 
offer a response to every single chapter in this collection. The contents 
advance our understanding of current developments and permutations in 
the conditions of (mostly young) womanhood, the production of gendered 
subjectivities, and the various requirements to perform a kind of sexual-
ity which will be compliant with the changing needs of a global economy. 
The authors all recognize and engage with the changes which have come 
to characterize the distinctive modalities of power that comprise flows and 
luminosities and formations of attention which attend to young women 
in contemporary sociality. Most vivid here is the expectation of ‘equality’. 
Where there is no question of this being fulfilled in socio-economic terms, 
or even of it becoming a lively subject for discussion, nevertheless it is prom-
ulgated as a prevailing cultural norm, as though to say in capital letters ‘Girls 
and Women Are Now Equal’. This provides a new horizon of power against 
which all sociological analyses must now proceed. Some might see this as 
an intensification of power through tropes of imaginary freedom, others 
as the gender logic of neoliberal governmentality. Certainly this equality 
norm has become a notional feature of social, political and corporate insti-
tutions through the last twenty years. Yet this has proved intractable, refus-
ing to yield itself for analysis until recently. Maybe the reason for this was a 
‘double entanglement’, a seemingly progressive push-forward factor which 
has seen gay and lesbian partnerships recognized and legitimated, and girls 
and young women being provided with new avenues and opportunities for 
achievement in education and employment and with sexual freedoms in 
leisure. At the same time, indeed as part of this same package, modes of 
patriarchal retrenchment have been digging in, as these conditions of free-
dom are tied to conditions of social conservatism, consumerism and hostil-
ity to feminism in any of its old or newer forms.
Perhaps I should say at this point that I owe all of my own writing on these 
topics from about 2003 onwards, to the slim volume by Judith Butler titled 
Antigone’s Claim where she lays out the terrain of exactly this kind of scenario 
(Butler, 2000). Indeed I appropriated her re-reading of Antigone to reflect on 
how sexuality, family and kinship were being reconfigured to incorporate 
some of the strengths and achievements of feminism (Antigone’s courage 
and strength). But in doing so such values were also, at the same time being 
discredited and repudiated, being literally entombed in a darkened cave 
with the effect that a whole range of sentiments, desires and attachments 
were to be forgotten about, abandoned. Desires that could not be fitted into 

xii Preface
the family unit were considered irregular and increasingly unthinkable. 
This included, for example, political desires for feminist collectivity, for 
communality, for non-familial forms of kinship, for shared childcare, for a 
politicized non-monogamy, all of which no longer have a place in the polity, 
giving rise to a sense of loss and to a haunting melancholia.
One way in which this mode of neoliberal governmentality has more 
recently been discussed by Butler, by Joan Scott and others, is through the 
idea of instrumentality, where feminist ideals are hijacked by governments 
and agencies of the state in order to pursue a completely different agenda 
which often entails the denigration of other cultures where it is argued 
women are degraded or their human rights are violated (Butler, 2004; Scott, 
2007). And consistent with this instrumentalization is a celebratory rhetoric 
in regard to the high levels of sexual visibility and the seeming enjoyment 
factor accruing to women in Western capitalism, as the fruits of secular 
modernity and the benevolent state, as though to say to those of us living 
in the West, that we should remind ourselves of ‘how lucky we are’. Joan 
Scott has recently dissected the way in which such instrumentalization by 
government of ‘women’s rights’ is currently played out in France through 
the ‘politics of the veil’ and her argument can be extended to the banning 
of the burkha. Here we see something similar, if more aggressive, to what I 
argued in The Aftermath of Feminism (McRobbie, 2009). The UK government 
during the Blair years offered itself as the preferred agency for delivering 
women’s rights, such that self-organized feminism might wither away. In 
France we see the Sarkozy government in effect become champion of wom-
en’s freedoms directly at the expense of migrant communities, already mar-
ginalized and suffering from poverty and from being targets for endemic 
racism. In the current volume this development is vividly described in the 
essay by Sadie Wearing in her discussion of the film Vers le Sud. The ‘liber-
ated’ older woman who enjoys sexual encounters with a young man in Haiti 
emerges in the film as a blame-free neocolonizer inattentive to the conse-
quences of her pursuit of sexual satisfaction. Likewise in Carolyn Pedwell’s 
chapter there is a detailed analysis of some dangers which are attached to a 
desire by feminists to bring together debates about the veil with those about 
hyper-sexualization of young women through the rise of what has been 
called ‘porno-chic’. Pedwell argues that these versions of intersectionality 
nevertheless confirm underlying essentialisms; Sheila Jeffreys, for example, 
takes the ‘oppressive nature of ‘non-Western’ practices for granted and pro-
poses a universalist feminism which would see women as both ‘bareheaded 
and barefaced’ (I myself recall my own fury as a young woman at the 
anti-make-up and anti-fashion stance of the radical feminists of the early 
1980s; indeed such a stance encouraged myself and others to go to further 
extremes of flaunting the love of fashion, make-up, etc.) And Pedwell also 
argues that Duits and van Zoonen, in bringing the veil and the thong or 
G-string together, through a cross-cultural analogy with reference to sexual 

Preface xiii
regulation, are themselves also creating an axis of intelligibility which has 
its own limits and constraints. It feeds into a sense of this is how girls nowa-
days are to be understood, either as veil-wearing or thong- wearing. Pedwell 
is suggesting that unwittingly perhaps they are consolidating a trope in con-
temporary discourse, feeding into the moral panic and into a conventional 
manner of thinking which needs to be reconsidered.
Sexuality is of course a major theme throughout this volume; this entails, 
for example, our attention being critically drawn to the eroticization of the 
pregnant mother’s body, and, in Róisín Ryan-Flood’s article, to the realms 
of pain and injury which emerge at the social interface of the experiences 
of lesbian couples who are embarking on the process of becoming pregnant. 
As Ryan-Flood poignantly notes, this ‘remains to some degree an “under-
ground” activity’. The trajectories of openness and of new possibilities in 
reproductive technology are foreclosed or circumscribed by the sheer dis-
crepancy between the commercialized and celebratory discourses which 
are now targeted at the newly pregnant woman and her male partner and 
the realms of subterfuge activity and, at the very least shameful discom-
fort, on the part of lesbians who want to have their own children. And so 
what prevails across the boundaries of lesbian, queer and heterosexual is the 
intensification of disciplinary practices as part of a new moral economy of 
reproduction where an absence of feminism within public policy discourse 
results in the privatization of interests according to sexual preferences. For 
‘well behaved’ heterosexual couples who have almost ‘left it too late’ to have 
children, there are government agencies supporting their needs for fertil-
ity treatment, in sharp contrast to the few specialist agencies who are even 
aware of the needs of gays and lesbians in this regard and for whom the 
words ‘reproductive rights’ barely exist.
Across the chapters in this volume we see the subtle ways in which hetero-
sexuality becomes more assertive, more expansive and ebullient than ever. 
Many of the chapters convey the mechanisms through which this occurs, 
even when, as in the many popular television shows which address the issues 
of love, sex and desire, there is an incorporation of gay and lesbian peo-
ple. Laura Harvey and Ros Gill show how popular TV programmes like The 
Sex Inspectors endorse a notion of female performance which corresponds 
with the practices and rhetoric of pornography, and this theme reappears in 
many of the other chapters where the focus is on pre-teen and teenage girls, 
so much so that it becomes in effect the dominant vocabulary for popular 
sexual discourse, something which the abundant provision of pornography 
through the internet has made more possible than would have been the case 
prior to the growth of the new media. It is fitting then that I should conclude 
this preface with a more concentrated look at the way in which sexuality is 
reconfigured within the realms of the ‘new femininities’. One thing that is 
overwhelmingly apparent is the way in which the internet and new media 
along with popular culture have created a space of sexuality which borrows 

xiv Preface
its vocabulary from the world of pornography and the sex industry. This 
then informs the everyday sex talk of teenagers, and studies referred to in 
this volume report the widespread practices of girls’ own self-description as 
‘sluts’. Many of these girls talk dirty among themselves and with boys across 
the social networking sites in a way that would be unthinkable ten or fifteen 
years ago. The prevalence of explicit talk about oral sex, for example, or of 
girls posting pictures of their breasts onto websites (not just the more usual 
bikini shots) seems to me to point to the need for more in-depth analysis of 
what this all means culturally. The authors here make an impressive start on 
this task; there is a recognition of class, age and ethnic differences and how 
they play out in these sexualized friendships; there is also recognition of the 
pervasive use of irony and humour as in one girl calling her best friend her 
‘whore’. There is also lurking somewhere in the background a feminist-influ-
enced destigmatization of sex work. This active taking up of pornography as 
a mainstream part of everyday life must have the effect of depathologizing 
the sex work which is entailed in its production, since so many people could 
hardy be active consumers whilst simultaneously condemning those who 
create it or bring it to their computer screens. At the very least this reduces 
the scope for old-fashioned hypocrisy. There is a strand of popular femi-
nism which unites young women’s investment in this kind of porn-scene as 
a buttress against the reappearance of the old sexual double standard. And 
as is shown with great clarity in the chapter by Feona Attwood the genre 
of ‘altporn’ provides sexually explicit material (e.g. Furry Girl who does not 
remove her body hair) some of which takes its benchmarks from queer activ-
ist and sex positive groups and sub-cultures.
I am totally in agreement with Jessica Ringrose that a feminist pedagogy 
dealing with these topics and brought directly into the classrooms for teen-
age girls and boys is an urgent requirement, that they might be exposed 
to the range of debates and the different arguments made by second-wave 
feminists and now also by their contemporary counterparts. This would 
give girls better ammunition with which to deal with some of their doubts 
and misgivings, with their uncertainties about how to engage with this por-
nographic popular culture which is perhaps in the first instances appealing 
precisely because it is ‘bad’ or ‘shocking’ especially to parents and teachers. 
And finally I welcome the chapter by Jin Haritaworn on the racialized slur 
of prostitution which sticks onto the bodies of second-generation, mixed 
race Thai-English and Thai-German women. Haritaworn’s account of the 
Mail.Order.Brides/M.O.B.s,a group of Filipina-American artists who chal-
lenge the dominant imaginary which places such women as ‘maids’, ‘brides’ 
or ‘prostitutes’, draws attention to the ability of art to function as critique 
in a context where more conventional organizational structures for political 
resistance have become exhausted.
Angela McRobbie

Preface xv
Bibliography
Butler, J. (2000) Antigone’s Claim: Kinship between Life and Death (New York: Columbia 
University Press).
Butler, J. (2004) Precarious Life: The Power of Mourning and Violence (London: Verso).
McRobbie, A. (2009) The Aftermath of Feminism: Gender, Culture and Social Change 
(London: Sage).
Scott, J. W. (2007) The Politics of the Veil (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).

xvi
Contributors
Editors:
Rosalind Gill is Professor of Social and Cultural Analysis at the Centre 
for Culture, Media and Creative Industries at King’s College, London. 
She worked previously at the Open University, where she was Professor of 
Subjectivity and Cultural Theory. Before that she spent ten years working in 
the LSE’s interdisciplinary Gender Institute. She is known for her work on 
gender, media, cultural industries and new technologies as well as for long-
standing interests in discourse and narrative analysis and visual methods. 
Underlying all her interests is a concern with theorizing the relationship 
between culture, subjectivity and change. She is the author of Gender and 
the Media (2007). Her latest book (with Róisín Ryan-Flood) is entitled Secrecy 
and Silence in the Research Process (Routledge, 2009).
Christina Scharff is Lecturer in Culture, Media and Creative Industries at the 
Centre for Culture, Media and Creative Industries, King’s College, London. 
Her research interests include young women’s engagements with feminism, 
entrepreneurial subjectivities and research methodology. Christina’s work 
has been published in Sociology and Critical Discourse Studies. She is editor 
(with Natasha Marhia and Maria do Mar Pereira) of the journal special issue 
‘Lost (and Found) in Translation’. Her monograph Repudiating Feminism is 
forthcoming in the Ashgate series ‘The Feminist Imagination – Europe and 
Beyond’.
Contributors:
Feona Attwood is Professor of Sex, Communication and Culture at Sheffield 
Hallam University, UK. Her research is in the area of sex in contemporary 
culture; and in particular, in obscenity; sexualization; sexual cultures; new 
technologies, identity and the body; and controversial media. She is the 
editor of Mainstreaming Sex: The Sexualization of Western Culture (2009) and 
porn.com: Making Sense of Online Pornography (2010) and the co-editor of jour-
nal special issues on Controversial Images (with Sharon Lockyer, Popular 
Communication, 2009) and Researching and Teaching Sexually Explicit 
Media (with I.Q. Hunter, Sexualities, 2009). Her current book projects are 
Sex, Media and Technology and (with Vincent Campbell, I.Q. Hunter and 
Sharon Lockyer) Controversial Images.
Gargi Bhattacharyya is Professor of Sociology at Aston University. Her work 
examines issues of racism, sexuality and globalization. Her recent publica-
tions include Dangerous Brown Men, Exploiting Sex, Violence and Feminism in 
the War on Terror (Zed, 2008).

Contributors xvii
Brinda Bose is Associate Professor of English at Delhi University and has 
recently been a Fellow of the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New 
Delhi. She researches in postcolonial, gender and cultural studies, with a 
focus on South Asia. She is the editor of Translating Desire (2003), Gender and 
Censorship (2006) and the co-editor of The Phobic and the Erotic: The Politics of 
Sexualities in Contemporary India (2007). She is currently working on a manu-
script on cities, sexualities and contemporary Indian visual cultures.
Shelley Budgeon is Senior Lecturer in Sociology at the University of 
Birmingham. She has published on the formation of gender identity 
within the context of social change in Choosing A Self: Young Women and 
the Individualisation of Identity (2003); postfeminism and constructions of 
femininity; the relationship between young women and feminism; and the 
practice of non-normative intimacy. She is currently researching third-wave 
feminism and its implications for feminist theory and politics.
Dawn H. Currie completed her PhD at the London School of Economics, 
London, in 1988. She is currently Professor of Sociology at University of 
British Columbia, and past Chair of the Women’s Studies Program. Her 
main areas of teaching include feminist theory and methodologies, girls’ 
culture, and more recently International Service Learning. She is author of 
Girl Talk: Adolescent Magazines and Their Readers (1999) and co-author of ‘Girl 
Power’: Girls Reinventing Girlhood (2009), as well as author of several journal 
articles on girl culture, feminist theorizing and teaching for social justice.
Umut Erel’s research interests are in gender, migration, ethnicity and class, 
culture and representation empirically and theoretically. She is interested in 
how these issues play out in practices of citizenship, differentiated along gen-
der and ethnic lines. Her recent monograph on Migrant Women Transforming 
Citizenship (2009) addresses these issues through the lens of the life-stories 
of migrant women from Turkey in Britain and Germany. She is currently 
exploring migrant women’s mothering practices as citizenship practices in 
their own right and with respect to shaping their children’s ethnic, cultural, 
political identities and modes of citizenship. Her recent publications include 
‘Migrating Cultural Capital: Bourdieu in Migration Studies’, Sociology (forth-
coming); ‘Constructing Meaningful Lives: Biographical Methods in Research 
on Migrant Women’, Sociological Research Online, 12(4) 2007 (Reprinted in: 
Life Story Research, ed. Barbara Harrison, 2008); and, with Jin Haritaworn, 
‘Encarnación Gutiérrez Rodríguez, Christian Klesse: On the Depoliticisation 
of Intersectionality Talk. Conceptualising Multiple Oppressions in Critical 
Sexuality Studies’, in Kuntsman et al. (eds), Out of Place (2008).
Lisa Guerrero is Associate Professor in Comparative Ethnic Studies at 
Washington State University. Her areas of research include black masculin-
ity, African-American popular culture, the commodification of racialized 
identities, and African-American literature. She is the editor of Teaching Race 

xviii Contributors
in the 21st Century: College Teachers Talk About their Fears, Risks, and Rewards 
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), and has published essays on African-American 
‘Chick Lit’, the Bratz dolls, irony in African-American film, and the space of 
black bodies in the wars on terror and same-sex marriage. Currently she is 
at work on a book-length project on satire and the commodification of black 
masculinity in contemporary popular culture.
Jin Haritaworn is Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies Fellow and 
works intellectually, politically and creatively at the nexus of critical race, 
gender and sexuality theory. Current interests include transnational sexu-
ality studies, feminist/queer/trans of colour theories, queer necropolitics, 
homonationalism, affect and intimate publics, ‘transgression’ and ‘ambigu-
ity’, Thai diaspora and mixed race, representations of sex work migration, and 
other multi-issue theorizing. Work has appeared or is forthcoming in vari-
ous journals, including Social Justice, Sexualities, European Journal of Cultural 
Studies, European Journal of Women’s Studies and Journal of Ethnic and Migration 
Studies, and a monograph on sexual citizenship, gentrification and militari-
zation is forthcoming entitled Decolonial Studies, Postcolonial Horizons.
Laura Harvey is a doctoral student at the Open University. Her work exam-
ines the relationship between sexual behaviours, attitudes and media repre-
sentations. Laura is particularly interested in the ways that sexual knowledge 
is mediated. Her PhD thesis focuses on the negotiation and representation 
of condom use in the UK. Laura is developing the use of private diaries as a 
tool in feminist sexualities research.
Sue Jackson is Senior Lecturer in the School of Psychology at Victoria 
University of Wellington, New Zealand, a post she has held since completing 
her PhD at the University of Auckland in 1999. Much of her previous research 
and publication work has centred on young women’s negotiation of sexual-
ity and ways sexuality is represented in girls’ popular culture. Currently her 
research centres on the project from which material in the chapter is drawn: 
the NZ Royal Society Marsden funded three-year project examining pre-teen 
girls’ engagement with popular culture in their everyday lives.
Deirdre M. Kelly is Professor of Sociology of Education in the Department 
of Educational Studies at the University of British Columbia. With Dawn 
Currie and Shauna Pomerantz, she is author of ‘Girl Power’: Girls Reinventing 
Girlhood (2009) for Peter Lang’s Mediated Youth series. She recently co- 
edited a special issue on The Popular Media, Education, and Resistance for the 
Canadian Journal of Education (http://www.csse.ca/CJE/Articles/CJE29–1.
htm).She is the author of Last Chance High: How Girls and Boys Drop In and 
Out of Alternative Schools (1993) and Pregnant with Meaning: Teen Mothers 
and the Politics of Inclusive Schooling (2000), which won a 2003 American 
Educational Studies Association Critic’s Choice Award.

Contributors xix
JongMi Kim is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Media and 
Communication, Coventry University. She received her PhD on Global 
Media, 
Audience 
and 
Transformative 
Identities: 
Femininities 
and 
Consumption in South Korea from the London School of Economics. Her 
current research interests are new femininities in the East-Asian context, 
and medical tourism, particularly plastic surgery in East Asia, and digital 
media in transnational families. Her forthcoming book, Women in South 
Korea: New Femininities and Consumption will be published by Routledge.
Michelle M. Lazar is Associate Professor in the Department of English 
Language & Literature at the National University of Singapore. Her research 
interests include critical discourse analysis, feminist and gender studies, media 
and political discourse, and multimodal discourse analysis. She is the editor 
of Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis: Gender, Power and Ideology in Discourse 
(Palgrave 2005/2007), and series editor of Routledge Critical Studies in Discourse.
Carolyn Pedwell is Lecturer in Media and Cultural Studies at Newcastle 
University. Her research interests include gender, the body and culture; 
multiculturalism and ethnic difference; and the transnational politics of 
emotion and affect. Carolyn’s work has been published in Feminist Theory, 
Feminist Review and in Feminism, Culture and Embodied Practice: The Rhetorics 
of Comparison (2010).
Shauna Pomerantz is Assistant Professor of Child and Youth Studies at 
Brock University. Her research interests include girls and girlhoods, youth 
culture, popular culture, sociology of education, constructions of academic 
success, qualitative research, and feminisms. She is the author of Girls, Style 
and School Identities: Dressing the Part (Palgrave, 2008), has co-authored arti-
cles on girl skateboarders, computer girls and popularity in the school, and 
has contributed to the anthologies Girlhood: Redefining the Limits (2006) and 
Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia (2007).
Andrea L. Press is Chair of the Department of Media Studies and Professor 
of Sociology at the University of Virginia, and has taught at the University 
of Illinois and the University of Michigan. She is internationally known for 
her interdisciplinary scholarship on the media audience, on feminist media 
issues, and on media and social class in the US. She is the author of Women 
Watching Television: Gender, Class and Generation in the American Television 
Experience, and the co-author (with Elizabeth Cole) of Speaking Of Abortion: 
Television and Authority in the Lives of Women and (with Bruce A. Williams) of 
The New Media Environment. She also co-edits the journal The Communication 
Review with Bruce A. Williams. She has published numerous essays, articles 
and chapters on feminist media theory, social class and the media, and media 
audiences. Her new project looks at representations of feminism in popular 
media and their reception among women of different ages.

xx Contributors
Jessica Ringrose is Senior Lecturer at the Institute of Education, University of 
London. Her current research explores postfeminist discourses of compulsory 
sexualization and pornification and teens’ performances of sexual identity 
online and at school. She has written numerous articles on teen feminini-
ties and heterosexualized aggression, bullying and cyber-bullying, appearing 
in: Feminism and Psychology, Feminist Theory, Girlhood Studies, British Journal of 
Sociology of Education and Educational Philosophy and Theory. Her writing explor-
ing neoliberal, postfeminist educational and media contexts can be found in 
Gender and Education and Feminist Media Studies. Jessica’s new book: Postfeminist 
Education? Girls and the Sexual Politics of Schooling is forthcoming.
Róisín Ryan-Flood is Senior Lecturer in Sociology and Director of the 
Centre for Intimate and Sexual Citizenship (CISC) at the University of Essex. 
Her research interests include gender, sexuality and citizenship and she has 
published articles on these topics. Her publications include the monograph 
Lesbian Motherhood: Gender, Families and Sexual Citizenship (Palgrave, 2009) 
and a co-edited book (with Rosalind Gill, KCL), Silence and Secrecy in the 
Research Process: Feminist Reflections (Routledge, 2009). She is also co-editor 
of several journal special issues on topics such as sexuality and visual cul-
ture; migration; and feminist epistemology. Her current research explores 
sexuality, citizenship and diaspora.
Estella Tincknell is Reader in Media and Cultural Studies at the University 
of the West of England, Bristol. She is the joint author of The Practice of 
Cultural Studies (2004) and author of Mediating the Family: Gender, Culture 
and Representation (2005), and of Reading Jane Campion: Angels, Demons and 
Voices (forthcoming). She has contributed to p.o.v. Feminist Media Studies, 
Gender and Education, Journal of Sociology of Education, Journal of European 
Cultural Studies, Journal of Popular Film and Television, and is on the edito-
rial board of Body and Society. She is the co-editor of Film’s Musical Moments 
(2006) and of the forthcoming Aging Femininities: Troubling Representations. 
Her most recent publications are on the figure of the female secret agent in 
Revisioning 007: James Bond and Casino Royale (2009), and on adolescence 
and witchcraft in New Gothic Cinema in Horrorzone: The Cultural Experience of 
Contemporary Horror Cinema (2010).
Imogen Tyler is Senior Lecturer in Sociology at Lancaster University. She 
specializes in the area of social and cultural identities and has published 
extensively in the area of maternal identities. Imogen is currently engaged 
in an EU funded research project on childbirth organizations and is also 
working on two book-length projects, Maternal Publics and Counter Publics 
and Social Abjection and Resistance in Neoliberal Britain.
Tiina Vares is Senior Lecturer in Sociology and Gender Studies at the University 
of Canterbury. Her research is in the area of audiences and popular culture 
with a current focus on ‘tween’ girls’ engagement with popular culture.

Contributors xxi
Sadie Wearing is Lecturer in Gender Theory, Culture and Media at the 
Gender Institute, London School of Economics. Her research interests are 
in the critical analysis of literary, visual and film culture with particular 
emphasis on conceptualizations of ageing, temporality and memory in both 
historical and contemporary contexts. She is currently working on a book 
entitled Age, Gender and Sexuality in Contemporary Culture.
