OECD Principles and 
Guidelines for Access 
to Research Data from 
Public Funding 

OECD Principles 
and Guidelines for 
Access to Research Data 
from Public Funding
ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT

ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION 
AND DEVELOPMENT
The OECD is a unique forum where the governments of 30 democracies work
together to address the economic, social and environmental challenges of globalisation.
The OECD is also at the forefront of efforts to understand and to help governments
respond to new developments and concerns, such as corporate governance, the
information economy and the challenges of an ageing population. The Organisation
provides a setting where governments can compare policy experiences, seek answers to
common problems, identify good practice and work to co-ordinate domestic and
international policies.
The OECD member countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
the United Kingdom and the United States. The Commission of the European
Communities takes part in the work of the OECD.
OECD Publishing disseminates widely the results of the Organisation’s statistics
gathering and research on economic, social and environmental issues, as well as the
conventions, guidelines and standards agreed by its members.
Also available in French under the title:
Principes et lignes directrices pour l’accès aux données 
de la recherche sur fond publics
© OECD 2007
No reproduction, copy, transmission or translation of this publication may be made without written permission.
Applications should be sent to OECD Publishing rights@oecd.org or by fax 33 1 45 24 99 30. Permission to photocopy a
portion of this work should be addressed to the Centre français d’exploitation du droit de copie (CFC), 20, rue des
Grands-Augustins, 75006 Paris, France, fax 33 1 46 34 67 19, contact@cfcopies.com or (for US only) to Copyright Clearance
Center (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive Danvers, MA 01923, USA, fax 1 978 646 8600, info@copyright.com.
This work is published on the responsibility of the Secretary-General of
the OECD. The opinions expressed and arguments employed herein do not
necessarily reflect the official views of the Organisation or of the governments
of its member countries.

 3 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
Foreword 
Innovative scientific research has a crucial role in addressing global 
challenges — ranging from health care and climate change to renewable 
energy and natural resources management. The speed and depth of this 
research depends on fostering collaborative exchanges between different 
communities and assuring its widest dissemination. The exchange of ideas, 
knowledge and data emerging is fundamental for human progress and is part 
of the core of OECD values. Thus, I am very pleased that the OECD has 
taken the lead in developing principles and standards to facilitate access to 
research data generated with public funding. 
The rapid development in computing technology and the Internet have 
opened up new applications for the basic sources of research — the base 
material of research data — which has given a major impetus to scientific 
work in recent years. Databases are rapidly becoming an essential part of the 
infrastructure of the global science system. The international Human Genome 
Project is but one good example of a large-scale endeavour in which openly 
accessible information is being used successfully by many different users, 
all over the world, for a great variety of purposes. 
Besides, access to research data increases the returns from public invest-
ment in this area; reinforces open scientific inquiry; encourages diversity of 
studies and opinion; promotes new areas of work and enables the exploration 
of topics not envisioned by the initial investigators. 
Science and Technology Ministers called on the OECD in 2004 to 
develop a set of guidelines based on commonly agreed principles to facilitate 
cost-effective access to digital research data from public funding. The 
attached Principles and Guidelines are the outcome of this request. They are 
intended to assist all actors involved when trying to improve the international 
sharing of, and access to, research data. Now that we have developed this 
useful instrument, I call upon political and scientific leaders to adopt it 
thoroughly. Its use will undoubtedly facilitate the scientific endeavour and 
therefore contribute to the betterment of society. 
 
Angel Gurria 
OECD Secretary-General


   5 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
Table of Contents 
Background 
7 
Preface 
9 
Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding 
13 
I. Objectives 
13 
II. Scope and definitions 
13 
Research data 
13 
Research data from public funding 
14 
Access arrangements 
14 
III. Principles 
15 
A. Openness 
15 
B. Flexibility 
15 
C. Transparency 
15 
D. Legal conformity 
16 
E. Protection of intellectual property 
16 
F. Formal responsibility 
17 
G. Professionalism 
18 
H. Interoperability 
19 
I. Quality 
19 
J. Security 
20 
K. Efficiency 
21 
L. Accountability 
21 
M. Sustainability 
22 
 


   7 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
 
Background 
In January 2004, Ministers of science and technology of OECD countries 
met in Paris and discussed the need for international guidelines on access to 
research data. At that meeting, the governments of the 30 OECD countries 
and of China, Israel, Russia and South Africa adopted a Declaration on 
Access to Research Data from Public Funding. In this declaration, they 
recognised the importance of access to research data and invited the OECD 
“to develop a set of OECD guidelines based on commonly agreed principles 
to facilitate optimal cost-effective access to digital research data from public 
funding to be endorsed by the OECD Council at a later stage”.  
This request was taken up by OECD’s Committee for Scientific and 
Technological Policy, which launched a project by asking a group of experts 
to develop a set of principles and guidelines. The experts drafted a first set 
of principles and guidelines and engaged in several rounds of consultation 
with research institutions and policy making bodies in the OECD member 
countries to achieve a consensus. A workshop involving key stakeholders 
was held in Paris in February 2006 which also contributed to this process. 
The work leading up to the final draft revealed that international frameworks 
to facilitate access were still lacking in the member countries, but also that 
improved access was generally seen as benefiting the advancement of 
research, boosting its quality and facilitate cross-disciplinary research co-
operation. Stakeholders considered that international guidelines would be 
useful in giving guidance to institutions in need of policies and in enhancing 
international co-operation in research. The principles and guidelines that 
resulted from this extensive consultation process were approved by the 
OECD’s Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy in October 
2006. The Principles and Guidelines were attached to an OECD Recom-
mendation and endorsed by the OECD Council on 14 December 2006. 
OECD Recommendations set out collective and precise standards or 
objectives which the member countries are expected to implement. A 
“Recommendation” is a legal instrument of the OECD that is not legally 
binding but through a long standing practice of the member countries, is 
considered to have a great moral force. Recommendations of the OECD are 
adopted when member governments are prepared to make a political 
commitment to implement the principles (and/or guidelines) set out therein. 
This type of instrument is often referred to as “soft law”. 

8  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
Although some flexibility in the drafting of the standard is possible, the 
flexibility should not be so wide as to allow individual member countries to 
modify the standard or object, consequently defeating the idea that there is a 
commitment on their part. That said, OECD Recommendations often leave 
significant flexibility to member countries as regards the means through 
which they implement them to take into account differences in legal, 
cultural, economic and social contexts. Thus, in some countries, imple-
mentation could be achieved through regulatory measures while other will 
choose, for example to resort to concerted action with national stakeholders. 
Recommendations are considered to be vehicles for change, and OECD 
member countries need not, on the day of adoption, already be in conformity. 
What is expected is that they will seriously work towards attaining the 
standard or objective within a reasonable time frame considering the extent 
of difficulty in closing the gap in each member country. 
The OECD Recommendation states that member countries should take 
into consideration the Principles and Guidelines on Access to Research Data 
from Public Funding set out in the Annex to the Recommendation, as 
appropriate for each member country, to develop policies and good practices 
related to the accessibility, use and management of research data. It also 
instructs OECD’s Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy to 
review the implementation of this Recommendation as necessary; and to 
review the Principles and Guidelines on Access to Research Data from Public 
Funding when appropriate, to take into account advances in technology and 
research practices, with the intention of further fostering international co-
operation. 
The attached Principles and Guidelines are meant to apply to research 
data that are gathered using public funds for the purposes of producing 
publicly accessible knowledge. The nature of “public funding” of research 
varies significantly from one country to the next, as do existing data access 
policies and practices at the national, disciplinary and institutional levels. 
These differences call for a flexible approach in developing data access 
arrangements. The balance between the costs of improved access to research 
data and the benefits that result from such access will need to be judged by 
individual national governments and their research communities.  

 9 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
Preface 
Increasing the return on public investments in scientific research 
The public science systems of OECD member countries are based on the 
principle of openness and the free exchange of ideas, information and 
knowledge. New information and communication technologies (ICTs), now 
in widespread use throughout all research disciplines, have greatly aided this 
system of free exchange and have opened up new avenues for collaboration 
and sharing. The progress of science, however, depends on more than just 
technologies. Research policies, practices, support systems and cultural 
values all affect the nature of new discoveries, the rate at which they are 
made, and the degree to which they are made accessible and used.  
The power of computers and the Internet has created new fields of 
application for not only the results of research, but the sources of research: 
the base material of research data. Moreover, research data, in digital form, 
are increasingly being used in research endeavours beyond the original 
project for which they were gathered, in other research fields and in industry. 
Administrative data from the institutions of OECD member countries, such 
as employment information, are now used extensively in the social sciences, 
as well as in policy making. Data from public health organisations play a 
growing role in the advancement of life sciences. Similarly, geo-spatial data 
collected by many different government organisations are essential for 
environmental and other types of research. The list goes on. 
Scientific databases are rapidly becoming a crucial part of the infra-
structure of the global science system. The international Human Genome 
Project is but one good example of a large-scale research endeavour in 
which an openly accessible data repository is being used successfully by 
many different researchers, all over the world, for different purposes and in 
different contexts. Many other examples, involving research undertakings 
both large and small, are readily available. 
Effective access to research data, in a responsible and efficient manner, 
is required to take full advantage of the new opportunities and benefits 
offered by ICTs. Accessibility to research data has become an important 
condition in:  

10  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
• The good stewardship of the public investment in factual information; 
• The creation of strong value chains of innovation;  
• The enhancement of value from international co-operation. 
More specifically, improved access to, and sharing of, data: 
• Reinforces open scientific inquiry;  
• Encourages diversity of analysis and opinion; 
• Promotes new research; 
• Makes possible the testing of new or alternative hypotheses and 
methods of analysis; 
• Supports studies on data collection methods and measurement; 
• Facilitates the education of new researchers; 
• Enables the exploration of topics not envisioned by the initial 
investigators;  
• Permits the creation of new data sets when data from multiple sources 
are combined.  
Sharing and open access to publicly funded research data not only helps 
to maximise the research potential of new digital technologies and networks, 
but provides greater returns from the public investment in research.  
Throughout OECD member countries, continuously growing quantities 
of data are collected by publicly funded researchers and research institutions. 
This rapidly expanding body of research data represents both a massive 
investment of public funds and a potential source of the knowledge needed 
to address the myriad challenges facing humanity.  
To promote improved scientific and social return on the public invest-
ments in research data, OECD member countries have established a variety 
of laws, policies and practices concerning access to research data at the 
national level. In this context, international guidelines would be an important 
contribution to fostering the global exchange and use of research data.  
These Principles and Guidelines are meant to apply to research data that 
are gathered using public funds for the purposes of producing publicly 
accessible knowledge. The nature of “public funding” of research varies 
significantly from one country to the next, as do existing data access policies 
and practices at the national, disciplinary and institutional levels. These 
differences call for a flexible approach to data access and recognition that 
one size does not fit all. Moreover, the balance between the costs of improved 

 11 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
access to research data and the benefits that result from such access will 
need to be judged by individual national governments and their research 
communities.  
Whatever differences there may be between practices of, and policies 
on, data sharing, and whatever legitimate restrictions may be put on data 
access, practically all research could benefit from more systematic sharing. 
As the authors of the US National Research Council study, Bits of Power, 
pointed out: 
The value of data lies in their use. Full and open access to 
scientific data should be adopted as the international norm for the 
exchange of scientific data derived from publicly funded research. 
The specific aims and objectives of these Principles and Guidelines are 
to: 
• Promote a culture of openness and sharing of research data among the 
public research communities within member countries and beyond; 
• Stimulate the exchange of good practices in data access and sharing; 
• Raise awareness about the potential costs and benefits of restrictions 
and limitations on access to and the sharing of research data from 
public funding; 
• Highlight the need to consider data access and sharing regulations 
and practices in the formation of member countries’ science policies 
and programmes; 
• Provide a commonly agreed upon framework of operational principles 
for the establishment of research data access arrangements in member 
countries;  
• Offer recommendations to member countries on how to improve the 
international research data sharing and distribution environment. 
The Principles and Guidelines contained in this document should assist 
governments, research support and funding organisations, research institu-
tions and researchers themselves in dealing with the barriers and challenges 
in improving the international sharing of, and access to, research data. These 
Principles and Guidelines should be considered in light of, and applied to, 
the following major issues inherent in providing data access: 
• Technological issues: access to research data, and their optimum 
exploitation, requires appropriately designed technological infra-
structure, broad international agreement on interoperability, and 
effective data quality controls. 

12  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
• Institutional and managerial issues: while increased accessibility is 
important to all science communities, the diversity of the scientific 
enterprise suggests that a variety of institutional models and tailored 
data management approaches are most effective in meeting the needs 
of researchers. 
• Financial and budgetary issues: scientific data infrastructure requires 
continued and dedicated budgetary planning and appropriate financial 
support. The use of research data will not be maximised if access, 
management, and preservation costs are an add-on or after-thought in 
research projects. It is important to note, however, that the cost of 
storing and managing data has decreased dramatically in recent years, 
and lack of knowledge about such changes can, in itself, be a barrier 
to advancement. 
• Legal and policy issues: national laws and international agreements, 
particularly in areas such as intellectual property rights and the pro-
tection of privacy, directly affect data access and sharing practices, 
and must be fully taken into account in the design of data access 
arrangements. 
• Cultural and behavioural issues: appropriate educational and reward 
structures are a necessary component for promoting data access and 
sharing practices. These considerations apply to those who fund, 
produce, manage, and use research data. 
In working towards better access to research data in the context of these 
Principles and Guidelines, member countries will need to determine the 
appropriate balance between the costs of improved access to this data and 
the benefits that result from such access. The efforts to improve access, of 
course, need to be carried out within existing financial limitations. 

 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – 13 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO 
RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING 
I. Objectives 
These Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from 
Public Funding (hereafter the “Principles and Guidelines”) provide broad 
policy recommendations to the governmental science policy and funding 
bodies of member countries on access to research data from public funding. 
They are intended to promote data access and sharing among researchers, 
research institutions, and national research agencies, while at the same time, 
recognising and taking into account, the various national laws, research 
policies and organisational structures of member countries. 
The ultimate goal of these Principles and Guidelines is to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the global science system. They are not 
intended to hinder its development with onerous obligations and regulations 
or impose new costs on national science systems.  
II. Scope and definitions 
These Principles and Guidelines are meant to apply to research data, 
whether already in existence or yet to be produced, that are supported by 
public funds for the purposes of developing publicly accessible scientific 
research and knowledge. The Principles and Guidelines are not intended to 
apply to research data gathered for the purpose of commercialisation of 
research outcomes, or to research data that are the property of a private 
sector entity. Access to such data is subject to a range of considerations that 
are beyond the scope of this document. Moreover, in some instances, access 
to or use of data may be restricted to safeguard the privacy of individuals, 
protect confidentiality, proprietary results or national security.  
Research data 
In the context of these Principles and Guidelines, “research data” are 
defined as factual records (numerical scores, textual records, images and 
sounds) used as primary sources for scientific research, and that are 
commonly accepted in the scientific community as necessary to validate 
research findings. A research data set constitutes a systematic, partial repre-
sentation of the subject being investigated.  

14 – PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
This term does not cover the following: laboratory notebooks, pre-
liminary analyses, and drafts of scientific papers, plans for future research, 
peer reviews, or personal communications with colleagues or physical 
objects (e.g. laboratory samples, strains of bacteria and test animals such as 
mice). Access to all of these products or outcomes of research is governed 
by different considerations than those dealt with here.  
These Principles and Guidelines are principally aimed at research data 
in digital, computer-readable format. It is indeed in this format that the 
greatest potential lies for improvements in the efficient distribution of data 
and their application to research because the marginal costs of transmitting 
data through the Internet are close to zero. These Principles and Guidelines 
could also apply to analogue research data in situations where the marginal 
costs of giving access to such data can be kept reasonably low. 
Research data from public funding  
Research data from public funding is defined as the research data 
obtained from research conducted by government agencies or departments, 
or conducted using public funds provided by any level of government. 
Given that the nature of “public funding” of research varies significantly 
from one country to the next, these Principles and Guidelines recognise that 
such differences call for a flexible approach to improved access to research 
data.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are defined as the regulatory, policy and 
procedural framework established by research institutions, research funding 
agencies and other partners involved, to determine the conditions of access 
to and use of research data.  

 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – 15 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
III. Principles 
A. Openness 
Openness means access on equal terms for the international research 
community at the lowest possible cost, preferably at no more than the 
marginal cost of dissemination. Open access to research data from public 
funding should be easy, timely, user-friendly and preferably Internet-based. 
B. Flexibility 
Flexibility requires taking into account the rapid and often unpredictable 
changes in information technologies, the characteristics of each research 
field and the diversity of research systems, legal systems and cultures of 
each member country. Specific national, social, economic and regulatory 
implications should be considered when organisations develop research data 
access arrangements, and when governments develop policies to promote 
data access and review the implementation of these Principles and Guide-
lines.  
C. Transparency 
Information on research data and data-producing organisations, docu-
mentation on the data and specifications of conditions attached to the use of 
these data should be internationally available in a transparent way, ideally 
through the Internet. Lack of visibility of existing research data resources 
and future data collection poses serious obstacles to access.  
Factors to consider in ensuring transparency include: 
• Information on data-producing organisations and their holdings, 
documentation on available data sets and conditions of use should be 
easy to find on the Internet.  
• Research organisations and government research agencies should 
actively disseminate information on research data policies to individual 
researchers, academic associations, universities and other stakeholders 
in the publicly funded research process. 
• Whenever relevant, all members of the various research communities 
should assist in establishing agreements on standards for cataloguing 
data. The application of existing standards should be considered, 
whenever appropriate, in order to avoid placing additional burdens on 
research resources and work loads of researchers and their institutions. 

16 – PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
• Information on data management and access conditions should be 
communicated among data archives and data producing institutions, 
so that best practices can be shared.  
D. Legal conformity 
Data access arrangements should respect the legal rights and legitimate 
interests of all stakeholders in the public research enterprise. 
Access to, and use of, certain research data will necessarily be limited 
by various types of legal requirements, which may include restrictions for 
reasons of: 
• National security: data pertaining to intelligence, military activities, 
or political decision making may be classified and therefore subject to 
restricted access. 
• Privacy and confidentiality: data on human subjects and other 
personal data are subject to restricted access under national laws and 
policies to protect confidentiality and privacy. However, anonymisation 
or confidentiality procedures that ensure a satisfactory level of confi-
dentiality should be considered by custodians of such data to preserve 
as much data utility as possible for researchers. 
• Trade secrets and intellectual property rights: data on, or from, 
businesses or other parties that contain confidential information may 
not be accessible for research. 
• Protection of rare, threatened or endangered species: in certain 
instances there may be legitimate reasons to restrict access to data on 
the location of biological resources for the sake of conservation. 
• Legal process: data under consideration in legal actions (sub judice) 
may not be accessible. 
Subscribing to professional codes of conduct may facilitate meeting 
legal requirements. 
E. Protection of intellectual property 
Data access arrangements should consider the applicability of copyright 
or of other intellectual property laws that may be relevant to publicly funded 
research databases. Factors to consider include: 
• As public/private partnerships in the funding of research and related 
data production are increasing, balanced public/private arrangements 
should facilitate broad access to research data where appropriate. The 
fact that there is private sector involvement in the data collection 

 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – 17 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
should not, in itself, be used as a reason to restrict access to the data. 
Consideration should be given to measures that promote non-
commercial access and use while protecting commercial interests, 
such as delayed or partial release of such data, or the voluntary 
adoption of licensing mechanisms. Such measures can allow the 
primary participants to fully exploit the research data without unneces-
sarily shutting off access. 
• In those jurisdictions in which government research data and informa-
tion are protected by intellectual property rights, the holders of these 
rights should nevertheless facilitate access to such data particularly 
for public research or other public-interest purposes. 
F. Formal responsibility 
Access arrangements should promote explicit, formal institutional prac-
tices, such as the development of rules and regulations, regarding the 
responsibilities of the various parties involved in data-related activities. 
These practices should pertain to authorship, producer credits, ownership, 
dissemination, usage restrictions, financial arrangements, ethical rules, 
licensing terms, liability, and sustainable archiving. 
Access arrangements, whether at the governmental or institutional 
levels, should be developed in consultation with representatives of all 
directly affected parties. In collaborative research programmes or projects, 
and especially in international scientific co-operation or in research projects 
based on public/private partnerships where there are differences in regulatory 
frameworks, the parties involved should negotiate research data sharing 
arrangements as early as possible in the life of the research project, ideally at 
the initial proposal stage. This will help ensure that adequate and timely 
consideration will be given to issues such as the allocation of resources for 
sharing and sustainable preservation of research data, differences in national 
intellectual property laws, limitations due to national security, and the 
protection of privacy and confidentiality. 
Access arrangements also should be responsive to factors such as the 
characteristics of the data, their potential value for research purposes, the 
level of data processing (raw versus partially processed versus final), 
whether they are homogeneous data from a facility instrument or sensor 
versus heterogeneous field data collected by single researchers, data on 
human subjects or physical parameters, and whether the data are generated 
directly by a government entity or as a result of government funding. These 
variations in the origin or type of data should be taken into consideration 
when establishing data access arrangements. 

18 – PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
Further, consideration should be given to the following: 
• Many of the problems related to access, dissemination and sharing of 
data result from the lack of explicit institutional agreements on the 
terms of access and use. With data management becoming ever more 
complex in certain areas of research, traditional informal arrange-
ments between researchers may no longer be adequate and may need 
to be complemented by formally agreed practices and procedures. 
• Responsibility for the various aspects of data access and management 
should be established in relevant documents, such as descriptions of 
the formal tasks of institutions, grant applications, research contracts, 
publication agreements, and licenses. 
• Long-term sustainability of the infrastructure required for data access 
is particularly important. Research institutions and government 
organisations should take formal responsibility for ensuring that 
research data are effectively preserved, managed and made accessible 
in order that they can be put to efficient and appropriate use over the 
long term. 
G. Professionalism 
Institutional arrangements for the management of research data should 
be based on the relevant professional standards and values embodied in the 
codes of conduct of the scientific communities involved. 
Factors to consider include:  
• The use of codes of conduct for professional scientists and their 
communities could help simplify and reduce the regulatory burden 
placed on access.  
• Mutual trust between researchers, and trust between researchers, their 
institutions and other organisations plays an important role in the 
establishment and maintenance of such codes of conduct. 
• In current research practice, the initial data-producing researcher or 
institution is sometimes rewarded with temporary exclusive use of the 
data. The rules for such incentive arrangements should be developed 
and explicitly stated by the funding sources in co-operation with the 
affected research communities. 

 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – 19 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
In certain areas of science, a lack of planning for and execution of the 
proper documentation and archiving of data sets is one of the key impede-
ments to realising maximum value from the investment in research data. 
Project and program planning activities, at all levels, should expressly 
acknowledge data issues at the earliest stages to take into consideration 
funding and technical assistance for the essential organisation and curation 
of those data sets. Attention should be paid to incentives and the develop-
ment of professional expertise in all areas of research data management.  
H. Interoperability 
Technological and semantic interoperability is a key consideration in 
enabling and promoting international and interdisciplinary access to and use 
of research data. Access arrangements, should pay due attention to the 
relevant international data documentation standards. member countries and 
research institutions should co-operate with international organisations 
charged with developing new standards. 
Although science is becoming a highly globalised endeavour, incom-
patibility of technical and procedural standards can be the most serious 
barrier to multiple uses of data sets.  
Factors that should be considered include: 
• The standards employed should be explicitly mentioned as this is the 
first requirement for interoperability. 
• Adoption of the practices of disciplines most advanced in this respect 
should be promoted, in particular by the international professional 
organisations dealing with science and the collection and preservation 
of data for research and technological purposes.  
• The work of organisations engaged in setting more general information 
and communication technology standards should also be considered. 
I. Quality 
The value and utility of research data depends, to a large extent, on the 
quality of the data itself. Data managers, and data collection organisations, 
should pay particular attention to ensuring compliance with explicit quality 
standards. Where such standards do not yet exist, institutions and research 
associations should engage with their research community on their 
development. Although all areas of research can benefit from improved data 
quality, some require much more stringent standards than others. For this 
reason alone, universal data quality standards are not practical. Standards 

20 – PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
should be developed in consultation with researchers to ensure that the level 
of quality and precision meets the needs of the various disciplines. 
More specifically, 
• Data access arrangements should describe good practices for 
methods, techniques and instruments employed in the collection, 
dissemination and accessible archiving of data to enable quality 
control by peer review and other means of safeguarding quality and 
authenticity.  
• The origin of sources should be documented and specified in a 
verifiable way. Such documentation should be readily available to all 
who intend to use the data and incorporated into the metadata 
accompanying the data sets. Developing such metadata is important 
for enabling scientists to understand the exact implications of the data 
sets.  
• Whenever possible, access to data sets should be linked with access 
to the original research materials, and copied data sets should be 
linked with originals, as this facilitates validation of the data and 
identification of errors within data sets.  
• Research institutions and professional associations should develop 
appropriate practices with respect to the citations of data and the 
recording of citations in indexes, as these are important indicators of 
data quality. 
J. Security 
Specific attention should be devoted to supporting the use of techniques 
and instruments to guarantee the integrity and security of research data. 
With regard to guaranteeing the integrity of a data set, every effort should be 
made to ensure the completeness of data and absence of errors. With regard 
to security, the data, along with relevant meta-data and descriptions, should 
be protected against intentional or unintentional loss, destruction, modifica-
tion and unauthorised access in conformity with explicit security protocols. 
Data sets and the equipment on which they are stored should be protected as 
well from environmental hazards such as heat, dust, electrical surges, 
magnetism, and electrostatic discharges. 

 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – 21 
 
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
K. Efficiency 
One of the central goals of promoting data access and sharing is to 
improve the overall efficiency of publicly funded scientific research to avoid 
the expensive and unnecessary duplication of data collection efforts.  
Consideration should be given to the following: 
• Data access arrangements should promote further cost effectiveness 
within the global science system by describing good practices in data 
management and specialised support services.  
• While publicly funded research data are subject to the default rule of 
openness under Principle A, this does not mean that all such data 
should be preserved permanently. The data archiving community 
should carry out cost-benefit assessments periodically and constantly 
develop and refine retention protocols to ensure that those data sets 
with the greatest potential utility are preserved and made accessible. 
Use of accepted retention protocols and thorough documentation of 
data should help to reduce unnecessary duplication of effort as well as 
to establish the necessary selectivity in preservation.  
• Specialised support services, for example through collaboration with 
non-academic specialists on specific research projects or the engage-
ment of data management specialist organisations, should be considered 
as a means to ensure the cost-effective production, use, management 
and archiving of research data.  
• Insufficient incentives for researchers or database producers may 
lessen their efforts on data-related activities. The development of new 
reward structures and the adaptation of existing ones, including 
recognition of data management activities in tenure and promotion 
review, should be considered as a way to address this problem.  
L. Accountability  
The performance of data access arrangements should be subject to 
periodic evaluation by user groups, responsible institutions and research 
funding agencies. Although each party is likely to use somewhat different 
evaluation criteria, the sum total of the results should provide a compre-
hensive picture of the value of data and of data access regimes. Such 
evaluations should help to increase the support for open access among the 
scientific community and society at large. 

22 – PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING  
OECD PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING – © OECD 2007 
The following should be considered in establishing evaluation criteria: 
• Overall public investments in the production and management of 
research data. 
• Management performance of data collection and archival agencies. 
• Extent of re-use of existing data sets. 
• Knowledge generated from the re-use of existing data. 
• The use of targeted foresight exercises to determine the nature and 
scope of data preservation activities and the types of data most likely 
to be needed in the future. 
Even if gaining clear insight into the cost, benefit and performance of 
data access arrangements will not be an easy task, those in charge of data 
access arrangements should put effort into showing the benefits of open data 
access to justify and help ensure sustained support from all levels of 
government. 
M. Sustainability 
Due consideration should be given to the sustainability of access to 
publicly funded research data as a key element of the research infrastructure. 
This means taking administrative responsibility for the measures to guarantee 
permanent access to data that have been determined to require long-term 
retention. This can be a difficult task, given that most research projects, and 
the public funding provided, have a limited duration, whereas ensuring 
access to the data produced is a long-term undertaking. Research funding 
agencies and research institutions, therefore, should consider the long-term 
preservation of data at the outset of each new project, and in particular, 
determine the most appropriate archival facilities for the data.  
 

OECD PUBLICATIONS, 2, rue André-Pascal, 75775 PARIS CEDEX 16
PRINTED IN FRANCE
(00 2007 39 3 P) – No. 88180 2007
