THE 
WORLjD 
]BANK
PARTICIPATION
SOURCEBOOK
ESD
.
.
., 
.
/ *
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Environmentally 
Sustainable Development Publications
ESD Proceedings Series
No. 1 Culture and Development in Africa: Proceedings of an International Conference
(Also in French)
No. 2 Valuing the Environment: Proceedings of the First Annual International Conference
on Environmentally Sustainable Development
No. 3 Overcoming Global Hunger: Proceedings of a Conference on Actions to Reduce Hunger Worldwide
No. 4 Traditional Knowledge and Sustainable Development: Proceedings of a Conference
No. 5 The Human Face of the Urban Environment: A Report to the Development Community
No. 6 The Human Face of the Urban Environment: Proceedings of the Second Annual World Bank Conference
on Environmentally Sustainable Development
No. 7 The Business of Sustainable Cities: Public-Private Partnerships for Creative Technical
and Institutional Solutions
No. 8 Enabling Sustainable Community Development
No. 9 Sustainable Financing Mechanisms for Coral Reef Conservation: Proceedings of a Workshop
ESD Studies and Monographs Series (formerly Occasional Paper Series)
No. 1 The Contribution of People's Participation: Evidence from 121 Rural Water Supply Projects
No. 2 Making Development Sustainable: From Concepts to Action
No. 3 Sociology, Anthropology, and Development: An Annotated Bibliography
of World Bank Publications 1975-1993
No. 4 The World Bank's Strategy for Reducing Poverly and Hunger: A Report to the Development Community
(Also in French, forthcoming)
No. 5 Sustainabilitiy and the Wealth of Nations: First Steps in an Ongoing Journey (forthcoming)
No. 6 Social Organization and Development Anthropology: The 1995 Malinowski Award Lecture
Related ESD Publications
Monitoring Environmental Progress: A Report on Work in Progress
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Environmental Sustainability: The Financing Challenge
Directions in Development Series
Toward Sustainable Management of Water Resources
Directions in Development Series
Nurturing Development: Aid and Cooperation in Today's Changing World
Directions in Development Series

THE 
WORiLD 
BANK
PARTICIPATION
S OURCEBOOK
The World Bank
Environmentally Sustainable Development 
Washington, D.C.
ESD

( 1996 The International Bank
for Reconstruction and Developmenlt/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street. N.W.. Washington, D.C. 20433. U.S.A.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
First printing February 1996
This report has been prepared by the staff of the World bank. The judgements expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Board of Executive Directors or the governmenits they represent. The boundaries, colors. denominlations, and other infor-
mationi shown on the maps in this volume do not imiply on the part of the World Bank any judgement on the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
ISBN 0-82113-3558-8
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
World Bank participation sourcebook.
p. 
cm. -
(Environmental 
Department papers; 019)
ISBN 0-8213-3558-8
1. World Bank. 
2. Economic development projects-Case 
studies-
Handbooks, manluals. etc. 
3. Economic developmenit projects-Citizen
participation-Case 
studies-Handbooks. 
manuals, etc. 
4. Community
developmenit-Case 
studies-Handbooks, 
manuals. etc. 
1. World Bank.
11. Series: Environmiiiental manaagemilenlt series (Washington. D.C.)
019.
HG3881 .5.W57W692 
1996
338.9-dc-20 
96-1868
CIP
Cover Design: Tomoko Hirata
Cover ANote: The artwork reprodUced on the cover is from the Warli tribe. who live in the Sahyadri mouLntaills in Maharashtra
state. north of Bombay. These tribal peoples are renownled for their mythic vision of Mother Earth. their traditional
agricultural metlhods. and their lack of caste differentiationl.
Photos in Table of Contents: Chapter 1. CuL-t Carnemark: Chapter 11. Stefano Pagiola: Chapter III, Ron Sawyer;
Chapter- IV, Asem Ansari: Appendix I. Deepa Narayan: Appendix 11. CuL-t Carnellmark.
e 
Printed on recycled paper

CONTENTS
Foreword 
ix
Preface 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xii
Acronyms 
xiv
The Project Cycle at a Glance 
xvi
INTRODUCTION 
1
CHAPTER I: 
Reflections: What Is Participation? 
3
External Expert Stance 
3
Listening and Consultation 
4
Social Learning 
4
, 
Social Invention 
5
Coi-nrnmmitment 
5
Popular Versus Stakeholder Participation 
6
Reaching the Poor 
7
CHAPTER II: Sharing Experiences 
9
A Guide to Sourcebook Examples (with Map) 
13
Albania: Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project 
17
Benin: Health Services Development Project 
23
Brazil: Municipalities and Low-lncome Sanitation 
29
Chad: Education V Project 
35
Colombia: Electricity Sector Reformli 
39
Egypt: Matruh Resource Managemiient Project 
47
India: Andhlra Pradesh Forestry Project 
53
Lao People's Democratic Republic:
Health System Reform and Malaria Control 
61
Niexico: Hydroelectric Project 
67
Morocco: Enhancing the Participation of Women in Development 
75
Mozambique: Country Implemenitationi Review 
83
Nigeria: Women in Agriculture 
89
Pakistan: Sindh Special Development Project 
95
Philippines: Integrated Protected Areas Project 
103
Philippilnes: Comimiunial Irrigationi Projects 
109
Republic of Yemen: Educationl Sector Adjustment Progr-am 
117
CHAPTER III: 
Practice Pointers in Participatory Planning and Decisionmaking 
121
Getting Started 
2 I
When to Star-t 
122
Getting Governm11ent Support 
122
Identifving Stakeholders 
125
Who Is a Stakeholder? 
125
[low to Identify Stakeholders 
126
iii

ITHl.E{11 
BANK51 
I).%l¢'T'(CllPATl').N 
91I(';llti
Involving Stakeholders 
129
Building Trust 
129
Involving Directly Affected Stakeholders 
130
Seeking Feedback 
131
Involving the Voiceless 
132
Involving the Opposition 
134
Participatory Planning and Decisionmaking 
136
What Do Participatory Techniques Achieve? 
136
Creating a Learning Mood 
136
What Does the Learning Mood Produce'? 
138
Strategic Planning 
138
Tactical Planning 
139
Task Manager Roles 
140
Initiating 
140
Facilitating 
140
Participating 
141
Sharing Expertise 
141
Observing 
142
Navigating 
143
Nurturing 
143
CHAPTER IV: Practice Pointers in Enabling the Poor to Participate 
145
Learning from the Poor 
146
Learning What Poverty Means to the Poor 
146
Providing Incentives for the Poor to Participate 
147
Facilitating Women's Participation 
148
Barriers to Women's Participation 
149
Seeking Women's Views 
150
Working with Women's Groups 
151
Building Community Capacity 
152
Understanding Community Organizations 
152
Building the Capacity of Community Organizations 
154
Intermediary NGOs 
155
NGOs as Intermediaries 
156
Intermediary Roles 
157
Understanding the NGO Sector 
158
Identifying Appropriate NGOs 
159
Bridging the Gap 
161
Strengthening NGO Capacity 
163
Financial Intermediation 
164
Fiscal Decentralization 
164
Social Funds 
165
Sustainable Financial Systems 
167
Group-Based Approaches 
168
Building Capacity of Groups 
170
Crafting Responsive Institutions 
170
Characteristics of Responsive Institutions 
171
Strengthening the Capacity of Government Institutions 
173
The Enabling Environment: Legal Issues 
174
Right to Information 
174
iv

C )N'r 
EN TI
Right to Organize 
175
Impact of Borrower's Financial and Other Regulations 
177
APPENDIX I: Methods and Tools 
181
Types of Methods 
181
Using the Methods Well 
182
Appreciation-Influence-Control (AIC) 
185
Objectives-Oriented Project Planning (ZOPP) 
187
TeamUP 
189
Participatory Rural Appraisal 
191
SARAR 
193
Beneficiary Assessment 
195
Systematic Client Consultation 
197
Social Assessment 
199
Gender Analysis 
201
Glossary of Tools 
203
APPENDIX II: Working Paper Summaries 
205
.. > 
Participation in Country Economic and Sector Work 
207
Participation in Poverty Assessments 
211
* 
Participation in Agricultural Extension 
215
Participation in Forest and Conservation Management 
219
Participation in the Irrigation Sector 
223
Participation in the Water and Sanitation Sector 
227
Participation in the Education and Training Sector 
231
Participation in Social Funds 
235
Gender Issues in Participation 
239
Participation and Intermediary NGOs 
243
Designing Community-Based Development 
247
Participation and Indigenous People 
251
INDEX 
255
Figures Figure 2.1 Problem Tree for Forest Protection 
56
Figure 2.2 Objectives Tree for Forest Protection 
57
Figure 4.1 The Participation Continuuimi 
167
Boxes Box 2.1. Forest Protection Actions Excerpted from ZOPP Problem Tree 58
Box 4.1. 
Organizing a Participatory Poverty Assessment 
147
Box 4.2. 
What Makes Community Organizations Work? 
156
Box 4.3. 
Indicators of Participatory Effectiveniess in Intermediary
NGOs 
160
Box 4.4. 
Tips For NGO Assessments 
161
Box 4.5. 
Desiggning a Social Fund 
166
Box Al.1. AIC Conference in Colombia lIeads to Commitments
and Action in the Energy Sector 
186
Box A 1.2. Creating a Forum for Stakeholdler Communication
and Innovation 
188
Box Al .3. Uganda. Private Sector Development Workshop 
190
Box A 1.4. Natural Resource Management in Burkina Faso 
192
v

Box Al1.5. Stakeholders Identity Institutional Requirements
of a Community-Management Approach in Indonesia 
194
Box Al1.6. Mali: Beneficiary Assessment in an Education Sector
Project 
196
Box Al.7. Zambia: Outlook from the Field 
198
Box A 1.8. Morocco: Fez Medina Rehabilitation Project 
200
Box A1.9. Analyzing Gender Issues in the World Bank's
Country Economic Memoranda: An Example from Uganda 202
Box A2. 1. Participation in the Long-Term Perspective Study for Africa 208
Box A2.2. Brazil: Creating Government Ownership 
209
Box A2.3. Benin: Confiontinlg the Diverse Interests of Stakeholders 
210
Box A2.4. Broad Stakeholder Participation in Cameroon 
212
Box A2.5. Policy Formulation in Peru 
212
Box A2.6. PPA Highlights Potential of Women's Groups in Kenya 
213
Box A2.7. Policy Impact of the Zambia PPA 
214
Box A2.8. Integrated Pest Management in Indonesia 
216
Box A2.9. Reaching Women Farmers in Nigeria 
217
Box A2. 10. Using the Pmlvate Sector in Latin Amer-ica 
218
Box A2. I 1. Contrasting Forest and Conservationl Management
Approaches 
2 19
Box A2. 12. Learning ftromi Indigenlous Practices to Increase Local
Participation and Improve Forest Productivity 
220
Box A2. 13. Women's Participation in Bank-Financed Forestry Projects 
22' 2
Box A2. 14. Tenure and Access to Forests in Nepal and IndiWa 
222
Box A2.15. Senegal: Creating Incentives for Farmer Participation 
223
Box A2.16. Evidence fi-om the Philippines 
224
Box A2.17. Mexico: Rapid Change in a Crisis Situation 
225
Box A2.18. Nepal: Building on Traditional Strengths 
226
Box A2. 19. Community Mobilization for Sanitation in Kenya 
228
Box A2.20. The Risks of a Multi-Agency Approach 
228
Box A2.2 1. Learning about Participation Models 
229
Box A2 .'). Tips for Task Managers of Water and Sanitation Projects 
229
Bo x A2.23. Student and Commliullity Participation in Colombia 
231
Box A2.24. Mobilizing ConnulitV Support to Primilary Schools
in Pakistan 
232
Box A2 .25. Building BorTower Commitimient in the Philippines 
232
Box A2 .6. Participatory Research in The Gambia Uncovers Reasons
for Low Enr-ollment and Highl Dropout 
233
Box A2.27. Flexibility at the Regional Level: Mexico 
236
Box A2.28. Tips for a Successful Social Fund Media Campaign 
237
Box A2.29. Zambia: Beneficiary Assessment in a Social Fund 
237
Box A2.30. Characteristics of Interiiediai-ies That Successfully
Support Participation 
238
Box A2.3 1. Involving Women in Policy Work 
240
Box A2.32. Addressling Gender Issues in Poverty Assessments 
241
Box A2.33. Gender Awareness in Project Design 
241
Box A2.34. Enabling Women to Attend Meetings 
242
Box A2.35. Indicators of Participatory Effectiveness
in Intermiediary NGOs 
244
Box A?.36. Mainstreaniming a Successful Participattory Process 
245
Box A2.37. Encouraging NGO Partnerships 
246
vi

(ONTrENrns
Box A2.38. Does Participatory Communiity-Based Development
Cost More? 
247
Box A2.39. Community Participation Yields Significant Results 
247
Box A2.40. The Benefits Must Outweigh the Costs 
248
Box A2.41. Checklist of Steps in Designinig Large-Scale Projects 
249
Box A2.42. Shared Control and Benefits: CAMPFIRE in Zimbabwe 
250
Box A2.43. The Politics of Indigenous Participation 
252
Box A2.44. Community Participation in Bilingual Education 
253
Box A2.45. Tribal Womenl and Forestry 
253
Box A2.46. Investing in Capacity Strengthening 
254
Tables Table 2.1. A Guide to Sourcebook Examples 
13
Table 2.2. Example of Calculating Costs from Caseload Data 
63
Table A. 1 .1. Participatory Methods and Tools 
183
vii


FOREWORD
A lthough I joined the World Bank less than a year ago, I have had the
privilege of visiting many of our developing country partners in
this short period. On every mission, I have made it a point to listen
and learn from different in-country stakeholders. Based on my dis-
cussions. I am convinced that their involvement and collaboration can not only
make our development efforts more effective and sustainable, but can also fos-
ter ownership and a sense of belief in the relevance and value of our programs-
right down to the community level.
This book presents the new direction the World Bank is taking in its sup-
port of participation, by recognizing that there is a diversity of stakeholders for
every activity we undertake. and that those people affected by development
interventions must be included in the decision-making process.
I personally believe in the relevance of participatory approaches and part-
nerships in development and am committed to making them a way of doing
business in the Bank. I therefore welcome The World Bank Participation
Sourcebook which shares with Bank staff how they can support participatory
approaches. To do this, the authors have turned to participation practitioners within
the Bank who contributed their expertise and advice. It is this experience-its
successes and frustrations-that is documented on the pages of this book.
I commend Bank staff who are pioneering participatory approaches in the
Bank's work. I encourage others to learn from the practical experience of their
colleagues in order to produce better results on the ground, improve develop-
ment efforts, and more effectively reach the poor.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
The World Bank
February 1996
ix


PREFACE
Thirouighi participa- 
articipation is a rich concept that means different things to different
tion, we lost 'control' 
people in different settings. For some, it is a matter- of principle: for
of the project and in 
others. a practice: and for still others, an end in itself. All these inter-
so doinig gainied 
pretations have merit. The World Bank Pairticipationi Sourc ebook, how-
Ownership anld ever, follows the definition of participation adopted by the Bank's Learnineg
sustainiability. pre- 
Group on Participatory Development:
cious things in our-
business. 
Participation is a process through which stakeholders influence and
-World Bank 
share control over development initiatives and the decisions
Task Manager 
and resources which affect them.
In writing the Sourcebook, we wanted to discover how this could be
achieved. As a first step. we turned to ouI- colleagues, who contributed their
experience and advice. It is tllis experience, both successes and frustrations,
that we have tried to capture for Bank staff.
The Sourcebook is not a policy documenit on participation; nor is it to be read
cover to cover. It also does not seek to persuade anyone (other thani through ex-
ample) to use participator-y approaches. It is primarily intendecl for readers who
have already decided to use participatory approaches in their professional work.
How you read the Sourcebook is up to you. We hope. however. that it
strengthens your ideas about participation and how you do your work. We also
hope you agree that the new ways of working presented here can improve
projects, contribbUte to the development process. and help reach the poor.
xi

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
S
Pa 
articipatory approaches to development activities have been pioneered
and practiced for many decades by community workers. government
bureaucrats, nongovernmental organization (NGO) practitioners, and
academics. Indeed, the World Bank is fortunate in being able to draw
from the vast body of literature and path-breaking work of the individuals and
institutions that have moved participation forward. We are most grateful to
development colleagues outside the Bank. whose experiences and support we
have relied on in learning how to apply participatory approaches in our work.
The World Balnk Participation Sourcebook has been prepared by the Envi-
ronmeent Department's Social Policy Division (ENVSP). It was written by a
team led by Bhuvan Bhatnagar, Task Manager, and comprising James Kearns
and Debra Sequeira. Valuable inputs came from Sandy Granzow, Sue Jacobs.
Gillian Perkins. and Jennifer Rietbergen-McCracken. Cristy Tumale. Isabel
Alegre. and Nona Sachdeva provided secretarial support. Pamela S. Cubberly
edited the manuscript. Jennifter Sterling was responsible for the design and
layout. The work was carried out under the general direction of Gloria Davis,
Division Chief, ENVSP.
Many other people inside the Worlcl Bank provided valuable contributions.
advice, and comments. All told, more than 200 Bank staff and consultants
contributed directly to the contents of the Sourcebook. As a result, the prepara-
tion process has resulted in sharing, learning, and a sense of ownership on the
part of participating Bank staff.
The Sourcebook builds on the work of a Bankwide Learning Group on
Participatory Development, which was led over the last four years by David
Beckmann and Aubrey Williams and which drew on the contributions of count-
less Bank staff. Case studies documeniting the Bank's experience with partici-
pation were contributed by Michael Azefor, Ajit Banerjee, Neil Boyle, Ann
Clark, Willy de Geyndt, Jacomina de Regt, Esther Gadzama, Sunita Gandhi,
Scott Guggenheim. Charles Gunasekara, Abel Mejia, Makha Ndao, Maria
Nowak. Yogendra Saran, Katrine Saito. Turid Sato, Bachir Souhlal, Denise
Vaillancourt, and Thomas Wiens.
Twenty steering committees composed mainly of Bank staff prepared back-
ground technical papers for the Sourcebook. Primary contributors included
Charles Antholt. Dan Aronson, Michael Bamberger. Aj it Banerjee, Anthony
Bebbington, Lynn Bennett, Mark Blackden, Gabriel Campbell, Tim Campbell,
Thomas Carroll, Nat Colletta, Chona Cruz, Shelton Davis. Jim Edgerton, John
Frankenhoff, Michael Goldberg, Gita Gopal, Davicd Gow, Hans Jurgen Gruss.
Malcom Holmes. N. Vijay Jagannathan, James Kearns. Anirudh Krishna, An-
drew Manzardo, Alexandre Marc. Ruth Meinzen-Dick. Augusta Molnar, Deepa
Narayan, Andrew Norton. Gillian Perkins, Richard Reidinger, Mary Schmidt,
Jerry Silverman. Lars Soeftestad. Tova Solo, Thomas Stephens, Abeba Taddese,
Ellen Tynan, Gabrielle Watson, and Willem Zijp. These background papers are
being published as Environment Department Papers, and most have been sum-
marized in Appendix 11.
xii

The Sourcebook was prepared with support from two of the World Bank's
central vice presidencies-Environmentally Sustainable Development (ESD)
and Human Capital Development and Operations Policy (HCO)-and with
resources from the German Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ)
and the Swedish International Development Authority. Thomas Kuby of GTZ
also provided substantive support.
In addition to direct contributions to its contents, the Sourcebook has ben-
efited from the comments and feedback of several hundred reviewers both in-
side and outside the Bank. We have taken many of these views and insights
into account in revisions. But given the sheer number of responses, it was im-
possible to incorporate all of them. Fortunately, we do not see this document as
the final word. Instead, we envision the Sourcebook as a "living" document,
which will be updated and revised regularly to reflect our rapidly growing
experience in this area. In future editions, we also hope to incorporate contri-
butions from outside the Bank-from donors. NGOs, our government coun-
terparts, and other participation practitioners, all of whom have valuable expe-
riences of their own from which we can learn.
xiii

ACRONYMS
ADP 
AA riculturlal Development Project
AIC 
Appreciation-Influence-Control
AIDS 
Acquirecd Immune-Deficiency 
Syndrome
BA 
Beneficiary Assessment
CAMPFIRE 
Commllunal Areas Management Programme for- Indigenous
Resources
CDEEP 
Comite Departemental de suivi d'Execution et d'Evaluation
des Programmes du Secteur de la Sant6
CEF 
Caixa Economica Federal
CESW 
Country Economic and Sector Work
CFE 
Coniisi6n Federal dc Electricidad
CIDP 
Communal Irrigation Development Project
CIR 
Country Implementation Review
CNEEP 
Comit6 National de suivi d Execution et d'Evaluation des
Programnmes dIi Secteur de la Sante
C(OGEC 
Cornite de Gestion de la Commune
COGES 
Comite de Gestion de la Sous-prefecture
DENR 
Department of Environlmiient and Natural Resources
ENVSP 
Environment Department, Social Policy Division
ESD 
Environmiientally Sustainable Developmenit Vice-Presidency
ESMAP 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Pro-ram
ESW 
Economic andc Sector Worlk
EXPACO 
Executive Planning andl Action Coordination Organization
FACUI 
Federal Agricultural Coordinatinc, Unit
FENACOAC Federaci6n Nacional de Cooperativas Agricolas de Ahorro.
Creditos. y Servicios Varios
FONCODES Fondo Nacional de Compensation v Desarollo
FPC 
Forest Protection Commllittees
GA 
Gender Analysis
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product
GOS 
Governmenit of the Sindh
GTZ 
Gesellschaft ffir Technische Zusammenar-beit
HCCO 
Hunuai Capital Developmenlt and Operationls Policy
Vice-Presidencv
HIV 
Humllani Immllunodeficienicy Virus
IA 
Irri-ation Association
ICC 
Indigenous Cultual-ll Community
IDA 
International Development Association
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development
INDAP 
Instituto NacionaLl de Desarollo Agropecuario
IPAS 
Integrated Protected Areas System
IPM 
Integrated Pest Management
KWSB 
Karachi Water and Sewerage Board
xiv

LogFRAME Logical Framework
LPDR 
Lao People's Democratic Republic
LTPS 
Long-Term Perspective Study
MOH 
Ministry of Health
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization
NIA 
National Irrigation Adminiistration
OOPP 
Objectives-Oriented Project Planning
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance
PA 
Poverty Assessment
PAMB 
Protected Areas Management Board
PPA 
Participatory Poverty Assessment
PPM 
Project Planning Matrix
PRA 
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PSM 
Public Sector Management
RDF 
Rural Development Fund
SA 
Social Assessment
SARAR 
Self-esteem. Associative strength. Resourcefulness. Action
planning, and Responsibility for follow-through
SCC 
Systematic Client Consultation
SSDP 
Sindh Special Development Project
TM 
Task Manager
TWUWS 
Transportation. Water, and Urban Development Department.
Water and Sewerage Division
UNICEF 
United Nations Children's Fund
VCC 
Village Credit Committee
VCF 
Village Credit Funld
W&S 
Water and Sanitation
WIA 
Women in Agriculture
ZOPP 
Zielorientierte Projektplanung (Objectives-Oriented Project
Planning)
xv

THE 
PROJECT 
CYCLE
AT A GLANCE
I 
_M
M I 
Km_KINII 
| 
X0 
'00IPwNABN: 
0 
|
OBorrower; 
primary 
Joint 
Bank; primary 
Joint
Bank: advisory 
_ 
o 
Borrower: advisory
Source: Th1e Task Manager's Handbook, World Bank, 1995
xvi

INTRlODUCTION
It is niot that ii*e 
-
Y 
e have written the Sonurcebook for World Bank Task Managers-
should sinplpv seek 
and those who work with them-to help them support participa-
newv 
and(1 better waYs 
tory processes in economic and social developmenit.
fior maanaging societv ,T 
The Souirrcebook 
is not a policy document on participation, nor
the econ7oivi .v an d the 
is it to be read cover to cover. It also does not seek to persuade anyone (other than
wvo rld. The point is through example) to use participatory approaches. In prepaling it, we are assum-
that wve shouild ing that readers have already decided to use participatory approachies in their
fundamen2tally'v chalnlge professional work. The Sourcebook has been formatted so that busy people can
howv wve behave. pull it off the shelf, consult the table of contents, and quickly tum to the section
they need. Chapters are set up in modular form, with reference headings that
-Vaclav Havel should allow the reader to dip in and out of the document according to individual
interest and need. Readers may also wish to supplement the contents of the
Soircebook by reading more detailed information on1 methods and tools (Ap-
pendix I) or the background paper summaries (Appendix II).
AV IIAT' 
IS9 
N' IN 
i 
T 
(H)E 
SO 
(I 
)OB(O?
Chapter I: Reflections on Participation
Chapter I brings together the key themes and common elements of participa-
tion. It also contains our reflections on what we have learned from the ex-
amples in Chapter II. We explore what participatory development is and what
it means to use participatory processes to plan and implement Bank-supported
operations. We also discuss the importance of using participatory approaches
in reaching the poor. Although Chapter I is not an executive summary, it does
invite you to explore the cases that follow.
Chapter II: Shared Experiences
This chapter contains examples, presented in the first person. of how World
Bank staff used or helped others use participatory approaches in Bank-sup-
ported operations. We identified these examples through the work of the four-
year Bankwide Learning Group on Participatory Development. In making se-
lections, we attempted to cover a variety of countries, sectors, and types of
activities. We recognize. however, that we have not even come close to captur-
ing the vast, rich. and varied experiences in participatory development. even
within the Bank.
In compiling these case studies. it became evident that each example is
context specific: therefore, applying what you find useful in these examples to
other situations will nio doubt require some interpretation and adaptation. You
may wish to browse through several of these cases to see what your colleagues
are doing before settling on a final approach.

[rHI-i 
NV O1RIA) 
BANK 
PAR'TIUI'I('IOI'\IION 
SMIRVEIIOOKI
Chapter III: Practice Pointers in Participatory Planning
and Decisionmaking
Chapter III draws largely on the experiences presented in Chapter II to guide
the reader through the various steps of participatory 
planning and
decisionmaking. These practice pointers provide answers to questions Task
Managers may have about using participatory approaches in Bank-supported
activities. Given the context-specific and multidimensional nature of partici-
pation, the practice pointers give the reader a menu of options for each stage of
the participatory process based on actual Bank experiences. This leaves read-
ers free to decide for themselves which examples are most relevant to their
own situation and adapt the ideas accordingly.
Chapter IV: Practice Pointers in Enabling the Poor to Participate
The practice pointers in Chapter IV focus on one particular group of stake-
holders-the poor-and some of the common barriers to their participation.
Chapter IV presents the experience of Bank staff and their government coun-
terparts and shares approaches to strengthening the financial and organiza-
tional capacities of the poor. It also discusses ways of creating an enabling
environment for the participation of all stakeholders, including the poor.
Appendix I: Methods and Tools
This appendix describes a range of participatory methods, some of which have
been used in the Chapter II examples. We have borrowed techniques freely
from those who "invented" them and have modified them, when necessary, to
fit into the context of Bank-supported operations.
Appendix II: Working Paper Summaries
Steering committees composed mostly of Bank operational staff prepared back-
ground papers on participation for the Sourcebook. The eighteen papers fall
into three categories (a) Bank-supported activities and operational tasks, (b)
sectors, and (c) cross-cutting issues. Appendix II contains summaries of these
papers and their main findings for readers who want to explore a specific area
or issue in greater depth.
2

C{HAPTEIR 
I
REFLECTIONS: 
WHAT 
ISI~
PARTICIPATION?
Participation is a 
ome readers who know the World Bank well will note that the ex-
process through 
amples presented in Chapter II differ from their notions of how the
which stakeholders 
Bank normally goes about its work. This difference could be either in
inifluence and share 
style or presentation. In our opinion, however, it is not a matter of
control over style but rather the "stance" adopted by the sponsors and designers in organiz-
development ing and carrying out the activity. Also different is the explicit recognition and
initiatives and the importance attached to description of the processes used to plan and imple-
decisions and ment development activities.
resources which 
The behavior of those who sponsored and designed the development ac-
affect them. tivities described in Chapter II illustrates what we mean by "stance." For Bank
activities, the central government is usually, but not always, the sponsor. In the
-Participation 
examples included here, the sponsors and designers take a stance that places
Learnng Group them inside the local social system being addressed; that is, they demonstrate
Final Report a willingness to work collaborativelv with the other key stakeholders in carry-
ing out the steps required to prepare a project for World Bank financing. Spe-
cifically, they do the following:
* 
Identify the strengths and weaknesses of existing policies and service and
support systems; that is, the stakeholders conduct the analysis and diagno-
sis collaborativelv.
I Decide and articulate 
what is needed; that is, the stakeholders
collaboratively set objectives.
* 
Decide in pragmatic terms. directions, priorities, and institutional respon-
sibilities; that is, the stakeholders collaborativelv create a strategy.
* 
Develop or oversee development of project policies. specifications, blue-
prints, budgets, and technologies needed to move from the present to the
future: that is, the stakeholders collaborativelv formulate project tactics.
These steps are carried out for all Bank-financed projects, be they tradi-
tional projects or projects planned in what we call a "participatory" way. But
the key characteristic of a participatory approach is the collaborative stance
the project sponsors and designers take in carrying out these steps so that stake-
holders inzfluence and share control over the decisions that are made.
1':x' 
I: I1141 
NA. 
I, 
1' E 
1 '1.1'1' 
'1' 
\ 
I 
N( 
I:'1
Bank-supported projects have in the past usually been prepared in a different
manner. We call this more traditional approach the "external expert stance" to
distinguish it from what we are calling the "participatory stance." In the external
expert stance, the same activities-setting objectives, diagnosis, and so on-are
undertaken to prepare a project for financing. The difference is that in the exter-
3

'THIC 
WoI1r.) 
WOL 
\ANI( I'PlA'I'rTll'.'I'ITN 
S(II1('ICI4)(JI(
nal expert stance, the project sponsors and designers place themselves outside
the local system they are investigatino and about which they are making deci-
sions-even if they happen to come from or live within the local system.
Usually. these exterinally positioned sponsors and designers are substan-
tive experts in the subject matter they are investigating. Thev deterillille what
the project will look like. They view other stakeholder-s mainily as sources of
informationi and opinions. Their- expert role" incltides collecting hinfolrilatioln
and opinions from the other stakeholders. making(T 
sense out of what they col-
lect, and converting all of it into a development strategy or project.
The external expert stance is not a World Bank inilovation but an inhel-elit
ancd deeply embedded part of our understanding of how to produce results and
the role one plays in producilng them.
LiS'T'EINING( 
AND) 
(oNFlm'1,TA'l'I)N
Even when working in the external expert stance. Bank staff. their government
colleagues, and the consultants they hire do consult with and listen to people in
the local system. Admittedly. in the past. sponsors and designers maya not have
always listened to all the people or consulted poor and disadvantaged mem-
bers of society, but this is changing. Concer-ted efforts are now being made to
consult and listen to all concerned stakehiolders. The emphasis of the Bank's
Afi-ica Region on systematic client consultation is an example of the changes
underway. The inclusion of beneficiar-y assessments in poverty assessments is
another example.
We fully support and advocate consultation and listening-especially with
the poor and disadvantaged. But we do not equate thils with the process called
'participation." Instead, we recoalnize consultationi and listening as essential
prerequisites for participation. because, no matter how good the sponsors and
designers are at consultation and listening, what is still missing is leirning on
the part of the people in thle local system. A person who is being '"listened to"
or "consulted with" does not learn nearly as muchi as the personl doing the
listening and consulting.
By focusing attentioni on "who needs to learin what" in a project and revis-
ing our understanding of how learnino occurs. we gain insights into the rea-
sons why the behavior change dimensionis of Bank-financed projects have run
into so many problems. We are also aided in our understanding of what project
design changes are needed to enable social change.
SOiA)' 
1. 
I-EA.RNIN-(:
In the external expert stance, experts design strategies and projects that require
behavior changes on the part of people within a given system. Then they tur n
these preset specifications over to people who are accustomed to behaving in a
significantly different way and have not learned what the experts have learned
about lowt! and why! their behavior needs to change. The implementation chal-
lenge that arises in such situations hinges, as far as we can tell, on the issue of
learniing. Specifically, how can the people within a local system learn the value
and rationale of new social behaviors specified by an expert'?
Behind the well-institutionalized practice of specifying new behaviors in
reports and other texts is the belief that people learn by reading informilation
about a reality external to them. Under this assuniption, it is logical to think that
4

presentinig people with a plan is enough to enable them to take new actions effec-
tively. And if the actions taken turnl out to be ineffective in practice. then we
believe it is necessary to go back and reconstruct our strategy or project or plan.
But. over time, development experience has shown that when extenlal ex-
perts aoloec acquire. analyze. and process information and then present this
information in reports, social change usUally does not take place: whereas the
kind of "social learning" that stakeholders generate and interilalize during the
participatory planning and/or implemilenltatioln 
of a developmenit activity does
enable social change.
As indicated in the Chapter IT examples. Bank Task Man1agaers are increas-
ingly supporting processes in whichi the stakeholders themselves generate. share.
and analyze inforimiationl: establish priorities: specify objectives; and develop
tactics. The stakelholders contr-ibute their experience and expertise-for instance.
the experienlce of what it is to be poor or female or the expertise to develop
specificationis for a new road or edLicational program. The stakeholders learn
and develop a joint purpose together.
!-illCIAl, 
I NVENT'1ION
This social learning is ftollowecl by "social inventioni." The stakleholders invent
the new practices and institUtional ariangem11ents 
they are willing to adopt. In
the process. they individually and collectively develop insight and understanld-
in- of the new behaviors required to attain the objectives they set. Having all
stakeholder-s work. learn. and invent together reduces the need for the transfer
of expeit learning ftromi one group of stakeholders to another.
The Task Managers of the case studies in Chapter 11 say that local people
often create the most importanlt parts of the projects. Task Managers make a
point of distinguishing between what seem to outsiders to be good ideas and
what the local stakeholders invent as practical and expedient ways to get thingys
of value done. The implication is that experts standing outside of the local
systemn often miss possibilities and opportunlities that come naturally to its
memiibers. The Chad Education Task Manager. for example. poilts out that he
had never thoughlt about parent education as an importanit means of inprovilng
child education until the parents them1selves proposed it.
Again. this seems sensible. How cani experts positioned outside the local
system figure out what the people in it are willing and able to change'? More
important, how can they know the speed and depth with which the local stake-
holders are willing to make these changes' If behavioral and organizational
chiangies are necessary, theni the people whose behavior has to change should
create the change and commlit themselves to it.
The absence of sufficienlt "commitmiienat" in many of the projects the Bank
finanices conies, we believe, mainily from the external expert stance, in which
small groups of experts ask the other stakeholders to commit themselves to a
project the experts have designed. Even if these stakeholders do so. they often
have not learned enoughi to understanld fully the commitmenlt they are being
asked to miake. Nor have they learned enough to judge their ability individu-
ally and collectively to fulfill it. We need to be clear that commitmenits made
ulider- such circumstanlces cannot be relied on.
5

ITHE4 
WORIAx1) 
BA4NE ISA1RTICIPATIIFMIN 
.SOU1 1EA 1 
01i((
Through the participatory process, however, people can make informed
commitments, and, by observing the participatory process, assessments can be
made by Bank and government staff, among others, about the presence or ab-
sence of the commitment necessary to ensure sustainability.
In Chapter II, we see how such a network of support and commitment
generated by participatory processes can keep a project going in the face of
problems. In the Benin Health example, a strong network of local health com-
mittees was formed during the initial design phase to set the objectives and
strategies of the project. This network was able to keep the project going as
officialdom continually changed-with four new health ministers in fourteen
months and four different notions about what would be good for the people.
This is because the process that produced the project was inclusive from the
start, therefore gaining broadly based support from all concerned.
Of course, more than commitment is needed. Economic, financial, and
technical arrangements must be in place to deliver on these commitments. But
if these arrangements exist only on paper or in agreements made without the
understanding of those stakeholders who must implement and sustain the
project, little will be accomplished.
-}OPrr1,AP, 
N-[,.IR!:tTs 
S;r.l;,KEU10.DERI 
PARs1TWulSPAT-MllN
When we began preparing the Sourcebook, we assumed we would be writing
about "popular" participation, that is, participation of the poor and others who
are disadvantaged in terms of wealth, education, ethnicity, or gender. It seemed
obvious to us to focus on the participation of these poor and disadvantaged
groups because, although often the intended beneficiaries, they are usually
without voice in the development process.
But, as we started documenting the Chapter II examples, we noted that
apart from poor and disadvantaged people who were directly affected, a
range of other stakeholders for Bank-supported operations existed. These
stakeholders could affect the outcome of a proposed Bank intervention or
were affected by it; because of this, their participation was critical. In addi-
tion to those directly affected by the project, these stakeholders include the
following:
* 
Borrowers, that is, elected officials, line agency staff, local government
officials, and so on. Governments representing borrower member coun-
tries are the Bank's most significant partners in that they are shareholders
as well as clients and are responsible for devising and implementing pub-
lic policies and programs.
* 
Indirectly affected groups, such as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
private sector organizations, and so forth with an interest in outcomes
* 
The Bank, that is, Bank management, staff, and shareholders
We also noted that, in our Chapter II examples, sponsors and designers of
development activities had to work with and through powerful stakeholders to
serve the needs of the poorest people. Attempts to bypass powerful stakehold-
ers often resulted in opposition from them; this opposition usually compounded
the problem of getting anything useful accomplished.
For these reasons, we shifted our focus from popular participation to stake-
holder participation-the participation of all relevant stakeholders in the de-
6

velopment process. This is a decision that we have made consciously and that
will have important implications for the way the Bank works. 
m
But although we argue that all stakeholders must work collaboratively to
advance development projects, we recognize that different stakeholders have
different levels of power, different interests, and different resources. For these
reasons, we also recognize that arrangements are needed to level the playing
field and enable different stakeholders to interact on an equitable and genu-
inely collaborative basis. Appendix I discusses the methods and tools that can
be used for these purposes.
Achieving consensus and reconciling key stakeholder differences is not al-
ways easy; it may entail risks, such as generating or aggravating conflicts among
groups with competing interests and priorities. Dealing with conflict often re-
quires an understanding of the underlying societal interests inhibiting consensus
and putting into place mechanisms for dispute resolution and negotiation.
h'F'.kc'II1N-(: 
[,HI,; 
Poo">
As the Sourcebook examples illustrate, the poor face many barriers on a num-
ber of different levels that prevent them from having a real stake in develop-
ment activities. Reaching and engaging the poor requires special arrangements
and efforts by the sponsors and designers that go beyond those used to involve
government officials and other relatively powerful stakeholders in participa-
tory processes.
Who Are the Poor?
The poor include people in remote and impoverished areas. Women and chil-
dren make up a large proportion of the very poor, which also includes people
marginalized by virtue of their race and ethnicity as well as those disadvan-
taged by circumstances beyond their control, such as disabilities and natural or
man-made disasters. Some of the poorest people live in countries character-
ized by weak governments and civil strife.
Because the poor are generally less educated and less organized than other
more powerful stakeholders, because they are more difficult to reach, and be-
cause the institutions that serve them are often weak, interventions targeting
the poor must often be small, context-specific, and resource-intensive.
Learning from the Poor
Task Managers, some of whose experiences are cited in Chapter 11, are learn-
ing a great deal about reaching the poor and engaging them in their own devel-
opment. Understanding how to do this calls in part for "bottom-up" approaches
that begin by involving the poor and learning from them about their needs and
priorities.
When we take a look at the types of methods and approaches that work
best at the field level for engaging and enabling the poor to participate, we see
that these are quite different from the set of techniques used when relatively
sophisticated and powerful stakeholders are involved. The Chapter II examples
indicate that stakeholder workshops and other planning methods, such as Ob-
jectives-Oriented Project Planning (ZOPP)* and Appreciation-Influence-Con-
trol (AIC) (see Appendix I for descriptions of both), tend to work well when
* From the Gernman term "Zielorientierte 
Projektplanung."
7

ITHl; 
\% (ORIA) 
BA.NK 
PA 
'.RTI( 
S0tT"I() 
F 
('l.X1:J3(>)1;K
the objective is to gain ownership and commitment on the part of stakeholders
such as governimlent officials and staff of internationial agencies. These examples
also demonstrate that workshops can be structured to include the views of the
poor, but this requires conscious and careful planniniig.
But, when the primary objective is to learn from and collaborate with the
poor, a different kind of dynamilc is involved that calls for a different approach
to facilitating participation. These methods should engage poor people and
build their confidence, knowledge base. and capability for action. Visual meth-
ods that are carried out in the local setting. using local materials and calling on
local knowledge and expertise as inputs into project design are often used to
good effect.
Building Capacitv to Act
Getting the participation of the poor involves a lot more than finding the right
technique. It requires strengthening the organizational and financial capacities
of the poor so that they can act ftor themselves. In searching for ways to build
local capacity. we found it useful to think in terms of a continuulil along which
the poor are progressively empowered.
On one end of' this continuum, the poor are viewed as beneficiaries-
recipients of services, resources. and development interventions. In this con-
text, communitv organizing. training, and one-way tlows of resources through
grant mechanisms are often appropriate. Although much good work has been
donie in this mode, the provision of bene'fits delivered to people in this way
may not be sustainable in the long term and may not improve the ability of
people to act for themselves.
As the capacity of poor people is strengthened and their voices begill to be
heard, they become "clients" who are capable of demanding and paying for
goods and services from governimlenit 
and private sector agencies. Under these
chianged circumstanices, the mechanisms to satisfy their needs Will change as
well. In this context, it becomes necessary to move away from welftare-ori-
ented approaches and focus rather on such things as building sustainable. mar-
ket-based financial systems: decentralizingi authority and resources; and
strenigtheninig local institutiolis.
We reach the far end of the continuum whenl these clients ultimately be-
come the owners and managers of their assets and activities. This stage ranlks
highest in terins of the intensity of participation involved. A questioni we asked
ourselves while preparing the Sourcebook was. how can we support and pre-
pare poor people to own and milaae assets and activities in a sustainiable mall-
ner? In part, we found out that the more poor people are involved upstreamii in
the plannilig and decisionmaking process, the more likely they are to oNvil a
development intervention, contribute to it. and sustain it: this alone, however.
is not sufficient.
Constraints exist at the policy level that impinge on the rights of people to
organize. access informationi, engage in contracts. own and maniage assets, and
participate fully as members of civil society. Efforts are needed. therefore. to
create an enablinig policy environimienit 
that allows all stakeholders-especially
pooI and disadvantaged ones-to be part of the definition we noted at the out-
set. They too must be enabledi to:
...influenice and share control over development initiatives and the de-
cisions and resources which affect themil.
8

CHAPTER 
II
SHARING 
EXPE,RIENCES
In 
prepar-ing, 
the Son rcebook we discovered that the best way to learn about
participation is to experience it direct/v. The second best way is by seeing,
what others have done in the name of participation. talking to themn and
seeking their guidance. Thits chapter shares the experiences of individu-
als who SuIpported par-ticipatory approaches in Bank operationial activities. We
have documnented these examiples to hielp Task Maniagers anid othier inlterested
parties learni abouIt participationi fromi the pr-actical experienices of thieir col-
leagues. They are presented in the first-person narrative. most often but not
always by Banik Task Managers. the people with overall responsibility' for- pro-
cessing Bank-supported projects and policy work.
No 
tE~"'(''MoI
We do niot offer these examiples as perfect miodels of how, for examiple. to plan
a development project in a participatory manner. In fact, we believ'e that no
-perfect m-odel" for participationi exists. Thie form- participation takes is highly'
inifluenced by the overall circumnstances and the unique social context in which
action is being taken.
Whatever our initial intuition might have suggested. we observed that par-
ticipation has m 
erany 
faces and ways of showing up in the multidimensional
field of developh ent-a field that embraces mian different types of historical,
political. CultUral. sectoryalh and institutional settiings.
~'i[L. I'irTIO 
M': LE'AHNN'D
We recoglnize that the Banik is in the process of learning how to introduce
participatory approaches into its work, especiall' friom those practitio-
9

TIH1E 
AN( 
IRA1.1) 
CNIIP 
A 
AION 
SOURC11 
I 10i 
)( ) Ii
ners in developing countries who have been practicing participation for
many years.
Because the Bank has a great deal to learn about using participatory ap-
proaches, you may wonder why we have not gone outside the institution in
search of examples. The reason is that, at this initial stage, we feel the
Sourcebook will be more useful, relevant, and convincing to Bank staff and
managers if it is based on actual Bank staff experience with participatory ap-
proaches. By highlighting current Bank practices, the Sourcebook demonstrates
that participation is not only possible but already underway in many Bank-
supported activities. We hope to include examples from other organizations in
future editions of the Sourcebook.
SEl.ECTION 
B1A1ES
We selected the following examples from those we came to know through the
work of the Bank's four-year Learning Group on Participatory Development.
We have included examples of economic and sector work, investment projects,
and a country implementation review-all of which were conducted in a par-
ticipatory manner.
We acknowledge two limitations in the range of examples presented in
this chapter. The first is that more of the examples are about participation dur-
ing preparation and planning than during implementation. This does not mean
we think the former are any more important than the latter. In fact, we want to
be clear that participation is an iterative process that can and should be re-
peated at every stage of the Bank's project cycle. This "planning bias," how-
ever, does reflect that the Bank has only recently made an institutional com-
mitment to supporting participatory approaches and most of the examples from
which we had to choose are still in the "honeymoon" phase of the project
cycle. Wherever we could, we have tried to include examples of participation
during implementation. But beyond this, we will have to wait, watch, and docu-
ment our experience in this area as it grows.
Perhaps more important, we have found that not all projects can be planned
in detail from the outset. Many projects deal with stakeholders or sets of prob-
lems for which the exact modalities for achieving the set objectives are un-
known at the start. These projects require flexible and iterative planning that
can respond to changing situations and new information as it becomes avail-
able. Such projects need to be approached in an exploratory mode, in which
future stages are planned in light of the outcome of initial interventions.
We have selected several examples because they illustrate how Bank Task
Managers adapted a "process" approach for such operations. This entailed
(a) piloting activities, (b) undertaking design concurrently with implementa-
tion, (c) introducing flexible targets, time frames, and funding mechanisms,
and (d) encouraging other changes in the existing project cycle and operat-
ing procedures. These examples also document a significant shift in stance
from emphasizing mechanistic "things" to emphasizing people, processes,
and continuous learning.
A second limitation of the Sourcebook lies in the preponderance of ex-
amples that deal with Bank-financed projects as opposed to policy work.
Again, this reflects the realities of Bank experience with participation to date.
We hope to add more examples of participatory policy work as our experi-
ence grows.
I0

SH.'%I?IN(; 
XPERIENCU;z:5 1:
THE, 
INLkNY 
F.x( 
;s 
()I' FPARTIC'IPATION
In selecting these examples, we have tried to reflect the impressive diversity of
participatory practices across countries, sectors, and types of activities. For
instance, we have included at least one example from each region of the Bank.
We have also tried to represent a range of participatory techniques currently
being used in Bank-supported operations. We are well aware, however, that for
every example we included, many other equally innovative and instructive cases
probably exist. We have been told so, in fact, by dozens of Bank staff who are
working in a participatory manner in countries, sectors, or activities that have
not been included in this edition of the Sourcebook.
INrEN,IIv 
t-I' 
i'lPA'r 
ici.r(rION
Another important criterion for selection was the level or intensih of participa-
tion illustrated by the examples. This is important because participation is an
elastic term that can mean different things to different people in different institu-
tions. All the examples you will read in the Sourcebook are situations in which
the relevant stakeholders have engaged in collaborative decisionmaking as op-
posed to listening and consultation. In making this distinction, we are emphasiz-
ing the point that participation must involve some degree of shared control.
' INI)IN(; 
Yot: 
WAY 
THIHOI 
1( 
'[H 
TH 
SotEl 
BOE1 
I0i
The map and table on the following pages will guide you to the examples most
appropriate to your needs. You may wish to read a few of the examples repre-
senting the sector or region in which you work, or you may wish to choose
examples based on participatory techniques you have heard about or the type of
Bank activity in which you are involved. However you choose to start, you will
probably find that reading an example will stimulate your interest in reading
others and drawing your own conclusions about what works and what does not.
11


,X ( 
ITII)I,: 
'I'() 
)t ' 1) ('EI1; 
I 
E X.,ANI 
I,E:
TABLE 
2. 1 
(tIDEI1, 
To 
SOLTR('EBO)IK 
EX.AmPt,ES
Stakeholders Community
Country 
Sector 
Activity 
Technique 
Starting Point 
Involved 
Organization
Albania 
Rural Credit 
Project 
Generic 
Preparationi 
G. 1, D 
Village Credit
Committees
Benin 
Health 
Projecl 
SW 
Preparationi 
G. 1. D 
Village Health
Commliittees
Brazil 
Water/Urban 
Project 
Generic 
Three years into 
G. 1. D 
Homeowner
Implemiienitationi 
Condominillrns
Chad 
Education 
Project 
ZOPP 
Preparationi 
G. I 
Parent-Teacher
Associationis
Colombia 
Energy 
ESW 
AIC 
Start of the Study 
G. I 
NA
Egypt 
Natural Resource 
Project 
PRA 
Preparation 
G. I. D 
Community
Management/ 
Resource
Agriculture 
Managemenlt
Committees
India 
Forestry 
Project 
ZOPP 
Preparationi 
G, 1, D 
Forest Protection
Comlmllittees
Lao People's 
Health 
Project 
SW 
Mid-way thioLugil 
G 
NA
Democratic 
Preparation
Republic
Mexico 
Hydroelectricl 
Project 
Generic 
Preparation 
G. I. D 
NA
ResettleIlemeit
Morocco 
Womell-ini- 
ESW 
PRA 
Beginnilg 
of 
G. I. D 
NA
Development 
Study
Mozambique 
Cross- 
CIR 
SW 
Start of the 
G 
NA
Sectoral 
Review
Nigeria 
Agriculture 
Project 
SW 
Preparaltioni 
G. I 
Womeni's Groups
Pakistan 
Public Sector 
Project 
Action 
Preparationi 
G 
NA
Management/ 
Researcl
Urban
Philippines 
Biodiversity 
Project 
Generic 
After Appraisal 
G, 1, D 
Comimlunity
Manlagemiient
Boards
Philippines 
Irrigatioin 
Project 
Generic 
Before Preparation 
G. 1 D 
lITigation
Associations
Yemen. Rep. of 
Educationl 
Sectol- 
SW 
Preparation 
G 
Locatl Schools
Adjtistilmeint
Progrlam 
s
Legend: 
NA = Not Applicable 
CIR= CountrY Iniplenmenration Rev iewi 
ESW = Economic and( Sector Wor-k
G = Government Stakeholder.s
I =n(irec t/v A'ftcted Stakeholders (NGO.Y, interinediarY orll:'izationls. 
technical bodies, and so on)
D = Direct/v Afft7cted Stakeholders (tlhose wh'l1o 
stand to benelit oF losef tion 
Bank-supp(orted operations)
Techniques: 
A IC = Appr71 eciationU-In 
-f7Pem1( 
e-Conit1Yol 
PRA = Participatorl Rural Appraisal
ZOPP 
= Oh/jec tives-Oriented 
Project 
Plannin1g 
SW 
= StakewiderWo 
rkshop
i 3

YEMEN, 
REP. 
OF 1 
EGYPT
Once governme-nt education officials fo-
cus on the quality of education instead of 
Bedouin representatives join govern-
ment officials and consultants on. a
number of classrooms, teachers, and 
project design team. Planning sessions
books, attention turns to the local schools. 
and PRA held in Bedouin comnmunities.
Workshops are used to givevoice to head- 
Separate planning sessions are held for
MOROCC 
masters and mistresses, local schools are 
wepat 
e 
d 
for
mowa<ze 
3 
0 
~~~~~empowered 
to create their own qualitywoe.Lclppedvlp 
ret
MOROCCO 
empowered 
to create their ownqualityimplementation 
arrangements including
Tthough meetings and oientationwo&k- 
education prograns with central govern-
shops in participatory metods, 1M con- 
ment funding. The network of support
vinces skeptical goverment officials t al- 
generated by theparticipatory preparation
low localwonen'to participate in folmu- 
approach keeps the momentum going
lation of Women in Deve 
estrategy 
during a change at the potical level. 
---
paper. Govenment agrees but stipulates 
c 
5 
that :PRA must be carried out by Moroc-
cans. Goverment and NGOpersonnel 
-
receive intensive training to undertake 
.Ž--
PRA in rural vilages. Rural woren are 
-
preparing teir owncomendationsfor 
;
inclusion in the sector report.
1e. ~ 
~ 
~ 
-- 
,;% 
' 
-
fallsxlso 
1 
t 
,. 
~'A' 
-~ 
-
- .
MEXICO
Negotiations between the govermnt and 
-
-_ 
the Bank break off, in part over the
government's reluctance to pr 
e paetci-
patotY resettlement plans. When the gov-
ernment returns seven monts later, how-
ever, the Bank helps CFE, the national
power company, to develop decentralized 
C OL G M B IA
outrach capacity, ceate appropriate in- 
When govenmnt asks the Bank to help
centives for its staff, and strength 
de 
al with the bankrupty 
of 
its electrich
lic accountability 
mechanisms. 
power sector, TM respotnds with the rec-
ommendation that Colombians solve the
poblem demslves thwh a parCIpatory , 
-
AIC workshop. Workshop concludes that 
/ ,
the main problem nis lack of coordintion -
among the my, diverse stakeholders. 
I
Workshop leads to the creation of an En- 
7 
|
ergy Board to coordinate the entire sector; 
-Z 
r/
however, lack of fbE0W-Uplin-its 
progres& 
j 
: 
//
The boundaries, 
colors, denominatons 
and 
lc 
o 
o, 
p 
-
/
any other information shown on this map
do not imply, 0n the part of The World
Bank Group, any judgment on the legal
status of any territory, 
or any endorsement 
/ 
/
or acceptance of such boundaries. 
,._ 
_ 
_ 
_ _ __ 
_ __._!
.- 
X NIGERIA
7-" / 
A¢1 
When studies reveal that wornen:are
BRAZIL 
,, 
.
benefiting sufficiently from agricultu
Participatory subproject design saves a 
BENIN 
,extension 
serces, the Bank brings tep
large ~~ 
.
~ 
senutnties of eovernment rmmstres 
large loan cQmponent 
targeted at the poor 
TM convinces skeptical government of- 
e 
f
from cancellation. A fiew 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~state 
agriculture line departments toget
from cancellatison. 
A new procurement 
ficials and villagers of the utility of par- 
i a 
e 
y pn 
wrsho 
t
approach binds engineering firms and 
ticipatory approaches by holding town 
velop action plans for implemnon
social organi2ers intojoint ventures. En- 
hall meetings in remote villages. Once te 
the extension progm. Due to several
;gineers and social organizers negotiate 
stakeholders are enlisted, the project is 
fieulties, women farmers are unable
design and management of subprojects 
prepared though participatory planming 
participate directly. Female extensi
wiehim dweUlets. 
Wen pride lead- 
wonshops. A result of te effort is that 
ents, familiar with and able to repres
ership in the slums. The Bank integrates 
villagers now serve on the boards of ia- 
t
stutue 
.er 
.
mt h 
he needis of woroen fannrs, serve as s
structured learning into the project. 
tional bodies and carry out important lo- 
rogates for them in pariipaty pln
cal health care delivery responsibilities. 
event.

ALBANIA 
PAKISTAN
Aftr piloting bureaucratic reorientation
An urgent need exists to njectcash nto 
of the Water Board, an intervention is 
INDIA
i 
eponeished 
mntin areas 
adprovide 
made through the preparation of the
employmentopporrinites.Priorto 
Bank- 
project to transform the core agencies of 
Bank helps mainstream the Forest Pro-
financed pilot, TM andAJbanian consult- 
the Sindh Province to accomplish pocy, 
tection Cnmttee aproachinitiated in
ants work with rural faning: communi- 
financial, and institutional reformn. A 
WestBanglo,Thgh this approachfor-
ties to design crediudelivery 
mAechanisms 
te-tiered participatory policy plamiing 
esters shift out oft a policing role to a
suitable for the poor. Sixty-three village 
structure is institutionalized to bring to- 
social role that provides income to poor
credit funds are created as a result. 
gether beaucrats and poliiians fi 
people and regenerates the forest. ZOPP
different parts of the Sindh govenment. 
workshop brings various government
Accomplishments 
in the Sindh are being 
stakeholders together to collaboratively
-~ 
-
-
adopted elsewhere in the country. 
identify institutional changes needed to
support Participatory foestry.
_ 
-/ 
//8
~~~~~~ 
~~~~~~~~~~> 
~~~~~~~~~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~
LAO P.D.R.
>_ 
1 </ 
-- 
< 
/ Government officials, misunderstanding
pared and implemned 
projec, 
much
-'- 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~~like NMO have beendo6ing 
in Lags. Mid-
4.(a_ 
t ' X /t- / 
/ 
way through project preparation, TM
used particpatory workshops to engen-
r \ ^ 
t- -- 
< S 
/ 
-4Xg, 
/, 
f 
der owneship among central, ste, 
and
,- ~. 
local govenment stakeholders.
'r 
\ 
\ 
S 
k< ~~~/ 
C7 
\f 
's3E
,4~~~~~~~ 
[21 
-' 
D/'J) 
\eT
r 
-f --
<7 
i~<// 
i 
\ 
rx 
\ 
PHILIPPINES
Bank and,government 
undertake a Joint
Consultative Appraisal Mission aanged
,2 
-
1 
/t 
\j 
~14 
-- v 
4-!f-- \zg: 
byanNGOondiscoveringthatexpert-
designed legislation and project over-
e 
1 -
= -' 
looked needs and concems ofindigenous
/ 
rl: 
/(1 
shrC 
\ 
communities. NGOs conduct follow-up
I 
meetings with local stakeholders andpar-
ticipatory hnplementation arrangements
are inserted into project to give local resi-
dents greater contol over resources and
decisionmaking in subprojects.
PHILIPPINES
In the late 1970s, fte Filipino National Ir-
MO ZAMB I QUE 
Nigadon 
Agency (NIA) Ileans how to plan
and nmange 
communa irrigation schemes
\ 
~~~~~~~~TM 
assipWe to the resdent wniFon brings 
admng 
omnl'iao
TM asignd 
tothe esient issin brngs 
collabormtively 
with local farmers. At the
CHAD 
togethetiivariospertoiftigovrnen
Ctim 
the Bank makes its first communal
Government spcifically requests par- 
a 
Baak to review pementato 
loan to NIA, the agency bas already
ticipatory preparation. Preparation time 
proibem. Govmmi 
pasdelp 
'"nainstreaed' farmer participation as a
and cost are very low. No women show 
an intragovernmental 
network as a result 
stndard practice. After veriying that the
up at planning sessions, and intermedi- 
of theaorop 
rOeiciparaly 
platow is effepcs 
ihe 
Bank
ariestepresentthoirown interests instead 
prove bi 
intpaim tion problems 
TM spends most ohis time helpig MA
of interests of te poor. Implomentation 
emaiu 
t 
of 
navigate through Bank and central gov-
arrangements include capacity building 
Absene of the 
nn of st 
obstacles.
for parent associatiotis. 
especially pol 
s with the power to af-
fect chage, lnits ewcvene_ss.


AI-BANIA
RURAL 
POVERTY 
ALLEVIATION 
PILOT 
PROJECT
Maria Nowak is the
Task Manager for the
Albania Rural
Povwermx 
Alleviation
Pilot Project.
F,~~~~~~~~~~~~~4
lbania is the poorest country in Europe, with an estimated 1992- per
capita GDP ot under $400. * Amiid political and economic tur-
mi,the centrally planned economy collapsed in 1992. giving way
to a democraticalily elected government and ending Albania's forty-
year isolation from the rest of the world. Revolution and reform have resulted
In an abrupt transition to a market economy, which has had a dramatic imipact
on Albania's rural population.
The dismiantling of agricultural cooperatives anid rapid privatization of land
has transformed state farmi workers into private land owners whose average
holding is a meager 1 .4 hectares per familiy. People were expected to create
farms out of their new plots to provide food for their f'amilies but have been
unable to do so because of a lack of start-up capital to purchase inputs and
supplies. Withouit the necessary tools, inputs, andi opportunities, people were
surviving, on little more than food aid. To make matters worse, rural inifrastruc-
ture was destroyed during the revolution along with rural organizations in charge
of its development and maintenance. The chiallege was clear: get village in-
frastructure up and running, provide employment opportunities for local people,
and find a way to inject cash into the most impoverished areas-fast.
LEARN ING 13Y 1I)()IN(.
The government's 
refori 
program, including restructuring Albania's entire
bankinr system, would take tme to take effect, but in the immediate terim we
knew that something had to be done to address the desperate situation of farm-
Unaess othern iselindicated in the text, dollers indicate U.lS. currence.
17

ing families in the mountainous areas. The system had 
to join our team. We hired two consultants, one a physics
no capacity to lend small amounlts to 3.000 small farm- 
professor at the university and the other an engineer. We
ers. Given the urgency of the situationi, we decided to 
took them to the villages to see how they interacted with the
begin immediately with operational activities. Setting Up 
farming communities. An important criterion in hiring them
a formal, traditional. "top-down" structure for operations 
was their desire and ability to work in a participatoryn man-
would have entailed a long, bureaucratic process. so we 
ner. Given the situation, we realized how important this per-
opted for a quicker-, mcore informal route. We chose to 
sonal interaction would be to the success of our elforts. I
take a "learning-by-doing" 
approach and train our 
also brought along two foreign consultanlts to help us de-
Albanian counterparts "oon the job" and in the field. 
sign the process. Once the team was assembled. we asked
In attempting this, we were entering uncharted ter- 
the Ministry of Agriculture to choose a district not too far
ritory with no prior experience on which to build. Our 
fiom the capital to launch the "pre-pilot."
first objective was to f'ind out what would work. For 
We met first with the district authorities and the com-
example. what type of credit delivery mechanism would 
inune chiefs wlho helped us identify the poor'est villages.
be most suitable for reaching the poor? A typical Bank- 
No official village organiizations existed at the time. so
supported project would have undertakeni a sector study. we met with village "chiefs" and informal village coun-
But in this case, we couldnl't do studies because there 
cils of different sorts. We wanted the meetings to be as
was nothing to study! Everything was new. WN'e 
were 
informlal as possible and open to anyone in the village
operatinc in a climate with so manly unkniown factors 
who was interested. so we held them Linder a tree where
and uncertainties that adopting an experimenetal and par- 
passers-by could join us.
ticipatory approach seemed the most sensible way to 
It was difficult at first to get things started. Working
proceed. In fact, there was really no other way. We 
In an Eastern European context posed all sorts of prob-
needed to work with the villagers to test out different 
lems, not the least of which was silmply explainilg the
ideas and mechanisms. 
concept of individual "'credit" to the local farming coImi-
This in itself presented a challenge. given that "bot- 
munities. who hiad never heard of such a notion. Many
tom-up" participation was a completely new approach 
were initially frightenied by the idea of assuming per-
in a country where everything hadc been decided at tlhe sonal risk. It was quite a challenge in the beginning to
top. So. not surprisingly, some government officials were 
intr-oduce suchI floreigni concepts as "'inflationi" or explain
skeptical ancl viewed this approach as a waste of time. 
why it was necessar-y to charge "interest" on loans.
After all. "credit delivery is a complex topic." they ar- 
These meetings constituted the start of a series of
gued. "What would rural peasants knoxv about suchi extensive conversations and i'epeated interactions be-
things?" During the course of our discussions, however. tween groups of villagers and the Albanianl members of
we realized that some key people within the Ministry of 
our team. who were charged with calTyilng on the pro-
Agricultur-e were receptive to this appi'oach. By building cess after the rest of us left. The fact that we had molney
an alliance with them, we were able to obtain the sup- 
available right away was key. It meant we could start
port and encouragemiient needed to proceed. 
experimenitinig immediately with the dit'ferent ideas be-
inc proposed. Not only did this expedite the process. it
P.Ah'TI('IP' 
T'l'()lX- 
I)lE'9l( 
'wN 
was critical in establishing our credibility amilong the ini-
tially skeptical village commlLunities.
()F' 
(' REI)IT 
('OIMII'O)NI:N-I'
In AuguLst 1992 we began a small test project with seecd VIA,A;G: 
CR 
IE:rTI 
FUL NL)!
monley fi-onm 
the United Nations Development Programmne
and Freres d'Esperance, a French nongovernmental or- 
We concenitrated our efforts on four villages that had
ganiization (NGO). Before studying, we began dloig. The 
shown the greatest interest in collaborating with us.
availability of flexible funds allowedl us to start experi- 
Through repeated visits, we worked with the local people
mentingC and spending money righ1t away. We were con1- to come up with a design for the credit program. My
vinced that the only way to ullderstancd what could work- colleagues andc I had certaini preconceived ideas aboLit
was to see it in action. We wanted to give money to people 
what might work. I had prior experience in Bangladesh
and observe what happened. This would provide us. we 
with the Grameen Bank and theni had worked for more
hoped. with the information needed to desigin a larger thanl thirty years in Afi-ica where I also helped to adapt
pilot project to be financed by the Bank. 
the Grameen model of group-based rural credit to the
We begani by advertising in the nationial newspaper- for 
local context. Later. I had founded an NGO in France to
two Albanian counterparts with experience in microcredit develop credit for self-employmienlt. So I was ilfuenced
I s

A . 1. 1 
\N 
IA: 
It FRA. 
1, 
P')VE 1H:TY 
A\ 
.1.1 
I, 
EN 
ATl 
ON
by my own experienices and was therefore thhinkitng along 
for those least well-off in the villages. The $500 limit on
the lines of a solidarity group-lending appr-oacih. 
loans "selected out" those better off among the group
When we introduced this notioni to the villagers, how- 
since the amount was too low for their purposes. Ulti-
ever, we were surprised by their response. Although they 
mately. however, it was up to the VCCs. which held pub-
were enthusiastic about the prospect of receiving credtit. 
lic meetngs, to evaluate loan applications and to decide
tile)' rejected the idea of solidarity groups outright. To 
who in the village would receive funds. Interestiigly.
them, it too closely resemilbled the comnlunist systemil they 
maniy VCCs chose to decrease the amounit of the indi-
had just cast away. But. although they were t'ed LIp with 
vidual loans from $300 to $200. so that more families
cooperatives. they were eager to restore village solidar- 
could receive credit sooner rather than later.
ity. So they took ouir idea and adapted it to suit thieir needs.
The result was group leidinig "Albanian 
style." 
HURAIX 
DEVEIA)PMlENT' 
lNNI)
Together, we decided on a "village credit fuLnd" (VCF)
in which thie enltire village is held accountable for the loans 
It was decided during appraisal that the Rural Poverty
of its memibers. In otlher words, it' anlyone in thle village 
Alleviationi Pilot Project would be best iimplelillented by
defaults, the whole VCF could be in jeopardy of be'in cut 
an autonomo's 
transition agency that would be outside
off. In hindsight. this approach has proved extremely ef- 
government. This decision was based on the ftact that the
fective and, thus far. has resulted in a 100 percent repay- 
existing adminiistrationi did not have the ability to carry
menit rate in sixty-two of the sixty-thiee VCFs. This is quite 
out the project in a participatory manner nor the outreach
remarkable in a country where the repaymilenit rate to for- 
to interact at the local level withi several thousanid small
mal banking institutionis is a real problemi,. 
farmiers. In anotiler country. NGOs may have assumed
Designing this credit componenit was truly an interac- 
this role. but in Albania no sucih NGOs existed. So. in
tive process between our team and the villagers. In one in- 
January 1993. the RuLal Development Fund (RDF) was
stance, tIle consultanit iadjust finishied explaining the ratio- 
established by government decree. As an autonlomiious
nale for charging interest on loans and was working with 
agency, it was given the responsibility for implementing
the g-roup to decide collectively on an interest rate. Tile con- 
both the pilot an(d subsequent full-scale project. It was
sultant proposed indexing the interest rate to the price of a 
given administr-ative, tfianicial. and technical autonomy
cow (whicih was a comimiodity of real value within these 
and the authority to enter into contracts.
commulnlities). Again, the villagers did not like this idea. 
The RDF is govemed by a Board of Triustees who are
They argued that all cows were not the samie and were not 
the miniisters of the relevant minlistries. sucih as labor. fi-
worth equal sums of moniey. After muchi discussioll, it was 
inance, and agriculture and chaired by the deputy pline
decided to index interest rates to the US dollar. 
miniister. It is run by an Albanian executive director and an
executive committee made up of the heads of the credit and
'.'IL1,.:E 
('lCREDI'' 
(iM 
IFlrF:E 
hinfrastrlucture 
departments. The credit program is decen-
tralized with credit officers in every participatitn district.
To ensure that decisionmaking control remained at the local 
They attend VCC meetings and follow up on loan repay-
level, we jointly decided that each villatge would elect a 
ment. All decisionmaking concerning the VCFs rests at the
three-person "village credit commillttee" (VCC) to decide 
local level. RDF engineers also work closely with communues
who would receive funds and oversee the disbursement 
and villages in implementing rural infi-astr-uctur-e projects.
and repaymenlt of loans to borrowers. Because the mem- 
which constitute tile other major component of the program.
bers of the VCC were themselves fiom the village, they 
The RDF has now attracted other cofinanciers including
knew the applicants and could assess tlleir- creditworthi- 
tIhe governnenit of Italy. the Eu.ropean UJnion. and the Inter-
ness based on personal knowledge. The ftunds were dis- 
national Fuild for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
bursed from the implementing agencv. the Rural Devel-
opment Fund (RDF) (see below) and deposited in tranclles 
INI1ONITOINh 
'( AND 
P) 
EV`A1.-jAnrN
directly into local branches of the state-owned Rural Com-
mercial Bank to be accessed solely by tile VCCs. An RDF 
Establishing a separate department within the RDF for
credit officer and a meinber of the local RuLal Comimer- 
project monitoring and evaluationi has proved difficult. At
cial Bank- played an advisorv role on the VCCs. 
the beginniig, the RDF staff person charged with this re-
Eligibility criteria for loans were also developed in 
sponsibility was not open to new' methods and ideas and
conjuinction witlh the villagers. Althougl1 funds were not 
was simply not the right type of personi for tIle job. Subse-
specitically targeted at the poorest families, the VCCs 
quent staff have been more open-nlillded, 
andl some
had made a clear agreemenit that tlhev intended the funlids progress is now beingi made. Midway through the pilot
1 9

THE 
NVORTA) 
HANK 
IPARTiICIPAITION 
'OUH(ICE1()00i
project. we undertook an evaluation in the form of an im- 
N.x .;x,r' STEI'-
pact study. The project hired foreign consultants to estab-
lish the framework for the study. and a teami of Albanians- 
Tlis project, particularly the provision of credit to small
from the large pool of previous cooperative farimi techini- 
farmers, progressively creates new needs and, therefore,
cal staff-were 
trained and hired to can-y out the surtvevs. 
is growing and expanding at a rapid pace. Enabling farm-
Although the establishment of a separate monitor- 
ers to puichiase livestock has led to the creation of local
ing and evaluation unit has been slow and difficult., thie 
"ianimal health associations," financed jointly by the RDF
small credit program itself continues to incorporate par- 
anid farmer contributions. These indigenously derived as-
ticipatory monitoring and feedback effectively. For ex- 
sociations. which ensure the vaccination of all livestock,
ample. thiough discussions with the villagers anidt VCC 
ar-e the first signs of what I think will be a growing trend to
members, it was learnec that tarmers wanted the loani 
diversify activities and a growinig demanid ftor technical
ceiling raised. In the first phase of the project, most farim- 
assistance and larger amounts of capital lending as farm-
ers had used their loans to purchase livestock. Now they 
ers branich iito animal breeding and other related activi-
wanted to inivest in larger, more capital-initensive itemis, 
ties. Already. they are moving toward off-farm activities,
such as small tractors. mills, and transport. As a dir-ect 
which are being financed under the credit program.
response to this feedback. the project was miodified and 
In response to this, the follow-up to the pilot. the
loan ceilings were doubled from $500 to $ .0(00. 
Rural Development Project, which became effective in
May 1995. will provide technical support for these new
activities through the creationl of a microenterprise sup-
I)TI;,I'I'I(Ic 
Ws-(:)1{1s>;11()I 1~ 
port department within the RDF to help farmers use the
Regular district seminars and workshops have done a lot to 
right technology arid find markets. The upcoming $12
promote dialogue. hininnation sham-i 
ng, and learning among 
million project will iniclude the creation of 125 additional
project participants from different areas. The Albainiani con- 
'village credit funds" throughout Albania.
sultant. who now heads the RDF's credit departmenit, orga-
nizes training seminars every two to three moniths, which 
Ti-lll; :,ND 
I(INEY
bring together VCC memilbers from various districts. These
typically two-day workshops are held in a local school with 
The participaitor-y preparation of the project actually took
the RDF covering the costs of transport, food, and accomii- little time. The first preparation mission was in August
modation for the participants. During these seminiars, rep- 
1992. and the project was passed by the Bank's Board in
resentatives of the various VCCs make presentations on the 
Februar-y 1993. A consensus existed among relevant Bank
way the credit program runs in their villages. They share 
staff that the project was needed quickly, so they agreed
new ideas and experiments they are undertaking and dis- 
that the pre-pilot phase and experience was equivalent to
cuss the obstacles and problems they face. 
a project appraisal. Supervision of the project, however,
For example, one VCC went beyond basic credit and 
has been time consuming. This may partly be due to its
started experiments to mobilize savings by soliciting con- 
participator-y nature (which makes supervision more com-
tributions from its members. They received help in setting 
plicated than slimply going to a ministry with a check-
up the necessary procedures firomii theil- district credit of- 
list), but it also has to do with Albania's 
transition
ficer. I was pleased to leamn about this initiative, because we 
economy and the fact that RDF has financing from five
had been planinling to introduce a savings component in the 
or six donors.
next phase of the project in 1995. We have found, however, 
As for the costs of preparation, our experience has
that introducirignew ideas andconcepts is mucheasierwhen 
been that participatory preparation costs less than doing
they come from the people themselves. After all, when lo- 
expert studies. because participation involves local people
cal people themselves invent practical ways to get things of 
riather than many foreign consultants. As mentioned be-
value done, they are more likely to commit themselves to it. 
fore, the pre-pilot was paid for by the United Nations
Now that the idea of savings mobilization has been planted 
Development Programimille and Fr-6res d'Esperance. The
by o*ne VCC, it has proved contagious, spreacling among 
aniount allocated for the credit componenit during the pre-
communities as other VCCs are eager to introduce the con- 
pilot phase was $20,000. The project impact study cost
cept in their villages. Local people are starting to really feel 
about $60,000, most of which was used to hire a foreign
that they own the system and. as a result, are willing to take 
consultant. This was paid out of project funds. The dis-
on greater responsibilities and risks. 
trict workshops were very inexpensive.
24)

A 1, BA N IA: 
I? r R.,,i,IN 1(\- 
u:l l'\ 
.11A.1.1, ; v 1\'F'() 
N
O)N HK:'FI.E (-rTiN- 
precise concept in the Albanian context. In dealing with
procurement and disbul-sement. I was shocked to discover
An added twist to this project is that we are operating in 
that when local comimlunes ordered supplies from a state
an Eastern European envir-onimient. Believe me when I 
enterprise, the standard procedure was to send a blank
say that it is a completely different and often difficult 
check. which would eventually be returinedl three months
context in which to work. In this project. we had to in- 
later with a fixed price filled in by the state. After so
troduce western management concepts, but. even after 
many years In a centrally planned systemn, competitive
two years of repeated interaction and training, it is clear 
bidding and western accounting practices are just not
that the Albanians are still not comfortable with these 
something people can relate to easily.
concepts of management and often insist on doing things 
Tryinig to apply Bank regulations in such a situation
their way. For example. our team really took for granted 
is complicated at best. As a Bank Task Manager, this
the tradition of writing down and documenting proce- 
meanis you have to be flexible, be willing to compromise
dures and activities. Albanians, however. have an "'oral" andi adapt, and learn how business is done "Albanian
culture, they don't understand our fixation on preparing 
style." This understanding does not develop overnight.
agendas or reports. For them, this information is stored but over time a process of cross-fertilization occurs in
in their heads, and they much prefer to tell you about it 
which each side learns from the other. I think this is the
than write it down. 
way it should be.
Similarly, when it came to recruitilng local stafl'for 
I also think the reason a great many of these
the project, the Albanians were baftled by our request 
projects fail is that we try to interject our style of do-
that job descriptions and selection criteria be drawn up. ing things into a context that has a completely differ-
Furthermore, they were surprised when we began ciloos- ent history, tradition, and mode of interaction. The
ing candidates based on their professional qualifications. 
reason the Albania Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot
Again, we had taken this for granted but soon realized 
project has worked well and has progressed quickly is
that this was not the Albanian way. Instead, people are 
because we started small. included local people. and
hired on the basis of their "biography"-in other words. 
then scaled up over time. This has allowed people to
according to the political history of their family over the 
get used to the project, understand it, feel comfort-
last two generations. So whether one's uncle was a good 
able with it. and claim it as their own. Of course, this
communiist or one has any relatives in prison is given 
is not possible for all projects: for example, you would
more importance than professional background. 
not build a dam with NGO seed money and piloting.
I am continually reminded that much of what we take 
But for this type of rural development project. the "pro-
for granted simply does not always correspond to any cess approach" has really worked well.


BEININ
HEALTH 
SERVICES 
DEVEILOPMENT 
PROJECT
MichaelAzefor, 
Task
Man77ager of the first
Beniin Heailth Services
Developlment Pro'ject,
was appI)ointed as the
Bt-llk's r-esitleiit
representative in
Ben in in October 
It
1995. Denise 
-
Vaillancourt is the
Task Mtitnager of tile
second pro-tect
I 
n 1971- Benin became a leading inlovator in primary health care. when it
designed-without outside help-a unique, state-of-the-an-t primary health
care system involving rural populations and covering the entire coulitry.
By 1986, however. Benin's primary health care ranked among the poorest
in Africa.
I D)E':N'TIF'I'C'T'ION 
N1 lSIION
When the government of Benin asked the Bank for help in this area, we sug-
gested we start by finding out why the original strategy failed. In February
1988 1 led an identification mission accompailled by a Bank healtih maniage-
ment specialist and an architect. As agreed in advance of our departure, we
joined forces with staff from Benin's Finanice, Planning, Health, and Rural
Development Ministries. These were the appropriate tgovernment stakeholders
who had to work together to provide primary health care. Although somile were
a bit skeptical. our governimienlt colleagues agreed that. to learn more about the
problems in the primary health care system, we had to begin with the local
health centers and communities they serve.
We decided to visit three districts that were the focal point of some previous
project preparation work to see to what extent we could build on what had al-
ready been done. Before arriving in a district. we requested that an open meeting
be arranged. The purpose of the meeting, we said. was to find out what the people
of the community expected from government by way of primary health care and
what they were willing to do themselves to have the kind of health care they)
wanted. All told, we held eight meetlings that were attended by representatives of
some thirty-two villages. Sometlimes. the entire village showed up.
23s

'i'Hl: 
NO ()RIA) 
HA.VNK 
PARTIC1(I 
PATlIO)N 
S(OURC( 
Ai; 
01(1
PAR'I'I('PI'ATORY 
DIS'I 
SIONNS 
all problems were written up on sheets of flip chart pa-
per, which we mounted on the walls. The participants
Long aMarxiststate,Beninwasiustbeginniingtochange. 
then assigned the problems to several categories they
Needless to say, local people had some difficulty in par- established: buildings and facilities, medicine. staffing
ticipating in open discussions. Some said they were too 
and skills, primary health care, and so on.
"busy" doing other things to attend, and no women 
We then spent a significant amount of time discuss-
showed up at all. Nevertheless, we were able to get across ing the diagnosis of Benin's current health care system.
that our objective was to learn from the people about 
using the categorized list of problems as the basis for
their situation and what they felt they needed. We said discussion. We did this to be sure that the different types
we did not want a project that only represented the think- 
of people attending the conference-from village mother
ing of the World Bank and central officials. We asked the 
to high-ranking government official to World Bank staff
communities to appoint a committee of five or so local 
member-understood the problems in the same way.
people who were wise about money, life, health, and how
the community worked. We also stipulated that at least
one or two mothers be included. These committees helped 
After attaining closure on the diagnosis, we devoted the
validate our analysis of systemic and operational prob- 
se 
ato 
developing 
app opit 
wa 
sove the
lems that contributed to poor health care in Benin. 
second day to developing appropriate ways to solve the
Before organizing 
th nextphaseofthework, 
problems. To do this, we broke into small groups, each
Before organizing the next phase of the work, we' 
checked back to see if community representatives had 
of which dealt with one of the major problem areas. We
been named. The communities had indeed done this and 
made sure that the officials responsible for the areas be-
ing addressed were part of the group. The villagers chose
presenlted US with the names of five people from villages 
fo 
r 
.
-
in each of the three districts we had visited. 
the
be expected, group size turned out unevenly and some
balancing had to be done. On completing the work, the
PR EPA 
RING 
TH-F: 
PROJECT 
small groups reported their conclusions to a plenary ses-
sion. A discussion of the recommendations took up the
Now that we had identified a good set of village stake- 
remainder of the day.
holders, we set up a workshop to generate a diagnosis of 
A small group of officials from the Ministries of
the existing primary health care system. A member of 
Health. Finance, Planning. and Rural Development then
the Bank team-the architect-had experience in run- 
wrote up the conclusions of the workshop and shared
ning participatory workshops. He served as the work- 
them with all participants. The proceedings subsequently
shop designer and facilitator. The minister of health is- 
served as health policy and guided the work of ministry
sued invitations to representatives of communities in a 
officials in preparing the specifics of the project proposal.
sample of three districts in various regions of the coun-
try for a workshop in Cotonou. Benin's capital. and we 
Feedback
reserved a hall in the ministry that was large enough to 
Before completing the mission, the joint Bank-ministry
accommodate the eighty participants. 
team again visited the original villages to discuss the re-
About fifty participants came from the various com- sults of the workshop and see if the recommend
munities we had visited. They were ordinary citizens, In-
cludinge abouttwenity. moThers, weratheordhan try a chtizefs, 
were what people really wanted. The villagers supported
clud-ng about tetmohsthe work of their representatives, giving the design team
who usually represent the villages. A few technical staff
from local German and Swiss projects also attendedJ 
further confidence that it was on the right track.
In addition to the village stakeholders. we invited
officials from the central ministries, regional and district 
PR 
, -AP l R A Is.A1I
health offices, and local health centers. We did this to be 
In April 1988 the Bank team returned to Benin for
sure we would be working on the enltire system of health 
preappraisal. Again we held a workshop with represen-
care rather than just part. 
tatives of the same four stakeholder groups (villagers and
officials from the ministries, health offices. and local
Brainstorming 
health centers) who had attended the first workshop. This
On the first day we brainstormed about health issues and 
time, participants reviewed the written project proposal
problems. Each participant had the opportunity to cite a 
to ensure that it was consistent with what was learned
problem. We went around the room again and again until 
and understood several months back. About sixty-five
24

1, i.-rN I N 
llr I E.A 1,H 
Fil:R 
1,;N NI C`
people attended the second workshop. We again assigned 
Swiss Development Corporation indicated that it wanted
small groups to work on the same categories identified 
to increase its cofinancing contribution by more than four-
at the first workshop. 
fold. Of course, we in the Bank welcomed cofinancing
The written proposal was a good reflection of what 
as a matter of policy, so we were pleased with the Swiss
the participants wanted. Two new concerns appeared, how- offer. It meant, however, returning to Benin for a joint
ever. The first had to do with who really represents and 
reappraisal of the project during which time the Swiss
speaks for the villages. After considerable debate, the par- 
became full partners in supporting and nurturing the par-
ticipants decided that village representatives should be 
ticipatory process. We then had to change the project to
elected democratically and that the village should enter 
accommodate budget cuts mandated by the structural
into a legal contract with the Ministry of Health (MOH), adjustment program. As a result, we didn't begin nego-
defining the responsibilities of both parties for improving tiations until March 1989. The Bank's Board approved
the health status of the local populations. 
the project in June 1989 and the credit became effective 
The second had to do with implementation priorities. in January 1990.
The communities with which we were working were not
necessarily those w ith the greatest need. Although they rec-
ognized that other communities were in really dire straits,
the participants nevertheless felt that their communities de- The Bank's applied time devoted to this project from Feb-
served priority given their involvement. In the final analysis, ruary 1988 to appraisal in June 1988 was about forty-three
all concluded that it would be best to continue working with staff weeks. Appraisal added another twenty-one staff weeks.
the same set of stakeholders during initial implementation. Govemnment paid the modest costs of the three workshops-
around $6,000. Preparing this project in a participatory
A P XR AI S A 
.I l. 
manner was neither expensive nor time-consuming.
The Bank team returned in June 1988 to appraise a project 
T NPA 
IENTrATIoN 
EXO:R 
IEN( 
I
that now looked like this:
The project has just started its fifth year of implementa-
* 
Improve the quality of primary health care delivery 
tion. After matters delaying loan effectiveness were
at all levels of the country 
cleared up, the first year went extremely well. In every
* 
Develop pilot hygiene and sanitation programs for 
respect, the pace of implementation that year was well
disadvantaged urban communities 
above any reasonable expectation for a project like this.
* 
Improve sector financial resource mobilization. al- 
I attribute this to the high levels of commitment of all
location, and management capabilities 
concerned and to the thorough understanding of objec-
* 
Strengthen institutional capabilities of the MOH 
tives, strategies, and tactics all stakeholders developed
* 
Improve human resource capabilities in the health sector. in working together. This understanding and the com-
mitment it generates are attributable, in my opinion, to
For a third time, we organized a workshop with the 
the participatory project planning processes we used.
same stakeholders to review the final version of the 
It is unfortunate that implementation ran into trouble
project. By that time. we had gone over it carefully and 
during the second year. A new democratically elected gov-
put it into Bank style and format. In so doing, we be- 
emient cleaned house at the center. An entirely new team
lieved we had not strayed from what the stakeholders 
of officials appeared on the scene, who not only knew noth-
said they wanted and were willing to do. But the only ing about the project but were also distrustful of anything
way we could be sure was to subject it fully to the scru- 
done by the previous government; thus, every aspect of the
tiny of those stakeholders who had been working on this 
project involving the MOH came to a halt. The dynamism
project since the beginning. As it turned out, our pro- 
at the local level, however, did not wane during this period.
posal did indeed reflect what they wanted and had been 
By the third year we were pretty much back on track, and
proposing all along. 
the project is doing well in all important respects.
EN('OUN'I( 
ERIN, 
I 
)EIN AY'-' 
E(CON 
I) PROJE(CTI
As we were reviewing the project in Washington and 
The design and development of a second project, pre-
getting ready to invite government for negotiations, the 
sented to the Bank's Board in May 1995, closely fol-
25

Tni.1: 
Wou11{1.) 
BASNI 
P%RTIs( 
WAI 
I.'llON 
So)tl-RUEBOOK(l
lowed the participatory process. which had proved so 
be handled well by the private sector. What was
effective the first time around. Virtually all meetings with 
needed was a small cadre of people who could fol-
the government, which occurred during the series of 
low the international pharmaceutical industry and
World Bank missions concerning this project, were at- 
wisely buy the small quantities Benin needs. The
tended by representatives of all key stakeholder groups 
agency is kept responsive to the communities through
including local health committee members from all over 
the villagers sitting on its board.
the country. Preparation of this project was intimately 
* 
The establishment of Comite National de suivi
linked with government efforts to prepare a revised na- 
d'Execution et d'Evaluation des Programmares 
du Secteur
tional health strategy for the period 1995-99, which was 
de la Sante (CNEEP), an intersectoral committee at the
the subject of a Health Sector Round Table held in Janu- 
national level, and Comite Departemental de suivi
ary 1995. We were quite successful in encouraging the 
d'Executionetd'EvaluationdesProgrammulesduSecteur
government to give stakeholder participation more promi- 
de la Sante (CDEEP) at the departmental level. These
nence in the sector strategy. both by highlighting accom- 
interministeiial committees undertake periodic assess-
plishments to date and by outlining steps to consolidate 
ments of the progress made in implementing the objec-
and build on successes in this regard. To make an effec- 
tives set out in the national health strategy. They are
tive contribution to the strategy from a participation per- 
composed of high-level representatives of central and
spective. the Bank mission undertook numerous field 
line ministries and other key stakeholders.
visits with MOH staff and held town hall meetings to 
* 
The reorganization of the MOH, which. followilg
discuss the views of the various stakeholders on their 
an organizational audit. encompasses the creation of
participation experience thus far. 
three new di-ectorates for (a) planning. coordination.
and evaluation. (b) administration and finance. and
(c) familv health and the strengttheninig of departmen-
tal directorates for health to accommodate the
With only about 50 percent of the credit disbursed and a 
government's intention to decentralize sector man-
closing date scheduled for 1997. assistance under the first 
agement and administration.
project has already resulted in a number of notable
achievements, which have both expanded and clarified 
-I.: s
the role of various stakeholders (including the ministry)
in the planning, financing, execution, and evaluation of 
* 
Local health commln1ittees: 
After several years of op-
sector activities. For me. the most notable among these 
eration. COGES and COGEC have demonstrated
achievements include the following: 
thei- potential. This experience has also highlighted
issues that still need to be addressed. For example,
* The creation of local health management commit- 
some COGES/COGEC members lack motivation
tees-coamite de gestion cle la commune (COGEC) 
because of a number of factors, most notably a lack
and comite 
de gestion 
de la sous-p7efecture 
of(a) understanding of their roles and functions. (b)
(COGES)-with 
real authority and autonomy, 
skills in community financial management and group
through which communities throughout Benin man- 
animilation techniques, (c) opportunity to exchange
age cost recovery funds and participate in the plan- 
informationl and ideas at the departmental and na-
ning. implementation, and evaluation of sector ac- 
tional levels, and, for some, (d) financial remunera-
tivities carried out in health facilities. The members 
tion. Although the bylaws of the local health man-
are elected democratically, and anyone may serve, 
agement committees state that elections should be
provided that at least one member is a woman. 
held every two years. elections have not been held
* 
The establishment of a central procurement agency 
that frequently or routinely. Some aspects of finan-
(Centrale d'Achat), which assures the affordability 
cial management of these committees are not fully
and constant availability of essential generic drugs 
explicit in the bylaws. Furthermore. accounting ca-
at all levels of the health system and is managed by 
pacity is lacking. Also, although COGEC bylaws
an autonomous board, composed of various stake- 
provide for one seat each for a woman and a youth,
holders and including representatives of local health 
elected by their peers to represent their interests,
management committees. Previously, drug procure- 
COGES members are elected from among the
ment was done-poorly and corruptly-by the MOH 
COGEC officers (presidents. treasurers, and secre-
itself. Given the fact that no drugs are produced in 
taries) leaving the possibility that women and youth
Benin for its small market, this wasn't ajob that could 
may not be represented at the subprefectiire level.
26

HEI:NN: 
H E.\.',I,H 
lt 
I':
*hltersectorYl 
coordfination. The establishment in 1988 
ties. Considerable 
effort will be warranltecd undelr the
of CNEEP and CDEEP constituted an impor-tanit step 
project to ensule the tollowing:
by the government to improve prooramii coordinatioin
and to strenigtheni decisionmaking capacity in the MOH. 
* 
Operationis at these various levels are realistic in terms
Their creation was meant to correct weaknesses in the 
of the capability, availability, interests. and compar-a-
planning, coordinationi. monitoring, andc evaluationl ot' 
tive advantages of the various partners.
sector Investments, which were largely donor-driveni. 
* 
Health managers and other health personiniel work
Since their creationi. these two organis of intersectoral 
effectively andc in cooperation with partners.
coordination have ncot been suLffiCiently active, palticu- 
* 
The need ftor conflict mnanaoement is appreciatedi and
larlv at the departmental level; they must be revitalized 
effectively met.
to enable them to car-y' out their 
*ipoitaiit 
fLICtiolIS. 
Partniers will occasionallv be given the opportunity
Furthermore. although their memilbershiip 
accomm11lo- 
to share experiences and exchange ideas and best
dates represenitatives from other line ministries and somze 
practices with their- counitelpar-ts at the various lev-
NGOs. at presenit no permanent seat exists for repre- 
els of the systemii.
sentatives of the local health commillttees, whose per- 
* 
Inforimiatioll on the perspectives of the partners and
spectives on investimienit 
planin ing and mon1itorilno would 
the qualitv andc extent of participation flvows freevly
be valuable. 
anid expeditiously, both up and down the system.
Polic/v andie in.stitutional refiwins. In addition to the
Banlk's success In strengthening and concretizing the 
As part of its aninlLal review of sector performance,
language on participationi in the draztft national healthl 
CNEEP and CDE.EP will evaluate progress niade in build-
strategy for the period 1995-99. we made two other 
ing and sustaininig participation ot' key stakeholders in
important contr-ibutionis to strengthening partnerships 
health anLd will revise plans ftor the coming year accord-
in health. Fi-st. we worked with government to pre- 
injglv. Central MOH, in consultationi 
with COGES/
pare a revision to thle adminiistiative text that lays out 
COGEC memilber-s and decentr-alized MIOH statff has
the bylaws of COGEC anid COGES. Major amend- 
compiled a list of inidicators for monitoring performance
menits were introduced to (ai) expantid memilber-ship to 
In this regard. The project will also suppolt the costs of
other partners working on relatecl issues in the same 
strengthening the capability of CNEEP anid CDEEP to
coniniune or subprefecture (NGOs. indigen1ous social 
uLider-tak-e participatory planning and evaltiationi of sec-
Troups. school teachers. personnel working on relevant 
tor activities as well as the costs of their operations.
developmenit projects such as water and sanitation, and
so on). (b) clariify aspects of financial maiiac-emilenit
and other operations, (c) establish two additionial seats
on the COGES and manidate that they be filled by one 
AlthougIL the Benin case is very' much alive and oncro-
womanl and one youth, and (d) specify procedures for 
lit. the participatory approach has already had positive
hiring with COGEC/COGES' own i'unds. independenit 
impact on the lives of comimluniity members. Three years
auditors to audit their own accoulIts alnnUallv. 
into the fiirst project. an independenit survey directed by
a local sociologist was comimiissionied to obtain feeciback
We also workecd with government on a draft decree 
ftromii people wlho participated in preparing the project.
amending the bylaws and internal regulations of CNEEP 
Through 
interviews an1d focus groups involving elected
and CDEEP to replace the 1988 decree creating- these 
village representatives and other villagers: local. regrional.
comnmittees. Amzenldimienlts 
were intiodluced to (a) specify 
and cenitr-al health officials: and the personnel of health
the functions and staff profiles for their- respective Secre- 
facilities, the followin- was learined:
taiiats. (b) provide for the represenitation of COGEC anid
COGES and other key nongovernmental Pillatilels in tlese 
* 
Villa,ge people noW klnow more about what health
entities. and (c) to streamlinie its operatiols. These two 
services are available.
texts will be sigtned by the timze this proQject is preseiited 
* 
People are satisfied with the increased availability
to the World Banik's Board of Executive Directors. 
and decreased cost of drugs throuoh health centers
land. as a result, incr-eased utilization 
of health
.srs llw- ,Tjj.DlN(i 
services).
* 
Funllilng for essentiail dIugs is Sguaranteed, because
Secondl. direct project support will be given to COGES/ 
local health comminlittees, not the minlister of health,
COGEC and CNEEP/CDEEP to strengthen their- capaci- 
manlaoe the cost r ecovery fun(ds.
Z!7

People appreciate the local control they now have 
be altered. Increasingly. MOH staff-particularly service
over funds collected by the health facilities. (These 
providers-are accountable to those they serve (their cli-
funcis now more than cover replenishimient of drug 
ents) rather than excLusively to their superiors in the admin-
stocks and, in some cases, even other essential 
istration. which had been the case in Benin several years
nonsalary operating costs.) 
ago. This is due in large part to the fact that their clients are
The involvenment of women in the project is a strong niow involved in the planning of health sector interventions
factor in buildling community support and has raised 
and in the evaluation of health sector performance.
the status of women as community leaders. 
Central MOH staff visiting and collaborating with
communiities is now becoming much more standard prac-
Perhaps the most significant of the findings of this tice-even in the absence of World Bank missions. The
beneficiary assessment is that local healtl staff are perfornm- participatory approach is evolving beyond the prepara-
ing better. Roles and responsibilities of the clifferent actor-s tion and implemenitation of Bank-financed projects to
and stakeholders in the sector have been recast in a 
becoming a permanent way of doing business for the
signiticant way, causing the system of accountabilities to 
health sector in Benin.
2 s

BRAZIL
MTUNICIPA,ITIES 
AND 
LOW-INC'OME 
SANITATION
Abel Mejia was the
Task Manager for the 
- .
__ 
.
I
Bra.il Municipalities 
i
and(I Low-Income
Sanlitation Project.
-
.
s_ 
-
I 
n February 1992-just thl-ee monthis after joining the Bank-I went on
mission to Brazil to decide the fate of a problem project, one that might
quite possibly be canceled. The problem was clear: the portion of the
project that would provide water and sanitation to slum comimiunities
wasn't moving. No disbursemenits had been made three years after effective-
ness on this part of the loan (62 percent of the total) and no real prospects were
tioreseeable for disbursing them.
This project was intended to bring water and sewerage to some of the most
congested and difficult slums in the world. The notorious favelaN-or
shantytowns-of Rio were among the intended beneficiaries. It seemed to me
that this is exactly the kind of loan the Bank should be making. Cancellation
would be unforluniate.
I N('1?EA, 
-1N( 
FRU'I' 
URATION
Canceling. howevei- would surprise no one. My colleagues in the World Bank
who prepared and appraised the original project beginning in 1986, were quite
discouraged about its prospects. They had tried time and time again to get Caixa
Econoinica Federal (CEF), the Brazilian government's gigantic national devel-
opment bank and the implemeniting agency. to move ahead-all to no avail.
Preparation of this project began in collaboration with Brazil's National
Housing Bank-an institution well known to the World Bank and quite com-
petent at water and sewerage work. But along the way. the National Housing
Bank ceased to exist by the stroke of a political pen. CEF took over BNH's
responsibilities.
2 9

TIu 
Hl:o 
u1i,i) 
BANKS 
PARTICIPATIO.\''lN 
Sf Il-lRCIAMM-zZl
Fromii every appearance, CEF had the ability to make 
We 
met with the SWCs, along with CEF. and laid
solinId Joans for- water and sanitation systems. But. as it 
our cards on the table. We said that we would have to
turned out, CEF management's heart just wasn't In deal- 
recomimlenid canceling the low-incomiie part of the loan if
ing with sluIlms and SlUi dweller-s-per-hapS uliderstanid- 
the SWCs were unable to subillit borr-owing proposals to
ably, because few successflul prececlents exist oir provid- 
CEF withill the next two moniths. We told them, if they
ing waterL and sanitation to the ftil-hIaS and their counter- 
submitted proposals, it wouLd be possible to persuade
parts throughlout the world. Bills aren't paid. illegal coIn- 
Our mania-emilenlt that things were movilng on this loal.
nections blossom. and care and maintenance are the ex- 
But, it was up to them, we said, as only they knew what
ception rather than the r ule. For lenders and water conilpal- could be done.
nies alike. serving the slumIls has been a losing proposi- 
Our strategy worked. Within two months we had pro-
tion, and few advocates of doing so can be found in water 
posals from six of the eight com1paniies. and CEF knew
compalnies. 
other-s were on the way. Unfol-tUnately, the proposals wer-e
vwish lists. lacking practical wvays to designi water and
('oITL,r) 
PARTICIPATFL0N 
H i,i? 
sewerate 
systems in the fti'lasex.
As I prepared 
for the ImlissioI, 
I learned thiat staiff fromli 
THE FA I-E'A 
A C'1AL 1ENG;I:
the Bank's Transportation, Water, and Urban Develop-
menit Departmenlt's 
Water and Sewerage 
Division 
Developing an efficient and effective water and sewer-
(TWUWS) had been visiting- Brazil duriig thie past year 
age system tfor 
any fui'ela-and 
particularly 
a Rio
to help us get this loanl moving. Their interest was the 
fri1'eIa--is a rea l challenge 
Rio hive/as climb the high
samle aIS OUIS: to find ways to prevent the cancellation of 
hills surrounding the city. Houses appear to sit on top of
this ininovative pro ject. 
one another and often do. Populationl density is extremiiely
TWUWS believed thalt involving slum dwellers in 
high. Their layout has no rhymiie or reason. Virtually ev-
the design, operation, and mzainitenialice 
of a water and 
ery bit of space is in use by someonle somehow, The lay-
sewerage systemii was the only way it could be clone well. 
ing of pipes, even uncderground, would more than likely
TWUWS wanted to do "action researchi" in the ar-ea or 
intrude on someone's sense of ownership. Adjudicating
commIDunLity 
participation in water anld sewerage systems, 
disputes fi-om the outsicle can be next to impossible,
something they callecd "structuirecd learnin-.- 
Mv own 
At the samie timie, the laws of hydraulics can't be
previous experience in rural irrigation for poor ftarmilers chianged. and engineers don't like to negotiate their de-
led me to the sam1e conclusion about involvingr the people. 
signs with nonengineers. Setting the reservoir higher than
Clearly we were simipati o. 
the houses is much cheaper than pumping the water up
My colleag,ues in TWUWS hacd been hard at work in 
to themi. The numiiber of users ancd the volumes to be de-
Brazil identifving allies who wished to milove alhead withi 
livered determinle the size of the pipe. regar-dless of
this loan andc its purpose. They h.ad idenitifiecd allies in 
whether a convenlient place can be located to lay the pipe.
CEF, in the state and municipal water companies. and in 
It's almost impossible to get to one house without going
the nonigoverinimlenital sector. Although they hadin't yet 
through or tinder someone else's. In addition., kivela popu-
succeeded In getting the loanI moving,. they toldl me that 
lations are not insignificant. We are nlow working with
the new project manager- in CEF. a veteraint' from the Na- 
one, made up of 30.000 houses. There is simplv no way
tioInlil Housing Bank's Water and Sewerage Departiment. 
to do anything without working closely with the people.
was enthusiastic about the project. 
vet there is no way for a water company to negotiate di-
rectly witil 30,000 individual families.
Pl1,ANNIENG 
'I'Hk: 
NMi1,SMN
A N EN 
ID)EA
We wZantedl to get this project moving anid inoving in the
right direction, But, at the same time. we had to face 
In the process of discussing how to proceed. we came
reality. On the positive side, we kinew that CEF had leild- 
Upon an approach that had not been tried before in Bra-
ing agr-eeieilts withl eiglht or so state water companies 
zil or. for all we know, in any other couintry. It struck US
(SWCs) and that these companies wanited to borrow' for 
that the way to deal simtiltaneously with the "hard" and
capital investimients. We also knew that we had an action- 
"soft" aspects of this problem was to get a different type
orienited person runiiing the project in CEF. andc allies in 
ofteanm to do the work. We decided that engilleering com-
the SWCs. 
panies bidding oil the project must team up with coill-
:3()

1:lAZt,l: 
1,0.%1\--NCOM)Pl l 
SA\NITATtOII(N
munity participation NGOs or individual specialists. We 
by the SWC or through hired firms
discussed this wvith our colleagues in the SWCs and found 
* 
Who pays for operation and mainteniance-users.
pretty ready acceptance ot' the idea. The engineering and 
cross subsidies, capital subsidies, and so on
community participation specialists indicated they were 
* 
If and to what extent institutional intermediation was used
willing to give it a try. 
* 
The nature. type. and ease with which collective
The original project wisely established simple and 
choice decisions were reached
straightforward criteria for subproject funding. which 
* 
Project outcomes
included: 
* 
Project impact.
* 
Cities with populations greater than 50.000 
It is nlow just over two years since my first mission
* 
Areas having per capita monthly incomes below $87 on this project. Some sixty-odd subprojects are now tin-
• 
Per capita. investmiienit 
ceilings of $98 for water and 
derway that account for 65 percent of the original project
$140 for sewerage 
cost estimate. None is complete. although some are in
• 
Obligatory stakeholder participation and hygiene 
the advanced stages of construction. As expected. differ-
educationi parts of the subproject. 
ent interpretations of participation are being used and
the subprojects are being designed using different tech-
niques. The most commonly used approaches. however.
Pivolve 
two different versions of community necotiations.
We were now ready to move. The water companies started The first starts with the design and then negotiates it with
issuing bid solicitations. We then began to discuss the 
the community. The second starts with community in-
criteria we would use to approve projects. Most of the 
volvement from which the design emerges.
criteria were pretty objective: city size. income, invest-
ment limits, and so forth. But what about stakeholder 
T 
STARTEO
participation? What exactly is it'?
We knew that different people had different inter- 
Let me describe the latter approach, which was used in the
pretations of participation. For some, simply interview- fi'wela called MoTro do Estado. Morro is in a satellite city
ing potential beneficiaries to establish demand prefer- 
close to Rio. We chose MoIro as a pilot because it looked
ences is participatory. Some believe "infor mingir and edu- 
somewhat easier than the other pilot possibilities. One fac-
cating" constitutes participation. Others insist that the 
tor in its favor was its small size, about 2,000 families.
essence of participation is a negotiation between the en- 
Next we had to find someone who could and would
oineers and ilte beneficiaries. Still others wvant to sit down 
wor-k in Morro. Generally, engineers who design and
with the beneficiaries and the engineers to build the sys- 
build water and sewerage systems hold extremely nega-
tem from scratch using facilitation techniques. 
tive attitudes about fi7'elas. 
We had heard. howvever. of
someonie who had a reputation for understandingl how
BE;EIN(. 
}IL.A(:MAI.TI(' 
slumIis work anid foIr working in themii.
This person is a sanitary enginieer by training and
To be honest, we weren't sure ourselves what constituted 
work experience. He comes from Recife-one of Brazil's
participationi and how to make ex ewlite judgmiienlts about 
poorest regions-where he worked for the municipal wa-
it. So we decided to let the water companies define it and 
ter authority. He is now a consulting-, engineer in private
go with their definitions. Then we would use structured 
practice. When we talked to him, he spoke of fiwelas
learning to kleep abreast of what was happening so that 
and their inlhabitants in a different way than most. He
we could systematically learni from this experience. We stressed that many were solid, permanenit communities
structured the learningi to track the following: 
where people had lived for as long as forty years. He
talked about how impressed he was by the energy and
* 
Methods of 'revealing' specific. price-sensitive de- 
creativity of fiwe/a dwellers who have to-and do-take
mand. instead of assuming- that demand existed, as 
care of everything themselves. as they receive precious
is normally clone 
little help from government. He described to us how he
* 
Hypotheses and assumptions on project design anid had wovoked with some fin\elas to generate affordable and
community involvement and how these intluenced 
effective water and sewerage systems on a small scale.
speed. cost. and effectiveness 
Whenl we told him about our plans for this project, he
* 
How the project is managed. ftor example. directly 
becamiie interested and excited over the possibilities.
31

lTI'.: NVORIAI,) 
BANIK. 
P 
iC1PA1(l'A1'I)N 
SOIMO()N)OK
After reflecting on and comparing his view offavela 
the individuals involved learned together what was pos-
dwellers with what we heard from conventional engineers, sible and not possible, what they really wanted, and how
we knew he would be a great asset to this project. We then 
they had to behave to get what they wanted. So the ac-
had a starting point. We began what turned out to be the 
tual engineering design of a functioning water and sew-
most arduous task of getting both the Bank and the Brazil- erage system run by a modern SWC. was a social. itera-
ians to agree to sole-sourcing a design contract to his firm. 
tive process between experts and ordinary people.
It took us four months or so to get all the agreements and
begin the work. We got approval from the Bank's pro- 
J3R01TRE1.:Nr 
AcTION
curement adviser to hire the firm as an exception based on
the highly specialized nature of the work. 
Once we were sure that local demand and a willingness
to work things out existed, we started the procurement
I_a INTI 
FIN4 
STAKEHOLDERS 
process-well 
before all the details were worked out. The
first step in construction would be trunk line work-con-
The first action we took was to learn about the conmunity, 
necting the fivela with the SWC's main trunk lines. The
how it was organized and operated. To do this, the design- next step would be connecting the trunk lines to the
ers had to be present in the community when the people houses.
themselves were present-often on weekends and late at 
Bidding trunk line construction work and pipes and
night. The initial phase served to identify who were the key fittings for house hook-ups and actually selecting the
stakeholdersandin particularwhowerethecomrxiunitylead- contractor made the whole thing real for the people of
ers. They came from all walks of life and places, but mainly Morro. They realized that what we were doing was not
were associated with religious, sports. or other types of clubs another election year promise. In election years.favelas
that exist in communities everywhere. 
got some partial attention, but no serious effort was ever
made to serve the entire community. We dissolved the
Tijii F 
1NIiPO)RTrA.NC(l; OF 
W0.1ENelection-year 
skepticism through our large-scale, early
procurement. This in turn motivated the local people fur-
It was the women's clubs, however, that proved the most 
ther to do what only they could do: organize themselves
effective instruments for working with the community, 
to work effectively with the water company.
and the women themselves turned out to be the key to
getting the subproject under way. In afalvela, more often
than not, a woman is the actual head of the household.
She is the permanent feature. The men tend to come and One of the key lessons for the people in the community
go. The designers met the women first when they came 
was something called the condominium approach. At the
into the community and worked with them on a daily 
bottom of it was the understanding that the water com-
basis to organize local involvement. In a real sense, 
pany could not deal directly with each family in a "helter-
women were the local community. 
skelter" community like Morro. Instead, families had to
band together to negotiate and commit to operate and
1t ILolI)ING a r1 -rn 
maintain the service to a group of some twenty to fifty
barracos (homes). This way of generating and support-
As the designers learned about the community, the commu- 
ing communal interdependence helped work out afford-
nity came to learn about them. The local people saw the 
able solutions: people could afford what they wanted and
respect the designers had for them. They saw the designers' the water company would recover its capital and operat-
admiration for people willing to take charge of their lives ing costs-a "win-win" game for all concerned.
and do something about it. To enter the community and 
The designers made the initial suggestions for orga-
gain trust meant in part accepting what the official commu- nizing a number of barracos into a condominium and
nity callsfavela illegality, including narco-traffic, violence, then negotiated the details with those involved. There
and the ubiquitous and illegal informal lottery. 
had to be and indeed was flexibility on the part of the
In the process, the designers helped the community 
designers to accommodate what the local people wanted
to learn about and understand the water company: how it 
in forming condominiums as well as other things. For
operated, what it could and could not do, and the basic 
instance, a water tank had to be placed at the highest
hydraulics of water and sewerage. At the same time, the 
point in thefavela to service the community. Of course,
community helped the designers learn about them. All 
the several possible locations for the tank were already
32

BR.AZIE: 
LO)W-J 
N'CONIEI 
S.ANITAT'I'I'N
occupied by a house, church. or other structure that was 
amounts substantially below the subproject estimates
important to at least some or all. 
prepared by the SWCs.
Negotiation was required to work out the water tank 
These final costs-not just in the pilot but in the sub-
siting problem. But perhaps the word "negotiation" 
sequent subprojects-are generally 50 percent below (in
misses the essence of what really went on. It wasn't just 
one case 25 percent below) the SWC estimates. Of course,
the designers negotiating with the community; more im- 
design and designi costs are one thing. Whether the sys-
portant, it was also the community working together to tern will work well, be sustained, and generate payments
take care of both individual and communal needs. 
that cover the investment and operating costs are the fi-
The Morro do Estado pilot project took about six 
nal tests. We have yet to get to that stage.
months to design at a cost of about $100,000. Since this
was our first such opportunity, learning was the objective. 
'1
A lot of people had to learn: the designers, the water com-
pany, CEF. the Bank, and the people living in the fatvela. This project is doing more than providing water and sew-
While the pilot was going forward. initial work began on 
erage to aftivela, 
in my opinion. It is a starting point for
other larger and tougherfitel/as: the lessons from Morro individual and community development. Person after per-
flowed into the second and beyond. The design phase of 
son has told me how she is looking forward to receiving
any project. however. is never really finished: redesigning 
water bills at "her" condominium. People also say-with-
goes on with construction and implementation. What is 
out being asked-that they intend to pay their bills. It's as
surprising, perhaps, is that the adjustments appear to have 
if the existence of a postal address and a water bill with
gotten done with ease and good will. By the time of con- 
one's own name on it confers a new, permanent identity in
struction and implementation, all became a team commit- 
the society-no longer at the margin, no longer a faceless
ted to producing something of real value. 
member of afjiiela. but a full-fledged citizen. Beyond that,
people in thefiavela speak of the possibility of realizing a
C' o)FS T .AN D '[1 NIE 
long-held dream: having their owIn telephone number, just
like "other" people in the country.
From time to time. I ask myself if this is a cost-effective 
If anything gives me confidence that these systems
approach. I must say I haven't got a satisfactory answer 
will be sustainable, it's an empowerment I have seen that
yet. The $100,000 design cost of MoITo works out to 
is almost palpable. Of course. a lot of other things have to
$15 per capita-not a large amount. More important, we 
be right for the systems to be sustainable: govemance,
are not only seeing final costs within the investment pa- economic management, jobs for people. and more. Our
rameters set by the original Bank-financed project but at 
project can't take care of these things. Only time will tell.
33


CHAD
E'D1TC'ATION 
V L'ROJEC'T
MVakha Ndao is the
Tassk Managerjtr 
the
Chadbe Eduication V
Project. 
I
..... .. ., ,h 
........... 
...................... 
01 :
Cv 
hadians value education highly. so local involvement and signifi-
cant local contr-ibutions to the cost of education have been a long-
standing tradition in Chad. During the 1979-82 war, Chad's educa-
tion system deteriorated seriously. The slow recovery from the
period of disturbances causecd local comIlmunities to play an even greatel- role
in financing and operating their schools. The Education V project, financed by
the Internationial Development Association (IDA), has been supporting reha-
bilitation In this sector.
During fLurthier 
disturbances In Decemlber 1990. looting and damage oc-
cLiriecl in the building housing Chad's Ministry of Educationi, which lost a great
deal of its recoircis, files, and equipment. Schools throughout the country suf-
fered various kinds of damaoe; books and other teaching materials were in
short supply. TFo rebuild the education system, the government of Chad devel-
oped an Education-Traininig-Emiiploymenit strategy for 1990-2000. Chadians
t'romil maniy backgrouncis and sectors (mainly from the public sphere) ancd most
manjor donors helped create this strategy. In 1991 the new minister of education
asked the Bank to help the government implemilenit its new strategy.
In our initial conversations with the minister, he asked that we prepare the
new project in a manner that involved local people and responded to their real
needs andc conceris. We were deligThted with the request and quickly responded
in the affirmative. Duringo our next mission, we visited local communities and
held discussions with officials and citizens at the local, regional, and nationial
levels. We theni sat down with the officials at the central level to decide the
specific actions and steps needed to plan the project
It sooni dawned on all of us that. although we were in full agreement with
planning the project. nonie of us really knew how to do it. We clecided to start
:35

THI: 
NVORIA) 
BAh 
I'R'PIA'IT'IC'IPAION 
SOUIR'CE13()0J1
by finding a tried and tested methodology with which education problemils and ways to correct them. We were
we were comfortable. The Banik offeed to find the meth- 
pleased that two of the meetings were held in a tradi-
odology. and, as Task Manager for the project. I under- 
tional manner, under a tree-sous 
Iarbre ci palabre-
took the search myself. 
where passers-by joined in the discussion.
As a result of these meetings we learned that
C'H)OOSING 
A INifE'THOD0oL()(GY 
Chadians at the local level are seriously committed to
and closely involved in educating their children. One
In talking with my Bank colleagues. I learned about a unexpected benefit for us was learning local people's
methodology called Objectives-oriented project planning concerns about thei- ability to collect and account for
(ZOPP) (see Appendix I) that was originated by 
educational funds and about dealing effectively with the
Gesellschaft fUrTechnische Zusamimienarbeit, a Germial well-educated people who ran the schools and taught in
aid agency. I found that a nearby company offered semi- 
them. Clearly, local people needed educationi on how to
nars on ZOPP. one of which I attended along with my 
run a school and would greatly welcome this as part of
Bank project team members. 
the project. We also noted how women came and spoke
ZOPP seemed to fill the bill nicely: the project team 
up at these meetings, often complaininig that not enough
returined to Chad enthusiastic about sharing what we had 
girls were getting educated in the countrv.
learned with our Chadiani partner-s in the project. At a
meetling, we told our Chadian colleagues that we could 
DESIC;NING 
THE 
PROJ(ECT
use a methodology called ZOPP and proceeded to ex-
plain how it worked. As we described ZOPP. I noticed 
All of this was helpful. but it still had not been translated
that people were giggling and laughing. I asked what was 
into a project suitable for Bank financing. To get the coIn-
the matter. They good-naturedly explained that in Chad. 
tents of the project identifiecd and to do the detailed prepa-
the word "ZOPP" was a slang expression with sexual 
ration. governlillelit convened a six-day national "OOPP"
connotations, and we all had a good laugh about it. But 
conference for participatory project planiing. The min-
they had a more serious concerin. They said we were act- 
ister of education invited ministry staff, regional officials,
ing in a typical Bank manner by prescribing how to do 
NGOs, and several of us firom the World Bank to a project
things. 
planning contfei-erice. 
All told. about thilrty people attended
We got over both these problems in good fashion by 
the conl'erence.
recognizing that ZOPP was the only participatory meth- 
Puiposely. government set the date of the meeting to
odology we knew. Besides. we explained, ZOPP is not 
coincide with a planned Bank project mission to the coun-
the usual way of doing things in the Bank, and we might try. In selecting the stakeholders. we thought that the
have to persuade Bank management that using it made NGOs would represent local people at a conference oth-
good sense. Also. we simply dropped the ZOPP acro- 
erwise attended by government officials. As it turned out.
nym and replaced it with its English equivalent "OOPP" 
the NGOs tended to represent their own interests. and it
or Objectives-oriented project planning. 
fell to others to represenit the views and interests of local
people based on what we heard at the regional confer-
I_1)ENT1FVI 1SN-f:: THTE. F;T VlSTAK:HT01,)1:RS 
ences. We also learned, to our dismay, that no women
were presenit at this meeting. because no one took any
The first step in the ZOPP methodology' is identifying 
special action to ensure their presence. Nevertheless, the
the stakeholders of the projects and then beginning to participatory planning process went rather well, in our
understand what they want. It was a simple matter to rec- 
opinion, even though it was the first thime any of us used
ognize the official stakeholders in an education project. 
our so-called OOPP methiocd.
But we wondered who really spoke for the local com-
munity and if there were issues of gender. ethnicity, so- 
THE 
NATION 
O{ )PP 
('ONFREN('
cial class, religion, or other factors that we had to take
into account. 
We hired a consultant from a nearby country to plan and
The government organized four regionial conferences 
facilitate the conference. The consultant was experiencecd
attended by high ministry officials. school inspectors, 
in the OOPP methodology and worked well with Chadians.
school directors and teachers, members of local school 
We devoted the first day to identifying stakeholder
associations, and representatives of NGOs and women's 
interests. We did this slimply by asking and encouraging
groups. At these meetings, we discussed local primary 
the participants to express their own interests, hopes,
3 6

C HA D): 
ED 
UCT'( 'I'ION
expectations, and fears related to Chad's education svs- 
TtI-F Pt0.JIi:c(I-
tern and a possible Bank-financed project. At the end of
the day, all of us at the conference could see pretty clearly 
In Bank project terms. the last two days of work pro-
how the potential project activities might affect each 
duced a project with these components:
stakeholder.
We spent the second day delineating the specific 
* 
Classroon conlstruction (800 prinmary school rooms)
problems that existed in providing sound primary edul- 
and rehabilitation (200 classrooms)
cation in Chad. We did this by means of a "problem tree" 
* 
Purchase and distribution of primary textbooks and
that clearly identified the causes of the problems the par- 
teacher guides
ticipants mentioned during the first day. We noted how 
* 
Restructuring and improvement of in-service and
well the participants worked together even though this 
preservice teacher traininlg
was not their normal way of working. This is not to say 
* 
Strengthening primary school management and in-
that everything went smoothly. At one point. a Chadian 
spection
participant said to one of us from the Bank. "I am telling 
* 
Development and imlplemiietntation 
of a girls' educa-
you that I have a headache, and you keep telling me that 
tion programn
I have a foot ache and vou want to force imie to take a 
* 
Promoting pedagogic improvement projects in indi-
medicine for that." Hearing that made us from the Bank 
vidual schools
think twice about our own feeling that we were i-eallv * 
Strengthening the capacity of 100 parent associations
just part of the group. 
* 
Institution strengthenlino of the Ministry of Education.
On the third day, we developed the objectives of the
project. As it turned out, this was pretty easily done by 
AN I) ' 
11
converting the problem tree into a "decision tree." One
key objective was to reinforce a clecentralized system in The total project cost is $33.8 million. The Bank is pro-
which local communities had more autonomy and re- 
viding an IDA credit of $19.3 million. Eighteeni months
sponsibility for their schools. while central government elapsed from Initial Executive Project Summary to Bank
provided part of the finance and technical guidance and 
Board approval in May 1993. well within the standard for
assistance. 
education pi-ojects in Africa. Three fund sources paid for
Day foul was devoted to developing alternative ways 
the preparation of this project. The Bank's budget contrib-
of attaining the objectives we had decided on the previous 
uted enough to pay for the seventy-eight staff weeks ap-
day. We did this together listeninig to proposals. discuss- 
plied to the project by four Bank staff members and one
ing them, andl then choosing what we considered to be the 
consultant. We made six imissions from idenitiCication to
best. We were pleased that the methodology facilitated a 
appraisal. I believe these preparationi costs are significantly
consensus among a group of people whose interests and 
below average for education projects in our region. The
views had so severely differed on1 the first day. 
previous IDA credit contributed about $8.000 for the out-
Days five and six were devoted to developing logi- of-pocket costs of the national conference, including the
cal frameworks for the project and its various compo- 
fees for the facilitator, who resided in the Central Africa
netits. The logical framework employs a project-plan- 
Republic. The government's budget paid tor the salaries
nmng matrix that looks like this: 
and associated costs of the Chadian officials.
PROI(JECT 
QITALI'ITS
Summary Verifiable Means 
and Sources Important
of Objecives/Activities 
Indicators of Verification Assumptions 
Implemilentatioin is just beginnino (the credit became ef-
GoaT 
fective on January 18. 1994). so I cannot say much about
Purpose 
how the participatory approach has affected sustainability
Activities 
and ease of imiplemnentationi. 
But I can share some imme-
Outputs 
diate results of the participatory planninig process. The
project wvent thll-ough the peer and management review
processes quickly and easily. which pleased us because
Participants broke into small groups. each working on 
the project was mainly prepared by the Chadians. During
one or more goals in a detailed fashioni. Banlk staff be- 
identificationi and preparatioll, a large numlber of people
came part of several small groups. 
w ithiln Chadl learned a great deal about what was wrong
.37

ITHl: 
AVORIA'1) 
BA\NK 
PAR'\ TICIPATIO\'11(N 
Solt 
lRCEMlA)oKil
with their educational system and what could be done given 
()N 
1xEFIAECTIION
the financial constraints of the country. The actual project
was produced by many of the people who will have to 
I think the process of identifying objectives and building
work together to implement it. They really "own" it. and, consensus brought stakeholders at all levels together and
more important, they really understanid it. Finally, we have produced a project plan that the local schools, donors,
something in it that the local people really want-help for 
and government could really "own." This project dem-
parent associations in interacting with the school direc- onstrates, in my opinion. that a participatory approach
tors and teachers. I doubt if we would be doing this if it 
can be employed within the time frame and procedures
hadn't been for the sous I'orbre 
b' palabre. 
of the Bank, if the Bank and government are genuinely
Implementation has been delayed some because of the 
committed to the process. If I were to do it over again.
economic and political situation in Chad and the constant I'd first have a consultant train four or five Chadians in
change of ministers and directors. In this difficult Chadian the ZOPP methodology. Then, with those four or five
context, the broadly based preparation process and the re- 
trained national facilitators, I'd ask the Chadians to iden-
sulting network of committed stakeholders has been keep- 
tify and prepare the project themselves as a basis for dis-
ing the project going through times of changing otficialdom. cussing with the Bank our financing their project.
38

C OLOMBIA
EL.ECTRICIITY 
SECTOR 
R1EFORM
Turid Sato, who was
the Task Manager for
the Colombia
Electricitv Sector
Reform Project, is
flow codirector Of
Organizingfior
Development, an 
A 
International Institute
(ODII) 
'41
In 
late 1984 1 received a new assignment as the senior loan officer for
Colombia in the Country Programs Division. Over the holidays, I acted
for the division chief while he was on vacation. To my astonishment, a
telegram arrived from the Colombian finance minister saying, in essence,
that the electricity sector was bankrupt. Because the Bank had been supporting
the sector for thirty years, could we help them solve this problem? At first, I
thought the message was exaggerated, but after some investigation and a Bank
workshop I organized in January to assess the situation, it was clear that the
crisis was real.
I \AN 1i 
XV(RKSXH()P
The workshop consisted of fifteen Bank staff familiar with Colombia, includ-
ing the relevant division chiefs. One of the staff was a Colombian power engi-
neer who had considerable experience in Colombia itself. The participants
determined that one major problem was the overbuilding of hydroelectric power
plants and a high debt load, which, because of a rapid devaluation of the peso,
had suddenly mushroomed from $1.8 billion to $3.5 billion. What should be
done? At about 5:00 P.Mi. the group's thinking gelled, thanks to an engineer
who said "The Colombians need an institutional mechanism to provide over-
sight for the entire energy sector." Everyone agreed. A nationwide energy board
was proposed as the solution. In addition, it was time to (a) stop new construc-
tion in the electricity sector, such as a planned $3 billion hydroelectric project
called URRA, (b) make better use of installed capacity, and (c) increase tariffs.
The trouble was: we weren't the Colombians. The Colombian civil service
is competent and doesn't welcome outside directives. Only the Colombians
3 9

TH1: 
W 
VORIA) 
BAN 
K 
PA1RTHr 
I'\'LI(PTN 
S(WR'C(E1B300K
could decide what they were willing to change and to collectively had the power to change the electricity sec-
what extent. 
tor-a bipartisan group that we hoped would carry for-
ward any commitments they made. despite the fact that
elections were onlv a year away. The invitations were
F I 1 S;T 
'M<1I 
EF I O) Nv
signed by the ministers of finance, mines and energy,
So on a mission in February 1985. my task was to find 
and development planning. I was pleased that everything
out if we could tind a way of working together with the 
was in order and that the Colombian stakeholders would
Colombians. From my graduate studies and work on in- 
have a chance to work together to find their own solu-
stitutional development at the Bank, I knew about a par- 
tions. A few days before the conference, I arrived with
ticipatory process that I thought might be useful. It was 
two facilitators, one of whom had developed the AIC
called Appreciation-influence-control (AIC) (see Appeni- process. and another Bank consultant.
dix I) and required all stakeholders in the electricity sec-
tor to participate in a search for solutions. The Colombi- 
11.:AlANG 
WITH 
()'POS 
I TION
anls-includiing 
the minister of imines and energy, who
was new and seeking priorities for a work program- 
But, wheni we got to Santa Marta, the small northern town
were delighted with my proposal of this approach. 
where the conference was to be held, we encountered a
We agreed to schedule a three-day conference in 
major problem in the form of a new member of the local
April, but the Colombians didn't trust the Bank enough 
conferenice team chosen by the minister of planning. The
to include it as a participant. They thought the Bank was 
new team member flatly vetoed the participatory ap-
seeking the chance to put a new loan in place. After con- 
proach already agreed on. She wanted a conventional
siderable negotiation, they were persuaded to change their 
"talking heads" confer-ence and insisted that "the minis-
minids and include Bank represenitatives in the confer- 
ters wanlt to make speeches, not participate in games.'
ence. While I was back in Washingtoni, the Bank's resi- After many hours of exhausting arguments about the
dent representative in Bogota assisted the government in 
agenda. the AIC consultant and the other facilitator said.
drawing up a list of participants and handling the logis- 
"We can't run this conference the way you want it. Our
tics. In the interim, the Bank sent comments on the URRA 
only choice is to pull out. We are leaving tomolTow morn-
project. the major beneficiary of which was a huge util- 
ing." And they left the meeting.
ity called CORELCA. The Bank's view-that the project 
After a final attempt to persuade the local team. I felt
had no justification and that the electricity sector needed 
I had run out of options. "If you insist onl a traditional
to diversify away from its heavy reliance on hydroelec- 
contference. I'll announce tomor-ow at the opening that
tric power-set off a firestorm. 
we cannot guarantee any results with a traditional format.
and therefore we will have to leave the management of the
CONFERIENCE 
IPREPARATJION 
conference 
to you." With this, our local counterpart
changed her mind. but she still insisted the ministers would
The Bank's resident representative worked one-on-one 
never go along with the idea of working actively and
with the Colombians to organize the coniference and did 
equally with others in a search for solutions.
a gtreat job of pulling together the key stakeholders-
that is, the people with the power, intluence. anid knowvl- 1) A 
:V 
I 
1'ii 
i: 
AI( 
(O 
NFEHE r, N('C.
edge to change the electricitv sector. These stakeholders
included the ministers, permanenit secretaries, heads of 
We had willilgly agreed that the four ministers would
the utilities and tleir contractors. several mlayors (because give introductory remarks. This went well and under-
some of the utilities were municipal), congresspeople, 
scored that the conference was being held under their
several expert consultants, and members of the opposi- 
auspices.
tion party. The special interest gNroups who waanted to keep 
Then the AIC consultant took the floor. He intro-
building more hydroelectric plants also vanted to attend 
duced the process we were about to use. The conference,
and were invited. Although the Colombians were initially 
he said. would help the participants find ways to Llnder-
reluctant to do so. they accepted the Bank's suggestion 
stand and manage three levels of "eenvironment":
to include six project department people from the Bank
and the Inter-American Development Bank, because they 
* 
The internal or c onitrolled environiment (of the orga-
too were stakeholders. All the above mentioned people 
nizationis that have the power and responsibility to
accepted the invitation. so we had all the people who 
carry out projects in the electr-icity sector)
4 0

* The relationship with others outside the electricity 
TH'I: 
AP'P'RECIATIVE 
PHA1I':
sector who influientce or are influenced bv the achieve-
ment of the sector's purpose (beneficiaries. contrac- 
The first assignment to the conferees was to come up
tors. credit companies, advisers. and so on) 
with an ideal future for Colombia. After ten minutes
* 
The relevant context that needs to be appreciated to 
for individual reflection, they were to go around the
understand the impact of economic, political, anid group with each person contributing an idea. They were
cultural factors on the achievement of the electricity 
to keep going around until all ideas had been exhausted.
sector's purpose. 
One of the group members was to be chosen as a
rapporteur. The facilitator would go around to ensure
These three concepts-appreciation, 
influence, and 
that everyone was heard and that they listened
control-he explained, form the core of the AIC method. 
uncritically.
"You will see how the "A," the "l," and the "C" play out 
Working in this mode, the groups made lists on flip
in this workshop." he said. "This is a differenit approach 
charts. They drew illustrations of their visions. They re-
to problem solving. It holds a lot of potential. and I nleed ally had fun. The six ministers, past and current, partici-
your commitment to stay with me for the next twenty- 
pated as equals. The minister of mines and energy grace-
four hours. After that, if you don't like the format we are 
fully stepped up to the role of concerned citizen and was
using. you can go back to a traditional conference. Here 
a model for everyone else.
is the assignment: Imagine now that you are ordinary 
The process enabled all the stakeholders, despite their
Colombian citizens. We have just received news that all 
relative power positions, to share information never pre-
the power plants in the country have been blowni up. You viously brought together. to learn from each other and to
are all out of jobs. Oveir the ilext twenty-four hours, you 
build a common appreciation of the entire electricity sec-
will act as ordinary citizens and devise a new electricity 
tor anid its relationship to the broader energy sector and
sector. an ideal one. that serves the interests of all 
the national economy. After about an hour, each group
Colombian people." 
summarized its ideas for the plenary. Common themes
With this. the confterence launched into the "appre- 
emiierged, but also many original ideas to which the ple-
ciative" phase, designed to understanld the econiomic, nary was receptive.
political. and cultural context of the Colombian electric-
ity situation and to stimulate the group to come up with 
D.A-\ 
2X: THE; AI(' 
('CON Fi R EN (CE
as many' ideas as possible.
The participants were divided into heterogeneous 
The "appreciative" phase continued the next day. with
groups of ten. structured to include people from across 
another assignmenit for the same small groups. Using the
the spectrum of the energy sector and each with a group 
same process, they were asked to examine present reali-
facilitator. They were told to come up with ideas and lis- 
ties. both positive and negative. Again, the groups reported
ten to each other without comment or judgment. Ques- 
back to the plenary. With the help of the AIC consultant,
tions would be allowed but only to clarif'y. not to criti- 
the plenary was able to reduce all of the thinking into one
cize. These guidelines would enable them to come 
overarching vision: a functioning system that provided
"'unstuck" from the present dilemma and unleash their 
electricity as a basic right of every Colombian citizen.
creative energies. to invent without thinlkinig about 
There was one major disagreement. The manager of
practicalities or all the reasons their ideas would never 
CORELCA. the huge utility that had been involved in
work. Role playing as ordinary citizens would also re- 
the URRA project. was furious. He stood up and said
duce the power differences among the group. The con- 
that he wanted to discuss URRA-nowi'. He ignored the
ferees agreed to accept the challenge and. within one hour. facilitators' attempts to calm him. so the minister of mines
the small groups were buzzing with ideas. 
and energy stepped in. saying "We will get to this issue
The press and electronic media were anothier matter. 
in proper order. I ask you to wait." The CORELCA offi-
Because the Colombians had almost doubled the partici- cial wouldn't take his seat. Finally, the minister took him
pants previously agreed to, the conference roomii lhad aside and told him that, if he was not willing to partici-
proved too small. We had moved onto a verandah. where pate in tlle process. he should leave. So the man did leave.
many reporters waiting outside a fence were able to hlear The rest of the people there agreed that the minister had
the loudspeaker. They took the facilitator's announice- done the right thing.
ment literally. and we had quite a timie persuading them 
This comiipleted the "appreciative" phase or the "A"
the World Bank hadn't blown up the electricity sector! 
in AIC.
41

THE4F 
AVO(R1,A) 
BA:NKC 
PA.RTICIPATIO'l(N' 
S4)URl 
lClEMMEl
FrliF, 
INP'lTrIEN(NE 
I'H-Xi: 
rected and, more generally, that most of the problems
could only be resolved with participation from a broad
Next, we moved to the "influence" phase-the 
"I'" in
AIC-during 
which the themes and priorities for change 
range of stakeholders. For instance, because the electric-
ity sector was organized along regional lines, no mecha-
and understanding the potential reaction in the political 
e 
f 
ti
nismn existed for tak'ng a national perspective Into ac-
environment were discussed. The same groups formed 
count. Colombia needed an institutional mechanism that
again. They were to listen fully to each other first and 
could look at the issues and recommendations emerging
then debate, pushing the limits of each idea. 
from the conference-and 
also future issues-in 
the con-
In the middle of the "I" session, each group made a 
text of both the entire energy sector and the national
preliminary report to the plenary. indicating roughly
.
.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~economy. 
They debated whether a national board should
their agreements and disagreements. 
Anticipating 
the 
be created for the electricity sector or for the overall en-
need for synthesis, we had asked the budget director 
a c 
.
.
-i.
from the finance ministry to be both a facilitator and a 
fluence" phase.
synthesizer of the many ideas we expected would come
forth. He was a quiet man whose leadership qualities
were not therefore obvious, but we had observed that 
D)AY 
3: 
T'iE 
(CONTRO], 
Pi-i\Ei.
he had an intuitive grasp of how the electricity sector 
The "control" phase, which took place on the third day,
worked in its totality. He reviewed the flip charts and
drew lines around the main themes and viewpoints, 
was structured so that clear outcomes and commitments
Then, with little preparation, 
fed back a concrete, 
emerged from the conference. We started by putting up
tetmntsnhiofhiseansrtiop flip charts around the room, each listing one of the main
twenty-. mne 
sy'ints 
of 
their 
and 
ategc 
themes developed the day before. We asked people who
tinued with more focus and clarity. 
had the power to implemiient recommendations to volun-
The groups were given some schematics with which 
teer as "champions" of each theme and form groups. Then
we asked the participants to select the issue they wanted
to work. First, they were given a stakeholder map to en-
., 
.
to work on. They tended to choose the group in which
able them to analyze the strategies they considered nec-tr 
c 
essary~~~ 
tacivthiidaouom. 
Thshlpdte 
they had power and/or a stake, or for which they had a
essary to acheve 
their idel outcome. T 
is epdte 
strong desire to influence. The groups were instructed to
consider all of the stakeholders associated with each strat-
egy and whether each stakeholder would favor or op- 
prepare action plans specifying what would be done by
pose that strategy. They also produced an AIC table. For 
whom, where, and when.
each of their strategic priorities, they could list all the 
The next morning, the groups reported back to the
In 
p~~~~~~~~lenary. 
Among the concrete recommfendations were:
stakeholders in the left-hand column and then indicate 
p
if, in relation to the strategy, the stakeholder had appre-
Iiistitutionial reformt. A "rector" or some kind of gov-
ciative, influence, or control power. This gave some in- 
erning entity, for managing the electricity sector in
dicators of the relative power of the stakeholders. 
tn
At the end of the "I" phase, the groups reported again 
mci 
ntefor teholoy 
andesomon
to the plenary for general discussion. Thanks to the syn- 
* 
Netorm, 
tecin. 
a fe 
on
thesizing efforts of the budget director, various main 
f 
fe 
years: dirsioncA 
from 
hydroeletricto
themes had been identified and options and strategies had 
for five years, diversification from hydroelectric to
?_11 
~other power sources via conversion of existing power
been proposed for each theme, along with an assessment 
plants (hydroelectric had gotten 90 percent of the
of the political feasibility of the strategies. One option, 
i 
ec
proposed by the minister of planning, whose family hap- 
yes): 
nd gegapi 
dvers 
tio 
(te 
ous 
thirty
pened to own one of the largest engineering firms, was 
oears: a 
generatilo was 
in 
atershed)
to privatize the entire electricity sector. The plenary's 
otFincncial issues. Change in the structure and levels
reaction to the Idea was chilly.
reaction 
to the idea 
was chilly.of 
tariffs, external borrowing to buv time.
Aside from that issue, the plenary looked at the list 
o
of main themes that had emerged from the group discus-
sions and voted on the top four: (a) a new direction for 
The groups reported these conclusions to the plenary.
policy, (b) finance issues, (c) permanent improvement in 
and they were accepted with little debate. They had arrived
the management of the entire sector, and (d) a new cli- 
at a consen sus by working together for the last three days.
mate of collaboration among the different stakeholders. 
During the final session of the conference, the group
Participants recognized that investments had to be redi- 
focused on next steps and designated a mid-level task
4 2

force to prepare a report of the conclusions. The mem- 
In 1986 the Bank provided a S400.000 Energy Sec-
bers were appointed by the minister of mines and energy 
tor Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) grant for
and represented all the stakeholders in the sector. Finally. 
work on the detailed strategy. This was carried out by
this minister took a microphone with a long cord and 
Colombian energy experts under the guidance of the
walked around the room giving it to whomever wanted 
Technical Energy Board and the ESMAP division. Even
to speak-and 
almost everyone did. The team spir-it and 
though the elections brought a change in parties. the fact
commitmenit to action could be felt in the air. In one way 
that the conferenlce an(d the tollow-up had been biparti-
or another, they said. "For the first time, we know what 
san led the new goverilnment to implement many of the
is happening. We came up with the answers, and we know 
recomimienidations detailed in the energy sector report.
what to do." As people were making, their own cominit- 
The new policies set the stage for the Bank, the In-
ments about the future. their voices were filled with emo- 
ter-American Development Bank, and the Export-limport
tion. They pleaded with the miniister and said, 'Please 
Banik of Japan to each make $300 million loans, temppo- 
don't drop the ball." The minister respondced. "The re- 
rarily alleviating the financial crisis.
sults of the conference have been brilliant. You have given 
By the time the Bank's loan went to the Bank's Board,
me imy work plan for the coming year." 
in autumn 1987. the Colombians had al-eady met most
of the conditions-which 
they themselves had proposed
in the first place.
The positions of some of the participants enabled them
The AIC conference had fundamentally changed the work- 
to use thei- influence at the right time in the policy process.
ing climate. The key actors in the sector moved fromil a situ- 
As tor the AIC process, the Colombians continued to
ation of inaction to a commitment to detailed proposals for 
ask the Bank ftor help with other key issues, such as a tranis-
clhange, seen in the many activities that were set in motion. 
portation strategy, an infonnation system for the country.
For instance, the task force conipleted the report, and 
and internal organization problems of the state petroleum
the minister- of mines and energy held a series of work- 
company. We have conducted approximately ten workshops
shops to review and obtain commitments to implement 
to deal with these and other matters using the AIC process.
the work plan. The report was used in the government's 
The Colombianls persisted with the commitment their
political negotiation process in the Parliament. 
participatory process had produced. In the 1987 Bank
The minister of mines and energy began implement- 
reorganization. however, the key people in the Country
ing some of the workshop recommendations 
before the 
Programs Division moved on to other jobs. For this rea-
final report was even completed. He immediately froze 
son, the Bank's follow-up lacked consistency and did not
construction 
and set up an interim coordinating body 
support all the recommendations of the AIC workshop.
called the Technical Energy Board. This board was the
forerunner of the National Energy Board. whose creation 
- l * 
E; 
I E N 
i' 
N 'I' S
required and eventually received the approval of Con-
gress. The National Energy Board, which then replaced 
The process that began at Santa Marta, however, did not
the Technical Energy Board, worked in cooperation with 
stop. In 1987 the Bank's Operations Evaluation Depart-
all the entities in the sector to carry out sectorwide plan- 
nient undertook an in-clepth evaluation of the history of
ning responsibilities and formulate policies and invest- 
lending to the power sector in Colombia and in 1989 is-
ment programs for the sector. 
sued a report that described a "checkered" picture. The
Later, with broad support, the minister integrated the 
report suggested that the Colombians continue with an
electricity and energy sectors and brought them under 
internal process to come up with their solutions. A sec-
his aegis (previously, the electricity sector had gone 
ond strategy session was held in Santa Marta in 1990.
around his ministry through its ownI contacts reporting 
This strategy session led to the design of a three-year
directly to the ministers of finance and planning). 
effort to restructure the power sector.
The minister personally reported the conference con- 
Untfortunately, Colombia encountered serious shortages
clusions to the World Bank and the Inter-American De- 
of electricity in the early 1990s, and all major cities suf-
velopment Bank and got their support for financing an 
feredfrequentblackouts.Aonce-a-ceniturydrought-prob-
energy sector study to help formulate a detailed energy 
ablycausedby"EI 
Nino"-primarily 
caused the shortages,
strategy grounded in the Santa Marta conference report 
exacerbated by the country's overdependence onl hydroelec-
along with two follow-up workshops to help design co- 
tric generation and the failure to maintain the actual avail-
ordination mechani.sms and implementation plans. 
ability of alternative electricity capacity in the country.
43:

TrHE; 
N(h'l.l) 
BANI 
BxNti 
I'sOI'I'A 
N 
S(t','I'sI.:m)((
ESMAP then becaime involved again. Many work- 
$5.00() by the Bank. In addition, six moniths of my staff
shops and seminars were held involving all stakeholders 
time was devoted to investigating the electricity sector.
in the electricity sector and provicing, "appreciative" 
ESMAP's subsequent work came at additional cost.
mechanisms for airing all views. These also became the
"intluence"' mechanisimis for clebating^. 
maylly of the StrIuc- ON 
H1.E1'1 
I)N
tuLal problems that had affected performance, such as
the risk-laden strategy of too heavy a reliance on hydro- 
Originally. I had thought of AIC as a good strategic plan-
electric power. lack of a regulatory mechaLinisimi, 
the mix- 
iniig tool. But, in Santa Marta. it turined out to be much
inc of generation and transmissioni in the system, and 
more than that. It had empowered those who had to live
lowv tariffs. New policies were adopted to address all these with the results to take charge of their own problems and
issues includinig privatization of electric ulilities. The 
thei own future. It had shown itself to be a self-organiz-
National Energy Board, which was originally designed 
ing process, low-cost, and repeatable. I thought about
as an "influence"' mechaniisin to mzediate and negotiate 
what a change this had been from the developmenit para-
among the many conflicting parties In the energy sector. 
digrn centered on the transfter of resources, technology,
was replaced by the Ministry of N4ines andc Energy. The 
and skills, in which experts defined solutions.
ministry's role was to work in cooperation with the na- 
In Colombia the AIC process continued to be popu-
tional and sector stakeholclers to formulate and negotiate 
lar: many requests emerged from the different ministries,
annual investment programiis for the energy sector as a 
state-owned enterprises, and even the private sector. All
whole. For the electricity sector-, a new Regulatory In0111- in all. I was able to support ten of these requests, mostly
mission, resembling what was recomnieind1edi 
at the first 
with money fromii di'ferent trust funds rather than from
Santa Marta conference, has n0ow been created, and the 
the Bank's own budget resources. The process achieved
Bank has recently' made a techilical assistance loan to three major successes:
support impleinentationi ot'the Colombianii-bred reforimls.
These activities are detailed in an ESMAP report en- 
* 
First, the process proved effective as a means to pull
titled Power Sector Restructuring Prog iram Rep?ort. It de- 
together all the stakeholders ftor an entire sector. en-
votes a chapter to the design and implemilenltationi 
of the 
abling them to understanld the whole situationi, dis-
process and states that "the restructuring of the sector 
cuss options. and make choices for action in a con-
was made in Colombia. by Colombianis. for Colonibi- 
genial atmilospilere. Previous attempts for organizing
ans.... The role of ESMAP, the Bank and foreian coIn- 
problern-solving sessions had led to much acrimloy'
sultants was limited strictly to ancillary support.'' 
almlonFg palrticipalnts.
The manager of the ESMAP pr'ogram in Colombia be- 
l 
Second. the process was empowering. When the Co-
lieves that the process adoptecl by tlhe Bank-not 
the Bank's 
lombian stakeholder-s saw the totality of the situa-
technical advice-facilitated 
the chatnge in attitude that led 
tion. they realized that they themselves were respon-
to the changes in policy. The Banik facilitated a process for 
sible for the conditions of the sector, not the Bank.
problem solving, leaving country 
officials to 
do their OWIn 
not the Inter-American Developmenit Bank, nor any
diagnostic work and thereby learin mor-e fully about their 
othel externial actors. They realized that they had to
own problems and set their own future directions. 
take charge of formulating policies and institutional
An energy economiiist, who was one of the small 
reforms in the energy sector.
group facilitators at Santa Marta and 
iS now the minister 
* 
Third, the workshop-short 
as it was-helped 
the
of minies and eneg-y', had this to say: "The participatory 
Colombianl stakeholdei-s to strengthen their- resolve.
process ill the powel sector started in Santa Marta in 1985. 
1 mentionied how this process. much to our surprise.
It has contilued with many'. mrany seminars before arriv- 
engaged people's emotions at a deeper level than most
ing at a schemile that we are all pleased with. I believe the 
conferences. 
For example, the Colombians 
after-
pam'ticipator' approach was the only' route to restructLure 
wards refen'red to the work-shop as the "Spirit of Santa
this complicated sector. The challenge now is to imiple- 
Marta.' Over time. in maniy clifferent settings, we
ment it. This is my top priority." 
have seen this team spirit emerge. often expressed as
a feeling of elation and harmony among the partici-
'OS'I'T; 
AN n) 'Fr iME: 
pailts. generating the energy to move forward. These
feelings halve proved to be an important foundation
T'he cost of the Santa Marta conference 
was about 
for the commlilitimienit, 
unity. and patience required
$25 ,000-$30,000 
contributed by the Colombians 
and 
during the frequently arduous implementatioi periocd.
4-4

Co'oNI1.I>111\: 
F:,4tU':(II'r 
I; 
, .i:'l)lwll:^z)ws
On the downside. the participatory process was not fully continued in fits and starts by the Colombians illustrated
understood in the Bank, and the two follow-up workshops for me what true development is: namely, to augment your
that were organized to continue the "influence" phase of 
ability to plan your owIn future and deal with the problems
the process were stopped. The Colombians, however, did 
you are facing in a democratic, transparent way. The Co-
continue the participatory process for the energy sector. This lombians have set the pace and paved the way for doing
led to major reforms in oil exploration policies, domestic sector work, policy formulation, and program implemen-
oil price levels, and gas development strategies. The AIC 
tation-all as one integrated, democratic process.
workshop did fundamentally change directions in the elec- 
After leaving the Bank, I helped form Organizing
tricity sector; for a long time to come. the Santa Marta par- for Development, an International Institute (ODII), which
ticipants were the initiators of refomrs in Colombia. Lead- is devoted to action learning and democratic approaches
ership emerged as well. Several of the younger participants to development. We have implemented the AIC self-or-
at that workshop later became ministers. 
ganizing process in many countries for both public and
Although I would like to have seen many things done 
private organizations at every level of society from vil-
differently. what was started at Santa Marta in 1985 and 
lage to global.
4.5


EGYPT
M.-ATRUH 
RESOURCE 
MANAXGEMENT 
PROJECT
Bachir Souhlal is the 
77
Task Manager
for the Egypt
Mazrih Resouirce 
_'
Mlfanagement 
Project. 
I
The 
Nile irrigates more than 90 percent of Egypt's agricultural
land. Unfortunately, limited scope exists for expanding Nile-irrigated
land, although some potential exists in the country's rainfed areas.
Rainfed farm and grazing land are mainly worked by poor tribal farm-
ers who sometimes distrust government and with whom government officials
have thus far had little effective contact.
In late 1990 the government asked the Bank to help identify ways to im-
prove agriculture in the Matruh Governorate, particularly for poor and remote
farmers. The governorate is in Egypt's Western Desert bordering. on Libya to
the west. the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Sahara Desert to the south,
and the Nile Delta to the east.
Approximately 250,000 people inhabit this large area, 85 percent of which are
Bedouins. These traditionally nomadic people have in the last decade switched to
a more sedentary lifestyle. Although the goverment has attempted to integrate
Bedouins into the mainstream of Egyptian society, they remain an isolated, tribal
society whose leadership still performs many administrative and judicial func-
tions. The Bedouin are aeong the poorest and most vulnerable of Egyptians.
In October 1990 led an identification mission to comply with the wovemment's
request for a livestock project in the Matruh Governorate. The mission, includ-
ing a Bank researchi specialist and a consultant, joined staff from Egypt's Ag-
ricuture Livestock and International Cooperation Departments for a field trip
to the governorate. As we traveled the Matruh Governorate, we noted that the
Bedouins are no lonaer nomadic. They had accepted incentives offered in a
47

'I 
EHF: VOR1,1) 
1.XANU 
lSOU'IltIlOAt'I()N 
K()t 
R (F 
IIO()(
government program about a decade ago to settle into a 
to get it from the Japanese. We faced a long delay, but.
more sedentary lifestyle. They now raise mostly sheep 
thanks to courage on the pait of a government official,
and goats. which seriously overgraze the sparse vegeta- 
we were able to move relatively quickly. The United
tion in the area. Figs, olives, and other crops grow 
Nations Development Programme put up an additional
throughout. Environmental degradation and poor resource 
$ 100.000. The Bank became the executing agent for both
management practices are evident everywhere. Fortu- 
grants, which allowed us to be closely associated with
nately, we also had the chance to talk to United Nations 
project preparation. But the local people did the actual
Food and Agriculture Organization volunteers. staff from 
work of identification and preparation, instead of a team
the Agha Khan Foundation, and Gesellschaft fur 
of external experts.
Technische Zusammenarbeit staff who were working in
the area. They were excellent sources of information.
It became clear to the mission that a traditional live- 
sITTIN(; 
I'l 
A LOC(AI., 
TArSK 
FOR(CI';
stock project was not the appropriate solution. Resource 
First. we established a local task force consisting of ten
management, particularly the capability to catch and re- 
people from the central government. twenty from local
tain rain water, had declined severely through an endemic 
government and local institutions, and ten from the
cycle of poverty, lack of viable production alternatives. Bedouin communiity. Local government authorities chose
and uncoordinated regional development. Intuition told 
the Bedouin representatives on the basis of their judg-
us that if things were to change. all stakeholders would nient about whonm the community trusted and respected.
need to make an effort. Local people would have to 
This task force stayed intact, working closely together.
change the way they behaved, individually and collec- 
throughout preparation of the project. To help them with
tively. Government would have to leam how to work with 
their work, we hired a British consulting firm. This firm
the local people and develop their trust and confidence. 
had the experience and capability to help prepare the
Finally, the Bank would have to learn how to contribute 
project using a participatory approach. It also helped the
its knowledge and resources to fit what the local people 
members of the task force prepare the types of data and
were capable of and willing to do. 
documents needed by the Bank.
(GETTtING 
TIME 
ANI) 
MONEY 
LE-ARlNi.NI(N 
AiVUTT 
MA'RI-H
On returning to the Bank, we reported that a regular live- 
The task force-now about forty-six persons, including part-
stock project would not suffice. Instead, the Bank should 
timie assistance from the consulting firm-set out to leam
encourage the government to address the funldamentals everything it could about the govemorate and its people. To
of natural resource management in the area. Initially. our 
start, the members combed texts of all sorts, some dating
thought was to ask the United Nations Food and Agri- 
back to the nineteenth century. Early on I had asked the
culture Organization to prepare the project. After delib- 
government to collect texts and prepare a local library that
eration. however, the mission recommended something 
was put to great use by the task force. We learned a great
new-an approach that would have central and local gov- 
deal from these texts about geography. topography, econom-
ernment officials collaborate with Bedouins to identify 
ics, history, and culture, but we weren't satisfied with that
and prepare the project. 
alone. We knew we had to go to the people. quickly but
This approach would, of course, require both money 
thoroughly. We decided to use a technique, called partici-
and time. Bank management agreed to the approach and 
patory rural assessment (see Appendix I), that appeared well
time needed, but no money was readily available to sup- 
suited to our needs. It would provide a good understanding
port the special kind of preparation we felt necessary. I 
of the people and what they needed through intensive and
offered to search for funds and came across the Japanese 
participatoly contact with them.
Grant Facility and an old friend in the United Nations
Development Programme who was interested in what we 
PAR'T'11 
'IATORV 
RUtRAXL 
AS SE 
E 
S SAI' 
1NT
were suggesting. We quickly put together and submitted
a Japanese Grant Facility application. 
The task force formed itself into about seven teams to
To our surprise. we quickly got a grant of 35 million 
learn more about the governorate and the Bedouins who
yen, the equivalent of $250,000, with virtually no strings 
inhabit it. We used the following elements over a three-
attached. It proved, however, much more difficult to get 
month period to identify what should be included in the
the government to formally accept the grant than it was 
project and how to implement it. In each case we sought
48

1' A.l'1PT: 
MA.-'ITRUH 
lRE:>(l'RCE' 
1N1ANA(:T'\IE''N'T
to have groups of informants participate with us in de- 
land use, vegetation, soils, cultural practices, infrastruc-
veloping the information. policies, activities, and insti- ture. trees, livestock, water availability, and so forth.
tutions that would constitute a project that would 
Actually, the local people did the observing, while the
sustainably help the Bedouins as well as meet Bank qual- 
team recorded their observations because local people
ity standards: 
always see things outsiders are likely to miss. After the
walk, we produced a transect diagram-a stylized repre-
Semistructured Interviewing 
sentation of the area covered by the walk(s).
These guided interviews with Bedouin households were
conducted by a subteam of the task force. Usually we 
Seasonal Calendars
interviewed a group of households together-an extended These calendars focus on local livelihood systems. They
family or larger community. Only some topics were pre- 
show month-by-month patterns of rainfall, crop sequenc-
determined in our preliminary planning for the interviews. ing. water use, livestock fodder, income, debt, migration,
leaving room for local people to talk about their own 
wild harvests, labor demand, labor availability, health, dis-
interests in their own way. We always asked open-ended 
eases. prices, and so on1. We put them together from inter-
questions and probed into answers and new topics raised 
views with local people, using several different sources to
by those being interviewed. Typically, these interviews 
create each calendar. Usually the calendars were created
provided data about the household-how many were in 
at a meeting of several households at which people de-
the household, how they related to each other, how they 
cided among themselves what are the appropriate answers
related to neighboring households, the household's his- to the various questions asked. We always created our cal-
tory, assets they owned. activities they engaged in, who 
endars and other records on the spot and in front of the
did what, who made the decisions, who controlled in- 
group, so that data checking occurred immediately.
come, who did the hard work, and so on.
But these interviews did more than just gather data. 
Social and Historical Profiles and Time Trends
They also gave both sides a feeling for and understand- 
We used these techniques to help understand key changes
ing of the other, thereby generating vital insights. For 
over the years in land use, erosion, rainfall, population,
instance, we learned-when they told us how they ex- 
tree cover. income opportunities, commoni property re-
ported lambs directly to Saudi Arabia at prices much 
sources. and so on. We also asked respondents to fore-
higher than they could get locally-that the Bedouins cast how they expect things to be in the future and how
are quite entrepreneurial. 
they would like them to be. Again, we always did this
with large groups of Bedouins to produce a lot of inter-
Participatory Mapping 
action between us and the Bedouins, and among the
Maps are especially important in rural development 
Bedouins themselves.
projects in which planning, implementation. monitoring,
and evaluation are required. The best sources of infor- Matrix Ranking
mation for such maps are the people who live and farm We used this technique to learn from the people what
an area. The maps allow us to collect and position a lot 
they thought about particular matters in both absolute
of information and recognize spatial relationships. They and relative terms. We began these sessions by listing
reveal differences in farming practices and pinpoint con- measures about which we needed their judgment (for
straints. The shared generation of a map creates consen- 
example, possible project activities). Then we asked a
sus and facilitates communication among respondents. 
group of local people to state their negative and positive
At the same time, it helped the team gain insights into 
feelings about the measures. They were also encouraged
the way people think, their priorities, and their reasonis to add their own measures and then rank order or assign
for wanting or not wanting to do something. 
scores to the various items on the list. We did this exer-
cise a number of times with groups of people represent-
Transect Walks 
ing different tribes, areas, and wealth. This helped us
This is a simple device to ensure that the team explores 
better focus project activities on the poorer segments of
and understands fully the spatial differences in an area 
Bedouin society. These exercises often turned into brain-
(catchment. village, or field, for example) under study. storming sessions; team members became active partici-
We walked to the periphery of the settlement, along with pants, offering at times concepts and suggestions that
a select group of local people, observing differences in 
were new to the Bedouins. These sessions produced the
49

IT-E Hl 
OI 
D1.1) UANIK 
P'AITI(I 
IPAlION 
SOtTIJ(' 
EIJ()(l(s
participatory, community-based implemiienitation 
arrange- 
on 6.200 feddans ( I feddan equals 1.037 acres). ce-
ments that form an important part of this project (see 
mented stone or gabion dikes across wadis to inter-
below for a clescriptioln.) 
cept the water flow and create about 500 feddans of
new fruit orchards, rangeland improvement and man-
VOCUS-~i 
N(. 
ON~ WOMEN 
agement of 14,000 feddans. and more.
* 
Adaptive research an(Id exten.sioni focuses on dryland
As we went along, we noticed that only meni showedl up ftor 
farming andc livestock production 
systems, range
meetings witlh the teamns (not unlusual fo r a Muslim com- 
maniagemlent. sustainable agr-iculture development.
* munity). But women were imiportanit fo- the project to suc- 
and training directed at the local comimlunities.
ceedbecause they takecareofssmall animals, producecrafts 
Amonig other things, foul subregional resource cen-
for sale, haul water, harvest wood, and performiil 
many other 
ters, built to bring services (research, extension, and
tasks. 'e enlisted a female meibe- of the British consult- 
credit) closer to the local communiities, would be
ing firm and paired her with a female Bedouin veterinarian 
suppor-ted with adequate staffing, technicall assis-
who was working on a Gesellschaft fir Technische 
tance. vehicles, equipment, and materials.
Zusammenarbeit project. These two held meethigs with 
* 
Rurlalfinaice, in inodest amoLints, was provided f'or
woImien to cover m1UCIh 
of the samie grouLInd 
covered at the 
small farmers, the landless, and rural women for on-
all-male meetings described above, 
and off-farm income-producinIg activities.
These vital meetings with women greatly contrib-
uted to the project. For instance, although women ale 
The project ats proposed in the locally produced fea-
publicly silent, we learned that all major~ decisions were 
sibility studv went through the Bank's project cycle fully
taken by the men only after they spokie with thle oldest 
initact anid rather rapidly. Negotiations went particularly
womzan in the household. When men1 saty aIt tr-ibal mleet- 
well: we started in April and the Bank's Board approved
ings "I have to think it over,'' what they oftenl ilmeani is 
the project in May 1993. In my opinion, the ease of ne-
they have to first discuss it with the women. But wlhat we 
gotiationis was due to the under-standing and consensus
really learned here is that the contenits of the project hadd
e 
developed In the country through the participatory prepa-
to be socially acceptable and that womilen wouild have a 
ration pr-ocess. Further evidence is that effectiveness.
strong voice in (leciding when it was acceptable. 
scheduled for the first quarter of 1994, took place on
Februarv 2, 1994, fewer than six moniths after the sign-
LOCA('.1, 
( )WSN l1S11 
P 
in,g of credit. Effectiveness usually takes much longer in
Egypt. in part because Parliamenit must approve each
In this project description. I frequently say "we." Actu- 
ci'edit. Parliament was closed due to elections for about
ally. my Bank colleagues and I were only involved in a 
half the time it took for the plroject to become effective.
small part of the actual work, that is. when we could visit
on mission. The local team anid the local comimiunitv clid
much of the work. The consultaints. like the Bank staff. 
MO( RE 
Tl 
IAN 
(COMPONENTS
were presenlt only on certaini occasions. Yet. all of us who 
The precedling project descriptioni leaves out the most
w'ere engaged in this project felt. and indeed were, part 
important poinit aboLt this project, which is special be-
of a special community engaged in "inventing" a new 
caulse of its thoroughly participatory and empowering
futul-e for the Bedouins of the Ma 0truh Governorate.
coiiiiiiLiiiltv-based 
iim-pleiietitatioii 
arrangemeiits. 
`Com1-
munity groups," which build on traditional Bedouin lin-
Ti-IL Fix-.xL 
I4I:'t 
1,'1'eage 
structures-the 
baivt-will prepare community ac-
tion plants to tailor the objectives of the project to local
It took about one year to prepare the project. The proposed 
circumstances and capabilities. Once the plan is prepared
project containied the following componients. eachl of which 
and approved, the commnuniity group will be involved in
was thoroughly vettecd within the large preparationl team an(d implementing it and monitoring results. A conditionl of
within the constituencies the team members represented: 
credit effectiveness was the preparationi of three such
plans, which wei'e ready on time.
Natural resour'ce mnagee 
nt was intended prinl- 
The community goups will help monlitor project Out-
rilv to conserve the water, land, and vegetation of 
comes by adding on-the-scelne interpretations to make
the Matruh Governorate. The project provides 800 better sense of the nunmbers we usually collect. In addition
underground cisterns, earth ancd stone contour- dikes 
to paliticipatory monlitoring. we will also be doing '"hi-tech"
54?

monlitorillg Using a geographic information systei, whose 
to build, ani the trust became mutual before long. I can-
satellite inages will help locus attention on natural re- 
not imagine that occun-rig when a group of external ex-
sources and the iilpact the pro ject has on them. 
perts rush in andi out gathering tacts and1 miaking judg-
In addition to community empowerment andl action. 
ments and quickl recommilenidations. Equally important, the
trust ancl respect have been established betweeni the 
Bedouins saw possibilities to take care of what counted
Bedoninis andc the government. I certainly hope it will 
for theml, began to think about their situationi, and made
prove sustainable, and I'm enicouraged by what some 
geniniile comimlitmiients to do something about it.
goverinimient officials have said to me about how mucih 
ThrougLh participationi, 
we lost "contiol'' 
of the
they have learned trom the Bedouins In the process ofl project 
antd in so doing 
gained 
owner-ship 
and
preparing the project. 
sustainability. precious things in our busiless. We also
galilled 
more influelnce with the local people. and they
]i'[ I N(; 
.NI) 
(~'()i''S 
were more open to listening to our sugggestions and to
the experienices of othel- people in the world that we
Identification and preparation started in October 199() and 
could provide. Althougih we learned a lot and devel-
concluded In January 1992. AbouL 3.25 years elapsed from 
oped understanding and empathy for Bedouin life, we
the first idenitification missioIn to effectiveness. I hear thils is 
couldc not know what would work ftor themii in the fu-
relatively ftast for the Bank. especially in Egypt and In our 
ture. Only they can klnow this.
region. The project cost about $350.0()0 to prepare. not 
If I had to do this project over again I'd do some
counting the cost of Bank statfftime and travel on the project. things differently, but [ would still have prepared it in a
This certainly compares well with projects prepared in a 
participatory manner. I got a great deal of' support from
more traditional manier. The real test will be in imiplemileni- colleagues in the Bank and the couLitry while going about
tation speed and the quality of the outcomes. We are al- this work. But I also sometimes encountered whalt I con-
ready ofl'to a good start with the speed ot'effectiveness. 
sider to be a general lack of understanding about what
participationi can do to make the Bank's work more ef-
O)N I1EI.'LLCTI0(N- 
fective. It was a touLh. stressful. 
timile-consumiing battle
to prepare this pro ject. At the same time, it is truly satis-
Not too long ago. someone asked me what value partici- 
fying to be able to maniage a project that generated so
pation added to the Matrih Resource ManagelilIt Project. 
much mutual trust and respect w\here little had existed
I said that one was that the BedoLinis realized we were not 
before. In so doing. possibilities opened up that did not
attemptini- to use tilemi, as had beeni their previous eXpelri- previously appear to be presenit for the Bedouins or tile
ence with outside authorities. This openedl the way for trust 
Egyptian authorities or the Bank.
5 1


INDIA
ANDHRA 
PRADESH 
FORESTRY 
PROJEC'T
An)2 Clark was the 
_____
T1sk Ma1,nagerftor the 
.
Andhra Pradesh 
.
Forestrx Project front 
8 
.Y, 
-
I
1992 to 1993. 
.
Ajit Banerjee is the
fi rester iwho helped 
A( 
Ie 
-
illitiaite the fto est 
-
pr-otection committee
alpp oacl in WVest
Bengal. i
I started work on the World Bank-supported project in the Indian state of
Andhra Pradesh at its very beginninig. I had just finliSTed work oni a tor-
estry project in the state of West Bengal in which I had learned something-
important from the West Bengalis: poor people can protect the torests
and earn income at the same time. In Andhra Pradesh. we helped dissemiiate
the idea, but it took those of us from the Bank a long, time to discover and value
this simple but effective approach.
F() 1> 
:S.'r 
('()1I"'S
The idea of usilng what are now called forest protection commillttees (FPCs) be-
gail in 1972 in West Bengal. At that time, the role of the state Forestry Depart-
ment was mainly to protect the forests from illegal use by unautilorized persons.
Foresters spent most of their time on armied patrol, hunting forest product poach-
ers and evictinig, people encroaching on forest lands, yet foresters behaving like
police were losing the battle to conserve the forests. Even though the forests
continued to degrade rapidly, local people became increasingly aggressive to-
warid the foresters, whom they generally considered corrUpt. In the Arabaii Range
of West Benoal. the local people had literally throwin the department out of its
territory. threateninig any forester who entered with bodily harm.
One forester, however, had a different idea on how to save the torests. He
felt that people living in the forests were not thieves. If they could supplement
their incomes through legal forest work and organized extraction of forest prod-
ucts, he believed they would not haphiazardly destroy the forests. In fact. he
wondered. would not the local people actually protect the forests if they' had a
real stake in themil'? So he went to Arabari to talk to the local people about a
5:3

ITHl: 
NVORIJ.) 
HA.NK 
PARTICIPATI'.\''llN 
.SOUR'1 
Il(FAMOR
new way of managing the forests-largely 
by and ftor 
products trom what became "their own forest." The forest-
the people. On its part. the Forestry Department would 
ers began playing a more socially useful role than that of
provide real support to the local people. who would re- 
"forest cop." Instead, they enabled the protection of exist-
ceive somie of the economic benefits on behalf of the 
in g forests against fultherdegradation. With theirowneyes.
oovernment. 
they coLIld see reforestation begininiig in areas that had ear-
lier beeni all but wlitteln off by the department.
AN A( 
1iE' 
ou 
PEWS()NAI. 
CM'!IRA;I: 
Faith in the local people and the new approach seemed
to pay otf. Over time. the news of good resUIlts for the local
Although this forester-who 
now works with us in the 
people spread to other comm1i1unities. 
Things then began to
Bank-modestly 
denies it, others say that he exhibited 
change in this part of West Bengal. More and imor-e people
extraordiniary courage in introduIcilng this new approach. 
who lived on the edge of a forest and depended on it 1'or
Simply ooing into Arabari put him into personal danger. 
firewood and other forms of subsistence banded together to
Nevertheless, he eventually gained the trust of the local 
form FPCs. The creation, however, of new FPCs proceeded
people. In a participatory manne-, they crafted a way to 
slowly because people felt wary of the (lelay in getting for-
halt forest clegradation, begin reforestation, and enable 
mial government approval for benefit sharing.
poor people to earn a legitimiate living while conservinv
the forest. 
F1(C 
ii 
s 
PI1 i'.AD)
r? l ALo 
A<; 
l 
v 
N ) .N' 1E: 
(: ()sT I 
.\ 
IA'IIO 
) 
N 
The FPC approaclh began to spread throughout that state.
mostly ot' its own accor-d but in some cases assisted by
Developing the new forest management appi-oach joinltly 
local foresters. Bv 1988 more than 500 Fl'Cs had been
with local people did nlot happeni overnight. however. It 
formlled coverini an area of mor-e thani 70.000 ihectares.
took about nine mzonths of dialogue and negotiation. The 
A large numiiber of FPCs had sprung up spontaneously
dialogue started with the foresters being fi-anlk about the 
following a West Bengal Governmenit Order in 1989. This
nmistakes they had made in forest management andit.l ' in 
order- fully recogtized the verbal agreement between the
dealing with their conflicts with the people. It was not 
foresters and the local people. which ainonig other things
loIng before the local people reciprocated. They admitted 
entitled FPC memilbers to 25 percenit of the final Sal tree
breaking the rules and explained whiy they felt they ha 
rl 
alvests. A year later. FPCs numilbered 1.250 and cov-
to do so. This led to joint exploraltioni of futuLe arralnce- 
ered an area of I 20.00() hectares. The cost of regenerat-
menlts that would take care of the neecds of the people 
ing the forests in this m1anniier proved remiiarkably low.
while they in turnl took care of the forests. By forming 
about 250 rupees per hectare or 5 percent of the cost of
themselves into a ulified village-based orCgalnizationl-a 
creating .I hectalb e of plae1tatiol1 trees
FPC-villa-ers 
oroanized themiiselves to neLotiate with 
Following the West Bengal success story, the gov-
one voice with the Forestry Departmienit. By negotiating 
ernnient of Inclia urged all state governments to adopt
amoni themselves, the villagers also learned negotiat- 
the FPC miodel. So far. fourteen states have not only
ini skills. 
adopted but imiproved on this model of protecting and
regenleratinig degraded lands. It appears. however, that
governlmelnts in India and elsewhere have been cener-
( 
(>5 
51 >N'I NTE1RFSTSi 
-ic
ally unwilling 
to share control ofiremaining 
non-degracded
Initially, the people ofAi'abati ald tie Forestry Depaltillenlt 
forests with the local people. Instead, traditional gov-
reached a verbal understanding- about their irespective fights 
emirnent forestry practices ai'e still beingg alpplied to these
and obligations. Among othoer thigs. the agreement pro- 
frests and are n1ot workinig anywher-e near as well as the
vided equality of contiibutions anid benlefits for- all ilmemil- FPC applroach to conserve the foi'est, particularly in for-
bers of the commilunity. The memilbei's of the FPC took on 
ests with good capacity for self-regeneration.
the duty of keeping the forest free fi-om poachers. FPC memii-
ber-s also 
agreed 
to protect 
shoots 
tilrowin up by Sal StUmpIS 
13HANKE Ii'Pl?'J 
FPC' 
IN 
-ES'r 
BP: NGAL
so that they would eventually become salable poles.
When the poles were harvested. FPC meiiber-s got the 
Wheni we approved the first Baniik forestry project in West
culls. plus a percentage of the reveniue fironm the sale of the 
BengTal in 1981 we seem to have entirely missed the pi-
good poles. But long before the first Sal harvest, mzemibers loting andl demonstration of FPCs. The Bank's maini ob-
of the FPC were legitimately harvesting mzaniy nontlimber 
jective at the timze was to support iiicreasecl fuelwood
54

INA.%: 
AN 
DIHIRA 
PIRAD)I'EI-SH 
FORIESTRY 
PROJEC.T('I
production in areas outside forests. This project. there- 
(O)FF'' 
A (.0m) 
STAI'AT
fore, mahily supported creation of village woodlots. strip
plantations, and farm forestry covering about 150.000 We left Andlira Pradesh feeling that prospects were good
hectares at a project cost of almost $30 millioni. 
for reworking the existing proposal into a strong project
By the time we got arounid to starting preparation foi 
proposal. Our discussionis with the department's leader-
the next forestry project in West Bengal in 1989. it was 
slhip were frank anlid cordial. We felt that we had persuaded
clear to us that village woodlots and strip plantations were 
themil to prepare a substanltial componenlt along the liies
neither directly helping poor people to thie extenlt envis- of the FPC approach and that they had agreed to take a
aged nor halting degradation of natural forests. 
close look at existing forestry policies and thei- effect on
I was also involved in preparing the seconid West enlisting private support for sound forestry practices. They
Bengal Forestry project. whichi largely supports the ex- 
also agreecd to do furtlier work in advanlce of our first prepa-
tension and improvemenlt of the FPC milovement, as well 
ration mission that we had scheduled for May 1992.
as the farm forestr-y programii. Impleienitationi is not vet 
We returned in May to continue the discussioni and
complete: the project is behind target in creating ilew 
see how preparation was going. Not a great deal of
FPCs in the northern part of the state. BLIt the southler-n progress had been made fromii our point of view. No policy
portion is going well. Some .3S50 FPCs (up fiom0l m11ore chanige proposals hiad been preparecl anc, although the
than 1.700 whieni the project became effective) now cover 
original proposal hacl been somewhat restriuctured along
more than 65 percent of the degrat.ded for-est in the state, 
the lines we discussed. it was still mainily a "village
including the entire southwest (about 335(000 lhectares). woodlots and strip llantations project. Nevertheless.
From the air. you really notice thle flour1ishing green ar- 
officials had a strong desir-e to move ahead with prepara-
eas that just a few years ago wer-e largely barreni. In 1994 tion ainid what seemed to us to be an openiess to a change
the West Bengal Forestry Department begani reorganiz- 
in thinikiing and directionl. The officials asked if they could
ing itself to support FPCs. 
get some help to prepare the project to Bank standards.
anid we agreed to see if we could arrange it.
On retur-ningo 
to Washington. we an-angTed for a con-
IN'ROD()I)U('1N(G 
F"P('S 
IN 
A NI)IIDHR 
IA'PRADI:H 
sultant 
teamii to be supportecd throughi a donior country
consultant trust fund. The termis of reference specified
[ was also part of the January 1991 identificationl iflission that local conisultanits also be engaged. The consultanit
forwhat was to becomie theAnidira Piadesi Forestr'y Project. team spent the summer of 1992 working on preparation
At'ter a while, I becamie its Task Maniaaer. When we ar- 
tai 
pn 
iesiiie 
f19 
okn 
t 
rprto
a 
We 
of the project. Looking back. I recognize that I was not
rived. we found thlat Andhr-a Pradeshl Forestry' Depar-tmenlt reallv thinking about having- the project prepared in a
staff had done a lot of good work in preparinig a pr-oposal participatory manner. Nevertheless I suggested that the
fior what would be thei- first operation with the Baik. The 
consultant team consider engaging the local consultants
FPC approach had not yet been introduced inl this state: their we used on the West Bengal project. In my opinion. thev
experience had also been with village woodlots and stlip did excellenit work in West Bengal. The foreign consult-
plantations-supported by a bilateral donlor whio was niot ants agreed to do so.
going to extend its sUpport. The departmenit was proposingc
a contiluation of this approach for the new project. The 
MORE 
1EARNING 
NEEDED
proposal also contained requests for guns and ammunition,
money to pay the salaries of more staff, subsidized distribu- In retrospect, I am glad thils happened. If this project was
tion of seedlings for fanmi forestry. improving tree genetics. to be done. muciL learining bv different stakeholders had to
research, staff training, and the like. 
take place both within the Forestry Department and within
On our part. we explaiiecd that the Bank siilply does 
other organizations working in the target areas. At least
not finance sucIh thinigs as guns. amimiuniition, 
and operat- 
five government agencies would be involved plus a num-
ing salaries. We said we doubted that subsidized seedlings 
ber of NGOs. They' had little experience working together
would be economically justifiable. In addition and more as a teamn. Moreover, the institutional competence in the
iilportait, we shared the experience in West Bengal. both 
forestry area was pretty much limited to policing and tree
with village woodlots and strip plantations on the one hand 
farming. Of course. the consultanits worked collaboratively
and forest protectioni committees on the other. We said we with various officials on the many technical matters that
understood that India's overall priority is to halt the coin- needed to be covered in the comprehenisive forestry project
tinued degradation of existing forests and that the Bank is 
we had underkay. but a key activity carried out toward the
seeking lending operations in support of it. 
end of preparation proved invaluable for the ftuture of this
5.70

THE; 
NV O)R1I) 
HANli 
1'A ITI'1A 
I 1T 
t1( N Fi )t 
K ( 
lt4 
)( Ii
effort. The local consultants organized and facilitated a 
that when those whose institutional and individual be-
three-day ZOPP (see Appendix I) workshop that brought havior needs to change grapple with such problems in a
together officials from the Forestry Department and other well-designed, intensive, participatory learning experi-
agencies. The lead foreign consultants and central gov- 
ence, the prospects for real change increase greatly.
ernment representatives also attended as participants. 
The workshop started with a presentation of the project
as it stood after the joint work of the consultants, Forestry
Z( )I'P 
m()RIW-IdI(m)P 
Department officials, and the local people with whom the
consultants and officials interacted during field trips. The
Prior to the workshop, the consultants interviewed some 
head of the Forestry Department opened the session (and
forty officers at various levels and locations in the in- 
then participated for the full three days); one of the for-
volved agencies. The interviews revealed that important eign consultants described the preparation process, and
institutional issues needed to be dealt with, such as coor- 
one of the Forestry Department deputy heads outlined the
dination among the several independent departments and 
proposed project. About twenty-five people attended.
agencies that would have to work together, inadequate
institutional capacity to protect existing forests, the qual- 
.; 
ANALYS 
IS
ity and productivity of forest work, personnel manage-
ment and the highly centralized operating format of the 
The first order of business for the attendees was a stake-
Forest Department. The workshop's stated purpose, there- holder analysis. It identified the interests, expectations.
fore. became "examining the institutional framework for 
and potentials of all the important groups. organizations.
the project to identify any gaps that needed to be filled.' 
and institutions that would be affected. one way or an-
For most participants, this would be the first time they 
other, by the proposed project. Almost sixty different
got to see the whole project and had a chance to think 
groups were identified, includinig villager-s from adjoin-
about their ability to carry it out. 
ing forests, rural women, cattle owners, tribes, the World
Although the consultants could have prescribed 
Bank. and so on. Ajudgment was made about the project's
policy, structural, and procedural "solutions"' to these 
positive and negative effects on each group, and an insti-
problems. they knew that such prescriptions would not 
tution was designated to deal with the matter. For ex-
produce the needed changes. Their experience told them 
ample. a positive result was villagers' involvement in
Figure 2.1. Problem Tree for Forest Protection
Extinction of certain 
Increase in tloods, drouight. 
Reduction in
flora aind fauna 
and reservoir situation 
productivity
Shrinkage of 
c<< EFFECTS >>> 
Degradation of
forest area 
forests and environment
Inadequate forest protectioni 
<<< CORE PROBLEM
Increased 
- Increased smuggling 
- Free grazing 
- Local population not involved
demanid for
forest products 
- Deteriorated law 
- Regulation of encroachimients 
- Mistrust of departnment by
and land 
and order 
population
- Political interferenice
Iopulatioi 
- Increased extremiiist 
* Departmenit collects beedi leaves 
- Lack of environmental awareness
increase: humani 
action 
* Increase plantation area 
* Nonfulfillment of villagers
and cattle 
* Failure to increase protection staff 
* Noninvolvement of
- InadequaLte facilities 
* Area too large and ulllinaageable 
department in welfare
for protection staff 
activ ities
- Lack of protection
staff
CAUSES 
>>>>>>
5(1

I N li I: 
AN 1) t-I 
P1)Ek 
P 
t) t1l 
UIl'O i' 
P'R R (R.IfI.:( -r
Figure 2.2. Objectives Tree for Forest Protection
Degradation alTested 
Extinction of flora
and environment improved 
and fauna halted
Shrinkage of 
Forest productivity
forest area controlled 
increased
I 
I
- Reduced 
- Reduced smuLggling 
- Organization strengthened to handle 
- Local population involved
demand for 
plantinng 
through FPCs
forest products/ 
- Laws strengthened
wood substitutes 
- Administrative jurisprudence 
* Double assets created
available 
- Law agencies 
workload reduced 
* Local needs reasonably met
coordinated 
* Interface with welfare departments
- Grazing reduced through cattle 
* Forestrv rehabilitation measures
- More protection staff 
upgrading and reduction of scrub 
* Environmental awareness
cattle 
* Public relations improved
l'Better staff facilities 
* Fire hazard reduced
Interface with politicians
Better staff incentives 
established
protection and generation of the forests, assisted by the 
tree and indicates what the future will look like by solv-
Forest Department and NGOs through the establishment 
ing each problem. This is done by converting the nega-
of FPCs. A negative result for cattle owners was the re- 
tive conditions in the problem tree to positive conditions
duction of the number of cattle: the animal husbandry 
in the objectives tree, with the criterion that an objective
unit was designated to handle the matter. 
must be both desirable and attainable. Figure 2.2 is the
resulting objectives tree for forest protection.
P1-()mBI.E1I 
TRP:E
A("1'1o(N 
PRo(GRAM
The next step was a problem analysis and construction
of a "problem tree." This involved the following: 
The next session converted objectives into the specific
actions needed to attain each objective. Alternative sets
* 
"Brainstorming" in which each attendee contributed one were created when possible. For each set, the group re-
or more problems drawn fromii personal experience 
viewed such matters as policy, probability of success,
* 
Clustering the problems identified during the brain- 
timing. resource requirements, cost-benefit ratio, and so
storming 
on. Box 2.1 shows several of the detailed actions selected
* 
Identifying the cause of each problem 
for forest protection.
* 
Identifying the consequences if the problem was not
solved.
The portion of the tree dealing with the forest protection 
A separate two-day workshop was held with Forestry
problem cluster is shown in figure 2. 1. 
Department staff and representatives of a wide range of
NGOs. Central government staff chaired this workshop,
OB.I E(TIVES 
'rR]SE 
which lent a lot of credibility to the effort. The first ses-
sion explained the proposed project to the NGOs and
Having completed the problem tree, the next step in the 
invited their suggestions and participation. The discus-
ZOPP methodology is to create an "objectives tree." The 
sion then focused on formation of FPCs based on a re-
objectives tree is really a mirror imiage of the problem 
cently issued enabling Government Order. It also cov-
5.7

ITHE< NVO(1x1,) 
IBANK 
PAR,TICIPATM\ 
N 
SOV'1C'1;1OMt)1
cal about it along with those who indicated openness or
Box 2.1. Forest Protection Actions -Excerpted 
outright support. All members of the team came back con-
from ZOPP Problem tAee 
vinced that the FPC approach was viable. The question was
:not if but howi to go about establishing FPCs.
Involvement of Local 
After returning to Washington, we began planning
Population in Forest Protection 
the preappraisal missioni, set for early December 1992.
1. Rehabilitation 
of headloaders (firewood poachers) 
To ensLure ownership of and agreement wvith the project
into plantation 
activities 
ireport prepared by the consultants, I decided to invite
11. Participatory 
management 
by the villagers 
the head of the Forest Departmenlt and the head of the
III. Reforestation 
of encroached areas under the 
consultant team to Washingtonl for detailed discussions
concept of FPC by actively involving the encroach- 
ersthemselves 
~~~~~~~of 
the proposal before preappr-aisal. It went well. The
ers themselves,
IV. Training of villagers andfarmersinthedevelop- 
two were qLuite uniftorm in what thev advocated. which
ment of protected forests 
made sense to us. The fact that the head of' the Forest
Department mentionied to me on leaving that he was con-
Meeting Local Needs Reasonably 
sideriny a few small changes in the proposed forestry
1. Opening up local fuelwood depots, bamboo depots. 
treatmenits did not worTy me.
and small timber depots
fl. Supply of bamnboo 
to local artisans at subsidized
rates 
FA.IN(G 
A 
1.A.J)R 
HREAJ(I)V)VN
III. Raising fodder plots in the forest adjoining the
villages 
Preappraisal began in early December as planned. but
:we were in for a big surprise. The Forestry Department
Interface with Welfare 
head disavowed the previous work and presented us with
Departments in Welfare Activities 
a new proposal. It was essentially the same as the origi-
I. 
Participation in implementation of welfare in ibal 
nal proposal-fundin,g for additional Forestry Depart-
areas 
;ment 
staff and a huge component of subsidized seedlings
for' distribution had crept back into the project.
It felt like we were back to square one. I was disap-
ered how NGOs could contribute to FPC development, pointed. The consultants and Forestry Department staff
The workshop was fruitful. The NGOs made many valu- who had been working together were perplexed. When
able suggestions for how to modify the proposals and 
we went to the field, we found staff' well informiied about
agreed to future collaboration. The foresters also became thle project and keen to start implemenitation. The propos-
less suspicious of the NGOs. 
als that the Forestry Department staff had seen. however;
were the later version issued by the Forestry Department
head, not the ones prepared jointly with the consultants.
SECO (ND 
PRE9P.-VRAT'IOIN 
MIISSIO}N
The problem wvith the Forestry Department head's newv
When we arrived for the seconcd preparation mission at 
proposal was mostly related to general forestry manage-
the end of September 1992. we f'ound a great deal of 
menit and the organizational aspects of the project. Also.
enthusiasm on the part of all concerned-the 
officials despite earlier enthusiasm about trying the FPC approach.
from the various agencies, the consultants, the NGOs. 
no further contacts had been made with NGOs by the For-
and others. The project scope. size, and components 
estry Department. Except for the preparation of guidelines
struck us as sensible and acceptable to the Bank. The 
for establishing FPCs, little else had been accomplished.
FPC approach had become a major part of the project. 
Through patient discussion, however, the situation turned
The results of the workshop gave me confidence that around. By the time we left, we thought we had reached agree-
there was now a quite widespread buy-in to try the Forest ment on what would and would not be covered by the project
Protection Committee approach. 1 cannot say that the ZOPP 
and the steps that had to be carried out before appraisal could
workshop alone did this. All the collaboration among 
begin. One of these steps was to contract the Tribal Cultural
multiagency staff anld foreign and local consultants provided Research Institute to carry out participatory ruLral 
assessments
an environment for thought. leamning. and judgment. In ad- 
(PRA) (see Appendix I) to obtain feedback from the direct
dition, a team of officials visited the West Bengal project beneficialies on the proposed project.
sites during the fall. The team was carefully selected to in- 
During the May 1993 appraisal mission we found
clude staff who opposed the FPC approach or were skepti- ourselves back on the roller coaster. The Forestry De-
#8

I ND11A: 
A\NDHRlt\ 
P'1ADE1,1:11' 
(1FORE1'TRY 
PROJECT1:"1
partment head kept returning to the essence of the origi- 
leained not too long after our returil fromii appraisal that a
nal proposal. On his priority list were moie staff, strip 
new head of the Forestry Departmilent had been appointe(.
plantations. andl seedlings for distribution. It \as also 
We were told that the previous head had been transferred
difficuIlt to persuade his team of the need to adopt effec- 
to another post, allegedly because of earlier problemils and
tive. low-cost technologies for forest land treatmenits. 
changing state priorities. Negotiations took place in No-
On the positive side, some movemenit in the direc- 
vember 1993 andc the Bank's Board approved the project
tion of FPCs was apparelt. The feedback fi'rom pilot PRAs 
in February 1994. The project becamie eff'ective in July
In the tribal areas was encouraging and included many 
1994. 1 aim no longer the Task Manager for this project but
specific suggestions for improving the FPC approaci. 
I understanidl from my successor thalt the project is still on
Trainin- of Forestry Department staff in PRA had started. 
course and widely supported by those involved.
Furthermore, an order had been issued to set up at least
two FPCs in each range as soon as possible: a few hald 
t) 
( 
)
already been createc. Some of the new FPCs existed only
on paper. but others (for which staff had been trained) 
The timing and costs for this project were fairly standard
were solidly prepared in the participatory' maninler that is 
for a foorestry project in this part of the world. Preparat-
fundamentall to the success of the FPC approach. 
tion took about twenty months. The Bank logged I 10
staff weeks durin, this time. The conisultant contract cost
Fomxt 'fNr.r 
I-E Il 
l; 
approximately $300.000.
During the mission. our teamn concluded that we had a 
(N 
REF 
lECTION
weak basis for a successful appraisal. What we really
hacd were two projectsweore prepared collaboratiVely by 
The next time I do a project like this. I will build more
senior memilbers of the Forestry D)epartment. other agen- 
participation inito the early preparation phase and the con-
cies. and the consultant team and the other belongingt to 
sultants' teriis of rel'erence. I highly recommend hold-
the head of the Forestry Department. Not that they were 
ing a participatory workshop for any project requiring
mutually exclusive, but the latter still included a numelire important institutionial chanige, which includes. I suspect,
of proposals that the mission could not Support. This was 
the vast majority of Ban<k-finaniced pr(ojects. It wouldc have
a dil'ficult situation. 
been better to haive the ZOPP workshop right at the be-
Before departing. I went to the state torest secretary, 
ginniln of ploject preparation rather than three-quarters
the person to whomil the Forestry Department head reports 
of the way thiouIh.
and put the problems on the table. The secretary indicated 
It would also have been helpful to allow the Forestry
both serious concern about the issues and per-sonal coll- 
Depar-timienit more tiile to interinalize the project and( con-
mitiimenit to the FPC approach. Ie said he would assess 
duct pilot PRAs with villagers. NGOs. and other con-
the sitLation imnmendiately. 
As it turneJd out, he became con- 
stituents before proceeding to preappraisal. Because this
vinced of ttie jointly prepared proposal and confiried sup- 
sort of project requil-es a long leacd thile, we need to be
port for it. I later heard that senior Forestry Departmelnt 
able to get project resouices at an earlier stage than is
officials also weent to the secretary on their own to express 
now possible.
their sllpport for the proposal they h1aCI 
helped create cluir- 
Some disappointing events occur-red durinig this oth-
inu the ZOPI) worklshop. That is rather extraordinary be- 
erwise rewartdingz experience. I am not suL-e I fully un-
havior for Forest-y Departimenit civil seivaits. Perh-laps the 
derstand why. At times I wonder if the participatory.
network of publicly stated convictioni and su)polt created 
collaborative 
approach used in prepar-ing- this project
during the project preparation phase and the ZOPP work- 
failed us somehow, After all, it makes little sense to do
shop promilpted people to behave differeitly'. 
a project that lacks the support of the top person. But in
the end. I aml con% inced that the participattory approach
REw OI(' 
r ION 
served us well. It built a1 large network of' support for
what in every respect is the best way we now know of
We left a;ain satisfied but still not suLe the issues were 
to pro(ect forests and help poor, fringe ftorest dwellers
finally settled. We knew they were, however, when we 
at the samile time.
5_


LAO 
PEOPLE'S 
DEMOCRATIC 
REPIJBLIC
HEALTH 
SYSTENI 
REFORM 
AND 
MALARIA 
CONTROL
Willy De Geyndt i.s 
.:- 
.
the Task Manager
ftbr the La o Healtli
S5vstetn Re -
et0d( 
Malaaria 
Conttrol 
-
_ 
.
..
_
Projeet. 
\ 
;
sr~~~~T 
-~~
_ 
m~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
T he Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) is the tenth poorest
nation in the world. Its people have suffered through decades of war
and wrenching poverty. About 4 million live in this sparsely popu-
lated. agricultural economily. About sixty ethnic grOUpS. maniy with
their own distinct cultural practices, share the nation's limitecd resources.
The vast majority live in rul-al areas, usually engaging in subsistence farm-
ing. Goverinmenit institutions 
are fragile, and few modern practices have
been acdopted. Many donior agencies and foreign NGOs are assisting the
cou1.n1try.
I began working in the LPDR in 1989. It was my first experience 
in a
truly pOOr COunLtry. 
havino 
spent the previous 
seven years in the Bank
workin, 
in Latin America and the Middle East, mainly in middle-incomile
countries. I had a lot to learn about this kind of country and culture, which
has rhythms distinctly dit'ferenit ftrom the Latino and Arabic ones I knew
so well.
.JI 'IT 
ANoTH 
FR 
HEA1, 
11E( 
TOR 
IEIPOfRT?
When I transfenred from Latin Amer-ica and the Caribbean region to the Asia
T'echnical Department I became the Task Manager for a health sector study. A
team ot us worked diligently on this study, including the "in-depth policy dia-
logue" with the countr-y's sectoral leadership. tor about eighteen months. Ac-
tually the dialogue was quite brief and successful. For the Lao, we were merely
another- international agency with a report containing an outsider's view of
what they should do. So they gracefully obliged according to their cultur-e by
agreeing to the recomimillenldiations.
(i I

ITHls: 
Woul,lll) 
11.\Nls 
'\{ll'l.''FNF}'U'el((l
The governienlt 
had agreed to thc developmenit 
Acainh we talked to numerous people in the coun-
strategy we recommenided, includlilln identificationi of 
try: officials at the central and provincial levels, health
the fi-st healtlh investmiienit project. But I was uneasy. 
practitioners 
of all types. other donors, and NGOs.
Aereemnent came too readily. I invited the then 
'vice 
Preparation 
went along smoothly. Governmient sup-
minister (now minister) of health ancl his assistant- 
ported us, albeit in a passive way that allowedl us to go
lily in-country counterpar-t-to 
a nmeetinLg 
at my hotel 
about our work as if we were one mor-e atgency that had
in Vientiane so we could talk in an informal setting 
knocked at its door. We were able to compile the basic
Their medical schooling 
in France and the informal 
data we needed for analysis and ieport preparation. What
venue fortuitously intluelIceCd the tone of the conversa- 
we suggrested, proposed. and wrote was fully and readily
tion and the behavioral expectations. We had a long talk 
accepted by the minister, the vice illnister. and the other
about the health needs of the CouLntry as they saw them. 
officials with whom we were working in a close and
From this talk emerged the elemienits of what became 
amicable fashio
the Health System Reform and Malaria Control Project.
now ulider impleimentaition.
We readily agreecd that controlling maLlar-ia.-endemic 
Si-]COND 
ANDTHIRD 
PREPARATION
in the LPDR-is 
an obvious high priority. Controlling this 
MI 
IONS
disease il a countr-y like the LPDR takes a lot of effort and 
Our secold preparatiOn mission went as well as the first
mioniey: the Bank is the obvious donlor to finance it. Be- 
In November 1992 we launiched what we hoped would
cause the task is forimlidable, a phased approaclh seeined to 
be tile finial preparation imiission. By that time, we were
niake the most sense. Health care delivery. especially for
-
well enoulOL- along to miake flinal commiiitmients for-
iiant.s. childrenl, aild mother-s. neceded ma,jor im1provement. preappraisal in Marchi 1993 and appraisal in September
The LPDR had scarce capacity in this area Much had to 
of the salie year.
be learned about what to do ald how to clo it. Etlilic diver- 
We all felt we had come to understanld this new
sity and low population clensity miade the pr-oblem iore 
(tO us) couotry quite well We believed our local col-
complex. In acidition to improving the deliver-y aLnid finaric- 
leatUes C.ld alrso colme to know andl under-stand us ancl
ing of health care, we also agreed thait improving- healti 
the instittion 
we represented. Although ours was the
awareness thr-ough education could pmvide a big payoI 
ftirst Bank health operation in the LPDR. the Bank had
Finally, we agreed that strengthelling tihe institIutionial ca- 
beell doing business in tllis country for some time in
pabilities at the central. plrovincial. and distr-ict levels was 
otller- sectors. ilicludiiig two fully disbursecd structural
essential. 
adjustllleiit cr-edits. More important, it seemed to us
On returnlil1g to Washington, our pr-oject team clis- 
that oLur in-coUntry couniiterparts now had started to
cussed the various approaches for- getting the project proIp- trust us Indeed they were quite frank and open in their
erly preparecd for- Bank financillg. It was clear- that gov- 
interactions 
with us
emin11enit 
hlad neitlher the hunlan resouices nor the moniey
to prepare this kincd of pro ject. We woull have to assemble
a teamn of experts to do tile joh and 1fiiicn the fund(ls to pay 
A Ll(;HT 
NA IW:NTI 
)N
fct- it. We aipplied for aild oot grants fi-oiii the JapaLiese
fi 
In one of the continuing 
conver-satiolis I was havini
Special Funicl for Policy and Huilan Resoui-ces Develop- 
with the vice milister, however, he started to ask ques-
iment for a total of $8()0.0()() The cgoverniiiieit of Bel-w tions about the Bank. saying he wanted to uniderstand
gium contributed about $25.000 ind the government of
i 
t tit 
better. He went on to sav that, in his opiniol, 
the
France S$24,00() froim their c011sultant 11rust fuLids. The
Bank wasjust another NGO but perhaps one that was
Banik put about 145 staff weeks into preparation.mr 
hruhadcuiusbfr 
einigiswr
iiie thorough 
anid cautious 
befoire 
begiiniiip, 
Its wor-k
and that obviously had more money. Whlen hle said this.
FmRhS1' 
PREiP-ARAFION 
MI119;9(ON 
a1 light went on. I recognized for the first time why
things were goling so well. The health officials expected
We mounted our first plreparation missioni in October 
us to do what the NGOs do--that 
is. design and ex-
1990. I brought along with me an architect, a health 
ecute our own program in some part of the country
ecoiloniist. and specialists in public healthl nianagenileit. 
For some reasoll. it lnever really got across to our in-
aind malaria control. We cid the preparationi work essen- 
country conliiterparts that they would have to imple-
tially the same way we had clone the earlier sector- work- 
melit. rull and sustain the project we were helping
in the expert imlode. 
themil designi.
(i 2

1..X ) 1'1) R: 
ril I.I.% ,I I 
9X9'':51 
I% 
II? 
I; v(pH N
ENGA(.IN(. 
LAO: ('r)'NI 
AIS'i'. 
pert-mode." project preparation. In my back-to-office
reports I expressedi my concerns about the lack of coun-
I returned to Washington in a state of depressiotn. We had 
try ilvolvement 
in project design and preparationl and
what looked like a great project-on 
paper. My colleagues 
received fuill support from my managers to make the nec-
ancd I were certain this project made senise for the LPDR. 
essary changes.
We also knew from countless briefings and discussions 
Fortunately. I received an offer from a colleague at
that our Lao counterparts agreed with it. But now I r-eal- the Bank's central Population. 
Health. and Nutrition
izecl, their- agreemnent was only limnited. constitutigli 
Departmienit who wanted to do some operational work.
mainily a nonobjectioni to what we were proposing. 
He becaime our new public health specialist. He had vast
I saw theni that our L.ao counterparts never really got 
experience working at the district level in African coun-
involved in the learning and inventioni that we were eni- 
trlies with pover-ty levels comparable to the LPDR. He
gaged in and commnittecl to. It was out project. We. a 
knew fr-omii pr-actical experience as a clistrict medical di-
teaim of "external experts." had: 
rector- how to get users and decisionmakers 
to partici-
pate in planning and executingc their own health pi-ogranis.
* 
Wrestledl with the facts of Lao health care to coil- 
He confirmed my instinct that shifting to the participa-
struct the diagnosis 
tory mode made sense. In addition. I hir-ed a health plan-
* 
Created a visiOI of how the future might be after manvy n1in1g conisUIltlnt who also turned out to have taleni in the
iterationis, debates, and arguments aniong ourselves 
area of computers. He had many ideas about Usilnt COmll-
* 
Crafted a strategy to take the country from its dismal 
pLuters to design projects in a participatory manner.
present to a better future 
Over the w*inter we desi_ned a Health Care Plan-
* 
Were preparing the tactical blueprinits. plans, and 
ninig Wor-kbook for use with ouLr Lao counterparts.
budgets to niake things happen. 
This workbook, provided a way for themii to plan a
provincial healthi program themselves. 
It contained a
I also recognilzed that there was simiiply' 110 way we 
ser-ies of matr-ices. Each was set up to record expected
could turn over our learning. excitemlenit. anid coimmit- 
incidence of Lao health problems 
for a typical dis-
menit to our Lao counterparts by briefing themii. talking 
tr-ict in the most popLIlous Lao Province. the one we
at them. or givino themi repor-ts to read. They hadin't 
intenided to includce in the project. The incidenice data
learinecd much wheln we listened to anld consulted with 
woLIdcl thieni indicate the caseload that health care per-
thein. If they were to learin-to gr-asp and internalize the 
soinnel would have if they were to take care of all the
action possibilities-they 
had to do the creating. argu- 
health need1s of the population they served. Using data
ing. debating. and anouishincg that we had done. Onily ii 
the Bank teaim had assembled. 
we completed sample
that way could they internalize this and tranislate it into 
milatrices for all possible elemenits of a basic health
actionl. 
care services 
delivery systemi, as illustrated 
in the
table below.
S H iL E N(. 
T10) 
A 
PAhTIC1IPi'AT'( 
)Y 
STIAN( 
CE 
The fiinished workbook-which 
we had translated
into Lao-consistedl 
of matrices with sample data inser-
Even though it was late in the process. I hacd to shift to a 
tions and an eqLual number of pages without data inser-
participatory stance and get the help of people who k}new tions. We also used Dbase to develop a program that
how to prepare a project in a participatory manner. I dis- 
would convert workbook data into such categories as civil
liked changing course and mission team composition in 
works. equipment. supplies, drugs, and staffing. It would
midstream. We were a good team. We had woriked well 
then calculate the corresponding costs an d print the re-
and hard together- and we had done a very good, "ex- 
suits as investment and operating costs.
TABLU 
2.2 
E:XANPLE; 
(0F' CALCIEAI'rIN( 
(')S'rT 
Fi0() 
('ASE1,0A)) 
DATA
Target Population 
Incident 
Frequency (percent) 
Caseload 
Action
Womeni 
Pregnancy 
4 
1.88( 
Imimluniize 
against tetanus
Women 
Child spacing 
4 
1.880 
Family plannliilg
Children 
< Age 1 
4 
1.880 
Fully imimlunize
All 
Cough > 2 weeks 
3 
1.410 
Ziehl test
All 
Positive Ziehl test 
0).3 
141 
TB treatment
63

TIN 
NVORE 
BA){11 
.N1 
PARIC'IPAT'IO.''tN 
SOURCEIM(Il(M(l
(CcmiPv-ri.:i-AriIEFr 
P:,RTI('CIATOR 
I):ElYD (,N 
She had been doing all along what we just recently
decided to do in the basic health services component.
With these two tools in hand, we designed a strategy to 
She was also running training workshops to build insti-
involve Lao health officials and personnel in the prepa- 
tutional capacity before project implementation began.
ration of the project. Indeed, we intended to have them 
It was clear to me that what was being proposed in this
do it entirely on their own. Our plan was to return in 
component had a sufficient amount of learning and com-
March for preappraisal as scheduled. At that time we 
mitment behind it to make the implementation and
would present the workbook to the counterpart officials 
sustainability risks acceptable.
in the ministry, go over it with them. and train two of 
I can't say the same thing for the malaria control
their staff in the use of the workbook. The blank sheets 
component. It was prepared using the "expert" stance.
would have to be filled in-working with their provin- 
The experts had done almost all the work and almost all
cial and district colleagues-with accurate local data in 
the leaming; their national counterparts had only "agreed"
time for a second preappraisal in June. 
to the proposed activities. Although it was an excellent
For the June preappraisal, we proposed holding a five- piece of work, somehow we would have to find a way to
day participatory workshop involving national level staff shift the stance to participation for this component so the
and key officials at the provincial and district levels. These 
Lao would decide for themselves and learn in the pro-
were, it seemed to us, the main stakeholders in the LPDR 
cess what should be done and how to do it.
health care system. No doubt it would have been useful to
involve some patients in the workshop. But we decided
against it on the ground that the first priority was to in- 
x+:AoNI) 
IiI{x\I-E 
Ai 1 
i.
volve the political and sectoral decisionmakers to gener-
ate political commitment and ownership at those levels. 
n our return in June, we concentrated on the Basic Health
The ministry officials accepted our request to com- 
Services Component and the participatory workshop. We
plete the workbook by June and hold a participatory work- held this five-day workshop in one of the two provinces
shop at that time. We decided to use some of the Japanese 
(Savannakhet) covered by the project. About forty people
Special Fund for Policy and Human Resources Devel- 
attended, drawn from national, provincial, and district
opment grant to do quick surveys and collect data in health care cadres. Two staff from the central level had
certain specific areas (HIV incidence, private sector phar- been trained by us previously and acted as facilitators. A
Thai consultant-fluent in Lao-was able to understand
macies, and user fees) to help the effort along. Central 
Thaisconsuand-rent 
back 
to u 
ndersthe
and provincial staff would manage the studies and hire 
the discussions and reported back to us on the flow of the
local people to do them. 
proceedings. The provincial health authorities made the
Satisfied that we had the basic health services com- 
necessary arrangements and decided whom to invite at each
ponent on track, I turned with some apprehension to the 
level, taking care to ensure that the people at the work-
other components. Fortunately, the health education com- 
shop were representative of the whole.
ponent was being prepared in a collaborative process with 
The three of us from the Bank stayed in the back-
the staff of the Lao Health Education Institute. I had seen ground, available to participate as resource persons if
the write-ups of this component and they looked solid, 
asked but primarily observing the process. But we also
but I hadn't paid attention to the process being used. 
added value in the form of a portable computer, loaded
with the Dbase program our consultant had designed for
that purpose, and a printer. At the end of each morning
ALlfi:.srEAD 
1TCi,NT(. 
PARTI(r'i(i'A'i'i(ON 
and afternoon, we entered the workshop's consensus
numbers. providing instantaneous feedback on changes
To help prepare the health education component we had 
n theg 
anstariabes.
hired a Thai consultant who spoke Lao. She did her work
by holding intensive workshops with the staff respon-
sible for health education. The staff themselves diagnosed 
BA 
;I( 
1iEA1,Tl 
X 
S EIRVICES 
() Ri(SHOI'
the country's health education problems, generated a vi-
sion of what it should be, developed strategies to realize 
On the first day, the facilitators formed the participants
the desired future, and then prepared the blueprints. They 
into two heterogeneous groups. For the entire five days,
then went to the provinces to work with the provincial 
these groups, after discussing and debating matters among
staff, thereby giving the central staff the opportunity to 
themselves, inserted data into the blank section of the
apply what they had learned by doing participatory 
workbook. The facilitators ensured that everyone spoke,
project preparation with their provincial colleagues. 
regardless of level, rank, or function. After both groups
6G4

1,x() 
PD)lR: 
H i:.%I.I''H 
SN 
,'T'I>M 
IRI':FO 
UM M
had com . eted their work, they compared results and 
lengthy. time-consuminiig process of clearing the staff
rieiotiated a consensus position. 
appraisal report, memoranidumli and recomimiendations of
Durinig lunch and dinner, the consultanit inser-ted the 
the president, and legal documents went on, the Laotians
data into the Dbase program. From it. we printed out the 
grew increasingly 
eager to start implemeniting their
humani and financial resources required to carry out the 
project. I was able to obtain and apply the resources of a
kind of basic health services programil implicit in the 
second Japanese Special Fund for Policy and Human
choices made by the workshop participants. The first ruLn Resources Development grant ($600,000) to start in-
generated a $35 million program. an amount totally out 
country capacity building and begin pre-effectiveness
of the question for a province of 600.000 people. The 
activities. This was a crucial step because it allowed us
participants concluded that they had been too amibitious to keep up the momilenitLIm, 
to do additional learinlg
and went back to the drawing board to reshape the pro- 
thiough piloting and demonstrating before mainstreaminlg
gram by spreading actions over a longer thime periocd. It- 
the project. and especially to fill the financial void and
eration two produced a $20 millioni program. more real- 
the lack of on-the-ground action between appraisal and
istic but still too big tor the human resour-ces the LPDR 
credit effectiveness.
could assemble and train. After furtiher- discussion, fur- 
Durinig that lengthy Bank-processing period (it will
ther modifications. arguing, debating. reshaping, and 
likely be more thani one year in this case), the basic health
computer runs, a programil of just less than $1 0 million 
services componienlt organiized a workshop to define theilr
was developed and agreed to by the participants. 
1994 preproject action program, organized a study tour
Although I couldnl't uLiderstand what was being said, 
to Thailand, started two pilot health centers, and orga-
the excitement running through the rooni was impossible nized English lan,guage and computer literacy courses.
to miss. This kind of conceptual planningil was unlusual The health education componenit ran a five-week inten-
for the Lao. but they picked it up quickly and used it 
sive information-education-communlicationi training
well. Many said that they had never- worked so har-d in 
couIse tfor thirty participants and organized surveys in
their lives, but it was well worth it. We knew that a great 
three provinces of people's health knowledge, practices,
deal ot' "embodied"' lcarning took place with the partici- 
and beliefs as an essential conditioni for designinlig health
pants. They learned what they themselves would have to 
messages and decidintg on the most effective message
do to implemenit and sustain "their project." wilicih they 
media. The national leaders of the malaria conitrol comi-
learned as the group of people who would have to work 
ponent called together the eight participating provinces
together to implemilenlt 
and sustain the project. 
to explain the objectives and the suggested approach.
Given the LPDR's fragile institutional infrastructure,
it was clear that a large inifusioni of hancis-oni expatriate
P R( 
)IJ lF:t 'T 
( )'% -N ERS{ 
H t1 P
technical assistance would be needed to assist the country
Clearly. this is what constitutes countly ownershilp of a 
in implementing the project. Client participation and
Bank-finaniced project. The vice minister with whom we 
project ownership are necessary but may not be sufficient
worked was pleased with the workshop. He promiiised to conditions to have a successfully executed project. Expert
do exactly the same thing in the other province in July'. advice and assistance is still needed in this country. As flor
before we retuined ftor appraisal in September. The vice 
many countries, the LPDR is reluctant to use their bor-
minister kept his promiise. The September appraisal wenit rowed money to pay fOr outsicle technical assistance. I
off without complications, 
therefore contilLued to approach bilateral donors and was
After returning fromii appraisal we begani preparation successftul in securing cofiriancing from Belgiulml for a S2
of the loan package for inter nal Bank review. A difficulty 
million technical assistanice grant-in-kind forproject imple-
at this point in the project cycle was to write the staff ap- 
menitation. We plan to use part of this to geneirate owner-
praisal report and menior-andumil 
and recomilimlenidationis 
of 
ship througTh participation for the malaria component.
the presidenit in language that suitably expressed the spiit
of the participationl mode and conveyed the essenice of the 
}* 
PA 
R 
v 
I 
( ) N 
( 
'0wT 
A NI 
'1'I M F
participatory process used. I kept falling back into old hab-
its and had to struggle to bridge the gap betweeni partici- 
Interestingly enough. shifting the stance in the middle
patory language-with less precision and more tlexibil- of prepar-ation neither added more time nor cost to
itv-and 
Bank standards, which demanldied a higher de- 
preparation. The time and money we spend (or cause to
gree of certainty and precise. hard numbers. 
be spent) on preparation are mainly for data collection
Negotiations with the country. originally schedulecd 
and report preparation to meet the Bank's internal loan-
forApril 1994, didn't take place until August. While the 
processing 
requiremients. 
Workshops, 
participationi,
65

TIHE: 
BA 
PNI A) IA.ANli 
PAHT1'I( 
I PAT'ION 
SMAtZlE(BO:Ml()(Pi{
collaboration, and the like are not very costly. The real pervision missions and expatriate technical assistance
choice is whether external experts do it by themselves 
staff will work closely with these teams. In this way, I
or collaborate with the local stakeholders. If behavioral 
believe the Bank can effectively participate with the lo-
change is the objective, the only way to do it is with the 
cal people in making the adjustments and changes al-
local stakeholders. 
ways necessary during implementation.
I'm comfortable with the health education compo-
(ON REF1,C'TX'IION 
nent, because those who will have to implement it have
been working on the design for about two years, includ-
I certainly learned a lot from this experience-which is 
ing lots of training.
far firom over. Fortunately, the Lao have also learnled a 
The use of computer-s has made a great difference.
lot in the process. This learning has led to a level of in- 
I've always considered computers good for linear think-
volvement, ownership. and commitment that otherwise 
ing: spreadsheets, calculating. and word processing, for
could not have been attained. My Lao counterparts say 
instance. I had previously used "timelilne" management
this wxsed to be the Bank's project but n1ovw it's ours. 
software to prepare and monitor a project, but it had never
I'm not yet willing to place bets oni implementation 
dawned onl me that a computer could be used to facilitate
success or failure. Fm not sure that the several months 
collaboration. By running the choices the workshop par-
of thinlking about the workbook approach and the two ticipants miade through the Dbase program. officials from
five-day workshops are enough to generate the kind of 
different levels and areas and with different skills had a
embodied learning necessary for effective implementa- new. common language to unite them. As one or another
tion and sustainability. We will need to keep at it through 
argued for their functional or geographic area, the effect
implementation. 
on the whole could easily be seen in the "bottom line"
I'm going to stpervise the basic health services com- 
the dlata base produced. I must say that this has helped
poneit by repeating the kinds of workshops we arranged 
me see more clearly how we are imprisoned in our
during implementation. The Laotians have already set 
sectoral and functional views of life. I also see how this
Lup the health managemiient teams at the provincial and 
gets in the way of collaborating with each other to serve
district levels to oversee and gtuide implemiientation. Su- 
the poor people of developing countries.
6t6

MEXICO
HYDROEI,ECTRIC 
PROJECT
Scott Guiggenheim 
/ 
/ 
-as onie 
of the soc ial 
/ /
scientiosts wto/rk.ing 
'
oil the Me(uoic 
Hydlroelectric 
1,'''rr 
¢r
Proec( ft. 
'g/ 
*!
Z~~
I-I) ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-X4,,. 
du.e/etil
daiiis. 
Int.d 
wewr 
rnigbhd 
a 
la, 
tal.w_cin,arun
,:,. .. , ,
I- 
lookedn over the dareki smoky. adobe hall and wondered how I'd gotten
into this situation in the tirst place. OUI mission was supposed to comn-
plete the social and envihronmental appraisal of two large hydroelectric
-dams. 
Instead,o we were criningh be hind a large table. watching .a raing
argLlumenlt develop between istcmpanfy oftficials and three or four husi 
ndred 
angry
peasaits. This was not the way to begin a participatory' project.
XViI 
\ 
I)oEl:sN''I' 
tEIwr 
'I;"rI.I:.;M1:N' 
r W)rKl?
IPvol Lintary resettlemenot in Mexico diftelrs little fiom large-scale resettlement
elsewhere in the workl. Large ilstitutions, in this case, the national power com-
pany (CeE). acqui-re land through eminent domain so they' can build hydroelec-
tric dlams. iniigation systems, htihways. and so on. But people lilsl on that land.
Four built-inl characteristics of most resettlemet 
situations make them in-
herently difficult. Perhaps the most significant factor is that iitais imnolanterd.
People dlo riot have the optionl of lnot relinquishing their land. At the same time.
although all legal systems require governments to pay compensation for ex-
propriated property. in pn-lctice. most compenisation sy'stems are determined
through administr ative rather than market mechanismis. They usually fall short
of providlinlg enough monley' to replace what's been lost, and few opportunities
exist to negotiate better rates. Resettlement situations typically pit large. pow-
erfuil institutionis against poor. weak, anid often (though not always) isolated
commuinities. Information, political and economic resources, and organization
are not eqLually balanced.
Unlike Imlost other examples described in the Souircebook. the affected com-
mLIllities are not central to the achievement of project objectives. It doesn't
(;7

matter, for example. if local communi.111ties 
are comimiitted 
ment package that had been tried elsewhere in the coun-
to developing national energy sources or not. The people 
try. They included unrealistic proposals for long-distance
who build a hydroelectric dam normially don't want their 
relay irrigation to sites that subsequent research showed
involvement. onily thei- departure. Managers of ir-iga- 
were unsuitable for agriculture or for breeding new, dwarf
tion projects, who might organize the most plarticipatory 
fruit tree varieties that could adapt to the har-shi mounitain
water user associations downstream. don't tilink of the 
environiliment where the people were expected to move.
displaced people as project participants. Constructionl 
Heavily influeiced by the engineering strengtils of CFE.
companies that must work against tight budgets and strict 
the resettlemenlt planis showed few signs of having been
deadlines irarely want to take extra time to plan and conI- developed or modified through discussions with those
suit with people whose major contributioni to a project 
whose lives they would profoundly change.
will be to get out of its way. 
But why should resettlement be treated like this?
Finally, an often underappreciated feature of the re- 
Wasn't there a better way? The Task Manager, project
settlemenit environment is thalt the people who will be 
lawyer, and I thoughLt there was. I'd al-eady worked on
displaced are frighitenied. Most have heard stories of (lis- 
enough projects to know that few technical agencies have
placement elsewhere and know that the rosy visions of 
as full control over resettlement situations as they think
new homes and farmis often don't turil out to be true. For 
they clo. Diversifying skills and increasilng participatioll
most. losing their land is tantamounit to losinc theil souirce 
are not just philosophically good principles; they're ne-
of livelihood in an environenlt 
in whichi there are few 
cessities. In addition. Mexico has some of the finest so-
ways to replace it. For them, a failed resettlemilenit pro- 
cial scientists. comillunity developimenit experts. and par-
-ramil isn't a 'lesson learned" or a lowered rate of return. 
ticipation specialists 
in the developed or developing
It's a leap into poverty. 
world: although CFE didn't know it. Mexican social sci-
Because it lies on the extremlie margin of the project 
entists have genlerated one of the world's richest litera-
landscape, resettlemenit provides a test case for develop- 
tuL-es on resettlement and its solutionis. The skills and
ment alternatives based on participation. With sucIh un- 
knowledge were there: now we. CFE. and the Bank had
favorable preconditionis. examples of successful. partici- 
to learn how to work with theml.
patory resettlemiient provide a special kinid of evidence 
AlthougIl the project was already in negotiation, our
for claimis about the scope and potenltial ol' participation 
teamii introduced tighit conditions to require the company
to imprlove developmelt, 
to develop an organizationial structure and obtain profes-
sionals skills that would be conducive to participatory
1'{L.E'l''l"l'l,l 
:NIENI' IN 
NIl;\l( 
() 
planni.ll
The Mexican delegation balked. but the Bank held
The Mexico Hydi'oelectric Project was going to be the 
lirm. The resolutioll of the situation was helped. I have
first Bank investimient project in Mexico's enerov sector 
to adlit, 
by anl eqLually intractable procureinent prob-
in seventeen years. The country was in dire neecd oftelec- 
lcimi. Negotiations broke dowvn; for the next seven months
tricity. Bank involvemilent was a new opportunity to sup- 
the project sponsor-s tried to raise money privately.
port long overclue production, efficiency. ancd manage- 
Many' things had changed when they returned to the
ment reforms in the sector. The project, conceived to be 
Bank seven monitihs later. A nationial election had trig-
the first of four large loans that would be miaide over the 
ge'ed a nationial political crisis, followed by a nation-
next two years, consisted of the Aguamillpa andc Zimapani 
wide campaign to improve local participationi in devel-
hydroelectric dam projects and a variety of policy and 
oplelet. Our in-country counterpa-ts 
were now much
institutionlal reftorms: hence. it provided an impor-tanlt more receptive to our ideas about what needed to be dole.
opportunity to piggyback social and environmental i-e- Helped by late night beers. we spent long hiours in dis-
formiis onto a major developmenit program. 
CuSSion about a new approach to resettlemilenit-an ap-
The resettlemilenit plans developed 
for the 3.000 
proach based on creating an institutionial capacity ftor
people who would be displaced by the Mexico Hydro- 
consultatioll and participatioln.
electric Project we'e neithier better nor worse than the
typical resettlemenit componient. At the point wlleni the 
) 
HAN 
I. I)l'([ 
()I- 
A 
NE.I 
N4 
(I' 
CAPACITY
Bank became involved, project technilcal planning (damns.
powerhouses. roads, and so on lhad advanced well be- 
We began by asking thiee basic questions that we thought
yond the resettlemenit plans, which were little more thani 
lay at the root of the resettlement problem. The first was
skeletal copies of a standaid (and unlsuccessful) resettle- 
if the companiiy knew enoughi about the people being dis-
68N

,Mi';xiu 
<: 
II 
Yi)ItbEL.1.4( 
''1'1
placed and their needs to prepare a good resettlenient 
generally well runi, suchl as utilities and parastatals. can
plan. The second was if the company had the skills and 
attract andi direct good staff once they uliderstand what
experience to manage a participatory resettlement pro- 
is requLlired. After some discuissioIn over which qualifica-
gram. The thircl was what channels were available for 
tions were relevant for the new position. CFE assembled
the people being resettled to make sure that agreements 
a good group of experienced planners, economists, and
were respected and inftorimiation flowed to decisionmakers 
social scienltists to staff the new unit.
when construction schedules began tightening. 
Making sure that the company included UnlitS with
Field-level information was strikingly incomplete. 
enough incentives and weight to do resettlemenit right
But more important than the lack of good planning in- 
was part of the solutioll to the problem of power imbal-
formationi was the conspicuous lack of contact with the 
ances. We wanted, however, to make sure that there were
villagers being resettled. The company's planning teams 
independetit sources of information and appeal as well.
had been set up to plan the resettlemenit programs and( Eacil state g.over-nimilent 
formed a -comite de concertacion"
rAp/ain them to the villagers. They weren't eqtuipped to 
involving ditfferent Iine agencies andl headed by the gov-
learn from them or to collaboriatively decide how they 
erno- to review and assist with the resettlemilent plans.
might want resettlement to proceed. 
The National Indian InstitUte-a 
branch of the Educa-
New teamis were recruited. This thime they caiie with 
tion Milistry-provided 
field monitoring. The company
different skills and experiences. Mixed groups of young 
also appointed a senior, independent resettlemilent adviser
professionlals-fi-omil university, NGOs, andc social worlk 
(an internationially faLious Mexican social scientist) to
and applied science backgrotiuicis-were 
sent into remiiote the compalny presidenit to concluct inter-iittent field re-
villages with termis of refer-ence that required them to 
views of the project.
stay there foI three weeks out of every four. The problemii
changed from one of getting the staff to listen to the
1SI.MAKE N(. 
TAHI 
siT~\I'.IEf; 
iNTo) 
A 
PRO()(;F 
AM
people. to one of getting them to stol) listening.r long
enough to write something down. 
The two projects took different approaches to turning the
If giving villagers a "voice" proved surprisingly easy. 
general resettlemicent strategy into on-the-groUnd pro-
developing an institutionial fi-aniewor-k to act on the infor- 
granis. Most of the people affected by the Aguamilpa
mation provecl surprisingly difficult. Yet there would be 
project were Huichol Indians. a group knowin for their
little point in havine highly participatory fieldwork if the 
wonderful artistry and symbolically rich rituals but also
information were lost in some office building. Virtually 
amonig the most desperately poor people Hi the country.
all of our involvement in the project was aboUt revising 
Aguanillpa's first attempt to organize group ineetings and
the institutional design for participation, rithier than "do- 
discussions about resettlement among the Huichol met
ing" participation oul-selves. CFE's organizationial shakeup 
with nearly complete ftailure. Villagers had no tradition
created a new. high-level Social Development Office that 
of group meetings with outsiders: virtually the only such
reporte(i directly to the company management. Sililar-ly, 
experience they'd ever had was when they were sum-
each project had its own. on-site high-level office that re- 
moned by local goverinments to learn that their houses
ported to the engineer in charge of constructioni. 
would be sprayed for malariai and yellow fever.
Why was the company receptive to these changes' 
Theproject'sindependentadviserquicklyrecognized
LUndoubtedly the size of the Bank loan[ helped. It was 
that a iore culturally appropriate approaci was needed.
believed that this would be the first oftfour pro jected $500 
The companiy increased the numliber of small field teams
million lending operations to the Mexican energy sector 
and began house-to-house visits to the remiiote settlements
in seventeen years. But other factors were equally Hn- 
dispersed in the high Sierra Madre Occidental. Local
portant. The new companiy presicdent caine fromii a politi- 
Co 
ulnlllity leaders were offering to help. The project
cal background and had already introduced several orga- 
grad(iually built a series of basic service programs such as
nizational reforimis. Other changes taking place in the 
health, cultural recreation. and basic needs that devel-
countr-y's own development dialogue were leading to 
oped trust beftwe they moved into the resettlemenit dis-
more requirements for environmental and social impact 
cussion. 
After years of "top-down" 
planning, 
the
analysis. Given the virtual nonexistence of such units 
Huicholes for the first time began contributing their ideas
withill CFE, the plan we'd developed durling negotiations 
about good locations, proper housinig designs, and where
was as good a start as any. 
to find the right priests (mawo 'katmikes for a proper inau-
Filling in the organizational boxes with qualified staff 
eur-ationi. The video we made of the project ends with a
was the next step. In my experience, comilpaniies that are 
small grouLp of beautifully costumed old men, sonic of
(i'

TII.: 
NVORIA) 
BANKi 
I'AR'I'I('II'\'ION 
9)IT11IHI:I(
the Huicholes' most respected mari 'kames. blessing the 
elsewhere. The conference brought together engineers,
large dam and new villages. 
researchers, activist groups, and academics.
Zimapan was a different kettle of fish. Lying in 
The mor-e open, more participatory approach drew
Mexico's central plateau. these comm1lunLities 
have 
favorable reviews from unexpected quarters. Articles in
marched across the pages of Mexican history for hun- 
nationial and ilternational newspapers compared progress
dreds of years. The irrigated orchards that would soon 
in Aguamilpa and Zimapan favorably with resettlement
be flooded, for example, were expropriated fi-om large 
elsewhere. Visitors from as far away as the United States
h?acielda.s and given by a grateful governmienit to its revo- 
and South America were also struck by the high degree
lutionary supporters during Mexico's great agrarian re- 
of local involvement in the initial program.
form of the 1930s. For centuries they'd lived in a hostile
svmbiosis with the outside world: they depended on
~~~~~ 
.
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~ INSTITtFI 
I'ONA 
I, Ri?E ;I 
;TAN 
UP:
employment in the large grain hacienldas of the rich, yet
internally they'd had to repress dissensioni to avoid los- The first sign that implementation would not be all milk
ing their lands to hungry outsiders. Unlike the Huichol, 
anid honiey came when a new head of the social develop-
they were used to collective action. The ejido assembly 
inent unlit was appointed. Concurrently serving as politi-
hall, where we had first met the villagers. was the forum 
cal adviser to the conpany president, he removed many
for all secular decisionmaking. 
of the most competent staff. Field morale plummeted.
More recent developments had led to somlle 
deep cracks 
The company also decided that it did not like reporting
in the social structure. Seasonal mieration to Mexico City 
to independent monitors, whose analyses couldn't easily
and the United States reduced many people's ties to the 
be discarded when they reported bad performance. An-
land. The poor harvests and shared poverty of fonner years 
tagonisms with Zimapan villagers flared up again when
was giving way to a new crop of parabolic anltennas on 
villagers were excluded from the company's replacement
adobe huts. Dissatisfaction with the religious hierarclhy lanld selection committee. The company, unused to so
had plowed the way for extensive evangelization by Prot- 
much ouLtside scrutiny, was reasserting itself.
estant missionaries, further dividing the communities. 
Relations with the Bank also became more brittle.
The participation strategy in Zirnapan was more 50- 
Reports bv the inidependent monitors showed that sev-
phisticated than in Aguamilpa because the strategy itself eral of the agreements reached with the communities (and
was negotiated locally. Community antagonism toward 
us) were not being fully implemented. At times, Bank
the first resettlement proposals had been so intenise that 
pressure seemed to be the only way to induce a response.
people had repudiated their official leaders, who had ac-
ceded to the company's plan. and formed their own lead-
ership. This evolved into a "negotiating committee" that 
IPR()JiM1,E1i11 
N 
I'I'H 
IPARITI(11CATI'ON
developed a protocol for all resettlement discussions with 
It wasn't just the power company's intransigence that
CFE: full disclosure of information, joilnt financial au- 
made for difficulties. Village-level problems also made
dits, no individual deal makinog and so on. Although the 
the participatoystrategyghardvto iprleme 
Two prob-
* 
~~ 
~ 
~~t, 
L_ 
the participatory strategy hard to Implerment. Two prob-
new resettlement unit was allowed to field social work-
ers,theonlybininc 
arrncrment 
Nvre hosesigedIems 
.stood out. First, despite their snmall size, the com-
ers, the only binding arrangements were those signed 
munities themselves were highly factionalized. Partici-
jointly in the monthly meetings in the assembly halls. 
pation was defined as imiuch by who didn't want to work
Saul Alinsky would have been proud. 
together as by who wanted to make joint agreements.
Second, the commilunities were highly stratified. One
TIi I 
E-ETIF "IlEIF.NTI 
i .
group of farmers was desperately dependent on land.
particularly on the irrigated fruit orchards that would be
The company as well as the villagers liked the new ar- 
destroyed by the reservoir. The second, more diverse
rangements. Field tensions quickly diminished. Particu- 
gr-oup consisted largely of land-poor or even landless la-
larly in Aguamilpa, the farmers came to trust the new 
borers who had left the communities to work as braceros
teams and even started coming to them for advice. As 
in the United States. Although most of these people had
the new social development staff started to think about 
started off poor. many had become relatively wealthy once
long-termii social impacts caused by CFE's development 
they received green cards that gave them access to regu-
program, the company decided to hold a nationial resettle- 
lar seasonal employment.
ment conference to discuss the approach being devel- 
As long as the issues confronting the communiities
oped forAguamilpa and Zimapan in light of resettlement 
were general ones that applied to everybody, commilunity
70

Nli1;x1( 
e: 
Hovj)H( F:l,u:(-'1'1i1{
leadership could negotiate fair deals on behalf of every- 
skills or experience to run them. Coming at the same
one. But once the big issues were resolved, private deal 
time as Mexico's dissolution of commlion property ejido,
making and special arrangements guided by the interests 
the villagers opted to sell the replacement farms negoti-
of the rich became an increasing problem. Poor people 
ated with the company rather than move there, despite
were increasingly 
excluded 
from resettlement 
their original agreements. It seemed less risky to com-
decisionmaking, and over time a new, small elite devel- bine rainfed farming back in their home villages with
oped within the community that jealously guarded its 
seasonal emigration. In other villages, in which the ap-
monopoly of power, sometimes through force. 
proach evolved to the point that farmers could select their
own land, it appears that resettlement went smoothly.
WOM)1EN'SF 
'.I(IX 
XCompensation 
payments 
provided another flash
point. Initial underassessments by the company were sud-
Rich and poor weren't the only fracture lines in Zimapan. 
denly matched by an equally absurd overassessment by
When CFE began its first community consultations, many 
the community's negotiating committee. Company threats
of the participants were women, because their husbands 
were matched by community visits to legislators and on-
were off in the United States or other parts of Mexico for 
site work stoppages. For the first time. compensation rates
the agricultural harvest. Initially too shy to speak up in were renegotiated and assessments raised to reflect the
public meetings, they became more assertive over time. 
real costs of replacing them.
Even some of the resettlement demands changed. Once
the women had a chance to say what they wanted, nego-
tiations had to include not just requests for land but also
some credit to open sewing shops or a small bakery. 
No easy way exists to measure accurately the costs of
This didn't last long, however. As the consultations 
our more participatory approach to resettlement. On the
began to produce tangible actions, the men attended 
Bank's side, the costs consisted of little more than tak-
meetings and women were increasingly scarce in the 
ing me along on regular missions. Our role wasn't to do
monthly meetings. The social workers, who were mostly 
the participation, only to help the company form and
young women, continued to visit their homes and trans- 
implement a more participatory program. Incremental
mit their requests for schooling, health, and other ser- costs for the Bank, therefore, came to about twelve weeks
vices that rarely occurred to the men who now domi- 
of staff time over the two years that I was with the project.
nated the meetings. Women never again had the same 
The cost issue is less clear when it comes to the bor-
voice in the big negotiations with CFE. 
rower. The two projects have been the most expensive
resettlement operations they've ever financed, costing at
WH 
WhAT 
1HAPPE.1 NED:I)? 
least double the most expensive previous program.
There's no question that the higher resettlenient costs are
I left the project about two years after the first villages 
caused by greater participation; negotiation forced com-
were moved to make way for the coffer dams, although pensation rates up considerably-at least to market rates
I've tried to maintain some contact with the Bank staff 
and probably somewhat beyond them. The company also
and consultants who have taken over. 
had to form social and environmental impact units at a
Aguamilpa supervision reports that resettlement is 
time when the Bank was otherwise recommending sub-
working well, a particularly encouraging outcome be- 
stantial staff slimming.
cause the Huicholes were especially vulnerable to the 
Project costs must be weighed against the benefits
debilitating effects of mishandled resettlement. During 
gained from the new approach. Aguamilpa and Zimapan
my last mission there, not only had all of the resettled 
are among the few large dams ever completed on time in
families remained in their new sites, but relatives had 
Mexico. Although not every delay in the other projects
started to move into the area. 
can be attributed to fractious resettlement, many can be.
Resettlement in Zimapan's main villages got off to a 
During roughly the same period that Aguamilpa and
bad start when people from the largest town discovered Zimapan were being built. two other large dams-not
that one of the ranches bought by the project's land se- 
financed by the Bank-were canceled entirely because
lection team lacked the promised irrigation water. Fur- of resettlement protests that blossomed into armed con-
thermore, as the villagers studied their new, irrigated, 
frontations and marches into Mexico City. Because of
highly capitalized ranches, on which they'd formerly been the enormous costs of dam construction-nearly a bil-
low-paid workers, they realized that they didn't have the 
lion dollars for the two projects-each 
year's delay in
71

THE 
NVO)RIAL) 
HANIK 
I'P\A'I'II'I'I(IN 
SOUR'I- 
'EIMM)(
project commilissioniing would have implied foregone 
Not all the lessons are positive ones. Pressed by time
benefits that exceeded the total cost of our entire partici- 
and swept up in the enthusiasm and camaraderie of a
patory resettlemilenit 
package by orders of magnitude. 
new idea, we didn't operate with a clear understanding
I think that the program's social benefits exceedecl 
of the limits of our participatory approach. nor with an
the econonic savings. The project's "participatory 
objective assessment of our role in making it happen.
stance 'led to happier people, not just ainonc the resettlers Field visits by Bank staff led to local beliefs that the Bank
but among the technical staff as well. Durilng supeIvi- 
was on "thei- side." Such sentimenits led to strong re-
sion we repeatedly met field enginieers and supeIvisors 
sentments in government agencies and raised legitimate
who commenited how relieved they were to be working 
questionis about the Bank's proper role.
on1 a project in which they didn't feel sulTounded by hos- 
How important to the overall outcome was, in fact,
tile, bitter people. 
the Bank's work in introducing a more participatory ap-
Finally. I think that the nation as a whole benetited. 
proach to the project'? It's difficult to step back enough
There isn't any real way to capture the true costs of us- 
to provide a fully objective evaluation, but I think the
ing state power to force resettlemzent, but they're high. 
Bank made a limited number of critical interventions that
Resettlement colonies in other projects we visited were 
paved the way for new ideas. The Bank's big compara-
often squalid places, mired in poverty and unhappiness. 
tive advantage comes from its focus on policies and in-
The children of Aguamilpa and Zimapan are already back 
stitutionis, not in "doing" participation per se We helped
in newly built schools, on their way to becoming the 
create the enabling environment that provided incentives
country's next generationi of engineers. economists, and 
and opportunities for CFE staff to work with the com-
perhaps even anthropologists. 
munities, insisted that the company assign qualified staff,
and introduced cleaner lines for decisionmaking. 
We
0 N 
R? E FLE f; ( "U I O) N 
played ailmost no role in developing the specific partici-
patory methodologies and activities.
This is not a case in which hindsight produces a much 
That said, there's no question that the Bank's sig-
clearer vision of what could have been done differently. 
nals were heard throughout the power company. De-
Certainly it would have been better to begini the participa- 
tails of the long discussion of resettleimenit at the Bank's
tory approach earlier instead of having to rebuild from a 
Board were known by every engineer we met. As the
fragile and already confrontational base. Yet many of the 
project advanced, the Bank's Mexico Department di-
project's problems were not really related to planning. 
rector and the energy division chief gave the project a
My experiences in Aguamilpa and Zimapan taught 
big boost by visitilg the communities and meeting spon-
me a lot about participationi and development. More than 
taneouslv with some surprisecd resettlers. These visits
ever before, I'm convinced that people make the projects. 
were as important for the impression they made otn CFE
Yet, good people trapped in powerless positions can 
managemernt as for any facts they found in the field.
achieve little. Resettlemenit in Aguamilpa and Zimapan 
Perhaps most important of all was that the Task Man-
worked because the power company hii'ed good people 
ager made a strong point of visiting the field sites on
and gave them a mandate and sufficient resources to do 
virtually every supervision mission, no matter how brief
what they already knew how to do. Once the field teams 
it was. Knowing that the Bank would come led to flur-
were in place, many of the ideas they came up with w'ere 
ries of activity before and after our missions, during
much different from what I would have suggested, but 
which some of the annoying problems that had been
usually they were better, 
lingering on through bureaucratic 
iner-tia were magi-
Resettlement also worked because community con- 
cally solved on the spot.
sultation and dissemination of information was so much 
The other big mistake we and CFE made in the project
better than in any previous resettlement program. People 
was in riot thinking carefully enough about the implica-
may not always have agreed with what happened, but they 
tions of commiunity stratification. Particularly in Zinapan,
were rarely surprised by it. Furthermore, because there 
most of our assumptions abouit communities' abilities to
was so much more openness about what was supposed to 
make satistactory collective choices turned out to be wrong
happen, NGOs and other state and national agencies were 
"Letting them decide" often turned into a way for unequal
able to pressure Mexico's civil institutions. Peasant resis- 
village social systems to become even mole unequal.
tance committees visiting slate capitals may have been 
Could we or CFE have done much imore about it than
troublesome to project managers. but they returned resettle- 
we did'? I'm not sure. In their few, short years of life,
ment to the national political system in which it belongs, 
development projects cannot undo social systems that
7_

.Al EN5 1(0' : 
H E I)R0L(l5ll 
'1a R
have developed over centuries; this applies as much to 
mess up resettlement. They used that trip well, comment-
the big bureaucracies with whiicih we work as it does to 
ing self-consciously about the differences among the lev-
the small comimlunities affected by projects suchi as this 
els of community participation in the program and adapt-
one. I'm not convinced that we have the analytical and 
ing that program's creative approach to participatory
operational tools we need to deal with the local-level 
monitoriig of housilg conistruction. We also imailed dowil
problems of conflict and inequality that we face once we 
a huge amount of literature on participation and resettle-
get through the highier-level problems. 
ment that was copied and circulated.
Several years after I left the project, I asked my in- 
What they liked least was the Bank's lack of self-aware-
counti-y counterparts in the diffetrenlt Mexican agencies 
ness duriig field visits. They thought we were fair game for
what they thought we'd done well and where they felt 
anlybody who wanted to manipulate the missions-from
we made big mistakes. Somewhat to my chagrini, nobody 
project heads who warned staff not to relay bad news, to
singled out the Bank's use of a field anthropologist with 
wily farmers who saw a chance to get a new round of con-
years of experience working in central Mexico as being 
cessions. Some of the more thoughtful people noted that
especially important. Instead, they focused on the Bank's 
because of the project's size. CFE and. by extension. the
-weight, " the fact that such clear signals about participa- 
Bank. transfornied and often in effect replaced traditional
tion came down to their own managemnent. More than 
conduits and mechanisms for local decisionmaking. Nei-
anything else. they said, the consistency of our overall 
ther the Bank nor the company, they said. had ever under-
message opened up space for them to try new ideas, of- 
stood the ramifications of these changes on a regional envi-
ten despite strong internal opposition to changing the sta- 
ronment. These are good points that I return to often.
tus quo. One senior enginieer, who strongly supported 
Finally. I hiave to say that introducing a participatory
the changes. told me that he believed that the Bank has a 
approach was not all fun and games. Old ways fighit back.
lot mor-e power to introduce changes than it thinlks it does 
We had our share of good times. and many of my in-
and a lot less than the government thinks the Bank does. 
country counterpar-ts who developed the project remain
The question was if the Bank had a clear enough strat- not only close friends but also people who have gone on
egy and resolve to make institutions like his more open 
to reforimi projects elsewhere in Mexico. Still, it would
to a participatory approach. 
be naive in the extreme to claim that all it took was a
They also liked some of our technical exchanges. launch workshop and participatory trainiing to get the new
Early into the project. I helped organize a visit to the 
approach adopted. "Buy-in" and "ownership" are part of
Hopi-Navajo relocation program in the LUnited States so 
the story, but so are Bank pressure and willingness to
our Mexican team could see how industrial couLitries also 
stand firimi on agreements.
73


MOROCCO
ENHANC1ING 
THE 
PARTICIPATION 
OF 
WOMEN
IN 
DEVELOPMENT
Sunita Gandhi is the 
.
Task Manager for the 
Ki
Economic anid Sector 
I
Work: E,zhaic-int g
the Participationl
of Womrieni in
Developmnent.
* 4~~~~~~
r F 641 
-; w 
A 
-t 
-
A" 4~~~~~
hy not ask the women themselves?" This was the question that
kept running through my mind as I sat around the table one
afternoon with members of my division. We had been called
together to discuss an issues paper that had been prepared as a
forerunner to the Morocco Women in Development sector study. Here we were,
sitting in Washington, talking about the different thiings that could be done to
help the women of Morocco. yet no one had thought to ask the women what
they wanted. So when it came my turn to comment, I expressed this thought.
My division chief imimlediately 
endorsed it. Both he and our director were re-
ceptive to the idea of a "bottom-up" approach. Shortly after our discussion, I
was asked to manage the Morocco Women in Development Sector Study.
STAIRTIN( 
ilN 
A 
"(Oh) 
(I'UE"
Because participatory sector studies were not customary in Morocco, I real-
izeci we would have to start by bringing together key Moroccan stakeholders
from governimienit. 
academia, and the NGO community to share their experi-
ences in working with women and get their ideas on how we should proceed
with the study. To do this, we organized a one-day workshop in July 1993 in
Rabat. This event marked the beginning of the preparation process for the study.
It was also the start of a long and involved effort to build consensus for partici-
pation at all levels in the country and within the Bank.
Now. you must understanid that we were starting all this in a "cold cli-
mate." The Moroccan government finds the question of women's economic
7 5

Till: 
NV O)I.l) 
B:AN 
I'XIUICIPATIION 
SOiiUCIMIS(II(
indepenidence to be controversial and up unltil this point 
women s issues. I think the neutral banier of the World
had been reluctant to even disc lss it with the Bank. Di- 
Bank helped facilitate dialogue between the two sides.
rect participationi of the local populaltion in development 
Through the course of the afternoon. I could see that
strategies is also a sensitive issue. As a result, getting the 
people were gradually shedding much of their initial skep-
ministries to attend a workshop on womenes develop- 
ticisimi and were beginning to think more about cooperat-
ment turined out to be mucih more complicatecd than first 
ing towaid a comilmon goal.
envisionecl. 
By the end of the workshop. the group had endorsed
the use of a participatory approachi. Withi regard to pri-
II) EN tIFY IN'\ 15-(; 
STA 
K i, 
\ 
1)i:RE 
orities. different views emerged during the debate. which
were iiitegrated with those of Bank consultants who were
The first step was figurinig out whom to invite. We knew 
preparing the back_round documenlt based on a review
we wanted to involve all those working with or inter- 
of existing liteirature. Out of this emerged four principal
ested in the affairs of women. Withi regard to goveril- 
areas of concentr-ationl in order of their importance: (a)
ment stakeholders. 
we invited all relevant ministries, 
literacy and education. (b) labor-saving technologies, (c)
which totaled nine. We also hacd local conIsultanlts corn- 
mlateinal health and preventive health care. and (d) ac-
pile lists of all NGOs and academic institUtion1s that were 
cess to creclit.
doing work in this area. By the end of this process. we 
This list represented ovr collective view of their pi-
hiad identified all potentially interested palties-or 
so we 
orities. Now the big question was if the women would
thought. 
come up with the same priorities. If not, whliose view
Our -overiinment 
counterpart for the stuLdy was the 
Couflts:> In addition, how would we reconcile these dif-
Ministry of Agriculture. Due to the nature of the topic, 
ferences in views not only between its and thieml, but also
however. we were faced with a prevailing reluctance on 
between various parts of the coulitry, because it was also
the part of the other ministries to participate in such an 
quite possible that views would differ among regions.
event. Nevertheless. I persisted in organizing this meet-
ing becaLuse I believed 
that withiout a consenstis 
at the 
(H10,IN( 
A T'HNIQUE
ministry level. we would never achieve the support and
leitiinacy 
needed to move the process forwvard. I sooIn When I retul-ned to Washington. I was caLitiously happy
realized that I would have to change tactics to bring the 
about the gence-al consensus on using a participatory ap-
different ministries to the table. So. instead of billing this 
proach for the strategy development. The next step was
as a higih profile workshop, I decicded to presenit it in a 
choosiiig the right technique. I believed that local women
niuch less threatening way. as a 'Joint discLIssion" with 
arc probably the best experts alound when it comes to
those involved in women's activities. I visited each min- 
knowing what they need and whiat they are (or are not)
istry personally and asked them to attend an inforimial willing to do to bring about the desired chiangtes in their
gathering to discuss tile issues. On the day of the work- 
commun.1ities. I knew I needed an approach that would
shop more than sixty people attended when we had ex- 
not only allow us to talk with womenl about what was
pected only twenty-two. Not only was every milist-y we 
important to them but go beyond this to involve them
visited represented. but participants from woinen's NGOs 
actively in the policy formulationl process. Tllis was my
ancd other groups we hadnit known even eistedl heard 
shopping list, but I didn't know where to look.
about the meetling and turined up. I think those who at- 
I mentioned this to a Bank colleague one afternoon
tended were a combiniation of people who were genu- 
over a cup of tea. He suggested that I consider using par-
inely interested as well as those who were just CLII;OUS 
tO ticipatory rural appraisal (PRA) methodologies (see Ap-
see what the Bank was doing. 
pendix 1). This was completely new to me. but I decicded
to look into it. The first thing I did was call Dr. Robert
THlE FiHR1T 
WO(!)RKSHOP)' 
Chambers 
at the Institute for Development 
Studies in Sus-
sex. After an encouraging conversation, he graciously sent
The objectives of this first workshop were to deterinilie 
me all sorts of m aterials on PRA. I immer-sed myself in
priority areas for the sector study and discuss a partici- 
them. drawn by the seeming dynamnism of the process and
patory approach that would enable us to identify womeni's 
the way it allowed people to modify their views as their
perceptionis of their own clevelopmenit. I shiould mentioni 
contexts ancd priorities changed. PRA seemed well suited
that this was the first time that government officials and 
for our purposes. but I still had miiany questions. How could
NGOs had sat down tooether at the same table to discuss 
we correlate qualitative responses with "scientific" data?
7 6

MOROCCO ('o: 
*WOMiEN 
IN 
DU1.A' ElO01'ME:NTl'
Is it worth the extra time, money. and effort'? Will the Mo- 
local people is a sensitive matter and shouldc be done by
roccans want it'? Where will the money come from?' Could 
Moroccans. Second. it was an issue of capacity building
this be done on a large scale'? Although I still remained a 
within the countr-y. This left me in a dif'ficult position. I
bit skeptical. it seemiied worth a try-particularly 
after a 
knew that there wereni't maniy PRA experts worldwide.
comparison with other approaches. A few weeks later. I 
let alone within Morocco. How was I going to find twenty
hir-ec two PRA experts and took them with me to Mo- 
or so Moroccans experienced in this area'?
rocco for the seconicd workshop. 
In the end. there was really only one option. We w ould
have to traini local people to do this. As you probably know.
trahiiiiii prolgraniis-let alone PRAs-are 
not conimionly
'I HE 
SECO'(ND) 
NVOIRISHOPI 
C_ 
-
a part of Bank-financed econlomilic and sector work exer-
We held the second workshop in November 1993 with 
cises. As such, this issue was debated quite vigorously at
approximately the same set of stakeholders. This time 
the departimlental and regional level at the Bank. My man-
around, the purpose was to discuss the specifics of uni- ager-s were nlot as conicernied about the methodology per
dertaking participatory fieldwork and the possibility of 
se but imlore about the cost effectiveness of incorporating
using PRA. One of the PRA consultants introduced thle 
local-level participation in a sector study. I would have to
participants to the basic principles of PRA and explainted 
do some convincing to get the fLunids to do this work.
how it could be used to contr-ibute to the study. A great
deal of debate followed her presentationi. Many qulestions 
T 
E'1S 
NT (i TIHl: 
1'i(oS 
ANY 
(' )N S
were raised about how the regions would be selectecd for
PRA and who would conduct it. One prevailing concern 
At a seminar- on gender hosted by the regional vice presi-
expressed was that the results would be qualitative and 
dent. I was given the opportunity to talk about the sector
not "scientific." How would this kind of' inforimiationl be 
study. At this time. I mentioned the problems of finding
incorporated into the rest of the study'? 
funcis for participatory work. I ran through the benefits
'I'he consultants and I did our best to respond to the 
coilpared with the costs of using a participator) approachi.
cluestiotins andc concerns. Durinig this discussion, we mnade whlichi in my view were that it would (ai) lead to a greater
a point not to try to influence the participants in any one 
dialoguie between governmnent and nonigovernment insti-
direction. I certainly lidil't have all the answers. as thils 
tutionis (somethilng that was currently lacking in the coun-
was new to me as well. I shimply presented the pros and 
try), (b) lead to greater ownership of the strategy by
coons of using the methodology and why I thouoht it made 
Moroccans at every level, (c) contribute to empowering
sense within the context of Morocco. Then I asked them 
people il rurlal and poor urban communllities by giving
what they thought. 
them an opportunity to assess their owIn needs and pro-
As I look back. I see that detachment is an important 
pose solutions, and (dl) likely lead to better implementa-
principle when presenting options, particularly on the part 
tion anid sustainability of follow-on projects.
of the Bank. The Moroccans are particularly sensitive about 
Then, of course, I stated the cons of using a participa-
anything "assumed"' about or forced on them. So I made it 
tory approach, that is, (ai) participation may be time and
clear that they could take it or leave it-the 
choice was 
resource intensive, (b) it raises expectations among- local
theirs. This approach put the Moroccans imimiediately at 
populations that may not be fulfilled if projects are not
ease. It let them know that they were in control and that 
Forthcoming. (c) it is organizationally 
and logistically
nothing would happen without their approval. This really 
troublesome. and (d) becaluse methodologies used are not
set the "learniln-" mood. From this point on, we were 
"scientific."the legitimacy ofthe results iiay be questioned
flooded with questions andl ideas. Everyone was interested 
by various expemis. Fortunately, the conclusion drawn from
and eager to know' more. We received manl1y suggestions 
all this was that the benefits of participation were likely to
regarding regiolial site selections ftor the PRA. 
exceed its costs in termis of extra tine and resources re-
quired. The regional vice president's special genider fund
providecd the critical funding we needed to move ahead.
The main outcomile of the one-day workslhop was a gen- 
(Wj? 
Hvi 
()THEI 
,
eral conselnsus on1 giving PRA a try. Participanlts, 
espe-
cially governmelnt representatives, held the strone° view 
In Februally 1994 we decided to runi a pilot PRA session.
that Moroccans should be the ones to carr-y out the PRA. 
I had heard 
that 
Gesellschaft 
fur Technische
no0t foreign consultants. First, it was felt that talkiilg to 
Zusammenarii-beit (GTZ) was runniinig a program in the
77

'IE 1 
ORiA) 
BANIr 
PA'TIC'I('I'''ATION 
SOURF'I 
:It(I' (II
Zagora area and had established a relationshlip with the 
stat'f NGOs. academics, and a few members of the bilat-
local populationi there. I contacted the headl of the pro- 
ernl donor community. Its theme was "Usino Participa-
graam who offered his staff to carr-y out the pilot. We hir-ed 
tory Mlethods." We intentionially held it in the South of
a PRA consultant from Singapore who joined two local 
Morocco away from Rabat. in a town called Ouarzazate.
womeni from GTZ and one from the local university to 
so that fewer people would attend. The interest was so
carry out the four-day exercise in the rural village of 
great, however, that despite the inconivenience of travel
Tinfu. In this wayv we were able to "piggybback on the 
and expense-which 
had to be borine by the partici-
work of GTZ. All this, however, was done in conjunc- 
pants--more 
than 100 people showed up. Sixty partici-
tion with the Ministry of Agriculture. our iin-couniti-y coun- 
pants were firomii goverinmenit (it is interestinC to note that
terpart for the study. Fromii the pilot, we learned that mien's 
this was a significant increase froii the ten who had at-
and women's views were diffe-erit. Whereas men wanted 
tended the first workshlop ancl twenty who had attended
to build bridges and roads. womieni's top priorities were 
the secon(l).
clinics, amnbulances, electricity, running water, and col- 
The workshop began wvith an overview of the gov-
lective ovens. This showed us that womieni's time hori- 
emilinleilt ot' Morocco's Strategy for Integrating Women
zons are short and their gL-eaitest concerins lie in meeting 
in Developmenlt and the role of the economic and sector
theil- imninediate needs and removing the bur(denis of their 
study. This was followed by' a presenitationi on the impor-
daily drucgery. Although rulal womenC vIalued girls' edu- 
tance of participatory methodls in preparation of the sec-
cation they viewed it as a lon_-terineed 
achlevIle 
tor tucly and the strengths and weaknesses of PRA coiln-
only after their most pressing basic needs had heen met, 
pared with conventional survey research minethiods. Next
This was a significant finding given that w'e-that is gov- 
camiie the fun part-the 
inter-active and practical exercises.
einiilenit, NGOs. academics, and Bank experts-as 
well
as (quatitLtive 
studies had all idenitified education as the
s 
~(;I'I 
i'ii 
W%Ho) KN0W)\F?
t'irst priority above all else. These results contfirlmed my
belief that we were moving in the rig,ht directio n anld that 
MuIcIh of PRA training is based on the concept of ''em-
we would learn a ireat deal by con(Luctilng PRA oni a 
bodied learning" througih social interactionis, game-play-
wider scale. The central problem. however, of how we 
i ug. gro-Up(dylnramlics and soon. We wanted to.get people
would integrate this information with the formal quanti- 
to shuedn thiri pi'ececeptiomls and start thinking in new
tative sector analysis remained to be seen. 
ways aboUt whose klnowledge couLits. To set the right
miood. we began with a warm-up exercise that I have since
D)0'13S'I'i 
i''TART'1' 
C'RIEI'JNG 
JIN 
namied "Guess Wlho Knows'?"
With the exceptioni of two people, the group was asked
Task Managers w'ho have supported participatory processes 
to gather in a circle and join hands. They were instructed
will tell you that it's harcl to do when you are only in the 
not to let go or change the positions of their grip during
country ftoir a few weeks at a tilme. I CiLlickly found out that 
the exercise. Next the facilitator asked them to entangle
these sorts of undertakings are dynamnic and reqluire coin- themselves any which wav. They found this to be quite a
tinuous interaction with the diffeerent stakeholders. Par- 
lot of fuin and caile up with all soils of contortiolns! The
ticipatory economzic and sector work is a completely new 
two outsiders were theni asked to help untangle the mess.
concept in Mlorocco. particularly when it attempts to bringt They were not allowed to touclh-only 
give instructions
local stakeholders into the policy dialogue. Anything lnew 
as to who should do what. We started timing the process:
is bound to r aise a lot of questions. So whell new person- 
six minutes to sort out the contfusion.
nel in certaini miniistries beg an to ask questions-aInd 
I was 
Next. the group was asked to r epeat the exercise and
not there to answer- them-thiey 
started makilln assLIuIp- 
entangle themselves once again. This tilme it was the
tions. Unkinown to me or my Bank colleagues, these mis- 
facilitator's turn to give instruction, but she simply said
uiderstandings and lack of in-CouLntry presence would lead 
to then. "Untangle YoUrselves! Aia-in we tiimed it. "JJust
to difticulties down the r-oad. 
over 10 seconds!" the fiacilitator anilounlced. "What do
vou think of this?" The group wvas surprised and excited.
(;ls:NI:R 
uI, 
( )RI 
F.N'l'.\'l'l(IN 
\\-1HtIsSH111' 
They bloke lIp in1to smiiall grOUpS to discuss. Olne conlCdlL-
(,ENE'RAL, 
( )RiENT1AT1ION 
~Te 
rk
sion was that ''local people kniow better hlow to get out of
Meanwhile. I was back in Washington busily preparint 
their- own mess because they live in it." Another- conclu-
ftor the two PRA training workshops. The first was a three- 
sion was that it took mor-e thie for outsiders to sort things
dav general orientation workshop held for government 
out, cespite thieir good inten1tions. Others, however, ques-

MO(ROC>((O: 
WVOMNIN 
IN 
I)DE:VAl,0PNIE:NT
tioned if this really represents what occurs in reality. This 
an opportunity to test some of the methods they were
led the group to ask. "What is our role as outsiders'?" 
learning. It was agreed that at the end of the ten days,
The facilitators began a discussion around the role 
twenty people would be selected to go out and do the
played by external experts in the development process. 
field PRA.
Through discussion, participants concluded that outsid- 
Preparations for the training were going smoothly,
ers have another, more effective role to play as "cata- 
but on the other side-the bureaucratic side-we were
lysts" or '"facilitators" as opposed to leaders of the de- 
experiencing lots of problems. We discovered that going
velopment process. The exercise helped them to under- into the field and talking to local people required a "visa"
stand that when people are given the opportunity and 
from the government. It took yet another round of per-
encouragement to help themselves, they learni how to do 
sonal phone calls and letters to get most ministries to
it in the process. 
agree. The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Statistics-
The remainder of the semiiina- consisted of maly such 
the key ministry when it came to fieldwork and re-
activities, which the participants enjoyed and ranked 
search-however. did not respond. We were not sure until
highly during the evaluation as preferable to the lecture 
the last minute if the field mission would go through.
format. The participants felt that learinig about PRA by
doing some of the actual group exercises such as map-
ping. ranking. and drawing matrices helped themn better t 
SUDDEN 
BRE*
appreciate the value of participatory methods. I am cer- 
When I arrived in Ouarzazate for the training mission, I
taim that these interactions contributed toward a level of 
was informed that a new person had just taken over as
understanding and commitmiient on the part of the par- 
government liaison with the Bank. Apparently, he was
ticipants that no amouLnt of lectures or book reading could 
under the impression that the Bank was trying to circum-
have achieved. The flood of interest in the upcominlg. vent the government and go directly to the people. These
intensive PRA training workshop came as no surprise. 
misunderstandings had in turn been passed on to the di-
rector of statistics-the man in charge of granting our
AN- EMBLARRA 
l:IENT OF 
UHICH:s 
clearance. He was angry and wary of our motives. He
felt that we were trying to carry out the fieldwork with-
Everyone wanted to attend. yet we had spots for only 
out his knowledge, despite the fact that a representative
twenty to thirty people. I was amazed that so many would from the Department of Statistics had agreed to the PRA
go voluntarily into a village setting and endure such rough at the November workshop. I decided to fly to Rabat to
conditionis. This was a bare-bones villaee with no elec- 
request permission to proceed.
tricity or rfinning water. We had asked each minlistry to 
In the meantime. the governor of Ouarzazate, who
restrict their nominations to two people and each NGO to had attended the opening of the training workshop, had
one person. Even then we ended up with thirty-four (thilty- become interested in the program. His presence at the
three women and one man) and a long waiting list. Many 
opening sessioni had given our project national televi-
people came up to me personally that afternoon and ex- 
sion and media coverage. Ironically, all this attention
pressed their disappointment in not being chosen for the 
served only to fuel the suspicion of central authorities
training. None of us could have predicted such a level of 
and made things worse for us back in Rabat. To add to
demand for training in participatory techniques. In pro- 
the difficulty of my situation. the governor himself asked
viding this training. the Bank is helping to build capacity me to proceed with the PRA activities in Ouarzazate,
within the country to undertake participatory wvork. 
regardless of whether we received permission to do so
fromii the central government. I thanked him for his sup-
port. but knew instinctively that I was better off not mak-
THURALNlNUi 
IN A V'ILLA.AE 
',E'r'iI[NG. 
ing any promises. We had been working in an environ-
For the ten-day intensive PRA training, we wanted the 
ment of uncertainty from the beginning. There was no
participants to live in a rural setting. We decided to hold telling what would happen next.
the training in Sidi-Filah. a village two hours east of
Ouarzazate, which was accessible onlly by dirt road. All 
B1ACK 
TO 
SQA>i 
Eh' 0NE
the participants. trainers, and Bank staffers (a total of
some fifty people) were to stay with village families to 
"Final clearance has been denied." This was the message I
see if trainees could endure such living conditions for received on arrival in Rabat. I was in a state of disbelief as
extended periods of time. We felt it would also give them 
the new governimenit liaison with the Bank and director of
79

Tii 
NVORIA) 
BANE 
PA'TIC'I'l('I'AT'l'ION 
SMOl{I'UCE)li
statistics started raisiln the same old issues and questiolls 
over a f0olr-imonth period and covered five rLral and two
that we had been answering for the past year. It was as if I 
urban regionis. The trainees were divided into teams of
was starting all over. What were we doing in Ouarzazate'? three. We sent five teams to rural areas and the remain-
Why was the Bank siding with regionial governments? 
ing tive people to urban areas. Within each region, the
Furthermore, the director didn't understanid our method- teams covered four or five doC1ar7/s 
or- villages, often in
ology and did not agree with some of the selection criteria 
isolated regions and desert commllunities. The first step
and the regions we had chosen for the study. He was an- 
was to meet with the local authorities and bring them on
gry because he perceived us as flouting the authority of 
board. We explained what we had come to do and asked
the central government. Again, I did not try to debate the 
for their assistance in selecting which villages withini their
issues with him or deftend my position. I simply presented 
region would be most suitable for the PRA. We found
the pros and cons of the PRA methodology and the ratio- 
that gainling their- support from the beginning ultimately
nale for wanting to involve local woomen in formulating ensured that our work in the douars progressed smoothly.
the sector strategy. After this I said. "if you don't think we 
Most d(luars conitained anywhere from fifty to one
should proceed with this, I don't either. This enthie effort 
hundred families. In doing the PRA. our objective was
has been based on conselnsus. Your support of this is im- 
to bring together memubers of the comm11ullity-both men
portant. We will do what we can to persuade you. but if 
and women-inl an open dialogue to generate learning
you do not agree, we are willing to withdraw the team." 
and spark innovative thinking on a wide variety of is-
With that. the attitude of the director changed dra- 
sues. The team used a numiiber- 
of techniques. including
maticallv. He had been afiraid that the Bank was trying to 
open-ended interviewing, focus group discussiols. Ilia-
run the show and was visibly relieved to realize that the 
trix ranking, mapping, and seasonal and historical dia-
Moroccans were in the driver's seat. From this point on. 
grammingi to bring out the rich experiences and local
he was much more receptive to everythini I said. At first, knowledge of the villagers.
he asked us to hold oft while the governmiient undertook 
This was a highly interactive process in which the
their naticonal census. This would meani a delay of more par-ticipants were able to modify their views as the PRA
than four months and possiblv Imluch longer. I decided to went along-adding 
to theil- previoLIs models or maps.
present to him the risks of delaying as opposed to the 
shifting priorities. rethinking their strategies, and invent-
benefits of doing. First, I explained, the newly trainied ing new options-as they began to view and discuss their
Moroccans might forget what they had learned if the PRA 
problems, constraints. and opportunities in new ways.
was postponed: second, the outside trainier-s wvere already 
The process was iterative and continuoUs. Each exercise
in the country, and I was not sure they Wvould be avail- 
built on the intormation anld ideas generated in the pre-
able if we did this later: third, too much delayv might lead 
vious one. For example. during a focus group discus-
the Bank to decide to withdraw its support for the study 
sion, womeni identified certain top priorities but were
because of a perceived lack ol' governmiienlt interest: and 
undecided on1 which of these was most important. The
fourth. several critical projects were coming down the 
matrix ranking exercise helped them clarif'v their priori-
pipeline that would need a strategy for integrating women. ties ancl think through the choices they were making by
Little by little, I could sense his reluctance dissipating. giving each a fixed number of points (representing
The last obstacle to overcome was the selection of regionis. money') and asking them to allocate these among a list of
At this point I realized how worthwhile it had been to spend needs that thev had identified earlier. When asked to look
the extra time and energy developing the elaborate (thirtv- at the same issue in a differenit wvay, some womnen foulld
point) selection criteria and site designation through a pro- 
that they valued one item mor-e than another and as a
cess of consensus. The broadly based support we had gar- group began to articulate and understanid the reasons why.
nered by involving the various ministries fronm the start gave It was a learning experience ftor the team as well as the
legitimacy to the site selection process. In the end, the di- 
participants to see hiow their responses changed and
rector made only one change to our regional lists. We re- 
evolved during the course of the PRA.
ceived our "visa" ftor PRA the followilg day.
FX'I P()%% E RI N( ; V( 
)1IF 
N
('RT 
RY 
Hy(I 
( )I 
M'1' 
P. RL 'lr 
II 
'.VI'( 
)h'
IR' 
.P- 
APP'RA]SA.I 
In oUr efforts to discuss problems and find solutions to
the constraints facing local women. we were always care-
Now that the director of statistics had given his final ap- 
ful to include the men and work with them as well. We
proval. we were ready to begin. The PRA was conducted 
realized the importanice of their participation in this ef-
sio

NXIoIzo('b: 
wom)NIEN 
IN 
i)E:EIA)I'NIEN'I
fort and the need to sensitize them to the hardships women 
synthesized them, we will be presenting the information
face. These group interactions helped them to understand 
in a language and format that has been filtered and for-
how constraints on women affect the family and village 
malized through our lens. But, I believe it's equally im-
as a whole. In this way. they became part of any collec- 
portant (and more powerful) for local women to present
tive solutions. So, although women remainied the focus 
their own findings using their own locally constructed
of our study. we knew it was essential that those who 
floor diagrams and models. I think lots of people assume
held the power-the village men-were involved in the 
that local people can't solve their own problems. My
process. It was clear that without their support, change 
guess is that it will be quite a revelation for many to see
would be impossible. 
that village women not only have the ability to identify
Having said this, we noted that organizing women 
constraints and invent solutions but that they can be quite
into focus groups for discussion and decisionmaking had 
good at quantitative analysis as well.
empowering effects on them; in at least one instance, it 
The locally (lerived strategies that will be presented
gave them confidence to take the initiative to improve to Moroccan policymakers will constitute a fresh source
their circumstances. Shortly after the PRA was completed of information. With regard to the sector study. we will
in one v illage, local authorities visited the community. 
use these findings to enrich the strategy document and
As was customary at such meetings, the men were seated refine some of our assumptions. Not only will this input
at the fi-onit of the room and the women gathered at the 
influence sector recommendations, but it will be avail-
rear. On this occasion, the representative of the local 
able to help guide the future work of the participating
people was quite vocal in expressing the community's 
ministries.
desire for installation of tube wells (in locations situated
conveniently near his own home). 
ON 
REFIA:TION
Suddenly. a woman at the rear stood up and voiced
her objection to this request. As a result of the informa- 
We are not at the finish line yet-the months ahead may
tion generated during the PRA, she was much more aware 
still bring further uncertainties-but I can say that intro-
of what was good for the village as a whole. Along with 
ducing participatory economic and sector work in
other women. she had worked through a cost-benefit 
Morocco has not been easy. We have made many mistakes
analysis type of exercise that showed that a tube well 
along the way. but I know that's part of the learniing pro-
would only benefit a few. She then put forth her own 
cess. We hope that, by the end. we will have insights to
suggestion for a collective oven, which she argued would share with those who are interested in undertaking simi-
benefit many more of the families in the village. She re- 
lar participatory sector studies.
ceived support in this from many of the other village 
Already, I can see the impact that this consensus-build-
women, who then also felt encouraged to speak. These 
ing process has had on everyone involved: government
women had gained strength from having done their own 
ministries that only last year showed marginal interest in
analysis and examining the pros and cons of various op- 
this initiative are now eager to be the main conductors and
tions. The consensus they had built around these priori- 
sponsors of this study; a broad range of government offi-
ties during group discussions and focus groups gave them 
cials and NGO personnel have been exposed to a variety
the power to speak and the knowledge to defend their 
of participatory methods and techniques; a smaller group
choices. We heard many similar stories from team mem- 
of their representatives have received PRA training and
bers returning from their different regions following the 
field experience that they will be able to pass on to others
completion of the PRA. 
in the country; and the director of statistics is now in favor
of utilizing PRA on a larger scale in Morocco-perhaps
NExT 
FrirPS 
within the context of the nationwide census.
Participation in the context of economic and sector
The next step will be to bring representatives of the 
work has not only generated interest, ownership, and
women who participated in the PRA together with se- 
collaboration among different government agencies,
nior ministry officials to present the priorities and strate- 
NGOs, and research institutions, but, more important, it
gies for their own betterment that they themselves have 
has opened up a realm of possibilities for involving local
devised. Although we have taken our PRA results and 
people in their own development.
81


MOZAMIBIQUE
('OITNTRY 
IMI'`FI, 
IENTATFION 
IREVIEWN'
Jacomina de Regt
rIll.s the, Tksk Mimi-
igerf ifr tllh Coo, \ 
b. 
._
Review' 
-- 
,
in M'oc,-,abi1ue.JW
ozainbique hals been at war since 1964, first to gain indepeni-
dence from Portug-.al in 1974 and theln a-ain for some ti-tteeni
years in a civil war. This meanis that allyolne Llider the age of
_ 
T 
9~0-albout 
ha11 the pOpU]ationl-does niot kn0ow 
whiat it mleajis to
live in peace. Mv tirst exposure to this couLIntry at war was in December 1988
while on a Bank mission to Maputo. Maputo was then a desolate city. Shops
and houses had been boarded up andc abandoned by their owners. Few cars
were in sight. People got ar-ound on toot. Telephonie service was erratic, and
electricity andi water were only occasionally available. Foocl and( other amnelli-
ties were scarce.
Two years later. I was assigned to the Bank's new residelit mlission ill
Maputo. By thel. things had improved somewhat. But it was still a difficult
place to live. More thani anythingt else, however, the difficulties and frustra-
tions I faced revolved arounid getting things clone at work. I did not realize just
how difficult it was in Mozambique until I actually lived there. Previously, I
had comie as a member of a Baiik mlission, well looked after by Mozambique
officials. I know now that the attention we received was at oreat sacrifice to an
official's governimienital and personal responsibilities, which had to be set aside
when Bank (and other donor) Imiissiols arrived.
Ex'rRAO\RDnNARY 
I'EIFVOIRT1 
I 
i 
EQUI-REL)
But we in the resident ImlissioIn had to worki with the government day by day.
Without extraordinary efforts. even simple things COuldi not get done. Picking
up the telephone seldom resulted in reaching the rihlit person or even any per-
son. If I wanted to get somnethincg to someone. I had it sent by mlesseniger. 
And
F3

if I wanted to see someone. settin,g up a meeting could 
ministries and the project implementation units of Bank-
take a lot of time. Living and working in Maputo allowed 
financed projects talking to each other about the real
me to understand in a differelt way why the Mozambique implemenltationl problems they faced. In doing so, we
portfolio had so many implementation problems. A gen- 
thought it might be possible to develop a network of sup-
eration of war simply does not produce the kind of policy 
port for implementing Bank-financed projects.
and administrative environment needed to implemenit. 
Having been placed in the field to improve imple-
much less sustain, good development projects. 
mentation. I had responsibility for designing and orga-
Although the war was a handy scapegoat on which 
nizinlg the CIR. I thought to myself that perhaps this
to blame problems, I also realizecd it was more than just 
would be the real start in Mozambique of what the re-
the war that was causing the problems. Clearly, too little 
gion is calling an "'impleimenitation culture." The more I
communication took place among the various parts of 
think about it, "culture" is a good word. because it in-
the government, a situation that was not really a conse- 
clucles everyone. And clearly, everyone must work to-
quence of the war. 
igether and learn to understand each other's constraints
to implement a project in Mozambique.
RCf1O(iNIZIN(' 
TlIE 
1'1 
,E)BL1F
I)EiN 
['(. 
A P.vAr'F1i(.IvPr(AI' 
(CJR
Donor-finlaniced projects almost always have prolect
implementation or coordination units staffed with well- 
The facilitator of the Mozambique Country Team team-
paid. competent people. The fact that these people often 
building retreat did a great job. I asked him if he could
come from government service weakens that service and 
help me design and facilitate a participatory CIR for
demotivates those left behind. No two donors follow the 
MIozambique on short notice. We would use a workshop
same procedures, thereby immensely complicating ad- 
format in which all participants-government 
and
ministrative actions in government. No wonder imple- 
Bank-would work together intensively on the problems
mentation problems occur. Maybe we are part of the prob- 
hindering project implementation. Fortunately, this fa-
lem also, and maybe we can do something about it. 
cilitator had become interested in w hat we were doing
In addition, the administrative system was hierarchi- 
and reshuffled his workload to be with us.
cal. operating on archaic rules and regulations often based 
I hurriedly put together some materials about the
on old Portuguese codes. Virtually all the decisions were 
Bank's Mozambique portfolio, a draft schedule for the CIR
made at the top. 
and two process and outcome scenarios. One scenario was
Then, in January 1991, I returned to Washington to 
of Bank and government staff learning together how to
attend the Mozambique Country Team retreat. The 
coiTect implenieitation problems and committing them-
retreat's purpose was team building. We chose to "build" 
selves to doing so. The other scenario was that the Bank
our team by working on a real piece of work. designing 
would study the problems, report them to government, and
the format ftor the next Mozambique country implemen- 
recommend the solutions. I gave them to our facilitator
tation review (CIR), scheduled for February 1991 in for reading on the plane. I also shared them with my coun-
Maputo. We also sought to claritfy the roles, functions, 
try team colleagues to get everyone thinking about it and
and decisionmaking powers of the country team com- 
to see the differences between the "participatory" scenario
pared with the divisional team. The seminar was facili- 
and the "Bank-mainly-does-it" scenario. To push the par-
tated in a way that had some Mozambique Country Team ticipatory scenario, I asked the Central Bank to invite all
members playing the roles of various government offi- the coordinators of Bank-financed projects to a meeting
cials while others played normal Bank roles. 
to iind out what topics they wanted on the agenida. The
four agenda points idenitified during that meeting were
Amaintained throughout the process.
15NSUAITTS 
AND 
PWt')BSlIAT1IES 
EA11IFI{RGES 
9
Something important happened at this unusuial retreat. 
IiN1T[F'N'I( 
TrHiE ST.AKEHI,)ERS
By identifying and playing the roles of the various stake-
holders in government, the enti-e country team together 
The fiirst step was to determine who should be invited
realized the lack of unity in the government of 
and find a way to get them there. At the Mozambique
Mozambique. We began to see that we might be able to Country Team retreat we had already identified the Bank
use the upcoming CIR to bring together the various parts 
participants, about fifteen in all. We wanted a large Bank
of govern1ment. We hoped to get the core ministries, Inze contingent to ensure that we talked not only to the gov-
8i4

INI 
ZX \A N I 
1I(QL 1,;:: ' ( )L 7N 'I' 1,: ' 
[ I I I I'I.I; : II.: N '1%'.\' I ( )N 
I 
.1: N I U%.5'
ernmenit officials but also to each other. On the country 
floor. We asked the participanits to choose any four carids
side, we targeted the core ministries and the agencies 
that interested them-except 
their owi-and 
begin a dis-
implementing Bank-supported projects. Our target was 
cussion with another participant not known to them.
to get, at a minimum, all the Central Bank and Fhianice 
After the discussiois, the participants "brainstormed"
Ministry staff hanidling World Bank-supported projects. 
and categorized a list of major problems. The following
pIlIs the project di-ector or cooridiniator- or both of each 
list then becamne the agenda for the CIR:
Bank-supported project from the implemilenitingit 
agenicies.
All told. the minimuimiiuill 
workshop would have about 
* 
Role of project implemilentationl agencies
sixty participants. We decided to limit it only to the Bank's 
* 
Procuremilenit
work because we believed we had a lot to do to develop 
* 
Disbursemilents
a better working relationship with our in-country coun- 
* 
Planning and fimonitorinig (budget, accounting, audit.
terparts. Once a sounder relationship was established, we 
and evaluation).
could then invite other donors.
A N.WA 
WYO 
VO1' 
W()R 
KING( 
1')(;E'riiI:R
(O)NVEN 
FNG 
TIHE (CIR 
VR 
I 
1I HI)I'
The opening 
session workec. 
People's 
moods had
Once the facilitator arrived. we quickly got to work. We 
changed by the endc of the session. I could see this clearly
went over our invitation list with the goverinor of the 
in the way people spoke to each other and to the group.
Central Bank and cliscussed the way we wanted to runl 
paying less attention to rank or organizational location.
the CIR. We asked the governor to issue the invitations 
More importait, the participants set the agenda for the
and stress the impor-tance of attendi.LT 
CIR instead of having it set for them by the organizers of
We set the CIR for February 26 through MatcCh I- 
thle event. Perilaps this may seem unexceptionial to some,
four full days. A seminary just outside Maputo afforded 
but lr mainv, per-haps most of the participanits. this is the
adequate space andc isolation from day-to-day' work pres- 
fiirst tilme they attended a meetinig or semiiiar- in which
sores. The resident mission provitled the supplies, mainly 
the agenda was theirs to create.
flip charts, magic markers, anid the like. The seminary 
We set up small gr-oups to work oii the various parts
provided shimple but adeqLuate food. Buses brought the 
of the agenda. We-the 
organizers-assigned 
the par-
pai-ticipailts in the morninigl and retur-nie(i them to the city 
ticipants to the various work groups. We had multiple
in the evening. 
gOroUps working on each issue. At the end of the session,
The vice governor of Banco Mozamnbique (the Cen- 
each group made a report of its findings, conclusiolns.
tral Bank) and the World Bank resident representative 
and recommenidations to a plenary session. The plenary
opened the session. 
Both made short, appropriate 
theni discussed the validity of the findings and the utility
speeches welcoming the participants anl(d stating the ob- 
of the recommendations.
jectives of the workshop: 
We repeated this format untild we comlpleted each of
the fLoul agenda items. We, as the ormanizers, maintained
* 
Identifying obstacles to project implementation 
control over the assig-nmenit of participants to the various
* 
Finding ways to overcome the obstacles 
g roups. W;'e dlicd this to give as many par-ticipants as pos-
* 
Incorporating what we learnecd into ongoing- and fu- 
sible the opportuLity' and experience of working with dif-
ture projects 
ferenit people. I must say we received a lot of opposition
* 
Creating a spirit of teamwork andc conistiuctive dia- 
on this. The small groups wanted to stay together after
logue among all concer-ned, 
they had gonle thri-ough the diffiCult process of establishing
a way of wor;kini together and hacd worked out their "in-
ternal" hiera-chy. Neverthieless, we stuick to our gUlS.
On the afternioon of the third day, represenitatives of
We used a "white car-d" exercise to get people acquainted 
the small groups began to work on prepar-ing an annex to
with each other and accustomecd to the openness an(d in- 
the CIR final report summiiarizinig the diiscussiolis about
foorimiality of the session. The purpose was to break the 
each agenda item. Wlhile thlis was goiog onl. an executive
oldi mold of extreme formalisimi in working together. We 
committee consisting- of the operationis adviser and resi-
*ave each person foul- blanik cards and asked each to write 
clent representative on the Bank's sicle aLid senior Central
one importanit implemilentation problem on each card. 
Bankl and project officials ftor the governiment, was forimled
Next we shuffled the cards aiic (lisplave(d them on the 
to prepar'e a summary report. We set up each group with a
8 5

balaniced epresentation ofgoverninent and Bank ofticials 
* 
A ULnit should always be responsible for project
as well as both core and line miniistr y gover-nmiiient 
repre- 
imn1pleimenitation. 
Such a uniit can be placed inside the
sentatives. The flip charts fioml the previous smal1 grIOUp 
ministry if the project cleals with only one agency or
presentation1s 
were available as input as well as the ch1ar-ts 
outsidie if the project deals wiith several minlistries
prepared by the faCilitator during the plenary discussions. 
and agencies.
* 
Project imiplemenltatioln 
unit funlctiolns should be har-
LoCAL~, 
PAHITI('l 
PANT1', 
TIA KI' 
THE 
INIT 
mTIvt,; 
nonized with those of the miniistry, which implies
that at timies project implemenltationi will be slower
At the initiative of several local people. we established two 
witlh only gr-adual imnprovemenelt In the capability of
new a-enda items and set up groups to deal with these ne- 
existinl ministries.
glected matters. As one of these focused on "inforniation 
* 
The dilemima between capacity building and project
needs." weiasked thedirectorof'planning to work withtlhem. 
implemleintationl needs to be addressed explicitlv.
The secon(d dealt with 'pay and remunerIation01 issues, so a 
Project implelentation 
UnitS shouIldC 
onlyv coordinate
MNiistry of Finance representative joined the (group to 
implemenitation. They should not be implemilentingT
piesenit Tovernmeneit 
s latest thinking on this matter. 
bodies. This needs to be addiessecd in all new projects.
The work of repor-t preparation anld the new agTenda 
The question of salary and remuneration also needLs
item1s started on the afternoon of the third day and con- 
to be lookecl into seriousLiv as this issue is causinl
tinted during the moninil of the fouLth day. The "pay' 
distortions within the government
and relmlulneratiol" group decided to split itself i two. 
* 
The WNorld Bank needs to standardize its criteriai and
with working-level staff of the central bank constituting 
elhliminate delays in responiding- to "ino objections" to
the secondc roup. By' lunch, each of the groups had coin- 
procuem1lent. It shouldc contilue 
to offer traininc
pleted its wvork of prepalingt anlexeS and the Summ11ar'y 
courses. develop standard contiracts foi technical as-
report. After lunch we condlucted an evaluation session. 
sistance. create a procuremenlt library in Mozam11-
again Using the "white cai'd" approach. We clistributedl 
biqCIe anid establish a systeim to back LIl) Task Man-
the final repoit at the endc of the evaluation session. 
agers so someone is always pi'esenit at headquiLitels
to handle plroculenlenit requests.
9 
The Central Bank's ability to hanldle disbuisemiienlt
'iand payment 
requeSts 
Shotildi be clecentialIzed.
The miniister-s ot' healtih andc edLuca6tion, thc vice mlillistel 
Project imlplemenitation Units should be trainied to
of agriculture, and the vice *govcrnol ot the Centi'al Bank 
handle the disbursemenit and paym1enit requests them1-
canie to the closing session Each working group miiade a 
selves Central Bank staff working with the public
brief piesentation of wVa11t 
the annexes andCl 
the summary 
\,vill be instructed to be molre polite.
repol-t conicluded. The miniister of health closedt the ses- 
* 
Thle Ministryl of Finance and the National PlanningT
sion and took a tough stance on the needl for change in 
C0ommlissionI shoull be actively involvecd in pro ject
the way the Bank organized 
and sent iaiss'iOfl 
to 
preparationl to enable sectors to propose irealistic in-
Mozamlbique. The ministerl ui'ed the Bank to ensuLe that 
vestmnent programns that will receive an adequate i'e-
its mllission milemilbers know' about the country before al- 
curr-enlt budget. The Ministry of Finance and the
rival andc also know the whole dcevelopimenit plan. This 
Worldc Bank should harmonize the accounting re-
would, he said. i'educe thle burdenl onl government olfi- 
luiremellts 
To solve the huge backlog of audits the
cials to "educate' Bank mission members. 
Cential B3ank will recLuit one audit agenlcy to carry
The minister's tougI tallsk oosk somce of the paitici- 
out audcitS for all projects.
pants by surprise as it is norm0al tOr sucSh sessions to end
with platitudes. I felt good about it. as it signaled to iime 
I think that somile of these Iecommendations would
that we had accomplished 
Our objective of cireatinig 
la new 
haIve beell Much less franiki if we haid clone a CIR in the
atmosphere of openness and franikness witlh onie another. 
'egular wavy. On the other hand, the plro ject iinplementa-
tion ulitS had So much anger ancl frustiationi with the
centli'alized decisionmaking 
system that it would have
hRE: it LU rhbeen 
hard to restrain them] eveni if we wanted to.
W' all learined a lot at this session. The recoinmnen(da- 
With loLir yeais' hindsight and thiee ClRs uLIClel my
tions conistituted a longl list. Some1 o)f th1e inl1poitanlt ones 
belt. it is clear to me that 'power' 
was the ireal issue at
these meetings. 
The 
Central 
Bank 
and for'eign 
exchange
illCicLdeci ttie follow 
inl:rr 

Nt ( )ZA 
NAI II( 
O'TIT:: 
( 
(1 N 
'I' 
Itv 
NI'I.ENENTAlTIO' 
(N 
H EV I EW
contiol departimienlt resisted any attempt to devolve responi- 
proaches in going about our work. I do not see it that
sihility or delegate decisionmakin, to the line a-encies. 
wayv We have no choice but to practice participation be-
cause development is a social process. It OCCuI-S 
when
people come together anid choose new behaviors that thev
have learned about by working together. There is simply
My imimlecdiate 
eValuatioll of this participatory CIR was 
no othier way to bLild ownership and a productive net-
positive. In my opinioin. the CIR achileved its three, al- 
work of relationships othier than by involvill 
tile elevant
beit modest, objectives to (ai) idenltify obstacles to project 
stakelholders in participatory sessions suchi as this. In the
implemilenitationi, 
(b) finhd ways to overcomile the obstacles. 
final anallysis. it is the process of collaboration thaat cre-
an(d (c) create a spi-it of teaLilwork. opeliness. andc conl- ates ownership and lasting relationships.
structive dialooue among all concerined. 
We dlid the next CIR in October 1992. in essentially
\A'e woulcI, of couIse, have to wait to see what effect 
the samlle mnnI'ler as in 1991: in my op0)inio it worked
the CIR Wouldl have on the design ot' new pro jects. but 
well. Quite a bit of opposition, however, camie fromil the
we all kinew what we had to clo. 
CentraLl Baiik on the "inforiality" 
of the process. They
The participalits evaluated the experienice positively 
clearly let us kn1ow thalt they preferred forimial andl well-
as meaCsured 
by the fact that twice as malny positive com- 
rehearsed mcetings. Although we ciropped the "games"
ielints were written thiani neaative conlilienits on thle white 
to accommiio)date 
the Central Bank. we went fLulther- in
cards prepared for the evaluation discu,sio1. In nzy oph1- the second CIR withi tie flexible agenda. In part this was
ionI, the following, techniques enabled reail participation 
forced on us by events. The Mozambique peace accorcl
to OcCUr in all othelwise ftormal. hierarchical society: 
was ratified on the fiirst day of the CIR and the secondi
was declared a public holiday. We therefore conicenitrated
T TIe "wh ite card" exercises, becaLuse 
they broke the 
on the " essence' of the process: a series of negootiatiolis
t'ormiial 
meetingy customI1ary in Mozamblique 
among stakeholders to eilter- into "contracts to remilove
Assign1ing people to grouLps in a way that providedl the imiiplementatioil bottleniecks identitied duringtheCIR.
the opportUllity for everyone to work seriously witil 
For inistLiance. 
a g'roup of project coordinators would walk
every other person at somie point 
into the smiall room in which the Ministry of Fiianice
* 
Asking the participants to set the CIR agenda 
staff was located and try tO get them to Commilit thenm-
Having everyone parlicipate in writing the final i-epoll 
selves to a period for contract clearing, whereas the
* 
Using a skillecd, experienced facilitator (even thoughll pro ject coordinators would commit themselves to sencl-
the facilitator (lid not speak PortuCuese). 
in, in the whole dossier ftor a contract.
Unquestionably. wlhat wve started in 1991 still per-
One of the local participanis captured the essence of 
mieates the way Bank an(l ooverinmenit officials intelact
what I believe the seminar producedl by saying: "It will 
in MozamINCbiLue. 
Compared with other country teamis or
be years before the public adiniliistr-atioll will work- efti- 
other CIRs that I have attended in neighborino countries.
ciently in our country. For the foreseeable future, work 
hierarchical formalismi is now much less present in both
will be accomplished based on who you know, and1 now 
the formal and informal interactions betweenl the Bank
we have created a networ-k of personal contacts that will 
and government officials.
facilitate project iilplemiientationi in the future." 
The overall record of imiplemienitation progiress. how-
ever. has not impr-oved dramilatically. linplemilentation
C os;r9 
1'breakcdownsS 
still occur muchi too often. We now resolve
breakdowns :faster throughi the network established dur-
As Icalculate it, tlis CIR cost approximiiately 
50 percelt more 
ing the ClRs. But systemic adminiistr-ative problemils still
thani if we had sent just a few key Bank staff. Most of this cost exist. Maybe the par-ticipant at the first CIR sizecd up the
came from the unusually large numiiber of Bank participants 
futuL-e well in saying it will be years befoi-e the systemi is
we sent to the CIR and the adciditionial 
two days we spent on it. 
efficient.
In my opinion, this Was thiiie and moniey well spent. 
But I feel thalt the main reason we have not madle
mioie progress is our failure to encage the political level-
{N 
RE1ILECTf0N 
the minlisters-in 
the participatory process and network.
They are wlilill 
to come to the start and fiinish but are
Somie people seemn to thiliik that wve have a choice in our 
apparently uniwilllinc to engage In the social learning and
business between participatory andi nonparticipatorx' ap- 
invention that goes on during the participatory process.
F4,

ITHE1 
WVORIA) 
BANK 
PARTICIPrAT'IIN 
l
Officials at the lower levels are not able to make major good example of how one can get the message across
changes without the support of the political level. lnvolv- 
that implementation is important. The Bank sent one
ing the political level in the participatory process is, as I 
single message: until you get implementation moving
see, a major challenge that we must learn to overcome. 
(defined as getting disbursements up). there will be no
The reason the political level was not engaged suc- 
new lending. This review did have the continuing par-
cessfully also has to do with the fact that unltil quite re- 
ticipation of political officials: the coordination and
cently. the implementation culture had not really perme- 
implementation staff considered their participation a posi-
ated the Bank. If we only raise implementation issues 
tive sign.
every eighteen months and spend the rest of the time on 
I think even more could be done to develop an imple-
lending and economic policv, the message is clear: imple- 
mentation culture. This probably includes broadening the
mentation is really not so important. 
dialogue by including other stakeholders who can affect
The third and most recent CIR (July 1994). now re- 
action on the oround such as donors. NGOs, and benefi-
named the "country portfolio progress review.'' was a 
ciary representatives.

NIGERIA
WVOMIE,N IN AGRIC 
ULTURE
Katrine Saito is 
___
thle Task MVfanager
ftor the Bank's Women 
.
in Agr-iculture Project 
.
E 
e Gadza 
a 
, 
H
in1 Nigeri'ti. .NO 
.
+ 
\-, 
.2 
>Kt. 
Esther Gadz-ama i%,%-u's'^ 
tst; 
works in the resident i
mission (Lagos) 
J\ 
i 
', 
.
'
as th1e Banik liaison * 
j 
II 
x
for thle WIA prY)graii.
In 
Nigeria, wvomen play a domiinant role in agricultural production. This
was confirned by the findings of a study financed by the United Nations
Developrent Programme (UNDP) in which I became involved when I
joined the Women in Development Division of the Bank's Population
and Human Resources Department in 1987. The study revealed that women
make up 60-80 percent of the agricultural labor force in Nigeria, depending on
the regioni, and produce two-thirds of the food crops. Yet, despite the facts.
widespread assumptions that men-and not women-make the key farm man-
agement decisions have prevailed. As a result, agricultural extension services
in Nigeria (as in other Airican countries) have traditionally been focused on
men and their farm pr-oduction needs, while neglecting the female half of the
production force. Most extension messages targeted at women emphasized their
domestic role with topics on child care and family nutrition.
It became clear that despite a decade of Bank assistance in building up
Nigeria's agricultural extension service. women were receiving minimal assis-
tance and information from extension agenlts. The study caught the eye of the
head of the Nigcria's Federal Agriculture Coordinating Unit (FACU) and the
Bank division chief on agriculture in the West Africa department who were
both committed to finding a solution. In 1988 their support led to the creation
of Women in Agriculture (WIA) programs within the existing state agricul-
tuLal development projects (ADPs) in an attempt to address the gender-related
del'iciencies within the existing extension program. The ADPs were created in
the 1970s with fundinig assistance from the Bank. Their overarching objective
was and continues to be increasing the production of both food and industrial
crops by stimulating agricultural production at the small farmer level.
#D9

ITHEl 
NVOEI) 
BANIK 
PART'I'IPIIA'I'ION 
SIlTRCE1300KIs
Up until this point, the ADPs had contaiiied only a 
ered bringing womnieit farmers fromii acloss the couLIty to
home economics 
wing responsible 
tor holime-r-elatedt participate clirectly in the worksliop, but this was prob-
women's 
activities. 
The WIA prograill, whichl WaIS lemaltic for a nulilber of reasons. The political situation
launched as a pilot (again withi UNDP fundcs), soug,ht to 
in Nigeria at the time was extremiiely volatile and made
improve agricultural extensioni services ftor women. Ex- 
in-country travel cdifficult. Strikes andt riots had brokeni
istilI home economics agents were retrained in agricul1- 
out in mianiy parts of the country, and military troops were
ture an(d extensioni methodologies. placing special emii- everywlie-e. There were no reliable limeIs of public t-ans-
phasis on women's activities. Pilot efforts were beglll in 
port. particularly in the rur-al areas. Moreover, the major-
differenit areas that were intenided to supplemnent our on- 
itV of these womenCe 
11aId nevel traNveled outside their vil-
going sector studies as well as provide practical insights 
lages. and manly would have to travel with their babies.
on how to change extensioni services to mieet the needs 
Getting the permission of their husbanids to come to the
of women. As Task Manag er of this researchi project. I 
capital posed yet anotlier obstacle.
wvorked wvith Bank project staTf and with FACU in devel- 
In addition to logistical difficUlties. 
ve had to take
oping program guidelines for assistiny woniieni farmers. 
into conisider-ationi othel factors related to the effective-
ness of womilen farmer-s as participants in this high-level
BRINGIN(i 
STA1iEHOIOF)ERSThCO(GETIKR 
-Urn This wouldc be an entirely; new aild potentially
overwhelming situation for them in whicih they Would
Froiii the beginning I knew this was going to be a process 
have to inter-act withi power-ful stakeholders sucli as mrli-
of learning by doing. We had maniy questiolns but few ready 
isters and senior- government officials. We were also Lin-
answers. Through the pilot programs. we worked with lo- 
certaini of thei- ability to articulate their problemils andc
cal ADP staff to test out differenit approaches. About a 
neecis et'fectively in this sort of context.
year into oui action resear-chi. it was clearl to Us that local 
For all these reasonis. the solutioll appeared to lie with
people had better ideas than we did about what coulcl work. 
the femiiale extensioni aoYents who inter-acted with womeln
We had been hearing accoulits about differenit WIA iitiaL- 
farmInels on a regular- basis. These womcen were accus-
tives in each state that seemed to be occurrine 
ll 
i a spo- 
tolied to working with iiale bureaucrats, traveling alolle
radic. ad hoc way: some ADPs were iaklilln tremilelnd(ous and were better able to articulalte constiainits faced bv
progress ancl others were doing nothing at all. We decicle(d women farllmers aLid plropose solutiolns On their behalf.
to bring evervone together in a National Planlllilln Work- 
We felt confident that these women extensioni ayents were
shop to take stock of various WIA initiatives arouncd the 
well qualified to( replesent the interests of women farm-
country, share lessons and experiences among regions. and 
ers because they were from the same areas and often were
develop three-yeaL action plans for each state. We ap- 
farmers thiemilselves. The' lhad fi-sthianid knowledge of the
proached FACU with the idea of inviting local-level stake- 
Nitualtioll 
and good working relatiolis with the womeli
holders to join national anid state agriculture development 
farmnerss 
Although it should never- be assumed that cer-
officials and Bank agricultuL-al staff at the workshop. Againi 
taMl grotips will accurately represent the interests of oth-
the director of FACU was supportive. He felt strongly that 
ers. in this case. we had every' reasoni to believe that fe-
those at the policy level (himself Included) should better 
male extensioln acenlts would serve as reliable proxies.
understand women's constiainits at the local level before
any recommendations for policy reforiml were made. He 
FHs' 
NATIONAL 
PiANNfNG 
IVRIiHOP
believed that this was best achieved byl broadening the
policy dialogue and bringing a range of differ-ent stake- 
In the days precedinig the July' 1989 workslhop. demonl-
holders into the learning and decisionniaking process. It 
stiatiolns against the goverinmenit had broken Out in many
was his enthusiasm and keen support for this initiative that 
cities. inaking travel to the capital even more clifficult.
made the workshop a reality. 
OII the day it was to begin. a coup was attempted in Lagos.
I wonderecd if anyonie was going to show up. But to Our
Cr l U~ 
V O 
( r \'(I( 
' Ie 'I'( 4) WO-( 
N!% 
If N 
1s P lu all w 9 
surpr ise. somile sixty-four participants-r-mostly womileni-
fromil all over Nigeria made theil- way to the worksliop.
In Nigeria, female farmers are often among- the voice- 
Sixteen ADPs were represenited in total. The delegates
less-particularly 
when it conies to influenicmie aericul- 
were primiiarily the female heads of the WIA units, chief
tural policies and projects. We were deterimlined to give 
extensiol o(fficers. and ADP project managers (mostly
them voice in the WIA policy reformn process but were 
men). Senior- miniister-s anld officials fromil the sponsorilng
uncertain about the best way to achieve this. We consi(l- 
goverinimenit departimienits of FACU andc the Federal De-
<,,)

oNi(;l:lm,^v: 
'*% 0()llNIN 
1A.(ijzl(7I'I'l.7jZ-,t
partment of AgriCUltural and Rural Developmenit wer-e aiotioid tables andci woikecl out the three-yeal- plans witi
also present. The Bank was represented by project divi- 
littlc miore than pencils and paper.
sion an(d residenit missioni staff.
The thl-ee-dav event startecd with opening remiear-ks 
anld
greetinLgs from the head of FACU. the residenlt imiission
represenitative, and mvself. We devoted the first day to 
Participaints were actively braiinstorni-i ng. discussing. and
lefining problems. Each WIA representative presented lhe 
exchanging all sorts ot ideas. They wer-e sharing experi-
assessimenit of the types of problemiis encouLitered by 
ences with other teami 
iliiemilber-s and gettilnLildeas for tleir
womiieln farmers il her respective ADP. explaining how 
own pr) ravis by learning what others wer-e (loinS to
extension services were currently' meeting- local needls and 
address similar problems in their states. Appropriate tech-
how they could be 'impr-ovec. Believe mie wheni I tell you 
nology and innovations were constanitly being exchanged
that these womiien were impressive! They were well-in- 
aionlt the womien. Extensioni agents froni one slate pre-
forimled, dedicated. cdynamllic, 
and articulate. They all camiie selitecd a new -aaclet that tihey ha(d develope(d with women 
-
with prepar-edi presentationis anid blew us away! The head 
farmers for ieedinu c*hickenis and channeling their- dtrop-
of FACU was visibly impressec. He had original.lly told uLs pilgs into fish ponlls Others had invented diffeenit types
he coould only attend for the first hour bLut ended up stav- 
of *ee ders or had other sorts of farming inventiolis and
inm the entir-e thiee (lays. The excitemenit and ener-y in 
tips to share. Another g-oup, through their own iinitia-
the r-oomil was almost tanlible. It was a -reat learning ex- 
tive. had started a cooperative woodlot and 1 was char-ing
perience for everyonle and a reatl eye-opener to see the in- 
a fee for fuelwood. Yet another had organized a nul-serv
novative thi ngs that local womeni wer-e doing to miect their 
and was sell in tiree seedlings to earn inicomie. It Was
needs. This sharing- of idleas and praCcticees °PeleCl tip a1 obvious thaLt a lot of' knowledge Was tloatiii g arOUnd at
realmii of new possibilities. providing Participnlits withl a 
this workshop---it WaIS jUSt a matter of pUllilg it together.
range of options they' may have nlot previously considered. 
We found that comihbining this local knowledge and cr'e-
Thie presenitaltionls were followedl by a plenary session. 
atiX itv witi the teciiical expertise of the government and
during which the comimilloin 
problems and constraints that 
Bank workie(d extremely well in producing plalln that were
had been expresse(d thiolluhout the daIy wele d1iscussed, 
localllv tailored. financially viable. and technically SOulid.
1-irl?AT11(;1( 
ANI) 
T-A'LICAI. 
PlANN 
INU 
(I I'111Ti 
I)NI 
T1('9
On the second cday.-the 
participants broke uL intlo teaMs 
The intelestilln thii g aboult thesc small group arrange-
to undertake strategic and tactical planning. They were 
menits was thalt it brioke the formal otfice hierarchy that
asked to comile up with three-year action plans fr inite- 
existed hetween the femaile extensionl acents and their
grating women inito the mainstream of ADP activities for 
ADP maniaers, who were male. I thililk this Was largely
thei- r espective areas. Each teamn was miadle up ot thlree 
attributable to the pressUmre situaltioll this was. The stakies
or four state ADPs. which 
we giroLiped into FACU ire- were hi lh. Eacih teamn haldi to malke a presentation 
in
,ion,: northlea;st (Jos), nortihwest (KaduLnla) souItheast 
fronlt ot everyonie the niext day. and they obviously
(EMIuu). and soutIhwest (Benin.) Each state ADP was 
waiited to (lo a good job. This forcecd thcm to cooperate
represented-at a mit imu in-by a WIA person and a 
and work together to comiie up with a detailed plami of
senior ADP manaLer. We felt it was cr-iticai to 1ave ADP 
activities, a waly to pay for themi. and indicator-s to mea-
managers involved to build ownership of the plans by 
suLe how their objectives were bein 
met. The dir-ect
management. Once participants had devised their- strate- 
interaction betweeln extensioll agents anld mamilaers was
aies. we asked themii to be as specific as possible. cletail- 
key. For one thing. it helped the iilen recogilize that the
int Lctivities. traininig. logislics. staffin,. timetables. and. 
womenl were experts too aiiic had Valuable kInowlecide
ofcourse, bud-ets. The teans woiked througlout 
the day 
to cOntribute about thelsituation ofwomIlelln famers. Both
aLii( into the niLht. As techiical specia.lists, those of us 
realized thalt they needed each others 
expelienice and
fronm the Bank. FACtU. the Federal Deplartment of Agri- 
knowledge to get the joh donic. Although the womeln
cultural and Rui'al Developiienlt. anmd the residenit mis- 
could put fortil thcir perspectives 
based on firstIhand
sion servecl as resouice people. We wenl ai'oLIlCl fi'oli 
expeCieices ill the field. managers could put a bhudget-
roiOLp 
to groLI1 ). histefiiin. offering suggestions 
andiv- 
aryperspective Oin souliolis beiiig proposed. while gaiii-
IiiL technical acivice wheln nee(led in shapig g the tactical 
ing all underfstanding of the 1m11pact theil dlecisiolis would
plans. The whole process was iitbOrnial. We all huddled 
halve oni womieni farmlers.
91, 

t'ilE 
X\OR8 
l 
HAw.} 
SsNI( 
I'.Ai{'l('It'Al.'lIO(N' 
914) 
N(iI:1(U)l1(
Thlis iterative process of' learinino and negotiation 
stnicture o' thie WIA program itself is also decentr-alized
sensitized all sides to the potential advantages and dis- 
and integrated inito the extension service.
advanita-es of proposed reforms. I noticed that, at first. 
At headlquarters, the WIA head holds the rank of
many managers felt uneasy about making comimitmilenits deputy director within the state ADP and is responsible
to budget items. They protestecd that they did not have 
for the overall planning and implemlientation of the WIA
the authority. This was another inistanice in whicih the pres- 
programn. Shc is assisted hy subject matter specialists who
ence ol' the head of FACU camiie in hanidy. He was able to 
work for WIA at the zonal level. supervisin- and moni-
assuL-e themil that makinig tentative commitments was. In 
toring the implementation of the WIA programris in their
fact. all right and that budgetary' decisions would be for- 
zone. These specialists interact with research and techi-
malized later. 
nology institutions, participate in problem identification
and field training, and provide support to WIA block
-
Bt'I1.DIN(~ 
( )WNE1~III 
extensioni agents. At the block level, these agents work
tsdirect v with womeni faimers. identifyinlt and organiz-
On the 
w 
einnl 
day of' the woirksho each ADP presented 
into groups in the eight-cell blocks and reg-
its action plan. covering staffing and training needs, or- 
istering grroups into cooperative societies. The ftormation
ganizational structure, logistical support. and proposed 
of WIA farmIelrs' groups facilitiates the dissemination of
incoime-earining activities 
foi woient 
farmers. 
This 
tiie, 
agriCUltUral 
innovations 
and 
provides 
women 
farimners
presentations were imade by the proogiriai managers rather 
with better access to farm inputs and credit than they
thani the extension agents. as we felt it was critical for 
woulId have as individuals.
managemilenit to gain ownershiip ot' the plan. We knew
without the personial involvemenit aind coiiimimitme of'the 
'T
ADP manager-s to the retfobrms being proposed. the likeli-
hood of changes being implemieted was mllillimlILI. 
Bring- 
One outcome of the workshop was that it resulted in a
ing aboLit change in favor of women fiar-miers requiriled large-scale administrative "switchlover" taken with the
ownership by both1 men (11a1d wiomien at all levels. We knew 
cooperationi of the key government miniistry and the state
from past experience that sensitizillg or empowering One 
ADPs. Although it was envisioned that all WIA agents
set ofstakelholders to take action while leaving other key 
have-at 
miliilulim-a 
cliploma in general agricultu-re.
players out of the process could lead to problems dowin 
In practice. too few womeni hald these qualificationis. To
the road or, worse, no action at all. Therefore, by pub- 
resolve this, a large cadre of existing home economic
licly presentinig action plans-in 
the presence of other 
agents weere redirected into the agriculture wint of the
stakeholders at the plenary-each 
state ADP was denil- 
ADPs and retiainied to become WIA agents. Buildinig on
onstrating thei- commitment to take action in improvinIg 
this existing cadcre meant that a huge number of women
services ftor womienl tfarmers. The head of FACU was so 
agents were mainstrearned into the agricultural depart-
enthusiastic aftter hearing the ininovative action prOpOs- 
menit with no net addition to the ranks of civil service.
als that he toc madle a public comimilitmllenit 
to miove for- 
Womeni's extensioni services received a highier pro-
ward with the WIA programil. He emphasized the need to 
file; resources were devoted to training the new WIA
set up anl institutional firamileworik to capture and main- 
agenits in agriculture and extensioni methodologies. 
In
taml the moinentuLil genereated at the workshop and to 
states that have a shortage of qualified t'emale staff. inale
help implemilenit and track the progress of these programs. 
aenlits try to work with womern in groups (although it is
generally fouLndC 
that women agents are better conduits
(JIt( .A.NI 
IZ,AT'I(O)NA\L. 
('H-t~ \ 
'(1: 
............. 
t'o r technology disseminiationl for a variety of reasons).
Followina the national planninii woorksiop, a flemale
Fortunately, the ADP structUre withlil whiici the WIA pro- 
extension agrent who had demonstr-ated stt'ong leadeirship
grami was to be housed was decentralized and, In this sense, 
skills and dynaimlismii at the workshiop was hired to be the
alrea(ly conducive to supporti ig localized. participatory 
Batik liaison tcbr the WIA program. She was charged with
activities. Each state ADP has field oftices staffed by l(OCal tiricking- thie activities and progress of implementation In
extension agents with FACU playing a coordinating role 
each state. Her firsthand kinowledge oftilhe situation, techni-
froml the capital. Establishment ol' the WIA program en- 
cal expertise, aLid personal ci:ive proved clitical to the suc-
sured that extension services in every state in Nigeria halve cess of' the programn. As WIA coordinator, she divides her
ftemale extension workers at every level o l'operation from 
time between the r esident mission and the field and has proved
state headquarters in the capital down to the villages. The 
extremilely helpftul in facilitating Bank supervision missionis.
02

Nwi(:i:zU 
%: WONIEN 
IN 
A(I1I(1li,'i'L'ixE
P R()I 
I)I 
N( E 
1 
'P rF" i 
toplanning and implementation. WIA agents assist thein
in selecting the type of project they want to engage in,
All staff assigned to the ADPs come from state iniilis- such ais cassava processing. groundnut oil production,
tries of agricul ture, other relevant departments, or 
ram fatt(ening. andl so on. dependino on which enterpr-ise
parastatals. Because they are existing government staff, 
will be most successt'ul 
in their 
locality. 
A
the project does not have to pay their salaries. To attract 
multidisciplinary approach is taken during planning and
and motivate WIA statf, however, they receive a salary 
implementation. Block extension supervisors, technical
that is one grade level higher than their ministry counter- 
specialists. and othier resource persons from ADP field
parts as well as transportation and medical allowances. offices advise the women's group on a regular basis, pro-
In general. ADP staff enjoy better conditions ot service 
viding technical inputs when necessary and monitoring
than their mniistr-y counterparts. 
their progress. Local women's groups are not required to
obtain official status to participate in WIA activities or
1I1'3,lD)NG 
0N 
E:1l'iN 
PAIRTWIPrATO(1Y 
receive assistance from ADP officials. In fact, the miajor-
s;'i'RU(T l 7R.S; 
ity of women i-eached by this program are members of
inlormal groups.
About one-third of Nigerian women belong to coopera-
tive societies or other locally organized associations.
Members may be united by common age. religion, trade.
or economic activity. Some groups are inforinal and temn- Eighteen months after the first workshop, a Second Na-
por-ary. while others have well-established principles and 
tional Workshop of the WIA program was convened to
operating procedures. The functions of such groups in 
take stock of the action plans' implemenitation. The same
rural areas include rotating credit and savings, sharing 
groups of stakeholders were brouglit together to share
labor. borrowinig money through cooperatives, and group 
their experiences, succes, 
and problems. By this time,
farming. The institutionalization of such women's groups 
all states had ongoing WIA programis, althoughi some had
started with the ADP system. Uncder the auspices of the 
started more recenitly than others. Objectives of the fol-
newly established state WIA prograiis, these groups were 
low-up workshop included problem idenitification. replan-
targeted by state ADP field staff to initiate and execute 
ning, and making mid-cotirse modifications for the fol-
project activities. The WIA progr-am helps to build the 
lowing year based on what had been learned. New an-
capability of these local groups by assisting theml to reg- nual targets for the WIA program, including the number
ister as cooper-ative societies to qualify 'or credit and tarm 
of feimale farmer groups were collectively set.
inputs and he recognized by other institutions and NGOs. 
The preliminary findings of a mid-term rural house-
The WIA program has three different ways of target- hold survey. which had been conducted between work-
ing women's groups and building their capacity. It works shops to monitor progress and measure achievements of
with pre-existing organizations in whicih metnbers are al- the WIA progr-ami, were disseminated and discussed at
ready pursuhig a specific goal such as credit or communal 
the conference. The survey was carried out in three dif-
work. Second, WIA agents help organiize women into 
1erenit parts of the country and revealed that WIA front-
blocks or cells so that they can receive ADP assistance. 
line agents were an effective channel of communication
Third. the ADP system uses NGOs to identify womeni's and feedback on the needs of womeni farmers. The in-
beneficiary groups. There are currently more than 5,000 creasedl demands from the women for information and
of such groups in Nigeria, and more are being organized. technology had been stimulating the supply from the WIA
units and FACU.
EP.AIRTI('IPATJO(>N 
INs- Fl2B1'ROJE( '} 
t lwi' 
Recomimiliendationis and action plans emanatinig from
the first participatory planning workshop had led to sev-
The WIA program that emerged from the worlkshop en- 
er-al positive results:
visions a syst\mc in which WIA agents work with groups
of women in their area of operation. Each women's group 
* 
The number of female extensioni agents doubled be-
elects four key leaders: a president. secretary. tieasurer, 
tween the two workshops.
and adviser. Decisionmaking authority rests with the 
* 
The number- of tfemale farmers in contact with the
group although at certain times. the clected officers cani 
extension services tripled.
make decisions on the group's behalft. The women par- 
* 
Better- diagnosis of' intformationi and techniology needs
ticipate in all aspects of the project, trom identification 
by gender was being undertakeni.
93:

* 
Male extensioni workers were beine trLirned in 
() N 1i? 
IXI,'[E('T1()N
womells activities.
* 
Femrale extension 
acents hald been successltll 
l i- 
Frankly, the programil developedl better than we'cl ex-
troduciHI male agents to womnen fairmers. 
pected; this is clue primilarily to the dynamilisnm ancd re-
* 
A concerted effort to register woinien's gronIps as 
soLIFcefulless of the Ni-erian womiien. Also important
cooper-atives with leg al statuis had facilitated their 
was the support of Bank pro ect staff and Nigerian gov-
access to bank credit and inputs, 
eminlenit ofticiails. We did. however. encouliter some clif-
ficulties along the way. Some staff both in the Bank
Workshop participants also idenilifiecl mobilitv prob- 
and the government were less than enthlusi.astic and con-
lems anld a lack of appropriate technologies amiiong thle 
stantly questioniecd the needl for such an 'lemphasis on
maini constraints that neededl to be addressed In the com- 
woinei 
Bu the momentum generated by the work-
ing year. Although many states had anl increased 
um- 
shiop was dif'ficult to stop. It created a much greater
ber of women agents. they were still not reaching thieir 
awareness 
ainonig policyrnakers 
about the needs ot'
targets due to Clifferelnt levels ol' access to transporta- 
womnen farmers, led to a rise Il the iliilmber of womiien
tioil. Men tendced to moniopolize the available velicles: 
extenisionl agenits. and resulted in a significant increase
whenever there was a shortage of'fLIel for lm1oPCeIS. Male 
in the percentage ot' womeii reached lby the extension
extensioni agents were given prelereice. In ad(clition, riot 
svstemi. I hILve 110 cdoubt that the prognaram has benefitedI
enougih progress had bcen made in developing apio- 
both the agricultural 
sector and tlie activities of rural
pirate tools and equtipimient to relievc womenie farmers of 
womileni considerably. Womein farmiers have increased
somile of their most basic labor and energy constraints. 
their standard olf lvi ng throLglh iilpr-oved productiol.
Provisionis to correct and address iltese ploblemils were 
which is a dilect result of the new technoloeies 
now
desi uned into the ftollowil- year's action plans along 
withiln tihcir- grasp. It is also hcartcning to see that womell
with any othelr activities that had not beeni achievedi 
farmers now retulalv 
visit the ADP headquarters 
to
the preVioLis year. Both the Bank and the governmient 
express thei- grievances and dissatisfaction 
aboLIt such
fiouLndC this participatcoy approachl to project planning 
thing-s as ilte miethod of fertilizer distr-ibutioni. for ex-
and replLianning to be an effective way oftranslating fieldl 
ample. Until i recenltly. womeni were rarely hear-d-onlly
knowledge into specific action for improving wolileii's 
seen--and 
in this sense the WIA programil has dramati-
productivity 
in agriCUltUle. 
cally increased 
their voice and participation.
The pIogIrIIa1, h1owever, ha1s not been withoLIt its prob-
lems. Althouglh the workshIopl generated finanicial suppoIt
COSTS 
foi the WIA programn through annually budgeted activi-
The initial study by tile Banik's Populationi and HtL- 
ties, the reatlity hias been that manly of these activities are
man Resourl ces Department. Womilen in Developiment 
nt being tilly implemented Priority is of'ten Cien to other
Division. that revealed the ineffectiveniess of tue ex- 
activities of tile Extension or Technilcal Services Depart-
tensionl prog ramil i n reachi nt \vomie n f armlilers anIld the 
iieliit: WIA conies last iin the allocation of resoUrces. Some
pilot projects thalt were launched to test va-ioLis ap- 
states are also experiencing difficultv hiring arid keeping
proaches were funded by the l!NDP at an 
adequate numbers ol qualified 
pemaole 
agents
iiiate cost of $40,000. whiclh included hirinit two Bank 
Staff relocation poses a significant problemil as many
consultants 
anid conduIctingtl two mllissions. The first 
Il married womeni ar-e unwilling to move from city centers
National Planning Workshop anid thie follow-up work- 
to the more remote rural areas Employing married women
shop held eighteen 
months later wer-e paid tor bv 
f-o'°m "local government areas" is being considered as a
FACU at an estimated 
cost of $il0 (1.00 each. The 
possible way of reducing this problemi. Curr-enitly. both
UNDP funded the mid-terim rUral hiousehold suir-vey 
FACU and the Bank are workinLg with the ADPs to de-
undertakenl between 
workshops 
aIt aIn aIpproximate 
xvelop strategies that will address these deficiencies and
cost of $65,000. 
allow the WIA program to realize its fLill potential.
"4

PAKI 
S TAN
SINDH 
SPECI.AL 
DEVEELOPMENT 
PROJEC'T
Neil Boyle is 
- 7m
the Task ManaiZer
of tle Sinitlh
SP'ci1(1 DeBi-elopmen)L'flt 
_1
Projec(t. 
-5 
,. 
_
A 
t the time of the 1987 reor-anization, I'd been with the Baink about
ten years. The reorganization produced a lot of problemils toi- Bank
staft'. But it also provicled me a useful opportunity.
By that thie, I had come to the concluSionI that we couldn't
help our clients produce sustainable clevelopment through episodic missions.
de(licated to producing yet another pro-ject as quickly as possible. In iimany
cases. our bor-r-owers lacke(d the governance an(d institutional capacity to imiple-
merit developimienit investimenlts properly, mucih less sustain them. Tacking, tech-
nical assistanice onto larec investimlenit loans didn't do the job: indeed, as frag-
ile institutions attempted to implement the loans we typically make in the ur-
bani sector-. theil institUtiolnal capacity often diminlished.
So. when my thie came to be "irehired'" in 1987. I said that I would really like
to iliake a lon-term commitmenit to one COUlltlry. 
in fact, to one part otf one coun-
trV-the Siindh. in Pakistan. I hoped to be able to penetrate the system in which we
did Our worlk, get to know tile people well, and find a way to help build needed
goverilance and institutionial capacity beftore we started lending. That's how what
became kilowni as the Sinhcil Special Developiienit Prioject (SSDP) oot started.
I kinew then-anid 
even more so oii looking back. that the people of the
Sinclh-elected 
officials. bulealucrats. and citizens-would 
have to collaborate
to devise answers on how to build this capacity. We would have to learn to-
gether while doing.
F;I'.\ 
R'Fl.N 
oui- 
i IN 
r'mHE Sil.NI)tI
Pakistan. where I hacd workied a number of times. be-an to chan,ge in the late
1 980s. In 1988 the first democratic national electiotis occurr-ed al'ter decades
95

'I'HIS 
N VORl.) 
BA.NES1.1'' PARTCIPTION>. 
SOURCEM)I;Z(MIX
of authoritarian rule. By the early 1 990s, the government help it needed. Early on. an opportunity presented itself. I
had begun the process of privatizing. reforming currency was attending a rather sensitive meeting with the senior
controls, improving taxation, reducing trade barriers, and 
staff and a sanitary engineer from the Bank. The chief
promoting exports. These changes had accelerated a mass 
engineers from two separate departments of KWSB were
movement to the cities and a strain on infrastructure, with reporting about their projects to senior management. These
accompanying shortages in water supply, sanitation, en- 
projects had run into delays and mistakes, which came
ergy, transport, and communications. 
out into the open during the meeting. My questioning
I was pleased about the opportunity to work in the Sindh brought out the fact that these delays and mistakes were
Province, which includes Karachi as its capital. Karachi, is 
due primarily to institutional and organizational problems.
less traditional than some other Pakistani cities, full of people Given that the two separate and unrelated departments had
from elsewhere and bursting with energy and opportuni- similar difficulties, I pointed out that KWSB's problems
ties. With an estimated population of 10 million, it is also appeared to be systemic. Staffed mostly by engineers,
the country's largest industrial, commercial, and financial KWSB did not have the practice of looking at the way it
center with the worst urban problems. 
managed itself. It didn't take long for the entire room to
Although the government of the Sindh (GOS) needed erupt into a heated argument in which everyone started
large infusions of capital to deal with these problems, it had a 
blaming something on someone else.
reputation for poor management and, by all accounts, was 
I had previously asked the consultant to wait out-
not in a good position to handle major infrastructure projects. side, because the meeting was sensitive and he was new
Although I am trained in engineering and finance, my inter- and unknown to the KWSB. At the point that things got
est in the Sindh was in figuring out how we could help put 
really out of hand, I slipped into the hall and invited him
institutional capacity in place so that the provincial gover- to come in. At first, the presence of' a stranger dampened
nance system and the policymaking machinery would be able the conflict, but it soon flared up again as people attacked
to sustain the Bank's investments. That was the challenge. 
each other and made excuses for themselves. I took the
opportunity to introduce the consultant as someone who
miTmht be able to help. The group gave him the floor. He
THE. 
K9\AUAHI 
NV ~ATER 
BOAND 
L)
asked everyone to take a blank sheet of paper and anony-
In 1987 we were preparing a new water project with the 
mously write a list of KWSB's organizational problems.
Karachi Water and Sewerage Board (KWSB). Like the 
He shuffled the papers, summarized the lists on a chalk
GOS, KWSB also had a reputation for poor management. board, fed back what the managers were saying, pointed
Without considerable change. it was in a weak position out that considerable agreement appeared to exist about
to absorb major Bank loans, which it was going to need the problems, and made some suggestions about what
to meet the demand for water and sewerage. Fortunately, might be done.
our discussions with KWSB's senior management team 
The senior management team calmed down and be-
led to an agreement to undertake an institutional reform 
gan to discuss KWSB's internal organization and mana-
program. To support the reform, KWSB applied for a 
gerial behavior-its real problems-probably for the first
British Overseas Development Administration grant. 
time. They indicated strong interest in working with the
We needed to f-ind a way to help KWSB understand 
consultant. We went back to the hotel excited, because the
its problems and develop a transparent, effective organi- 
group that had the power to make decisions and change
zational style. Instead of doing an expert study, I was 
the organization was now ready to take action. We asked
interested in using an organization development approach 
ourselves if a similar process could be undertaken with
to the transformation. But, of course. this approach would the Provincial Cabinet and administrative departments in
not work unless the KWSB managers were willing to 
which even broader institutional problems existed.
change both the organization and themselves. And these
changes could only be eff'ective after they had gained 
N 
Hp1,ES
fresh insight into the organization's deficiencies and why
they needed to change their own behaviors. 
Using the Overseas Development Administration grant,
KWSB hired the consultant on a long-term contract. His
'REATIN(l 
A LEARN 
ING 
MOODmandate 
was to take the role of a facilitator, always help-
ing KWSB understand itself and search for ways to
On my second mission, I brought along an organizational change; help the senior management team see what was
development consultant I believed could give KWSB the 
going on and reflect back to them what had happened in
96

PAISTA\D<I 
N: 
SI 
NII 
Sp11 ;195(,1.v1 
)1; 
11(>'11,1
thei- recent meetings or events: and help them internal- 
fice. All this resulted in gridlock. For example, to autho-
ize important learnings. althoughi the decisions would 
rize paynient to contiactors took 1 74 clerical steps. Cus-
always be theirs. 
tomers -didn't pay their water bills; government agencies,
Durinig the first months, however. distrust of the coIn- 
not individuals ancd businesses. were the worst offend-
sultant kept bubbling up. We had expected this and dealt 
ers. The agencies played a ping pong gamile: the electric
with it through1 open communication, reflecting back any 
power agency didn't pay for its water; the water agency
veiled suspicion anid reiterating the consultant's puipose: 
didn't pay its power bills; the telephone company didn't
he was there to help the organization undierstand its owin 
pay for its electricity or its water: and so forth.
functioniing and the problems this was causing them.
Along the way, he would help themi learn ways to correct 
1. > 
F 
N( 
I H 
( 
x- 
N(4 
IsR( )(
the problems. We stressed he was also there to help the
Bank team learn so that we could be of assistance. Yes. We had started at the top of the organlization. working with
he would be a liaison for the Bank-but 
not a spy. 
the managing director and the clepartment heads, because
WorkingT for botli the Bank Task Manacer- and 
we had access there. As these leaders becamie mor-e com-
KWSB's managing director remailed a delicate matter 
mitted. the collaborative probe went deeper into the orga-
for the consultant. He had to be clear which inftormation 
nizationi. drawing in division manaters. section chiefs. and
could be relayed to whomn. Over time, a hi_h level of 
supervisory aiid executing engineers and thei- assistants.
trust developed anlong the three of ls. To keep it that 
We didin't work exClusively with each tier. At any
way. both the managing director- aiid I 0rew to under- 
given meeting, we tried to mocdel openiness by iicluding
stand that this meanit the consultant had to be discreet. 
several levels and conistanitly enCouragingt those lower
The consultant. I must sav. did not let either of us dowin. 
dowin to give feedback and participate in decisiolns. We
also saw to it that documenits that we _ave out were widely
distributed and not withheld by any managTer fromil his
staff. One outcome was that lower-level people took more
The process the consultailt brought to KWSB was "ac- 
aLn(d mior-e responsibility in meetings. sharing y more. as-
tion researchi." He aicl I had learned abouit this techniique 
sUltlilng leadership roles more assertively, and so forth. It
at the National TrainingT Laboratory, where we hacd both 
was truly inspiring to see this develop over time.
separately spent several years studying organizational. 
The consultant kept feedinig back to the senior mana-
group. and individual behavior change. Action researchl 
aiemenit team w hat everyone was learning, thereby stimu-
is a process that helps people change their organizations 
lating discussion 
an(d helping the managers at all levels
and solve their problems by carrying out their own data 
recogtnize that they were empowered to makle chaniges.
collection, diagnosis, planning. and evaluation-learn- 
In addition, the Consultant and I conducted many in-
ing wh ile doing. The role of the outsider is that of facili- 
ftorm1al discussionIs with the senior manacgemenit team, help-
tator rather than expert. 
img thcimi see, without being threatened, how their beliav-
iors worked anid didin't work, recomimiending new man-
) acelenleiit techniqcues 
and helping 
them internlalize 
learninig
l]i.llRINAITIS 
OF1q TIHEI: 
NFO(RMA1. 
( )RGA.NIZ 
..................
T............... 
''(N ... ,'v, and( invent collaborative ways of getting things done.
At KWSB. the senior manaoemiienit teami and the coin-
sultanit began by using action research to miap strategic 
( 
( 
), (;N 1/,xi'> 
-'
pathways of power and iltiuenice to under-stand how the
managers actually got things done. Wheni I was there on 
Thr-ougIlout this process. the organization was articulat-
milissioI, I participated. 
inc its owIn issues and findilng much more comimioniality
The senior- maniagemilenit team discussed the findinigs 
thaLn anyonie had expected. After about a year, the senior
in group meetings and one-on-one sessions with the con- 
management teamil and top staff were ready to assume
sultant. Gradually. the recognition spread that, for the 
responsibility' for KWSB's problems andi move to goal
last fouI years. they had been runiniig KWSB as an amal- 
setting and action plans. After discussioii with statff the
gami of three organlizations-which 
is how KWSB came 
senior managemient teaml hired a local consUlting fir-im in
into existence-with 
three different service rules. medi- 
1990 to ulider-take aii organization stucly.
cal insulanice plans. and pension plans. There were no 
The organization stLidv becamne the principal tool for
staff meetings. The managing director would hold six 
driving the reformi/modernization effort forward. It pro-
meetings at once, with anyone permittedl to enter his of- 
vided a comprehenisive organizational cliagnosis and rec-
97

TIHi E 
tVRIA( 
1 
1;) 
AN K 
PA RT 
I'I'P'AI()N 
SO 
'1R[ 
I.:IM(O 10
ommendatiolns to the KWSB Board of Directors. The 
While we were waiting for the approvals. we kept
Board of Di-ectors and the seniori management team com- 
preparation going with bailino wire and trust. The KWSB
mitted themselves to almost all of the recommendations 
consultaiit and several Pakistanis at times had to wait
in the organization study and set out to implement them. quite a few moniths for their pay. To cover other expenses,
The steps taken over the next two years either came out 
we were able to hold things together by using technical
of the organization study or evolved as the KWSB man- 
assistance money ftrom other projects.
avers retlected about them together andc with those lower 
We began to lay the groundwork for the provincial
down in the hierarchy, making adcjustments based on what 
fiscal and adminlistrative reform program. which we ex-
they had learned. 
pected would be the cornerstone of the SSDP. This expe-
rienlce gave us insight into the ad hoc, arbitrary way the
_ATE 
K PROJECT 
I]E- t1T 
GOS developed policies-similar to KWSB several years
earlier. No institLutionlalized means existed for collabora-
The most dramatic result of the new organizational style. tive policy formulation within the bureaucracy, much less
transparency. and collaborative processes has been sol- amonig the bureaucrats, politicians, and public. In effect,
vency. The KWSB increased water tariffs fivefold be- 
policy was formllulated in "stovepipes' consisting of each
tween 1987 and 1993 and improved collections bv 40 
department and its iminister. Little, if any. lateral consulta-
percent. The most recent tariff iicr-ease, two years ago. 
tion took place and certainly none with the public at large.
enabled the authority for the first time to cover all of its
operating costs except depreciation. Most of these tariff 
xVorking with the Entire GOS
increases occurred in the absence of adiditional water 
In Januarv 1991 tile final arant approval came through.
supply. Until new supply is commissioned in 1997, the 
and work intensified on preparation of the policy reform
emphasiswill be on reducing current expeniditures. 
progran, thanks to the leadership of the ininister for plan-
ning and developimient. who saw the reforiims as contrib-
Tni, 
SjINDH)II'E( S 
II. 
1)A1DEVEIlA)PNIENT 
uting to the administrationi's platform of improving ur-
PROJEi.(T 
ban infrastructure 
and services.
DuLinglls 
that year-. we used the same participatorv
As word got around of the improved perforimiance of the 
techniques we had used in the KWSB project. Working
Water Authiority, other gover nment institutionis began 
with the whole government rather thani just one agency.
asking the Bank to help them improve tieir performance. 
however, was more complex. To help GOS come to
The time was ripe for major change. The federal gover-n- terimis with this complexitv, we conceived of policy as
ment was experienlcingp great fiscal imbalanices anid had 
being formulated at three levels-technical. 
adminis-
to tighten up on discretionar-y _rants and bailouts to the 
ti-ative (including legal and regulatory), and political-
provinces. In 1988 an urban-basecl political party with 
and then helped create the institutional apparatus to
strong interests in improving the conditiolIs of urbani miake it work. We started with ad hoc working oroups
Sindh became the majority party in the GOS assemiibly at the departmenit level. These groups each made rec-
and took over the Cabinet. These factors caime togethier- ommendations 
to their minister. After discussion and
to focus serious attention on urban development and, as 
imiodification, the minister then negotiated the recom-
the Sindh Special Development Project progressed, the 
imiendationis via meetinigs ancd inftormal discussions with
Sindh Cabinet naturally took an active interest. 
other members of the Cabinet.
The recommineidations amounted to a broad and de-
Preparation 
tailed reforiml program covering hve urban subsectors:
I should be able to give the date wheni we began to pre- 
land managemient. urban transport. urbani envi-oniment,
pare the SSDP. but the learning approach we used makes 
water and sanitation, and nmunicipal developmenit. In ad-
that a bit difficult. Again, we had to obtain funding. In dition. the GOS would focus on strengthening its taxa-
1990 we got a grant fromii the Bank's Japanese Grant Fa- tion and financial management. Although the details were
cilitv (the precursor of the Special Fund for Policy and 
to be spelled out dUring implemenitatioin. the ad hoc work-
Human Resources Development). But we couldn't spend 
ing committees proposed some far-reaching strategies,
the money until the GOS and the goveriinment of Pakistan 
such as property tax reforimi based on market value, an
had formally accepted the grant. The GOS took three 
across-the-boar-d 
labor redundancy 
program. 
the
months to approve the legal agr-eement. and there was a 
privatization of the Karachi Transit Corporation. and a
seven-monith delay with the governimient of Pakistan. 
provinicial urban environment 
program. The Cabinet

1'VAKIS'TA.\N: 
S1.NDH1 
SPCIA1,tl.l 
D)EV\ l.rf,()'ANF;N'F
members supported these proposals. The GOS expected 
broad participation of the chief secretaries. assistant chief
the program would take about two decades to implemenit. secretaries, and other levels of the bureaucracy in the
departmental ad hoc working comimittees, the ideas in
UEIs:]'()R.XI 
P.v('ls\(l§: 
XN1)AI>'\I<)I\NITI 
SIthe 
eniot-aiidLniofagreenie(ithad support that survived
.MFRA 
PACKAGE 
AND 
Z _)_ 
~~ 
h 
eoanu 
foemn
the goverinmen1t leadership changes. Without that, the new
OF1> AGKEE:<:S-ISTE'I'r. 
r
chie' minister would never have signed. Eleven months
The Bank team was happy with thie effective work of the 
later, we negotiated the project. including the policy re-
ad hoc committees and the support the minister-s wer-e able 
form program. without a hitch.
to generate. The process and the resulting learning repre-
sented significant strides in both the reformn and collabo- 
Av 
RA 
t 
: 
AR RN(iEMI 
ENT'
rative decisionmaking process. But all of this was too in-
forrmal. Despite the consultations, we were worried that The institutional arrangemenlt agreed to by the GOS con-
the Cabinet was still not adequately involvedl. A lasting sists of three tiers. Each tier has a particular function and
process aiid structure for turning the recommeniidations makes recommendations to the next tier up in the chaini:
from the departments into official policy still needed to be
created. Much more work needed to be done to institu- 
*Ad 
hoc interdepartewntal working gooups to look at
tionalize the decisionmakinig process so that the politicians 
the core functions of goven1ment. Composed of middle-
and bureaucrats could collaborate with each other. 
level civil servants, these groups develop and assess the
Given that the Bank team often was the only con- 
technical feasibility of policy proposals and work} to-
stant in the picture. moving ahead was n0t easy. Thie GOS 
ward harmonizino departinental viewpoints. Their rec-
itself experieniced almost perpetual turimoil. New minis- 
omimlenidations 
go to the Secretaries Committee.
ters were appointed all the time and. except for 1991 anid * 
Secretaries Comttiittee. This includes concerned secre-
early 1992, their involvenmenit was sporadic. Neverthe- 
taries (the highest ranking- civil servants arid heads of
less, as early as mid-1l9,1 key Cabinet members were 
the provinicial adminiistrative core and line depart-
telling the Bank team that they needed a formal 
menlts) and is chaired by the chief secretary. Its pur-
policymaking structure and process to linki the various 
pose is to examine the policy mneasures presented by
government entities to each other ancd to the public-a 
theworking gi-oupsanidassesstheiradninistr-ativeanid
structure and process that would surVive the GOS's pe- 
legal-regulatory feasibility and conisistency with ac-
rennial political changes. 
cepte(d public adminlistrative standar-ds. Its recom11meni-
In June 1991 1 went on a mission to Karachi to ap- 
dations oo to the Cabinet Committee.
praise the project. As I ponderedl the problems. I thought 
Cabinet Conimiorittee. 
This top-level tier is a committee
about a three-tier institutionial arranoemirent that would 
of concerned miniisters fiom the Cabinet of the GOS
bring burceaucrats froml different levels and politicianis 
and is chair-ed by the chief minister. Its purpose is to
together in the policymnaking process. The good workinig 
examin1e the policy measures for political feasibility.
relationship that was now in place between the senior
officials and the Bank gave me the couraLye to su-est 
At the top. to provide overall coordination of the
my idea. The people we were meeting with-the chief 
SSDP. the group agreed to establish the Executive Plan-
secretary, the miniister- of planning and development. and 
ning andci Action Coordination Organization (EXPACO).
the chief minister-were interested. 
This organization serves as the secretariat to the Cabinet
We agreed to inlcorporate this three-tier arrantgellent and 
Committee. EXPACO's work is carried ouLt through the
the basic content of the policy refonin progiamn into a melmio- followin- directorates:
raiduim of aoreement between the mission and the CJCS.
* 
Polic Action Coordinaijon Uniit for policy' formula-
tion and implemenwntation
* 
InslitiIIionl Strengthening Coordination Unit for in-
But by June 1992 all the ministers I had been workino 
StitutiOn strelngthelling
with were gtone-the entire Cabinet resignied to protest a 
* 
PnjeXt Planning Unit for plannin. 
nonitoring. and
military intervenition in the Sincdh. So we had a new Cabi- 
supervisioni of major works.
net and a new chief minister In September 1992 the new
chief minlister signed the mTeIorand0umIC 
of agreemlent. 
EXPACO is headed by a director gteneral with civil
kniow the GOS well enouoh to say that. thaniks to the 
seivice manik equivalent to a secretary. EXPACO reports
99

TIHi; 
BAoRI.i 
HAN 
P 
T 
1'. 
'IIPAT\'I'IO.N 
S()OFUIUIIE 
)Mi
to the chief secretary of GOS. FouL hi-h-level GOS staff 
* 
Imimiiediate actions on alleviatino envirollillental deg-
people make up EXPACOQ with all other support func- 
radation and traffic congestionl
tions provided by a private contractor, The views ol'the 
* 
GOS's newly created policy planninlg arTangement
public are brought into the policyimaking, process thl-ough 
andl nistitutioll 
strengthenlilng
advisory ancl steering cominittees composed of' public 
* 
Fiscal and administrative reforms in GOS
and private NGO represenitatives. 
* 
Eni'neerilnL studies for intifrastructure improveimenits.
How the Arrangement U'orks 
Other loans or creclits or both will be prepared while
The GOS approachi ttorul1 1LIlti ugill land mianaoement 
the SSDP is being imuplemilented 
bhut these will be approved
policy provides an illustration of how the thiee-tier strtic- 
only when GOS has demonstrated the success of its re-
tulre works 
'forimis 
and the ability to sustain the Bankl's investmenlts.
The landc maniagemnent reforimi package was devel-
oped by an ad hoc working- group made uLp of experi- 
N i- 
A( 
((I 
N 
NTA" 
II ATY'
enced senior officials fironii several adciniiistrative depar-t-
menits of GOS. land registrationi ot'fices of hoth GOS anid 
More limportant than the credit was the shift from midi-
municipall governimenit, and the Boardi of Revenue. 
vicual to group responisibility and the improvecl account-
To provide input to the workilln group from 
t'l-0111 1IV 
ability of the entire govermiient. The open meetings of
stakeholders, the GOS also establishied an Urbani Land 
the comimillittees andc EXPACO dramatically underinilied
Advisory Council. To take into IccOLunt the views of 
closed-door dealings revolving- around cliques, ethnic
"shiftees," the people who are otten forced tc) relocate 
reliatiois, and patronage. Oice people iake comimiilitimielnts
because of government developmienit policies, the coonl1- in public, it is risky andi potentially embarrassing to re-
CilI inclUded a spokesperson representing the highly or- 
neve. because they will have to contend with the other
canized squatters and encroachers. The concerins ot' tie 
stakeholders. The new transpairenicy also led to a clear.
shiftees were also voiced by the Bank. based oni numer- 
public picture ot how the government was operatllng-
oIis consultations with the shittees over- the years. 
one that was not in the anniual buidget reports. Contrary
After several mionithis of work and debate in 1991 
to these reports. the GOS was runninig a deficit, as every-
and 1992- the working rolUp selnt a policy r-eforlml 1l)ck- 
one unofficial ly kiew.
ace to the Secretaries' Commiittee to he revieweci for le- 
A cri tical cvent that showed how far the process
gal. administrative, anid regulatory adequacy as well as 
had miiovecl took place as early as 1991. wheln I meni-
for the trade-offs that might have to be made. The pack- 
tinoned the deficit in a high-level meeting. One official
age passed this test anid was then sernt to the Cabinet 
becaile filrious. But the secretary of 'lianice wanted the
Cominittee, which gave it final approval, 
truth to come out. He said "I'd like to correct Mr.
Boyle's numbers. The deficit is not Rs.3.5 billion. It is
Rs.4 biillionl."
Using the Three-Tier Process: Thle SSDP Credit 
In June 1993 the Cabinet presented the fiscal 1994
Since then, the GOS has usedi the three-tier decisionl- 
lJue19 
teCbntpsneithtic 
94
budget to the Assembly. For the First time in five years.
makill 
process to prepare detailled policy action pro- 
the chief minister, with the agreement of the Cabinet
yrams for the fi-st tive vears. finalized with the Bank in
-
-
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~hose 
to pi-esenit the real pilcture.
September- 1992. Ani impor-tant part of' the negotiations 
c
was the a-reemiient that futule filnlciail suplpolt would
depencl oni how well the GOS implemilents the policy re- 
k' 
ANi) 
Timi'
formii programi.
Fromil 1990 to 1993 approximilately 83() staff weeks (572-
bv the GOS anci 258 bv the Bank) went into preparing
SSDP Approved by Bank 
SSDP. By Banki standards. 258 stat'f weeks is high. The
The SSDP project. 546.8 million, was approvedl by the 
institutional chances we ha(ve supported however, reuire
Bank Board in December- 1993' andc signed by the gov- 
a long-term commitimienit and the kiind of staff time that
eminillent of Pakistan on March 10. 1994. fOuL years after 
we clevotecl. Much of the tine should 
be viewed as re-
the first missioi. The plo ect was declared effective i 
seaL-rh andti developimienit in the forma of action learning
September 1994. 
on the g7rouIndC.
To help Karachi and to a lesser extenit six intelior
cities. the credit will support the tfollowiicg
t104)

PAKP,TAl' 
N: 
SI.NDII 
SPECIA(1.1,)1: 
DEVET>AWlNIEN
O)N- t¢E'1ZE( 
'II(" >N- 
ing settiniz up decisionrmaking procediures and steerin-
committees. Other costs were covered by using language
As I thlinik abouit ouI experience in the Sindh. I am pleased 
in the credit legal document, which was amenable to in-
that we decided to work on institutioll strenothening, he- 
terpretation. It would be nice if we could draw on the
fore lendinio and that we have retained leverage by link- 
Bank's budLget for all this work; it would simplify mat-
ing future loans to the pace and quality of refolIS. 
It 
ters anlcl ieduce preparation time. Another hurdle was the
would have been difficult to carry out investillenlts suc- 
project cycle. The Bank's problem identification process
cessfully. I think, if we hadn't supported the GOS in build- 
r-equires standard research, analvsis. an(d quantitative data.
ing sound capacity to makie policies and investment 
The participatory tools we used in the Sindih, on the other
decisions. 
hand. were catalysts for plans based on the self-discov-
ery. cominilioni sense. aiid collective experienice of the
The Triad 
people themselves. Translatin g these plans into a tradi-
I thinlk the politicians. buleaucralts, and citizens could be 
tional Bank appraiisal documenit was quite a task!
seen as forming a triaid. Initially, in the Siclh, the char- 
A thir(d hurld-le lay in forIulating 
a long-term policy
acteristics and relationships of the three groups addedl 
ancd institutionial 
reform program-in 
SSDP. of maybe
up largely to a closed sstem, 
impoverishied of ideas and 
two decades-and 
linking futtire lending operations of
ima-ination andl not able to mana-e lonm-term develop- 
the Bank to progr-ess made on the reforill pio 
'ram 
We
mzeit. This triad conicept has givenl us an imipor-tanit frlamle- did this by grouping the program into tive-vear sections.
work for the Sindhi Special Developmilent Project. 
but this wa's not easy because Banki processes doni't work
The gradually improving health and energy of the 
tilis way.
triaed is. I think, mo-e important than the physicail devel-
opment plans the Sindhis have made. I am pleased that 
Interventioni and Participation
In so malny important areas the three legs of the triitd are 
I can't claimii that everything we dlid was participatory.
collaboratint 
regularlly and directly for the first tiie. At 
Thle Banik teamn's leverage lay in having the knowledge
miany levels, politicians and bureaucr-ats comprising the 
to be catalysts for ijU1Ilp staitino'' change and in making
GOS and the represenitatives of ordinary citizenis have 
suggestions based on our experience around the world
diaginosed their probleiis. decided what issuies they ar-e The thiree-tier structure and EXPACO are examples of
going to own, and developed the solutions: the participa- 
ideas we proposed (although they were adopted only af-
tory policymaking iimaciniller-y is also embedded enough 
ter extenisive discussioll amonie the bureaucrats and poli-
to be used for new purposes. It will be used. for examllple. 
ticians who would have to change their behaviors to manke
for problem solving in connectionl 
ith the plroposed 
the new structure successful).
Karachi Urban Ti-aispor-t Project. GOS will work through 
Looking at the whole, some of the ad hoc working
EXPACO to help reach a much-needed public conseni- 
gro1Ups anid advisory committees representing the civil
sus on mass transit investmenits. dlevelop a transit authlol- 
societv h-ave fuLictionied in a participatory manner and oth-
ity'. and lay the foundaltion of a legal-regulatory systemn elrs have not. BuIt the Slindh is at larle social systemil in whlich
for the traLnsport sector. EXPACO will f;acilitate the wor-k capacity is unevenly clistributed: -radial chang-e seems to
of the ministries, agencies, and consultative groups r-ep- 
ille to be a realistic expectation. As time passes. I thilik the
resenting the populationi as a whole andc presenit policy 
imiore participatory working groups and( comiiittees will
recommendaltions to the Secretaries Comimiiittee anid the 
demonstrate their success and others wvill follow their ex-
Cabinet Comimnittee. This structuL-e for involving the enl- 
ample. Through EXPACO, GOS is already building, its
tire tr-iadl is neither "top-down" nor "bottoml-up." We caine 
atbilitv to pr-epare fLutuL-e projects collaboratively. Each time
to view it as "middle-out." 
I visit the Sincid. I find prog-ress. The Karachi Uirban Trans-
port Project I just mentioned is an example. There is much
Navigating Bank Requirements 
public debate (and sometimes criticisimi) of this project,
bLut I believe the participator-y process will give the debate
Participation activities in the Sln(dh ,vere miacle possible 
_
not niiiv alli outlet bLut a policyi-akViin fLulICtioll and Lliti-
by the grants fromt the Japanese Grant Facility andc the 
o 
a
British Overseas Development 
Adminiistiation. 
The 
niatelv a resolutio
Japanese grant paid for the KWSB participant-observer,
the goal setting process, the organization study. process 
The Future
consultation, extensive coaching, of KWSB leadership. 
Until now', we have given highest priority to the svstemilic
project costing, and the restructuring of KWSB. includ- 
problems within the government, because these problemis
I (0 

THE 
NVORIA) 
BANE 
IP'AIRI(IIPAT'ION 
SOII{IFIN 
Ohi 
were at the heart of the policy gridlock. As the SSDP 
Impact
progr-esses. the next step is to further involve the public 
A strong signal that the participatory approach is work-
in the policymaking process. We will explore ways of 
ing lies in the fact that ownership of the SSDP project
including beneficiaries and adversely affected people 
has survived eight successive national and provincial
themselves in the deliberations, because the NGOs may 
-overinimlents, militar-y inteivenltioni, and mass resigna-
not be truly representative. I think we should encourage 
tion fromli the provincial assembly in protest of the mili-
the GOS to strenigtheni the advisory committees and. in 
tarv. In March 1994 the government of Pakistan re-
time, introduce public hearings. although1 this is a so- 
quested that the Sindh project model be replicated in
phisticated concept. The East Asian mocdel of delibera- 
other provinices. Disbursements 
of the International
tive councils may be another mechanism of giving voice 
Developienit 
Association credit have begun. and bids
to civil society. We are also considering how we can help 
have been called for the two largest physical compo-
the GOS Provincial Assembly be a mor-e effective force. 
nents in the project.
I ( 02

PHILIPPINE: 
S
INTEGRATED 
PROTECTEr) 
AREAS 
PROJECT
Thomas Wiens was 
T
the Ta-sk Manaitger *~
of the Philippines 
'
sitegrcatetd Protected 
_ 
I
Areas Project. 
<--,-
I 
t was on the eve of the appraisal mission that I realized we had a potential
problem on our hands. We had been working with the Philippine govern-
ment for a number of years to devise a policy framework that would help
preserve the few good stretches of forest that were left in the country. Out
of this was born the Phililppines Integrated Protected Areas System (IPAS)
project. It envisioned a shift toward a decentralized mianagement system to
resolve the resource conflicts among various user groups at the ground level.
But despite the or-iginal intent to give equal attention in project design to
biodiversity preservation anid the nieeds of directly affected groups, the project
had been prepared in an expert, "top-down" manner, with miinimial local par-
ticipation at the onset. A local e xpert had drafted the new protected areas leg-
islation, which had subsequently been passed by Congress. Teanis of NGO
consultants had been hired by the government to identify priority areas to in-
clude in the project. They were then charged with developing managem-ent
plans for ten of these based on scientific criteria. These same NGOs were also
give 
resonsbility 
for holding, public meetings in these areas to disseminate
information and obtain community feedback on the new legislation.
Up to this point, I had been focusing most of my energy on the draft legis-
lation and hadn't paid much attention to the participatory aspect of the project.
I assumed that, because it was being done by local NGOs, participation would
take care of itself. I was soon to learn that this was not the case.
WARNING 
SIGNAES
By the time we ariived in Manila for the appraisal mission. I had received
many signals from the NGO comimunity that the public consultations had not
1I03

TI 
NVO\ 
1R1.A) 
BA\NKs}.N11 P 
TICIPATIlZlN 
S01l 
'Rf 
:B;(l01l
been done satisfactorily. Apparently, maniy stakeholders 
unique situation as PANLIPI was brought into the pro-
who expected to be included in the earlier discussions 
cess personally by the secretary of the DENR. who was
had been left out. From what we were hearing. we knew 
a former huliman rights lawyer. In addition to being trusted
potential issues with indigenous peoples would arise that 
by the government, PANLIPI had a good reputation
woulcl have to be addressed. A numliber of Indigenious among- indigenous communllities and hiad built a relation-
Cultural Communities (or ICCs, an acroniymii 
used in the 
ship of trust by providing them with pro bono legal ser-
Philippines to refer to tribal peoples) cur-enitly inhabited 
vices. Because of their good relationship with both sicies.
a good portioni of the proposecd park lands. It was clear 
PANLIPI was able to organize the necessary meetiligs
that we would need their participation and stipport to 
between the mission anid the communities in each of the
implement the project. But somehow. we hadni't man- 
four areas that had been selected. They identified the
aged to achieve this. What had gone wrong'? 
stakeholder groups that would be met by the appraisal
team based on their knowledge of the groups in the area
and used their connections with the local NGOs to ar-
PRk;P.1R.-NITION 
B3E- E.xPu;k.RPI
ranige open meetings with the variotIs indigenious groups.
When I clelved into the matter. I discovered that the NGOs 
Inii my view, PANLIPI did a pretty good job of staying
hired to help the Departnent of Envirojnment and Natu- 
neutral and ensul-ing that all relevant stakeholder groups
ral Resources (DENR) to prepare the project were es- 
were brought into the dialogue. By this, I mean both
sentially technical in orientation-a collection of scien- 
groLups that supported the project and those that strongly
tists. academics, andc forestry specialists brought in for opposed it.
their expertise in biodiversity preservationi. No one on
the team had any experience working with indigenous 
Information Sharing
peoples or using participatory approaches. Although they 
The fotu- sites chosen for appraisal by the joint mission
were the right kind of NGOs to design the technical 
were selected because they presented the greatest chal-
framework for the program. they were the wrong kind to 
lenge for implemilenltationi 
of the IPAS progratm and had
undertake collaborative dlecisionmakinii with local 
tihe most coniplex humani and sociological pr-oblemlis. 
The
people. This reflected the fact that our thinkinIg lup ulntil appraisal team spent between two and thr-ee days in each
this point had been more focused on getting the "sys- 
of the four areas. We met with local NGOs and indig-
tem" right and identifvinsg what was worth protectill. 
enous communities as well as with the local authorities
Althoughi we kinew that people constituted the miain thieait and church groups that interacted with them. Some meet-
to the effectiveness of such1 a system. their needs hiad niot ings were chaired by PANLIPI. but most were hosted bv
been in the forefront in designinig the legislation1. 
the local NGOs in the area. As far as the meetings went,
I don't think enough information was provided in ad-
('CONuST1TIN(' 
THE 
PEOI'lE 
vance to the participants, so a fair portion of the time
was spent explaining to themil what the project was all
We realized we would need to get the local people in- 
about. Tlhe proposed new systemil called for active local
volved to remedy the situation. One of our tasks durinig 
maliagemilenit and possible restrictions on resource use:
appraisal was lo redraft the implemenitation guidelines. 
therefore. we wanted to enstire that those who were go-
which woulcd spell out in detail how the legislation was 
ing to be affected by the project (or could affect its out-
to be implemilenlted and clarify any ambiguities. We de- 
comile) clearly under-stood the rights and responsibilities
cided to take this opportunity to consult the people about 
the IPAS would brilig.
the new legislation. We wanted to identify any critical
problems related to the IPAS design andc ask them if they 
Negative Feedback
wer-e willin- to joini thle proposed park systemi. To do this.-
I e -
j 
The DENR officials took a lead role in explaininig the ob-
we suggested that the mission be set up as ajolint consUl- j 
i
tative appraisal between the government and the Bank. jectives and benefits of the new' legislation, whereas w'e
Taive wappisreadily aeptweclb the government aildthe Bank. 
(the Bank staff) mainly just listened, observed, and spoke
This was r-eadily accepted by' the DENR. 
only if there was a specific question directed to us. Then it
was the people's turn to tell ItS what they thought. In
Participatory NGO Enlisted 
Mindoro. the Mangyan leadlers along with represenitatives
PANLIPI. a nationial legal services NGO. was contracted 
of Mangyan comMUnity organizations fromil across the is-
to identify the relevant stakeholder grOUps and organize 
land begani ahilost imimiediately by poinltiig out serious
the meeting agenda for the mission. This was a ralther llaws in the system that the expert design teain had over-
1 04

1 I 
I, I 
I 
1.1 
I'1' 
P;' 
1;. 
HAI 
N'':.{\lF: 
1) I"(),I 
vl( ''r I.; ) A u1.\
looked. For exaimnple. 
the Mangyan people had looked at 
Manila, there was no doubt in any of our minds (Bank
the IPAS maps for Mildor-o and discovered that a portion and DENR staff included) that the project would have to
of the park had been classified as a "strict protected zone" 
be redesigned to respond to the expressed needs and pri-
in which vi-tually all human activity was to be banned. orities of those whose lives were going to be directly
They subsequently infonned us that a number of Mangyans affected. We were now much more focused on "people's
lived within this zone and dependecd on hunting, fishing. 
problems" and realized that the project plans, as they
and gathering of forest products for their livelihood. Not stood. were not centered on people.
surprisingly, they found these regulations to be unaccept- 
For one thing. we realized that the protected areas
able and incompatible with the traditional lifestyle of their 
le-islation was inadequate to deal with the intel-ests and
people. Like other ICCs, the Mangyans have close attach- concerns of indigenous peoples as they had been con-
ments to their ancestral lands and possess customr,11-y 
laws 
veyecd to us. It was obvious that if we did not change the
for regulating the use and transfer of these lands and their 
project to correspond with these realities, we would not
natural resources. They made it clear that the recognition 
win the cooperation of the ICCs and their support groups.
of these "'ancestral domain rights" and the actual demar- 
We therefore set about redrafting the implementation
cation of the boundaries of this domain were precondi- 
guidelines based on what we had been told. Now, imple-
tions ftor considering their participation in the protected mentation guidelines for any legislation can modify its
areas system. 
impact to a greater or lesser extent, depending on how
In Palanan, we discovered that livelihood concerns 
flexible the legislation was in the first place. The changes
were the central issue for the resicdents. The town was in 
we made following the consultative appraisal mission
the middle of the proposed national park. Most of the meni were designed to skew the implementation of the law in
made their living from illegal logging, and some asked us 
favor of ICC rights to traditionial meanis of livelihood and
quite matter-of-factly if we could cut a road through the 
occupancy. decentr-alized park management. and comn-
virgin 'forest to facilitate their trading and give them some 
inuility managerial boards that gave a strong voice to in-
contact with the outside world! This startling request helped digenous peoples.
us to understand an important reality: if we didn't chanige 
Another persistent complaint we had heard from
the project and place a greater emphiasis on livelihood is- 
ICCs in Mindoro was that the process of delineation and
sues. we would not have any hope of sustaining it or get- 
recognition of their ancestral domains was incomplete.
ting the local people to stop relying on logging as a source They were ullderstandably frustrated and wanted to know
of income. Similar concerns were raised during consulta- 
why. Recognizing this issue as a potential obstacle to
tions at the remainin1g two sites. 
ICC acceptance of the IPAS, we followed their sugges-
tion and requested DENR to show good faith by coin-
pleting its stalled delineation work prior to project imple-
A Snip-r 
IN ()1 R ITHINKvING (O
mentation. In addition. we revised the implementation
These constiltations clearly demonstratedl weaknesses ;l 
gui delines to emphasize ancestral domain rights (includ-
the IPAS manlagement plans designed by' the conisuLltanits. ing precedenice over IPAS laws in the evenit of conflict)
Although we knew the plans were stronger in thieir tech- 
far more We also earmarked project funds to continue
nical descriptionls than in their social anlatlysis, we hadni't the delinieationi work in this and other areas.
realized how far removed they were f'rom human reali-
ties. Because of the difficulties involved in demographii- 
INIERTI 
NG 
PA.RTI(CIPATIORx
cally surveying certain areas. basic information on how 
ARRAN(;I:: 
iE.N1rs
maniy people inhabited the region and which areas were
most densely populated was often lackiing. 
With regard to project design, we got the message loud
Now I've heaird it said many times before that con- 
and clear that the existing project allocated too little
sultation with local stakeholders is not the same as par- money toward livelihood purposes. Froi'n the wide array
ticipation. After all. we-the team of outside experts- 
of ideas, suggestions, and reqLiests that were put forth by
still had ultimate conitrol over the decisions that were 
communities during the different meetings. it was ap-
being made. Talking directly to the people. however, was 
parent that the only way to reflect community desires in
certainly better than making those decisions in isolation 
project design was niot to specify potential livelihood
from Manila or Washington, D.C. We learnecl a Lgreat deal 
projects in detail prior to implementation. Rather, we
from these consultationis; the things people told us influ- 
decided to more than double the funds for such activi-
enced our way' of thinking dramatically. On ouL returni to 
ties. develop some gener-al criteria. and design a com-
1I 05

THEi; 
\'WOR1,I) 
BANE 
IPAERTICIPA 
T'*'ION 
SOt'I7RJ.H4)Oli
munity-based mechanism for identification and selection 
sessions: therefore, during subsequent meetings in other
of such projects "on-the-fly." 
areas, workshops for tribal people were kept exclusive
And that is exactly how we ended up proceeding, by 
to avoid the influence of other groups on their percep-
tossing out many of the other activities budgeted during 
tions and feedback regarding the IPAS legislation. In these
preparation, while increasing the range of permissible 
cases, the DENR, local government unit officials, the
activities and enlarging the funds available from 20 per- 
Church, and NGOs were allowed in as "observers."
cent to 50 percent of the total project budget. In short, 
The workshops began with a presentation by
we felt that the "social fund" approach was the only prac- 
PANLIPI on the terms, conditions, and implications of
tical way of responding to so many different needs and 
the IPAS law and revised implementation guidelines.
priorities. This was a critical step in ensuring real par- 
Participants were then divided into small groups to re-
ticipation by local people in the project, because it gave 
view the maps and documents and discuss the items that
them control over financial resources and how they would affected them. PANLIPI primarily played an observer role
be spent in their communities. By devolving resources 
in these discussions, responding only to questions of clari-
to the local level and responding to the demands of the 
fication regarding implementation of the IPAS law.
ICCs for ancestral domain rights. we were betting on tak- 
Through this interaction with each other and with
ing much of the "heat" out of the opposition. Would in- 
PANLIPI, local people carefully considered the implica-
serting participatory arrangements at this late stage work? tions of the legislation and weighed their options with
We decided to put it to the test. 
the understanding that they were free to refuse member-
ship in the parks system. In the process they learned what
Z"F0)I,1 .()5X ING(: tTl, 'their 
rights and responsibilities would be under the IPAS
and what tasks they would undertake as members of the
Once we had translated the local input into a new set of 
community management boards. Once they understood
participatory arrangements, we suggested that the DENR 
the overall framework and assessed their own means and
organize a series of follow-up meetings with the same ability to participate, they collectively adopted resolu-
communities. We recommended that NGOs be hired to tions concerning topics such as ancestral domain, liveli-
conduct the follow-up. DENR readily agreed. 
hood, IPAS restrictions, resource use, management
Four NGOs were sent back to the four areas we had 
boards, and tourism. In doing this, they were making
visited. Of these, PANLIPI was sent to Mindoro-the 
promises in the presence of other stakeholders about the
island that had voiced the most opposition to the IPAS actions they were or were not willing to undertake.
during the previous consultations. All four NGOs returned
with the revised implementation guidelines that had been 
AN 
U NEXPECT( 
OU) 
L'TCOM 
E
influenced by indigenous peoples' input. They also took
back the new terms of the project, which were also much The results of the follow-up meetings were that three of
improved by giving real control to local people over de- 
the NGOs came back from the field reporting strong com-
cisions that would affect them. The objective of these 
munity support for the revised project with no signifi-
follow-up meetings was to provide an opportunity for 
cant problems or objections. After weighing the costs
local stakeholders to review the revised arrangements, 
and benefits of the newly revised terms of implementa-
provide feedback, and propose any further modifications. 
tion, the affected groups concluded that participation in
They were also intended to begin the process of self- 
the IPAS was in their best interests. They agreed to join
selection of representatives for the Protected Areas Man- 
the national parks system.
agement Boards (PAMBs). 
But the events that transpired in the Mindoro work-
In Mindoro, for example, follow-up meetings with 
shops were dramatically different. To begin with, par-
the various stakeholder groups were held in a workshop 
ticipants rejected the basic premise of the follow-up meet-
format. PANLIPI greatly emphasized the voice of the 
ings. This had been expressed to them by PANLIPI as
ICCs because they are the most affected by the IPAS. "discussing arrangements for community representation
The views of support groups such as community work- 
on the Protected Areas Management Boards." The par-
ers, the Church, NGOs, and local government units, how- 
ticipants argued that they could not talk about the terms
ever, were also given due consideration. In the initial of their participation in the project when the legislation
workshops, the different stakeholder groups were mixed 
itself was not acceptable to them. By being adamant on
together. It was observed, however, that in these instances, this point, they succeeded in shifting the focus of the
the NGOs and local authorities tended to dominate the 
workshop from "representation" (which implied voice)
1 00

P'H IIPPII'IN 
ES: 
INTUA;(;AlT) 
E'Ro'I'IE. 
AlF>:Ak
to "acceptability" of the IPAS program itself (which im- 
ownership in the early stages of project design. The les-
plied an "exit" option). This question, they felt. had niot sonI of Mindoro also helped us create a better project by
been adequately addressed during previous consultations. 
forcing Us to pay more attention to participation when
The proceedings of the tribal workshops in Mindoro 
putting implementation arrangements into place.
were dominated by objections ancd protests over the per-
ceived primacy of environmental concerns over the hu-
man needs of the Mangyan people as retlected by the
IPAS legislation. The overwhelming opinion of the ICCs 
For those areas that agreed to join the parks system, the
as well as the Church and NGO groups was that the re- 
IPAS legislation sought to institutionalize local partici-
vised terms of tile project did not go ftar enough in meet- 
pation by decentralizing the management of protected
ing the demands of the Mangyan people for self-deter- 
areas and giving greatev control and representation to
mination and ancestral domain. The ICCs felt that tiheir local people. We built provisions for a multistakeholder
indigenous land-use systems were more appropriate than 
PAMB in each region into the implementation guidelines.
what the IPAS had to offer. 
The next step was for communities to select their repre-
During the workshop, the ICCs also rejected mem- 
sentation on the managemilent board. During the follow-
bership on the management board, which they felt would 
up consultations, the NGOs contracted by DENR began
be controlled by the politicians and bureaucrats. They 
to work with the communities to develop a process to
viewed tribal representation on such a board as a "to- 
select theiir representatives to sit on the board. Stakeholder
ken" that could be manipulated as an instrumilent for jus- 
,groups were free to choose their board representatives in
tifying government programs. The local groups, there- 
any way they wished. The ICCs learned about the differ-
fore, refused PANLIPI's invitation on behalf of the gov- 
ent rights and responsibilities they were commilittilng to
einment to choose tribal representatives to the PAMBs 
in accepting boardc membership. These tasks included
because they rejected the concept of the IPAS as a whole. 
approving mnanagement and zoning plans, setting rules
Other points of contention included, the peri-it system, 
and licensing resource use within the park, and collect-
provisions for mining resources in ancestr-al lands, and 
ing fees and fines. Perhaps. most important from the
tourism projects that could convert tribal lands into a 
standpoint of the ICCs, representation 
on the PAMB
"Mindoro zoo"! The principal message from all of this 
meant that they would have a say in the sort of livelihood
was that the local people had been left out of the process 
activities to be funded by the project. Moreover, local
and no changes we could make at this stage would suf- 
NGOs would be hired to assist them in preparing and
fice. The opposition to the IPAS legislation had solidi- 
implementling these projects.
fied. The indigenous people had reached an overwhelm- 
In several cases, the ICCs expressed concern that their
ing consensus: "We don't want to be a national park!" 
power on the PAMBs would be diluted by other, poten-
tially more powerful, stakeholders. They rightly predicted
that pressure for represenitation from a growing number
S;ETTINGs 
A 
PRECE'DE.NT 
L
of user groups in the area would expand membership 
on
This was the message that PANLIPI carried back to M.I- 
the management board from the initial limit of fifteeni
nila from the ICCs of Mindoro. It was an outright re jec- 
memilbers. In view of this. DENR decided to establish an
tion that ultimately resulted in Mindoro being dropped 
executive comimiittee for each PAMB. This three-mem-
from the protected areas park system. In this instance, 
ber committee-consisting 
of one representative from
participation had meant giving local stakeholders the 
the DENR. ICC, and NGO communities-would 
have
option of saying "no" to a project because consensus and 
the decisionmiaking authority for the board. The new
commitment to it were lacking. The long political struggle 
terms of this power-sharing arrangement were welcomed
between the Mangyans and the government over the scope 
by the ICCs.
of ancestral domain claims proved unresolvable within
the context of the IPAS legislation: although I regretted 
(os,],
the loss of Mindoro, I believed it was better than having
the government and the Bank invest resources in a project The funds ftor all the preparation work, including the
doomed to failure. I also felt that "allowing" local com- 
participatory components, came from a Japanese Tech-
munities to opt out of a project set a good precedenlt by 
nical Assistance Grant. The joint appraisal meetings
discouraging fluture expert project preparationl efforts and 
were relatively inexpensive, costing somewhere in the
pointing out the benefits of building local consensus and 
r ange of $5,000 to $10.(000. The follow-up consulta-
1(07

THE 
WO()RI,) 
BANK 
P.\A'TI(1'.\'IPATN 
S()II(EI1U()I(
tions, however, were more extensive. They totaled about 
If I hacd to cdo it over again, I'd start at the point at
$30.000 to $40,000. Each of the NGOs was giveni ap- 
whicih we ended up this time around-by 
introducing
proximately one-fourth of this aIount. 
With regarcd to 
participation as early as possible into the process. One
time costs, the participatory 
interactioni did not delay 
of the benefits participation brings is that it allows ev-
the project in anyway In fact, the follow-up sessions 
eryone to see clearly what different stakeholders are and
were intended to fill In some of the tinle between ap- 
are not willing to commit themiiselves to. The participa-
praisal and effectiveness, lest the expectations and en- 
tory stance that was taken during follow-up with the comn-
thusiasm raised duril-g appraisal diminish by the time 
muniities allowed indigenous grOUpS to decide what was
project implementationi began. 
in their best inter-ests. I think this fact. combined with
the participatory hilplementationi arTangements that were
_ -
~ 
Rf~LE('I 
IOadded, 
will go a long wav to ensuLe that this project is
_t:_ 
()N 
['.RIEUT"'TZON
one that the people living within the protected parks sys-
The project went through many changes between identi- 
temn are williig to maintain and support.
fication and approval. This evolution took thime and cer- 
The change in our stance over the course of preparationi
tainly would have been much easier and faster if we had 
andc appraisal was a gradual process of getting deeper and
knowvn at the beginning what we know now. We started 
deeper into the pro-ject andcl developing an understanding of
out with an expert-desigined. technical preparation that 
the inextricable link between participation and project suc-
then shifted to an NGO-driven consultative process duIr- 
cess. Once we made a concerted effort to seek out the differ-
ing appraisal. From this it evolved into a hilghly partici- 
ent stakeholders and biing thliem into thle ecisionmakilng po-
patory project in which one communllity walked away and 
cess. the pr(oject began to change-tor 
the better-in 
innu-
the others acquired resources througIh the livelihood fund 
merable ways. We mlay have been slow in starting, but this
and representation on the managing board. 
only goes to prove that it's never too late to get it right!
I 08N

PHILIPPINE 
S
C'OMM 
lUNAL 
IRRIGATION 
PROJEC'TS
Charles Gunasekara
vn'as t/e Task Manz-
ager ftor t/ie Philip-
/pitnes Ca7intit lit n!
lirioation 
Projects.
In 
1982 1 weilt on my first Banik ImiissiOI to the Philippines. where we'd
been wor-king- with the National Irrigation Adiniiiistrationl (NIA). I was
supervising coilpletion of several previous loans and finishling prepara-
tioil oft a new loan. I arrivedl at a time when NIA was adijLstill 
to some
miportant changes. Created to help develop greater food self-sufficiency in the
Philippines. NIA began by investing miainly in large irrigation systems. But by
the beginning of the 1 970s. it began to place imore emiphasis on coniniunial
irrigation 
systemCs that WOLlkd benefit remiiote poverty-afflicted 
areas.
In learnmiL about my' new assiglnment. I kept hearing about NIA's work
withi farmicrs. Mv NIA couLnterparts toldl mie that the agency had conisciously
set out to collabor-ate with farmers and to buildc on centuries of farmier-run
irri Cation schemnes. To clo this. NIA was fielding communllity organizers to work
hand-ill-hanILd withi the farmiers to provide training and team suppoirt building.
Their goals were to increase the ability of farmers to work together. negotiate
effectively withi the coveriniulenit. operate and maintain the system, and manage
it flliancially.
The tone at the agency was enei'getic: many people there spoke respect-
fully' about the farmiers' collabor-atioll. Although NIA was a traditional engi-
neering agency, the enginieers I m et told me that the participatoi-y experimenits
had persualLded theml of the valuIe of working withi the farmers.
Having arrived in Manila. I wantecd to get out into the field and see what was
workinig and whiat wasn't. On my first ImiissioIn. I visited a comimiunity in the
northi of LLIzoI. The comm1lullity organizer-I'11 
call hel- Rosa-had 
arrived
109

T II.; 
WoIf 
l. I) 
1RANK 
,% 
,¢ 
I 
I'I.'l''I()I 
N 
( )I 
'I; III()( 
)Ii
there about a month before. She had been gettino to know 
The group found that cost recovery was an impor-
the farmers, workin- with themi in the fields, participat- 
tant aspect of the participatory approach. As they helped
ing in their social life. andc meeting with the local irriTga- pay for the systems, the farmers developed a financial
tion association (IA). I could sec how she appreciated 
stake in the projects. But. more important. repayrent
and sensed the needs of the farm 
itfanilies, 
especially of 
helped motivate NIA personnel to treat the farmers as
the women. 1 found this attituLde of respect and caring 
clients and to be interested in promoting strong lAs that
among the comimiunity worker-s almost everywhere I went. 
would be capable of repayment.
For centuries in the Philippilnes, farmers have gotten 
By 1980 NIA had shifted away from its strictly engi-
together- to build and maintain simple communial Irrigation 
neering approach to a sociotechnical approach. NIA in-
schenmes. Rosa's comniunity was no exception. The farn- 
volved i-rinationi staff who were to implement the new
ers already managed tleir owi canials, usiig tempora-ry damns approach to develop detailed pr-ocesses for farmers' par-
made of logs aid stones to diveil water- froi a streamii nearby. 
ticipation. NIA ulider-took a large training program. With
Rosa and one of the village elders, Tio. took nie to see one 
assistance fromil experienced community organizers and
of the dams. Tio was about seventy years olcd. He could 
social science and management institutions, it trained
remember long ago chancinig oin the streamii we were look- 
newly hiried community organizers in farmer miobilization
ing at and dreaming of directing these waters to the rather 
and action research; it taught the enginieers how to work
amidc lands Cultivated by his father and those of the other 
with the farmers and guide the irrigation associations in
villagers. Some years later. he had been able to obtain the 
operations and maintenance: and it trainied farimier leaders
suppori of his fi-iends andc relatives ancl built a diversion, 
ini meeting techliniques. leadership. and managmeniit.
whicih gave them a small am11oun1t 
oF water.
Although still ciLide. the systemn had matured to iniclude 
( 
M 
NIT 
( 
1 
M 
)R(; 
N 
NI '/.I'?,
a main dam and canal and many small ditches, constrlucted
by the far-niers of several comml1unlities and( serving about 
By the end ot the 1980s. NIA had almost 750 commu-
400 hectares. During the annual floods. the damil and many 
nity organizers. The organizers ar'e carefuilly chosen for
othier- works woulcl be washecd awav. Every year. the fanmi- theil ability to relate with delicacy to the fariners and to
erS would iebuild the dlanlaged stirLICUres lidl epair the maina speak the local lanLguage. Typically. they take about ten
canal, contributing as many as 1(0.t)0()0 
person-dlays of vol- 
molithis to lay the groundwork for construction of new
unlary labor. The wvork was organized informally. 
irri-ation schemes. They work behind the scenes. encoLir-
aging the farimlers to organize formally their lAs and to
NtIA 
Rv;E1'O)NI)S 
take the lead. The lAs help to secure the rights-of-way.
contribute to the design work. and enter into an agree-
Over many years. Tio and his co-villagers also trie(d to 
ment with NIA. wiich covers cost issues ald definles their
get ouiside help to improve their systeim. Finally. NIA 
respective roles in implementation and subsequent op-
responded. During the 1 970s. cdrawingg 
on its 1 974 char- 
erations andl maintenance. Duingl1'T 
construiction, the lAs
ter. which auth1o-rized it to delegate management to the 
contribute about I0 percent of the costs in casi or in kind.
farmers and collect paymenits fromil them. NIA had been 
When constiuctioni is completed. the IA evaluates
experimileniting with participation inl sm11all, comm11unalll 
ir- 
the work and foirmiially 
takes over the systemii. acceptilin
rigat ion pilot projects. NIA had obtaiiedi grait funding 
fLIll responisibility foI the operations and maintenance and
firomil the Ford FouLIndatioll to sLIpport the developimienit of 
repayvimenit of' NIA's chargeable cost at no interest (this
pr-ocesses for fltiarmer- 
participation. Thi s I'lex ible fUnding 
excludes overhead, roads, and such). To ensurle financial
enabled NIA to undertaike action research that coUld not 
transparency, NIA and the lAs holdl monithly reconcilia-
be fulide(d througIh the UsuaLl government hudgets. 
tion of costs chargeable to each IA. This encoulages the
A multidiscipllinary learning gr_oup composed of NIA 
IA to meet their tfinancial obligations. Once an IA is well
officials, somiie of the newly hiredi comllullnity organiz- 
uLider way. the ComImlullity organizer visits only periodi-
ers. and people firomii social scieice, mianagement. and 
callv and shifts attention to a new area.
agrlicultItUral en gin eeri ng institutionis providled advice to
tihe NIA .assistant adiiinlistiator- wlho managed the pilot 
SEPTI 
N 
l' 
AN [ l 
IGA'FION 
AS9o'IATIoN
projects. The learniniig groLIp exanli ned the implicatiolis
of NIA's experience in these pilot oper'atmionIs 
for dleter- 
Rosa had already' beeni talking withi the fariller s aboLut NIA's
mininig changes in NIA's policies, procedures. and train- 
proposal. Durilng these meetings, the farm'ers had been able
ing programils. 
to deal with various reservationis they had. For exatiiple.
I 10(

P'HII.IPPIINVI.!: 
COtMMUllNA\.1,Xt( 
IRRIATIO
their concerns about accountability for village funds were 
munal Irrigation Development Project (CIDP) loan of
allayed when they cleveloped clearly stated and understand- $121 .9 million.
able procedures. including the organization of monthly 
CIDP I was the first foreign-assisted project to focus
reconciliation meetings, the training and support NIA entirely on communal irrigation development and farmer
would give to the villager designated to handle finances, participation. It became effective in late 1982. just after I
and the public display of financial statements. 
had come on the scene. The loan was to cover 33,500 hect-
Rosa invited me to a general assembly where she hoped ares, about two-thirds to be new irrigation and one-third
to obtain the farmers' agreement to proceed. The villagers to be rehabilitation of existing communal systems. About
agreed to NIA's proposition that, with their participation, $3.5 million of this was dedicated to institutional devel-
NIA would improve and expand the inigation system and 
opment (farmer and staff training, community organizers
that the farmers would set up a fornal IA to handle opera- and supervisors. meetings. and technical assistance).
tions and maintenanice and over time pay for the construc-
tion. By assumiiing these responsibilities. the IA would clearly
demonstrate its commitment to the project.
Over the next several months. Rosa helped the farm- 
CIDP I was added to my supervision responsibilities. On
ers develop their local group into a more formal IA. They one of my missions. I heard that the farmers' commit-
set up a three-tiered structure, with an elected president, 
tees in the village I had initially visited had "walked
a board, and sector-level groups. The board, composed 
through" the NIA plan with the NIA engineers. The plan
of the heads of the sector groups, determined how the 
laid out a new water course for the main canal and some
rebuilding and maintenance responsibilities would be 
of the smaller canals and provided for a new dam. Dur-
divided among the different sectors and how water would ing the walk through, the farmers had requested some
be rotated during periods of scarcity. 
modifications because they knew certain landowners
Althouglh the board helped with commnuniication and 
would resist giving rights-of-way unless they were paid
coordination. each sector had its own struclure, leader- a high price. After several meetings to discuss jointly
ship style. and organization. Each was responsible for 
various issLIes, the farmers' suggestions were incorpo-
mobilizing and managing the needed labor and materi- 
rated into the plan and the layout was presented to the IA
als. As it did for other lAs across the Philippines, NIA 
general assembly for further modification and approval;
provided traininig to the farmers so they could manage 
thus, the NIA engineers and the farmers learned and in-
their organization and helped the IA register as a corpo- 
novated together.
ration with the National Securities and Exchange Coin- 
With Rosa's help. the IA had then secured the water
mission. This meant that they' could ownI property. make 
riellts and obtained the rights-of-way. Given that every-
contracts, collect fees, and impose sanctions. 
one stood to benefit from the new main canal, all but one
With Rosa's help, the sector committees developed 
of the farmers along the route had agreed to give right-
by-laws (specifying the numiiber of board memiibers, for 
of-way without charge. The exception was a man who
instance) and divided the responsibilities for such mat- 
would lose a considerable number of fruit trees: the IA
ters as water rights. monitoring of materials and costs. 
agreed to compensate him. Because the farmers had
and matching of farmers with the paid irrigation con- 
worked out a clear plan and dealt thoroughlly with all the
struction jobs. Rosa later told me that the IA had done a 
rights involved, the construction went smoothly and was
good job of reviewing all of the rules and decisions with 
completed on time.
the members and ensuring that both water distribution
and maintenance were handled equitably. 
NOVE 
'EIIRATION
G(tN'ING 
1NC 
RXNK 
SI'U'P'POR'T 
Six months after the irrigation system was completed. I
was on another supervision mission and had the oppor-
Until the early 1980s, Bank support had mainly focused 
tunity to visit the village again on the day management
on NIA's large- and mid-sized national irrigation 
was officially turned over to the IA. The officers of the
schemes. These had been built by NIA engineers with- 
IA signed documents approving the construction costs
out farmer involvement. In 1981 a Bank team reviewed 
(which. in turn. would determine the annual amortiza-
NIA's participatory' work and endorsed the agenicy's in- 
tion payments due) and assumed responsibility for the
tention to expand participation to all local and some 
management of the system. The signing was followed
national irrigation schemes. This led to the first Com- 
by a party and speeches. Rosa congratulated the farm-
LIlI

ITE 
NVORI4A) 
BANI 
I'PARTI'IPATI'*VIION 
SOIURCE('IIOOIK
ers. saying she was confident that the success of the IA 
sustainiable. I also concluded that. thanlks to NIA's par-
and the new experience the farmers had gained in their 
ticipatory process. this irrigation system now truly be-
comimiittees had prepared them 'for this momilent. 
longed to the farmiers.
By this time, the association had set up various mani-
agement positions, such as operations manager and
gatekeeper, and had selected a water tender and fee col-
lector for each sector. The fees were to be paid in kilo- 
The LLIZOI village is just one example. I visited mainy
grams of paddy per hectare: 130 kilograms of paddy per 
communities all over the Philippines. As NIA expanded
hectare during the wet season and 95 kilograms per hect- 
the participator-y approach. it was finding much greater
are for the dry season. For each sector. the water tender 
satisfaction among the farmers with the irrigation
would deliver the bills to each farmer and. after the har- 
schemes, dramilatic increases in the acreage irrigated dur-
vest, a fee collector would pick up the paddy fromii each 
ing the dry season, and increased conscientiousness
ftarmer and provide him a receipt. The collector would 
amiong the IAs regarding pay-clown of the debt to NIA
then sell the paddy and turn the revenues over to the as- 
and mnaintenance of the canals. Because of local funding
sociation. 
constr-ailts, design changes. and law and order difficul-
I learned that the ftarmers had already brought 250 
ties. delays were the norimi for many. if not most. of NIA
hectares of previously arid land under irrigation. In ad- 
projects (and most of the Bank's projects in the
dition, thev had increased their yields from an average 
Philippines as well). In some cases, the lAs ran into dif-
of 2 tons to about 3.5 tons per hectare. This was a very 
ficulties with major repairs, and NIA had to step back il.
poor community and, from the new clothing worin by 
Nevertheless, in the participatory projects, thanks to the
families at the meeting, I could see that the people had 
involvement of the ftarmers in the planning, maniy prob-
already benefited from the big boost in their crops. 
lems were avoided. As a result. the delays were shorter-
Shortly after the turnover event. I hear-d that the sec- 
and less firequent.
toI groups of the IA had elected new board memilbers.
New leaders had emerged during the w'ork with NIA: as
Rosa had hoped. many of them wer-e elected, includilig 
; I.J 
Il
two womeni whose contributions were widely recognized. NIA's support for the far-miiers 
grew durinig the course of the
The leadership during the operations and miainltenianlce pilot pro jects and continued during ftull-scale hilplemilenta-
phase would thus be strong. 
tion. As an example, to stay close to the lAs. NIA estab-
lished a widely dispersed network of sixty-seven provincial
inigation offices, which were strengthened with Bank as-
sistance. The goal of these offices was to help clevelop com-
Participatory projects are not completely smooth. Four munal lAs. Among other things. they foster information
years after the Luzon villagers had assumed responsibil- sharing amiong lAs. Through this visitation and peer train-
ity for their inigation system. I visited Tio's comimluniity ing. the faimiei-s learned a great deal fiom each other.
again. NIA had moved Rosa to another community and. 
NIA provides bonuses to these offices and their em-
left to their own devices, the farmers had permitted the 
ployees based on their cost effectivenless. This encour-
maini canal to become overgrown. When I sat with the farml- a-es them to treat the faarimlers 
as valued customers whose
ers, they were pretty embarrassed. They said. "We were 
satisfaction is indispensable to NIA. Fromii my many vis-
just going to clean the canal. This is the only one we haven't 
its to com munal projects, I can say that, in general, NIA
got to. But our yields are as high as ever. and we have staff are respectful of the ftarmiiers' wishes.
been able to keep all the new land under cultivation."
Looking around the area. I could see that the irriga- 
(II)I, 
1l
tion system. although not in perfect condition, was pro-
viding a steady supply of water. Farming was going well. 
In the late 1980s, as we conipleted supervision of CIDP
The new prosperity had led someone to construct a mill. I, we began preparing the second communal loan. As we
and many people had made significant improvemenits in considered how the new loan might build on the old.
the size and quality of their houses. I concluded that. 
which had ultimately resulted in the in-igation of about
although I might have preferred a higher standard. the 
50.000 hectares. we hacd much to review.
farmers had stabilized systeni maintenance to a nor-m with 
We wanted to be sure the Bank continued its long-
which they were comfortable-one that was doable and 
teriml, programi approacih to supporting NIA and that les-
I112

PI'llIPPINEI'III: 
COI 
N1 
IRRAt'. 
I.ll(LNV'lT)ON
sons learned from one operation could be built into the 
We have enough food for ourselves. We can really im-
next one. During our preparation missions. NIA set up a 
prove our incomes now if we get the right kind of assis-
series of meetings with selected lAs to conduct compre- 
tance." They wanted better weed control in their canals
hensive discussions of the experiences to date. A num- 
and paddy lands. They wanted to diversify their crops,
ber of these meetings were in the northern Luzon region. 
particularly in the dry season. They wanted to understand
Since the time I first visited there, the number of lAs had 
more about fertilizers and pest management and to pro-
almost doubled. 
cure the needed seed. fertilizers and agrochemicals.
During the course of these meetings, we developed 
Both NIA and the farmers said they were committed
an understanding of two major sets of needs. The first to meeting these needs through participatory processes.
set had to do with record keeping about the projects and 
For these purposes. NIA devised a novel grassroots ap-
their impact. The second had to do with the opportuni- 
proachi. For all communial irrigationi systems rehabilitated
ties created by the greater availability of water. 
or established under CIDP I], NIA collaborated with the
lAs to prepare and implement agricultural development
plans. These plans cover most of the needs raised by the
farmers, including cropping patterns, equitable water dis-
The Bank team had been reviewing the lAs' books 
tribution in the case of shortages. reforestation, soil and
throughout the ]980s and recognized the integrity and 
water conservation, nurseries, and other support services.
thoroughness demonstrated by virtually all of the lAs. 
They also include farmer training, extension visits, dem-
Although they started off with little knowledge of mod- 
onstration programs for crop production methodologies,
ern accounting and bookkeeping, most of them could 
and pest management and mechanization, as well as co-
show their membership what funds were coming in, and 
operatives and other means for bringing greater credit
how they were being spent. 
and marketing schemes to each IA.
Nevertheless, as the communal systems expanded. 
CIDP II was appraised and approved in 1990. It be-
both the lAs and NIA needed more systematic account- 
came effective in January 1991. The loan is for S46.2
ing and national reporting. They also needed to improve 
million. Although supporting the activities just described.
their tracking of water distribution, cropping, rainfall. 
it covers new irrigation works on about 10.000 hectares
flow statistics, operations and maintenance, crop perfor- and the rehabilitation and improvement of about 15.000
mance, and agricultural incomes. 
hectares. CIDP II was deliberately kept small because of
In CIDP II, we agreed to support the further develop- the somewhat tight fiscal situation in the country. We
ment of performance monitoring and training at all levels. expect the irrigation schemes built under CIDP II to help
The training programs helped the associations develop about 20,000 farm families directly. In addition, these
needed skills in decisionmaking, resource mobilization, families and the many other small irrigators in the nearly
conflict resolution. and performance monitoring. 
3.000 NIA-assisted communal schemes, will benefit from
the institution strengthening and improved agricultural
support services that CIDP II supports.
The improved irrigation services at the communal level 
Sil'l'l;l 
I 
)
and the greater availability of water have led to a higher
and more varied set ol agricultural needs. During prepa- 
Things are going fairly smoothly in spite of financial dif-
ration of CIDP II, the Bank team attended a series of 
ficulties that have slowed the pace of implementation.
meetings organized by NIA with the f:armers around the 
Supervision missions about twice a year for CIDP II ap-
country. These meetings dramatized the farmers' needs 
pear to be adequate, particularly because we make a point
and desires. In some areas, the more successful lAs had 
each time of visiting the farming communities.
already developed their own solutions, investing in thresh- 
By 1994 we could already see improvements. The
ing floors, bulk procurement. storage facilities, and mar- Bank receives quarterly progress reports fiom NIA. and
keting and providing credit to other groups of farmers. 
the lAs have improved the pay-down of their loan obli-
This stimulated the less successful lAs to do the 
gations as well. We also get a comprehensive report on
same-and 
more. Some of the farmers thought they 
the status of the communal schemes. Our review indi-
needed to form cooperatives to get group credit, crop 
cates a substantial increase in average f'amily incomes.
insurance, and marketing services and to build drying 
My frienids in the lAs tell me that their improved records
floors. As one of the farmers put it, "We have the water. on water allocation and cropping are helping to ensure a
I 1 3

ITHE 
VORIA) 
Ft XNI( 
PART\ICIPIl'ATITON 
SOURIOIRI{ 
)4hI(
more equitable distribution of water ancd to ease the reso- 
patory systems included more tenants and small farimi-
lution of disputes. 
ers, whereas in nonparticipatory systems the leaders
To participate with NIA in the implemilentation of the 
tended to be wealthier. These differences indicated
Agricultural Development Plans, each IA has formied an 
that in participatory lAs. the socioeconomic status
Aoricultural Production Subcoimmittee. The subcoimnit- 
of the leadership was closer to that of ordinaryv mem-
tees meet often, after obtaining suggestions and coim- 
bers than was the case for nonpar-ticipatory lAs. This
plaints from the IA memiibers, to arrange water schiedLil- 
may have contributed to the mor-e equitable water
in, review accomplishmenits to date. establish aniual 
distribuItion noted below.
objectives tor the next stage of implemilenltationi. an(d pro- 
* 
With regard to equitable water- distribution amonc
vide input into the annual work plans of the commuity 
memibers during times of scarcity. the participatory
organizers and extension workers. 
systemils were more likely to (a) rotate water accord-
ing to a schedule, (b) allow each grouip in turn to
I,_ I 
n 
I ,I, s 
iiiake use of all available water for an allotted period
of t'ime. and (c) employ personinlel to supervise water
Farmers' participation in irrigation seems to have paid 
distributioni to ensure equity.
off. My visits arounicl the countrv tell me that the results 
* 
Significant differences were also discovered between
of a study conducted in 1985 by the Institute of Philipplie 
participatory and nonpalticipatory systems when it came
Culture of thle Ateneo de Manila Univer-sity contilue to 
to the financial practices ot'associations. Up to 50 per-
hold true: 
cent of participatory systems employed practices such
as conducting annual audits of their accounts. prepar-
* 
In participatory systems, production yields averaged 
ing financial statemenits, using vouchers for expendi-
more than 3 tons per hectare in both the wet and dry 
tures and monitoring paymiients on each member's card.
seasons, whereas, in nonparticipatory systems, yields 
Fewer- than one-fifth of nonparticipatory systems are
were a little more than 2.5 tons per hectare. 
engaged in sucIh practices.
* 
In the dry season, the participatory systems expanded
their irrigated area by 35 percent, whereas the 
r il; 
tA 
N I'S 
hI, 
1,
nonparticipatory systems expanded by only 18 percent.
e 
Farmer-s' degree of' satisfaction with the resulting 
The Banki has been lending to a relatively successful
canals and structures also differed between partici- 
agenicy that was client-oriented anid supported participa-
patory 
and nonparticipatory 
pro jects. 
In the 
tion. This was due, in part. to the support NIA received
nonparticipatory 
systeims, farmers abandoned 
18 
ftromil the Ford Foundationl andl from other aid orgaiiiza-
percent of the canals constr-ucted with NIA assistance 
tions. The Batik team as well as NIA benefited from the
andjudged an additional 20 percenit of the new struc- 
experience and expertise of these organizations. Our con-
tures to be defective. In contrast, in the participatory 
tribution over thime could be described as follows.
systems. only 9 percenit of the canal s were abanclonied
and 13 percent seen aIs defective. 
* 
Flevibilitv. It proved unlrealistic to try to predict rig-
* 
One of the ways farmiers were requirecd to contribute 
idly the tine needed to develop the associations and
to the costs of construiction was through "equity"- 
ensure their ability to participate. Also, targets that
labor, materials, and landl. They were required to 
were too rigid tended to underinilie the f;arimiers' au-
contribute 10 percent of the construction costs or 300 
thority over the systems and. in turn, their commit-
per hectare (whichever was less). The noni-partici- 
merit. In CIDP II, the desired flexibility was achieved
patory systems fell shior-t, raising onlvy 54 per hect- 
by commilitting to work programs only one year at a
are, wher-eas NIA's participatory systems generated 
time. Each year's work programn took into account
357 per hectare on average. thereby exceeding the 
the performanice of the precedinig year.
minilmlll. This represents 
an immediate 
60 percent 
* 
CoorclinwtinZg 
between 
NIA Ofnid1 othelr agencies. 
Al-
recovery of costs for the institutional development 
though other government agencies were charged with
activities i-elated to participation. 
providing the necessary support services, they sel-
* 
With regaa-d to orianizational 
structure. in-igation 
doml functionied in a cooi-diniated manner-. To a great
associations 
developed through participatory 
ap- 
extent. the Bank team provicded a liaison function.
proaches were found to be more "'rooted in their 
For example. NIA had trouble getting the budgetary
commllunlities. Organizational 
leadership in partici- 
agency to release funds appropriated for NIA. and
I I 4

the lAs hacd trouble getting credits in a timiely manl- 
I also felt that because Our country counterparts some-
ner from the Land Bank. We were able to use the 
times lacked comimillitineit or ability, we tended to seize
Lancl Bank's good offices to facilitate timely actionl 
the initiative and, with the bor-ower inaclequately in-
by these agencies. 
volved. we sometimiles made most of the clecisions and
* 
App/ 
/ling 
appim'priate technologyv. Sonietliies traci- 
provicded most of the expertise. The result was that the
tional engineering approaches lead to work that is 
people in the country were not learning much and thus
not the most appropriate to the situation. So. in the 
tended to have a lower commitimient and to becomile mlore
com01m1u.nals, 
we supported NIA in using the simplest 
clependent on the Bank. By giving the farmers control of
techniques possible. For instanice. we encouraged 
their own systemn.s and making thei pa-tiners of NIA. the
them to adopt drainage crossings. Using check gates 
Philippines approach appeared valuable to me in avoid-
and spillways wher-e appropriate instead of siphons 
ing a lot of these problenis.
and diversion weirs. Through many efforts such as 
For these reasons, we cid oui best to use the avail-
these, we were able to reduce costs andi limiit the need 
able humilani skills an(d physical resources and to see to
for higher levels of skill and supervision. Most in- 
it that. wherever possible. systemii design was based pri-
portant, because these systems were simple. the farm- 
maily 
on NIA's approaches 
and standards. 
makilng
ers could understand and manage them. 
chaLnes only where essential. For example, I've men-
• 
Helping resolv'eproblenms. This was an important area 
tioned the simple drainage crossings. check gates. and
for the Bank. For example. a private firm was dis- 
spillways that were used. We also helpedl NIA reduce
charging effluent into one of the irrigation systems. 
the costs of headwor-ks by eliminiating unim1portant as-
We asked the president of the tirm if something s couldl 
pects of the design.
be done. After a lot of resistance, he finally said. 
Working in tle Philippines over a long period of tiie
"Well. I clo have an idea. but I donl't think you will 
has made it possible to take a process approach to sup-
accept it." As a matter of fact, we thought his idea 
portinig NIA. We avoided the tendency to plan thing s to
was pretty clever and agreed to it. So he constructed 
death. Implementation 
was used to modify and adjust
a series of ponds. rani the effltienit thl-ough them and 
plans based oni new developments and information. NIA
reliecd on the natural anaerobic action to rend(er themil and the lAs had as much flexibility as possible to go at
harmless. This woriked satisfactorily. When I went 
the pace mllOSt 
appropriate for them. Wherever we could,
back a few months later, the last pon(d hacd fish andc we adopted a work plan approach to be developed each
frogs and aquatic veoetationi, ad a goat was drink- 
yeaL- rather than ri gidly scheduliillg the work for the en-
inc fiomii it. 
tire loan period. This meant NIA could operate "in synch'
Prieserving NIA's auton,oniv. In another instance, 
with the dlynamics of the lAs and other events in the coun-
someone wanted to turn NIA into a regular line 
try. I think the Philippines experience shows that sLich
agency receiving imost of its reveniues from govern1- tlexibilitv is valuable for the Bank.
nient cotters. This step woulcl have potentially de- 
As for the future, the Philippines comm11uLial i-rigla-
stroyecd the linkage between NIA's services andic its 
tion prOgram is at anotlher cross'roads. Based on1 the
reveniues, which helped keep NIA oriented towardl 
strength of past participatory efforts, the existing l As and
meeting the farmers' neecs. I can't say the Banlk team] 
irrigation systems contilnue to funlctioll failly well. But
single-hanidedly prevenited this niove. but I hope that 
institutionall support for the existing systems andl devel-
our influenice helped. 
opulent of new system1s is at a stancistill. Because of a
new local gover-n1menlt code, the author-ity for the
0)N 
HEFI,ECT10N 
comuInals 
had evolved tromii NIA to local government
Ullits. This has taken place without full appreciation for
In hindsight. I am happy that my initial instilct was to 
the neeed to adLIust all of the aspects of the program-
support and( build on what was already working wher- 
such as financial authority, supervision, cost repaymiient
ever possible. I had observecd in the past that when we 
procecCLIre. and other policies. People in both the Bank
introduiced new approaches-ratlher 
than huildiiw oni in- 
ancl the Philippines are attenipting to arrange for NIA to
digelnous capabilities-the 
pi'ocess was tedious and the 
have a role ii assisting the local governments. I hope
results were often suboptimal or uIsatlisfctlory, 
this will be possible.
I1I5


REPUBLIC 
OF 
YEMEN
EDUCATION 
SECTOR 
ADJu,STMEINT 
PROGRAM[
Yogendra Saraui is
the Task Managei
(4 the Yemen
Education Sector-
Ad1iustment Pr-ogra,,, 
m.
ecause of its rapid expansioni, the qLuality of secon(dary education in
Yem1en had been deterioratin- steacdily for many years The Bank\
1992 Education Sector Report pointed this out clearly and emphati-
cally. Wheln the min1ister- of education alTived at the Bank to negotiate the
Basic Education Project forYemen. we discussedl 
the next project In his Country. We
ag-eed tllhat it shouldC t'ocus on the developimienit of human r esour-ces to m1eet 
the emerg-
ing needs of the economiiy and shouldi target secondary and post-secondary nondegree
educationl. We also agreed thalt the qLuality 
of secondary education was the cntcial
issue and shIould be addressed in the next project. Finally, we agreedi on adoptingt a
participat 
ory 
approach at this Stage ati that hvo 
wo 
I 
gin- 
2roups. 
each chaired by a
deputy miinister, would deal with seconidary education Co111111mmuity 
colleges.
D) E 
IN ING( 
'I'lE: 
APPR 
'OAH
While in Washington condcILICting our pre-niiissioni planning. we proposed
througll coriesponidenice the idea of convening a national workshop of profes-
sional educators and other parties to address the quality issue. The members of
the workingt grOups and the minister of educationi accepted our proposal, and
planning of the workislhop began. In tultiler discussiolIs, the Batik teamn offeered
to facilitate the worklshop in a participatory mailier.
Our fir-st decision was that Bank memlbers-staff 
as well as consultants-
would act as facilitators rather than experts. Our objective was to pIt the plan-
ning of the project. including objectives, strategies. componelnts, costs. and
plans, firmil in the hands of the Yemeniis. We agreed am11on1 ouIrselves that two
things would be vital foIr im11pr-oved 
edUcational quality 
in the COU1try. First, the
whole systetn had to be addressed, not just a paLt of it as we had in past educa-
t 1 7

TIHE; N%VOlI,) 
BANK 
l'PARV'i('II'P\''ION 
41011UE'I;IMOI)
tion projects. Second. those in the system had to do the 
'TH 
1 
FIRi 
T \'%VORKI 
Hoi-'
learning about what was wrong at present and how-in a
Yemeni way-improvements could be made. 
Wheni we ari--lved in Sana'a in July 1992. we held discus-
sions with the working groups that had been set Llp by
the minister. Working group member-s for secondary edui-
('IIo:o(SI N4: i 
A ME'i'HOi)Oi)tE.( 
(; 
cationi. consisting of high Minlistry of Education officials,
had concluded that Yemen needed mor-e classroomiis
As a long tune trainer. I knew of a numiber of techniques
.. 
.
.
, 
~~~~~~~equiipiiieiit, 
anid textbooks to avoid overcrowdinol and
to foster participation durin- the workshop. So we de- 
e
ct 
l s 
really nothing else to improve the quality of secondarv
~~~cided 
that In Iily openiilX- stateilienlt, } OII 
woidSLI-"est 
thlat
the tak of 
te ps 
w 
education. They did not see the need to hold a workshop
the task of the participanits was to dievelop a planned 
dotf 
te-p'rt 
reso 
laie 
codnl
change program to improve the qualitv of education at 
or to Id 
I 
I 
a
the secondar-y and postsecondarv levels. I would also say 
they had not sent out any invitations or macle the logisti
that the role of Bank staff wouild be to facilitate the work 
cal arrangements we had been expecting.
.
.
.
.
.
~~~~~~~~~~~We 
didn't challen-te thie COIClCIUSiOII ot' the wor-kinLy
of the participants using some techniques with whichi we 
W 
th
* ~~~~C 
gJroup but insteaid engaeed the mieniibers in a discussion
were familiar. But the agenda of work and the substance 
g 
t 
-
th
owrwudeo 
e 
t 
of just how they believed more investment in improved
of work would belontT eitli-ely to the participaints. we
planned my final opening remiark as an offe for the par- 
facilities alone would increase the quality of education.
* 
| 
, 
a 
^ 
~~~~~~~~~~~In 
this long imeetlil-g 't becanie obvioLus to the imeiilbers
ticipants to accept the proposal JUSt made or to reject it
and create their 
own task assignment. 
of the secondar-y educationi working group that they ire-
anid create their- own task assi-nmient.' 
A
ally could not answer- the "quality" question or develop
a comprehensive strategy without involvinig profession-
ID)EN 
r 
r l YIN(G 
THE 
S '.NlTA;1>0IA)E> 
.E 
als, resear-chers, administrators, and teachers in the dia-
We were able to identify the stakeholders in the education 
logue. The invitations were then sent, an'angemennts made,
and we started work.
svstem with ease. We decided that what we needed were
The Community College CJIOLUP. 
consisting of pri-i
people working on education in both the private and pub-
LI 
I 
vate sector repi-esenitaitives from the Sana' a Chamilber-s of
lie sectors, because the tormer is an important element of 
C 
' 
' 
' . .
desired
postsecondary education in the country. Unf'ortunately weCo 
ereadNinit'ofEutonftcasdsrd
pt' 
a broader dialoglue with employers. We agreed that the
could not identify any NGOs. womeni's groups. or parents 
.
.
vod 
-c 
t 
m~~~~~iission 
would coiiduct semiiiiai-s fOI' the pr-ivate sector-
associations that might be able to contribute significantly
t 
.
^ 
~~~~~~~and 
then explore the modality and scope of cooperation
to this work on secondary education and bevond. NGOs 
with industry.
and women's gi-oups exist, of couise. in Yemeni but nonIe
deal with secondary or postsecondary education.
We sent a set of objectives. a plan of actioni, anid eni- 
SNMALA, 
(iR0VPS/PI,L;NARx' 
Ssr;E,lto.Ns
teria for the composition of the workshop as a proposal 
The workshop included three Of uS from the Bank and
to the Yeinietlis. OUI- objectives were first to ideiltit'v pi- 
ti pri- 
about forty participants. although we had only expected
ority areas and barriers to change and then to add input
-
¢ 
.~~~~~Z 
thirtv. We decided to set up three workingT grouIps of about
to the terms of reference of the working groups develop- 
thIteen particints each The workshop would have tour
ing the planned change reform program. We proposed
I 
t 
t 
sta(yes each en(iing in a prlenary sessoioin 
mwilici 
the sniall
that the workshop include thirtv people, one-thir-d of 
t 
es
<"l'OUDs W ould mialie r-eports. The stages woulcl handle the
whom should be womeni, with a wide distribution of pro- 
gro 
ould 
m 
taske
follow itiL tasks:
fessionals in the educationi system. Two days of working
sessions were planned. 
* 
Define the quality problem
I had been working in Yemien for about five years 
.
Deterinilie what to do about it
and considerable trust had developed among all of us .
Identify the barriers and decide how to overcome
involved in this effort. I was pretty sure that the Yemienis 
them
would be favorably disposed to our suggestions. They 
-
Develop the methiodology for measuring ancl ensuring
wrote back agreeing to the programn. setting the work- 
that quality would be produced by the actions takeni.
shop date to coincide with our next ImlissioIn to Yemen (a
project identificationi missioni) in July 1992. The Minis- 
We gave each participant three blank cards at the start
try of Educationi would convene the worikshiop. chaired 
of each stage. The first job of each idividual was noting
by the deputy minister of education. 
down thl-ee ImajO'r problemiis or issues he or she believed
1 18

crLicial on the cards. Next, individuals would explain what 
run. We therefore asked the milnister to invite school head-
they wrote on the cards to the grouIp. Theni the group 
masters to attend a workshop in Sana'a. In certain re-
prepared a consensus report for presentationl at the pleniary spects. the headmasters were really the voiceless mem-
session. We Bank facilitators worked with the group, 
bers of the educationi system. At the bottomil of the rung.
making suire all got an opportunity to contribute and help 
they were expected to do what the ministr-y directed. But
develop a consensus. 
some of us had the intuition that what the local head-
masters had to say might indeed be the most impor-tanit
contribution to the chang-e prooram. Indeed, headmas-
PR I O 
{lR 1'rI ZA'l 
O(.N- 13Y H1l), AIAAWAT.\ION 
cot- 
-1 
C
ters were underrepresented in the national workshop. and
During the plenary reporting sessions, we recorded all 
little focus was given to what the local schools them-
points made on large flip charts so everyone could see 
selves might contribute.
them during the next stage. We then had the participants 
All told, forty headmasters joined us at the regional
prioritize their conclusions by using a bidding system. 
workshops along with some people from the ministry
Each participant had to allocate a total of 100 points to 
and the working groups. The participants first reviewecd
the various problems or issues cleveloped by the group 
and discussed the output of the national workshop. that
as a whole. 
is. the Planned Change Program, and discussed how the
The workshop unleashed a tremendous amounlt of 
local schools could participate. They then broke inlto small
energy and creativity. We were pleased and a bit suiprised 
groups to prepare detailed proposals.
by the way the participating womeni made themselves
heard and served as a real force for ideas and consensus. 
s 
sit 1lNoJE("r'
The participants liked it from the start. At the first break,
several told US that they had come expecting yet another 
Again the workshop unleashed an immense amount of
Bank-run session in which they'd be lectured; instead 
creative energy. The headmasters (three were headmis-
they were actually doing the work themselves to their 
tresses) had a great deal to say about what could be done
surprise and delight. Anothier surprise was that the origi- 
well locally and with local community involvement. What
nal notion that all that was needed was more schools and came out of these workshops was a decision to include a
textbooks had vanished. Indeed, after the bidding, an- 
school-based subproject component of the project in
other objective turned out to be the first priority by a 
which local schools could get funding for their owIn pro-
large measure, that is. teacher performanice. 
posals to produce higher quality in education. As a prac-
tical matter, relatively small amounts of money could
[emipower Lup to 100 local schools to innovate and become
an integral part of the national program to improve the
This workshop produced the diagnosis of the quality 
quality of education.
problem in the Yemeni education system. It also set ob- 
To be fi-ank, we from the Bank liked this part of the
jectives that would constitute a Bank sector operation. 
project best. It confirimied what we had come to believe:
that is, a planned change program to improve significantly' the closer you get to the people. the more practical and
the quality of secondary educationl in Yemen. Seven key useful are the actions that can be taken. Although this
areas were named for secondary education: teacher per- 
component was small. we saw it as the opening wedge
formance, physical facilities. curriculum development, to bring local people in communities into the process of
evaluation, school management, learning resources. fe- 
school development and management.
male access to education, and community colleges. Com-
munity college workshops 
would also be held in two cit- 
1)DETAA 
IL,Fl) 
1 
,AN 
NI N(
ies outside the capitol with broad private sector partici-
pation to identify the needs for mid-level personinel in Following the second round of workshops, whicih had in-
the emerging modern sector of the economy. 
cluded the Sana'a and Aden Community Colleges as well
as headmasters' workshops. the detailed work of prepara-
TrH E ~FiU:O'(N1I) 
'W)OI<uSH-I' 
tion began. Here the experts began to take on a larger role
in developing strategies, timetables, specifications, detailed
We believed that quality education would show up-or 
action plans. and resource needs. Indeed, we had some-
not show up-in the local schools themselves rather than 
thing unusuial as we went into negotiations for the project.
in the types of central programs that government would We al-eady had three volumes of detailed. well-done imple-
1 19.

'1'111 
\%'ORI{1I) 
B'.NIs 
P.-l'lAl''I( 
''lI'AIIO 
,-)t'1cI'iz:1 
i(>(
mentation plans that flowed from and were fLully consis- 
weeks in our division. We had done, however, a great deal
tent with what the large number of participants-almost 
of detailed implementation planning by this time, which
200 all told-themselves inventecl. We expect that the 
is unusual and will most certainly facilitate a more rapid
implemilentation specifics will come as no surprise to the 
and easy implemenitation of the project.
stakeholders, who will be ready to act swiftly and surely
once the credit becomes effective.
IR U:F t I 'I"i-S
(4()v 
F';F 
.
.N1' .> NI' 
('II.ANs-{ 
1' > 
No concrete results, of course. have yet been achieved.
But if the Bank's emphasis is right about the need for
Lest anyone thinks all this went perfectly, let me share a 
country ownership and commitment. it is present in this
little about a real scare we had. When the preparation 
project. Also, the educational content is appropriate. Fi-
was well advanced with subproject development, cost 
nally. the local strategy and priorities fit well with the
estimates, ancl resource allocations near-ly complete. the 
local culture and realistic possibilities in the country. After
-overiniiment chaniged. We went on the preappraisal Imlis- all, the local people clicd it. not outsicders. Indeecl, they've
SiOnl just after a new governiment took over with a new 
decided to make organizational and structural changes
educationi minister. Of couise, we feared that the new 
in the min1istry itself. In our judgment, these are sound
minister might want to start froni scratch. We called a 
changes. It will be iiterestilng to see how these changes
one-clay meeting. however. with his new education offi- 
are accepted by the affected staff and how fast and well
cials andc othel-s in the system to go over the project. Af- 
they are introduced. I believe that i-eal institution strength-
ter that one-clay session, the minister said let's go ahead 
ening will occuI in the ministry and at the local school
as planned. Oiie important, positive lesson from this ex- 
level because the affected stakeholders decidecd what tlhe
perience is that when a project is prepared in a participa- 
wanted to change and how.
tory mannier- by a large network of stakeholders in the
couLntrv, its clices 
of surviviin a peisoillel change at
chances 
survivine 
a perto 
( ).N 114 V 
.F1( 
'ITI( )N
the top are greatly improved.
Fromii tilme to time, IIIV colleagues and I have asked our-
selves if we would have done anything differently if we
were to do this same project again in Yemen. Our answ'er
We stailed this project witlh the identification missionl. Six- 
is. "No. not really." We would have liked to have more
teen moniths later (about standar-d cycle time ftor an educa- 
local commn.11lity involvemilenit than we had, but to get that
tion project in our region) we began negotiationis. The to- 
we would have needed more leaders within the system
tal preparation cost involvecd a Japanese preparation grant 
with an understanding and practice of participation. Such
of close to $1 millionl. BaLik staff input was about ninety leaders did not exist at the start of this project. but they do
staff weeks, much fewer thani the nor-limal 1 30-15(0 staff 
now, and we will work with them in ftuture projects.
1 21(

CHAPTER 
I I I
PRACTICE 
POINTIERS 
IN
PARTICIPATORY 
PLANNING
AND 
DESCISIONMAKING
In 
chapter I. we shared our understaniding of participatorv development.
In chapter- II. we shar-ed the experiences of a few selected Task Managers
who have carried out the Bank's work using, participatory approaches. In
this chapter, we provide anlswers to questions Task Managers have about
Using participatory planning and decisionmaking processes in Bank-supported
activities. We draw largely on chapter II examples to help readers identify how
their- colleaguies have uised participatory processes in their work. We also cite
additional projects and World Bank activities that m-ay not be described else-
whe-e in this document.
( 
; T' F I N( 
S'I2AT,I)
This section is about the first impor-tant step in starting participation: getting,C
gcovernment support. In m-ost of the Souircebook examples, this was not a
problem. In others, Task Managers used various means of persuasion, from
initiating pilots and field ViSitS to SUStained 
dialogue, orientation workshops
and building alliances with those who support participatory approachies. Some-
times Task Managers faced outright oppositioni. In these cases, some held
firmi to Bank policies supporting participation, others proceeded without par-
tUcipationi. This sectioni answers the questionis of when and how you start
participation.
1 2 1

TI 111VO 
<R1.) 
BANK61 
PARTICIPATIO'\'ZlN 
SMAtCE15(mlli;(1
When to Start
Start participation as soon as possible. remembering that it is never too early or
too late to start, as indicated in the following examples:
Starting In the Chad Education example, Chad's government developed an Educa-
at Identirication tion-Training-Employmiient Strategy for the next decade. in order to rebuild an
educationi sector clestroyed by war and disturbances during the 1 980s. Chadianis
fromii many backgrounds and sectors and most major donors participated in
creating the strategy. In 1991 the government decided to implemenit this strat-
egy with the Bank's help. The minister of education requested that preparation
of the new education project involve local stakeholders and respond to their
needs and concerns from the beginning.
Starting In the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR) Health example, the de-
in the Middle signers and sponsors shifted from the external expert stance to the participa-
of Preparation tory stance mid-way tlhrough preparation. Although this was not the first Bank-
supported project in the country. discussions with the vice minister of health
revealed that he and his colleagues expected the Bank to implemlent the project.
The Task Manager immediately shifted out of the external expert stance and
into the participator-y stance. He did this so that the appropriate stakeholders in
Laos (who would have to implement the project) would help create. learn about.
and take ownership of the project well before implementation began.
Starting during In the Brazil Municipalities example, a Bank loan to a financial intei'mediary
Implementation was on the verge of being canceled. The problem was clear-the component
that was to provide water and sanitation to slum communities was not disburs-
ing. The new Task Manager assigned to this project had previous experience
working with poor farmers in the ilTigation sector. He believed that the only
way to save the loani was to take a participatory stance. involving the slum
dwellers in the design ancd management of water systems. Working with like-
minded allies in the Bank and Brazil, the Task Manager helped develop a new
approach that enabled engineers. social organizers, and slumli dwellers to col-
laborate in designing effective, affordable water and sanitation services for
some of the worst slums in the world. Three years into implementation. the
Bank loan was resuscitated by initiating participatory 
planning and
decisionmaking in subproject design.
Never Too Early. These examples clearly indicate that it's never too early or too late to start
Never Too Late participation. They also help us recognize that participation often begins in a
nonparticipatory manner. A sponsor (the central government is usually the spon-
sor for Bank activities) decides to pay attention to a particular geographic area
within a country or to a particular development concern. So in a sense, when-
ever participation begins it is a/wavs a bit late and always preceded by prior
opinions, attitudes, and judgments of its sponsors.
Getting Government Support
Governments' stand on stakeholder participation is critical. Without govern-
ment support. the Bank can do little to initiate. broaden. and sustain participa-
tion. This does not imply that Bank Task Managers remain passive. It does
mean, however, that Bank Task Managers must obtain government consent to
work in a participatory manner. We now share some of the experiences that
1 2 2

Task Managers have encountered in getting oovernment stippolt for the par-
ticipatory stance.
When th7e Government Is Sup?portivte
In most of the Son rcebook examples. using the participatory stance instead of
the traditional external expert stance was not a problem for oovernment. Either
Task Managers proposed the idea to a receptive government or vice versa. In
the Chad Education example. the minlister of education specifically asked
that the project be prepared in a participatory maninier. The problem for the
joint country-Bank design team then became finding a participatory method-
ology. None had planned a project in a participatory manner, and now had to
learni how.
Dealing wit/ Skeptic,y
Sometimiles government counterparts working on an activity with the Bank Task
Manager are skeptical about participation and need convincilg .
Encouraging 
In thie Beniin Health example. the Task Manager askedl his gcoverinimlent 
cooin-
Field Visits 
terparts to keep an open mind uLitil they met with the villagers. Participating in
face-to-face interactions served to persuade the governimienit officials that in-
volvinig the local people in project preparation made good sense.
During prepar-ationi of the India Forestry example, officials from the Andhra
Pradesh Forestry Department went on a Field visit to review West Bengal s expe-
rience with participatory Forest Protectionl Comtnittees. The head of the For-
estrv Department helped ensur-e that the team included skeptics as well as sup-
porters of participatory approaches. All returined from the trip convineed of the
value of participatory approaches to forestry. Not only had they seen local people
eariniig income while conservinig and helping regenerate the forest. but their
West Benoal lor-estm-y 
peers told them the participator-y approach made thei- wor-k
professionally rewar ding and personally more satisfying. Wher-eas the West Bengal
foresters once had an antaconistic relationship with the local people. they now
work cooperatively with them and are welcomed and valuedl for their services.
On returning lihomie. the teami shared what they had seen with their colleagues,
thereby helping to sway other- skeptics in Andhra Pradesh.
DuriLn the idenitificationi of the Pakistan Privatization of Groundwater
Developmeiit project, the Task Manager oryganizecd a field trip to the Domini-
can Republic and Mexico for irrigation officials from the central and provin-
cial governiment in Pakistan. Tlhe trip focusecd on one theme: the transfer- of the
maiageielliet of irriyation systems to water user associations. The report of the
group conClLided. "In the Dominicani Republic and Mexico. the process of trans-
fer has beeni rather quick. and tangible results have surfaced even earlier than
expected. The major reasons appea- to be the will oftthe governmeit, the highly
commilitted efforts of the oreanizations assigned the job of transfer, the niental
receptivity of the farmers, and other sociological factors. The successful pro-
gramns of transferring the responsibility of irrigation managemilent to the farm-
ers' organizations in these two countr-ies, along with the accruing benefits, are
a sour-ce of encotiragemilenit for Pakistan to embark on a simiilar progroamil."
Educating 
In thle Morocco Women in Development example, officials wanted to restrict
and Persuading the dialogue to eoverniment circles instead of ilvolvinilg 
nongovernniental or-
ganizatio ns (NGOs) anid rural women. They believed participatiol 
would nei-
ther work nor add much to what they already k}new. The Task Manager decided
123

IT111,:\ 
ttl.)1 
BANK1 
PA\1V'1AC'1'\I'II.TN 
<1''Fltl
to avoid a hard sell for participatory processes. She visited all the concerned
ministries personally ancd asked thein to attend an informal gathering to dis-
cuss the issues. At the gathering, she laid out the pros and cons in a balanced
mianiner for goverinimienit to decide. At their reCIuest. she held a follow-up work-
shop to explainl the specit'ics of tihe proposed participatory technique. Once
the officials reconinized that the clecision was theirs to make, thiey decided to
give participation a try, provided Moroccans did the work insteacd of foreien
consultants.
Btiilding Allianees 
Although Task Managers ilitiatecd participation in many of ouL- examples. none
of theim did it alone. Allies withiln the country were always needed. In the Egypt
Resource Management example. a government official took personal respon-
sibility tOr CUttingc through the red tape involved in making the project prepara-
oton orant effective. In thie Brazil Municipalities example. disbLIrsemilent rates
were so poor three years into implementation that the loaln was slated for calicel-
lation. ImpleInenitation hegan in earinest only wheni the Task Manager- and staff
| froml the Bank's central Water and Sanitation Division collalborativelv built a
strong. personlal relationsihip with the national project manager and his team in
| 
Brasilia. Together they soLig01t out other Brazil ian allies in the state water coIml-
patties. consuiltine fii-is. and NGOs. All shared the common golal of providingi-
sustainable services to slumII comImIllunLities. 
One lessoni that can be drawn from
the way alliaIces Were built is that governments and societies are not mono-
lithic. Almost always. somiconle in the coLIntry-sometirimes many-SLIppOrt par-
ticipation because it produces sustainlable results.
Piloting 
Pilotiln Can bc Lused to demonstrate the effectiveness of participatory plan-
ninI in SitUaltionllS 
in whichl uLIceltainties exist and horrowers are accustomiled
to external expert nicans of project preparation. Pilots can be usefull in coil-
vinIcine "overnmllelnt skeptics that involving stakeholders in project planninig is
beneficial. that risks are manaceable. and that potenltial exists tfor delivering a
positive development imlpact.
The Tiask Manra-er in the Albania Rural Poverty Alleviation example
decidledl to collaboraile with rurall farimiers to test what would work ini providing
credit and rehabilitatin- 
infralstructulre il tleilr coinMIunities. Some of their
Lyovernment couLnterparts. however. believed that involving thie local people in
designing the project was a waste of thime because villagers 'kknew nothing''
abLout comIlplex issues suchi as credit delivery mechanisiis. Nevertheless, the
Task Manager managed to build an alliance with a few like-minded goverll-
menit officials and obtain tunLining from the United Nations Developmenit
Procranmme andc a Frenichi NGO to carry out a pre-pilot to experimilent with
i(eiIs form11ula.ted in collaboration with locail people. The Bank team. along
with Albanian private conIsultalIts, worked with the villagers to design the pre-
pilot, set criteria. and create implementation arrancements. The resulting so-
cial lulid mechaniism, which incorporated village credit commiiittees and coIll-
ii11unity-genera-.ted 
proposals for infrlstrlucturle funding. proved effective in
reaching- corniii u LIIties 
and building 
local ability 
for participatory
decisionmakinu. As a result. more and more officials in the government started
to take notice. Thley became so interested in both the pre-pilot and its use of
participatory approaches that they considler-ed the pre-pilot as "'appralisal" and
pushed for approval of a larger Bank pilot project. The ensuing Bank-finianced
project was desigined based on lessons learned from the participatory pilot.
I -4

PAR1T' 
IPATO'I 1' 
'' 
1,-I'. 
N NI N(;.' AND1 
1111E( 'P1( 
N 
1.%1A1N-(
Dealing Ivit/li Oppositio17
Holding Firm In the Mexico Hydroelectric example. negotiations between the government
and the Bank broke off-at least in part-over the government's unwilling-
ness to prepare resettlement plans that met the requirements of Bank policy.
Technical studies had not been completed, and levels of local participation had
been insufficient in preparing the resettlement plans. The government with-
diew the loan request and sought money elsewhere. The government, however.
returined to the Bank seven months later to reinitiate the request and develop
resettlement plans that were in keeping with the Bank's resettlement require-
tments. including participatory planning.
Waiting for the There may not always be a "happy ending." Government may adamantly op-
Right Moment pose the use of participatory processes. In that case, the choice is either to
withdraw or proceed in the external expert stance and wait for the right mo-
meit. In the Brazil Municipalities example, participatory planning began in
the third year ot' implementationi. reminding us that it's never too late to begin.
Onlce the government and the Bank joinitly agree to work in a participatory
stance. they can begin the process of identifying the appropriate stakeholders.
Typically. Bank Task Managers have collaborated with government to identify
relevant stakeholders by asking questions and seeking answers from both in-
countr-y and Bank souices. Often, the objective itself has defined the relevant
actors. Sometimes, firsthand observation was used to identify appropriate stake-
holders. In other cases, disseminating infoormationi about the proposed activity
enabled interested stakeholders to show up by themselves.
Who Is a Stakeholder?
In the context of Bank-supported 
activities, stakeholders are those affected
by the outcome-negatively 
or positively-or 
those who can affect the out-
come of a proposed interventioni. The examples in the Sourcebook reveal that
determininig the relevant stakeholders for any given concern depends on the
situationi and type of activity to be supported. Task Managers generally take
tihe prag,matic position that the development concern being addressed identi-
fies the stakeholders. Once a participatory 
stance is taken, getting the right
stakeholdters becomes essential to producing good results. Not all parties,
however. can automatically 
be assumed relevant: in addition, ftor every de-
velopment concern being addressed, a broad spectrum of stakeholders exists
ranging fromil directly affected parties to individuals or institutiolis with indi-
rect interests.
Government 
For the Bank. government is always a key stakeholder. In every case, centr-al
government officials were the obvious and ftirst stakeholders that Bank Task
Managers worked with. This is because the gover-nment is a Bank shareholder,
the primiiary decisionimiaker- and implemileniter of policies anid projects, amid the
one who repays the Bank loan or credit. Usually more than onie cemitral govern-
ment institution has a stake in a Bank activity. A core ministry is always in-
volved-finance, 
planning. the central banik, or a similar ministry. Dependingll
on the activity, oflicials from other core and line ministries may have a stake in
the activity as well. Officials from other levels of government. including state
1 2 5

T tlI: IN 
)uI, 
I).\ HN 
i 
PI.%TI',( 
I I 
(iH);N 5i, Y I{, 
I.:E4Aooij
or provinicial authorities and local- or imunicipal-level officials, virtually al-
ways have a stake. Inideed. the Bank and the govermilenit must enter into a
close partinership in which shared development objectives keep the partner-
ship together. In general. Task Managers in the chaptei- 11 exaimples experi-
enced little difticulty in identityinge the relevant coverniiment stakeholders in
preparation of Bank-sLipportecd operations.
Directlv Affected 
Those cdirectly affected by a proposed inteivenitioti are clearly amnong the key
Groups 
stakeholders. They are the onies who stand to benefit or lose from Bank-sup-
ported operations or who war-ant redress from any negative effects of such
operations. The poor and marginalized are often among this group. It is these
(lirectly affected stakeholders, Task Managers tell us, who are the most diffi-
cult to idlenitify andc iivolve in participatory efforts.
Indirectly Affected 
Many individuals or institutions may be indir-ectly involved or affected be-
Groups 
cause of theil- technical expertise or public andl private interest in Bank-sup-
ported policies or programs. or they may be linked in somile way to those who
are directly affected.
Suchi stakeholder-s may include NGOs, various inter mediary or represen-
tative organizations, private sector businesses. and technical and professional
bociies. Identifying and enlisting the light intermiediary groups has provecd tricky
at times forTask Managers and in some situations turined out to be a process of
trial and error.
In the Philippines Integrated Protected Areas examiple. a group of NGO
consUltalnts were hir-ed to design a technical ftramiiework 
for biodiversity pres-
ervation as well as attend to the public participation componlent of the pro-
-rami. Although this group of scientists, academics, and forestr-y specialists
were ideally suited to address techinical issues, they had no experience with or
linkages to directly affected groups. At appraisal, the Task Manager discov-
ered thalt the real concerins of the people had been missed. To remedy this. a
national legal services NGO. PANIJPI. was brought in to identify key local
stakeholders and facilitate meetings between them and the coverrilneit-Bank
appraisal team. PANLIPI was respected by the head of the key governmenit
agency involved, who was a tormer- humall riolits lawyer. PANILIPI had pro-
videdl pro bono legal services to indigenous communities so they were knowil
and trusted by the indigenous groups. PANIIPI also had links to other- local
NGOs. which were able to arrange meetingos with local comimnuniities.
How to Identify Stakeholders
Trusting Vour MucIh still needs to be learned about how to identify and involve stakeholdlers.
Judgment 
No hard or f'ast rules exist to tell us whom to involve and how. What we do
know is that stakeholder involvemilenit is conitext-specific: what works in one
situation maly not be approprliate in another. Trusting ancl using one's ji(lgr-
ilnelt. therefore. may be the best advice Task Managers can give each other at
this point in time.
In bothi the LPDR Health and Yemen Education examnples. the in-coun-
try stakelholder-s in participatory events were limited to governiment eimploy-
ees. includilln low-level staff stationed away fromil head(Luar-ters. The Task Man-
a; ers believed that involvini_ tfield-level staff--who are amnong the "voiceless"
Withill the bureaUcracy---was the furthiest dowIn they couldl go at the time. Al-
though a pref'erence often exists for includiicl directly affected stakeholders in
I 21

PAR'TI(IPA'T'I'o(iY 
IA'I.ANNIN(i 
ANt) 
IAND ([liONMAKEN'
participatory events. this may not always be appropriate or possible. If design
is proceeding from the participatory stance. then it is probably wisest to trust
the judgment of those closest to the action-from the Bank's perspective, the
Taskl Manager. Af'ter all, many of the participatory activities in the Sourcebook
are fi-st-tirime events for all concernedl some caution in not -going too far or too
ftast may have been prudent.
A good way to identify appropriate stakeholders is to start by asking ques-
tions. Task Managers have shared with us the types of questions they ask them-
selves and then others. These questions are not an exhaustive list but rather a
preliminary road map to guide Task Managers:
* 
Who might be affected (positively or negatively) by the development con-
cerni to be addressed'?
* 
Who are the "voiceless" for whom special efforts may' have to be niade?
* 
Who are the representatives of those likely to be affected'?
* 
Who is responsible ftor what is intended'?
* 
Who is likely to mobilize for or againist what is intended'?
* 
Who canl make what is intenided more effective througlh their participationi
or less effective by their nonparticipation or outi-iht opposition?
* 
Who can con1tribute 
financial 
and technical 
resoui'ces'?
Whiose behavior has to chiang-e for the eft'ort to succeed'?
Observing No substitute exists for firsthand observation, even though it is rarely done in
Stakeholders practice. In the Brazil Municipalities example. Bank and government spon-
sors were coniviniced that the only way to provide water and sewerage facilities
to sluimi dwellers was to involve them in subproject design and implementa-
tion. Once in the participatory stance, the next question for the sponsors to
address was how to identitfy the appropr-iate slum dwellers to iivolve'? To an-
swer this question. the first action taken by the design team was to learn about
the slum dcwellers: holw they were organized an(d how they operated. To do this.
the designers had to be present in the comm11ullity 
wheni the people themselves
were present--otten on weekendls and late at night. This helped them under-
stanid that the SIlum dwellers were aissociaited with religious, sports. and other
types of clubs. They' discovered. however, thalt it was the womilen's clubs that
were key. In atfui'la. inoi'e often than not. a womran is the actual head of the
household. She is the permanent featu'e. The meni tend to come and go. In a
real sense. womeni were the local comlinUllity and were the appropriate stake-
holders for involvement in subproject design and implemenitationl.
hIn-c'oIirltrv 
r'esoiirccs
Seeking Help Many of the Bank's horrowers have national institutes or centers with infor-
mation on the demography. cultural practices, and socioeconomic situation of
the countries' stakeholder groups. Local social scientists. academlics, NGOs.
governmienlt officials. an(d resident ImlissioIn staff can also help identify appro-
priate stakeholders.
In the Egypt Resource Management example. the designers created a small
library of basic refei-eice malterial about the Matrith Governorate and the Bedouilis
who live in it. A consulting teamii pr-ovided social scientists andc other skilled
people to work with the project design team to identify the local stakeholders
and their relationships to one another and the oovernment. Local authorities as-
sisted the Task Manager in identifying Bedouini representatives to serve on a
Joint task force. In tile Morocco W'omen in Development examiple, local con-
12 7

ITHEs AVO>RI.) 
BA.NKS PARTlICIPAT.IO<N 
S(OI 
1C 1EBOO(K
sultants from the university drew up lists of potential stakeholders from the NGO
and academic communities to invite to an initial planning workshop.
Batik resources
Social assessment and other types of social science data can help Task Manag-
ers get answers to the questions noted above. For example. in several recent
Global Environment Facility projects. stakeholder profiles have been prepared
to help determine who should be involved in biodiversity conservation projects
and how. A document showing how stakeholder profiles can be prepared is
available from the Environment Department's Social Policy Division (ENVSP).
The Bank's regional technical departments and ENVSP include social sci-
entists who can help design social assessments or help identify consultants to
do so. Such consultants generally possess specific regional. country, and eth-
nic group knowledge.
The Bank's libraries also contain a wealth of information that may be helpful
in identifying different stakeholder groups, determining their relationship to one
another and understanding the social. cultural. and institutional factors (for ex-
ample: gender, ethnicity, income level, social organization, and power relations)
that affect the ability of stakeholders to participate. For example, one of the best
sources of information on indigenous peoples is The Encyclopedia of World Cul-
tuires, edited by David Levinson (1993) and available in the Bank's library.
Sourcebook resources
The best way to learn about participation is to experience it directly. The sec-
ond best way is vicariously, by seeing what others have done in the name of
participation and then seeking their guidance. We encourage you to get in
touch with the Task Managers and staff who have shared their experiences in
chapter 11 and find out how they identified appropriate stakeholders for their
operations.
Disseminating The design team undertaking the Sri Lanka National Environment Action
Information Plan convened an open public meeting, as is standard under environmental
procedures. They developed a list of relevant stakeholders by seeking help
from in-country and Bank resources but also advertised the meeting in the
local newspapers. By making sure that information about the proposed activ-
ity was widely disseminated, the design team enabled interested stakeholders
to show up on their own accord.
12'
"vx"~~~~~~~

I NN'()1,V'IN(; 
S'T'AIEIIOLA)ER
Once stakeholders have been identified. the next step is to enlist their partici-
pationi. After this. sponsors and designers have sought to worki with affected
stakeholders througlh a variety ol'approaches. But "speciaP measures are needed
to ensure that groups that are normally excluded from the decisionrnaking pro-
cess have a voice. To achieve this. designers and sponsors have first organiized
the "voiceless,'" mandated theil- representation, heldc exclusive participatory
sessions with them, employed "leveling" techniques that allow stakeholders at
all levels to be heard, and used surrogates-intermediaries with close links to
the affected stakeholders. But what happens when opposition exists'? This sec-
tion concludes with examples of this type of situation.
Building Trust
To maniy of the identified stakeholders, an outsider bringing offers of "partici-
patorv developmenit" may seem suspect. Prior experience with public agen-
cies, public servants, and donor projects has. in many places. created negative
imipressions that need to be rectitied. In the chapter 11 examples. improving
communication. engaging stakeholders in repeated interactions, and workiing
through initerimiediar-ies 
who have ongoing relationships of trust with poor and
vulneiable groups helped gaini the participation of affected stakeholders.
Sharing Information In the Benin Health example, trust was built by sharing information about
what was intended by the proposed project. The Bank Task Manager and a
numilber of (theni still skeptical) centr-al goverinimlent officials held a series of
"town meetings" with groups of skeptical villagers. During these meetings,
the villagers came to learn about the hlos and whys of the possible project,
while having the opportunity to express their expectations from governmenit
for primilary health care. In so doing. wariness about outsiders faded as the
villagers became conviniced that they would not be giving up moore than they
might get in return. Once trust was established, village members were invited
to form their own village commillttees and participate in project planiling.
Interacting In tile Egypt Resource Management example. intensive and repeated inter-
Repeatedly action between design teams and Bedouiis during project preparationi helped
the Bedouins realize that the outsiders were not attempting, as in the past. to
use them. As both sides developed a feel for and understanding of one anothel-
through iterative planning sessions. suspicion of each other began to dissipate
and the basis for trust, respect, and cooperation was established.
In the Brazil Municipalities example, slumli dwellers had learined from
experience that the water companies were not interested in dealing with slums.
They, in turn, did not pay thci- water bills and constructed illegal water coIn-
nections. The sponsors of this project realized that building trust between ithe
water companies and slum dwellers was going to take time and effort. The
design teams spent weekends and nights in the slunms learninig about the coIIm-
mnulity. The local people saw that the designers were making an effort and
that they admired the local people's initiative and creativity in taking charge
of their lives. In the process, the designers helped the community learn about
and understand the water company: how it operated, what it could and could
not do. anid the basic hydraulics of water and sewerage. Joining the local
stakeholders and lear-ninig togethier with them what was possible. what they
I 2!

'CtuH Woim.i) 
B.ANii 
Pvwri( 
ci 
.vrAioN 
sOI 
E(I'VU 3(PBOO
really wanted, and how much they were willing to change their behavior to
get it. helped create mutual trust and cooperation between the designers and
the slum dwellers.
Working through In some instances distrust is so great that intermediaries may be required to
Intermediaries bridge the gap. In the Philippines Integrated Protected Areas example a
national NGO. which was respected by government, indigenous peoples,
and local NGOs alike, was able to use its unique position to bring the differ-
ent parties together. In one instance, PANLIPI used its influence to persuade
two rival NGO groups to cosponsor a public meeting. They also persuaded a
church mission group not to boycott the meeting but instead attend and par-
ticipate. All these small steps led to the beginnings of a dialogue on the
terms and conditions for future collaboration between the designers and lo-
cal stakeholders.
Involving Directly Affected Stakeholders
A great deal can still be learned about how to work with directly affected
| 
stakeholders in Bank-supported operations once they have been identified and
enlisted. The lessons of the chapter 11 examples point to several approaches
for enabling intended beneficiaries-as well as those likely to be adversely
affected-to participate in planning and decisionmaking.
Working with the In the Brazil Municipalities example, it became apparent that the only way to
C(ommunity save the Bank loan from cancellation was by the direct involvement of slum
dwellers in the design of the subprojects. Consequently, several approaches
were used to work with them. The most commonly used approaches were two
different types of community negotiations. One started with the water com-
pany deciding the engineering design first and then negotiating it with the
entire commnunity along with issues of billing. operational responsibilities.
and user contributions. The second started with community involvement from
which the design emerged. Perhaps the word "negotiation" misses the essence
of what really went on. It wasn't just the designers negotiating with the com-
munity but. more important. the community working together to take care of
individual and communal needs and making commitments about what they
were and were not willing to do.
Working with the In the Benin Health example. town meetings with the entire community were
Representatives followed by local communities being invited to form their own village health
committees to represent them at future planning events. The rules of the game
set for selecting committee members specified including at least one mother,
someone good at handling money, another good at getting things done, and a
person wise in the ways of village life. This ensured that the important func-
tions that had to be undertaken at the village level to address health care needs
were represented on the committee. Members of the village health commit-
tees collaboratively designed the project along with government officials and
other stakeholders during three planning workshops. Through their represen-
tatives, each community was able to have input into the project.
WVorking 
with Another approach to involving directly affected stakeholders is through inter-
Surrogates mediaries or surrogates. SuiTogates may be any group or individual who has
close links to the affected population and is capable of representing their views
I 30

and interests during participatory planning. In the Nigeria Women in Agri-
culture example, female extension agents served as surrogates for farm women
at a national planning workshop on women in agriculture. The objective of the
workshop was to create three-year action plans for improving extension ser-
vices for women. The transportation and time constraints involved in traveling
to the capital combined with the fact that rural women needed the permission
of their husbands to attend made direct involvement of women farmers diffi-
cult. The credibility of these female extension agents to speak on behalf of
farm women was based on their daily interaction with them and the fact that
these agents were from the same areas and many were farmers themselves. But
the Chad Education experience warns us to exercise caution in selecting sur-
rogates to speak for the directly affected. In this case, the Task Manager was
surprised to find that NGOs invited to a planning session on1 behalf of the poor
represenited their own interests instead.
Seeking Feedback
In cases in which stakeholders patrticipate through their represenitatives or sur-
rogates. Task Managers ofteni follow the rule of thumnb that onie should trust
those whio speak for the ultimiate clilents bLut fr-oni t'ime to time verify d'irectly
wvith those whose opinion really counts. The chapter 1I examples offer a nurn-
her of approaches for follow-up and feedback. Apart fromi serving the cross-
chiecking- funiction, these approaches also facilitate broader ownership and com-
mnitment amiiong, those affected by the proposed intervention.
Making On-Site In the Egypt Resource Management example. a local task force that included
Visits Bedouin representation prepared the Bank pro.ect report. During preparation
Inissins, the Bask team-which 
COUld not attend all participatory ruaral as-
sessment sessions (see Appendix [)-interacted directly with communitties to
ensLre that their interests were being accurately represented in the project docu-
mhenit. These exchanges OCCuorred 
In both a fo 
brm eoal 
and informal way. Form-al
sessiols were aTantged and facilitated by BedoLin representatives on the task
force. Memribers of the task force reported to the community ong te progress of
project preparation. Open discussion followed in which local people expressed
their opinions and asked questions. Their feedback. duly n(oted by the Bank
1 :i 1

TIHE: NVOIRIA) 1 
I.NIK 
P'ATIUI(iI'I.PAI(N 
!1OIUNCI-AOOi
team. was later incor!porated in the final project documenit. In additionl to these
formal meetings. the mission memilbers went unaninlounlced into ranldoin vil-
lages (usually prior to the scheduled meetings). 
They introduced themselves
and asked farmiers if they had heard about the project andi what they thought of
it. This informal feedback was compared with what the missioni was hearing
at the imore formal meetitigs and at the task force sessions. It served as a way
of verifying consistency and checking for biases. The Bank team always in-
cluded a female memilber who was pai-ed with a female Bedouin veterinarian
to calTy out the same formial and infornial interactions with the Bedouii womenl.
Stakeholder Review 
Anotlher way Task Managers obtainedl feedback was by providinig the oppor-
of Documents 
tunity for stakeholders to review and revise draft documents prepared by the
design team. The Egypt Resource Management, Morocco Women in De-
velopment, and Philippines Integrated Protected Areas examples are all
cases in which directly affected stakeholders provided iiforniatioll, ideas. so-
lutions. and recommenidationis that were later incorporated into reports andl
project documents by the designers. In each instanice, a follow-up 
was done
during which the wider memilbership of the directly affected groups were able
to review what was being said and proposed and make changes if necessary.
Task Managers found this follow-up to be crucial in fostering broader owner-
ship and comilillitiiient beyonid julst those who wer-e presenit at the par-ticipatory
planniniig events.
Involving the Voiceless
Some groups-especially 
the very poor., women, indigenous people. or others
who may not be fully mobilized-may 
not have the organizational or iman-
cial wherewithial to participate effectively. These are often the exact stake-
holders whose interests 
are critical to the implementationi 
success and
sustainability of Bank-sUpported progr-amils. Special efforts need to be made to
level the disequilibriulim of power, prestige, wealth, and knowledge when stroni-
ger anid mior-e established stakeholders are meant to collaborate with weaker.
less organized groups.
Building Capacity 
For instance, in the India Forestry example, the sponsors and designe-s helped
local people forni an(i strengthenl their own organizationis. Durinig the lengthiy
organizing process-as 
muchi as nine months in West Bengal-the 
local people
1 :32

I-\'AI'Iu'l('l'oI''tlv 
I'1.AN 
NIN(; 
AN'1) 
1);KI>1<NMA1.hIN'(
learned how to work together- to take care of their individual and comnmunial
needs. Once oroanized anid having clarified their own interests, their willing-
ness and ability to use the new power and skill of speaking with one, unified
voice increased signilficanitly.
In West Ben-al, capacity was built by supporting a process through which
forest cdwellers 
could come up with their own decisioniimakilln structures. Rather
thalin taking7 a rigid position about the r ighit desion for the local forestry protec-
tion commillttee, sufficielnt flexibility was allowed so that local forest dwellers
COLICd comile up with their own processes for planninig and negotiating.
Mandating 
In the Benin Health example. the sponsors and designers foresaw the possi-
Representation 
hility of wonien being let' out. So they macle participation of at least one mothier-
on each village health comimittee a "rule of the gamne." In the Chad Education
examnple. no special measuLes were taken in advance to niobilize and invite
womeni. The result'? None showed up at the national participatory planninig
workshop; hy then it was too late in the process to do anything about it.
Organizing 
In designinig, the Togo Urban Development project. initial studies revealed that
Separate Events womeni hadl almnost exclusive responsibility at the household level for the sani-
tary environimienit. providinig water, maniagt,ing waste, and familly health. Yet, dur-
ing the preappraisal mission, the first two meetin,gs included no women. So the
Bank teamn suggesteCd holdillng a separate meeting at whicih the women could
articulate their priorities and concerins. Their main concerns-whichi 
differed
froma those ol' the men-were 
meni's unemploymenit, the need for standpipes and
lat-ines in marikets, providing cential play space for children. access to drinking
water. access to finanice and credit, and trainingt in managemenit, hygiene, health.
an(d literacy. The women's agenda was fully incorporated in the final project
desigen. which inclided emiploymilenit generation through labor-intensive public
works anid a training programi in environimenital maniagemilenit geared to the needs
of a largely illiterate andc mostly female populatioll.
Similarly, in the Philippines Integrated Protected Areas example,
PANLIPI. the NGO hirecd to conduct follow-up workishops with local stake-
holder- groups, discovered that the sessions were being domilinated by local
authiorities and NGOs at the expense of indigelnoLus comm1lunlities. To let the
voice of tribal people be heard. PANLIPI decided to hold exclusive workshops
tor the tribal groups and( adimit other parties as "observers" only.
Leveling Techniques 
Power differenices among^ stakeholclers can be climinlished througIh the use of
participatory techiliques. Skilled design and facilitation of participatory pro-
cesses can promote "level" interactions. Small workinig groups, governed by
facilitator-mnonitored "behavioral riles"' that ensure that all participants speak
and receive respect ftor theil- contribUtions, is one way of doingr, it. "Leveling" is
facilitated when people listen to or observe quietly what others say without
criticisimi or opposition. In the Egypt Resource Management examiple, out-
siders watched respectftilly as the Bedouinis drew mnaps on the -round. Quiet
observation encouraged the "voiceless" to express themselves through nonver-
bal representationls. Similari-ly. role reversal, when the Bedouins led outsiders
on tranisect walks instea(d ot the other- way ar-ounld, helped level the playing
field. Role-playinIg exercises, such as used in the Colombia Energy example,
whichi helped sensitize powerful stakeholders to the lives others lead, are all-
other meanis of leveling.
I: 3

IHE, 
VORIAI) 
BA NKI 
PA RT I 
I 1P A T1( I N 
SOU)t' H( 
EI 
K)(
Using Surrogates The Nigeria Women in Agriculture example demonstrates the use of exten-
sion agents as surrogates for women farmers at a national planning workshop.
The Task Manager wanted to ensure that farm women had a voice in formulat-
ing policies and programs targeted at them. Not only did it prove logistically
infeasible to bring them to the capital, however, but power differences also
had to be considered. It was thought that in making presentations to the minis-
ter and other senior government officials, women farmers might feel intimi-
dated and overwhelmed and might not be able to articulate their needs effec-
tively. Bringing in female extension workers provided a reasonable substitute.
Although they were familiar with the situation of women farmers, they also
had experience working with male bureaucrats and local government officials.
It was therefore easier for them to speak to more powerful stakeholders and
participate more equally in preparing action plans on behalf of farm women.
In the Mexico Hydroelectric example, community meetings in Zimapan
between the national power company, CFE, and the communities included
mostly women because their husbands were migrant laborers, working in the
United States or other parts of Mexico for the agricultural harvests. This gave
the women an opportunity to participate in the resettlement negotiations and
express their needs, which included credit to start up sewing shops, bakeries.
and other sorts of microenterprise activities. As the men began to return and
reassert themselves in the meetings, however, women's participation began to
drop off. Their voice in the process, however, was maintained by female social
workers who continued to visit their homes and transmit the women's requests
for schooling. health, and other services.
Involving the Opposition
Chapter 11 contains no examples in which the designers encountered sustained
"opposition" when the participatory process started early and began with con-
sideration of a broad development concern. This was so even when it was
clear that harmony did not exist among the stakeholders before the project
began. Sometimes collaboration among different stakeholders may not be pos-
sible, however. In these cases, either resources should not be committed to the
proposed activity or a group of stakeholders may have to be left out, generally
by modifying the concern being addressed.
Stakeholder conflict is often produced by the external expert stance. When
external experts formulate a complete, fully developed proposal and present it
to the people it affects, immense room exists for misunderstanding on the part
of those who were not involved in preparing the proposal. In the India Health
and Family Welfare Sector Study, NGOs invited to a forum with govern-
ment unanimously rejected a preset agenda and action plan. They perceived
the plan as afait accompli and their participation in the workshop as a token
gesture of collaboration. Instead, they wanted to start from scratch and come
up with their own workshop agenda and action plan. The sponsors agreed to
this request, and both NGOs and govermnent broke up into small, mixed groups
to devise a new action plan. This plan was adopted during a plenary session
and was incorporated into the final report.
Starting Early In most instances, fully developed proposals are really "take-it-or-leave-it"
and Broadly propositions, no matter how much lip service is paid afterward to collabora-
tive decisionmaking. After sponsors and designers spend millions of dollars
and many years preparing a complete plan, they are not likely to be open to
134

PARl'llTICIPAl<)TORI 
PI..%^NNI(; 
A\Nr) 
DEIIO:'l>NMAH.lsNGi
significant changes. For those who perceive a loss for themselves in the pro-
posal, outright opposition may appear to be the only possible stance: the greater
the loss, the stronger the opposition is likely to be. As we know from some-
times bitter experience, once opposition mobilizes, it is difficult-if not im-
possible-to resolve the matter. The Philippines Integrated Protected Areas
example illustrates well the mobilization of opposition that could not be over-
come in one of the intended project areas. In the other three areas. however,
initial opposition gave way when participatory implementation arrangements
were used to give local stakeholders decisionmaking power in a formerly "top-
down" project.
When all stakeholders collaborate in designing their collective future, it
increases the chances of former differences being resolved and a new consen-
sus emerging around issues everyone can agree on. This is probably so be-
cause people who have to live and work together can often find ways to agree
if given the chance. Unfortunately, people do not often get the chance to work
together to determine their collective future. Development projects prepared in
the external expert stance do not provide that chance. The participatory pro-
cess, however, facilitates working together. So participation can be a "conflict
avoidance" process to the degree that it helps stakeholders with different inter-
ests explore and potentially find common interests. 
-
Finding Common In the India Forestry example, the foresters were shooting at the local people
Ground who were starting to shoot back before the participatory planning began. By
focusing on common interests-how to protect the forests while ensuring eco-
nomic survival for local people-the West Bengal Forestry Project eventu-
ally resulted in sustainable collaborative action. Through nine months of re-
peated dialogue and negotiations between the foresters and the local people,
the forest dwellers agreed to take care of the shoots thrown up by Sal stumps
so that they would become salable poles. When the poles were harvested, the
forest dwellers got the culls, plus 25 percent of the revenues from the sale of
good poles. The Sal stump growth subsequently became the main agent of
reforestation, leading the foresters to proudly show off "their" forests.
Despite the success stories, consensus will sometimes be unattainable and
no basis will exist for future action, especially in situations with a long history
of entrenched conflict and divisiveness among the parties. In such cases, the
result is no action, which is probably better than action that will fall apart
during implementation for want of consensus. Although this strategy may not
always lead to a Bank loan, it will, we believe, lead to making those loans that
have a reasonably high probability of producing what they promise, that is,
being implementable and sustainable. This point applies equally to the govern-
ment and the Bank.
Dealing with Alternatively, when strong opposition exists to a project from one set of stake-
Deadlock holders, a Task Manager may, in certain circumstances, proceed by leaving out
that set of opposition stakeholders and working with the others. Employing
this approach has many potential dangers, but it does happen from time to time
and has worked. In the Philippines Integrated Protected Areas example. the
decision to drop the entire island of Mindoro from the proposed national parks
system was taken once it was clear that the local residents were unwilling to
support such an initiative. Nevertheless, the project as a whole proceeded. The
Task Manager felt that this outcome-however unexpected-was ultimately
in the best interests of both the government and the Bank. The lack of commit-
135

1'FI E: 
V'( 
1 I, 
1) 
HAN N 
' 
P 
T 
I( 
'VIICI.\'lI( 
)N 
H)I 
1?( 
I;l
ment fromn the people oTf Mindoro would have made implementation difficult
and sustainiability improbable. In this case. the participatory process saved the
sponsors fr-om committing scarce resources to a project component that would
have performed poorly.
I
PA 
RT~IC 
IPIATO(RY 
P1,1 AN N IN(. 
A ND[ 
). 
~IN~llIN
Once appr-opriate stakeholder-s hiave beeni identified anid mieasures takenl to ensur-e
their- inivolvemient, 
the niext quiestionl to aniswer is how do stakeholders englage in
participatory planning and decisiont-aking? This section dlocum-enits 
approaches
ithat sponisors anid designlers have uised to collabor-ate with other stakeholders in
this process. Participatory planiniiig 
anid decisionmiaking shoLlid start by creatinga a
mioodi for learningI rathier than plunging directly into problemi solving. The learn-
ing phiase theni sets the stage for strategic anid tactical planning. Thle strategic plan-
ning stage in turni generates bm-ad dir-ectionis 
and priorities, whlich are operationialized
inito detailed imiplemientaitioni 
actions durting tactical planniing.
What Do Participatoryv Techniques Achieve?
Thie essential steps of project planningi anid replanning-setting 
objectives.
creating, str'ategies. and formlulatling tactics-cani 
be carriied out in both thle
exter-nal expert and participatory stances. The essential differenice between the
two is that, in the exper-t stanice. untdertaking- 
these steps is the primiary responl-
sibility of the sponsors and designers:, in the participatory stance, these steps
arec undertaken collaboratively with relevanit stakeholders.
Participatory techniiques (or- miethodis or appr-oaches) generate construc-
tive collaborationi amionig stakehiolders wvho may not be used to workingc to-
gether, ofteni comie fromi dlifferenit 
backgriouinds. anid miay have different values
andi interests. This section documienlts approaches that designers, anld sponlsors
Luse to unldertake participatory planning anld decisionmaking withi appropriate
stakeholders collaboratively. To learil miore abouit lindividual techniques, please
tLlrn to Appenidix 1.
Creating a Learning Mood
In designing- a par-ticipator-y evenit, it is r-easonable to aSSum1le that participants
will arrive prepared to take actioni based on what they already k-now, or to take
I 36_

n1o action because they believe that change is impossible. Participatory plan-
ning and decisionmaking should start by changing this mood. Although tech-
niques described may initially seem overly simple to Bank staff, Task Manag-
er-s who have used them report that they have found them extremely useful.
Interrupting the The Mozambique Country Implementation Review example used a "white
Normal Mood 
card'' exercise to enable participants to get acquainted with each other and
break the normal mood of extreme formialism in work relationships. Each par-
ticipant was given foul blank cards and asked to write one important iilple-
nmentation problemii on each card. The cards were shuffled and displayed on the
floor. The participants picked Up any four cards. except their ownI. and began a
discussion with another participant they did not know. As a result the partici-
pants had to "engage a stranoer" to get something done, an unusual way for a
business meeting to take place in that country. Interaction among people who
did not norimially interact with one another broke the ice and resulted in estab-
lishing openness and innforinality for the participatory wor-kshop.
In the Egypt Resource Management 
example. it was necessary to inter-
rupt the distrustful, "no-action-possible"' mood of the Bedouins toward outsid-
ers. The designers achieved this through repeated sessions between themselves
and Bedouill clients in whichi the clients did most of the talking and suggest-
ing. A typical participatory session started withi the Bedouins drawing maps on
the ground with sticks and stones. while the outsiders respectfLully watched the
process. The outsiders noted what was drawn first. what was drawn dispropor-
tionately large. and so on. Maps usually led to transect walks, in which the
Bedouilis who had drawn the map led the outsiders in exploring spatial differ-
ences in the area. The reversal of roles put Bedouins in a leadership position in
which their knowledge was valued and sought after.
Creating 
Common 
In the Colombia 
Energy example. one-third of the time il the stakeholder
Purpose 
workshop was devoted to creating a learning mood. Although the social and
power differences among the participating stakeholders were not significant in
this example, the potential for conitlict amolig the competing interests in tile
energy sector was great. So the facilitator designed this phase to bring forth
consensus amnongg 
differenit stakeholders. He asked participants to envisioni aild
design an ideal future for the energy sector without thinkincg about constrailnts
or setting any timelilles for achieving this vision. Some participants expressed
their visions orally whereas others cliose to portray theirs visually through
drawings. Participants were requested by the facilitator to appreciate everyone's
contribution withlout criticisill or oppositioll. It was during this stage that people
began to realize that they weren't so far apart in their tlinking after all and that
nearly everyone wanted the same things ftor the energy sector in the long runL.
This ullity of vision succeeded in creating a new-albeit 
temporary-commu-
nity of people with shared understanidings and goals. Motivated by the sense of
a coiiiioi ll mission. tile gr'oup was tempor-arily able to foorimi 
an effective plan-
ninge collllllluitv.
Opening up New 
Sometlimes closed-circle brainistorfiing sessions can be preceded and improved
Possibilities 
by exposing individuals or groups to practices of groups elsewhere. The op-
portunlity for the Andhra Pradesh Forestry Department officials in the India
Forestry example to visit and see ftor themselves how' forestry projects were
being organized in West Bengal opened up a range of possibilities that were
1 3'7

'HIE' 
N':VO RIA) 
IBA NK 
PARTICIP1 
'ATIO()A N 
O( 
EI: 
)() k
not seriously considered earlier. Bank staff and their colleagues possess a great
deal of cross-cultural knowledge about what people in other countries or re-
gions are doing to address similar concerns. Sharing this cross-national expe-
rience can open up possibilities for future action. The emphasis in the learning
phase should be to expose stakeholders to a menu of options instead of limit-
ing the horizon to any single way of doing things.
What Does the Learning Mood Produce?
When participatory techniques shift the normal mood and facilitate new. com-
mon learning they succeed in the following:
* 
Sharing information freely and broadly
* 
Drawing on the inherent possibilities of collaboration among stakeholders
* 
Bringing forth consensus (or making it clear that none exists)
* 
Setting the stage for action planning and collaboration that may be able to
resolve former conflicts that previously paralyzed common action.
I 
Strategic Planning
In this stage, decisions are made in pragmatic terms about the directions and
priorities for action needed to change the current situation and reach the envi-
sioned future. Effective strategic planning sessions are not free-for-alls or "gab
fests." The use of participatory techniques during strategic planning serves to
facilitate the formulation of group consensus in prioritizing objectives and
inventing action possibilities for the future.
Prioritizing In the Benin Health example, stakeholders made a list of all the problems
they could think of related to the state of the health care system. Listing
everyone's concerns produced such a lengthy list that problems had to be clus-
tered under broader headings such as buildings and facilities, medicine, staff-
ing and skills, and so on. The categorization of problems helped develop a
common view of health problems among such disparate stakeholders as vil-
lage representatives and central ministry staff. Categorization also helped the
different stakeholders see more clearly who owned a particular problem and
who would have to change individual and institutional behavior to fix it.
In the Yemen Education example, about forty-five participants were each
given three cards and asked to write down what they felt were the three biggest
problems with the quality of education. During the plenary session, all these
problems were noted on large flip charts. The facilitator helped narrow down
the list of problems through a "bid allocation" scheme in which each participant
had 100 points with which to bid. The participants were free to allocate the 100
points as they wished-to a single problem or any number of the problems that
had been written on the flip-charts around the room. The problems that received
the most points became the priorities for strategic and tactical planning.
Inventing Action The ZOPP technique (see Appendix I) used in the Chad Education and India
Possibilities Forestry examples illustrates a strategic planning approach in which a prob-
lem tree is first created followed by a mirror-image objective tree. The very
process of creating these diagrams, if well facilitated, can also promote infor-
mation sharing and learning.
In the Colombia Energy example, the second phase of the AIC technique
(see Appendix I) is called the "influence" stage. Here small work groups fol-
138

PiXIVVICIVATORY 
PL,ANNIN(G 
AND) 
1)DI(',IONNIA1N(N
low a stylized, "looking-backward" technique to create strategies that would
move the country toward an ideal situation. In this exercise, participants work
back from their ideal future vision to the current realities of today, listing the
key events that have to occur in terms of both personal and institutional changes
along the way. These key events, in effect. represent priorities for change. In
this way, it becomes clear to all participants what needs to change to reach
future goals. The facilitator invites each person to share their important key
cvents with other members and record them on a circle on a flip chart. Others
are invited to discuss and debate the importance of these events. What happens
is that the key events tend to build on one another and concentrate on a particu-
lar segment on the circle rather than getting randomly dispersed. This then
becomes the basis of the group's strategic plan.
Tactical Planning
Tactics are the detailed implementation and operational steps that permit action in
the short and medium tenn. These steps have to be modified and adjusted during
implementation based on information and new developments. Deviations from
tactical plans will always and inevitably occur. When these occur, some degree of
replanning will be required. This is the time to regather the stakeholders and replan
tactics based on what was learned by all during implementation.
Budgets, staffing, recruitment plans, organizational design, blueprints, other
specifications for physical construction, social marketing programs, account-
ing system design, capacity-building mechanisms. benchmarks for success,
and so forth fall under tactical planning. These are the specific arrangements
that produce action on the ground during the implementation phase. Tactical
planning, our chapter 11 examples indicate, is largely the domain of experts.
Although experts should be given time and space to design plans, it should be
made certain that all stakeholders review and approve tactical plans.
Using Government Often, the government ofticials who participate as stakeholders in participa-
Expertise tory planning take on the job of tactical planning. The Benin Health example
indicates that a group of governmnent officials (health experts) did the detailed
tactical planning and report writing. Following this, the full body of stakehold-
ers-including village representatives-reconvened to review and endorse (or
modify) the plans.
Using Local In the Egypt Resource Management example, the sponsors engaged a so-
Expertise cial development-oriented consulting firm to help design the project. The
firm was familiar with the way the Bank operates and knowledgeable about
participatory planning. They worked with the joint government-Bedouin
project design team to devise the tactics for implementation. Interestingly
and quite appropriately, the specific tactics for environmentally sound natu-
ral resource management were created by committees of people froml each
local Bedouin community. Not only was doing this consistent with local cul-
tural practices, but it also relied on the best available experts on Bedouin
behavior-the Bedouins themselves.
Using Bank In the India Watershed Development project, the Bank Task Manager helped
Expertise his Indian counterparts find technical solutions to operationalize their strategic
plans. Once the local stakeholders decided to use vegetative conservation meth-
ods as opposed to mechanical methods, the Bank Task Manager brought the
I 39

highly drought-resistant vettier grass to their attention. Not only dici it prevent
erosion, it helped feed hun.gry cattle. Bank staff can provide other types of ex-
pertise, including sharing their cross-niational experience about implementationi
arrangements that have been used to enable poor people to ifliuenlce develop-
menit decisions and resources that affect them. We have highlighted such ar-
rangenients, basecd oni a review ol' Bank experience to date, in chapter IV.
Using Existing 
In the Colombia Energy example, the tactical planninig phase was structured so
Power 
that clear outcomes anid comillitilments would emerge. Subgr-oups were forimled
around the strategic options agreed on during the preceding phases. Individuals
with the real power to implemilenit recommendations headed the suboroups. Work-
shop palticipants joined each subgroup depending o0l their technical compe-
tence and ability to influence the outcomie. Each subgr-oup negotiated their rec-
omiimencdations with every other subgroup to prepare their part of a nationwide
plan. During the final session, the participants selected individuals fromil ariong
the group to form a National Power Board that coordinated the different plans
and drafted a report stli.lmlarizilng the tactical plan. A series of follow-up stake-
holder workshops reviewed the plans. which were then preselited to the Colom-
hiall Parliament. In between these workshops, participating stakeholders shared
the draft clocument with their constituencies for 'feedback and approval. This
resulted in wider- ownership of and commiiitimient to the tactical plans.
IA1r 
MAL NA.;IJ 
N()LES
Task managers new to participation ask what role they should play in an activity
being planined and decided in a participatory way. Anotiler-and 
perhaps more
straightforward-way 
oftasking this might be, "Isn't it true that I have no role to
play in participatory processes'? Don't I just have to go along with what the in-
CoLiuitry stakeholder-s want'?" The answer is a clear and resounding "No!" Just as
Task Managers play multiple roles wheni working il the exterinal expert stance,
tihey also play multiple r oles in the participatory stance. The chapter 11 examples
indicate that Task Managers have played the role of initiating, facilitating, par-
ticipatiiig sharinig expertise. observing, navigating and iuitunn.
Initiating
In theory, the governimcnt sponsor of an activity shoulid choose the design
stance. In the ma'jority of the chapter 11 examples, however. the Task Manager
decided to work itn the participatory stance. In addition, Task Manager-s often
took on the job of finding allies, arranging financing. convincing skeptics in
the country and the Bank. identifying and involving stakeholders, inventing
techniques. anld building in-coLIntry participatory capacity. In the future, the
participatory stance may be standard practice in borrowinio countr-ies as in the
Philippines Irrigation example. or government sponlsoIs could always ask
that the participatory stance be taken, as in the Chad Education example. But
unitil this time, Task Managers wvill have to continiue to Initiate participation in
manly situations. Tlle Task Managers to wholm we have spoken see this role as
a welcomed and satisfying one.
Facilitating
Only in one instanice-the 
Yemen Education example-did 
the Task Mall-
ager take oni the facilitator role. because he happenecd to be a skillecl, experi-
4 O4

PAHT R'I 
I I 
'IATO.(NY 
P1ANN 
INt 
AN I) 
I)A(ND 
DEl(ANONIMAITIN(;
enced trainer. In several instances, Bank staff with facilitation skills served as
facilitators, while the Task Manager and other Bank staff were participant-
observers. In other cases, local conIsultants or governriment staff played this
role. sometimes after being specitically trained ftor it through programiis orga-
nizecl by the Task Manager. In the Egypt Resource Management and Mo-
rocco Women in Development examples special training was provicded to
-overniment officials and others in the country to play this role with resources
orgaiiized by the Task Manager.
Participating
The job of the facilitator is to design and carefully manage a process that en-
suLres that all those involved can and do become fully engaged with the sub-
stantive miatters uncler consideration. Facilitators need to remain "substance-
neutial" to do their job. They have to concenitiate on processes that ensure that
the "voiceless" are heard. that other- norms of collaboration are followed, that
lear-nilln occurs, and that practical results are produced. Task Managers. how-
ever, are not-and 
should not try to be-"substance-neutral."
Task Managers represenit the Bank's stake in each anid every activity. They
may have to take an advocacy stance from time to time-withiln 
the rules of
the g;ame entorced by the facilitator-in 
keeping with the Bank's mission, policy,
andc objectives. They bring expertise to the process that may not exist among
the local stakeholders. By participating. rather- thani facilitating, these experts
share what they know with the other stakeholders (as the other stakeholders
share their expert knowledge with themil) througil the social interaction of par-
ticipation. Experts cannot teach other participants all they know durinig the
participatory process. Instead what they can do-and 
do more effectively than
with writtenl reports-is 
open possibilities for action that may riot otherwise be
imnagined by other stakeholders.
Banik staff and thei- exter-nal colleagues can share with local stakeholders
thei- worldwide knowled,ge about what other people are doing to handle simi-
lar concerns. Sometimiies, as indlicatedl In the India Forestry example, experts
may be sharin'g whalt they learined clsewhel-e in the same country. Although
Banik staff halve had much experience in operating in tihe external expert stance,
more and more fiirsthand experienice in supportilng participatory planniniig pro-
cesses is being amassed. Simliliarly, learning and other iniforimiation is being
generated about arrangements that build local capacity through participation
(see Chapter IV). Bank staf'fcan share this cross-national experience with lo-
cal stakeholders to open Up possibilities fo r f'uture action.
Sharing Expertise
Participation does not eliminate the role of experts in the field of develop-
menit. It just changes the way experts comImIunLicate their expertise to the
other stakelholders. It also increases their effectiveness. Local stakeholders
clo not know everything. 
Experts of all types-engineers, 
social scientists,
econiomiiists, sector specialists, institutional specialists, and more-need 
to
conltr-ibute what they know. In a participatory stance, what development ex-
perts have to offeer has a much better chanlce of being accepted and used than
when they rely on reports and briefings to share their expertise. Chapter II
examples show no signs that experts or their expertise will soon be extinct in
the field of development. In fact, biases favoring expert knowledge show up
in several of our examples.
141

TUIH 
Hi: 
)V 
OI-.) 
HANNF 
PA RTICI 
I PATlI4)N 
S(O)IRCF 
IB)O)I
Participation allows local people to speak for themselves. After all, they
are the "experts" on what they want and need. Through participation, experts
rnay open up other possibilities for local people for incorporation into their
own expertise. Local people are also uniquely expert on what they are willing
to change. to what extent. and how. The challenge for Task Managers is to find
ways to bring this local expertise into Bank-supported activities.
Observing
In addition to sharing expertise and helping get the balance right between tech-
nical and local expertise, Task Managers also have to play an "observer" role in
participatory processes. One result to look for, or "observation target," is a rather
straightforward matter: "Are the technologies and methods the stakeholders in-
tend to use sufficiently effective and efficient to make the project a worthwhile
investment?" In other words. will the internal and economic rates of return sup-
port the investment'? A related observation target is if the stakeholder's decisions
are acceptable to the Bank with regar-d to its objectives and policies.
A relatively new observation target-one 
of immense importance for
poverty alleviation-is 
if project implementationi arrangements build local
capacity so that the pooIr can sustain and build on1 the benefits of the devel-
opment activity. Traditional engineering, economics, and sector expertise
do not include everything needled to build local capacity. Social scientists
have much to contribute in this area, as indicated in the Mexico Hydro-
electric example.
Other observation targets are consenisus and commliitmiient. 
Put simply, the
conisenisus target is when a sufficient number of key stakeholders freely agree
on the content, strategy. and tactics of the proposed project. This is, of course.
a matter ofLjudgmllent. 
But observers of participatory processes are in an espe-
cially good position to make well-grounded judgments of the degree and breadth
of freely reached consensus.
The final observation target is commitmenit. Bank staff and others tend to
uLiderstand commitment as something that can only be seen clearly after the
fact from what people actually have done. The participatory stance offers a
different but practical interpretation of commitment. This ilterpretationi moves
commitment into the domain of observable human action and enables Bank
and governmiienit stalf to make assessments on the ground about the presence
or absence of commitment before approving a project and beginning imple-
mentationi. When in the participatory stance, Task Managers can observe "com-
mitmiient" as action taken by speaking (or writing) a promise to do something
in the future. Commitments can be trusted as reasonable indicators of future
action when they are made under the following conditions:
* 
People are free to make whatever commitmiients they choose. including
the decision to take no new action at all.
* 
People make their commitments publicly in the presence of other stakeholders.
* 
People unider-stand what it will take to fulfill the commitment.
* 
People have or believe they can get the means and competence to fullill
the commitmenit.
Commitmnents-including contracts and formal agreements-cannot be
trusted when made under duress or in secret in the absence of full information
and understanding or resources and the ability to act.
1 41

PARTlifII-APATORY 
PI-'IANNIN(; 
.\NI) A 
)Ni(Il-IONNI\ICIN(:
Navigating
Another important role that needs to be played in many but not all circum-
stances is that of navigator. Many obstacles to participation currently exist in
the way governments and bureaucracies-including the Bank-operate in the
field of development. In almost all our Chapter II examples, Task Managers
have exerted considerable effort to adapt external expert rules, principles, and
practices when working in the participatory stance.
In the Philippines Irrigation example, after verifying that participation was a
standard practice of the National Irrigation Administration (NIA), the Task Man-
ager spent most of his time helping NIA work in partnership with the central gov-
ernment and the Bank. For instance. NIA had trouble getting the core budgetary
agency of the central government to release funds in a timely manner. The Task
Manager liaised between this agency and NIA to ensure timely disbursement of
funds. The Task Manager also persuaded Bank colleagues to avoid setting specific,
long-term targets for creating new irrigation associations. The Task Manager ar-
gued that it was unrealistic for NIA to try to predict the time needed to create and
build the capacity of new associations. Also, targets set and imposed from the
outside tended to undermine the farmers' authority and control over their irrigation
systems. The desired flexibility was achieved by NIA committing its work pro-
gram one year at a time, depending on progress in the previous year. This change in
Bank requirements permitted NIA to build on existing irrigation associations in-
stead of rushing to meet predetermined targets for creating new ones.
Nurturing
Nurturing may sound like an especially soft and passive role for Bank Task Man-
agers and others to play in the field of development, which has such pressing and
urgent needs. It may also be a difficult role for Bank staff to learn how to do with
ease. skill, and comfort, given their education and experience and working in a
culture of power and control. Nevertheless. it may be the role that produces the
greatest results. Nurturers build on existing participatory capacity and help strengthen
it. The Bank's in-country counterparts ought to be the ones who are participating
with their clients and the other stakeholders. After all they-not the Bank Task
Managers-have the responsibility to serve the ultimate clients. While in this role,
Task Managers can nurture the collaborative possibilities that arise naturally in the
culture. In so doing, they should be careful to avoid snuffing out the start of poten-
tially healthy and desirable possibilities for social change. This role was played by
the Bank Task Manager in the Philippines Irrigation example. The Task Manager
first ascertained for himself that NIA was indeed working collaboratively with the
farmer-run irrigation systems. Then he helped provide a way the Bank could sup-
port and strengthen NIA's existing participatory approach.
143


CHAPTEIR 
IV
PRACTICE, 
POINTERS 
IN
ENABLING 
THE 
POOR
TO PARTICIPATE
-7~~~~1
....
y devote a chapter of the Sourcebook to participation by just
one group of stakeholders-the 
poor'? The reason is a practical
one. Participatory methods that have been used successftully to
vY v 
involve gover-nment officials and other relatively powerful stake-
holders in development initiatives may be inappropriate or inadequate for reach-
ing the poor.
Many cultural, economic, and political barriers effectively prevent the poor
from having any real stake in development activities. Without special efforts
by the designers and sponsors of projects and without appropriate policies to
adcdress and overcome these obstacles, the voices of the poor will not be hearcd
and their participation will at best be token. Reaching the poor, therefore. re-
quires working with them to learn about their needs, understanding how clevel-
opment decisions are made in their communities, and identifying institutions
andi mechanisms that can get opportunities and resources into their hands.
Involving the poor in decisionmaking 
and getting resources to them
requires strengthening their ability to act for themselves. This occur-s through
investments in human capital such as education and health. investments in
social capital such as local-level institutions 
and participatory 
processes.
and support for commiliunity-based development efforts planied and imple-
mented from the bottom up. These efforts require responsive institutionis
and legal and regulatory policies that enable. not hinder, local parLicipa-
tion. We recognize. however, that crafting responsive institutions 
and cre-
1 45

TIE 
Hl: 
VO>RTA 
BA\NKl 
PARTICIPATIO\''lN 
SiOt'R1'11MOK>1
ating an enabling environment facilitates the participation of all stakehold-
ers, not just poor people.
This chapter shares the experiences of Bank Task Managers in this respect.,
highlighting some of the ways in which they have worked with in-country coun-
terparts to increase the poor's ability to participate in development activities.
I,;ARINING 
FOI)Ni 
THil: 
1P()R
The first step in any effort to enable the poor to participate involves learning
from them firsthand about the problems they face, how they have tackled them.
and their proposals for gaining more control and influence over development
initiatives. Task Managers gain an understanding of these issues in a variety of
ways, including rapid participatory needs assessments as part of project de-
sign. broadly based participatory poverty assessments (PPAs) in the context of
country economic and sector work (ESW), or more formal, large-scale. cen-
sus-type surveys. Here we focus on some of the participatory methods that
have proved useful in poverty assessments and ESW and that could be equally
applicable during project preparation.
Learning What Poverty Means to the Poor
Several methods are available to explore how the poor perceive poverty. These
techniques should be used by local people (or by a team of researchers that in-
cludes local men and women) who know appropriate ways to approach the topic.
They should be used after researchers have spent some time in the local commu-
I 
nities. clarifying the reason for their interest in learning about poverty there.
Defining Poverty The Bank's Zambia PPA used wealth-ranking techniques to learn how local
people characterize poverty. Villagers were asked to sort a stack of cards. each
labeled with the name of a head of household, into piles according to the relative
wealth of the households, using any criteria of wealth they wished. Wealthy house-
holds were identified as those, for example, with the biggest fields or enough
money to dress well and give to the poor. Those identified as poorest were com-
monly female-headed households or people living by themselves. dependent on
relatives or neighbors for their daily needs. Ranking exercises such as these can
lead to frank group discussions on poverty-often a sensitive and difficult topic.
In the Burkina Faso PPA simple "point-and-shoot" cameras were lent to
various members of three representative communities, who were then asked to
take pictures of what they thought constituted poverty in their communities.
The cameras were handed out to men, women, and children, none of whom
had ever used a camera before. The films were then developed locally and the
prints shown and distributed for discussion by the community. They were sub-
sequently shared with some of the country's senior policymakers.
Learning about the The design of community-level. poverty-focused initiatives always requires
Poor's Priorities some kind of direct consultation with the poor to learn about what they con-
sider to be the development priorities in their communities. Care needs to be
taken when asking about their priority needs, because people's expectations
ma' be raised even though the project may not be able to fulfill them. Re-
searchers need to be honest about the likelihood that the communities con-
sulted will benefit from the upcoming project and about the start-up time re-
quired before they will see any results.
146i

ENI:..UJIN(. 
TH11F; P'(M(R 
TO'( PA.UT1 
1 
IPAT 1
Box 4.1. Organizing a Participatory Poverty Assessment
Task Managers who have been responsible for organizing complete PPAs highlight the following steps in the process:
* 
Selecting technical support. In practice, most Task Managers in charge of PPAs have started by locating a senior
social scientist either in the Bank or outside to take responsibility for carrying the exercise through to completion.
* 
Identifying objectives, methodology, and a research agenda. The PPAs conducted so far have varied a great deal in the
methodologies used, the scope of the research. and the duration of the fieldwork, which has taken from days to
months.
* 
Identifying in-counztrv institutions and researchers. Some combination of academic researchers, nongovernmental
organization (NGO) staff, and government agency staff has been involved in most PPAs. An experienced local social
scientist is generally needed to oversee the exercise and make a substantial input to synthesizing the conclusions. A
competent local institution is also needed to deal with the logistics of mounting a large-scale field research exercise.
* Identifying sources offinding. Many PPAs have been funded from trust funds such as those provided by the Overseas
Development Administration, the Dutch Poverty Trust Fund, the Swedish International Development Authority, the
German Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit, the United Nations Children's Fund. and the Canadian Inter-
national Development Agency.
* Designing a training input. A significant training input may be necessary to familiarize the researchers with the
participatory methods and systematic recording and reporting of fieldwork results.
* 
Support to implementation. No matter how well designed the research activities may be, a certain amount of support
and supervision is usually needed while the teams are in the field.
* Aialysis andfortnulation of policy recommnendations. 
Task Managers stress that fieldwork results must be well docu-
mented and a certain amount of analysis must be done while still in the field-something the researchers may not be
used to doing. Task Managers also recommend finding social scientists experienced in policy formulation in develop-
ment agencies, such as the Bank. to assist the local researchers in their analyses.
Source: Andrew Norton and Tom Stephens. 1995. Participation in Poverty Assessrmzents. 
Participation Series, Environment
Department Paper, World Bank. Washington, D.C.
Formal beneficiary assessments can offer insights into what poverty means
for the poor and their priorities. A beneficiary assessment (see Appendix I) is a
tool to gather information to assess the value of an activity as it is perceived by
its principal users. the beneficiaries or clients. Formal beneficiary assessments
with systematically selected populations can take four to six months. so early
preparation is needed and can cost $30,000-$50.000.
In some of the communities visited in the Zambia PPA, focus group discus-
sionis were held with men and women to investigate what people saw as the main
issues facing their community and potential ways of resolving them. Focus groups
r anked problems in order of severity and identified potential solutions actionable
at the level of individuals or households, the communitv, and outside agencies.
Providing Incentives for the Poor to Participate
People will not participate unless they believe it is in their interest to do so. All
too often participation is seen as a way of getting poor people to catTv out
activities or share in their costs, when the benefits are not clear to those ex-
pected to participate. When these projects fail, it is often the participatory ap-
proach that is blamed. Some forestry projects. for example. have expected for-
est dwellers to plant and maintain community wood lots or engage in forest
reueneration even though participanits cannot be certain who will get the ben-
efits when the trees mature. It is no surprise that poor people only support
these projects as long as tihey are paid. Successful participatory projects, on the
other hand, illustrate many incentives identified through participatory processes
that support and encourage participationi at the local level. A few examples of
appropriate incentives follow:
147>

Clear Benefits 
A key tactor in the success of the Fundasal Low-Income Housing project was
the incenltive to own a home. This was so attractive to the beneficiaries that they
were hiohly motivated to paL-ticipate. No other incentives were required.
In the India Forestry example. forest protection committee memiibers (who
were local people) i reachied an agreement with the West Bengial Forestry Depart-
menlt that entitled them to a share of intermiediate forest products plus 25 percent
of the revenues fromil the sale of final hai-vest poles. This served as an incentive for
themii to cooperate with the gover-nmenit in protecting and regeneratling the forests.
The legislationi being presented to indigenous comimiuniities in the Philip-
pines Integrated Protected Areas example restricted resource use and pub-
lic access to toirests. Designers restructLl-ed the project to fund alternative live-
lihood opportunities that would be proposed and implemented by indligenous
conimunities themselves with assistance from local nongovernmental organi-
zations (NGOs). It is expected that includingi fulids for alterniative livelihoods
will provide an incenltive for residenits to stop logging. Indigenous comnuni-
ties also insistecl on recognition 
of their ancestr-al domain rights and
legitimization of land claims as preconiditions of participation.
In the Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutritioni project, women's working groups
were developed to support comImlunity nutrition workers. An impor-tanit factor
in explaining the existence and strength of women's working gr'OUpS in a given
comIllunity was how the villagers' perceived the value of the services offered
by the comml.unity nutritionl workers. When a village did not consider the
worker's services to be a prior-ity, they were not inclined to form a support
gcroup aroulid her: therefore, the provision of quality services meeting the needs
of the beneficiaries was the fiirst step In creating an environment conducive to
Icomm1ullity 
palticipation.
Prompt Action 
In the Brazil Municipalities example. the process of selecting contractors mo-
and Visible Results 
tivated the local comimlunity of MoITo to oroanize anld collaborate with the water
company. They realized that this was not just ancother- electioni-year- promilise andc
their election-year skepticism was dissolved by prompt and visible action.
In the Rajasthan WVatershed 
Development project, encouraging field results
',eneratedl considerable enthusiasimi among staff and local residenlts. Villace com-
moin and plivate lands expenienced tip to tenlfold increases in todder yields in alilost
all locations. These early, visible results demonistrated that the new program was
producilln significant gains andc motivatecd people to participate more fully.
Among the poori womeni are overrepresenite(l: therefore, in oul eff'orts to reach
anid engage the pooIr, we must recognize that some issues and constiainits re-
lated to participation are gender-specific and stem from the fact that men and
womeni play differenit rO/es. have differenit needs, and face different constraints
on a number of different levels.
Because of such differences, we caninot assume that women will auto-
maticallv benefit from efforts to involve poor people in project design and
implementation. On the contrary, experience has macle clear that. unless spe-
cific steps are taken to ensur-e that womeni participate and benefit, they usually
do not. A World Banki evaluation of 121 r ural water supply projects founLd that
even In a sector in which women carried the greater share oft responsibility.
they benefited primnarily fromil the 17 percenit of water projects that had been
specifically designed to involve theli.
I 4

ENk1,;I'EillF 
pom?, 
.,s, 
1s1t
.P~~~^'
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Z 
_
Barriers to Women's Participation
Systemigc ender biases may exist in the forim of (t) customi1s, 
beliefs, and atti-
tiides that contine women mostly to the domestic sphere. (b) womieln's eco-
nomic and domiiestic workloads that impose severe tine burdens on them. and
(c) laws and customiis that impede women's access to credit, productive inputs.
employment. education, inftrmationi. or medical care. These differences affect
meW15s 
and women's ability adlcl incentives to participate in economllic andi so-
cial development activities.
Sociocultural In seeking the participation of women in development activities, sensitivity is
Constraints 
nee(decd on the social and cultural barriers that may inhibit women's participa-
tion. In the Balochistan Province of Pakistan. the acute shortace of femiale
teachers has been due, in part. to cultural constraints against girls going away
to attend residential teacher training colleges. The lack of female teachers is.
in turn, aln important factor in the low enr-ollmenit ( 15 percent) ol' girl's in pri-
marv schools. Most parenits find it culturally unacceptable to send thei- daugh-
ters to boys' schools or to have thenm taught by m1ale teacher-s brought in from
the city ancd unknowin to the community.
By adapting 
to these constrainits. 
the new Balochistan 
Primary
Education 
Program has succeeded 
both in increasinio the supply of fe-
male teaclhers ancd in raising girls' enr-ollimenit rates to 80-100 percent in
villages with new schools. Under the this program. potential teachers are
recruited from iwitlii, 
the village bv parenlts on the newly formed village
education conimiiiittees: the program also provides mobile teacher training
in the girl's village. After graduating, the teacher becomes a uovernment
employee, 
assigned to teach in the school establishecd bv her sponsoring
village education comlm1ittee.
Time and Mobility 
In addition to cultural constraints. women's work often denies them the time to
Constraints 
participate in meetings. As wottien's domestic responsibilities often require
them1 to stay close to the homile, lack ot m1obility may also be a constraint.
Various practical measures-fromn 
providing child-care facilities to installing
standpipes that reduce time spent fetching water-can 
ma;ke it easier for women
to attend meetingts or training sessions. In particular, the choice of tine and
1 49)

IT1)1: 
(1x1.1 
IO 
IA; HANI 
PARTFl(IC.\IPAION 
S()11('RCVM()z1,:
place for meetings must take account of women's schedules and the availabil-
ity of safe transport.
In the Nigeria Women in Agriculture example. specific steps were taken
to reduce the conflicts in women's schedules and guarantee regular attendance:
each group meets on the same day at the same time and place; reminders
about the meetings are posted at highly visible and accessible locations, and,
if the scheduled day conflicts with a market day, the women are consulted in
advance and an alternative time found. Consequently, women rarely face the
problem of not knowing where and when the meetings are held.
Legal Regulatory Legal restrictions in some countries prevent women from participating in for-
Constraints mal labor markets or holding certain occupations. They may also prohibit
women from entering into contracts under their own name, inheriting prop-
erty, or holding legal title to land.
The Honduras Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit includes sup-
port for implementing changes in the law to allow women to have title to land.
Before the new law, land tenure rules and regulations made land adjudication
and titling cumbersome. The law also specifically forbade women from hold-
ing title to agricultural land unless they were widowed with dependent chil-
dren under 16 years of age. Women relinquished even this limited title when
their eldest son reached 16 years. This and other provisions not only excluded
women from independent agricultural production but also prevented them from
iholding the collateral necessary to obtain credit for agricultural or other pro-
ductive ventures. In 1992 the law on land tenure was modified to provide
wotmen with equal rights of access to land. Tranche-release conditions under
I 
the Agriculture Sector Adjustment Credit include satisfactory implementation
of the new Land Tenure Action Plan.
In some cases, conditions are such that special legal or regulatory provi-
sions may be needed to permit the equal participation of both men and women.
In Pakistan, for example, several reforms were undertaken to facilitate girls'
participation in the Balochistan Primary Education Program. Changes in
the regulations governing recruitment. training, and support of feniale teach-
ers were made so that women could be recruited to teach in their own village.
This included lowering thie minimum age to 14 years and raising the maxi-
mum age to 40 years: lowering the minimum qualification for matriculation:
legalizing a mobile teacher-training program for women; and officially sanc-
tioning new community-sponsored village schools and teacher posts. Without
such changes, the (lemianicl 
for community-managed girls' schools would have
far outstripped the nuLmnber- 
ol qualified. available women teachers.
Seeking Women's Views
Using Appropriate Often the first step toward determining appropriate measures for supporting
Methodologies women' s participation is to obtain good informnation-about gender roles,
needs, activities. access to and control over resources., existing institutions,
and the constraints operating against women's participation. This can be done
through gender analysis, which, if effective, elicits the views of women and
often involves gender awareness training for facilitators or interviewers.
Genlder analysis leads to the formulation of a gender strategy that addresses
pra<cti(cl gender needs (roles and responsibilities) and strategic gender needs (sys-
temic issues of equity and empowennent). Effective gender strategies pay particu-
lar attentioni to resoulce allocation at both household and community levels.
150

EN ABLING 
THEPHERI' 
T)( O) PA II'FI(CI 
PAlE
Because gender planning is part of the overall planning process, it is criti-
cal that the integration of gender concerns occurs early in policy formulation,
analytical work, and project preparation.
Gender-Responsive Some recent poverty assessments have been designed explicitly to solicit
Poverty Assessments women's views on a wide range of questions. In the Cameroon PPA, 50 per-
cent of the interviewers and 50 percent of those interviewed were women. The
resulting information on gender issues was fully integrated in the subsequent
analysis and recommendations with strong policy implications. For example,
women in Cameroon were found to be shouldering most of the burden of pro-
ducing and marketing food. Their average labor hours per week were esti-
mated to be more than double those of men. As a result, urgent action was
recommended to give women access to time- and labor-saving transport and
technology to allow them the opportunity to develop their own skills and par-
ticipate in community projects.
Involving Women In the Morocco Women in Development example, poor rural and urban women
in Policy Work were given the opportunity to articulate their needs and priorities through a
participatory rural appraisal process (see Appendix I) that provoked discussion
among community members about development and gender issues and sought
women's views in formulating national policy objectives. It was discovered
that women's concerns and priorities differed from those of the men and other
stakeholder groups. The findings of this qualitative exercise were used effec-
tively to complement conventional survey methods, and the new perspectives
gained were applied in defining the recommended program of action.
Working with Women's Groups
Making an effort to engage and involve women can bring significant returns. Over
and over in our examples, we find that women's groups have proved to be one of the
most effective entry points for initiating activities and reaching poor households.
In the Brazil Municipalities example, women's clubs proved to be the
most effective instruments for working with the community. Within the favelas,
the women themselves turned out to be the key to getting the subprojects under
way. The designers met with the women first when they came into a commu-
nity and worked with them on a daily basis in designing and implementing the
water and sanitation subprojects.
In the Nigeria Women in Agriculture example, government field staff,
recognizing that more than one-third of Nigerian women belong to coopera-
tive societies and other locally organized formal and informal associations,
built on these indigenous women's groups to expand the newly established
state Women in Agriculture (WIA) programs. The WIA program used NGOs
to help identify women beneficiary groups and then WIA field staff targeted
them to initiate and execute project activities.
Under the Gambia Women in Development program, women's groups or kafos
are the entry point for the skills development component of the project. Kafos, usu-
ally with about 100 voluntary members, traditionally provide mutual member sup-
port, sharing labor and making loans to those in need. More recently their roles have
expanded to include income generation and basic education. Members of kafts have
access to skill training provided by community development workers in business
management and productivity enhanicement. Some kqlb members are being trained
by community development workers to tutor in basic literacy and arithmetic.
1 51

'I'Hll 1; W(MA)1.} 
BA N h 
VA. 1TI'( 
'IPAl'.''()N 
S411(t 
Ex 
1:1MOK1
When designing poverty-focused initiatives. Thask 
Managers 
have founfd 
it nec-
Z~Fq 
, 
t7
essary to learni about the characteristics of poor communitiUes and thL local
organizational Str-UCture- 
within whichi decisions are taken. As the exaimples
fromi the prev.ious sectioni suggest. women's groups are ofteni found to be amon-
the miost effective local-level IinstitUtions. Maniy other struCturies. 
however. ex-
ist at the local level that represent valuable organizational resources and pro-
'ide potential ability for Linder-takine- 
developmient activities.
Understanding Community Organizations
Seeing Invisible In a typical poor- commuiLnity, 
a whole range of organizationis ar-e operating:
Groups formal or inform-nal, 
traditionial or- miodlern, 
indigTenouIS 
or externally established.
All these have differ-ent functions, be they produiCtive, 
soci'al, religious. or oth-
erwise. It iS Oftenl thi'loLugh 
these organlizations 
that demiand is expressed. par-
ticipatory processes organized. and developmient 
services deliver-ed.
Some of the miost active commi-unity 
organizations ar-e informial. They ai-e
niot listed in aniy documients, 
anid they m-ay be unk-nown even to people fam-iliar
with thie commiiuniti'es 
(exteilsion agenits, local developmient 
agency staff, and
so forth). Learninig about these groups enitails visiting the COmmunIllities 
anid
talkintz with inihabitants abouit the deci's'ioninaking units pr-esent.
A simple "Institutional mapping," exercise has been used successfully in
several PPAs. Local people were asked to identify the comimunitv groups by
drawinie circles of differnne sizes-the bigger the circle the imore imnportant
and influential the institution it represents. 
The extent of shared decisionmiakingC
among groups cani be repr-esenitedi 
by' how circles are placed in relation to onie
another: the closer together and thie more overlapping, the greater the degree
of inter-actioni 
between the repr-esenited 
gr-oups. 
These graphics. somnetimies 
called
"chacpati diagrams," have proved effective in identifyling iniformal groupings
-~~~- 
.
that are important ,safety nets" foir the poorer Iemnbers of the comimunity and
revealing that soe of the mi ore obvious organizations are actually quite weak.
Building on Manv of the projects described in Chapter 1l worked through existing commu-
Traditional'Structures nityo rganizationssandarebuiltonthealreadyestablished,collaborativeexpe-
rience of these grouips.
I '52

E:NABIAI,IN 
i THF: 
1'( ()i1 
'IT ) PA F'rl('Jl'J'II;
The Nicaragua Municipal Development project. not described in this
report. used existing local grassroots organizations-the Sanidiiiista Defense
Commiittees-formed during the Nicaraeua Revolution. Because of their struc-
ture,i motivation. aild the cohesion of their memilbers, they proved an extremliely
effective instrumlient fior reaching and involving the local population. Their par-
ticipation in civil works construction improved the rate of return, iicr-eased the
quality of construction. and enhianiced efficiency. The planned five-year project
was completed in three and a half years.
Even where nietw institutions are foorimled, 
they may be most successful if
based on pre-existing relationships:
In the Senegal Small Rural Operations project, groups of farmers orga-
nized arounldi a shared economic interest registered as a groupment 
d'int7ret
(chOnhmiqulle 
(GIE) to identify and prepare subprojects. open accounts in the
local bankinu systenm, and contribute funds for renewal of equipment and in-
frastructure. A mid-term review of the project found that the most ftunctional
GlEs generally evolved out of old intforimial 
groups characterized by social co-
hesion. mutual trust, and a history of joint action. Newly created GlEs that had
been mobilizecd around a temporary, shared economic activity were the least
efficient and most f'ragile.
The Egypt Resource Management example built on a traditional Bedouin
lineage structure, the baWt, to create community groups that became involved in
preparing community action plans and implementing and monitoring subprojects.
Catalyst Organizers Establishing new groups and building on existing structures requires a good
deal of groundwork to increase community awareness about the benefits of
organizing to participate in project design and implementation. This prepara-
tion is often donie by providinig facilitators or "catalyst-organizers." These fa-
cilitators may be f-om the implemileniting 
agency or from an intermediar-y orga-
nization such as an NGO.
In the Balochistan Primary Education Program, collective action was
induced with the formationi of village education committees. Commulnity work-
ers went door-to-door to organlize parents' groLIps, encouraging all parents to
forml an association. No parental involvement existed in schools at all, in fact
many parents were not even aware that their children had a right to public
education. Parents joined village education committees, which had clear man-
dates to perform specific tasks, such as identifyiig teachers and monitoring
teacher and student attendance.
In the Nepal Irrigation Sector program, an association officer was sent
out to each district to meet with farmers. inform them about the objectives of
the project, and encourage them to organize themselves into an irrigation asso-
ciation (IA). In maniy villages, unofficial farmers' organizations were already
functioning around the irrigation system. Association officers encouraged irri-
gation associations to form around pre-existing village societal organization,
and villagers were asked to elect an executive committee for the IA through
their own selection process.
Federated Structures Effective coninullity action is rooted in local-level systems and is relatively
small in scale, often averaging some fifteen to thirty households that are en-
gaged in collective action. To keep authority and responsibility anchored at
the local level while providing integration and learning among similar groups,
a pattern of "bottom-up" integration emerges in many of the examples we
reviewecd.
153

ITHE4 W\ )MIA) 
I:,AN'hl.K 
{l 
PARICIPATIOtN' 
SOVRC-lA Ilmotli
In Colombia's Community Child Care and Nutrition project, home-
based institutes are administered through a three-tiered community structure.
First, parents of children enrolled in ten to fifteen centers form a parents'
association. Second, parents at each center elect three representatives to join a
local assembly with thirty to forty-five members. Third, the assembly elects
five parent representatives to serve as its board of directors. The parents' asso-
ciations, through the board. manage the project funds and the local contribu-
tions from parents.
Deep tube wells provide large areas with irrigation water under Nepal's
Bhairawa Lumbini Groundwater 11 project. About 150 farm families are
served by each tube well, but such a size proved too large for members to
work together effectively. To remedy this, tube well users' groups have been
subdivided into units of approximately thirty families each. Seven or so of
these units are confederated into a water user group; four to five such groups
form a water user association, which has an elected chairman. The subunits
and water user groups control water distribution at the local level, whereas the
water user association has decisionmaking authority over issues that affect the
system as a whole.
Potential Pitfalls A common failure in working with local groups is to create the institutional struc-
ture without paying adequate attention to the capability, knowledge, and technical
skills the groups will require. Newly established groups have failed because too
nmuch was expected of them too soon. Likewise. attempts to modify the form or
function of existing groups to serve project needs does not always work.
Building the Capacity of Communitv Organizations
Community groups, in addition to lacking sufficient funds to begin their own
development efforts, frequently lack adequate organizational, administrative,
and technical skills to design and implement such activities. Task Managers
and their government counterparts have sought to assess and build this capa-
bility within Bank-financed projects. Most of the examples come from social
funlds, because these operations are currently at the forefronit of the Bank's
capacity-building efforts.
Assessing Capacity Several social funds have included institutional assessments of community
organizations during subproject appraisal or even earlier to determine the de-
gree to which these organizations are operating in a participatory manner.
In the Peru National Fund for Social Compensation and Development
(FONCODES), community organizations are assessed during subproject ap-
praisal through a beneficiary assessment (see Appendix 1). At the time of ap-
praisal, FONCODES staff talk with villagers during site visits to verify that
general assemblies were held in which members of the subproject manage-
ment committee were selected by the community.
Indicators The Social Investment Fund in Ecuador used a set of indicators to deter-
of Capacity mine the institutional strength of community organizations. including:
* 
Internal process and regular leadership renewal
* Degree to which members control and audit the use of funds
* 
Degree of physical participation of members in the communal activity
* 
Degree to which members participate in organizational decisions
154

I 
AB.IA,lNG; 
TIHE1`: 
( 
T)) 
()1 ' 
PA\RTICIPATE.- 
11
* 
Administrative capabilities of the organization
* 
Technical capacity of the organization (education level, special courses.,
and training of leadership and members)
* 
Degree to which members are able to handle required technology by
themselves.
Providing Training Training community organizations can empower them to better identify and
prioritize their needs and develop strategies to meet them, begin microprojects,
and sustain their development efforts once outside assistance is withdrawn.
Training can be provided by project staff or subcontracted to NGOs or other
local firms experienced in community-level programs.
The Ethiopian Social and Rehabilitation Development Fund project in-
cludes plans for an extensive training program for local community leaders and
subproject management committee leaders, with special emphasis on the partici-
pation of women. Training is to be provided in local planning, needs prioritization,
subproject preparation and supervision, and management of microproject funds
and accounting. Local govemment officials and local NGO staff are in turn being
trained to help communities prepare and implement subprojects.
Community participation training has been built into the Benin Health ex-
ample. Each year at their annual training session, all members of Benin's health
care profession receive specific training on how to work with and in local com-
munities. They learn skills in listening, facilitation, and satisfying the needs of
local communities. Through this kind of training, government employees are
taught customer service and the value of being responsive to clients.
Branching Out Once groups have become skilled in tasks required for their participation 
in the project
activities, they can go on to undertake other development activities on their own.
Many of the women's working groups that sprang up during the course of
the Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition project to promote better health and
nutrition practices in the villages later began food processing to supply the
feeding supplement under the project. This had the advantage of contributing
to income and employment opportunities. Women's groups that t'irst mobi-
lized aroUnd healtlh. were the predecessors of the women's cooperatives and
societies that later formed around larger-scale and diverse activities. Appar-
ently their organizational capacities were strengthened to the point that they
could begin activities outside the project.
Once local farmier irrigation associations in the Philippines Irrigation
example had learned to work together in designing and improving irrigation
systems, the more successftul irrigationi associations used this experience to
collectively invest in threshing floors, undertake bulk procuremiient, manage
storage facilities, and provide credit to other groups of farmers. This stinIu-
lated the less successful irrigation associations to (1o the same. lAs also col-
laborated with National Irrigation Administration in preparing agricultural
development plans, which cover cropping patterns, water distribution, refores-
tation, soil and water conservation, farmer training, extension, demonstration
programs for crop productioti tnethodologies, pest management and mechani-
zation, as well as cooperatives and other credit and marketing schemes.
We have presented Bank experience in working with commnunitYv-based 
orgalniz/la-
tionis to reach the poor and flacilitate their participation. We now look at the
I55

TIiH5 \ 
)111 
BA.\NE1 
PARTZllICIPATIO 
lN SOUt R( 'BO1(>zK
Box 4.2. What Makes Community Organizations Work?
Task Managers may find the following list of five common characteristics of well-functioning community groups useful
whether they are planning to work with existing -roups or establish nlew organizations.
The grouup addresses afelt need antd ac common inzterest. When people share a commnl(oni 
problem that can be addressed
by group action (such as a lack of water supply, a security problem. or a degraded natural resource), they are more
likely to mobilize themselves and work with support agencies to change the situation than if the problem applies to
only a few members. Social cohesion tends to break down as groups grow or spread over large areas and monitoring
the behavior of individuals becomes more difficult. For this reason, as groups expand. they either create subgroups or
formalize regulations and delegate decisionmaking to smaller working groups.
* 
The henefits of workintg together outwveigh the costs. Benefits may be economic (cash savings, increased production,
income, and time savings), social capital formation (increased ability to collectively solve problems), increased indi-
vidual capacity (knowledge and skills), psychological (sense of belonging and confidence), or political (greater ac-
cess to authority, greater authority, and reduced conflict).
* 
The grouip is embedded in the loccal social organization. Community organizations are most successful when based on e.xisting
relationships and groupings or when members share a common identity such as kinship, gender. age, caste, or livelihood.
* 
The group has the capabilitv, leadershilp. knowvledqe, an7d skills to manacge the tasks. As noted above, special attention
needs to be given to ensuring groups have the necessary capacities for the tasks at hand. Those in leadership positions
need to be respected and honest in their dealings. In some cases, safeguards may need to be put in place to ensure that
these leaders are accountable to the group's members.
* 
The groulp ownts and enforces its rules and regutlations. All successful groups and associations are characterized by
internalized rules and regulations that are known by its members. Group members shoulcd be able to participate in
determining the rules and the enforcement mechanisms.
Source: 
Deepa Narayan. 1995. Designing Commnunirn-Based Developmnent. Participation Ser-ies, Environment Department Paper
= 
~~~No. 
7. World Bank, Washiingtoii, 
D.C.
I--? 
No. 7. World Bank.Washington.D.C. 
bridoint 
institutions 
that can provide links among the poor (and their comillunity
orcyanizationis). their governments. and the World Bank. We tocus here on one
particular soit of intermediary institution-nationally 
or internationally based
NGOs-although 
we recognize that this intermediationi role mnav also be filled by
diffelenlt 
inStitUtiOIS, 
SUCh aS line agencies, local gove nmiellnt units, or private fiims.
NGOs as Intermediaries
Strengths 
Many national and international NGOs serve an interimiediary fuliction whether
it be channeling developimienit resources to conmiunity-based 
organization1s.
lroviding theml with services or technical assistance, or helping to strengthen
their capacity. Although NGOs vary in thei- ability aiid comimiitment to work
with the poor. in many cases they have advantaoes as inter-miiediaries in reach-
ing people-includinlg 
womeni, ethnic minlorities, and the very poor-who 
are
not represented equitably by formal institutions. For example, NGOs may have
more field presence in a given area and emplo' local people familiar with
local coni(litions. They may' have better rapport with the poor and a clearer
understanding of poo)r people's survival strategies and perceived needs than
other kinds of interimieediaries. They may be familiar with low-cost techniques
and innovations relevant to poverty alleviation. They also usually have greater
tlexibility thanl the staff of official agencies. Many intemiecliary NGOs have
experience In participatory project design and skills in participatory research.
ComImILuInity 
miobilization. hicilitatioll 
techIIliques. ancd gtroup dynamics.
Limitations Several limitations of NGOs as intermediaries have also been identified. al-
thougch it is difficult to generalize about the sector as a whole. Sonie NGOs
I 56

have limited financial aLid manazgemnent 
expertise and institutional capacity.
Others work in isolation. communllicating or coordinating little with other or-
ozanizations (inclUding government agencies). Many may be conJfinied to smiall-
scale interventions. They may also not fully understand the broader social and(
econoIm01ic 
COnItext In whicih tiley are working Not all kinds of activities, thiere-
fore, are suited to the operational systemis of NGOs. nor do NGOs always
reaclh the poorest of the poor.
Intermediary Roles
The followinie are some examples ot' intermediar-y roles that NGOs have played
in Bank-supported projects:
Identifying The Mali National Environment Action Plan is g1iving comm.1unities 
an op-
Community Needs portunity to identify and explore enviroi-nental probleims and solutions. Be-
cause of ilteir history of woriking in communities. NGOs in Mali are in a strong
positioll to CarIry out assessinents of' environim1lenital 
conditionis in target coin-
mulnities. For this reason. the government engaged a Malian consorliLl 
of
NGOs to identify. scr-eell. subcontract, train, and supervise its member NGOs
in carrying out the assessments.
Giving Voice In the Philippines Integrated Protected Areas example, the objective of the
to the Poor joint Bank-governmient appialisal m11issioIn 
was to consult the indigenous cuIl-
tul-al comimlunities about the policy fra'miework that would help preserve stretches
of torest in which they live and ask them if they were willing to jo;in the pro-
posed protected parks system. Because of its close linkis to local communities,
PANLIPI. a nationial legal services NGO. was conitracted to idenitify the rel-
evant tribal groups an(d organize consultative meetincs between themli and the
joint appraisal missionl. PANLIPI was also hired to conduct follow-up consul-
tationis with the indioenous cultural communities. The NGO discovered that
the sessions were being dominalated by local authorities andl local NGOs at the
expense of indigenoLus comimlunities. To let the voice of tribal people be heard.
PANLIPI decided to hold exclusive consultations ftor the tribal groups and ad-
mit other parties as "observers'' only.
Organizing In the Shrimp Culture Project in Bangladesh, NGO personilel andl the gov-
Conmmunity Groups 
erinlenit inilpletilenltationl agency's extension staffteach perforimi their essential
missions in cooperation with one another. The extension service has good tech-
nical skills. whereas the NGO personnel concentrate on mobilizing, orgYaniz-
in". and motivating f'arimiers. 
Each group is performing those tasks ftor which
they have a comiparative advantage. and the two are coordinating their activi-
ties to uood effect.
Channeling Dur-iiw the Guatemala Earthquake Reconstruction project, FENACOAC.
Resources 
an NGO tederationi of sixty-nine rural savings and loan cooperatives. chan-
neled more than $3.7 million to villagers in tihe form of microeniterprise loans.
Because of its extensive network of rural members. FENACOAC was able to
reach large numiLbers of disper-sed comm11u1nities 
m11uch1 
mor-e effectively than
goverillnlelit or private sector banks. The federation tookl responsibility for in-
forrinioig beneficiaries (in this case cooperatives) of the microeiterprise com-
poneint of the project. identifying cooperatives that were eligible to receive
funds. assisting them in preparing proposals. and disbursing the funds accord-
157

ingly. The recovery rate from the entrepreneur participants has been almost
100 percent.
Understanding the NGO Sector
The term "NGO" encompasses a broad array of different organizations, vary-
ing enormously according to their purpose, philosophy, sectoral expertise, and
scope of activities. In the developmenit field, NGOs range from the large chari-
ties based in developed countries to community-based self-help groups in de-
veloping countries: they also include research institutes, churches, professional
associations, and lobby groups. Task Managers need to understand this diver-
sity to identify which organizations have the appropriate abilities, skills, and
orientation to fill a particUlar intermediary role.
Comtnun itv- based NGOs provide the institutional framework for benefi-
ciary participation and are more likely to receive project goods and services
than intermiiediaries. Among the interm-ieediary NGOs with whom the Bank col-
laborates, the following distinctions are important:
Geographical Base National orgatziZations 
operate in individual countries, whereas intenlationial
NGOs are typically headquartered in industrial countries and carry out opera-
tions in more than one developing country. Working through locally based
NGOs has the importanit advantage of contributing to the development of the
local NGO sector and is usually more cost effective. When local NGO capac-
ity is weak. however, international NGOs can be good intermediaries, particu-
larlv when working in partnership with national NGOs.
~ 
In the Benin Food Security project. partnerships were encouraged between
stronger, larger NGOs and weaker, newer NGOs to stimulate the transfer of
=metlhodologies 
and technology. This project began as a pilot that involved inter-
national NGOs and a few Beninlese NGOs. After two years of the pilot experi-
ence, NGOs were brought together with government and donors at a woorkshop
to design a new project based on the pilot phase. One of the findings at the
workshop was that geographic concentration in the capital isolated many large
NGOs fi-om target communities. International NGOs had the humanl and finan-
cial resources to submit competitive proposals to include in project activities.
They often. however. had the least recent or direct experience with potential
client communities. When local NGOs lacked transport to access project areas,
internationial NGOs had the necessar-y equipment and staff but lacked the local
contacts. At the workshop, agreemiienit 
was reached to moclify the project in sev-
eral ways. including creating incentives for NGOs to establish field offices in
the project area. giving regional offices the authority to approve microprojects
and disburse funds, and requiring international NGOs to partner with local NGOs
to facilitate technology transfer and infor-miiation 
sharing.
Primary Activities Operational NGOs are engaged primarily in designing and implementing
projects. whereas the maini pulpose of advocac.v NGOs is to defencd or pro-
mote a specific cause. Some NGOs engage in both sorts of activities. Advo-
cacy NGOs, such as those defending the rights of indigenous peoples, may
perfor-m an imporltant intermediary role in supplying informllation and facili-
tatilo communllication andc consultation.
PANLIPI, a legal rights NGO. helped gaini the trust of indigenous com-
nunities at the appraisal stage of the Philippines Integrated Protected Ar-
eas example. PANLIPI's involvemiienlt 
also resulted in several changes in the
I 58

E NABH 
IANG( 
Ti 
E 
l'l()()i? 
)H 
1P(A .-
UV10* P..Xri.
project. including increased attention to indigenous land tenure. resource ac-
cess, and livelihood issues and to greater participation by indigenous commu-
nities in managing protected areas. Generally, however, Bank-NGO collabora-
tion on specific projects is more likely to involve operational intermediaries.
Orientation Not all NGOs are effective in ensuring beneficiary participation within their
and Area of own programs. At one extreme are NGOs whose orientation and competence
Competence are similar to the private sector firms with whom they compete for contracts in
project implementation or service delivery. Such NGOs may be efficient (and
in strong demand) as senrice deliverers but are oriented to meeting the require-
ments of bureaucratic funding agencies; they may be less likely to use partici-
patory processes. At the other extreme are participatory NGOs that see them-
selves exclusively as ena-blers and capacitv biilders and refuse to compromise
their objectives or independence by collaborating in official programs.
A small number of exceptionally effective NGOs combine a high level of
competence in service delivery and in community capacity building. The Aga Khan
Rural Development Program in Pakistan provides an example of what can be
achieved by such organizations, committed to "bottom-up" planning and combin-
ing strong technical expertise with effective institution building at the village level.
Using infrastructure projects as the catalyst for institution building, this program
reached 38.000 households and created 1 10 women's groups within four years.
Accountability An organization serves the interests of those to whom it is accountable. In this
respect, national- or regional-level mnemnbership 
NGOs. including federations
of grassroots organizations or cooperatives, trade unions, peasant unions, or
ethnic groups can be valuable partners in projects requiring broad participa-
tion (although women and marginalized groups are not always well represented).
One difficulty, however, can be that they are often more politically embroiled
and subject to state regulation.
The Indigenous People's Component of the Eastern Lowlands Natural
Resource Management and Agricultural Development Project in Bolivia
was prepared in a participatory manner by a regional Indian federation in col-
laboration with a technical assistance NGO. Following a major political con-
frontation, however. between the federation and the regional development cor-
poration over control of the component, the component was redesigned, greatly
reducing the power of the federation in project implementation.
Among NGOs that are not membership based, accountability to client coin-
mnunities, for example, through community contributions of cash, labor. mate-
rials. or facilities, is an important indicator of an NGO's participatory effec-
tiveness. Nonparticipatory NGOs may regard community members purely as
beneficiaries and the fnding agenici.es as their clients.
Identifying Appropriate NGOs
Specific criteria-in terms of technical and operational capacity, outreach po-
tential. skills in community capacity building, and knowledge of conditions in
target communities-need to be matched to the specific task at hand. In general,
the most effective NGOs are those that have already established participatory
processes with their clients. The following list of indicators has been drawn up to
guide Task Managers and their in-country counterparts to those NGOs that are
likely to employ participatory practices effectively. Assessments should be based
on the track record of the NGO rather than on its stated objectives.
1 5 9

TI'HI-E WVoRIA.f 
BANK 
I''IPAT'I)N 
S4)11(IIz:1I(
Source 
A useful starting point for Task Managers unfamiliar with the NGO sector is
of Information 
the data base maintained by the Bank's NGO group in the Poverty and Social
Policy Unit, which containis information o0n more than 8,000 NGOs world-
wide. The NGO group also maintains a library of NGO directories and sector
studies fromii a large numllber of developing countries. Within borrowing coun-
tries. information is frequently available from NGO utilbrella organizations,
local offices of donors (for example. the United Nations Children's Fund, United
Nations Development Programme. and Ford Foundation), or from the govern-
ment ministry responsible for NGO liaison. Some resident missions also keep
NGO directories on file.
If an NGO is needed simply to provide informal advice on Bank-sup-
ported operations, sufficient informliation may be obtainable from local con-
tacts, such as resident donor representatives or leaders of NGO consortia. If
the aoal is to identify an NGO for partnership in project design and iniplemen-
tation, a more active search is required, including field visits by consultants
and interviews with a sample of community leaders and members in the areas
of the NGO's activities. When NGOs are themselves to screen other NGOs in
operations-as 
is often the case with social funds-formal 
eligibility criteria
and case-by-case institutional appraisal methods are called for.
Selection Criteria The Bangladesh Second Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance project sought
an NGO to share inftormllationi with affected groups. represent their interests, and
consult with them to ftormulate a resettlemenit action plan. The selection process
set out in the staff appraisal report considered three criteria. First, appropriate
NGOs had to have a track record showing experience and ability to mediate and
work with people at the grassroots level. Second. the skill Imix, field experience.
availability, and mobility of staff of each NGO was factored into the selection
process. Third. the selection process focused on the proposed work plan and
approach put forth by each NGO for this particular project.
NGO Assessments 
When NGOs will be involved in a wide variety of activities or when little
or no information 
is available. it may be helpful to conduct an NGO as-
sessment. The Bank has unclertaken NGO assessments on1 a national basis
(in Uganda). in a specific sector (India Health and Family Welfare Sec-
tor Study) and in connection with specific projects (the Nepal Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation 
project). Drawine froni this experience, 
box 4.4
represents the factors that have proved useful in NGO assessments. 
par-
Box 4.3. Indicators of Participatory Effectiveness in Intermediary NGOs
* 
A flat management structure with decentralized authority
* 
Organizational structures at the community level to which funding and/or other decisions are delegated
* 
Use of iterative planning, involving consultation with local communities
* 
Contributions of cash, labor, raw materials, or local facilities by community members and organizations. making
them clients rather than beneficiaries of the NGO
* 
Staff recruitment criteria, incentives, and training that support participation
* 
Strong field presence outside metropolitan areas with a high proportion of staff of local origin
* 
Community leaders and members have a positive perception of the NGO.
* 
Turnover of client groups as they "graduate" over time and intensive field attention is transferred to new groups.
Source: Thomas Carroll, Mary Schmidt, and Tony Bebbington. Intermediary NGOs and Participation. Participation Series,
Environment Department Paper (forthcoming), World Bank, Washington, D.C.
1 (G()

Box 4.4. Tips for NGO Assessments
* 
The most useful NGO assessments are done on a sectoral or subsectoral basis. This allows the NGO universe to be
divided functionally and geographically and permits systematic interviews and sample surveys.
* 
When evaluating newly formed NGOs or other NGOs that are new to a specific region or sector and therefore lack a
track record, focus on the individuals who lead the NGO and what they have done in the past.
* 
Select an assessor who has a previous working relationship with government as well as NGOs to build trust.
* 
Build participatory elements into all NGO assessments on a systematic basis. Both terms of reference and survey
methodologies should include indicators of NGO quality in community development as well as technical and mana-
gerial dimensions.
* 
An NGO assessment should include information about the technologies used by NGOs to communicate with mem-
bers and to network with each other. Also, the analysis should cover the constraints limiting communication in remote
areas.
* 
Whenever NGO consortia or apex organizations exist they should be given a role in NGO assessments. Nonmembers
of consortia, however, should be informed of the federation's role.
* 
Bank resident mission staff should be involved in NGO assessments and. wherever sufficient capacity exists, resident
staff members should be responsible for supervising and updating NGO assessments.
Source: Thomas Carroll, Mary Schmidt. and Tony Bebbington. Interm-tedliary NGOs eanid Participation. Participation Series,
Environment Departnent Paper (forthcoming). World Bank, Washington. D.C.
ticularly in NGO assessmenits that identify the participatory qtialities of
NGOs.
Obtaining Referrals il sonie cases. Bank Task Managers have approachied a consortium of NGOs
for referrals on partnier-s in project design or implementation. Such federations
can direct Task Managers to memiiber NGOs and in some cases select and su-
pervise them. A limitation of this appiroach is that not all NGOs are repre-
sented by such an apex body. This can create rivalry and isolate potentially
suitable NGOs.
Soliciting Proposals When many NGOs are interested and qualified. Task Managers and their gov-
erinent counterparts may choose to select NGOs as they wotld consultants
by soliciting proposals and selecting the best of these. A danger exists. how-
ever, that this could rule out qualified organizations that have strong expertise
in commliunity development but do not have skills in preparing proposals.
Bridging the Gap
Supporting A paradox confronlting the Task Manager is that the qualities that make NGOs
Participatory par-ticipatory-and therefore attractive as intermediaries-may be inconsis-
Processes tenit with many government, donor, and Bank requirements. One of the major
constraints to group formation and capacity building is donor or government
pressure to disburse and deliver services quickly. Unless procedures are made
more flexible and both the Bank and the governiment are committed to sup-
porting participatory processes, the NGO may be pressed into a service-deliv-
ery rather than capacity-building role.
This has happened in a numiiber of Bank-funded projects. including
Liberia's Second Education project. Under this project, schools were coIn-
structed rapidly and at low cost. No attention was given, however, to support-
ing the intermediary NGO in building community ownership of schools and
planning for maintenanice. As a result. many schools deteriorated or went un-
I (; I

TH-E 
'VAOR1J,) 
BANK 
PARTHI 
lPATION 
SO1h'(R 
E13B()
used. Similarly, in the Zambia Squatter Upgrading project, it was agreed in
principle to pursue long-term community development goals by promoting
active beneficiary participation. A stipulation was included, however, in the
final agreement that, if the collective self-help approach used by the two inter-
mediarv NGOs inteifered with the predetermined project schedule, contrac-
tors would be employed to canry out the work.
Ensuring Flexibility Task Managers have found ways to ensure that they support rather than under-
mine the participatory strengths of NGO partners by introducing mechanisms
that permit revisions in project priorities, greater- tlexibility in the timilg and
scale of implementationi. and alternative procurement procedures. Sometimes,
introducing mechanisms that allow NGOs to design and implement their own
programs can also be effective.
Encouraging 
Collaborative decisionmiaking from the outset concerning developmenit objec-
Partnership tives can help resolve the tension between the short-term project objective of
in Project Design the Bank or governmlenit and the long-termn community development goals of
NGOs. The most successful cases of Bank-NGO collaboration have involved
mutual transparency and shared decisionmaking from early in the project cycle.
If NGOs are to participate in a Bank-financed project in a significant way. it is
important that they have a say as early as possible in the design of the project
and in defining the terms of their involvement.
In examples such as the Philippines Health Development project, which
aimed to reach the poorest members of society by building partnerships among
the maniy health-oriented NGOs, local governments, and the Department of Health.
ll1hivolvemelnt 
in project design was considered essential in defining effective op-
erational partnerships, contributing to "quality at entry" and achieving successful
implementation. Many of the NGOs were initially skeptical of involvement with
the government. Giving them a stake in the decisionmaking process-in creating
the tenrs of the partnerships-made it possible for NGOs to be the lead agencies
at the local level and helped to overcome their skepticism.
NGO Liaison Units A numiiber of Bank-supported projects have created NGO liaison units. Under
the West Bengal Fourth Population project, the government of West Bengal
created a voluntary agency cell (heacled by the additional director of health
services), which is responisible for facilitating, supporting, and coordinating
voluntary agency activities in the state. With the establishment of this cell, it is
expected that the role and scope of NGOs in West Bengal family welfare pro-
grams will be substantially increased.
Information Sharing The Bank can also promote government-NGO relations by sponsoring meetings
for dialogue and information sharing. In the Sri Lanka Health and Family
Planning project, for example. joint training was provided for NGO and gov-
ernment staff in Information-Educationi-Commiiunication 
techniques. In addi-
tion, a series of annual workshops was organized to bring government and NGO
personnel together to discuss ongohig strategies and implementation plans.
Scaling Up Highly participatory NGOs tend to work on a small scale, experience suggests
and Scaling Down that some of their programs depend on staying small and resource intensive.
But in some cases NGOs have established participatory processes that they
have themiiselves extended to large programs or that have proved replicable by
other organizations or by government agencies on a large scale. Various ap-
1 (2

ENA 
BLA 
[N(; 
THE 
i'OO 
TO 
'r() PAT 
IRC(IPATE
proaches have been taken to enable successful NGO programs to be scaled up
and "mainstrearned," where possible, without losing their essential participa-
tory qualities and without individual NGOs having to grow to the poillt that
they become hierarchical and bureaucratized. This may involve strengthening
the capacity of NGOs, both through training and promoting NGO partnerships.
Scaling up may also involve training government staff In participatory
methods and relaxing some government regulationls. When working with gov-
ernments to encourage NGO linkages, it is useful to consider that government
agencies as well as the Bank may have to scale down in the sense of decentral-
izing and buildinig flexibility and microvariability into their operations. This
not only pushes decisionmaking down closer to the populations most affected
(anid in this sense is itself more participatory) but also makes it easier to work
with regional and local NGOs.
The community support process in the Balochistan Primary Education
Program is establishing new community schools for girls in remote rural vil-
lages. The process began in 1992 with a pilot project by a small national NGO
whose communlity workers went door to door-, urging parents to forn village
education committees, identify a potential female teacher, and select a site for a
school. The success of the pilot led to full acceptance and ownership of the pro-
graim by the governmenit, which is now funding the program on a province-wide
basis using International Development Association credit. Already, the NGO has
succeeded in mobilizing community members to establish as maniy as 200 schools.
Replicating the process on this scale and incorporating the schools and their
teachers into the government system once the school has proved viable has cle-
pended on the willingness of the Ministry of Education to relax a number of its
regulationis, so that girls with as little as eighth grade education can qualify as
teachers and receive training at home firom mobile training teams.
Strengthening NGO Capacity
Encouraging NGO For the Bank-financed Improved Environmental Management and Advo-
Partnership 
cacy project in Indonesia, an international NGO teamiied up with twelve Indo-
nesian NGOs to strengthen the ability of local intermediaries to address the
enivironimental consequences of pesticides. The international NGO assists lo-
cal counterparts in developing primary learning approaches to educate local
people about environmental problems and solutions. This collaborative NGO
effort is a broad initiative to develop education and training programis for farm-
ers, conisumer s. and province-level regulatory officials and also serves to transfer
skills and knowledge amiong NGOs.
The goal of the Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land Reclamation project is to
reclaim salt-affected lands usling participatory management techniques that
could serve as a model for replicationi more broadly in the future. Farmers'
water management groups will be organized and commilunity volunteers will
be trained in technology transfer by small local NGOs. The staff of these
grassroot NGOs will be trained in turn by larger interimiecliary NGOs with pre-
ViOUS expeiience in participatory management.
Other projects. such as the Bangladesh Participatory Forest Develop-
ment pro ject. are using a similar structure in which advisory NGOs coordinate
the implemenitationi activities of small locally based NGOs. These projects are
coordinated at the national level by a single organization that works directly
with the government to ensure compatibility with national goals and policies.
1 63

ITHl, 
NVOR141) 
BA\N1 
P'_1t'1'1('1PAT'11()N 
SO111AWEBOOK>11
Providing Training The Task Manager of the Bangladesh Second Road Rehabilitation and Main-
tenance project felt that for an NGO to act adequately as an interimiediary
between beneficiaries and government ageilcies. its staff should be trained
specifically in the use of the Bank's resettlement guidelines and generally in
land valuation and compensation.
Usually. training that builds NGO capacity is provided by a component
for technical assistance within a large project or through a separate project.
The Ethiopian Social and Rehabilitation Development Fund project treats
proposals for trainiing as it does proposals for other microproject componients.
Any community group or NGO that has an identified need for training is in-
vited to submit a proposal. This fund has designed comniunity development
and microproject developmenit training programs and has appointed a trainingi!
and promotionl oficer.
I
Vi 1.\AN(<'I.I1, 
.N'iJai :'l l;i)irIo.\ l{
This section looks at thl-ee methods that have been useci il Bank-financed opera-
tions to give the poor a more active role in managing the resources intenlded to
improve their econoinic security and well-being. The first involves fiscal decen-
tralizationi to give mIllicipalities and local goverinments more contiol over de-
velopIllent funds and enable them in turni to stipport comilllity-level 
develop-
menit. The second involves social funds, which are an alternative mechanism for
providimlg financial assistance for locally led initiatives. These approaches pro-
vide new ways to bring resources and control over them closer to the level at
which thev are being used. The thi-d approach involves two-way reciprocal con-
tracts, which form the basis for sustainable financial service systems.
Fiscal Decentralization
One of the most commilon ways to ,et resources to the local level is through munici-
pal fuLids, matching grants. and community developmenlt funds that decentr-alize
functiolns and molney to existing line agencies and local governmenlts. Under such
au-angemilents. cential governments allocate resources to municipalities or other in-
stitutions. which in turn fund many smaller projects. These subprojects are often
prepared a nd contiolled by coMMunities, which contribute to cost-sharing through
I 64

the donation of their labor and materials. Simple procuremilelit procedures along with
democratic and transparenit project selection at the neighborhood and municipal lev-
els contiibute to the success of these types of fLuniding arrangements. Through their
ability to reach the neighborhood level and mobilize local resources, they remove a
cnitical constraint to communLity action, the lack of financial resources.
The Bank's Mexico Decentralization and Regional Development project
gives municipalities control over funding many local projects by providing them
with annual block grants. Such grants are made throug,h muniicipal solidarity
funds, which are accounts created at the mullicipal and community levels to
finanice small comimlunity projects. They are intended to channel resources to the
most deprived conimunities by democratizing project planning as well as decen-
tralizing- project financing. This signals a change in the destinatioll of the re-
sources from the Iine agencies to the munllicipllities and involvecd elected munici-
pal officials jointly with the communllities in project selection.
Numliel-ous examples exist of fiscal decentralization. 
Not all involve local
participation in decisionmaking, but most help to provide an enabling environ-
ment in which such participation becomes possible.
Social Funds
Social funds can provide funding to local organizations such as community-
based grlOupS, NGOs. and local governments In a more flexible. transparent.
and rapid manner than liie ministries. They are "demanid-driven fundilng mechia-
nisms. They do not identi'y projects in advance but instead respond to re-
quests g,enerated by local organizations. Social fulids do not implement projects.
They promote specitic activities, appraise pro jects or sLibprojects for 'funding
using, strict selection criteria, superv ise implementation. and monitol- project
effectiveness. Social fiunds have spread rapidly in developing countries since
the Bolivia Emergency Social Fund was started in 1986; in 1994 the World
Bank was supporting about thirty social funds.
Autonomy Typically. social funlds are set up as autonlom11ous 
institutions that are transparent
and have flexible fuliding, procureinenit, and( disbuisemenit piroceclures. Because
they are autolloilmous they are able to avoid political interfer-ence and respond
directly to local needs. In soiiCe cases, a social fuLn(d is an autonoMous covern-
mental structure reporting directly to the presidenit or primiie miniister. In other
cases, sucIh as the Agence D'Executioln des Travaux d'Infra;str1ctures Publiques
(AGETIP) in Senegal. it is a private association contracted by the government.
The Nepal Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) project uses an
altollolOLis 
funid (RWSS-FUND) to SuppOIt demilanid-cidiven, comIunity-based
wvater and sanitation initiatives. This fLunlcl 
is designed to be maniaged by a board
with repr-esentatives from both the governimienit and the private sector (NGOs).
The boaLrd is autolloilmous andc t'ully responsible for the ftund's management.
Money is providied by the Ministry of Finance throughi a siilplified, block-
grant release process.
In the Albania Rural Poverty Alleviation example, the RuL-al Develop-
ienit Fund was created by government decree as an autonomilous agency be-
cause the existinCl government strLcture lacked the ability to work at the com-
munLity level in a participatory manner. To fulfill its responisibilities for imple-
nienting both the pilot andc full-scale Bank-assistec project. this fund was given
administiative, 
financial. andc techillical autonomy as well as the authority to
entel into contr-acts. One of the principal functions of the fund is to support
I 65

I 
V(1 
\'<)1R1,1) 
HA N ii 
I'.\<r 
lull 
(II 
'l' 
I ( bN ~ 01 
R((S()t'(('1,
Box 4.5. Designing a Social Fund
The following tips may be helpful to Task Managers responsible for designing a social fund.
* 
Be clear about the objectives of a social fund and the centrality of participation in realizing objectives. Designers must
weigh the trade-offs between rapid disbursement and capacity building in beneficiary and intermediary organizations.
* 
Refuse to fund nonparticipatory microprojects, and prioriti2e selection of microprojects according to the intensitx' of
participation. Ask how much local participation there has been in the processes of microproject identification, design,
and planning and if the community is involved in implementation.
* 
Encourage or mandate establishment of microproject management committees. It may be necessary to require repre-
sentation of women and other marginalized groups in the management committees.
* 
Apply participatory data collection methods. such as participatoty rural appraisal and beneficiary assessment (see Appen-
dix Ifor descriptions), to monitor subprojects regularly. Assessing 10 percent of subprojects a year may be a good target.
* 
Providefor capacity buildinig of intermediary and community organizations as early as possible.
* 
Develop a piloting phase in which participatory mechanisms can be tested, the concept of participation introduced,
and actors given time to learn.
* 
Design flexible and transparent procurement and disbursement procedures.
* 
Deliver iwhat has beeni promnised. Avoid delays in processing proposals and delivering services. Critically monitor the
performance of the social fund.
Source: Alexandre Marc and Mary Schmidt. 1995. Participation and Social Funds. Participation Series, Environment Department
Paper No. 4, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
work undertaken by village communities on1 the subproject for demand-re-
sponsive, rtiral infrastructure rehabilitation. The Rural Development Fund is
_.-3Cgoverned 
by a Board of Trustees composed of the ministers of the relevant
iministries such as agriculture, labor, and finance. It is chaired by the deputy
prime minister of Albania.
Decentralized 
To operationalize the Zambia Social Recovery Fund to finance microprojects
Operations 
for rehabilitation 
of social service infrastructure, 
an office called the
Microprojects Unit was set up within the Zambian presidency through which
funds were channeled to local community organizations and NGOs. The spe-
cial status of the Microprojects Unit allows it to hire personnel from outside
the civil service and bypass the government bureaucracy.
This enables procedures to move quickly and allows the unit to deal di-
rectly with beneficiary communities. Communities prepare proposals for so-
cial service microprojects for which they contribute to total costs. On approval,
the implementing organization sets up a bank account to receive direct. incre-
mental dispersals from the Microprojects Unit, thereby cutting through typi-
cal bureaucratic delays and red tape. This has proved a quick and effective
way of getting resources down to the local level and responding to varying
demands and priorities among local communities. The channeling of funds to
NGOs and local organizations has also increased the institutional ability of
these organizations to under-take development activities and serve as instru-
ments of participation.
In the Albania Rural Poverty Alleviation example, a social fund inecha-
nisin was used to provide funding for rural infrastructure rehabilitation. Infra-
structure officers from the coordinating institution, the Rural Development Fund.
are assigned to each district. They, along with engineers from the fund. work
with local villages and assist them in preparing proposals for the one infrastruc-
ture rehabilitation project that represenits their highest priority. Once a project is
I 66

IE>NAB1LIN(.'I 
HE 
POOR 
'1T 
PARTICIPATE
approved by the fund, the contractual partner for implenmenting the project be-
comes the commune (that is the corTesponding local government unit). To fulfill
the employment generation objective of this component. the commune. in turn,
hires local villagers to work on the project. This approach has proved successful
in celivering priority infrastructure to irLral communiities.
Sustainable Financial Systems
The preceding section examined ways to improve the effectiveness and impact
of resources flowing from the governmiient to the poor. In this section. we turn
fironm one-wvayv grunl t resource flows, which characterize most of the decentrali-
zation projects and social funds, to two-wav' reciprocal contracts, which are
the basis for sustainable financial service systems.
Task Managers migiht want to know more about how to build sustainiable fi-
nancial service systems for poor men and women for two reasons. First, from the
point of view of financial sector developinienit. people who have not been inte-
grated into the formial financial sector because of low income. genider. ethnic iden-
tity, or remote location often represent a large and potentially profitable market ftor
institutions that can clevelop ways to reduce the costs and risks of serving them.
From the perspective of povertv reduction, the case is even more compel-
ling. For the most vulnerable of the working poor. who may not be ready to
talke on debt, accessible savings can help maintain consumption over crisis
periods and greatly improve economic security. Then, once some degree of
economic security is attained, access to credit can help them move out of pov-
erty by improving the productivity of their enterprises or creating new sources
of livelihood.
Participation 
Participationi occurs along a continuuL11. On one end are "beneficiaries." who are
Continuum 
the recipien1ts of services and resources. More and more successful projects. how-
ever, define participants as "clients" and invest in setting up timely feedback
mechanisms to ensure they stay in touch with what their clients want. In these
projects, "'clients" are perceived as those who buy something (for example, fi-
nancial services) and must agree to pay more than a symbolic fee for it. They
also ensure that a clear contiact exists with clients. which lets them know what
Figure 4.1. The Participation Continuum
Role of 
ON
Participant:
Level of
Participation
and Decision-
Making:
Choice of Services
Risk
Increase in: 
Responsibility
Potential Return
Source: Lynin Beninett. Mike Goldberg, and Pam Hunte. Group-Based Financial Sysics: 
Lxiploring tie Links between Pert 0rinan ee
and(l Participation. Participation Series, Environimiienit 
Departimienit Paper (forthcoming). World Bank. Washington, D.C.
1 ; 7

THl: E'()R 
I I) 
BAN 
K PA IW'I' 
'I( IC PAT 
IO.N 
SO( )lCU( 
I;mE(Oli
they must do to keep the services coming. The challenge is to devolve the
decisionmaking power and control over resources to participants as "investors"
or even "managers" who make strategic and operational decisions about how
services are designed and delivered. But it is important to remember that many
people are not willing or able to take on the additional risks and increased re-
sponsibilities associated with higher levels of self-maniagement.
Overcoming Building an appropriate system of financial intermediation that is accessible
Barriers to poor people and yet sustainable for the lending institution can be a chal-
lenge. Overcoming the vulnerability imposed by continual reliance on subsi-
dies (finance as charity) by establishing a market-based system (finance as
business) that can operate on its own is not easy. In most cases, it is not some-
thing that can be fully achieved within the time frame of one or sometimes
even a series of Bank lending operations. In some borTowing countries where
barr-iers are created by remoteness, poor infrastructure, a stagnant or primarily
subsistence economy, illiteracy, or social factors such as caste and gender.
self-sustainable financial services may not be attainable for a long time.
Need What is needed to build and support sustainable financial systems with the
for Intermediation poor is a combinationi of financial and social intennediation. Mechanisms must
be created to bridge the gaps created by poverty, illiteracy, gender, and re-
moteness. Local institutiolns must be built ancl nurtured, and skills and confi-
dence of new low-income clients developed. This costs money and requires
the help of intermiediaries at local levels.
I 
Group-Based Approaches
One of the most promising routes to sustainable financial intermecliation is the
use of local self-help groups. Although many local variations exist, the ap-
proach essentially involves identification and organization of local voluntary
associationis or self-help groups amonlg disadvantaged populations. These
groups are then liniked1 with for-miial financial institutions or assisted in devel-
oping their own parallel. semiformal systems for financial intermediation.
I~ 
6S

Solidarity Groups One of the most successful-and certainly the best known-group-based finan-
cial service system 'for the poor is the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh. Grameen
was established as a financial institution in 1983 to provide financial services to
low-income niral households that had no access to formal sector programs. By
1993 Graineen Bank had served almost half of the villages in Bangladesh. lend-
ing $311 million and mobilizing $218 million in savings and deposits. Its total
membership is more than 1.8 million, of whom 94 percent are women.
Grameen supports the formation of self-selecting- "solidarity" groups of
five people. Members receive small working capital loans backed only by the
joint liability of other members. This means that even though the loans are
given individually, default by any member blocks access to further credit for
others in the group until they either prevail on the defaulter to pay or cover the
debt themselves out of joint savings or a pooled contribution.
The loans are for twelve months with weekly installments. which makes
accounting and repayment simple and easy for group members to understand.
Members are also requi-ed to contribute to group savings and emergency funds
on a regular basis. Many borrowers use the loans for petty trade, traditional
agricultural processing. animal husbandry, and activities that borrowers know
well. Reflecting its responsiveness to the vulnerability of its members to sea-
sonal and other shocks, Grameen also lends for "consum1ption" purposes. such
as medical care and food. Repayment for the program as a whole in 1993 was
96 percent.
Village Credit In the Albania Rural Poverty Alleviation example. the dire economic situa-
Committees tion made it imperative to inject cash into impoverished areas as quickly as
possible by developing a credit delivery mechanism suitable to poor farmers.
But the project designers did not stop with simply delivering the credit. They
sought to buiildl a sustainable financial serm'ices svstem. The villagers rejected
the solidarity group approach (based on Grameen Bank) and chose to create a
village credit ftund in which the whole village is collectively responsible ftor
repaymiient of individual loans. Each community elects a three-person village
credit commillttee, which is responsible for selecting boriowers and ensuring
that loans are repaid. Decisionmaking rests entirely at the local level and the
village credit comnmittee holds open meetings to evaluate community member
loani applications. Expansioni has been rapid with fifty-nine such commliittees
established, more than 2.750 subloans made during the first two years of the
project. and nearly 100 percenlt repayment.
Advantages 
Group-based approaches have several advantages to the finanicial intermedi-
of Group-Based 
ary: group liability is an effective collateral substitute. self-policing mecha-
Services 
nismis cani increase repayinent rates and reduce lender risk. savings mobiliza-
tion is often impressive and has proved an ilexpensive source of loan capital.
and acdmlinistiationi and enforcemiient costs can be reduced. Group-based finail-
cial systems can in 
h1 many situationis effectively shift some of the costs and risks
from the lending institution to the group.
Fromll the client's perspective. groups may offer the only affordable way of
igainilng access to financial services. For landless men and womeni. group li-
ability substitutes for physical or financial collateral: without it they could not
obtain formal credit. The savings mobilizecd by groups are often re-lent to their
memitber-s for emergenicies. conisumiiptioni. and similar purposes ftor which for-
mzal instituitionls are reluctanit to lencl. With regard to capacity buildinig. group-
I ,j.

THi 
NVOKIA) IBANIK 
PAHTl 
('II 
A'T'1( 
N S0I'HR( 
F IH )()KI
basecd approaches can build solidarity, confidence, and financial management
skills among members.
Advantages For women, one of the most important aspects of a group is that it provides a
for Women legitimate "social space" beyond the home and fosters a sense of solidarity
that allows them to deal more freely with unfamiliar formal institutions and
processes. Some evidence from Bank and other projects shows that women's
groups perform better than men's groups in terms of repayment and longevity.
One reason may be that in many societies women have few other financial
opportunities and value them highly. Group membership may also have a per-
sonal and social value beyond its economic utility.
Characteristics Characteristics of strong groups include self-selection of members, literacy of at
of Successful Groups 
least a few gr-oup members, and membership of only one genlder. Group en-
forcemenit of sanctions is strongest when a system for calling on outside assis-
tance (usually from the NGO) is readily available to resolve serious conflicts.
Most successful systems appear to be ones in which a large proportion of the
lending capital is raised from group meinbers' savings. Elements of groups that,
contrary to general belief, do not appear to affect group performance include
group size, leadership rotation, and the kincd or frequency of group meetings.
Pitfalls of Groups Groups are not a guarantee of success. Despite potential advantages, groups
may face serious managerial problems. They may be costly to set up: con-up-
tion or control by powerful groups is a possibility: and minority groups or the
a most disadvantaged are often excluded. Nevertheless, the resiliency and popu-
-ff5 larity of many locally based, financial service organizations indicates that lo-
cally managed groups can improve their financial management practices and
move toward sustainability through selft-help efforts.
Building Capacity of Groups
It is critical to build up the human resources and local institutions needed to
prepare groups to manage their own institutions or to enter into responsible
business relationships with formal financial institutions. Ultimately. it is the
cohesiveness and selfi-management capacity of the groups that enables them
to bring down the costs of financial intermediation by reducing default through
peer pressure and lowering the transaction costs banks incur in dealing with
many small borrowers and savers.
To achieve this eventual efficiency gain and develop sustainable financial
services for the poor. however, substantial up-front investimients are needed to
build the skills and systems that permit the group to take over most of the
management of their own financial transactions eventually. Time-bound "in-
fant industl-y" subsidies, such as building self-reliant groups through training
group members in accounting skills, managenient skills, and use of manage-
ment inforination systems, are also justified. Where government subsidies are
not Justified, however, is in supporting the price of fitancial services with
artificially low interest rates fo r the end users.
(CAFTINI: 
RESIPONSIN'T 
l 
INT'I'ITUTIO).N
Putting people first also requires changing the very ways in which govern-
ment bureaucracies are accustomed to functioning. It requires different plan-
1 7 0

F:NABI.N(i 
THE Il'( 
<)R 
r)r 
PARTI'CI 
P( 
r'ATE
ning procedures, institutional arranigements, and measures for resource alloca-
tion. To put people's needs first, institutions must redefine responsibilities,
reallocate staff resources, offer different incentives to staff, build in new mecha-
nisms for learning and experimentation, 
and build outreach capacity by hiring
new staff and retraining old.
Characteristics of Responsive Institutions
Delegating In the Benin Health example. the Ministry of Health gave the local health
Authority 
management committees decisionmaking 
power and control over resouices.
Each local health center (typically serving three to six villages) has its owIn
management committee of six to eight people. Committee members are elected
democratically: 
anyone may serve, provided that at least one member is a
woman. The committee is directly involved in preparing the health center's
annual budget for submission to the ministry. It is responsible for collecting
and accounting for funds paid to the health center for services and drugs and
also manages the procurement and inventory of drugs. Representatives of local
committees serve on the board of the government's 
new drug procurement
agency and on the government's central Health Sector Coordinating Commit-
tee, giving them a voice in national policy.
The success of El Salvador's Community-Managed School Program
(EDUCO) depends on community involvement in public education. Each com-
munity is required to provide a building as a school for its children. Parents elect
school board meimbers for three-year terms. School board members, who are
legally authorized to manage the schools, work with the Ministry of Education
to establish annual budgets for the schools. Once the ministry transfers the agreed-
on amount of money to the boards' bank accounts, the boards recruit, select,
hire, pay, and manage the teachers and curricula. The boards and the teachers
jointly allocate funds for teaching materials. Each local board monitors teacher
perfoonnanice and, if necessary. takes the necessary steps to fire teachers for whom
poor performance or absenteeism is a problem. About 25 percent of schools in El
Salvador- nlow have such arrangemilents in their schools.
Flexibility In the Philippines Irrigation example, it proved unrealistic to try to predict
the amouLit of time needed to create local irrigation associations and ensure
their full participation. It was found that preset targets tended to undermine the
farmers' authority over the systems and, with it, their commitment. In view of
this, the National Irrigation Adminiistiationi persuaded the Bank to avoid set-
ting specific, long-term targets for constructioni. Flexibility was achieved by
developing work programs one year at a time, depending on the progress of the
preceding year rather than rigidly scheduling work for the entire loan period.
This flexibility allowed the National Irrigationl Administration to spend more
time building on existing irrigation associations instead of pressing to meet
arbitrary targets for the creation of new ones.
Experimenting 
In the Rajasthan Watershed Development project. the new challenge of imple-
and Learning 
menietilg small, integrated watershed developmenit forced staff from different dis-
ciplines to work together; the lack of prior experience even among senior offi-
cials created a genieral willingness to experimenit with innovative approaches.
Governmileit field staff were told to "stall with what you know, what you have
resources for. and what people want." Staff were given the freedomii to do small
experiments and try whatever they thought might work. An enabling policy was
1 71

THEll 
NV'(111.) 
BANK1 
PAHlT1U1PAT1.\lu()N 
9'()W'RC 
E:M;(Htl
that no penalties should be given for failed experiments and successful innova-
tion would be rewarded. In this way, significant progress was made in develop-
ing area-specific technologies. Much of this progress came from interactilig with
local people and seeking out and using their indigenous practices.
In the Cameroon Rural Community Microprojects, the Milistry of
Agriculture took a "learning" approach. allowing local commillttees in charge
of approving loans to go slowly and learn from their mistakes in funding
microprojects. The objective of the project was just as much on capacity build-
ing as it was on lending for microprojects. This tlexibility and less structured
pace allowed disbursements to be made slowly and allowed local people to
learn valuable lessons and make adjustments to lending criter-ia as they went
along. A marked improvement in the quality of microprojects and repayment
rate after the first year clemonstrated that local people had indeed improved
their- skills through the process of trial and error.
Accountability 
An important factor in the success of the Benin Health example was the cre-
ation of a new ooverrimeital drug procUriement agency. which exists as an
autonomilous alencv responsible for procuring all druos used in the country.
As this was (lone poorly and corruptly in the past, the new agency is kept
responsive and accountable to local commilnities through village representa-
tives that sit on its board.
In the Mexico Hydroelectric example. accountability mechanisms were
put into place during a reorganization of the national power company. CFE. A
new, high-level Social Development Office was created that reported directly
to the company inanagemilenlt. In addition, each state governmilent formed an
inclependeiit cotniue (le coti erthiJon headed by the gover-nior and consistiuig of
different line agencies to review an(d assist withi the resettlement plans. The
National lndiani Institute was asked to provide independent field monitoring
of the project, and a senior. indepenclent resettleinent adviser was appointed to
the office of the company president to concluct field reviews of the project.
These mechanisims served two puiposes: to channel information from the field
clirectly to CFE's inanagement and to keep CFE accountable and responsive
through a public monitoring and review process.
In the Nepal Irrigation Sector programil. fanrmer involvement in the selection
of contr-actors provided a much-needed element of transparency Hi the mobiliza-
tion arid usc of the Irrigation Departmelit's financial resources. Farmer Irrigation
Associationi oversight and ownershilp imlproved the qulality of construction.
Multidisciplinary 
To undertake participatory activities in Mvlexico's Programa Integral para
Approaches 
el Desarrollo Rural. several local multidiscipliniary teams consistilgo of so-
ciolorists, 
economilists. planners. and various technical experts were put to-
cether to udll(ler-take collaborative planning with beneficiaries. This approach
empihasized the linkage between the sociological and technical sides of the
planning process.
In the Mexico Hydroelectric example. a new social developmenit unit
wvas created at the project level to introduice participatory appr-oaches into project
planning and clecisioninaking. This institutional innovation brings together a
ftoul-celled resettlemenit team (planners. regionial developmenlt wor-kers. envi-
ronmental specialists, and CO 
-Inullty organizers) with the headl enrineel- in
charge of construction. This multifunctional team creates a critical bridge be-
tween the technical and social sides of the project.
I , 

NA\BI,N( 
'T'H 
PH OOR1 'I(O 
PARTh 
IC I'P'AT
Strengthening the Capacity of Government Institutions
Training 
As part of several forestry projects in Nepal. training programs are beint con-
ducted for 'forestry officials to facilitate greater communication andl coopera-
tion with rural forest users. Local officials have also been trailled to watch for
attempts by the wealthy to take contr-ol of forests fi-oin broadly based user
gl-OLlps and to focus on genuinely elected leaders of such groups.
In the India Forestry example. Forestry Department staff received trail-
ing il participatory rural appraisal (see Appendix 1) and othier- participatory
approaches to prepare theim to worlk in a collaborative maniler with the village-
based ftorest protectioni comillittees.
Providing 
In the Nigeria Women in Agriculture example. to attract women agents into the
Appropriate 
extensionl service and inci-ease their time spent interacting with women farmers
Incentives 
in the fielcl. the Women in Agzriculture program offered incentives in the form of
hilpr-ovedt mobility, tranisportation, travel allowances, and higher salaries.
In the Philippines Irrigation example. National Irrigation Acminiistration
(NIA) employees receive bonuses when their decentralized cost centers break
even or better. This means they must treat the faarimlers 
as valued customiers whose
payLimenits ftor services are indispensable to NIA's existence. Such a system en-
ables NIA agents to be responsive to the needs of thei- local clienlts. In addition.
NIA's budget vvas linkecl to farnier conitributions (that is iir-ioationi service fees).
wher-eas governIlllent subsidies were phased out. This structural change in the
implemienting agency helped to mainistr-eamii participation by helpiln to develop
a strolln service orientation. instilling clienit responsiveness an(d forcina- agency
employees to place a high Valule Oil ftarimler- 
participation.
Developinig In the Nigeria WVomen in Agriculture examnple. the Women in Agricultuire
Outreach Capacity 
prograrm was set up within the existing state agricultural development projects.
whicih wa.S a ver-y decentralized systemii. Each staite agricultural developiment
project has field offices staffed by local extension agents and has contr-ol over
its budget and activities. The Federal Aguricultural Coordinating Unit plays a
coordiniatling role fi-om the capital. To better respond to the needs of women
farmers and increase the number of womeni extensionl agents in the field, the
Ministry of'AgiiciCltui-e began a large-scale administrative "switch-over" dur-
ing whicih a large cadre of existing home economic agrents were redirected into
the agricultural whing of the agricultur-al development projects to becomne Woniell
in Agriculture field agents. Building on this existilg human capital allowed a
significanit increase of field-level staff in the agricultural departmenit with no
net addition to the ranks of civil service.
In the Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition project, a cadre of community
nutrition workers was created within the health outreach services of the De-
partment of Social Welftare to disseminate information, raise awareness of bet-
ter nutritioni practices, and encourage the formilation of women's groups to be-
gill comImILinity-level action aroulid health and other issues. The focal point of
project activities was 9.000 conmi1unity nutrition centers, each staffed by a
local wvoman. Staffing criteria for this position required women who (o) were
fi-omii the village. (b) were poorer than average but had well-niour-ished chil-
dr-eni. anid (c) hacd an interest in health. Selected commullity nutrition workers
were highly motivated and had good access to mothers. In choosing outreach
staff for the comImlunLity 
nutritioni worker cadre. these qualities were giveni greater-
weight than edLucation levels and qualificatiolis.
I 73:

'Flrui: XVoRIAJ TAN-Ij 
I> 
'IPIART 
I'I'l'TION 
s;(ITRruEIO)Kli
In the Mexico Hydroelectric example, the national power company. CFE,
did not initially possess the skills or experience to manage a participatory
resettlement program. To acquire this ability, they created new social and en-
vironmental units and recruited skilled personnel to run them. They also hired
teams of young professionals with backgrounds in the social sciences, social
work. and NGO activities and sent them out into the villages for three weeks
out of every month to consult with villagers. answer questionis, and record the
concerns and priorities of communities on behalf of the company.
THI;: 
EN.A!.kBLAN; 
E[NIVO()NNMENT: 
Lf:: 
I'E;
Laws and policies can create an enabling environment that tacilitates-or 
at
least does not impede-peoples' 
participation. Although individuals, groups,
and agencies play key roles in initiating a process of "bottom-up" develop-
ment, change can be facilitated if rules and regulations at both the national
level and pro ject level provide the freedom and incentives for people to par-
ticipate in the design and implementation of development projects.
To ensure effective stakeholder participation in Bank-financed projects, spon-
sors and designers must examine the legal framework within which affected
beneficiaries and communities operate to identify and address any constraints
posed by the law. Three sorts of legal issues are important: (a) the right to infor-
niation, (b) the right to organize arid enter into contractual agreements, and (c)
the impact of the borrower's financial and other regulaitions on communities.
I-> 
-
Right to Information
Participation is a function of information through which people come to
share a development vision, make choices, and manage activities. To achieve
this, information miust flow froni governments and extemnal supporters in ways
that genuinely support people's informed participation. The objective of in-
forimationi sharingy, therefore, is to ensure that all affected individuals or coIil-
munities receive adequate information in a timely and meaningful manner. To
attain this, the following questions are relevant:
Obligation 
* 
Is there an obligationl on the part of the implementing unit to ensure that
to Disclose 
stakeholders are provided with adequate ancd relevant information'.
* 
Is such information to be provided in a meaningful manner, that is, in a
form that can be readily understood by relevant stakeholder groups'?
Access 
* 
Is the mechanism for providing or requesting inforimiation accessible to all
to Information 
stakeholders'? Is it a simple mechanisimi that can be used by all'? For ex-
and Legal Remedy 
ample, are stakeholders requirecd to fill in complicated forms'?
* 
Are there time ancd financial constraints that may discourage people from
seekiny information'? Is there a significant delay between the request for
information and the provision of informration?
* 
Are there any cultural or social constraints for accessing this information?
Do barriers exist that may inhibit women or other vulnerable segments of
society'? Are special measures r equired to reach potential participants who
are poorly educated or illiterate'? Is the information available in local lan-
guages and dialects?
* 
Do stakelholders have any legal remedy when their right to informiation is
infringed'?
1 74

ENABI,IN(G 
'I'lIE 
PoOR 
1'() 
'OAR'ITI(IPATE
Disseminating Bank experience suggests tilat centralized offices may have problems dissemi-
Information nating intformation. In the Sardar Sarovar project, for example, information
was available in an office near the dam site. But affected communities found
this ineffective. It was costly, time consuminig. and difficult to access the infor-
mation. In addition, women who faced mobility problems or cultural constraints
to travel were virtually cut off from information.
Infoorimiationi 
can be successfully disseminated to stakeholclers in a number
of ways. In the Gambia Public Works and Employment project, a commu-
nity participation program is being developed that uses newspapers. radio, talk
shows, leaflets, posters, and stickers to disseminate information. The Gambia
experience reveals that taking into account literacy, language, scope, timing,
anid selection of themes sensitive to gender, age. and ethnicity is critical to
channeling information flows to target audiences.
But sometimes newspapers. radio, television, and other forms of mass
communication are nlot the most effective means of reaching the general pub-
lic. Information can flow vigorously through local communication systems.
This includes traditionial entertainmenit such as song, dance, and community
theater. The exchange of information can also be facilitated at traditional
gathering places. such as village markets, religious meeting places, police
stations, or marriage celebrations. If. on the other hand. these modes are
ignored, such indigenous comilmunication systems can transmit messages that
oppose and under-mine developmenit etforts. In South Asia, such communi-
cation channels have in the past frequently carried negative rumors about the
side effects of family planning methods. sometimes leading, to the outright
i-ejectionl of the contraceptives being introduced.
In the Ethiopian Social and Rehabilitation Development Fund project,
a number of village-level workshops were held. Additionally, a number of
NGOs and community facilitators who are respected by target communities
were appointed and trained to disseminiate information among communities.
iAn effort is being made to recruit female promoters to improve the access of
women's groups. In the expanded phase. it is expected that with the use of a
mobile van, more effective dissemination of' information can be achieved
even in remote areas. In the Guatemala Social Investment Fund, field staff
were recruited who spoke the local dialect and had a cultural background
necessary to interact with the communities. Materials are also printed in the
local languages.
Legal Literacy The righit to inforimiation is conlnected withi the following issues of legal literacy:
* 
Are communities legally literate and aware of their rights?
* Is there a need to educate them?
* 
What institutional arrangements are necessary'?
In the Mexico Decentralization and Regional Development project, il-
lustrated brochures in Spanish were designed to communicate in a simple man-
ner the economic opportunities afforded by the project as well as inform po-
tential participants about the their rights and obligations.
Right to Organize
The second issue relates to the legal status of communities and groups and their
internal organization. The objectives are to (a) design effective mechanisms for
175

gloup participation. (b) ensure that legal standing of these groups is appropriate
and enables them to interact effectivelv with external paities as required, and (c)
ensure equitable relationships among gr'oup members and transparent processes
for ilternal decisionmiaking. Importanit questions include the following:
Formaliziig Groups * 
What are the available processes for formalizing groups so that they can
participate in project-related activities'?
* 
Are such processes complex or time consuminig and beyond the scope of
small community groups?
* 
Is such formalizationi necessary to receive public funds or enter into valid
contracts'?
* 
If there is no formal legislation or regulation. can project-specific arrange-
ments be developed to achieve the same objectives?
Bank experienice in this area is varied. In some cases NGOs and other
groups may be reluctant or incapable of entering into a standard contractual
agreemiient. In such cases, a memlorandum of understanding or conventioni
signed with the government or executing agency may be more appropriate. In
the India National Cataract Blindness Control project. a participating NGO
that was reluctant to take on the risk of contractual liability signed a memllo-
randumii of understandinig defining it as an equal partner- with the executing
agency. According to specified terms, the NGO was under no formal obliga-
tion and would be paid for its services on verificationi of performance.
In the Philippines Irrigation example. the National Irrigation Adminis-
tration persuaded the legislature to give legal recognition to the irrigation as-
sociations that provided them with authority over the operation and mainte-
nance of the communal systems, legal water rights, and standing as corporate
bodies with the Philippine Securities and Exchange Commission-which meant
they could own property, make contracts, collect fees, and impose sanctions.
Ability to Receive A number of factors affect whether groups can engage in financial transac-
Public Funds tions. Importanit questions in this area include the following:
* 
Can the community group receive public funds'?
* 
What are the requiremiients'? Are such requirements complex. time con-
suming. or beyond the scope of small community groups.
* 
Does the community group have a separate legal identity?
* 
Can it enter into a valid contract on behalf of the members at large?
The Uttar Pradesh Education project permits informal groups to receive
public funds upon complianlce with certain specified conditions, including the
collection of community contributions and the appointment of a headmaster.
In the Zambia Social Recovery Project, however. the opening of a bank ac-
count and deposit of the community contribution is considered a satisfactory
requirement to receive public funds.
In the Mexico Municipal Funds program. a component of the Mexico
Decentralization and Regional Development project. government regula-
tion permits groups to register as "solidarity committees" with the municipal-
ity, thereby giving them the right to receive public fuLnds.
In the Burundi Social Action project, an intermediary with legal status,
selected and approved by the commliunity, is brought in to sign the contract on
behalf of the community group.
1 76

ENABILIN( 
I'HF: 
P)OO-R 
'TO 
PI-'ARTICI 
PIATE
Internal Regulations Where formal groups have legal standing, it may be important to examine their
internal regulations or by-laws. The by-laws or internal regulations of the com-
munity group or entity should be developed by the group and are crucial in
addressing some of these issues. Where community groups do not have the
skills to identify issues and address them in the by-laws. assistance should be
incorporated into project design. Appropriate questions include the following:
* 
Are the responsibilities and obligations of the members clearly defined'?
* 
Do the intemnal regulations ensure that sharing of resources/profits is un-
dertaken in an efficient and equitable fashion?
* 
If the project involves financial contributions by communities, is there a
mechanism for ensuring that such contributions are provided in an equi-
table fashion? What constitutes community contribution? Can they con-
tribute cash instead of labor?
* 
How are internal regulations drafted? How can they be amended?
* 
Is it possible to provide sample by-laws for different categories of project-
related activities?
* 
Are records kept of such contributions to ensure that contributions are made
by all beneficiaries in an equitable fashion?
* 
Are there any justifications for excusing specific households or individuals?
Representative Different kinds of questions relate to whether the groups so constituted are
and Accountable representative and accountable. To determine this, Task Managers may want to
Groups ask the following questions:
• 
Is there any restriction on membership to the group?
X 
Where the regulations are neutral, do they unintentionally have the effect
of excluding women or other vulnerable sections of society?
* Can such unintended impacts be mitigated through the use of internal regu-
lations or by-laws?
* 
Who makes the decisions? Is there provision for participatory
decisionmaking processes'?
* 
Are the leaders accountable to the larger group of members?
* 
Is there a possibility of introducing some fomi of mutual monitoring or
peer pressure?
Impact of Borrower's Financial and Other Regulations
The third issue relates to the impact of the borrower's financial and other regu-
lations on the ability of communities and groups to participate effectively in
the project. The objective is to ensure that any potential bottlenecks created by
the borrower's regulations are addressed well in advance and that NGOs, in
particular, are not adversely constrained by government regulations. Because
many of these restrictions are vested in law, the ability to modify them through
project design may be limited. Some legal restrictions, however, can be inter-
preted in a flexible manner. Some potential issues follow:
Requirements In many countries, national procurement regulations are not suitable for com-
for Competitive munities and NGOs involved in participatory projects. Borrowers' reluctance
Bidding to decentralize fiscal control may also affect community-related procurement
and disbursement. Often thresholds for competitive bidding, that is, the value
of contracts that must be procured under competitive procedures) are set so
1 7 7

TI-I 
N 
XVORIA) 
B-IAN K PAT 
IC1PI PAIN 
S()1 IU 
1i 110(0)4K
low that even small contracts require bids that impose time-consuming and
bureaucratic procedures on communities.
Some potential questions related to competitive bidding are:
* 
What are the manidatory processes for competitive bidding?
* 
Do they impede efforts by community groups to use competitive bidding?
* 
Are the threshold levels appropriate'? Do they permit noncompetitive pro-
cedures when necessary?
In the Uganda Alleviation of Poverty and Social Costs of Adjustment
project, any item more than $1,000 required approval by the Central Tender
Board for Procurement and Disbursement. This tedious process caused seri-
ous delays and limited community involvement. In the Guyana Health, Nu-
trition, Water, and Sanitation project, community groups were allowed to
procure their own goods through "local shopping" procedures. which required
quotations from at least three qualified suppliers. This was found to be a bur-
densome requirement, because it was difficult to find even a single qualified
supplier in some rural areas.
The traditional concept of competitive bidding may be not appropriate in
cases in which community gr'oups are contracted to undertake their own works.
Often commun1ity groups invest in goods to be used by their own members;
experience shows that, in such cases, there are built-in incentives for commu-
nity groups to use their allotted resources efficiently. The experience with the
Mexico Municipal Funds program. a component of the Mexico Decentrali-
zation and Regional Development project. for instance, has been that works
_= 
implemented by the communities cost one-third to one-half less than works
by traditional municipal administrators or contractors.
Prior Review The issue of prior review of publicly funded contracts-imposed by national
of Contracts legislation or sometimes by the Bank's procedures-has caused. in some in-
stances. substantial delays and frustration during project implementation. To
suit the needs for community-related procurement. requirements for prior re-
view of contracts have been adapted in some projects.
The Mexico Municipal Funds program does not mandate prior review of
contracts with communities: instead, a sample of projects are reviewed during
or after implementation. Replacing prior reviews with strict ex-post reviews is
done under the assumption that no disbursement will be made on contracts
that violate principles set forth in the implementation guidelines. In the
Cameroon Food Security, project contracts for goods and services above
$50.000 require prior review. Because the majority of the community-related
procurement subprojects are below $25,000, such a threshold level avoids the
need for prior review in all cases.
Accounting Sometimes, participating groups, fearing that their autonomy is being threat-
and Auditing ened. may not want to reveal their accounts to the government. On the other
Requirements hand, accounting transparency helps to reduce abuses and the government as
well as the Bank have a right to insist on transparency of accounts in a Bank-
financed project. The degree of infonnation revealed by the participating group
should meet the requi-ement of public scrutiny without compromising the in-
dependence of the group. A practice that has worked well in this context is
that the government and the Bank are allowed to examine the accounts for that
1 78

FEN AIAI 
N( 
TIiHE 
P(O)()R 'IT(< [PA RT' 
CIPAT'IF
particular project but not all the NGO's accounts. In any case, the details of
this should be agreed on to the mutual satisfaction of the government, NGO.
and Bank at the outset of the project.
Key questions in this context include the following:
* 
Do the regulations require that the use of funds must be accounted for? If
so, how, in what manner, and to whom?
* 
Do the regulations require that use of public funds be independently au-
dited? If so, who is responsible'?
* 
If the Auditor General's Office is responsible, can this task be delegated to
a private entity'?
In Zambia. for example. the auditor general is required to audit the use of
public ftunds. This would require the NGO or community group receiving pub-
lic funds to be audited by the auditor general's office. In some cases, however,
it has been possible for the auditor general to delegate hiis powers to a private
accounting firm to audit groups involved in project-related activities.
Processes Sometimes government procedures and processes for disbuLsemlelnt 
can create
for Disbursements delays. Experience has shown that delays in disbursement can signitficantly
(lamipen community enthusiasm. In the Colombia Integrated Rural Devel-
opment project. government procedures typically took 103 days to process
disbursement requests. To overcome these problems, in some projects. espe-
ciallv those set up as social funds, the decree establishinig the fund exempts its
operations from the procuremenlt and disbursement regulations in the country;
tihus. in the Ethiopian Social and Rehabilitation Development Fund project,
the fund operates under its special procur-emiient 
and disbursement guidelines
specifically described in its operational maniual. Appropriate questions in this
conitext include the following:
e 
Are disbur-semnenit 
procedures for access to and utilizing funlds transparent.
efficienit. and objective?
* 
Can steps be taken to keep government agencies out of the day-to-day
affairs of community groups and NGOs?
Dispute Settlement Dispute settlement is an important elemenit for effective participation. A forum
Mechanisms for presentation of grievances and the mechanisms foI third-party settlement
procedures are imperative for sustained developmenlt. A cursory examination
of the form-lal clispLIte resolution systems in most countries reveals that access
to remiiedies through the formal process is generally constrainied. A large pro-
portioni of poor and disadvantaged people are legally illiterate: they have inad-
equate access to legal aicd and do not have the economic resources to resort to
the normally complex and sophisticated legal processes to seek' remedies.
Many societies, however, have traditional methods of dispute resolutioni
that are based on principles of mediation and conciliation. Project designers
have attempted to make use of such incligelnous methods of dispute resolution.
In the India Upper Krishna Irrigation 11 and Andhra Pradesh Irrigation 11
projects. lok ad-clallbts 
or people's courts have been established to settle griev-
ances of community grOLipS that have been adversely affected by project ac-
tivities. In the Egypt Resource Management example. such indigenous meth-
ods of dispute resolution have also been employed.
1 79)

THE 
BVI) 
HANK 
P'AR'ITI(I'IATION 
('OURI:(I)()ol
The following questions are relevant to problems related to dispute
settlement.
X 
Are existing formal dispute resolution mechanisms accessible, or are they
lengthy and costly'?
* 
Are there any customary dispute resolution mechanisms that communi-
ties can resort to?
I p44)

AP`PENDIX 
I
METHODS 
AND 
Tools
Development practitioners use a wide variety of different methods, tailored to
different tasks and situations, to support participatory development. This Ap-
pendix. set up as a reference guide, introduces the reader to ten methods that
have been used in different development situations to achieve various objec-
tives. These include: workshop-based and community-based methods for col-
laborative decisionmaking, methods for stakeholder consultation, and meth-
ods for incorporating participation and social analysis into project design.
The methods are first introduced in a matrix; then each is briefly described,
including background, a step-by-step description, suggested further readings,
and an example. Each method is compared and contrasted with the others and
their advantages and disadvantages noted to help Task Managers choose those
most useful to them. A glossary of available tools, many of which are compo-
nents of the methods, follows the summaries. More details on both the meth-
ods and the tools can be found in the forthcoming Environment Department
Paper Methods anid Tools for Social Assessment and Participation.
Reading about participatory techniques will familiarize Bank staff and others
with terminology and context, but learning from one's colleagues who have expe-
rience with these methods and tools is also helpful. Readers can call the Environ-
ment Department's Social Policy Division (ENVSP) to obtain an up-to-date list of
Bank staff and consultants who are well versed in these methods and tools.
Workshop-Based Methods
Collaborative decisionmaking often takes place in the context of stakeholder
workshops. Sometimes called "action-planning workshops:" they are used to
bring stakeholders together to design development projects. The purpose of
such workshops is to begin and sustain stakeholder collaboration and foster a
"learning-by-doing" atmosphere. A trained facilitator guides stakeholders, who
have diverse knowledge and interests, through a series of activities to build
consensus. Appreciation-Influence-Control (AIC), Objectives-Oriented Project
Planning (ZOPP), and TeamUp are three such methods.
Community-Based Methods
In many projects, Task Managers and project staff leave government centers
and board rooms to undertake participatory work with local communities.
Task Managers work with trained facilitators to draw on local knowledge
and begin collaborative decisionmaking. In such settings, local people are
the experts, whereas outsiders are facilitators of the techniques and are there
to learn. The techniques energize people, tap local knowledge, and lead to
clear priorities or action plans. Two such techniques (see Appendix 1), par-
ticipatory rural appraisal and SARAR (an acronym based on five attributes
the approach seeks to build: self-esteem, associative strength. resourceful-
181

Ti 
N: 
H 
L'(IRIA) 
BANK 
P\RII(II'PATION 
iSOTI:IlIl)OI(lh
ness. action planning, and responsibility) use local ma- 
out in country economic and sector work to establish a
terials and visual tools to bridge literacy, status, and 
broad framework for participation and identify priority
cultural gaps. 
areas for social analysis. Such methods evolved to meet
the need to pay systematic attention to certain issues that
Methods For Stakeholder Consultation 
traditionally had been overlooked by development plan-
Beneficiary Assessment (BA) and Systematic Client 
niers. The SA methodology, which is described in this
Consultation (SCC) are techniques that focus on lis- 
Appendix, has been designed specifically to assist Bank
tening and consultation among a range of stakeholder 
staff and reflects Bank procedures.
groups. BA has been used throughout World Bank re-
gions. in both projects and participatory poverty as- 
tsINc 
I-IE 
.rIOD) 
WE1 
1
sessments (PPAs). SCC, which is used primarily by
the Bank's Africa Region, is a set of related techniques 
It would be misleading to claim that any tools or meth-
intended to obtain client feedback and to make devel- 
ods are inherently participatory or that they spontane-
opment interventions more responsive to demanld. Both 
ously encourage ownership and innovation among stake-
methods intend to serve clients better by nmaking do- 
holders. The participants in development planning and
nties 
actioni-tlhe users of these methods and tools-must be
nors and service providers aware of client priorities, 
the ones who encourage and enable participation. The
tools themiiselves facilitate learninig. preparation, and cre-
ative application of knowledge. They make it easier for
Methods for Social Analysis 
Task Managers and borrowers who are committed to
Social factors and social impacts, including gender is- 
participation to collaborate with a broad range of stake-
sues, should be a central part of all development plan- 
holders in the selection, design, and implementation of
ning and action, rather than "'add-ons" that fit awkwardly 
development projects. These same methods, however,
with the universe of data to be considered. Social As- can also be implemented in a "top-down" manner, which
sessment (SA) and Gender Analysis (GA) are methods 
merely pays lip service to participation. The ultimate
that incorporate participation and social analysis into the 
responsibility for using these methods well, therefore,
project design process. These methods are also carried 
rests with the users and facilitators.
I F 2;)

A1I1''1.:N1)1X 
: N1I: 
HODI-> 
AND 
1001.-
TABLE: 
A1.1. 
PARTICIPATORY 
METHO)DS 
AND 
TooLS
Description 
Comments
Collaborative Decisionmaking: Workshop-Based Methods
Appreciationi-linfluence-Control tAIC) 
Strengths
AIC is a workshop-based technique that encourages stakeholders to 
* 
Encourages "social learning"
consider the social, political. and cultural factors along with techni- 
* Promotes ownership
cal and economic aspects that influence a given project or policy. 
* 
Produces a visual matrix of project plan
AIC helps workshop participants identify a common purpose. en- 
* Stakeholders establish rules of the game
courages to recognize the range of stakeholders relevant to that pur- 
* 
Stakeholders establish working relationships
pose, and creates an enabling forum for stakeholders to pursue that
purpose collaboratively. Activities focus on building appreciation 
Avoiding Potential Pitfalls
through listening, influence through dialogue, and control through 
* Completed matrices should not be considered unchangeable.
action. 
* 
Workshops 
should be part of a plan that involves 
all
stakeholders.
Objectives-Oriented Project Planning (ZOPPI 
* 
Not all stakeholders are comfortable in workshop settings.
ZOPP is a prolect planning technique that brings stakeholders to work- 
* 
Measures should be taken to give voice to less experienced
shops to set priorities and plan for implementation and monitoring. The 
public speakers.
main output of ZOPP workshops is a project planning matrix. The pur- 
* 
Choice of workshop 
location should be accessible 
to
pose of ZOPP is to undertake participatory. objectives-oriented plan- 
local stakeholders.
ning that spans the life of project or policy work, while building stake-
holder team commitment and capacity with a series of workshops.
TeaniUp
TeamnUp builds on ZOPP but emphasizes team building. TeamnUP
uses a computer software package (PC/TeamUP) that guides stake-
holders through team-oriented research, project design, planning,
implementation, and evaluation. It enables teams to undertake
participatory, objectives-oriented planning and action, while fos-
tering a "learning-by-doing" atmosphere.
Collaborative Decisionmaking: Community-Based MVethods
Participatory Rural Appraisal IPRA) 
Strengths
PRA is a label given to a growing fiamily of participatory ap- 
* 
Based on interactive. 
often 
visual tools that enable
proaches and methods that emphasize local knowledge and en- 
participation regardless of literacy level
able local people to do their own appraisal. analysis, and plan- 
* 
Demystifies research and planning processes by drawing on
ning. PRA uses group animation and exercises to facilitate infor- 
everyday experience
mation sharing, analysis. and action among stakeholders. Al- 
* 
Participants feel empowered by their participation and the
though originally developed for use in rural areas, PRA has been 
sense that their contributions are valued.
employed successfully in a variety of settings. The use of PRA
enables development practitioners, government officials, and lo- 
Avoiding Potential Pitfalls
cal people to work together on context-appropriate programs. 
* 
PRA or training alone does not provide local communities
with decisionmaking 
authority 
or input into project
SARAR 
management. These features must be built into the project.
This participatory approach, geared specifically to the training 
* 
Thesetechniquesgenleratepositiveeniergy.whichwillquickly
of local trainers/facilitators. 
builds on local knowledge and 
subside if it is not channeled into actual tasks and programs.
strengthens local capacity to assess, prioritize. plan. create orga- 
* Trained facilitators are necessary to guide and synthesize these
stregthiis oca capcit 
to sses, 
riortiz, 
pln. 
reat. oga- 
exercises.
nize, and evaluate. The five attributes promoted by SARAR are:
self-esteem, associative strengths, resourcefulness, action plan-
ning. and responsibility. SARAR's purpose is to (a) provide a
multisectoral, multilevel approach to team building through train-
ing. (b) encourage participants to learn from local experience
rather than from external experts. and (c) empower people at the
community and agency levels to initiate action.
(continuedon 
o next page)
1 83

'I'HE 
NVORA1 
) BANK 
PAR'T'IuI'PA'rION 
SOURCIAMOK
TABLE 
Al.1. 
(CONTINUIED)
Description 
Comments
Methods for Stakeholder Consultation
Beneficiary Assessment (BA) 
Strengths
BA is a systematic investigation of the perceptions of beneficia- 
* 
Systematic listening and consultation requires lengthier,
ries and other stakeholders to ensuire that their concerns are heard 
repeated, 
and more meaningful 
interactions 
among
and incorporated into project and policy formulation. BA's gen- 
stakeholders.
eral purposes are to (a) undertake systematic listening to "give 
* 
BA and SCC are field-based, requiring project or program
voice" to poor and other hard-to-reach beneficiaries, thereby high- 
managers or their representatives to travel to communities
lighting constraints to beneficiary participation and (b) obtain 
and to become more aware of the realities of the field.
feedback on development interventions.
Avoiding Potential Pitfalls
Systematic Client Consultation (SCC) 
* 
Listening and consultation alone do not lead to increased
SCC refers to a group of methods used to improve communica- 
capacity 
or facilitation 
of client 
participation 
in
tion among Bank staff, direct and indirect beneficiaries and stake- 
decisionmaking or action.
holders of Bank-financed projects, government agencies, and ser- 
* The effectiveness of these techniques often rests with the
vice providers so projects and policies are more demand-driven. 
ability of the managers 
and their representatives 
to
SCC intends to (a) undertake systematic listening to clients' atti- 
"translate" client needs and demands into operationally
tudes and preferences, (b) devise a process for continuous com- 
meaningful terms and activities.
munication, and (c) act on the findings by incorporating client
feedback into project design and procedures.
Methods for Social Analysis
Social Assessment (SA) 
Strengths
SA is the systematic investigation of the social processes and 
* 
Thesemethodsprovideaprocessforbuildinginformationinto
factors that affect development impacts and results. Objectives 
plans and plans into action.
of SA are to (a) identify key stakeholders and establish the ap- 
* Systematic social analysis identifies what communities think
propriate framework for their participation, (b) ensure that project 
they need and sets up ways to communicate this back to
objectives and incentives for change are appropriate and accept- 
implementing agencies.
able to beneficiaries, (c) assess social impacts and risks, and (d) 
* 
Flexible framework of GA and SA allows design to be
minimize or mitigate adverse impacts. 
consistent with project or policy components and goals.
Gender Analysis (GA) 
Avoiding Potential Pitfalls
GA focuses on understanding and documenting the differences in 
* 
Data collection and analysis must be focused on priority
gender roles, activities, needs, and opportunities in a given context. 
issues, rather than being general data collection exercises
GA involves the disaggregation of quantitative data by gender. It 
that are not necessarily tied to project or policy concerns.
highlights the different roles and learned behavior of men and women 
* 
Involving experienced local consultants from a variety of disci-
based on gender attributes, which varv across culture, class, ethnicity, 
plines builds in-country capacity for actionable social analysis.
income, education, and time; thus. GA does not treat women as a
homogenous group nor gender attributes as immutable.
1 84

API'I'PEND)IX 
1: 
uI F,'rH(0D)S 
A.NI) 
TO )OL* ,
APPRE 
C IATION- 
* 
Control through action. Enable the stakeholders to
take responsibility for choosing a course of action
I N EL ,IE Tl<NC 
- C' O)N ' R(> 1, 
Ifreely, 
based on information brought to light in work-
shops. meetings, and activities.
COLLABORATIVE 
DECISIONMAKING:
WORK-SHop-BASED 
METHOD 
AIC Philosophy in Practice
AIC was designed to break the patterns of "top-down"
"Appreciation-Influence-Control" 
(AIC) is both a phi- 
planning by stressing the following:
losophy and a modelfor action. The philosophy, anchored
by the principle that power relationships are central to 
* 
The value of small, heterogeneous groups. Initially,
the process of organizing, was translated into a model 
when stakeholders are meeting, perhaps for the first
for organizing development work by William E. Smith in 
time. heterogeneous, small groups allow for interac-
the late 1 970s and early 1 980s. AIC is a workshop-based 
tion and learning among people who tend not to inter-
technique that encourages stakeholders to consider so- 
act in daily life. The objectives of these small groups
cial, political, and cultural factors along with technical 
is to interrupt the normal mood, thus opening partici-
and economic aspects that influence a given project or 
pants to new ideas and different perspectives.
policy. AIC (a) helps workshop participants identify a 
* 
The value ofhomogenous groups. Later on, when a strat-
common purpose, (b) encourages participants to recog- 
egy is generated for realizing the vision created during
nize the range of stakeholders relevant to that purpose, 
the appreciation phase, the power of homogenous
and (c) creates an enabling forum for stakeholders to 
groups of stakeholders, who share a common language,
pursue that purpose collaboratively. Activitiesfocus 
on 
is harnessed for action. The objective of these groups is
building 
appreciation 
through listening, 
influence 
to consolidate the expertise of like stakeholders, each
through dialogue, and control through action. 
of whom has recently learned the perspectives of the
AIC is a process that recognizes the centrality of power 
other stakeholders at the conference.
relationships in development projects and policies. Con- 
* 
The value of symbols. Language and literacy differ-
ferences that are part of the AIC process encourage stake- 
ences can be a stumbling block, particularly at the
holders to consider social, political, and cultural factors in 
beginning of a conference when participants are be-
addition to technical and economic factors that influence 
coming familiar with each other's objectives. Par-
the project or policy with which they are concerned. In 
ticipants often begin by creating nonverbal represen-
other words, AIC facilitates recognition of "the big pic- 
tations of their experience and understanding-draw-
ture." This process has been implemented in a variety of 
ings and pictures-to 
ease communication and to
sectors and settings, including local, regional, and national. 
elicit creative thinking.
0 
The value of the written word. Agreements reached
'T'F. 
Al ( 
I-'Iioe 
F( ss'. 
during sessions are promptly written up after the first
workshop to clarify and create a common understand-
In the development context, AIC proceeds along the follow- 
ing of the elements of the plan. Seeing the groups'
ing course: identifying the purpose to be served by a particu- 
progress in writing helps participants to understand
lar plan or intervention, recognizing the range of stakehold- 
their individual responsibilities in context and to
ers whose needs are addressed by that purpose, and, through 
move forward on their commitments.
the AIC process, facilitating creation of a forum that empow- 
* 
The importance 
of a strong facilitator. 
The type
ers stakeholders to pursue that purpose collaboratively. 
of listening encouraged by AIC can be stressful
Through the AIC process of meetings, workshops, and 
for people who are used to taking immediate, de-
activities (collectively referred to as the "conference" inAIC 
cisive action. Similarly, certain stakeholders might
terms), stakeholders are encouraged to do the following: 
not be accustomed to voicing their opinions. A
skilled facilitator is trained in navigating around
* Appreciate through listening. Appreciate the realities 
tough spots, guiding the entire group through new
and possibilities of the situation by taking a step back 
experiences, and stimulating open discussions and
to gain perspective on the stakeholders and situation. 
negotiation. The facilitator is a critical catalyst for
* Influence through dialogue. Explore the logical and stra- 
setting the AIC conference in motion and for steer-
tegic options for action as well as the subjective feel- 
ing participants toward a conference closure that
ings and values that influence selection of strategies. 
leads to action.
185

I H F: NVORIA.) 
HAN 
P 
I.AR'TI( 
I 
C''I'TION 
40UIRC 
'IlOI(O
R:FE, 
EN 
, 
( 
NES' 
Smith. William E. 1992. "Planning for the Electricity
Sector in Colombia." In Marvin R. Weisbord, 1992.
Discovering Commoni Ground. San Francisco:
Kearns. James M. and Turid Sato. 1989. "New Practices for 
Bennett-Kohler Publications. pp. 171-187.
Development Professionals." Developmlent, The Journial Smith. William E. 1991. The AIC Model: Concepts and
of the Society for Intemnational Development. No. 4. 
Practice. Washington. D.C.: ODII.
Box ALL. AIC Conference in Colombia Leads to Commitments and Action in the Energy Sector
Key stakeholders gatheed for a thee-day AIC conference in Santa Marta, Colombia. The AIC consultant, the Task Man-
ager, and a third failitator joined ministers, heads of utilities and their suppliers, mayors, congresspeople, opposition
party members, interest groups, and others to design a plan to resuscitate the energy sector and to make commitments to
carry out thmeplan. 
D.ring,the first day and ahalf oftheconference, the "appreciative" phase, participants shared informa-
tion, exained 
ties of the energy sector, and reated group rapport that carried them ogh the conference. The AIC
process encouraged, participants to envision clear outcomes, make recommendations, and make commitments that would
transform their coenc 
plan. into actions. Amnong the outcomes of the conference were:
* 
Collaboration between the task force and ministry to implement COMMitments
* 
Creation of an interimi coordinating body and passa of legislation to support it
Integration of the electricity and energy sectors
* 
Further Bank, Inter-Amtecan Development Bank, and Japanese Export-Import Bank support for an effort in which
Colombian counterpartshad shown their initiative to propose and commitment to meet various conditions.
The cost of this three-dayAIC conference of approximately $30,000 was paid for in large part by the Colombians ($25,000).
Tfhe Bank 
tontibuted 
lhe 
remaimng $5,00. 
:
186

APIPIENDI)IX 
1: NIEITH10I) 
ANDI 
1T00i)-
{OBJEi,C TI YE 
;-O)RIEN'rE,I) 
* 
Alternlatives. A project strategy is created by under-
standing the range of means for meeting objectives.
PROJE1 F CT PJLA.i1_N NtN 
(Zo( P P) 
* 
Assumptions. These conditions are necessary for suc-
C'OALABOIIATIVE 
cessful transformation of problems into securecd ob-
jectives. Assumptions are systematically examined
and arranged in the PPM.
DEC 
ISI[CN 
MAKIN 
G:
WotI(SKHOP-BASED 
METHOD 
Participants first review the variety of means avail-
able to achieve the project objective. The project plan-
ZOPP, from the German term "Zielorientierte 
ning matrix shows activities and results as well as the
Projektplanung," 
tranislates in English to "Objectives- 
conditions necessary for achieving both. These condi-
Oriented Project Planning." ZOPP is a pro ject planning 
tions are important assumptions on which rest decisions
and management method that encourages participator} 
about activities, location, timing, procurement, and so
planning and analvsis throughout the project cYcle witll 
on. The information is organized along two axes that show
a series of stakeholder workshop.s The techniique requires 
(a) why the project is being undertaken and (b) what the
stokeholders to comne together in ai series of workshops 
project outputs are that signal success. The PPM thus
to set priorities an2d plan for implementattion and inoni- 
systemiiatically answers the following questions:
toring. 7he main output o( a ZOPP session is a project
planning mnatrix, which stakeholders build together Thle 
* 
Why does the project aihm for this overall goal?
purpose of ZOPP is to undertake participatory; objec- 
* 
What is the project purpose'?
tives-oriented planning that spans the life (of project or 
* 
What results/outputs will the project achieve?
policy work to build stakeholder team commitment and 
* 
How will the project achieve these results/outputs?
calpacitv with a series of workshops. 
* 
What external factors (assumptions) are important'?
ZOPP is a process that relies heavily on two particu- 
* 
How canl achievement of the objectives be measured?
lar techniques-matrix building and stakeholder work- 
* 
Where are the means/sources of necessary data?
shops-to encourage participatory planiniing and manage- 
* 
What will the project cost?
ment of development work. ZOPP helps a project team
create a project planning matrix (PPM), similar to a Logi- 
1TF;RA'rl 
W'OR1jS.1 
)P)
cal Framework or LogFRAME, to provide in-depth analy-
sis of project objectives, outputs, and activities. The PPM ZOPP is not a one-shot exercise; the designers of the
results from stakeholder workshops that are scheduled planning method envisioned strategic planning "phases,"
through the life of a project to encourage brainstorming, 
each of which requires a workshop that focuses on a fixed
strategizing, information gathering, and consensus build- goal. In the workshops, participants analyze key issues
ing among stakeholders. 
throughout the project cycle. No set formula exists for a
successful stakeholder workshop. In fact, each one is truly
TI-Li.: PPM^1: PHO('ESfiN 
IsS-1) 
IRR)I)t-( 
', 
unique because it brings together a blend of people who
have never before worked as a group and who need to
The PPM is central to ZOPP-based project work because 
create a common language to understand one another's
the process of building it relies on repeated, collabora- 
widely divergenit concerns. As described by its creators
tive stakeholder input. In the stakeholder workshops in at GTZ. five distinct ZOPP phases. which ruLn alongside
which the matrix is developed systematic attention is paid 
the project cycle, can lead to a sound strategic project
to five important issues: 
plan.
In the traditional coniception of ZOPP, the first three
* 
Participation 
analysis. Taking stock of the range of 
of the five phases take place during project planning. The
stakeholder identities, interests, biases, expectaitiolls, theory here is that extensive, earnest efforts to plan
and concerns. 
collaboratively prior to implementation increase the like-
* 
Problems. Often made visually clear through a "prob- 
lihood of smooth implemetntation and the degree of stake-
lem tree," through which key problems the project is 
holder ownership and readiness to work toward
meant to address are identified, grouped. and priori- 
sustainability.
tized and their causes and effects brought to light. 
Collaboration is not "automatically" part of the ZOPP
* 
Objectives. In a corresponding objectives tree, the de- 
process. The project team, borrower, and stakeholders
sired solutions are articulated, clustered and prioritized. must commit to adopting a participatory stance for the
1 8 7

'I'ILOF 
WOR)IA.1 
BANK-1 
PAICT'1'1'PAT'1<ON 
SOURCE('IM(M(It
overall project; otherwise, the ZOPP process is merely 
holders' resolve to "save" the project is grounded in a
an organizing tool. During each planning phase of the 
broader commitment to collaboration.
ZOPP process, participants reinforce their commitment 
In its initial form, ZOPP was created to be closely tied
to include the diverse expertise and concerns of a variety 
to the project cycle; hence, it has mostly been used in a
of stakeholders. 
variety of sector and country settings for project work. The
two main component tools of ZOPP-the stakeholder work-
ApI" XI('.AT1UNS IN 
BANI-I 
NVORK 
shop and the PPM-can also be used for the participatory
planning of policy and economic sector work.
Objectives-oriented planning assumes that joint analysis
and planning is necessary throughout the project cycle. 
P.i:F 
t'I?I ',N 'I;:,
If instituted early in the life of a project, ZOPP can pro-
vide a ready forum for extensive participation of diverse 
Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ).
stakeholders. ZOPP is also a helpful approach to jump 
1991. Methods and Instrumentsfor Project Planning
starting stalled project initiatives. 
and Implementation. Eschborn: Germany.
Fora variety of reasons, promising projects have been GTZ. 1988. ZOPP (An Introduction to the Method).
known to falter unexpectedly in midstream. In these cases, 
Eschborn, Germany.
ZOPP can be a powerful tool for reorganizing if stake- 
GTZ. 1988. ZOPP in Brief. Eschborn, Germany.
Box A1.2. Creating a Forum for Stakeholder Communication and Innovation
The Task Manager for an Industrial 
Efficiency and Pollution Control project for the Philippines took the initiative to create
'communication 
linkages among govemment,;the 
Bank, industry, and nongovernmenta 
organizations 
(NGOs) to establish
a common Bank-borrower 
team approach to the project preparation 
process.,
Through the local counterpart 
agency, the Task Manager organized a series of stakeholder meetings to further refine
problem formulations 
and define the objectives for a project that had yet to be identified.
A ZOPP7-based 
approach was used to 1:britng 
together stakeholders 
who initialy felt that their conflicting priorities would
preventPP-themdo 
aproachi 
Pa 
sdt 
rn 
prevent them from reaching consensus on project objectives.
Not only did stakeholders 
achieve consensus on objectives and prioritization, 
but the communication 
linkages begun in
the two-day workshop began a dialogue on systematically focusing on community-level demands to encourage participa-
tion and ownership at the local level.
188

AIPPI;NIMX 
1: .MIFTI'IIMDI)>\NI) AND00IS.
TEANII 
P 
* 
Opening round. In the opening round, stakeholders
discuss their expectations for the team during the
TeamUP workshop and beyond. What does each
C-LABRAIV 
DA Nstakeholder 
hope to accomplish 
in the workshop?
WORKSHOP-HASEI) 
METHOD 
* 
Clarify representation. Stakeholders define the in-
terests each represents and set out roles that each will
TeamUP is a flexible, team-based method for improving 
play. Who will act as the team manager? Who will
both the substance and process of project cycle manage- 
be responsible for what?
ment. It was developed to expand the benefits of ZOpp 
* 
Set norms. "Rules of the game" are set out so that all
and to make it more accessible for institutionwide use. 
team members have common expectations of how
PC/TeamUP, a software package, automates the basic 
they can most effectively work together. How will
step-by-step methodology and guides stakeholders 
consensus be measured? What will the protocol be
through team-oriented research, project design, planning. 
during discussions? How will conflicts be resolved?
implementation, and evaluation. 
* 
Identify client. In this first action-oriented module,
TheTeamUPmethodisanorganizedprocessforbuilding 
stakeholders establish who will benefit most if the
high performance teams. It has two dimensions, (a) task func- 
objectives of the project are achieved. What is the
tions, which assist stakeholders in planning, decisionmaking, 
total range of potential beneficiaries and negatively
and acting and (b) team building, which encourages stake- 
impacted groups?
holders to collaborate as an effective work group. 
* 
Review histonry. This is a team-building and action-
The TeamUP method is a series of steps or modules 
oriented exercise to ensure that everyone at the meet-
designed to enable a group of individuals to perform es- 
ing has equal footing. Is this a brand new project
sential management functions collaboratively. Typically, 
with no prior history? Are there applicable lessons
the team meets for a two-and-a-half- or five-day work- 
from elsewhere? Have some team members worked
shop. Software (PC/TeamUP) is available to facilitate the 
together before?
process. The software accommodates input from a broad 
* 
Define mission. 
What is the team's mission in the
range of stakeholders who stand to benefit or otherwise 
workshop? To prepare a project or a program? To
be affected by design or implementation decisions and 
develop a strategy for wider client participation?
adjusts as the range of stakeholders changes through the 
Furthermore, what is the mission of the project or
planning and implementation process. 
program itself?
Define deliveraibles and assumptions. In this mod-
ule, the LogFRAME (see the glossary of tools at
TEAM 
UP 
AN[I.v-) Z( )I-'I
the end of this Appendix) is used to map out end
TeamUP-developed in the late 1980s by the World Bank's 
products and necessary conditions in relationship
Economic Development Institute and Team Technologies, 
to overall impact. What changes in behavior and
Inc.-uses the basic ZOPP method and then expands it. 
environment will the project outcome inspire? Who
TeamUP assumes that the past and future are two different 
will change and how? What are the assumptions on
sources on which to draw when designing and implementing 
which these outcomes rest? Are these assumptions
project-related events. ZOPP, mainly concemed with antici- 
biased in any way? What if these assumptions do
pating and avoiding problem situations, looks to the past to 
not prove to be true?
understand the present. TeamUP, concemed with both prob- 
* 
Ciabr sef i 
worke plan. Through the LogFRAME, team
lems and opportunities, looks to the past and the future to 
members define steps to move the project from idea
understand the possibilities that offer themselves to the present. 
to action. How will the intended deliverables become
Furthermore, TeamUP adds depth to basic problem 
reality? In what order and with whose help? What
identification and design features by encouraging teams 
tools and further plans are needed, and whose sup-
to anticipate implementation arrangemiients and inform 
port is critical?
the quality of their designs with these realities. 
* 
Define roles and responsibilities. This module is de-
signed to prepare the team to take action beyond the
TN% tE;IA* I.: B 
~IsC(, 
Sworkshop 
by firming up how the work is broken
down. Who will manage what aspects of fulfilling
TeamUP's twelve core steps are alTanged so that earlier 
the objectives? Tools used in this module encourage
steps help a team build identity and later steps help them 
people to identify specific tasks and take responsi-
take action. 
bility for following through with those tasks.
lff'9

'TIlE 
Hl:,L< 
) 
HA.NK 
P.mIuI'A'II' 
N 
S-l( 
.UI 13( 
s( 
i
* 
Define learning svstem. The team establishes a pro- 
plan might face. What if certain assumptions turn
cess to review what they have done and how the teaml 
out to be untrue? What if certain unforeseen events
has worked together. What have they learned from 
take place'? Are contingency plans possible? Finally.
this experience? How will they cart-y what they have 
a plan for future team workshops is set out.
learned into the futuire of this project or program'?
Estiblish budget. Using perforniance budget planning 
E
tools. the team reviews the work plan and systemnati-
cally attaches cost to each activity in the plan. Will 
Cracknell. B. 1989. "'Evaluatinlg the Elfectiveness of the
this project or plan be feasible? Where should the teamii 
Logical Framework System in Practice." Project
turn to secure financing? What are the possible souIces 
Appraisal 4(3): 163-167.
of ftunding'? Do budget estimates meet operational re- 
McLean. D. 1988. Logical Frainmevork ini Research Plani-
quirements'? What fturther information is needed"? 
ninzg and(1 Evaluation. 
International Service of Na-
* 
nIplement ant inmprove. The conviction and wisdom 
tional Agricultural Research Working Paper No. 12.
of the team's plan is put to a series of tests. For ex- 
Washington. D.C.: ISNAR.
ample. the workshop facilitator will take on the role 
Team Technologies, Inc. 199 1. PC/LogFraine R&D Soft-
of devil's advocate to iitiodluce obstacles that the 
w'are eimmcd 
User Mtanail. Chantillv, Virginia.
Box Al.3. Uganda, Private Sector Development Workshop
The World Bank provided assistance to the Uganda Manufacturers' Association and the Ministry of Finance and Eco-
nomic Planning to oganize a workshop, whose purpose was to (a) review survey results on 105 businesses and 265 private
investors, (b) introduce a private sector development strategy to a broad constituency of private sector, government, and
donor participants, (c) achieve agreement on fundamental elements, and (d) identify a private sector task force to begin
preparation of a possible International Develoent 
Association-funded operation in this area.
The workshop design, based on the TeamUP approach, used public involvement methods for involving large numbers of
stakeholders in building agreements about policy, strategy, and execution. The method integrated more than seventy partici-
pants in a series of small 
discussions designed to identify issues, surface and resolve conflicts, and build understanding
and initial agreement about a proposed project design. Summary responses from participants indicated:they believed the
wvorkshopdemonstrated the government's and Bank's comnnitment to a collaborative, demand-driven process.
I 9f)>

AiuIf-'ENmIx 
1: 
NXI11'111(1),XNI) 
'Iooi
PARTICIPATORY 
1] LTRA.LI 
appropriate in a particular development context will
be determined by such variables as the size and skill
mix of the PRA team, the time and resources avail-
able, and the topic and location of the work.
COICLLABO[.RATIVE 
DEC,ISIONMIAKING: 
* 
Optimtal igniorcanice. 
To be efficient in terms of both
COMNIMUNITY-BASED 
METHOI) 
time and money, PRA work intends to gather just
enough information to make the necessary recom-
Participatory rural appraisal (PRA) is a label given to a 
mendations and decisions.
grow inlg Ja1ilv of participantorx approaschles and meth -
* 
Triangulation. PRA works with qualitative data. To
od.s that empheasize local knowscledge aInd enable local 
ensure that information is valid and reliable, PRA
people to make their own appraisal, analysis, andplans. 
teams follow the rule of thumb that at least three
sources must be consulted or techniques must be used
PRVA uses group as7Ziz7eatioi7 
and exercisves to,facilitate in- 
toivsigt.h 
sam tpc.
formation sharing, analvsis, tInd actionz among stakeholcl- 
to ivestigate the same topics.
ers. Althouigh originallv dleveloped for use in rural ar-
eas, PRA has been enmploved success fullv in ai varietv of 
PRA 
TFor)L-os
settings. The puirpose of PRA is to enable developmnent 
PRA is an exercise in comunication and transfer of knowl-
practitioners. government officials, and local people to 
Regardless 
e 
in icatied 
trasfer of prowl-
work together to plan context-appropriate programs. 
edge. Regardless of whether it is carried out as part of project
Participatory rural appraisal evolved from rapid rural 
identification or appraisal or as part of country economic
appraisal-a set of informal techniques used b develop- and sector work, the learning-by-doing and teamwork spirit
ment practitioners in rural areas to collect and analyze data. 
of PRA requires transparent procedures. For that reason, a
Rapid rural appraisal developed in the 1 970s and 1 980s in series of open meetings (an initial open meeting, final meet-
response to the perceived problems of outsiders mi-issing or 
ilig, and follow-up meeting) generally frame the sequence
miscommunicating with local people in the context of de- 
of PRA activities. Other tools common in PRA are:
velopment work. In PRA, data collection and analysis are
undertaken by local people, with outsiders facilitating rather 
* 
Semistructured interviewing
than controlling. PRA is an approach for shared learning 
* 
Focus group discussions
between local people and outsiders, but the tern is some- 
* 
Preerence ranking
what misleading. PRA techniques are equally applicable in 
Mapping and modeling
urban settings and are not limited to assessment only. The 
* 
Seasonal and historical diagramming.
same approach can be employed at every stage of the project
cycle and in country economic and sector work.
KEY 
'ITENETFx OF 
I'RA 
A typical PRA activity involves a team of people work-
ing for two to three weeks on workshop discussions,
* 
Pcarticipation. Local people's input into PRA activi- 
analyses. and fieldwork. Several organizational aspects
ties is essential to its value as a research and plan- 
should be considered:
ning method and as a means for diffusing the par-
ticipatory approach to development. 
* 
Logistical arrangements should consider nearby ac-
* 
Teamwork. To the extent that the validity of PRA data 
commodations. arrangements for lunch for fieldwork
relies on informal interaction and brainstorming 
days. sufficient vehicles, portable computers, funds
among those involved, it is best done by a team that 
to purchase refreshments for community meetings
includes local people with perspective and knowl- 
during the PRA. and supplies such as flip chart pa-
edge of the area's conditions, traditions, and social 
per and markers.
structure and either nationals or expatriates with a 
* 
Training of team members may be required. particu-
complementary mix of disciplinary backgrounds and 
larly if the PRA has the second objective of training
experience. A well-balanced team will represent the 
in addition to data collection.
diversity of socioeconomic, cultural. gender. and 
* 
PRA results are influenced by the length of time al-
generational perspectives. 
lowed to conduct the exercise, scheduling and as-
* 
Flexibilitv. PRA does not provide blueprints for its 
signment of report writing. and critical analysis of
practitioners. The combination of techniques that is 
all data, conclusions, and recommendations.
191

'I' IE 
W 
Ai].i) B.AN1 
PA RIT( 
1'A'II ( )N 
i4 
)1'(:lit( 
)(
* A PRA covering relatively few topics in a small 
port has been established, given the relative sensitiv-
area (perhaps two to four communities) should take 
ity of this information.
between ten days and four weeks, but a PRA with a 
The current situation can be shown using maps and
wider scope over a larger area can take several 
models, but subsequent seasonal and historical diagram-
months. Allow five days for an introductory 
ming exercises can reveal changes and trends, throughout
workshop if training is involved. 
a single year or over several years. Preference ranking is a
* 
Reports are best written immediately after the 
good icebreaker at the beginning of a group interview and
fieldwork period, based on notes from PRA team 
helps focus the discussion. Later, individual interviews can
members. A preliminary report should be available 
follow up on the different preferences among the group
within a week or so of the fieldwork, and the final 
members and the reasons for these differences.
report should be made available to all participants
and the local institutions that were involved.
SEQUlN(C 
() 
'OIT(ECINJQ1JI.. 
Chambers, R. 1992. Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed,
and Participatory. Institute of Development Studies
PRA techniques can be combined in a number of dif- 
Discussion Paper 311. Sussex: HELP.
ferent ways, depending on the topic under investiga- 
International Institute for Environment and Development,
tion. Some general rules of thumb, however, are use- 
Sustainable Agriculture Program. 1991-present. RRA
ful. Mapping and modeling are good techniques to start 
Notes (now titled PLA Notes). United Kingdom.
with because they involve several people, stimulate 
McCracken, Jennifer A., Jules N. Pretty, and Gordon R.
much discussion and enthusiasm, provide the PRA 
Conway. 1988. An Introduction to Rapid Rural Ap-
team with an overview of the area, and deal with non- 
praisalfor Agricultural Development. London: Inter-
controversial information. Maps and models may lead 
national Institute for Environment and Development.
to transect walks, perhaps accompanied by some of 
Theis, J. and H. Grady. 1991. Participatory Rapid Ap-
the people who have constructed the map. Wealth rank- 
praisalfor Community Development. London: Save
ing is best done later in a PRA, once a degree of rap- 
the Children Fund.
Box A1. Naturw Resource Management in Burkina Faso
Prior to appiaisal of tis environmetal management project, twenty pilot operations tested the PRA approach to deter-
maine which techniques suited the project's resores 
topic, and location. Best practices were distilled without blueprint
designs.
The, result is; project based on a multitiered process in which commumnties 
design management plans with the help of
multidisciplinar teams of technicians. This approach starts with awareness raising and trust building and proceeds to
collaborative diagnosis, pom nity oniti 
and plan design. Local govenment agreement, implementation, and
participatory monioig 
and evaluation follow.
Centraladreon 
governments have come on board with this approach, endorsing adminstrative decentalization and
reorganization and woing for revisions of aibiguous land tenure laws. Both of these steps encourage local solutions to
loc81 problems andl wor for empowering people to manage natural resources in a sustainable way.
Source: The World Bank, Agriculture:Technology 
and Services Division (AGRTN). 
October 1994. Agriculture 
Technology 
Notes.
No.6. Wasgton, D.C:
1 92

API'I'PENDIXI. 
1: NIETH'IHODI). 
ANDI) I )11,
SARAR 
(GIENEIATI. 
ON 
OF 
D)ATA
The nuts and bolts of SARAR are a series of carefully
COLLABORATIVE 
DECISIONNIAKING: 
developed, flexible activities. The activities are designed
COMMUNILTY-BASED 
METHOD 
to draw out participants' own life experiences and bring
to light local perspectives, feelings, values, and socially
SARAR is a participatory approach to training that builds sensitive data. This data can be extremely valuable to
on local knowledge and strengthi1ens local ability to as- 
project managers in establishing a partnership relation-
sess, prioritize, plan, create, organize. and evaluate, 
ship with communities; thus, it is qualitatively different
SARAR's purpose is to (a) provide a multisectoral, mnlulti- from data obtainable through conventional tools such as
level approach to team building through training, (b) eni- questionnaires.
courage participants to learn froin local experience rather 
The data-generating aspect of SARAR. however,
thanfron extertnal experts, and (c) emipowerpeople at the 
is neither its main aim nor a discreet function to be
communitv and agencv levels to iniitiate action. SARAR is 
used for extractive research purposes. The data-gen-
a philosophys and practical approach7 to adult education 
erating process is designed to set in motion a process
that seeks to optimi e people's ability to assess, prioritize, of retlection. self-enDhancement 
of positive values, and
plan, self-organize, take initiatives, and shoulder manage- 
motivation to act. Data that grows out of the group
itient responsibilities. The acronym SARAR stands forfive 
activities becomes more meaningful when put at the
attributes or abilities that are criticallv important for 
service of decisions that underlie a plan of action. If
ach1ieving 
fidand committedparticipation in delvelopment: activities are treated simply as a battery of data col-
self-esteenl associative strength resourcefulntess actiont lection instrtuments to support management decisions.
plafnintgeaeid resposibilitreforfollow-turcoughl SARARcis their use out of context can leave people confused,
a highly experiential methodology that deliberatelv dif- distrustful and frustrated.
fers in style from conventional "top-down ' methods. Its
central strategy is groutp process; it beginis with creating a 
A (-iv v1 rrl i , 
rO S '[H 
EN 
( THEN
relayed and coongenial atmosphere in which hierarchical 
Gv:( i* E Ai ii,rLribll
difetrences are set aside.
The concept was first developed through field-based 
SARAR activities fall into five categories:
training of rural extension workers in Indonesia, India,
and the Philippines in the early 1970s and in Latin 
* 
Investigative. Demystifying research by involving
America toward the end of the decade. In the mid-1980s 
participants in data gathering and processing so
the SARAR approach was applied to the water supply 
they "own" the outputs and are committed to us-
and sanitation sector in East and West Africa, Nepal, In- 
ing them.
donesia, Mexico, and Bolivia. Initially, the focus of 
* 
Creative. Promoting fresh viewpoints and imagina-
SARAR was primarily on local communities and field 
tive new solutions. liberating expressiveness and
staff. In response to emerging needs and experience, the 
openness to change.
method has been broadened to include an institutional 
* 
Anal tic. Engaging the mind in critical assessment
focus as well. SARAR has proved flexible in adapting to 
of problems, identifying their causes and effects,
urban settings, although it was originally designed for 
categorizing and prioritizing them, and arriving at
rural use, and it has been applied across sectors, such as 
sound choices.
rural development, agricultural extension, health, and 
* 
Planning. Expanding the vision of what is possible:
water and sanitation. It is now being adapted to wildlife 
developing skills in goal setting and marshaling re-
conservation and utilization and HIV/AIDS-related edu- 
sources to achieve them; and managing, monitoring,
cation. SARAR is indeed directed toward whole com- 
and evaluating the outputs.
munities. but it has proved to be especially useful in giv- 
* 
Informnative. 
Accessing the required information
ing special attention to populations, such as women, 
in an enjoyable way and using it for better
whose input and needs are hard to assess with traditional 
decisionmaking in implementing a plan of action.
development approaches.
SARAR's approach to group process combines gen- 
Each of the activities has been developed to be ef-
eration of data with strengthening of group abilities to 
fective in a variety of circumstances. As a package of
assess needs, identify priorities, establish goals, and de- 
tools. they are designed to be multisensory so that they
sign action plans to be implemented and monitored. 
affect behavior in multiple ways. The intention is to
193

'1HF; 
NVORI 
RN 
BANKP 
(AR I'CIPATION 'n)I 
R(EBOOIi
foster creativity and involve the whole person. not just 
Rl.FEIE 
1x 
cEv
the intellect. Some SARAR activities. such as force
field analysis. mapping, and gender and task analysis, 
Narayan. Deepa and Lyra Srinivasan. 1994. Participa-
are similar in focus and name to components of many 
tory Development Tool Kit. Washington. D.C.: The
methods for social assessment and participation. Some 
World Bank.
activities. such as pocket charts, story with a gap, 
Narayaln. Deepa. 1993. Participatory Evaluation. World
flexiflans, and three-pile sorting cards, are unique to 
Bank 'rechnical Paper Number 207. Washington,
SARAR. 
D.C.: The World Bank.
Srinivasan, Lyra. 1990. Tools fir Community Participa-
tion. New York: PROWWESS. United Nations De-
velopment Programme.
Box AL.S. Stakeholders dninstitatiotal 
Requireients of a commulitaent 
Approach
hi Indonesia
As part of preappraisal for the Wate and Sanitation Project for Lo-Icome 
Couuni 
sixty senior government
personnel from the provinces an: the capital joined 
t 
and World Bank s 
for a two-dy workshop.
Using the SAROARapproach, brief preenta4ions were itrmix 
with hands-on activities; most work was done in small
groups. Participants drew 
: 
their person vidions of communityo manaement on large sheets of paper and presented and
discussed ithewith one another. Partiipantsth*n exani 
e roles dxresponslbilities 
that woId be required to fulfill
each ision. Usinga 
*tat list deckions that alwter prjc 
require aWd live levels ofc 
who might
address 
0 
thetu, p 
iats 
discussed the decisions, pocedures, and responsible actr needd to: support each vision.
Finally participat expiothe4ei tn of 
capaity necessary at each evel for comiunity manmgement
The long, often-heated dis 
on resulted in concurrncet 
the technlogy used-such aIs spring captures
and improved wel"the 
mtre liketicipants 
were to 
r 
l and authorito 
Muni 
gt ps. A comon
vision about skis and uid ining tesultin 
thedeision to 
rk 15 to0 pe 
t of r 
t 
foraacity 
building
in comiunity mnagement f water proects am 
eciobr 
tit,sdistt 
dic, 
and provincial
levels as Wl asat tlevel 
oftentrai'overment;
Source:. Deepa Naryan. Navemkr 1995. Toward P 
tcyy Rrch. 
World Bank Wcnal Paper N. 307. Washington, D.C.:
The1WorldBank
194

A P PEN 
1) IX 
1: 
E'1 I-ToH 
() 
A ND) TI 
0()1.9
BENEFIC1IARY 
ASFES;NI 
ENT 
research to writing of the BA report, the entire BA pro-
cess typically takes from four to six months. Ideally, this
process is repeated in an iterative fashion throughout the
METI-l0on 
FOR 
STAHEHO1A)hR 
life of the project. Recent BAs conducted by the Bank
C ONSLTTATI()ON 
have cost between $50,000 and $100,000.
Beneficiary assessment (BA) iivolves svstematic consuil- 
I[H 
{t L;E, 
o{}} BA
tationz wvith project beneficiaries and othler stakeholders
to help them identify anid design development activities. 
* 
Project Work. BA helps to define problems from
signal anvy potential constraints to their participation, 
the point of view of the people who are affected
andd obtain feedback on reactions to an intervention dur- 
by projects. Such knowledge improves project
ilg implementaztion. BA is an il7vestigation of the per- 
preparation and the monitoring of implementation.
ceptions of asystematic sanmpleof beneficiaries and other 
BAs can also help lay the foundation for partici-
stake holders to ensure that their conicernis are heard and 
patory development work. With evidence that their
incorporated iito project anicd policYs formulation. Thle 
icleas are being heard and respected. beneficiary
generapurposes of a BA are to (a) unidertaike svstematic 
populations are more likely to participate in de-
listening, which "gives voice" to poor and other 
velopment projects and take steps to improve their
hard-to-reach beneficiaries, highlighting constraints to 
access to resources. BA is best used iteratively
beneficiarv participation, and (b) obtain ft'edback on 
throughout the project cycle as a monitoring or
initerventions. 
supervision tool for evaluations. For example,
BA is a qualitative method of investigation and evalua- 
three BAs were used for the mid-program evalua-
tion that relies primarily on three data collection techniques: 
tion of the Zambia Social Recovery Project to as-
sess the success of the component 
funding
* 
In-depth conversational interviewing a round key 
microprojects in education and health. The BA
tihemes or topics 
approach has been instituted in some country work
-
Focus group discussions 
programs in Africa and South Asia as a manage-
* 
Direct observation and participant observation (in 
ment tool to improve quality.
which the investigator lives in the community for a 
* 
Poverty assessments. BAs provide qualitative input
short time). 
by focusing on the human factors that affect poverty,
the incentives and constraints to behavior change,
Interviewing and observation can be carried out with 
the reactions to service delivery and institutional re-
individual beneficiaries or with groups; BA work can take 
sponsiveness, and the importance of formal and in-
place in urban or rural settings. Focus groups are com- 
formal safety nets. Specifically. BA work is done in
monly used as a forum for interviewing a number of ben- 
connection with the consultative portion of a pov-
eficiaries and for conducting institutional assessment 
erty assessment known as the participatory poverty
done within a BA. 
assessment (PPA). When incorporated into poverty
The BA approach is not meant to supplant quantita- 
assessments, BA helps to ensure that poverty reduc-
tive surveys and other traditional methods for data gather- 
tion strategies take into account the experience and
ing; rather it complements these methods with reliable and 
concerns of the poor.
useful information on the sociocultural context and per-
ceptions of a client population that will intorm Task Man- 
S 
EP , 
IN 
ENEFIC 
IAY 
AiS, 
F: s 
i'ENT
agers and policymakers. BAs are approaches in which the
participatory process can begin with systematic and con- 
* 
Familiarization. 
Technical specialists are selected to guide
tinuous tracking of client attitudes from identification 
the BA project. Important problem areas are identified
through preparation to implementation of a project. 
and reviewed using available information including in-
Ordinarily, BAs are carried out by local people unl- 
terviews with key stakeholders such as donors, govern-
der the direction of a trained team leader or social scien- 
ment, and local people. A guide for seniistructured inter-
tist. The skill Imlix and number of staff varies according 
views is developed to cover key themes.
to the tools used and demographic characteristics of the 
* 
Stuxdv desigtn. Target populations are identified. An
beneficiary population: BAs often require an experienced 
appropriate representative sampling framework is
focus group facilitator and participant-observer. From 
devised, and the issues to be explored (according to
initial desk reviews of available information through field 
the objectives of the BA) are clearly delineated. A
195

research group and team leader should also be 
* 
Influenced policy and led to changes in project de-
designated. 
sign through improved targeting. efficiency, and ef-
• 
Selection anid orienitationi (of local interviewers. The re- 
fectiveness of programs
search group helps select and train local men and women 
* 
Informed policy with otherwise unavailable and/or
who are fluent in local language(s), good listeners, and 
new informiation
skilled in recall and writing. The study team, including 
* 
Increased sustainability by providing operationally
local interviewers, practices descriptive and accurate 
oriented feedback from the client population
writing, note taking, awareness of and separation from 
* 
Gave voice to the poor by indicating what the poor
preconceived notions, and data analysis. 
see as problems and possible solutionis
* 
Studv. BA work commonly includes interviews, fo- 
* 
Promoted dialogue, ownership, and commitment
cus group discussions, participant observation, and 
by involving all stakeholders in listening and
institutional analysis. 
consultation.
* 
Preparation of the BA re.port. The BA report includes
recommendations that incorporate assessment find-
ings into project design or sector work. The report
should be reviewed by the interviewees 
to 
Amelga, M. 1994. A Relview of Beneficiary Assessments
cross-check for accuracy. 
Conducted by the Bank. ENVSP Consultant Report.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
BANK 
EXPIRIINC(I: 
%I'I'H 
I:. 
Salmen, Lawrence F. 1992. Benefieciar Assessment: Ai
App,uroaclh Described. Working Paper No. 1. Techni-
Between 1983-95. the BA approach has been used in 
cal Department. Africa Region. Washington, D.C.:
forty-seven Bank-supported projects in twenty-seven 
The World Bank.
counitries and across six sectors. A 1 993 review under- 
The World Bank. Africa Region, Southern Africa De-
taken to assess the use of BA in Bank-supported projects 
partment. September 1994. Systematic Clienit Conz-
found that BAs: 
sUltation. Mimeo. Washington. D.C.
Box A1.6. Mali: Beneficiary Assessment in an Education Sector Project
A BA was done in Mali as part of an education project to try to understand 
why parents in rural areas did not send their
children to school. Attendance for girls was especially low. The BA found that the costs of transportation 
and feeding the
child at school plus the opportunity costs of losing the children's labor at home outweighed the benefits of a poor quality
education with few prospects for finding a job.
These findings led to reformulation of policy to (a) reduce costs to beneficiaries by building schools in closer proximity,
(b) increase attendance by designing a girl's component, and (c) train teachers to improve the relationship between parents
and the school system.
196

AP'PElNDI)IX 
1: M.E:TrHOI). 
ANI 
IANDTOOL.
SYSTENIATIC 
C(LIENT 
SiCC 
IN 
P1?(AT1i('.:: 
TEN 
STEI'S
CO 
Nj 
lS TITA,TAT( 
N 
* 
Laying the groundwork. Before consulting with cli-
ents, staff must familiarize themselves with existing
M'lETHOD 
FOR 
STAKEHOLD1ER 
infonnation, select information goals. and determine
informiiation needs in light of the overall project.
('ONFjlTLT 
TIO)N
sectoral, and country strategy.
Who does whliat. SCC requires staff time throughout
Systematic Clien-t Conisiltationi (SCC) refers to al grouip 
the life of the program, a local institution to carry
of methods used to improve communication amlong Balk 
out the consultations, an advisory committee (pro-
staff direct aznd intdlirect beneficiaries anld stakelioldeers 
gram managers, interviewers, government represen-
f' Bank-financed 
projecis, govervnment agencies, anrd 
tatives. relevant civic associations, and other program
service providers so projects 
anitd policies 
ar-e more de- 
partners). and institutional support from headquar-
mnand driven. SCC endeavours to (a) uniidertake systemn- 
ters and the resident mission.
aitic listening to clients' attituides anitd preferences. (b) 
* 
Estaiblishlinlg a budget. In preparing a budget for SCCs.
devise ai process for continuous communication, anlda (c) 
managers must consider the number of clients (indi-
act onz the findings byv incorporating client feedback inlto 
viduals. households, businesses, focus groups. and so
prio ect design 
and( Procedures. 
on) to be surveyed; 
the time period covered 
(usually
SCC has been developed in the World Bank's Africa 
the life of the project) and time required for prepara-
Region as a means for improving the sustainable devel- 
tion, fieldwork. and reporting: the number and pern-
opment impact of their operations in the field. This ap- 
odicitv of surveys (one consultation a year. three con-
proach emerged from the region's quality management 
sultations with selected groups each year for five years.
strategy. which includes strengthening stakeholder com- 
and so on): personnel requirements (interviewers. fa-
mitment and systematic listening to beneficiaries. SCC 
cilitators for focus groups, and participant-observers):
emphasizes continuity in the process of learning and re- 
training for interviewers: output (oral and written re-
adjustment that is intended to make Bank-sponsored poli- 
ports), and dissemination of findings.
cies and projects more responsive to the needs and wishes 
* 
Designing an information-tracking plan. A project in-
of the countries they serve. It is a system 'for keeping a 
formation-tracking plan should sequence a series of
finger on the pulse of client reactions in the field so that 
client polls at specific intervals throughout the life of
Bank interventions are kept on target. even in contexts in 
the programn: include mechanisms for information gath-
which circumstances are subject to frequent change. 
erilg. analysis, dissemination, responsive action, and
SCC recognizes that social research incorporates many 
evaluation; and be adjusted as the program progresses
dimensions and that the issues to be addressed detenrine 
(sometiies targeting highly affected segments or other
which method is needed. Among the techniques used to cany 
selected groups within the client population).
out SCC are: firm surveys. sentinel communlity surveillance. * 
Ilentif ing the ta1rget group. In selecting the client
beneficiary assessment. and participatory rural appraisal. 
target group, managers must identify 
those
decisionimiakers and officials whose assessment of
THE: 
Fi(s( 
'I HE:OFRE- 
the program is vital to its success; divide large client
groups into smaller categories whose relation to the
SCC is premised on the belief that information gathered 
programii can be more specifically defined: and iden-
must be analyzed, acted on. and reassessecl: thus. SCC is 
tify clients who have current, factual information
based on: 
about project performance.
* 
Designing daita collection 
in?str-umlienits. In conisult-
* 
Conl.su/ltation. 
Obtaining regular feedback from those 
ing with clients, field interviewers should be
involved with and affected by Bank-supported 
trained; interview guides and questionnaires
projects regarding the continuing validity of a 
should be pretested (questions should be as spe-
project's goals and its effectiveness in meeting them. 
cific as possible anid be largely confined to the cli-
* Actioni. Revising project designls and procedures on 
ents' actual experience); clients should be asked
the basis of information gathered fromii clients. 
to rate their concerns in order of priority and pro-
* 
Follow-up. Assessing the impact of revisions and tak- 
gram services in order of importance and effec-
ing further action wherever necessary to make sure 
tiveness: and clients should assess the effective-
that client concerns are being addressed. 
ness of any new measures taken.
1 97

TIHE 
NVOHRL) 
BANE 
PAulwrww.vrioN 
SOv 
R(,i 
' 
ii()Ii
* 
Pultting client in1formation to use. Data supplied by 
gram is oriented to deliver products and services with
clients can be used to help define economic strate- 
the characteristics that clients value; establish a
gies: set standarcis of program performance; adjust 
mechanism for adjusting the progranm in response to
performance standards to accord with evolving pub- 
client criticisms; and use client concerns as the basis
lic opinion; and direct resources and efforts to deal 
for benchmarks for monitoring.
with issues the client community deems important. 
* 
Follovv-up. This step repeats the actions in step 1.
* 
Disseminating 
results. To disseminate client feed- 
but this time asks clieits about the efficacy of changes
back, the program must provide focused iniforimia- 
made to deal with issues identified during the last
tion on clienit perspectives; establish comMiUnication 
rounid of consultationis.
channels to stakeholders that will not require exces-
sive staff time; and use brief, simple formats that
make data easy to record and read.
* 
Acting oni clienit inlfornation. In response to infor- 
The World Bank. Africa Region. Southern Africa De-
mation gathered from client consultationis. manag- 
partment. September 1994. SYstematic Client Con-
ers should establish mechanisms for relaying client 
sultation. Mimeo. Washington, D.C.
comments to those who can affect policy changes: 
The World Bank. Africa Region. September 1994. A Svs-
check the programii's operational systems and proce- 
tentatic Apprnoach to Clientt Consultation. Mimeo.
dures a,ainst clients' commenits; ensuire that the pro- 
Washington. D.C.
Box AI.7. Zambia- Outlook fron the Field
In 1992 the Zambia Social Recovery Project launched a comprehensive 
client consultationprgram to find out what the
intended beneficiaries thought of the project. 
main technique used was beneficiaiy assessment. Local interviewers
undertok three phases of congultations with community members, service providers, and key informants, individually or
in focus groups.
In phase I of the SCC, beneficiaries rated local institutions that carried out welfare n-iicroprojets in the community. Jn
phase 1I, beneficiaries assessed the community's role in these projects and its contribution in other social areas. In phase
II1, beneficiaries considered the project's and itemiary 
institution's overall impact on the community and ranked
community problems and priorities.
The three phases of interviews provided information on commnunityV 
conceres and relative strengths and weaknesses 
of
local institutions and commnittees. 
Specific probleims with accountability, workmanship, and loCAl government were iden-
tified and managers made recommendations for actions toiaddress problems. In addition, the process enhanced local
ability toundertakevsocial research.
Source: The World Bank, Africa Region. September 1994. A SystematicApproach to Clienit Consultatio. Washington. D.C.
.
.. 
... 
..
1 " 8

Ai 
i1iI'.N 
Dix 
1: 
MIETIOD()1)S 
AN)1 
T(om,
SOCIAL 
ASsE;ssmENT 
stakeholder ownership of' and action on decisions that
are made.
For example. where social factors are complex and
social impacts or risks are significant, formal studies
generally need to be carried out by consultants as part of
Social Assessment (SA), a mtethod dleveloped bY Wo-rld project preparation. This does not mean that all prob-
Bank staff providtes an integrated jraanework for incor- 
lemis can be solved in the project prepar-ation process.
porating participation anlfd social analyvsis into the Bank 's 
Where there is considerable uncertainty due to lack of
operational and anael vtical work. Beccau.se there are manY 
awareness, commitment, or capacity, social assessments
social varia-ibls tht co(uld potelttidly afQ't ct pro 
n- 
can contribute to the design of projects that build on ex-
pacts antid success, SAs must be selective and strategic 
perience and respond to change.
anid fbc -us on issues of operational relevance. Decidinig 
The degree of stakeholder involvement needed also
what i.ssues arte critical and how thex can be aiddlressed influences assessment design. In some cases stakehold-
requites consultation with stakeholders (liltd otherfJriins 
ers simply provided information and no further interac-
of dtac collection andt anal ysis. 
tion was foreseen. but often projects are improved when
Gender, ethnicity, social impacts, and institutional ca- 
issues are jointly assessed and agreed on or beneficiaries
pacity are among the social factors that need to be taken are given the responsibility for identifying problems and
into account in development operations. In the past these are empowered to find solutions. Where local participa-
factors have been analyzed separately with the result that tion in project design and implementation is expected.
some issues received attention whereas others were over- participatory data collection and analysis can help build
looked. Social assessment was developed by the Bank's 
trust and mutual understanding early in the project cycle.
Social Policy Thematic Team to provide a comprehensive, 
The range of stakeholders in Bank-supported projects
participatory fi-amework for deciding what issues have pri- 
includes those negatively or positively affected by the
otity for attention and how operationally useful informa- outcome or those who can affect the outcome of a pro-
tion can be gathered and used. Because this method was posed intervenltion. including the following:
developed by Bank staff, the steps in SA are consistenit with
Bank procedures and existing operational directives. 
* 
Government. The B3ank's most immediate client, the
Social assessments are carried out in a project conI- 
borrower, is the government, includinig the agencies
text to do the following: 
responsible for project implementation.
Directly affected groups. These include individuals.
* 
Identify key stakeholders and establish an appropri- 
families, communities, ororganizationsthat areproject
ate framework for their participation in the project 
or policy beneficiaries. At-risk groups, such as the poor.
selection, design. and implementation. 
landless, women, children, indigenous people, and
* 
Ensure that project objectives and incentives for 
minority groups. require particular attention.
change are acceptable to the range of people intendel 
* 
Indirec tly afle'cted groulps. These include others with
to benefit and that gender and other social diflerences 
vested interests, including donors, nongovernmen-
are reflected in project design. 
tal organiizations (NGOs). religious and community
* 
Assess the social impact of investmiienlt 
projects and. 
organizations. and private sector firms.
where adverse impacts are identified, determine how
theycanh beovercomeorat least substantially mitigated. 
Social assessments may be carried out by a single
* 
Develop ability at the appropriate level to enable 
social scientist who contacts key stakeholders and iden-
participation, resolve conflict, permit service deliv- tifies and resolves issues or. where issues are more coni-
ery. and carry out mitigation meaisures as require(l. 
plex or more systematic participation is needed, by a
consultant team that carries out social assessment as part
A S Se s S MIlE.N T 1) l;ES 1 (~ . .Nof 
project preparation. SA can take place during all phases
of the project cycle, but well-planned integration of so-
SAs involve consultations with stakeholders and affected cial factors in operational work begins at identification.
groups and other formiis of data collection and analysis.
Deciding how much wor-k is needed, what informationi 
CONINON 
IQT.:-S'll()NS 
IN SA
is required. and how it should he obtained depends pri-
marily on the significance or complexity of the issues 
VWhoarethestakeholders?Aretheobjectivesofttheproject
and the degree of participation that is needed to gain 
consistent with their needs, interests, and capacities?
I99

TIHE: 
NVORIAI) 
BAN 
PAITI('I1I'.'I'I()N 
SOVRJ(,10041-)l
* 
What social and cultural factors affect the ability of 
* 
What institutional arrangements are needed for par-
stakeholders to participate or benefit from the op- 
ticipation and project delivery? Are there adequate
erations proposed? 
plans for building the capacity required for each?
* 
What is the impact of the project or program on the
various stakeholders, particularly on women and
vulnerable groups? What are the social risks (lack of
commitment or capacity and incompatibility with 
The World Bank. May 10. 1994. Social Assessmnent: In-
existing conditions) that might affect the success of 
corporating Participation and SocialAnalvsis into the
the project or program'? 
Bank's Operational WVork. Mimeo. Washington, D.C.
The World Bank. 1994. Incorporating Social Assessment
and Participcation into Biodiversitv 
Conservation
Projects. Mimeo. Washington, D.C.
Box AI1.8. Morcc:z 
Fz MedinalRehabii:tation 
Project
This proposed project to rehabilitate the old city-called the medina-of Fez in Morocco includes components to upgrade
infrastructure, open access roads, mitigate pollution from craft industries and workshops, and renovate residences and
monument buildins to be consistent with the past but also to serve the present.
Early in project preparation, social scientists were recruited from universities in Fez to undertake a participatory and
social assessment, which began with data olen 
on and consulting with a wide array of sta7eholders. Government,
religious and civic leaders merchants, artisans, householders, rentets, and many othr ordinary citizens contributed ideas
for possible elaboration into project components, worked toward consensus on interventions and strategy, and described
the social dynaicsof the city to assure a match among plans, aspirations, and local capacities.
The assessment process, which lasted four months and cost approximately $140,000, included stakeholder workshops,
sample surveys, infomal interviews, and focus group meetings. Three sets of workshops with :fieldwork in between
produced analyses and proposals that had been widely discussed by the time the assessment was complete.
The assessment pr4duced ideas that had not been considered previously. Among them are: using the sites of buildings in
ruins to provide social service centers, regulating encroachment by merchants into residential areas, disaggregating reha-
bilitation plans by neighborhood, allowing thosedisplaced by access road construcion to be rehoused in adjacent areas,
and su 
rtingriaft assoiatons in the medina and upgrading craft associations either ini their present locations or, if
necessary, by moving m n gros. Byi ncluding residents in the decisionmaking process, the assessment also raised
local interestin ngradiAadmaintenanceofthe 
medina.
200

A P'I: 
:NIx1)I: 
M1 :rii0 i) 
AsN 
kN 
'FTo 
.9
CGENDE2R ANAL,YS;L 
focus on immediate practical needs for food, water,
shelter. health, and so on.
* 
Strategic gender needs. These generally address is-
sues of equity and empowerment of women. The fo-
cus is on systemic factors that discriminate against
Gender analusist ocuses on understaniding and document- 
women. This includes 
measuring 
the access of
inig the differences in gender roles, activities, nieeds, cand 
women, as a group compared with men, to resources
opportunities in a giveni context. Gender analsis involves 
and benefits, including laws and policies (such as
the disaggregation of quantitative data by gender It high- 
owning property). Strategic gender needs are less
lights the different roles and learned behavior of mien 
easily identified than practical gender needs, but ad-
an1d women based oni getnder attribuites. These 'aix across 
dressing these needs can be instrumental in moving
cultures, class, ethnicit, 
income, education, anid tiune, 
toward equity and empowerment.
thlus, gen1der analvsis does nlot treat women as a holmio- 
h Intrahousehold 
dynvnamics. The household is a sys-
genieous group or gender attributes as imimnutt-ble. 
tein of resource allocation. All members of a house-
The concept of gender analysis arose from the need 
hold-men, 
women, and children-have 
different
to mainstream women's interests while at the same time 
roles, skills, interests, needs, priorities. access, and
acknowledging that women could not be treated as a 
control over resources. Any development interven-
homogeneous group. It was realized that women's needs 
tion that affects one member of the household will
were better understood when viewed in relation to men's 
positively or negatively affect all others; hence. it
needs and roles and to their social. cultural. political, 
is important to understand these interdependent re-
and economic context. Gender analysis thus takes into 
lationships. the rights, responsibilities, obligations.
account women's roles in production, reproduction, and 
and patterns of interaction among household
management 
of community and other activities. 
members.
Changes in one may produce beneficial or detrimenital .
Interlioutsehold relations. Individuals and households
effects in others. 
belong to larger groupings (such as professional or
Gender analysis is important in the formulation of 
religious groups or extended families) with whom
country economic memoranda, country sector strategies. 
they are involved in labor exchanges, flows of goods,
structural adjustment. country portfolio management, 
and other alliances for survival. It is important to
poverty assessments, environlmental assessment, and in 
understand the social organization of these larger
sector-specific project planning, monitoring, and evalu- 
networks and the gender differences in roles. func-
ation: thus. many variants of policy and sector-specific 
tions, and access.
gender analysis tools are available.
K i1; i 
1'1N 
R 
I 
l' 
CI 
.F:, 
P
PtTR 
I)'(SFi
Because gender planning is part of the overall planning
Applied to development interventions, gender analysis 
process, the composition of the planning team, timing of
helps (a) identify gender-based differences in access to 
data collection. tabling of issues, and integration of gen-
resources to predict how different members of households. der- concerns ilnto overall objectives is critical early in
groups, and societies will participate in anid be affected by 
policy and project formulation.
planned development interventions. (b) permit planners
to achieve the goals of effectiveness, efficiency. equity, .
Planninig as a process. Programs that intend to be
and empowerment through designinig policy reform andc 
gender responsive depend on flexible planning pro-
supportive program strategies. and (c) develop training 
cesses that are interactive, adjust objectives based
packages to sensitize development staff on gender issues 
on feedback, and enable beneficiaries to be active
and training strategies for beneficiaries. 
participants in the planning process.
* 
Genider diagnosis. Data collected should be orga-
KEY 
('CONCE;PT'; 
nized to highlight key gender problems, underlying
causes of problems for men and women. and the re-
* 
Prictical gen1der imeeds. These relate to womien's tra- 
lationship between problems and causes.
ditional gender roles and responsibilities and are 
.
Gender objectives. Objectives clarify what gender
derived froImi their concrete life experiences. For ex- 
problems will be addressed and what the practical
ample, when asked what they need. women usually 
and strategic goals are. It is important to negotiate
401

THF; 
VORLt) 
B.AN 
PivRr(I 
c 
'ATIION 
S4)5IOUC1EBOON
consensus on objectives at policy, managerial, and 
The extent to which information is collected on par-
working levels. 
ticular issues depends on the nature of the problems be-
Gender strategy Clear operational strategies, which 
ing addressed and the quality and depth of infornmation
will be used to achieve stated objectives, must iden- 
already available.
tify the incentives, budget, staff, training, and orga-
nizational strategies to achieve stated objectives. 
FE R 
F.F;
Gender moniloring and evaluation. Flexible planning
requires gender monitoring and evaluation to enable ad- 
Feldstein, Hilary Sims and Janice Jiggins (eds.). 1994.
justment to experience and to establish accountability of 
Tools for the Field: Metlhodologies Handbook tor
commitment to achieve gender-specific priorities. 
Gender Analysis in Agriculture. 
West Hartford:
Kumarian Press.
GENr)ERR ANALYSIU; 
FRATMIEWORK 
Moser, Caroline 0. N. 1993. Gender Plainning aind De-
velopment: Theory. Practice, and Traiining. London:
Five major categories of information comprise gender 
Routledge.
analysis: 
Narayan. Deepa. November. 1995. Toward Participatory
Research. World Bank Technical Paper No. 307.
* 
Needs assessment 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
* 
Activities profile 
Wakeman, Wendy. 1995. Gender Issues SourcebookJor
* 
Resources, access, and control profile 
Warzter and Sanitation. UNDP-World Bank Water and
* 
Benefits and incentives analysis 
Sanitation Program/PROWWESS. Washington,
* 
Institutional constraints and opportunities. 
D.C.: The World Bank.
fBox A1.9t AziaIy~iig G 
er Isses io the Worild 4nk's COUOtry 
Ecioc 
Memoranda: An Example
from Uga da
This povery 
profile 
i 
,ustrated 
the relevanc of getnd in assessing poverty and stressing the importance of incorporating
gender,concerns ino the formulation and desighno strAtgies 
or redticing poverty and promoting economic growth.
The : most pressing 
issues with respet t0o 
eotle 
s, in relatidon 
to those of men are identified as the basis for
-the B 
lis 
for 
the problems cited are (al women's
lack oftchology, inputs,andf ince toy a 
teacutual 
tas, 
) m 
e household responsibilities without
labor-savn techinology, 
(c) ow heath aand 
nutional sttus, (c) low levels of literacy, and (d) laws and customs that
impede women s access to credit, eduoagoto, trainmig,inxfrmaion, 
and medical care.
In response totheseh 
prolems -the Ugandan go,vernet as adpted gender-responsive 
actions that will be undertaken as
terconcte 
ce of mutually rein orc:g 
:meas 
Mr:.
SoMrce. The W~1d l~ank 1994. Enlwncing Worn n~Partiapatfrr 
Ecoiw6mi DevelopIent. World Bank lPOlicy 
Paper. Washing-
22

A I, I'iNI) 
Ix 
1: 
N E'I'H( 
) I ) 
A N1) 
10 ()OL
(GL(OEFARY 
OF 'rOC)LSF 
diagrams or pictures, which minimilze language and
literacy differences and encourage creative thinking.
H 
Ilealth-seeking 
behavior. A culturally sensitive tool
Each of the methods daescribeid abe 
i. a combinatiozn 
for generation 
of data about 
health 
care and
of toolsf held together by a guiding principle. Dozens of 
health-related activities. It produces qualitative data
exerc ises exist to cultivate collaborative development 
about the reasons behind certain practices as well as
planning and action. These are thle tools with whih .so- 
uantifiable information about beliefs and practices.
cuial sientists 
cfld other developent 
practitione rs en- 
This visual tool uses pictures to minimize language
courage and enable stakehovlder participation. Soaie tools 
and literacy differences.
are designed to inspire reativesolutions, 
others areused 
* 
Logical Frcamnework or LogFRAME. A matrix that
for investigative or analvtic purposes. One tool night be 
illustrates a summary of project design, emphasiz-
useful ter sharing or collectinig informnation, whereas 
ing the results that are expected when a project is
another is an activity for transferring that inlormnation 
successfully completed. These results or outputs are
into planms or actions. These brief descriptions 
tire in- 
presented in terms of objectively verifiable indica-
tendled to provide the reader withi a glossary o)fterminol- 
tors. The Logical Framework approach to project
ogy that practitioners of participatory development use 
planning, developed under that name by the U.S.
to describ7eth?etools of their tildo. 
Agenicy for International 
Development, 
has been
adapted for use in participatory 
methods such as
* 
Access to resources. A series of participatory exer- 
ZOPP (in which the tool is called a project planning
cises that allows development practitioners to col- 
matrix) and TeamUP.
lect information and raises awareness amonig ben- 
.
Mapping. A genieric term for gathering in pictorial
eficiaries about the ways in which access to re- 
form baseline data on a variety of indicators. This is
sources varies according to gender and other im- 
an excellent starting point for participatory 
work
portant social variables. This user-friendly 
tool 
because it gets people involved in creating a visual
draws on the everyday experience of participants 
output that can be used immediately to bridge verbal
and is useful to men, women, trainers, project statf, 
communication gaps and to generate lively discus-
and field-workers. 
sion. Maps are usetul as verification of secondary
* 
Anal.sis of tasks. A gender analysis tool that raises 
source information, as training and awareness-raising
community awareness about the distribution of do- 
tools, for comparison, and tor monitoring of change.
mestic, market, and coimmunity activities according 
Commoni types of maps include health maps, insti-
to genider and familiarizes planners with the degree 
tiltonail mnaps ( Veinn diagramis), and resource maps.
of role flexibility that is associated with different 
.
Needts ssessmiletit. A tool that draws out information
tasks. Such infonnation and awareness is necessary 
about people's 
varied needs, raises participants'
to prepare andi execute developmenit interventions that 
awareness of related issues, and provides a frame-
will benefit both men and womell. 
work for prioritizing needs. This sort of tool is an
* 
Fzocuxs group 
meetings. 
Relatively 
low-cost, 
integral part of gender analysis to develop an under-
semistmuctured. small group (four to twelve partici- 
standing of the particular needs of both men and
paints plus a facilitator) consultations used to explore 
women and to do comparative analysis.
peoples' attitudes, feelings, or preferences, anid to 
.
Participant observation is a fieldwork technique used
build consensus. Focus group work is a compromiiise 
by anthropologists and sociologists to collect quali-
between participant-observation, 
which is less coii- 
tative and quantitative data that leads to an in-depth
trolled, lengthier, and more in-depth, and preset in- 
understaniding of peoples'practices, 
motivations, and
terviews. which are not likely to attend to partici- 
attitudes. Participant observation entails investigat-
panits' own concerns. 
attds 
iriiai 
bevto 
nal 
netgt
tForcefield 
awnaclvsis. A tool siilar 
to one called 
ing the project background. studying the general char-
acter-istics of a beneficiary population, and living for
"Story With a Gap." which engages people to define 
an extended 
period amone beneficiaries, 
during
and classify goals and to make sustainable plans by 
which interviews, observations. and analyses are re-
working on thorough "before and after" scenarios. 
corded and discussed.
Participants review the causes of problemilatic sitLia- .
PFckct charts. Ilnvestigative tools that use pictures as
tions, consider the factors that i nluenice the situa- 
stimuli to encourage people to assess and analyze a given
tion, think about solutions. and create alterative 
situation. Through a "voting' process. participants use
plans to achieve solutions. The tools are based on 
the chart to draw attentionl to the complex elements of a
24:3

TH 
NVO 
(RLD1 
BA\Nh 
'K 
{ll'l'\ll 
S(O1T1{('[,;:(O<)J;
development issue in an uncomplicated way. A major 
tion plan. the sociocultural profile helps ensure that pro-
advantage of this tool is that it can be put together with 
posed projects and policies are culturally and socially
whatever local materials are available. 
appropriate and potentially sustainable.
Preferenice ranking. Also called direct matrix rank- 
* 
Surv evs. A sequence of focused, predetermined ques-
ing, an exercise in which people identify what they 
tions in a fixed order. often with predetermined, lim-
do and do not value about a class of objects (for ex- 
ited options for responses. Surveys can add value
ample, tree species or cooking fuel types). Ranking 
when they are used to identify development prob-
allows participants to understand the reasons for lo- 
lems or objectives, narrow the focus or clarify the
cal preferences and to see how values differ among 
objectives of a project or policy. plan strategies for
local groups. Understanding preferences is critical 
implemilentation, and monitor or evaluate participa-
for choosing appropriate and effective interventions. 
tion. Among the survey instruments used in Bank
* 
Role 4laving. Enables people to creatively remove 
work are firin surveys, sentinel conimmunitv surveil-
themselves from their usual roles and perspectives 
lance, continigent valuation, and pri orit vsurvevs.
to allow them to understand choices and decisions 
* 
Tree lia gratins. Multipurpose, visual tools for nar-
made by other people with other responsibilities. 
rowing and prioritizing problems, objectives. or de-
Ranging from a simple story with only a few charac- 
cisions. Information is organized into a tree-like dia-
ters to an elaborate street theater production, this tool 
gram that includes information on the main issue.
can be used to acclimate a research team to a project 
relevant factors, and influences and outcomes of these
setting, train trainers, and encourage community dis- 
factors. Tree diagrams are used to guide design and
cussions about a particular development inteivention. 
evaluation systems, to uncover ancd analyze the un-
• 
Seasonal diagramis or seasona(il calendars. Show the 
derlying causes of a particular problem, or to rank
major changes that affect a household. conmiIlunity, 
and measure objectives in relation to one another.
or region within a year, such as those associated with 
* 
Villaige mneetings. Meetings with many uses in par-
cllimate, crops. labor availability and demand, live- 
ticipatory development, including information shar-
stock, prices. and so on. Such diagrams highlight the 
ing and group consultation, consensus building,
times of constrainits andc opportunity, which can be 
prioritization and sequencing of interventions, and
critical information for planning and implementationi. 
collaborative monitoring and evaluation. When mul-
* 
Secondary data review. Also called desk review, al inex- 
tiple tools such as resource mapping, ranking, and
pensive, initial inquiry that pm-ovides 
necessary contex- 
focus groups have been used, village meetings are
tual background. Sources include academic theses and 
important venues for launching activities, evaluat-
dissertations, annual reports, archival materials, census 
ing progress. and gaining feedback on analysis.
data, life histories, maps, project docuLiments, 
and so on. 
* 
Wealthi ranking. Also known as well-being ranking
* 
Seinisiructured interviews. Also called conversational 
or vulnerabilitv analysis. a technique for the rapid
interviews. interviews that are partially structured by 
collection and analysis of specific data on social
a tlexible interview guide with a limited number- of 
stratification at the community level. This visual tool
preset questions. This kind of guide ensures that the 
minimizes literacy and language differences of par-
interview remains focusecd on the development issue 
ticipants as they consider factors such as ownership
at hand while allowing enough conversation so that 
of or use rights to productive assets. life-cycle stage
participants can introduce and cliscuss topics that are 
of memilbers of the productive unit, relationship of
relevant to them. These tools are a deliberate depar- 
the productive unit to locally powerful people, avail-
ture from survey-type interviews with lengthy, pre- 
ability of labor, and indebtedness.
determined questioninaires. 
* 
Workshops. Strictured group meetings at which a vanl-
* 
Socioculturadl pInfiles. Detailed descriptions of the so- 
ety of key stakeholder groups, whose activities or influ-
cial and cultural dimensionis that in combination with 
ence affect a development issue or project, share knowl-
technical. economic, and environmenital dimensions 
edge and work toward a comimoni vision. With the help
serve as a basis for design and preparation of policy 
of a workshop facilitator, participants undertake a series
and project work. Profiles include data about the type 
of activities designed to help them progress toward the
of commilunities, 
demographic characteristics, economy 
development objective (consensus building, infomiation
and livelihood, land tenure and natural resouLrce coii- 
sharing, prioritization of objectives. team building, and
trol. social organizationi. factors affecting access to 
so oni). In project as well as policy work. from preplanning
power and resources, conflict resolution mechanisms, 
to evaluation stages, stakeholder- workshops are used to
and values and perceptionis. Together with a participa- 
initiate, establish. and sustain collaboration.
204

APPENDIX 
II
WORKING
PAPERH 
SUMMAR1IES
The Sourcebook draws on the experience. talent, and contributions of more
than 200 Bank staff and their colleagues. To produce background material for
the Sourcebook, steering committees were established under the leadership of
Bank participation practitioners, each of which prepared a draft paper of thirty
to forty pages on participation in a specific area of the Bank's work.
Members of the steering committees shared their own experience, pro-
posed further contacts and sources, and provided guidance on the content of
the paper, reviewing and recommending changes to successive drafts. This
process provoked thought and generated a wealth of information concerning
participatory development practices.
The resulting papers provided material for the Sourcebook; chapter IV has
also drawn on the practical information of these papers for the "how to" guide-
lines for Task Managers. The papers, which are being edited and published by
the Environlment Department as part of a Working Paper Series, present back-
ground information and provide an in-depth treatment of each topic to supple-
ment the Sourcebook.
This Appendix provides summaries of twelve of the eighteen working pa-
pers. Copies of all working papers are available from the Environment Depart-
ment, Social Policy Division. The World Bank, Washington DC 20433 (fax:
202-522-3247).
The topics covered and the authors of the eighteen working papers are as
follows:
Bank-Supported Activities and Operational Tasks
* 
Countrv economfic (1l(1 sector work: Dan R. Aronson and Ellen Tynan
* 
Povertv assessmnent: Andrew Norton and Thomas Stephens
* 
Project planniing: Jim Kearns and Jim Edgerton
* 
Procurement anid disbursenit: 
Gita Gopal and Alexandre Marc
Sectors
* 
Agricultural extension: Charles Antholt and Willem Zijp
* 
Forest and conservation inainagemnen t: Ajit Banerjee, Gabriel Campbell.
Chona Cruz. Shelton Davis, and Augusta Molnar
* Irrigationi: Ruth Meinzen-Dick, Andrew Manzardo, and Richard Reidinger
* 
1 Vater and sanitation: Gabrielle Watson and N. Vijay Jagannathan
* Educlationi: Nat J. Colletta and Gillian Perkins
* 
Urbani Projects.: Tova Solo
* 
Social Funds: Maiy Schmidt and Alexandre Marc
* 
Finaince: Lynn Bennett and Michael Goldberg
05

T'H IN F 
VORI 
F ) IANH 
PARTICI ( I PAT 
IO( N S(OlR('IE14EB)tkR
Cross Cutting Issues 
* 
Intermediary nongovernmental otganizations (NGOs):
Toni Carroll, Mary Schmidt, and Tony Bebbington
* 
Gender: Michael Bamberger, Mark Blackden, and 
* 
Public sector management: Malcolm Holmes and
Abeba Taddese 
Anirudh Krishna
* 
Local govennmenzt: David Gow, John Frankenhoif 
* 
Commulnit-based 
development: Deepa Narayan
with Jerry Silverman and Thi Campbell 
* 
Indigenous. peoples: Shelton H. Davis and Lars T.
Soeftestad
206

AI'Pl; 
NI)IX 
1: VV)RIi 
N(; 
PAPER S 
ItIM5IA R I UES
PARTICIPATION 
IN 
('0ITNTRY 
BE.NEF 
1TS
ECONOMIC 
ANDI 
SECTOR 
WO()RIK 
Although the number of participatory CESW exercises
is still small, experience has demonstrated that partici-
Using a participatory approach in the Bank's country 
pation can produce important benefits that more than
economic and sector work may involve extra costs as 
compensate for the additional costs.
well as some loss of control over the timing and quality
of the work. Experience suggests, however, that these 
The Bank-Borrower Relationship
costs are more than offset by substantial benefits, includ- 
As a result of collaboration in CESW, communication
ing improvements in the Bank-borrower relationship, 
between the Bank and the government can be improved
speedier acceptance of recommendations both by the 
and a sense of partnership developed with borrowers.
Bank and the borrower, and increased in-country capac- 
The Bank gains better knowledge of and sensitivity to
ty for pohlcy research and analysis. 
the client's circumstances. This was an important ben-
The Bank's country economic and sector work 
efit, for example. of the participatory approach used in
(CESW) analyzes the situation of and prospects for bor- 
the Long-Term Perspective Study for Africa (see box
rowing countres and provlides the framework for Its lend- 
A2. ). At the same time, greater transparency of Bank
ing programs 
and poliyadvice.Traditonally,CESWhaswork 
increases the Bank's credibility within countries
been under the exclusive control and ownership of the 
and among stakeholders.
Bank. Although well regarded for its technical standards,
this work has also been criticized for failing at times to
take sufficient account of social and political realities or 
Validity of Recommendations
forpresenting borrowers with policy recommendations that The substance of the work benefits from a wider and
they do not fully understand or cannot implement. 
deeper local knowledge, resulting in recommendations
In addressing such concerns, agreement is emerginig that are likely to be more valid and implementable.
that CESW, like projects, benefits from the active par- Country economic and sector strategy always involves
ticipation of stakeholders. In a number of diverse cases, 
a compromise between the best assessments of experts
CESW has been undertaken in full collaboration and joilt 
and the social and political interests operating in the
ownership with government. Often, as in the Morocco 
sector. When the work is done in partnership, political
Women in Development Study, contributions have also 
and social questions can be raised, confronted, and in-
been sought from experts and organizations outside gov- 
tegrated from the outset.
ernment. In some cases, such as the Benin Transport Sec-
tor Strategy and the Guinea Health Sector Review. CESW Acceptability of Recommendations
has attempted to involve a broader range of stakeholder 
A given piece of CESW is successful only when its
groups in the review process. 
recommendations are adopted or at least incorporated
Making CESW participatory depends not just on the 
into the debate on policy. By building ownership and
range of stakeholders consulted but on the depth of their 
consensus for policy formation and implementation in
involvement at various stages in the process. In practice, 
the course of the work itself, participatory CESW leads
no process is fully participatory, nevertheless. Bank prac- to speedier acceptance of recommendations by the
titioners have found ways to share information and open 
Bank and borrower. Participation not only yields richer
the development dialogue with useful results both for 
diagnoses of problems but also inspires and mobilizes
members and for the Bank. 
the actors to follow through on the consensus that has
been built.
CO) rS' K, 
AN 1) It I S R S
It is important to be aware of the costs of doing CESW Capacity Building
Participatory CESW increases in-country capacity for
in a participatory way. Often, but not always, more time 
subsequent analysis in the same or new areas of concern.
and money is required. including additional management 
It treats CESW not just as a preparation for policy for-
work up front, to establish a participatory process. At the 
mulation and investment decisions but as a development
same time, changing the role of the Bank by adding other
LI 
activity Itself, improving the capacity within member
goals to that of technical excellence risks diluting the
Bank's agenda and involves some loss of control over fonned policies for themselves.
the schedule, methodology, and quality of the work.
207

Box A2.1. Participaon 
in the LoagTerm Perspective Study for Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth. A Long-Term Perspective Study was the last in a series of five
major reports on Africa published by the World Bank in the 1980s. What distinguished this report from earlier ones was
not only its broad scope and time horizon: but also the participatory process by which it was organized. More than 300
people were consulted, of whom about two-thirds were Africans, including government officials, acadeniics, development
professionals, and representatives of the private sector and NGOs.
The Bank's Long-Term Perspective Study (LTPS) team made visits: to fourteen African countries, durng a six-month
period. During the trips, a group of LTTPS 
African resident advisors was identified from among former high-level officials,
academics, arid development professionals. These were the major sources of background papers, country perspectives,
inputs to the LTPS themes, reactions to the LTPS draft, and success stories. Through the World Bank office for liaison with
the NGO cormunity, the draft LTPS was circulated to a large number of NGO representatives. Drafts were also discussed
at conferences and meetings of NOCOs 
held outside Africa.
A five-day Workshop on Regional Integration and Cooperation was held at the Bank, bringing together more than three
dozen participanis from wide-ranging backgrounds including history, political science, economics, law, journalism, bank-
ing, business, and public service. The LTPS chapter on regional integration and cooperation drew heavily on the issues and
themes discussed at this workshop. A few months later, in December 1988, the Arusha Conference brought together
African contributors to the LTPS with donors and others to obtain input on whether the draft report was on the right track,
its analysis valid, and its vision consistent with the Africans' long-term perspective for Africa. Following the conference,
the LTPS team revised the draft report to reflect both the consensus and disagreement expressed by participants.
As a result of the participatory process and particularly the visits made to Africa by the LTPS team, the final report
reflected some significant departures from earlier World Bank views. This was particularly true concerning the efficacy of
adjustment lending in Africa. As participants in the process shared their views and experiences, the authors of the LTPS
came to a new realization of the basic problems of African societies, the depth of the crisis, and the possibility of an
alternative explanation to problems the continent faces. In short, what the LTPS team heard and saw in Africa through the
participator process led it to look beyond the adjustment optimism of the mid-1980s. The final report's content and
messages reflected the new 
tive gained through the process.
As a result, the LTPS study elicited strong support from the Africans, donor, and NGO communities, and United Nations
and African regional orgizations.
(ONDITIONS 
FOR 
St 
R 
' 
,U(' 
tence in developing good contacts within and outside
the government.
Participatory CESW requires policymaking environments
that are open to participation, enabling stakeholders to
collaborate in defining the issues for analysis, gathering 
Yeentifor 
relevant stakeholders i
c 
data, reviewing results, and deciding strategy and priori-
ties, Task. Managers,mostofwhomagre 
thatthep 
the participatory CESW exercise. Community organiza-
ties. Task Managers, most of whom agree that the pro- 
..
cess is risky, messy, and potentially conflictual, have been 
tions professional groups. religious leaders, and ndi-
.. 
viduals critical to the sector. can all be partners in the
creative in addressing each of these steps in a participa-
tory way, adapting methods and style of participation to 
Bank's work: omitting early contact with them can re-
circumstances. 
duce their willingness to cooperate.
Although identifying stakeholders is typically a fairly
informal process, more deliberate procedures can ensure
Building the Case for Participation 
that a broad range of perspectives is covered and that
In some cases. participation in CESW has been in re- 
participants are truly representative of the sectors or
sponse to local conditions rather than a proactive 
groups for which they speak. Successful methods have
choice of the Bank. In other cases, however. Bank staff 
included field visits to help communities create commit-
have sought wider participation than the government 
tees of local villagers; open public meetings, often in
partner expects. In these circumstances. building the 
several different cities and advertised in the newspaper;
case for participation depends on the experience of 
translation of draft documents and meeting proceedings
Task Managers in a given country and on their persis- 
into local languages; and inclusion of "opposition" non-
208

API'ENDIIX 
11: WORKING 
PAPER 
SI'lIMArIE
governmental organizations (NGOs). making work less and workshops: contracting local consultants or univer-
comfortable in the early stages but creating the environ- 
sity researchers. backed up by consultation with policy
ment for further collaboration. 
organizations. NGOs. unions, and trade associations; and,
Task Managers stress that the Bank itself has an im- 
in sonic cases, setting up community committees and
portant role to play as a participant rather than a neutral carrying out field interviews.
party. The Bank teamn needs to argue its own positions as
a stakeholder but from a posture of humility. Professional 
Avoiding Bias
or at least neutral facilitators should chair workshops and 
Involving nlontraditional partners in sector work puts extra
roulldtables so that the Bank team can plav its stakeholder
-
~~~~em-phasis 
on having clear and tilght terms of reference
role and inject issues that it thinks are important. 
c
t'or studies. Participatory CESW teams m-ust also avoid
co-opting local interest groups and maintain safeguards
Eliciting Stakeholders' Contributions 
to ensure that potential sources of bias are recognized.
Consultation should begin early and broadly before the 
For example, researchers can usually be counted on to
issues paper fixes the work program for the CESW exer- 
emphasize the value of more detailed research, whereas
cise. Papers commissioned from the local research com- 
NGOs stress greater reliance on their participation. Ex-
munity. issues workshops, study panels, and open meet- 
pert bias-the tendency for policymakers and the public
ings can all point to themes that might not otherwvise have 
to believe technical experts over stakeholders who are
appeared and highlight cultural and political points not 
less articulate-is a recurring problem. The role of local
normally raised in Bank discussions. In most countries. 
team members is crucial in ensuring that diverse opin-
local consultants can make an important contribution. 
ions are fairly represented and in preventing a dialogue
Consultative partners in setting the CESW agenda have 
from being hijacked by powerful or vocal parties.
also included development assistance organizations.
NGOs. labor unions, and private business people. 
The Role of the Bank
Several strategies have beeni used to expand the stake- 
In the end, all policy choices, whether agreed on in the
holder presence in data gathering and analysis, such as: 
study or made afterward, must clearly be the responsi-
establishing a task force of local experts' convening a
-
, 
t 
~~~~~~~~~bilitv 
of the borrower. The Bank's own policv or strat-
general roundtable followed by a succession of retreats
Box A2.2. Brazil: Creating Government Ownersbip
The Environment and Agriculture Division of the Bank's Brazil Department recently completed a major new study of
management issues int agriculture, rural development, and-rnatuai resources. From the outset, the division and Task Man-
ager were commnitted 
to doing a report that was rich in content and broad in impact, both on the Bank's lending program
and on policy discussions in Brazil.
FoHowing formal issues meetings within the Bank, the issues paper was drafted in Brazil. Two sets of Brazilian inputs
were crucial. First; senior Brazilian agricultural economists were members of the CESW team. Second, a broadly based
panel of experts drawn from politics, government departments, foundations, and universities across the country met in a
two-day workshop to finalize the issues paper. They supplied more than thirty technical background papers and met again
over a rough draft of the report. A goverment technical review followed.
Before the formal discussion of an early draft in the Bank, the CESW team translated the report into Portuguese and
requested that the Ministry of Planning set up a cross-ministerial discussion of the draft. More than fifty officials attended,
representing all the ministries involved. The workshop lasted three full days (with a half day devoted to each chapter).
Most of the discussions and arguments around the table were among rministries, rather than with the Bank. The Ministry of
Finance and Planning usually defended the Bank's recomnmendations 
against criticisms from the sectoral ministries, but
the ministries generally agreed more than disagreed with the draft. By the end of the meeting, the executive secretary of
the Ministry of Planning decided that he would try to adopt the same format for all CESW discussions. The intensity of the
interaction, the fact that the Bank team was able to act only as a resource group, and the expressed pleasure with the format
all indicate a high level of ownership of the results throughout the government.
After government clearance, the CESW team disseminated the report's findings at two research seminars outside govern-
ment and published parts of it in a major Brazilian economics journal. Further seminars with farm groups, NGOs, and
agroindustry representatives were to be held later.
209

UIHF: 
NVOHIA) 
13BANIK 
1'.\PATICIP'AI'ON 
SOFiRCEB 
)OOH
Box A2.3. Benin: Confronting the Diverse Interests of Stakeholders
Both the Bank and the government of Benin supported a participatory process to prepare the country's first comprehensive
transport sector strategy. Given the strength of the private sector in transportation, government ministries saw the wisdom
of using participation to build commitment to the strategy. For the Bank, the goal was to build a strong foundation for
future projects.
After initial preparation, a national workshop was held, attended by more than 120 people. Every ministry in the sector
participated (finance, planning, transport, housing, and public works), as did various representatives of public enterprises
and the National Assembly. The drivers union, the truckers syndicate, and the union for the freight-handling company
were also included. Theme-focused working groups met on their own and with expert consultants, at which time partici-
pants began to enunciate their positions concerning possible regulatory revisions. The consultants were able to help estab-
lish areas of consensus and conflict even before beginning their own special studies.
Next, separate subsectoral study consultancy teams (each composed of international and local members) began their work.
To ensure that their divergent findings would be aired fully rather than resolved within a single consultant's offices, the
teams were led by consultants from different sources. Good coordination was needed to ensure the compatibility of find-
ings as contradictions emerged.
After most of the studies had been completed, the Ministry of Public Works organized a second seminar to discuss the
main conclusions. This time the range of participants was even broader, including other donors and groups of stakeholders
that had been identified during the studies. Three days of intense and open discussion took place from 8:00 A.M. until 10:00
P.M. Study conclusions concerning privatization and price regulation were modified in what was by this time a well-
inforrned policy debate. One local consultant helped work toward consensus; in the meanwhile, a foreign consultant
worked to synthesize the debate and produce the final strategy.
After the government issued its draft strategy paper, a donor round table was held for a final debate involving eight
ministers, members of the national assembly, donors, and consultants. The participatory process led to recommendations
that were genuinely different from those the Bank and the government would have produced. Yet, the strength of the
consensus in Benin has provided such momentum that the strategy conclusions have remained intact through the entire
Bank review process.
egy within the economy remains, of course, the Bank's 
advantage will lie in providing a global frame of refer-
own prerogative to choose. As borrowing members gain 
ence on a multitude of questions. including what works
stronger ability and confidence in initiating and inform- 
in building the capacity for transparent, participatory
ing their own policy debates, the Bank's comparative 
analysis.
* This nore is based on the paper written by Dan R. Aronson. Contributors include Michael AZefor. Malcol/n Bale. Kreszentia Duer,
S Sunita Gandhi, Charlotte Jones-Carroll, Peter Landell-Mills, Karen Lashmnan, Himnelda Martinez, Bernard Peccoud, Robert Prout v. Lee
Roberts, Helen Saxenian, Guilherme Sedlacek, Jerrv M. Silverman. Susan Stout, Maurizia Tovo, Tom Tsui. and Bruna Vitagliano.
21

.\11w:N1>:v 
1: 
Wonl>XI[IN(i 
1'.1)l 
%] 
ilAl.l,llES
PARTICIPATION 
IN 
POVR 
TY 
allowed, the funds available. the local research capacity,
and the level of government interest in discussing pov-
erty issues. It has also become clear since the initial flurry
of PAs in 1993 that to increase participation Task Man-
The Bank's approach to country poverty assessmlents (PAs) avers need somewhat more time and resources to com-
is increasingly to stress the involvement of stakeholder plete PAS
groups with the aim of building in-country capacity to ad-
dress the problems of the poor. The participation of gov-
ernment and other institutional stakeholders in all aspects Involving Institutional Stakeholders
of the work increases sensitivity to poverty issues, improves It is the institutional stakeholders. from senior govern-
analytical skills, and builds allegiance to the measures pro- 
ment officials and a variety of actors in civil society to
posed for poverty reduction. In addition, conventional sta- service providers and development workers at the com-
tistical analysis is complemented by qualitative informa- munity level, who are responsible for defining poverty
tion from participatory PAs (PPAs), which reveal concerns reduction policies and for translating them into programs
voiced by the poor. Some early lessons for Task Managers and services. The collaboration of these groups at each
have already emerged from this experience. 
step of the PA helps to promote consensus. ownership,
and commitment to the strategic conclusions among those
ATV ( )N. 
1 ,1; 
whose support will be needed for effective implementa-
tion. It also helps to build the institutional capacity for
PAs are now an essential component in the Bank's country ongoing, iterative policy analysis and formulation for
economic and sector work, contributing to the wider process poverty reduction.
of poverty-related analysis and the formulation of all aspects 
So far, most institutional stakeholder involvement in
of country strategy. Making PAs participatory requires more Bank PAs has been linited to government officials and
time and resources but can yield important benefits. 
local researchers. Innovative approaches such as those
Involving a range of stakeholders, including the poor 
used in Cameroon (see box A2.4), are needed to involve
themselves. can help the following: 
other actors, including opinion leaders, journalists, civic
or religious leaders. public interest groups, and indig-
* 
Improve understanding of the cultural, social. eco- 
enous NGOs, in preparing the PA.
nomic, and political dynamics that perpetuate pov- 
The scope for collaboration in defining the research
erty in a given country 
agenda depends on political and institutional conditions
* 
Ensure that strategies identified for poverty reduc- 
in the country concerned. Especially in the early PAs,
tion reflect the real concerns voiced by the poor 
scope was also constrained by tight deadlines facing Task
* 
Promote ownership of the proposed solutions by a 
Managers for completing the work. Close consultation
variety of stakeholders 
and agreement between the Bank and the government
* 
Build in-country institutional ability for ongoing analy- from the outset can reduce the risk of later misunder-
sis of poverty and the design of measures to reduce it. standings and acrimony over politically sensitive issues,
especially the controversial question of establishing a
A distinction is made between "participation in PAs,' 
poverty profile and poverty line to serve as benchmarks
the subject of this paper, and PPAs. The latter has come 
against which progress can be measured.
to refer to the use of specific qualitative research tech- 
Drawing as widely as possible on local skills and
niques to discern the perceptions and attitudes of the poor knowledge in the analytical work of the PA contributes
themselves. PPAs, however, are only one component of 
to the quality of the conclusions. It also spreads the own-
the wider PA. This paper argues that most components 
ership base. Analytical studies and report writing have
of the PA. from defining the agenda and designing the 
been contracted to local researchers and/or assigned to
research program through data gathering and analysis to collaborative teams of Bank and local researchers. To
report writing and formulating policy prescriptions, can 
broaden participation, Task Managers have also used
benefit from broad stakeholder participation. 
workshops or retreats and established in-country task
forces or steering committees.
MAKIA ANG( 
Tl'H E PA 
Mom 
( ) i-~ i.: I~X ~ 
~ 
) ~ 
Collaboration in formulating policy prescriptions can
be more difficult; most Task Managers have faced the
The methods used to broaden stakeholder participation 
quandary of how best to reconcile the interests of senior
in PAs have varied enormously, depending on the time 
officials and vocal stakeholders with the results of re-
211

THI; 
NV4)RLi) 
BAN K P'AR TIl 1( lIATI 
l 
N SOURC( 
EhTOOI
search and analysis. The most PPAs in this respect have 
penditure by eliciting the perceptions of the poor on
been those for Peru (see box A2.5) and Morocco: in each 
the accessibility and relevance of services
case, (a) the PA was presented as supporting research 
* 
Expand analysis of factor markets by illustrating the
and analysis to help the goverlnment in the policy formu- 
operation of constrainits on disadvantaged social
lation process, (b) the government took full responsibil- 
groups to realizing market-based opportunities
ity) for preparing the policy docLument, discussing. suc- 
* 
Contribute to policy prescription on the economic
cessive drafts with Bank staff before final publication, 
and regulatory framework by demonstrating the im-
and (c) the Bank has integrated the government s pov- 
pact of regulations on poor households and commu-
erty strategy in the lending program of the country de- 
nities
partment as a whole. 
* 
Support policy analysis of "social safety nets" by
examininig local experience of the operation of for-
Incorporating the PPA 
mal and informal safety net systems and the coping
Incorporating 
the PPA 
~~~~strate-ies 
used by the poor
The participation of the poor and other groups through 
u 
y 
PPAs can contribute to the oerall PA by coplemen_ t- 
* 
Assess the capacities of the poor to act independenitly
ing. informing, or validating the results of more conven- 
through community organizations (box A2.6 provides
tional analysis based on household survey data and gov- 
an example from Kenya).
ernment statistics. To date. PPAs have been designed
specificalv to 
do th tollowill 
The participationi of the poor has been elicited
through various data gathering and consultative mecha-
* 
Enrich the poverty profile by illUstrating local experi- nisms. The nmain imiethodologies-beneficiary assessment
ence and understanding of poverty and vulnerability 
and participatory rural appraisal-share many core tech-
* 
Improve understanding of thle illlpact of pulblic ex- 
niques. including coniversational and seinistructured in-
Box A2,4. Browd Sleba 
PderiPlrffpafiona 
in Cameroon
Cameon' 
PA was carried oWQt 
COwith extensive aierooni pnd 
the, National Statist 
Office in
preparing 
poverty profile and th 
for itrtion 
n 
a 
food insecuity issues. The PPA mwas
carried out by local 
TNGOsand research institutes.
lo bshare theresearch results and broaden pcipation 
in dalogue onthe poliy implications a four-day technical work-
shop was sponsored by the goverment and the Bank with financial.support from sev 
key donors. Participants included
representadtve of donoragencies and some1forty-five 
Cameroonians with interest inrelatesearch and civic or goven-
ment activities. from the goernmnt, university, research and advocacy groups journalism and NGOs. Women partici-
:pants were; funded by the United Nations C 
rts 
Fud Despite the breadth of differe: interests represented. Some
important areas of agreement emerged, including the potential benefits of eingf 
decisionmking.0 By the end of
fourdays, agreement was reached on the form the recom 
ons should take and consi 
le enthusiasm had been
generatd for the final report.
The workshop was followed by a one-day conference to provide wider exposure of the findings to both government and
the general public. The immediate impact of this conference was to raise consciousness concerning poverty issues, gener-
ate widespread 
public interest and concem, and put poverty reduction higher on the public policy agenda.
Box A2.5. Policy Formulation in Peru
In the Peru PA. the Bank team opted to hold back on defining a poverty alleviation strategy and wait until the government
produced their own strategy. Two thingsX 
that helped this approach to work were that (a) most of the survey analysis had
been done in Peru, making it easier for Peruvians to inco 
e the results into a policy document and (b) government
officials were aware that presentation of their strategy for poverty alleviation would be key to an effective Consultative
Group meeting, which was to be hosted by the Bank to Iraise funds for social programs. Bank staff worked closelyf with
government staff on drafts of the strategy. The resulting government document is quite strong, setting specific goals in
several areas, and should serve as a good base for measuring progress in reducing poverty in Peru.

.A LI'E 
NI6)I 
11: 
\V 
H)I..IN(, 
PAPEl4R 
St FlS NITlR.E~
Box A2.6. PPA Highlights the Potential of Women's Groups in Kenya
The coping stratgies of the poor (the vast majority of whom do not have access to credit) depend on diversifying their
livelihoods and on the strength of their social netwo6rs and informal groups. Because their livelihoods are so diversified,
no single employment program will reach the poor. The informal groups and associations, on the other hand, engage in a
wide range of economic and social welfare activities. The PPA in Kenya highlighted the untapped potential of these
groups to reach the poorer segments of society.
The PPA study estimated that at least 300,000 groups and associations exist in rural Kenya, including more than 23,000
registered women's groups. It found that every village had from five to seventeen different types of groups, and more than
one active or defunct women's group. The following are some of the findings that emerged about these women's groups:
* 
During discussions of coping strategies at the individual, group, and community levels, women's self-help groups
were mentioned frequently in every district. They were a particularly important part of the coping strategies of fe-
male-headed households.
* 
In addition to ineome generation, group objectives frequently included welfare activities: raising cash to pay school
fees, meet hospital expenses, or assist with transport costs to bring the dead back to the villages for burial.
Most groups levied membership fees and monthly contributions.
* 
Although the poor were excluded when membership fees were high, many groups targeted their activities specifically
to assist the poor with food, school fees, and housing construction.
* 
Women's groups were often formed along clan or kinship lines and often had male members.. Generally, they were
supported by village men and the community at large.
Based on the findings of the PPA, proposals to reach the poor by strengthening women's groups include legal registration
so that groups are eligible for credit, technical and business management training of group members, and extension of
microenterprise credit to groups.
terviews, focus 
iroup 
niterviews. and participant obser- for qualititative data. The key challenge is to inte-rate
vation. Participatory rural appraisal (see Appendix 1). the two approaches withinl the PA framework. appreciat-
which focuses on analysis at the commnunity rather thanl ing the limitations of each.
household level, also uses thematic mapping. wealth and 
Identifying and selecting field sites and participants
preference ranking. institutional diagrammning. and other 
(a representative sample of "'the poor") is a critical issue
techniques by which participants genlerate their own 
for the PPA. especially when societies and the commu-
analyses of key elements of their livelihoods. 
nities within them are highly stratified. This can be ap-
The choice of methods has depended in practice on 
proached either through participatory methods. usin-
the particular experience of the Task Manager or sup- 
local perceptions of key groups for analysis, or through
porting specialist, as well as on available resources and 
sampling based on household survey results. Research-
the role intended for the PlA within the overall PA. ers need to be clear about which they ar-c using as results
Achieving reasonable coverage for a nationtal-scale ben- may differ.
eficiary assessment to investigate a ranie of issues typi- 
There are Qood reasons ftor selecting a broad range 
<
cally requires at least six to nine months work and a bud- of people, firomii 
differenit techinical and institutionial back-
get in the region of $50,000 to $100,000. Rapid appraisal. grounds. ftor the PPA research teams. Including NGO and
requiring less than one month ot' fieldwork. has been used government staff as well as academics broadens owner-
in five of the seventeen countries in which E'PAs have ship and enables the team to draw on wider institutionial
been undertaken. 
experience. The more diverse the backgrounds of team
Some early lessons have already emerged from this 
members. however, the more vital is a rigorous training
experience. In defining objectives of the PPA. thie temp- 
input to generate a unified and coherent approach.
tation exists to overload the agenda with a large number 
Another- lesson learned on the early PPAs is that it is
of questions impor-tan1t to the PA as a whole. Most Task 
easy tounderestimatethetinieandskillsrequired foranalysis
Managers feel in retrospect that results of the PPA wouldl and synthesis of qualitative research material. Task Manag-
have been richer if the research focus had been narrower. ers should plan for some of the analysis to be carried out in
The PPA can provide an imrportant new perspective on 
the field and also allow for inputs from experienced social
the issue of poverty, complementing but not substitutillg 
scientists (from within or outside (he Bank).
2 L3

ITHEi 
WOIA 
BAx11 
1 
N1 
PAR\TICll11'V1'1,TN 
StilUR 
11C7iMO
Box A2.7. Policy Impact of the Zambia PPA
In the case of the Zambia PPA, the impact on the PA was clearly strong especially on the action plan. Specific elements
that influenced the action plan included the stress on rural infrastructure investments (roads and water) and on urban
services (mainly water supply). Other parts of the PA that drew heavily on the findings of the PPA included the poverty
profile (especially for community-based identification of the ultra-poor) and the chapter dealing with coping strategies,
safety nets, and targeted interventions.
The Task Manager for the PA gave the following assessment of the overall impact of the Zambia PPA on policy formula-
tion in Zarnbia to date:
* 
Government has been influenced by the priorities expressed by the poor in ranking exercises in the PPA (by reinforc-
ing the current emphasis on agriculture and health, stressing the importance of rural infrastructure and environment
issues to the poor, and emphasizing ongoing problems with the delivery of education services).
* 
The Ministry of Health has been using the results of the PPA and the PA extensively as a whole in policy development,
for example one of the authors of the PPA has been participating in a comrnittee looking into the issue of exemption
from user fees for the poor.
* 
Observations from the PPA related to the timing of school fee payments (which coincide with the period of maximum
seasonal stress for most rural communities) have contributed to ongoing work in the Ministry of Education on school
fees; a new policy is in preparation that will address these issues.
* 
The very positive feedback from communities in the PPA on the functioning of the emergency safety net during the
southern Africa drought of 1992 influenced policy recommendations 
on ongoing provision for the vulnerable in the PA.
Because the PPA is only one of the inputs influenc- 
of the PA. especially the action plan and national policy
ing the recommendations of the PA. and because the 
formulation.
PA document, in turn. is only one of the factors influ- 
EvaluationoftheZambiawnexperience(thefwrstnational-
encing actual policy change, it can be difficult to mea- 
scale PPA to be completed) also points to some measures
sure the policy impacts of specific PPAs. Nonetheless, 
that could have increased the value of the PPA in policy for-
policy relevance should be the guiding criterion in the 
mulation: a stronger focus on the institutional mechanisms
design of methodology and process for the PPA. Evalu- 
by which needs and problems could be resolved, completing
ation by the country department of the impact of the 
the PPA earlier to allow for follow-up of the priority areas
Zambia PPA. as summarized in box A2.7, has found 
identified, and sharpening methods to investigate local per-
that the PPA strongly influenced both the conclusions 
ceptions on specific policy issues, such as food marketing.
This note is based on the paper written b! Andrew Norton anld Tliomas Stephen.s. Contributors include Johnz Clark. Hugo Dia_, Anne
Doi.e. Anin Duncan. Jorge Garcia-Mujica, John Innes, Evangeline Javier, Poll! Jones, Steen Jorgensen, Gibw a Kajubi. Saralh Keener
Qaiser Khan, Adriana de Leva, Claire Lucas, Alexandre Marc, Branko Milanov ic, Deepa Nara van, Miria Pigata. Nicholas Prescott,
Lawrence Salzen, LYnne Sherburne-Benz. Roger Sulli/an, Mauri_ia Tovlo, and Mark Wi?odw'ard.
1 4

AXPPENIIX 
II: 
NVORKIN(. 
PAP'ER 
SI'\1i\iMR1iE 
9
PA RT '1'1 
I PAT 
I 
N IN N 
ments are pursuing include full commercialization; devolv-
AGRICIT 
uRT 
IURN, EXTE 
N 
N S I 
N 
ing control tolocal govemment units, cost sharing between
extensionists and farmers; contracting service delivery to
Putting responsibility in the hands of farmers to determine 
private firms. NGOs, and/or technicians from cooperatives
agricultural extension programs can make services more and farmers' organizations; and supporting farmers' self-
responsive to local conditions, more accountable, more help groups. Although Bank experience with these alter-
effective and more sustainable.' To realize these benefits 
native approaches is still too new to permit systematic
the role of the public sector has to be redefined to permit 
evaluation, evidence already exists of potential benefits
multiple approaches that account for user diversity and to 
and particular issues to be confronted in implementation.
develop partnerships with farmer organizations, NGOs,
and the private sector for service delivery.
IRATI4 )NALE ~1,By 
making extension more demand driven and more ac-
countable to farmers, participatory approaches can help
Project experience over the last twenty years has fueled to ensure that services are relevant and responsive to lo-
debate concerning the role of public sector agricultural 
cal conditions and meet the real needs of users.
extension in strategies to increase agricultural produc- 
When programs benefit from farmers' traditional
tivity and alleviate rural poverty. The dominant approach 
knowledge as well as modern research, the risk of seri-
in Bank-supported projects since the early 1980s-the 
ous mistakes is greatly reduced. Examples of what can
training and visit system-has 
been to accelerate the 
happen when the value of local knowledge is not appre-
adoption of new technology through intensive, regular 
ciated include the aggressive promotion of maize by
interaction between government extension agents and se- extensionists in Ethiopia to replace the indigenous grain
lected "contact" farmers to disseminate a package of key tef despite skepticism and resistance from local farm-
agricultural messages. This approach has had some note- ers. Many Ethiopians suffered unnecessarily when maize
worthy successes and some failures. Although the sys- 
proved less drought resistant and the crop failed; subse-
tem is intended to incorporate feedback from farmers. 
quent data also showed that teff provided superior food
this is not always accomplished and the role of farmers 
value. In Bali, after efforts in the 1970s to introduce the
as receivers of instructions is often passive. Consequently, Green Revolution to rice cultivation had led to cata-
the results of investment in training and visits have some- 
strophic pest damage, researchers learned that traditional
times been disappointing and have been especially un- 
local husbandry techniques were more efficient.
satisfactory regarding sustainability. 
The opportunities for promoting technologies to im-
The most significant shortcomings of public agricul- 
prove farmer incomes are expanded through participa-
tural extension in general have been (a) unresponsive- 
tory, farmer-centered approaches to extension, which
ness to the variation in farmer needs. (b) lack of owner- encourage a holistic perspective, shifting the focus of
ship by the intended beneficiaries, (c) failure to reach 
attention from simple production to the whole farm sys-
poor and women farmers, (d) limitations in the quality tem. Farmer participation is essential, for example, in
of field and technical staff. and (e) high and unsustainable 
introducing integrated pest management, which requires
public costs. Some of these problems have been eased 
farmers to invest effort and resources in techniques that
by modifying the training and visit system, for example, 
are knowledge intensive. In Indonesia (see box A2.8),
by working with groups rather than individual farmers 
on-farm trials with substantial farmer involvement have
or by increasing reliance on radio and other mass media 
proved the best means to ascertain and demonstrate the
Agricultural specialists increasingly recognize, however, potential benefits of integrated pest management.
that if extension is to meet the diverse needs of modern 
Participatory methods, often through NGOs. can also
farming, a fundamental change of approach is called for 
help to make the distribution of extension services more
toward educating and enabling farmers to define and solve 
equitable. Proactive efforts are needed to ensure that op-
their own problems and determine and take some respon- 
portunities for participation are open to all farmers, in-
sibility for the extension services they require. 
cluding the poor, indigenous peoples, and other
Agricultural extension in many countries is being re- 
marginalized groups. The importance of the role played
oriented to provide more demand-based and sustainable by women in agricultural production is such that the wide-
services, taking account of the diversity, perceptions, 
spread failure so far to reach women farmers through
knowledge, and resources of users. The options govern- 
formal extension services has major repercussions for
2 1 a

'I H; 
NV(WRLTD B.ANK 
SouRuI(IABoImN 
O1H( 
EB 
I(
Box A2.8. tr 
Pest Mngm 
l in LndXnesa
Integratedpest management 
nbPMs}is 
anapproacht copprotectionbed 
on the rationale that pestpopulations can be kept
below economic ijy 
levls wiofiimal 
op S1o recorse tB chicalpesicidThe 
nu of 
tins is defined by
agroecological, socioeconindi 
utal 
acr 
mcnag 
rt, such as
crop rotations and intercrops, a 
incls 
e use of resistant varietes, b 
g 
cl, 
andiagnostic techniques.
The Indonesia Integrated Pest Management project inndones iaillutrates boh the potntial of this approach and its
dependence on 
atory extension.
After linking pest outbreaks in 1985 and 1986 to escalig 
use of psticides, the government of Indonesia banned fifty-
seven broad-spectrum pesticides for rice, gradually eliminated sta subsidies ontherpesticies 
instituted PMas
the national pest control strategy for rnce. The IPM Farmer Field School was developed as: tbemodel for government
extension agents and pest observers to train farmers in 1PM.
The farmer field-school training approach represents a move away from conventional packet technologies in agricultural
extension toward empowering farmers with knowledge and skills, using nonformal educai 
methods and a field-based,
experiential learning process. Farmers make their own decisions about crop management based on their experience, on
local field and market conditions, and: on basic IPM principles leared in famer field-training. 
These prnciples
include weekly monitoring of pest levels, conserving the natural enemies of pess, s 
ng information, and coordinating
control strategipes with neighboring farmers.
Between 1987 and 1990 the volume of pesticides used on rice fell by more than 50 percent, whereas yields increased by
about 15 percent. Farmers are testing and developing new 1 
practices, including PM for other crops, withthe help 
of
farmer trainers in their communities. NGO involvement has been encouraged to develop field school activities, new train-
ing components, and farmhenetworks, resulting in awide exchange of ideas and resources andfthe spread of IPM farmer
field schools from community to community. In 1993, $53 million was:comtmted by the U.S. Agency for International
Development and the government of Indonesia with support fiom eWod Banik to a project to extend the use of IPM
throughout the country.
national output and food security as well as social jus- 
prepackaged messages. Agents also need training in par-
tice. The Nigeria Women in Agriculture Project (see box 
ticipatory methocds of working with farmers. Some of
A2.9) illustrates the potential of the participatory ap- 
these adclitional costs can be offset by reductions in the
proach to bring women into the national agricultural 
number of staff needed, as farmers themselves take on
policy debate and local project management, as well as 
more responsibilities, and the economies of "distance'
enabling them to improve thei- own productivity. 
methods (using mass media and modemn informationi tech-
Making farmers influential and responsible clients 
nology) are more fully exploited.
rather than passive beneficiaries of the extension service 
Additional time and resources are also needed to rede-
improves sustainability-both of the benefits of invest- 
fine and establish the institutional framework for participa-
ment in new technology and of the service itself. Partici- 
tion. for example. to decentralize fiscal and administrative
g 
patory methods can increase farmer ownership of the 
functions, to build collaborative partnerships. and to
technologies promoted by extension management, espe- 
strengthen the capacity of NGOs and farmer organizations.
cially when the methods are developed, at least in part. 
On the part of the Bank, additional staff time is required for
by the clients themselves and are based on technologies 
projectpreparationandsupervisionanidri-esourcesarelneeded
that they have seen to be effective. At the same time, 
for participatory analysis during project design.
when the value of the service is clear to them, fanmers 
The costs of participation to farmers can be substantial.
are willing to contribute to its support. reducing depen- 
particularly in tenns of their time. Where participatory pro-
dence on public funds for meeting recurrent costs. 
gramiis depend on significant contributiolns of cash and/or
labor fi-om fanmers, steps have to be taken to ensuLre that
this does not exclude the poor from sharing in benefits.
A higher level of training and skills is needed if exten- 
ELI.:.;IEN'I5
sion staff are to collaborate effectively with farmers, ap-
plying technical knowledge to site-specific socioeco- 
Key consideration in promoting participation in agricul-
nomic ancl agronomic conditions, rather than delivering 
tural extension include the following:
2 16I

Ai.v'i'Nt)1x 
IT: 
% ()RKI-IN(4 
P,APER 
SITAFNiARIE.
Stakeholder Commitment 
key issues include: instituting incentives and mechanisms
Broad consultation from the outset is needed to ensure 
for accountability to farmers on the part of extensionists:
sufficient commitment to change on the part of all stake- 
identifying where legal and regulatory changes are
holder groups. Extension services that are participatory 
needed; training staff in participatory methods; building
and accountable to farmers imply some loss of control 
the capacity of local farmer groups: and ensuring that
for government central planners (and for Bank Task 
local level institutions do not exclude some groups of
Managers). Even if the degree of control in setting spe- 
farmers from participation.
cific targets and scheduling plans to meet these targets
may sometimes be illusory, its symbolic loss cani be 
Two-Wav Communication
strongly resisted. Vested interests in the existing exten- 
In adopting a learning process approach. the function of
sion bureaucracy can also present strong resistance. Farm- extension is not merely one of technology transfer but of
ers themselves may be skeptical of calls to conltribute ensurina effective two-way flows of information with the
time, effort, or cash if their experience of exteinsion in aimofempoweiin-fariiielstfirou hkiiowledoe-atherthan
the past has been negative, 
issuingr technical prescriptions. Methods available for lis-
The Institutional Framework 
tening to and establishing dialogue with farmers include
There is no one institutional model for delivering par- beneficiary assessment, gender- analysis. participatory ru-
ticipatory extension services. Some countries. such as 
ral appraisal and problem census. Joint problem solving
Chile and Costa Rica (see box A2. 10), are using the pri- and decisionmaking are achieved through workshops.
vate sector to carry out what was traditionally a public rouLnd tables, public hearings, and farmer organizations.
sector activity; some are decentralizing ancd reorientilln 
Considerable potential exists for adapting the use of
public sector agencies: and still others are working 
mass media and infornation technology to support par-
through NGOs ancl farmer organizations. A multi-insti- 
ticipatory extension, channelinig feedback from rural com-
tutional approach is common, recognizing that farmers 
munities to researchers and extensionists as well as pro-
get information from several different sources and that 
viding information to farmers. Farmer participation in de-
some organizations are more effective in reaching cer- 
signing and implementing mass media progranms improves
taim categories of farmners. 
programii quality and enhances the learning process.
Defining and facilitating operational lini<kaes at an 
Communication for technology transfer in agricul-
early stage is crucial. This can be approached through 
ture is an extension methodology that combines the
stakehol(ler workshops during project preparation to dis- strenoths of mass media dissemination and grassroots
cuss possible forms of partnerships and the allocation of 
extensioll advisers. Focusing on behavioral change. the
responsibilities for implementationl andc support. Other 
methodology involves gaininig a thorough understand-
Box A2.9. Reaching Women Farmers in Nigeria
In Nigeria women wrere found to make up between 60 percent and 80 percent of the agricultural labor force, depending on
the region, and to produce two-thirds of the country's food crops. As elsewhere in Africa, however, extension services
focused on men and their farm production needs.
The Nigeria Women in Agriculture (WIA) project (see chaptef II) was introduced to address this shortcoming in the
extension system. Through a participatory, learning-by-doing approach. the prject has succeeded in giving women a
voice in the national policy reform process and in integrating women into the mainstream of agricultural extension and
development initiatives in their localities.
Because of the shortage of women trained in agriculture, existing home economics agents have been retrained to become WIA
agents. The formation of WIA farmer groups has facilitated the dissemination of agricultural innovations and provided women
farmers with better access to farm inputs and credit than they would have as individuals. Assisted by WIA agents, women now
participate through these groups in all aspects of subprojects, from identification to planning and implementation.
Project planning and replanning has been carried out through national workshops with representatives of WIA groupsata
process that both the Bank and the government have found to be effective in translating field knowledge into specific
action for improving women's productivity in agriculture.
One of the greatest benefits of promoting parficipation in decisionmaking at both the local and national levels is found to
be the momentum generated by the dynamism and resourcefulness of Nigerian women.
_~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Box A2.10. Using the Private Sector in Latin America
As early as the 1920s, Chile began to replace public technical assistance to farmers with private services. Since 1990 exten-
sion to medium- and large-scale farmers in Chile has been executed by a private farmer's group and is now totally privately
funded. The Agricultural Development Institute (INDAP) of the Ministry of Agriculture reaches a large number of small
farners through an extension program that is publicly funded and privately executed through private technology transfer
firms. Community-based INDAP offices with cormnunity representatives select firms through competitive bidding and su-
pervise and evaluate their performance. Farmers sign annual contracts with a firm and are expected to contribute up to 30
percent of program costs; if they are not satisfied with the service, they can decide as a group to ask INDAP for a change.
A recent project directed to the poorest and smallest farmers contains several innovations. Extension is to be provided by
private sector firms and NGOs. To reduce dependence on the public sector, farmers graduate from a three-phase extension
and credit program. Farmers will spend three to six years in the intensive phase I, which begins with individual visits.
Phase II, to last for three years, will use a group approach and focus on managerial skills and marketing. Phase 11 is to be
wholly farmer-financed, independent, extension support. As farmers graduate from the program, new farmers will join
without any increase in INDAP's staff and budget.
Under a Bank-financed project in Costa Rica, a strategy has been devised to divest government gradually from extension.
As the Ministry of Agriculture is reorganized, some extension personnel are to move to the private sector and government
will provide training to private extensionists. The project intends to provide private technical assistance to small- and
medium-scale producers through an Extension Voucher Pilot Program. Farmers will trade vouchers for individual and
group technical assistance. Farmers are distinguished according to whether they require high- or low-intensity assistance.
The extensionist is to indicate annually to the ministry which farmers should graduate from the program. At the end of the
seven-year implementation period, all beneficiaries are expected to continue with purely private services.
ing of existing knowledge, attitudes, and practices in the 
successfully in Peru, Honduras, Indonesia. and Jordan.
target communities, before identifying potentially rel- 
providing clear evidence that, when carefully tailored to
evant technologies and testing communications options. 
specific conditions, mass media programming can mag-
Communication for technology transfer has been used 
nify the impact of participatory extension cost effectively.
This note is based on the paper written by Charles Antholt and Willem Zijp. Contributors include John Farringtol2, Malcolin Odell,
Dennis Purcell, Franz Schorosch, Bachir Souhlal, Andrew Spurling. and Venkatachalam Venkatesan.
218

IPARTICIPATION 
I-N V()RO 
SANID 
Over the ]ast decade, approaches to fOrest manage-
('ON SERVATJ' 
1 O) N 
MIAN A (;NM ENT 
nment and biodiversity conservationi shifted fundamentally
from a focus on centralized planning and management
by government agencies to a more participatory approach
The participation of local communities and other stake- 
that balances social, environmental. and economic ob-
holders inmanagingforestryandconservationprojectscan 
jectives. Reflecting this shift, between 1991 and 1994,
help to improve forest productivity, alleviate poverty, in- 
Bank investment in forestry projects classified as social
crease environmental sustainability, and make rules gov- 
and environmental increased from $834 million to $1.2
eming forest access more enforceable. Introducing par- 
billion or 27 percent of all lending in the forestry sector.
ticipatory management depends on government comniit- 
Key differences 
between the two approaches 
are
ment and requires time and resources to develop con.sen- 
outlined in box A2. 11. Under most centralized forest
sus among stakeholders, establish new institutional ar- 
policies, large management units are oriented to a single-
rangements, decentralize finance and administration. en- 
use objective (such as timber production or policing a
sure appropnate rules and incentives for local involvement, 
conservation site) and the rights of local users are lim-
and build organizational capacity at the local level. 
ited to low-value secondary products and temporary
Box A2.11. Contrasting Forest and Conservation Management Approaches
Government Forestry and 
Participatory Projects
Conservation Projects
Objectives 
Timber production or other single-use objec- 
Usually multiple production and biodiversity
tive (for example, watershed protection and 
conservation objectives involving all stake
short-rotation 
fuelwood); protection of 
holders; developing local skills forforest and
biodiversity paramount over other uses, 
conservation management.
Scale 
Large management units based on natural bio- 
Micro-management units corresponding to
physical or political boundaries. 
self-selected or residential units.
Local Use 
Usually very limited and frequently ambigu- 
Extensive, clearly defined rights for local users.
Rights 
ous or temporary.
Protection 
Policing by forest service guards and fenc- 
By local community, frequently using social
ing, often ineffective and expensive. 
fencing; higher local costs but low govern-
ment costs; local accountability.
Typical Plan 
Long rotation of even-aged stands for econo- 
Short rotation of uneven-aged stands designed
mies of scale in management and industrial 
to supply diverse products for continuous in-
supply; centralized management of protected 
come and subsistence needs; community man-
areas and conservation sites. 
agement.
Harvesting 
Generally, large government contracts with 
Generally combine multiple household mar-
Contracts 
administrative pricing mechanisms and sub- 
keting arrangements with small-scale con-
sidized supply arrangements. 
tracts for high-value products.
Technical Basis 
Based on results of scientific research and 
Based on combination of traditional knowl-
single product optimization models. 
edge and use patterns with forest and conser-
vation service guidance.
Planning 
Centralized management planning process 
Plans drawn up by community or household
Process 
carried out by forest and conservation service 
participants with guidance an d approval from
staff. 
forest an conservation service.
Plan Revisions 
Generally, little flexlbility inmranagemnent 
pre- 
Great flexibility in management prescriptions
scriptions without cumbersome bureaucratic 
to adapt to changing conditions and needs.
approvals.
219

THE 
NV(ORLI) 
BANN 
P 
1'ARTICIPAT'IO'I 
N' 
fl T 
( E IE)() 
K
concessions. 
In contrast, participatory 
forest projects 
Forest Productivity
are based on a broader valuation of forest resources. 
With the benefit of local knowledge and participation, the
taking into account the multiple values of forests and 
value of nontimberforest products todifferent users for food.
the social and economic needs of local forest users. 
fiber, medicines, oils, and gums can be more fully exploited
Access and use rights to forests-as 
well as conflicts 
(see box A2. I2). Indigenous productive technologies-
arising among competing users-are 
locally defined and 
applying knowledge based on close experience with local
managed. The structure of incentives and the choice of 
ecological conditions-can 
enrich scientific research and
technologies are geared to environmiienital sustainability 
serve as potential sources of new products.
over the long term.
Sustainability
N 
ENF;VI'I,E 
Although still seeking to generate economic benefits from
forest resources, policyrnakers are increasingly aware of
The benefits of using participatory approaches in forest 
the imiiportant role played by forests in preserving
and conservation management include the following: 
biodiversity and protecting critical watersheds. Especially
in regions with large and g7rowing populations, partici-
Cooperation 
pation is often the only viable way to conserve forest
In practice, one of the most compelling reasons for seek- 
areas for sustainable use or for their environmental val-
ing the participation of forest users in managing forest 
ues as intact ecosystems.
resources has been the inability of governments to po-
lice forest areas effectively and entforce their own rules 
COSTS 
AND 
LIMITATIONS
of access and use without local public support. When
local communities and private companies share in the 
Participatory 
approaches have proved unworkable in
design. benefits, costs, and management responsibility 
some circumstances, including when (a) conflicts over
of forestry projects, they have incentives to cooperate in 
forest resources are particularly intense, (b) forest re-
enforcing rules on which they have themselves agreed. 
sources are abundant in relation to a small, dispersed
population in the forest vicinity, (c) powerful interests at
Poverty Alleviation 
thie national level are opposed to policy reform in the
The majority of the people who occupy forest areas or 
sector or to decentralization of authority, or (d) extreme
the agricultural fringes that sun-ound themii are poor atnd 
social inequalities at the local level reinforce the control
vulnerable populations. Many are indigenous or landless 
of forest benefits by local elites.
people who have migrated from other areas. Enabling 
Even in favorable circumstances, time and resources
these people to share in the benefits as well as the man- 
are nieeded to establish effective participatory processes.
ageseent of forest development and commllaercialization Costs ar-e inicurred in three broad areas: (a) identifying
helps alleviate their poverty and diversify their souLrces key stakeholders and creating the conditions for etfec-
of income. 
tive cojnsultation, (b) establishing appropriate institutional
Box A2.12. Learning from Indigenous Practices to Increase Local Participation and Improve Forest
Productivity
Using under-exploited tree;and crop species in Africa. Trees in agroforestry:systems in Africa provide many other prod-
ucts and services, such as food, fiber, medicines, -ils, and gunms, that are used by many indigenous groups (for example,
Elaeis guineensis for bil, wine, thatch, and mulch; Moringa oleifera as edible flowers and leaves and fodder; and Xylopia
aethiopkca as a tobacco substitute an4dfuel in Imcost of Kenya and the Farlo regions in Senegal). The annual harvestable
productionr from leaves and fruits is about 300 kilograms per hectare in typical Sahel areas and more than 600 kilograms
per hectare in the Sudano-Sahel.
Crop-livestock-fallow rotacions. In the: Zimbabwe and Haiti Bank-financed forestry projects, rotations of crop cultivation,
grazing, and tree-shrub fallow are permitted as a:result of documentation of indigenous crop-grazinig systems. The rota-
tions involve twa or more sbpopulations in the project site but often just one piece of land. Because lands are appropri-
ated on the basis of kinship and ethnic affiliation, several families have user-rights to the land over a certain period of time.
This multiple use arrangeneqt encourages paricipation of other user groups.
220)

APPE'INL)DIX 
II: 
WVORK(ING, 
IP'iRH 
SUMI MARIE9
alTangernents, including intermediary organizations with vironinent Facility-financed Conservation of Priority
the skills and incentives to address environmental and 
Protectecd Areas Project in the Philippines, a grant is made
social objectives, and (c) building the organizational abil- 
to a consortium of NGOs for implementation of conser-
ity of local communities to manage large forest areas. 
vation programils. Trust funds have proved useful, as in
Bhutan and Uganda, when returns to investments occur
over the long, term.
(CONDITIONS-! 
FOR 
SitTo'('.EiSS 
C_
Bank experience provides a number- of lessons concenling Stakeholder Analysis and Consultation
the conditions for successful participation in forest and con- 
Idenitifying and consulting stakeholders at the earliest
servation management and the measules that have helped possible stage is important not only for ensuring that all
to establish these conditions, including the following: 
the important issues are addressed but also for strength-
ening, commitimient to implementing the necessary re-
Government Commitment 
forms. Gender analysis can be used to assess the differ-
Success depends first and foremost on government com- ent impacts of proposed policies on men and women.
mitment to broad stakeholder participation in deteniiii- 
and measures can be taken to ensure that women share
ing forest sector and conservation objectives. Measures 
in decisionmiakinlg and project benefits (see box A2. 13).
by Task Managers to facilitate policy dialogue have in-
cluded: sponsoring intemnational or regional imieetings at 
Security of Tenure
the ministerial level, enabling policymakers to benefit from 
Because of the longl gestation period of forestry and con-
other countries' experience in devolving authority to for- servation investimients. security of tenure is particularly
est users; holding donor meetings to coordinate iniitiatives impor-tant as an incentive for community investment of
and assist govemnmeit in defining the agenda; using forest 
timile andl resources. Existing regulations frequently re-
sector reviews and biodiversity conservation strategy work strict access and undermine local or indigenious claims
to begin policy cliscussions with decisionmakers and key 
to resouices. Overlapping claims by goverinment, differ-
stakeholders: and supporting preparation of issues paper-s ent groups of forest users and industry, however, can make
by experts firom stakeholder groups. 
adjudicating tenur-e rights a complicated process. In Bank-
WhengovernL ment1isactivelyinvolvedindiscussionls finianced projects in Nepal and India (see box A2.14),
with stakeholders. forest maniagemilenit 
reforms are easier- publiclv endorsed written agreements have been instru-
to introduce. For example. the multisectoral stakeholder- mental in resolving. tenure conflicts.
workshops held in Mexico and Zimbabwe were helpftul
in identifying key reforms in forest tenure policy. regul-
lations on marketing of nonwood products, and delinca- 
Equitable Rules and Incentives
Forestry projects have the best chance of succeeding when
the costs and responsibilities of each stakeholder are
closely related to rights aiid benefits. Arrangements for
Decentralization 
the shar-ing of costs, benefits. and manageinenlt responsi-
A wide ran2e of differenlt institutional arTanigemnenlts- bilities as well as mechaniisimis for resolving conflicts 
h
from private contractual agreements to joint public/pri- 
amiong groups are most likely to motivate participation 
X
vate partnerships-has 
been used to devolve author-ity if they al-e widely understood and agreed on by all stake-
over forest managemilenit 
to the local level. In most cases. 
holders throLigh an open negotiating process. Special
some restructuring of government agencies has been 
imieasLues may be needed to ensure that women, indig-
called for as well as changes in proCuremenit ancl other 
enous groups. and landless households are not excluded.
administrative procedures.
Methods that ensure the availabilitv of funds at the
2 .
.
~Appropriate Technology
local level have included increasing private sector 
A 
ol-
-
.
Appropriate forest maliagemii 
enit technolooies provide
volvement bv opening up lines of credit. underwritinC, 
g 
private sector forestry investments, and endlorsing 101 lit 
imilportant inicenitives for participationi. The participation
nrivatsctual 
manfageent of forests as in forestry projects 
of local ulsers is enCouraged by an anillnial flow of income
in Indonesia, Zambia, the Plilippinies. Bangladesh, and 
from nontimber products, such as agricultural intercrops,
fodder, or- thaItch -Jrass. and comiiilerciallv valuable seeds
Costa Rica. In other cases. direct fundingo to NGOs has 
t 
o
proved the best mieans of delivering funiids directly to 
or leaves. This can only occur in plantations with wider-
comm 
.nitic> 
.
or example, under the Bank/Global Eu- 
spacings andc multitiered. more cliverse tree and shrub
COliln1L1imtiC'. For examiiple, Lindei- the Bank/Global Enl- 

'Ill11: 
\\ 
()Itl.l) 
Ii.%N'J 
I-'.AIUII'(II'.\'lIl(ON 
4Ol1'1lUl1I17)(bl{
Box A2.13. Women's Participation in Bank-Financed Forestry Projects
Kenyan women participating in forest-sharing agreements. With the assistance of the international NGO CARE, the
Kenya Forestry Development Project solicited the help of women in devising an agreement between the government and
local users regarding distribution of agroforestry or intercrop benefits, because most of the village agroforestry lands were
controlled by women. During project implementation, women were in charge of recording households that received har-
vest shares and they were key actors in resolving conflicts over forest benefits.
Indian women as members offorest protection commitrees. In the second West Bengal Forestry Project, the Bank worked
with the state forestry agency and NGOs to pernit and encourage the recording of women as forest protection committee
members. This allowed women to participate fully in decisionmaking and thereby receive a more equitable share of timber
harvests. When women were given responsibilities in these committees, the project gained wider support and spread
rapidly to other villages.
Box A2.14. Tenure and Access to Forests in Nepal and India
The Bank-financed Nepal forestry project allowed user communities to take over forest management. Forest users re-
ceived certificates ensuring long-term rights to forest benefits. The only control the Nepal state forestry agency retained
over forests was through approval of village forest management plans. The project, however, had to reconcile the multiple
and often conflicting rights to forests by local villagers before long-term tenure could be recognized.
In the Bank-financed second West Bengal Forestry Project in India, written agreements between the state and villages
established ownership and user rights to forest protection committees. To maintain rights over forests, however, each
committee had to provide evidence of sustainable forest use.
species than are found tinder conventional even-aged 
training of forest service staff and local leaders, village-
maniagement. Technologies defined by the community 
level publicity and extension, developing
on the basis of local knowledge are often more effective microplanning tools and facilitating plan formulation,
in terms of forest productivity and sustainability. More- improving forest marketing information networks.
over, the entire community understands the management 
facilitating the formation of women's groups and farm
rules and has an incentive to monitor and enforce them. 
forestry associations, and technical support to forest
Local Capacity 
product processing, energy alternatives. or village-
based conservation inventories. One of the most
Most Bank and Global EnvironmIent Facility/Bank- 
effective tools for building local capacity is the studv
financed forestry and biodiversity conservationi projects 
tour. enabling stakeholders to visit and question their
involve a capacity-building component, often con- 
counterparts on projects in which participatory man-
tracted to NGOs. to strencrthen mIanagement capacity at 
aeethsaraybe 
salse
the community level. The role of NGOs may include
This Izate is based anz the paper written bY Ajit Banzeijee, Gabriel Camipbell. Maria C. Cruz, Slhelto/a Davis, anbd Augusta Molinar.
Contr-iblutors 
include Gloria Davis, Claudia Aldernman. 
B17uv an Bhatiagair Danziel Gross, Asmneen Khan, WilliaimA 
Magrath, Jessica Mott,
Simion Rietbergen. Got, Scriz-eiber. Radhia Siagih. Jimz Smvle, and Toan Wiens.
2 2...

APPE14NDIX1 
11: 
PAPERll-'( 
S'.1MMAR 
1'.1\1\1{1:
PAZVR'rI(CIPATI0N 
'I'HE 
ciency and standards of service are achieved when design
and management of the irrigation system are transferred to
IRR{IGASTIONA 
SE}C1TO)R
farmers. System design benefits from local knowledge, and
farmers have the means and incentives to minimize costs and
The irrigation sector provides a rich source of experi- 
improve services. For example, irrigation user associations
ences and lessons in user participation. Participation by 
can reduce labor costs by paying lower wages than govem-
farmers in system design and management helps to en- 
ment agencies, local farmers can provide closer supervision
sure the sustainability of the system, reduce the public 
of staff than distant agency supervisors; and breakages are
expenditure burden, and improve efficiency. equity, and 
reduced when fanners feel a greater sense of ownership. In
standards of service. Mobilizing support at all levels and 
Senegal (seeboxA2.15). forinstance, electricity requirements
establishing the participatory process, however, involves 
were reduced by half. Ultimately, as a result of more timely
costs; it also demands knowledge of the incentives fac- 
water delivery and repairs, farmers' yields are higher. In the
ing each group of stakeholders and of the essential ele- 
Philippines (see box A2.16). dry-season rice yields increased
ments in building effective user organizations. 
by 12 percent and farmers' net income by 50 percent.
BPI:NE EFITE 
Public Expenditure
Efforts to increase userpartciOne of the most noted effects (although this has nothing
Efforts torease 
user 
ticipatio have been rred 
to do with farmers' motives for participation) is the re-
byapo perormance in efrce 
equity,ncost rcvy 
duction in govemment staff and expenditure requirements
and accountability 
maen lreatio 
systemspan- 
caused by farmer management and contributions of cash,
aged by government agencies. Greater participation by 
labor. and materials. Farmer associations have proved
farmers through water users associations has helped over-
come many of these problems. 
more effective collectors of user fees than government
agencies. It is not unusual for farmers to be willing to
pay more than the original user rates after transfer of the
System Performance 
system to their control. Increased collection of fees. how-
The overriding reason for increasing participation in irriga- ever, does not motivate farmer participation. Participa-
tion is to improve system performance. Clear gains in effi- tion must also result in direct benefits to participants.
Box A2.15. Senegal: Creating Incentives for Farmer Participation
Early efforts in Senegal to transfer irrigation system management 
to farmers by establishing village units showed little
success because of unclear plans, timetables, and provisions for transfer and because of the failure to provide control or
incentives for the farmers.
Recognizing these problems, the 1990 Bank-assisted 
Irrigation 
IV Project required total transfer of operations and main-
tenance (O&M) to farmers as a precondition for financing rehabilitation works. Getting farmers to agree to take over these
systems required considerable negotiation, particularly 
because they perceived existing irrigation fees as too high, let
alone the additional costs and responsibilities of covering full O&M.
Increasing the control of farmers over irrigation services was the key factor that persuaded them to agree to assume
responsibility for system management and cost recovery. Farmers demanded the right to hire their own staff, choosing
agency operators only if they had performed well, and even then reducing their salaries from the full civil service package. 
t
Following the transfer to farmers of ownership of rehabilitated operating systems with their infrastructure, agency staff
would be allowed to enter the schemes only with farmers' permission. To improve farmers' management 
capacity, manu-
als were prepared for each system; training in basic literacy as well as technical and financial skills for organizational
leaders was incorporated. 
Farners were willing to pay at least part of the training costs.
Although the long-term sustainability of the project is difficult to assess at this stage, the accomplishments 
to date are
impressive. Before the transfer, assessed fees covered only 17 to 21 percent of maintenance and replacement costs; less
than a quarter of these were actually collected. As a result, maintenance suffered, electricity often was not paid for, and
system reliability was poor. After the transfer, farmers paid fees four times as high, covering full O&M and a replacement
fund for capital. The benefit to the farmers was greatly improved irrigation reliability. Moreover, because they were able
to monitor the pump operators and had an incentive to save on energy costs, electricity requirements were reduced by half.
Savings to the government included huge reductions in agency staff costs, as farmers took over functions.
223

I'H H; 
XNVOR 
1L) 
BA NK 
PAI- RTI 
CI IIATIN ON 
7Ot'R('iK31()O1 I
Box A246. Eieaefo 
h 
hlpie
The- first'anid best dcnimdntiniepom 
to bul npnciaina 
conrtoeo 
r 
to policy ocretd
the Tip 
e 
e AppL4 wA e 
:~~~~~ns 
O' 
i 
n 
: 
.h
system and 
,ve 
e,e,e 
to lag nain 
irrgaio 
-
ytes 
Th Naon Iriato Aihrt 
ha evle 
fro 
""an-,D.$ 
P,-,, 
000 -- ,S,: -:0
0~~~~~~~~~~ 
O 00f WM 
_t 
:0:
t.~~~~~~0f 
im. 
:e,e TeY 
' 
t'
Sustainability 
tcme project's colitg oa than wspeog constrUCting daptes or
Buildioag irrigation systeais that aire wanted, saopportecs deliverv st.uctu-es. Once the participatory approach has
and owned by use9s themiiselves provides the best assur- 
been established, however, it is not unusual for partici-
ance of sustainability. Physwe 
cal and fiscal s 
ostaillecti pation actually to reduce the inc plefmentatio4 period. The
of the irrigation system beyond the project is enhanced 
kinds of probletmss that typically delay the impleyienta-
when operation and 
p 
aintenatice costs are met from 
t 
user 
tion of nonparticipatory irrigatio 
m 
projects. such as dib'fi-
fees rather than hingh levels of rovermicfoent 
subsidy. 
culties in negotiatinp riohts of way or obstruction bd 
lanil-
ers or local politicians irl an be avoided or solved throurh
Bauiding irrigation systems thatarewanted,supported,deffective 
participatore processes.
Moae equitable orianizational atTangeislents and water
detiverr have bein noted wbeyn pateticiprjtoi-y 
approaches 
i)nsor 
oblre(mNs 
that typi,Callel,S
are followed. A contributing factor is the socmoecotfomuri o
staths of the leadership. which teonds to be closeni to that Tce success of participation ewaoyts in the irrigation sec-
of the ordinary member. involving nmore tenants aid sneall tors depends on how well the project mobilizes support
farmeirs than in nonparticipatory 
systems. 
acd bsNilds ef'fective farmers' 
organizations.
Spillover Effects 
Mobilizing Support
The transformation of water users from beneficiaries to 
User participation changes but does not eliminate the role
partners in irrigation development canl have a widespread 
of government agencies in irrigation development. Build-
impact as farmers become trained and organized. It can 
ing support from policymakers and agency staff as well as
increase local ability to coordinate input supplies, foir farnmers anid other water users is essential for successful
example, and to deal with other government agencies 
participatory projects and involves paying close attention
involved in rural development, 
to the incentives relevant to each group. The greatest re-
ceptivity to participation is often ftound in crisis situations,
as was the case in Mexico (see box A2. 17). when manage-
-o~r~ 
AND' 
R1~1(i 
ment problems or revenue drains are most apparent.
Establishing user participation involves costs in mobi- 
In building the confidence of policymakers and se-
lizing field staf'f, train1ing, and organaizine farmlers and 
iior agency staff, pilot projects have been used effec-
carrying out socioeconomic research. These additional 
tively to demonstrate the capacity fOr farmer manage-
costs. however. are usually offset by subseqUent savingis ment the potential improvement in system performance.
ini construction costs and higher loan repaymlent rates 
and potential saving in governmenit expenditure and im-
A bigger problem can be the additional timiie nleededi provement in cost recovery rates. Building alliances with
to establish a participatory approachl and get the projectsupportive 
idividuals i governmet has been facilitated
off the ground. especially in the absenice of existinia lo- 
by participatory economic and sector work, by enabling
cal institutions for cooperation. Developing farmer or- Task Nalagers to spend several years working in a coun-
ganizations is ofteni a slow process, silnce less is under 
try, and by supporting them with good social analysis
2 24

AP'PE.;NDI 
XI 
II: 
W(ORKItIN(i 
PAPER 
SUt NINI ARIE i
Box A2.17. Mexico: Rapid Change in a Crisis Situation
Mexico experienced rapid and widespread incorporation of user participation in the irrigation sector. The objective was to
make the national irrigation system financially self-sufficient as well as to obtain full cost recovery over time for major works
already constructed. The cornerstone of this policy was the transfer of irrigation management to water user organizations.
Crisis situations in irrigation system financing and management provided the impetus for sweeping changes. By the end of
the 1980s, an estimated 1.5 million of 6.1 million hectares of irrigated land went out of irrigated production because of
lack of funding to complete infrastructure and for O&M. Bank management was influential in pointing out the need and
direction for change; the Bank also provided a loan (cofinanced by the Inter-American Development Bank) for the Irriga-
tion and Drainage Sector Project. The three pillars of this project were decentralization and transfer of irrigation districts
to water user organizations, self-sufficiency in fee collection to cover full O&M costs, and efficiency in budget allocation.
The transfer is done in two stages. The first gives producers, organized in water user organizations (covering 5,000 to
18,000 hectares), responsibility for O&M of large lateral canals and drains. In the second, these organizations take respon-
sibility for the main irrigation and drainage canals and the machinery and equipment required for O&M through the
creation of an enterprise or sociedad Farmer groups are set up as organizations, rather than less formal associations so
that, under Mexican law, they can operate as legal entities and obtain loans. These organizations are meant to become
financially self-sufficient through collection of water charges. Each organization hires a professional team to carry out
O&M, including a manager and a group of water masters (one for approximately 3,000 hectares) and a chief of mainte-
nance (all graduate engineers) as well as their support staff.
To educate farmers about the changes and persuade them to support the program, Mexico relied heavily on mass media
campaigns prepared by communications specialists from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
along with universities and industry. These were followed by detailed training of the farmer organization staff in, among
other subjects. computer applications and use of maintence machinery. Districts in the best financial condition were
transferred first (after deferred maintenance was done) to ensure a successful start and build confidence.
The process of transferring management to farmers already has exceeded targets. Since 1991 thirty-three irrigation dis-
tricts covering 2.3 million hectares have been transferred and an additional eleven districts are in process. O&M cost
recovery rates have increased from 18 to 78 percent.
Project implementation rests ultimately with agency 
can only develop gradually. Sudden cuts in the status quo
staff. Internalizing support for participation within irri- 
should be avoided, and the composition of staff allowed
gation agencies often involves structural changes to link 
to change gradually.
agency budgets firmly to farmer contributions instead of
government allocations and to promote a more service- 
Building Effective Farmers Organizations
oriented approach. Because agency staff typically come 
Teams of trained specialists acting as community orca-
from en-ineering- backgrounds and are not orientcd to-
f g g r 
n 
n 
n 
nizers have proved to be the most successful catalysts in
ward dealing with farmers, incentives for them to sup- participatory irrigation projects. Wherever possible. ex-
port farmer participation need to be backed up by train-
ing- program-ns. Study tours to farmer-m-nanagred 
irripatisting 
orgailzational capacity should be built on, as il
rglStdt ot 
igtin 
Nepal (see box A2. 18), for example. In cases of very hi-
districts can be particularly effective, not onfly for their 
erarchical social structure and inequitable distribution of
demonstration effect but also in raising the prestige of
.. .
. .
.................... 
^assets, 
it may be unrealistic to expect fully' democratic
participation. exposing staff to new possibilities, and cre- local organizations. To control vested interests, the vary-
ating a bond am-nong 
participants. 
iimg incentives ot ditferent categories of tarmers should
The strongest opposition to farmer participation is 
be identified and accounted for in project design (for
often encountered at the field technical level, especially
examiple, in definin- water rights3. along with the result-
when civil service unions are strong. When field staff
r 
.
~~~~in- 
problem-s of achieviing collective actioD.
perceive the proposed changes as a threat to thelr jobs 
ngproble 
ieng 
clective 
act
and 
Appropriate incentives are needed if farmers are ac-
and livelihood, these vested interests can retard or even 
tively to support the user associations that are essential
sabotage participatory projects. Clear directives are 
channels for participation and to assume the additional
needed from policymakers, supported by performance 
costs in time, materials, and fees (as experience in Paki-
measures linked to bonuses and promotions, to encour- 
stan has deMOnstrated). The most important of these in-
age greater accouLntability to the farmers. The new ethos
2 2 5

Box A2.18. Nepal: Builng on Traditional Strengths
Nepal has a long tradition of direct fanrer participation and cooperation in irrigation development. About 70,000 farmer-
managed irrition schemes, ranging in size from very small to thousands of hectares, account for 70-80 percent of the
country's inrigation. In general these systems achieve high levels of perfornance over long periods of time without gov-
ernment cost or involvement. Such systems, however, are frequently damagd by landslides and floods beyond the capa-
bility of farmes to repair alone; mostcan be improved substantially with modem materials aconstruction techniques.
The Bank's irrigation line of credit was designed to assist these schemes by building on the famers' traditional capability
to organize and cooperate together. To participate uander the irrigation line of credit, farmers had to form legal farmer
irigation associations, agree ahead of time to contribute to capital costs,,pay full O&M costs, and maintain full control
and responsibility for all decisions regarding their irigation schemes. Such stringent requirements had never been at-
tempted before under a Bank-supported project in Nepal. But in prtice these requirements simply formalized the farm-
ers' traditional mode of irrigation development and provided an avenue for Bank assistance that would strengthen rather
than destroy the traditional farmer institutions. The iffigation line of creditapproach proved highly successful, has become
strongly demand driven, and isi now being expanded to government-managed 
projects.
centives are improved irrigation services and a voice in to farmers throughout the project or sector. Building the
management decisions through a user organization that is 
necessary organizational capacity for this turnover in-
fully accountable to its members. The support of farmers volves training farmers for a variety of new functions,
is most likely to be sustained and organizational capacity including basic literacy, accounting. how to hold meet-
developed when they are ilvolved from the beginning in ings, how to deal with agencies with legal regulations.
decisions on system desion and their organization has full 
possibly even computer applications, and water manage-
ownership and management control of the system. It is 
ment and operation of equipment.
essential. for example. that specialized staff be selected 
Fundamental to meeting all these conditions is a
by and accountable to the fanner organization. even if they strong and transparent legal framework for the organiza-
have been trained by government agencies. 
tion from the outset, providing farmers with rights and
To be successful, farmer organizations must interact 
benefits as well as duties and responsibilities. This frame-
constructively with govenmment agencies and technical 
work should also be flexible enough to allow farmers to
experts. This relationship works best when consistent 
evolve their own organizational structure and to permit
rules and procedures are established and supported by 
the organization's responsibilities to grow in line with
government regulationi for the turnover of responsibility 
its capacity.
2263

APPE'N'I.:X1) 
11: 
'%V()IKh1NG 
PAPI'ER 
S1 UM1M1ARIES'
PARTICIPATIO0N 
IN 
TrHE 
WVAT'ER
* 
User participation makes services and service provid-
ANDi 
SiANITAT.'I(N 
SE('T()R
ers more responsive and accountable to beneficiaries.
* 
Cost recover-y and the sustainability of services im-
The participation of users in designing and implement- 
proves when technology choices and services corre-
ing projects and managing water and sanitation (W&S) 
spond with what users want and are willing to pay for.
services is now being built into Bank-funded projects with 
* 
Managemiienit 
of services is more ei'fective when insti-
the aim of increasing efficiency, equity, and cost recov- 
tutional airangements are tailored to local practices.
ery and facilitating the extension of service coverage to
poor communities.' Success depends on establishing the 
Demand-based approaches can also help resolve con-
necessary institutional arrangemilents for participation and 
flicts over water resource allocation among competing sectoral
project delivery. In addition, Task Managers have to spend uses. Increased participation by pimaary stakeholders. whether
more time in the field. and adapt Bank procedures to sup- 
through consultation or through the purchase of water rights
port appropriate models for financing and procurement. 
in regulated water markets, helps ensure that choices are an-
chored in demand and not unduly influenced by contractors.
consultants, and other secondary stakeholders.
Most of the experience with participatoly W&S projects
Prior to the last decade, the business practices of W&S 
so far has been gained by NGOs and, with a few notable
utilities hardly ever involved consumiiers in decision- 
exceptionis. mostly on a small, experimental scale. Althiough
making or management. More recently. with concern th.it stakeholderparticipation is well accepted in the Banik's work
agencies are still failing to reach more than a billion of the 
in this sector and is seen as especially vital in extending
poorest in developing countries. moving people center 
services to the poorest communities participatory W&S
stage in W&S projects has become an important themile. projects are relatively new. mostly either still inder imple-
Despite massive investments between 1980 and 
imentation or in preparation. Much is yet to be learned about
1990-the International Drinking Water Supply and Sani- 
ways to optimize participation in large pro ects, but a num-
tation Decade-the 
needs of rural and ur-banl poor are 
her of important lessons are already emerging.
still largely unmet by formial public services. whereas in
many areas private vendors charge tei to a tiousaid times 
CN( 
) 
ITMNS FR 
S C CES'
the official tariff rates. Pervasive inefficiency on the part
of overstaffed agencies providing subsidized urhban ser- Promoting the participation of water user-s is not equally
vices has resulted in financially unsustainable services 
appropriate and feasible in all W&S projects. It is better
that benefit only a small portion of the population. 
suited to the provision of feeder than trunk infrastr-uc-
At the same time. competing user needs have not 
ture. Adverse political and institutional conditions may
been well balanced; many water resouL-ce interventions- 
make it difficult to establish participatory processes. In
large dams and irrigation projects in particular-have 
the poorest countries in which capacity is weak, the cost
misallocated water resources and caused social ancl en- 
of expatriate facilitators to promote institutional inter-
vironmental disruption. 
mediaition may also be high.
To increase responsiveness to user needs, impr-ove cost 
The critical question is to understand what rules and
recovery and serice managemenit, and incorporate finan- institutional arTangements are useful in supporting stake-
cial, environmental. and social concerns into project design holder participation in the sector and undier what circum-
and management, services should be based on demand. 
stances they are appropriate.
THI; 
RO? 1,E 
OF PA'RTICIP'ATIIN 
Working with Governments and Sector Agencies
Support from higher levels of government is essen-
Participation plays a central role in meeting these chal- 
tial to the success of demand-driven projects. It was cru-
lenges. An example from Kenya (see box A2.19) shows cial, for example, in overcoming line agency resistance
how involving users in the design and management of 
to plans for beneficiary participation through an autono-
W&S services provides a means of revealing demanid mous fund for rur-al W&S projects in Nepal. Cultivating
and ensuring that services matchi what people want, are 
national level support ftor participation in W&S can be
willing to pay for, and will strive to maintain. The ratio- 
tackled fromli two ends: by country economic and sector
nale for user participation is summarized as follows: 
work, through which support is generated before projects
22 7

ITHEi NVOR1{1.) 
BA\NI 
PAR\T'''l.'ICIPATIO 
'%0UI,{':CI:S()()IZ
Box A2.19. Community Mobilization for Sanitation in Kenya
The village of Maina is an informal settlement within the boundaries of Nyahururu town in Kenya, where the Danish
international Aid Agency executed a sewerage house connection project between 1988 and 1991. In the first year of the
project, a trunk sewer and a few lateral sewers were constructed without any participation by the residents. The conse-
quences were predictable: villagers did not understand the project motives and resisted collaborating with project teams
when the plans indicated that the layout of some plots would be altered to make room for roads, storm drains, and toilet
units. Villager apprehensions were based on a valid concem that engineering plans would result in large-scale alterations
to existing houses and structures.
A review mission by the Danish International Aid Agency in 1989 recommended that, before any further investments were
made, the physical plan be revised with community participation. A site comrittee was formed, involving residents in the
process of determining what the project components would be. Extension workers with government ministries and staff
from a leading Kenyan NGO were selected as facilitators. The results were striking. Communities began mobilizing labor
and materials for construction and also began participating in O&M of constructed facilities.
By the time the project came to an end, the comnmunity 
groups with support from the NGO had charted a completely
different course for the project and were able to engage the municipal council in a productive dialogue on where and when
other infrastructural facilities such as roads, a police station, and a post office should be located within the village.
are begun. or through individual participatory projects. 
Each of these approaches has its own drawbacks (an
whose lessons change sectoral policies at the national 
example is described in box A2.20) and in all cases the
level. When consensus or political support at the national 
challenge remains to persuade engineers trained in apply-
level is weak, it may be easier to begin by demonstrating 
ing industrial country standards to consider alternative tech-
the move fronm projects to policy work. Most of the de- 
nologies, leave theirdrawing boards, and consult with pri-
inand-driven projects reviewed in this paper, however, mary stakeholders. Investment in training staff in commu-
emerged from earlier sector work that laid the basis for 
nity participation by itself cannot remedy the situation
and created interest in trying this new approach. 
unless career rewards are linked with success in imple-
Finding agencies capable of carrying out participa- 
menting demand-based projects. Lower-level staff often
tory projects may be difficult. Several strategies have been 
have more accepting attitudes toward community involve-
used in cases in which the sector agency is not qualified 
ment and are better equipped to inter-act with poor benefi-
or interested in involving primary stakeholders more ac- 
ciaries. Staff with experience from other agencies involved
tively: (i) using multiple agencies in project implemen- 
in extension work can also adapt easily to an intermediary
tation, (b) cultivating reformers within the larger resis- 
role between consumers and W&S service providers: in a
tant agencies, (c) bypassing the agency by creating anew 
project in Brazil, for example (see box A2.21), responsi-
agency or fund, and (d) designing the project to include 
bility for rural water has been placed with the public health
< 
an expanded range of secondary stakeholders as partner 
agency with good results.
organizations to prevent capture of project benefits by 
In Bank-funded projects in which existing sector
water utility staff and contractors. 
agencies have had few qualified community mobiliza-
Box A2.20. The Risks of a Multi-Agency Approach
In a rural water project in a country in Asia, the central government did not provide adequate resources to the department
of local government responsible for setting up rural water associations with community involvement. The public works
department, on the other hand, received its budget allocations on schedule and went ahead procuring well-drilling materi-
als before comrmunities 
had been consulted on what sorts of facilities they wanted and were wilin,glto pay for. In response
to political pressure f 
provincial politicians, the public works department distributed budget allocations evenly over alI
the provinces, 
spreading proJect investments too thinly. The project was driven by drilling companies and politicians
rather than, as envisaged in the project, by the community-based rural water associations. These pitfalls could probably
have been avo'ided if comimunity participation had been established before the hardware was procured.
228 
: 
: 
:X 
.
S

111:N 
11)x 
II: 
-I*VoftINi 
I,I,'I; 
I 
S 'Ni1tI 
\It,L:E
Box A2.21. Learning about Participation Models
The PROSANEAR, a Brazil water and sanitation project for low-income conrmunities, is being implemented in several
states in Brazil. Each state water company has been free to incorporate participation, using its own procedures. In practical
terns, what has emerged are models of participation that differ depending on how the water company and the project
design consultants worked out the "rules of the game."
In the engineer-activist model, the engineering consultant was also a dedicated social activist. The rules permitted benefi-
ciaries to negotiate a wide range of topics with the state water company, such as levels of service, physical layouts,
sequencing between water supply and sanitation investments, prices, billing, and so on.
In the participation specialist model, professional community participation facilitators work jointly with design teams led
by engineers. In one variant of the model, the water company decides on engineering design in advance and allows
communities to negotiate the organization of billing, assignment of operational responsibilities, and group contributions
of labor. In the other variant, negotiations are restricted to assigning O&M responsibilities among the beneficiaries, user
groups, and the water company.
In the hygiene education model, health educators focus on a more conventional set of interventions intended to change
knowledge, attitudes, and practices, rather than iteratively working out or negotiating any aspect of service provision. The
assumption of this model is that there is no need to build any explicit negotiation mechanism into the choice of service level,
The extent of conflict has been greatest in the participation specialist model and nil in the hygiene education model. Per
capita investment costs were highest in the hygiene education model. After project construction is completed, it will be
possible to evaluate the effect of each of these models on service sustainability.
tion staff, specialists hired as project consultants have teams consisting of engineers and community partici-
acdded up to 10 percent to total investmuenlt costs. The 
pation specialists.
best outcome in terms of community participation. ben-
eficiariy satisfaction, and per capita costs for water and 
Designing Stakeholder Participation
sewerage resulted from having the detailed engineer- 
Most projects set up community councils or water user as-
ing design done jointly tinder one bid by consulting 
sociations. through which beneficiaries can influence deci-
Box A2.22. Tips for Task Managers of Water and Sanitation Projects
F 
Financing and Procurement. Standard bulk procurement procedures are rarely appropriate for demand-driven projects.
Altematives include (a) direct procurement by communities or agencies from prequalified, small construction firms
and consulting engineers, using a schedule of standard materials and labor costs; (b) multiple procurement proce-
dures, depending on the size of the project; and (c) geographic clustering of subprojects to allow limited packaging of
specific elements.
* 
Project Preparation. Sector work can help clear the way for participatory projects. An essential part of preparation is
the time spent by Task Managers in the field. Especially at this learning stage for the Bank and borrower countries,
preparation and supervision of participatory water and sanitation projects require more financial resources and staff
time than conventional projects.
* 
Supervision, Monitoring, and Evaluation. Monitoring, evaluation, and fine tuning of project design becomes an itera-
tive, consultative process, involving Task Managers, sectoral counterparts, project managers, and beneficiaries. Per-
sonal field visits by Task Managers are essential. Staff time for supervision in participatory water and sanitation
projects has varied from twenty to forty-five weeks a year.
* 
Mobilizing Additional Resources. Task Managers have mobilized extra funding for preparation from the Japanese
Trust Fund, Japanese Grant Facility, and Project Preparation Fund. Bilaterals, the United Nations Children's Fund,
regional development banks, and local and international NGOs working in the country have been useful sources of
experience, information, and innovative approaches.
* 
T7e Role of Consultants. Almost all projects involve consultants promoting participation in some capacity. The key
issue is how the community participation specialist and the engineering design specialist can be encouraged to coor-
dinate their efforts. One solution is to invite bids proposing both together, forcing consultants to form consortia of
engineers and social activists.
229

Fl-il: 
BANE 
PAR.) 
13 
K 
l'AITICI 
IPATIO I 
N S(O)U 
W( CEII()0 
1K
sions concernin- the sort of service to be provided, play a 
ability, and hydrological or geographic factors. Typically.
role in project implementation, and channel their contribu- however, a number of options exist: the key factor is
tions of cash, labor, and materials. Long-tern community motivating the enginieering staff to be innovative in
participation in O&M of systems may also be sought, al- searching these out.
though this is more difficult and experience is still Imaiited. 
To limit the influence of local elites, effective ben-
Project design niust allow time to discover workable 
eficiary participation also requires accountable leaders
structures. Flexibility in community-level project design 
who make decisions on the basis of transparent rules. In
allows institutional arrangemiienits 
to be adjusted as needed 
Paraguay the combination of easily understood program
to match what community members feel comfortable 
rules and clear information about costs and benefits has
with. It also permits chaniges to be proposed by benetfi- produced an effective rural sanitationi progranm for larger
ciaries duriing the course of project implementation in 
villages. The government's sanitation agency offers the
rules and procedures. managemiient structures. assignment program to any community that can set up a coinmittee
of responsibilities among alternative organizations or 
and supply 15 percent of the investment costs. The com-
firms, or the kind of service to be provided. 
munitv repays another 1 5 percent in cash or labor and
Demand-driven projects allow beneficiary commu- 
materials at the time of implementationi and a further 30
nities choice over the type and level of W&S service they 
percenit over ten years, contributing to 60 percent cost
want, based on their needs, priorities, and financial situ- 
recovery for capital costs. The community is expected to
ations. To make informed decisions, they' must receive 
cover 100 percent of operational costs. The success of
suLfficielnt information about options, their respective 
this programi in termns of cost recovery and the effective-
costs, and other implications. The range of service op- 
niess of local organizations owes much to the clear rules
tionls miay be limited by settlemenlt density, resource avail- for entry and for division of responsibilities.
This n ot 
is based an the pap)-wr 'rilten hb Gbrie/ll/e 
Wbitms 
anti N. ViJax 
Jagannalthan. Conriba tors itcl/iude 
Bo/li,i Al/mass 
v. A/Aleatder
E. Ba/alian, Jlanai/ B1esen, N'ie/ Ba v/le. loa/a Brirs ale, Loais C/tang, Leal Donaldsona. Mike GalFJin, 
Etaiu 
Jintiniez, Farni, Kempet: XCIvier
Legarin, Abel Meia, 
tVicctte Pmquerm (,George Plan, Lairs Rasnuissen, Geu!fffe Read. Carla Rietveld Robe-t Roc/he, Gerhard
Tselhannerl. Anthan-v cian V,'grt A/lbert Wrig'/ht. Rekha Daval. Peter Lchery. (111(l 
Mukahini Ka,iiaki.
23 (3

A li,N 
I) I x 
I: IWo 
)RI 
IN(; 
PA t' 
1,lR 
S 
t 
T 
MJARH 
I fl-E
PA 1U TI X C I P9AT I ON 
I N T'H F, 
sustainability of projects by ensuring that learning programs
matclh the needs of the populations they are ser-ving.
Ef'forts to make the provision of bosic education more
S E,C'r OR 
responsive to commnunity needs have included education
vouchers for families, fund transf'ers to school boards,
Operations in the education sector can be greatly im- 
and various models of school- or community-based man-
proved by increasing stakeholder participation of gov- 
agement. Colombia's Escuela Nueva program (see box
ernment officials, education professionals, local commu- 
A9.23) and the Balochistan community support process
nities, and the private sector.' Such participation can in- 
(see box A2.24) provide two examples. The involvement
crease the relevance and quality of educationi. improve of parents 
and other community 
members 
in
ownership, build consensus, help to reach remote and 
decisionmnakinig has, in many cases, made the curricu-
disadvantaged groups, mobilize additional resources, anld luni. teaching materials, and school calendar more ap-
build institutionial capacity. Participator-y operations in- 
propriate to local conditions and improved teacher and
volve risks and costs, however, and certain preconditions 
student attendance rates. The result has been to boost
are necessary for success. 
morale. reduce drop out and repeater rates. improve
achievement scores, and expand enrollment demand.
Nonformal education has had a relatively long his-
PI)OTEN'T'IA, 
BENEFITS 
tory of student and community participation. Programs
have proved more effective in ter-ms of attendance rates,
ManyB 
ted 
and otheroedcai 
projc 
have 
learning achievements, and behavioral change when leamh-
promoted the participation of stakeholders from govern-'. 
.
.
LI 
e rs lielp identify their ineeds, desi-n anid mianage iear-inafi
inent officials and education professionals to community 
r h
programs, and participate in developing learning materi-
mem1ber-s par-ents stLudents. anid emp)loyers in desi gn and
als. Not only are such programs more relevant to the knowl-
im-plemientation. Such participation can contribute in a 
implmenttionSucpaticipati 
cancoedge 
and interests of the students, but also the participa-
variety of ways to meeting the challenges facing educa- 
tr 
i 
e 
tion systems in developing countries: improving quality. 
Similarly, themotvaio 
and achieement ol
.
.
' 
~~Slimlarly, the i-notivation and achievemneiit of stuldents
promoting 
equitable enrollmnent. and conltr-ollilg soaring
publiccosts, 
-in 
v'ocational a2nd 
I higher education have been enhanced
wheni studenlts and commlllunity-based 
organizationis 
par-
ticipate in designing and managing programs to meet their
Improving the Relevance and Quality of Education 
needs. In these sectors. the participation of private sector
In a sector in which demanid is often poorly understood, a 
employers has been particularly important for improv-
fundamental rationale for increased stakeholder participa- ing technical standards and linking training to real em-
tion is to improve the relevance, effectiveniess, anid ployment opportunities.
Box A2.23. Student and Co(nunity Partcipation in C.lombla 
.
Colombia's Escuela Nueva program was created in the mnid- 
1970s to overcome curriculum, training, and administrative
deficiencies in multigrade rural schools. The program incorporates a number of innovaive components, including partici-
pation of students in school government and community participation in designing and supporting the school curriculum.
In each learning task, self-instruction books guide students to identify examples, cultural elements from their own experi-
ence, and local materials to be accumulated in the learning centers. Teachers are encouraged to organize meetings with
parents and discuss the material prepaird by the students. Children also participate in health, sanitation, and nutrition
activities. In this way, the school gradually becomes a resource center for teachers, for agencies operating in other sectors,
and eventually for the community itself.
In addition, Escuela Nueva child&en are introduced to civic and democratic life through student councils. Students orga-
nize into committees to take care of discipline, cleaning, maintenance, sports, school garden, newspaper, and library. They
also cooperate in the instructional process by helping so.wer students. This is seen as an essential part of the curriculum as
it creates linkages between tie school and the community.
Evaluation of the program, which has expanded rapidly to some 20,000 schools, suggests that educational achievement
and civic behavior compare fiavoraibly 
with the output of traditional schools at similar costs per pupil.
231

THI-: 
NVO)II.A) 
HANK 
PIAITI(IPAI'AIfON 
SO-II 
(I:IsO(H
Box A2.24. Mobilizing Communit Support to Primary Schools in Pakistan
The community support program in pnmary education in Balochistan, a province in Pakistan, provides a remarkable
example of what can be achieved in adverse conditions tlhrough participatory methods.
Beginning with a pilot project in 1992, the community support progrm has already succeeded in establishing 198 new
community girls schools in remote rural villages that had no government school and no tradition of parental involvement
in schools. Enrollment of girls is 100 percent in many of these villages with high attendance rates.
To begin the participatory process, community workers went door to door, urging parents to form an association. In each
of the villages, education committees have been created that are responsible for selecting a site for the school, identifying
potential teachers, and monitoring teacher attendance and student enrollment.
A local girl, educated at least to the eighth grade, has been identified and trained as teacher for each school. After she
demonstrates her commitment by teaching for three months on a voluntary basis, mobile teacher-training teams are sent to
her home village to provide intensive three-month pedagogical training. This home training is needed because of cultural
barriers that prevent girls from traveling far. Following the training, the teacher becomes a government employee: govern-
ment rules, which normally require teachers to have matriculated, have been stretched to accommodate the program.
The pilot project resulted from the initiative of a Pakistani consultant. The Bank Task Manager, with whom she discussed
her plans, recognized the potential of this approach and was able to organize U.S. Agency for International Development
funding for the pilot. The consultant subsequently1formed 
a: small NGO to qualify for funding from other sources, which
now include local and international NGOs, USAID, the United Nations Children's Fund, and the government of Balochistan
through a World Bank loan,
At the project preparation stage, when the pilot was tried, there was no way of knowing if the approach would work or not.
The success of the pilot led to full acceptance and ownership of the program by the government, and the government itself
is now funding the program on a province-wide basis using International Development Association credit. Because of the
experimental nature of the project, World Bank support to the program has only been possible through the new lending
approach, which supports the entire primary education program rather than selected components.
Building Ownership and Consensus 
relevant information and views from many sections of
In a sector as socially, politically, and culturally sensi- 
society. Techniques for facilitating dialogue among
tive as education. stakeholder involvemenit in policy dia- 
stakeholders in policy or project design have included
logue helps to define the values oil which policy is based 
focus groups. workshops. conferences. and, as in
and to develop consensus between competing interest 
Botswana. innovative use of video technology. The
groups. It also helps to ensure that proposed changes have Phil ippines (see box A2.25) is one of several coun-
the understanding and suppoilt of all the groups on whom tries in which Economic Development Institute work-
successful implementation will depend. 
shops have been the catalyst for participatory educa-
In some cases in which major policv reform has 
tion sector work.
Uj 
been envisaged. education commissions have elicited
Box A2.25. Building Borrower Commitment in the Philippines
The participatory process used in education sector work in the Philippines is reported to have called for much more time
and patience on the part of Bank staff than would have been the case with a more traditional Bank approach, but it is hoped
it will pay off in terms of government commitment.
This work started with an Economic Development Institute workshop, focusing attention on the characteristics of effec-
tive schools, how schools improve, why schools were not working well, and what the priorities of reform should be. This
was followed by another national seminar on the same subject. Broad stakeholder involvement was promoted through a
participatory workshop for project design (the ZOPP methodology) that included forty people from each broad geo-
graphic zone. From these participants and other stakeholders, a team was selected to draft a national implementation plan.
Having secured ownership in the sector, the exercise is now being extended to the central agencies in which the decision
to borrow or not ultimately lies.
23 2

API'ir;.N1x 
IT: 
NVO(RKING 
P-'APER-t 
[1 
SUNINAIE\-
Reaching Disadvantaged Groups 
or voluntary contributions is motivated by their having a
Participatory methods have often been successful where 
voice in such decisions and confidence in the value to
formal education systems have proved least effective in 
them of the school or program.
serving the needs of girls (see box A2.24), remote com-
munities, and marginalized groups. Participatory social 
Building Institutional Capacity
research. as used in The Gambia to investigate the rea- 
As in other sectors, participation by stakeholders in de-
sons for low attendance of girls in primary schools (see 
signing and managing programs in the education sector
box A2.26), can help identify the policy measures needed 
can also yield substantial long-term benefits beyond the
to counteract the bias against disadvantaged groups. Ex- 
individual project by strengthening the institutional ca-
pertise in bringing educational opportuniities to the poor- 
pacity for sustained development. The process of par-
est communities and in promoting the education of 
ticipationempowersindividualsandenhancestheirabil-
women is found in NGOs that have experience in work- 
ity to contribute to the wider development process as new
ing with community-based organizations and the neces- 
skills are learned and new norms adopted. Although these
sary flexibility to adopt participatory methods. 
external benefits are difficult to measure, they can be in-
ferred from many of the project reviews.
Mobilizing Resources
The experience of participation through cost sharing in 
COT 
N 
HI 
;
education has been mixed. Efforts to generate commu-
nitv contributions of cash, materials. or labor to school 
Evidence in the education sector suggests that higher
construction, for example, have tended to be most suc- 
initial costs may be incurred in participatory projects to
cessful in remote areas where the influence of central 
carry out the necessary social research and community
government bureaucracy is weak. They have been least 
work and to disseminate information or organize work-
successful when communities have not participated in shops. Furthermore. project costs may be understated
decisions concerning location, design. construction, 
wheni the opportunity cost of voluntary time and effort is
school management. or education priorities. The support 
high. These additional costs, however. are generally off-
of parents and otheir community members through fees set by subsequent gains in efficiency.
Box A2.26. Participatory Research in The Gambia Uncovers Reasons for Low Enrollment and High
Dropout
An innovative approach was used in this survey to gain better understanding 
of the reasons for low enrollment and high
dropout rates of girls in primary education in the Gambia. In addition to conventional survey methods (including question-
naires in schools, teacher interviews, and parent focus interviews), the techniques of participatory rural appraisal (PRA)
were adapted to education to counteract the bias against disadvantaged groups and provide a voice to people who are not
usually heard.
Thirteen local researchers, including statisticians, Ministry of Education staff, and teenage girls (to interview their peers)
were trained in PRA methods. After trials in three villages, the team carried out a series of projects in seven villages and
seven urban schools. Focus group discussions were held, at which community members were asked to explain their
problems and how education related to those problems. Villagers constructed matrices of community and educational
problems, drew seasonal diagrams on income and expenditure, constructed social-educational "maps" of the village.,
identified households with girls of school age, and provided a wealth of socioeconomic information.
One of the most startling results was the discovery that one-quarter of all the school-age girls (those who were pregnant,
married, or about to be married) had remained "hidden" from enrollment statistics. because they had not been counted by
villagers in the initial census. Costs to parents, including indirect costs and the coincidence of school fee payments with
the season of lowest income, were seen as the biggest problems associated with education. As a result of this research,
various measures have been introduced, including a change in the timing of fee payments.
The work was followed up by a second project, working with two rural communities to examine practical, community-
based solutions to the problems identified in the first project and to assess available community resources for implement-
ing such solutions. Options deemed by the community to have the highest chance of success were included in a commu-
nity action plan. Women in one of the villages, for example, decided to start a conmnunal farm and devote half the income
from sales of farm produce toward school costs for girls.
233

IHEi F*%'( 
)R,lI) 
B A NKI. IPA''RT( 
ICPAT 
I()N 
S( 
1CI 
MO(K'F 
HE)(
There is some risk that the allocation of costs may be 
weak political will, support for participatory approaches
inequitable or place an excessive burden on the pooI in has been generated by sustaining dialogue and demon-
participatory projects in which substantial community 
strating potential benefits through pilot projects.
contributions are sought. For example, even the contribu- 
Institutional conditions may make participation more
tion of labor in school construction has been founld to be 
or less difficult to achieve. whereas simple scarcity of
beyond the means of some of the poorest communities. management and communicationi skills may be the main
Estimating the ability and willingness of communities or 
constraint to increasinig participation in some of the poor-
individuals to share in costs needs to be approached on a est countries. It is often necessary. therefore. to build an
case-by-case basis in the context of equity objectives. 
education or training component into a participatory
Difficulties that have been encountered in participa- project in any sector to overcome skill shortages. Infor-
tory projects include delays in implementation and depen- 
mation sharing and dialogue are also important to suc-
dence on charismatic project leaders. The risk of abuse by 
cess: in demand-driven education projects, communities
individuals, local elites, or interest groups also has to be 
must have access to the best possible information on tech-
borne in mind, as does the potential for misuse of funds. 
nical options. costs, benefits, and opportunities.
Commitment to a process of dialogue among groups 
Because of the need to respond flexibly to develop-
of stakeholders involves its own risks. which must all be 
ments as the project evolves, making education projects
taken into account: the timing and possibility of reachinc 
participatoty calls for additional skills and greater toler-
consensus are uncertain; political conflicts are liable to be 
ance of uncertainity on the part of the Task Manager: it
exposed; and the risk exists of generating social unrest by 
also puts a greater onus on the quality of project prepara-
raising unrealistic expectations among parlicipants. 
tion. clarification of objectives, and project supervision.
These costs and difficulties notwithstandcing. the risks 
Task Managers who are promoting participation in
of expensive failure in participatory projects are judged 
education projects say that success depends on attention
smaller than in a typical, "top-down" education project, 
to the t'ollowinig critical elements:
in which lack of sustainability may not be recognized
until after significant investment is complete. 
* 
Early stakeholder analysis and involvemiient
* 
Ilnfonmiatioii 
sharinc and dialogue among stakeholders
o 
Flexibility in the funding. timing, and scale of
Conditions for Success 
projects
The most important preconditions for success in partici- 
* 
Institution strengthening
patory projects are political will on the part of central 
-
Appropriate systems of monitoring and evaluation,
government and commitment by key actors. In cases of 
and mechanisms for ensuring accountability.
This note is baxsed on the paper wriften 
' b\ Not J. Colleita and Gillion7 Per-kin.s. Contributors include Sarbuni Chakrabortv. Mae Chi
Chiang, Francoise Delannoi' lVtV-d Henei'eld, Eileen Kane. Samiuel Lieberinant, Paud Murphy, Makha Hdlau, Robert ProutY. Alc sone
Saliba, Lawrence Salmien, Yogeied,-i Saranl, and Don Winkler
234

APPIl:;NDX 
11: 
WORIuN; 
PAP'ERI1 
St'M'IAIHlT:
PARTICIPATIO0N 
IN 
SOC( AI, 
erating commitmenlt to sustaining project activities and
benefits beyond the life of the fund.
FUNDSr)F; 
Increasingly, beneficiary participation is also sought
as an end for two prirnary reasons. First, when coinmu-
The newest Bank-supported 
social funds are designed 
nities are given the responsibility and ability to identify,
explicitly to increase the participation of beneficiaries in 
implement, anid supervise microprojects, they are better
identifying and managing microprojects with the aim of 
prepared to involve themselves in future development
making project activities more relevant and sustainable.' 
activities. Second. social funds can serve as models for
Features that support participation are built into the de- 
participatory processes, demonstrating to governments
sigin of the funds' 
managemenit 
structure 
and the 
andother intermediariesthefeasibilityandutilityofpar-
microproject cycle. Additional time, imiatiatenient, and 
ticipatory approaches.
training resources are needed to assess and build the nec-
essary capacity of local organizations; special measures
may be called for to enable the most marginalized groups 
C ''r
to participate. 
Promoting participation in social funds involves costs as
Social funds have spread rapidly in developing coun- 
well as benefits. Building the ability of beneficiaries to
tries since the well-known Bolivia Emiiergenicy Social 
'bil't'esthroughouttheiicroprojectcycle
Fund was launched in 1987. The first large-scale funds 
asuicrespoilsi 
I I 
Ls
cani increase mianagemient anid trainingy costs as miore staff
were designed as temporary institutions to mitigate tile 
and euipment 
are 
_eeded 
to reach beneficiaries and to
adverse impact of' structural ad justment by creatin 
em- 
build organizationial capacity. Some of these expenses
ployment and delivering emergency social programs. As 
can be absorbecd by the iicroproject. but it is likely that
objectives have evolved over tlme, funLds are now also 
some will have to be covered by the social fund.
used more generally to support developmenit in the so- 
In addition, social fund managers face two potential
cial sectors and poverty reduction at the local level. 
contlicts: (a) the conflict between the need for rapid
Social funds are typically set up as autonolmlOuIs ill- 
microprloject imitplemoentation and the time required for
StitUtiOnS to provide funding to local organizations (coin- 
conisultation and capacity building and (b) because de-
munity-based 
organizations. 
NGOs. or local 
overn- 
miand is expressed first by communities with the skills
ments) in a more rapid. flexible, and tranisparent imaiinner niecessary to prepare proposals and gain access to the
than line ministries. rhe funds do nlot themilselves iden- 
funid, the demand-driven niature of social funds may have
tify or implement microprojects; instead, they respond 
to be suIpplemilented by special measures to enable the
to requests generated by local groups. appraise projects 
poorest and most iarginalized among intended benefi-
fi-or funding. supervise implementation of projects. and 
ciaries to participate.
monitor their effectiveness. 
Because the implications of these trade-offs are so
Because most social funds have beenl temilporary an(d importalt, fund desiginers must clarify and integrate pri-
because they have not provided for recurrenit costs, funid 
orilies from the outset
managers have often faced dif'ficulties in sustaining large
number-s of dispersed microprojects. Strategies to involve 
to
beneficiaries in cost sharing were developed initially in 
IIT1I,DIN(G 
PAI.TI(II'AT'iION 
INNr() 
F'NI)
response to these difficulties. Currenitly the World Bank 
I)I':(I:N
is funding about thirty projects to suppolt social funds;
theInewest 
of these. i 
In promoting participationi in social funds, Task Managers
hey Fndwes an these, Ethiang 
Social 
R 
and Rion 
must consider how to involve all stakeholders, how par-
ery~~~~~~ ~ FudadteEhoinSoiladRhbltl 
ticipatoi-y elemenits of temiporai-y funids will be ultinmately
Development Fund, are designed explicitly to Increase 
tiiaoyemnsofeprryudswlbeliaey
Develoiiien 
Fund are esigiid 
expicitl 
to icreas 
transferred to oovernment niinistries, how to enhance parl
beneficiary participation inl microproject identification 
t 
e 
to goemmenthe misr,owo 
enhancle
and maniagement as well as costs. 
ticipation at every stage of the microproject cycle and how
to evaluate implementing and community organizations.
13 ii; N i.; F'lt T SStakeholder 
Groups
The involvemiienit of beneficiaries in consultationi, cost 
The participation of all stakeholder groups in social fund
sharing, and decisionmaking can improve the outcomes 
design-central 
and sectoral ministries, the NGO comn-
of Bank-supported 
social funds by ensuring that the 
muniity. municipalities and local Coverinimients, as well as
microproject is relevant to beneficiary needs and by gen- 
comml1un_ity-based organizations and beneficiaries<ebuilds
235.

THEI 
Hl: 
'VO1,1) 
i-iA Nh 
PA1'[ 
Il 
'l I'A'I 
I )N 
.' 
( 
'EHI 
)()I{
ownership and commitmnent to beneficiary participation 
eight countries (including Mexico. see box A2.28), some-
among all parties on whom implementation will depend. 
times for purely logistical reasons but sometimes to de-
In preparing the Armenia Social Investment Fund, 
centralize responsibility 
for consulting with communi-
efforts to cultivate wider government support included 
ties and for contracts with local organizations.
conducting semin1ars for senior governmienit officials. tak- 
Beneficiary participation in project activities is best
ing them to the field to observe beneficiary participation 
promoted by assigning full-time staff to multidisciplinary
firsthand, involving them in targeting selection. and shar- 
teams. In Guyana. for example. a multidisciplinary team
ing reports with them. To support consensus building, 
is able to integrate services needed by the community.
national debates involving parliaments, the press. and 
while continuity is ensured by having the same team ap-
NGO communities were promoted prior to establishing 
praise. supervise, and evaluate a microproject.
social ftunds in Zambia, Guatemala. and Honduras. In
Albania and Arme-nia, pilot phases were uLsed to intro- 
The Microproject Cycle
duce and demonstrate the concept of participation. 
At every stage of the microproject cycle, strategies can
Appropriate tactics for disseminating information on 
br
t 
~~~~be 
emiployed to einhalice participation. For exanmple,
social funds are outlined in box A2.27. 
in identifyying target groups. participatory 
data collec-
tion techniques (including beneficiary assessment and
Institutional Structures 
participatory 
rural appraisal 
[see Appendix I]) have
When the fund is intended to be a temporary institution, 
been used to enable communities 
themselves to iden-
design must incorporate mechaniisimis fior transferring the 
til'y the neediest.
participatory elements to regular government ministries. 
Piloting can help point to a justments needed in pro-
The Bolivia Emieroenicy Social Fund developed a pro- 
inotional strategies. ln Ethiopia, it was learned in the pi-
gramn for training ministry staff in management iniforma- 
lot phase that cultural and time constraints and illiteracy
tion and cost control systems during microproject ap- 
had prevented women's groups from submitting propos-
praisal and execution; this training will be exten(ded to 
als: as a result, in the next phase of the fund. promo-
cover appraisal and ionitoriig 
procedtures. Similarly. the 
tional activities will target more women's groups and
Ethiopian Social and Rehabilitation Development Fundl 
prefer-enice will be given to females in hiring community
project is training local governmient statf to work with 
organizelrs.
comilimluniities 
in a participatorv way. 
Clear and well-publicized microproject selection cri-
Decentralization 
of fund m.anagemient to regionial 
teria that "imeasure" participation can be used to signal
offices encourages managers to pay greater attentionl to 
to all stakeholders the fund's commitmenlt to beneficiarv
participation-related 
issues, although it may also expose 
participation. Such an approach. prioritizing microproject
them to local political pressure. Regional offices have 
selection 
according 
to intensity 
of participation, 
is
been established or are planned f'or f'und mana.genient in 
planinlecd in The Galilbia.
Box A2.27. Tips for a Successful Social Fund Media Campaign
Media camnpaigns should be designed to increase the awareness of the population and the direct beneficiaries of the social
fund, sensitize and encourage community participation, improve a continuous dialogue with beneficiaries, and maintain
the flow of information about the running of the social fund. Tactics that have proved successful include the following:
* 
Consulting government agencies and NGOs that have run media campaigns to determine the optimal strategy to reach
the bulk of the population. Use of written media, such as newspapers and leaflets, mainly reaches the literate, who
may be a minority of the population.
* 
Using visual media such as posters and stickers to promote themes similar to those broadcast on radio or in other
media
* 
Disseminating information through institutions, individuals, and avenues that are accepted and integrated into daily
cultural practices (such as traditional singers and dramas). This reduces the potential mistrust of the messages com-
municated.
* 
Using radio spots on popular music radio stations to reach urban youth who tend to lose interest in more traditional
channels
* 
Linking themes among different outlets to reinforce messages
* 
Enabling communities to express their own ideas, such as through radio phone-in programs.
23 :6f

A P'PE'EN 1)1 
II: 
W5 )RKi 
Nk 
P I'PAPEI 
SUNIN XI AR.I 
Box A2.28. Mexico; Flexibility at the Regional Level
The National Indigenous Institute of Mexico and its regional Indigenous Coordinating Centers, which are in remote
zones, launched the Funds for the Development of Indigenous Peoples in 1990.
The Indigenous Coordinating Centers requested that each indigenous organization or community interested in receiving
funds send representatives to regional assemblies organized throughout the country. At these assemblies, the organizations
elected five- to nine-member leadership councils, which in turn were formed into subcornmissions to oversee the admin-
istrative, financial, and technical aspects of the funds.
Once formed, the National Indigenous Institute transferred funds to the Funds for the Development of Indigenous Peoples,
which then received, appraised, and approved loan requests from indigenous organizations for productive projects, which
these organizations designed and their members implemented.
When beneficiaries, especially marginalized groups, 
learn about the technical aspects of the project. In par-
are to take responsibility for preparing projects. docu- 
ticular, project design needs to take account of the tech-
ments can be simplified and funding provided for tech- 
nical capabilities of the community.
nical assistance to help community groups prepare pro- 
Various approaches have been used by managers both
posals and carry out technical feasibility studies. In ad- 
to monitor and evaluate microprojects in a participatory
dition to training. one of the ways to prepare beneficia- 
manner and to monitor participation itself. The Zambia
ries for a role in microproject implementaitioni or super- 
Social Recovery Project has conducted three beneficiary
vision is to ensure that they are involved from the earli- 
assessments to date (see box A2.29), using participatory
est stages of the microproject cycle, enabling them to research tools to gather qualitative and quantitative data.
Box A2.29. Zambia: Beneficiary Assessment in a Social Fund
Phase II of the beneficiary assessment conducted for the Zambia Social Recovery Fund employed conversational inter-
views, participant observations, and focus group discussions. The combination of these research tools with a multidisciplinary
research team from the Rural Development Studies Bureau of the University of Zambia helped to remove biases, strengthen
the quantitative data base, and obtain qualitative information.
The specific objectives of the study were to identify, examine, and assess the factors affecting project implementation and
community participation. Such factors included: the allocation of responsibility for maintenance, the perceived impacts
and benefits of projects, the views of beneficiaries and project committee managers on the performance of the Microprojects
Unit and regional office, and governance issues such as transparency and accountability.
Key findings on community and intermediary organizations were as follows:
* In a minority of cases, communities had no say in the selection of the project committee.
* 
The average female representation on project committees was less than 20 percent. Among the factors explaining this
were social attitudes and women's lack of time due to other duties.
* 
Factors constraining community participation included the following: 
4!
* Lack of transparency and accountability (54 percent of projects)
* Domination of the committee by one or two individuals or an NGO (16.7 percent)
* Other agencies doing the work and the committee being ornamental (7.5 percent)
* Contracting builders from outside rather than within the project area
* Mobilization was constrained by suspected nisuse of funds and materials.
Donor funds in three projects discouraged cash and labor contributions as it was felt that donor funding was sufficient and
that sacrifices should not be made by the poverty-stricken community.
The findings of this assessment led to specific recommendations and actions to improve fund administration and increase
community participation. Actions included: improvements in accountability procedures, development of a bookkeeping
module for-the project committee training manual, confirmation of community cash and in-kind contributions as manda-
tory conditions for Microprojects Unit support, strengthening of regional offices to speed communication and disburse-
ment, simplification of application forms, and initiation of project launch workshops in communities to ensure informa-
tion dissemination.
*23: 7

THE 
NVORIA) 
HANIK 
PA-RTII(CIP'ATION 
SOIFi 
(BI.:I1OOIK
Box A2.30. Characteristics of Intermediaries That Successfully Support Participation
* 
Participation is an institutional objective.
* 
Field presence
* 
Staff incentives and training that support participation
* 
Iterative planning in consultation with local communities
* 
"Bottom-up' accountability mechanisms
* 
Contributions of cash, labor, raw material, or local facilities by local communities, which make the communities
clients of the intermediary.
* 
Horizontal and vertical linhages to other institutions
* The agency has prior expenence in the community in which the microproject is to be implemented and is aware of
local conditions.
* The commumty/beneficiaries 
have a positive perception of the agency.
* The agency and its personnel have a keen understanding of and sensitivity to issues concerning women and minorities
and toward the environment.
* The philosophy of the agency on community participation is reflected in other microprojects it has undertaken, and
the strategy for participation in the present proposal is in line with the fund's strategy.
The beneficiary assessment can be integrated as a per- regular appraisal of a microproject on the basis of se-
manienit mechaniismii 
by. for example. assessilg 10 per- 
lection criteria (see box A2.30). which also serve to
cent of completed microprojects every year. In GLiate- highlight where training is needed for capacity build-
mala, annual moniitoring procedures stipulate that inter- 
inlg. In addition, assessment after thle fact during im-
views be carried out in communities that have not sub- 
pact assessment studies or annual and mid-ter-m evalu-
mitted proposals as well as those that have to identify 
ations is designed to yield lessons for future fund strat-
problems in communicating fund goals and to ascertain 
egy and mechanisms.
how and by whom decisions are reached. 
The capacity of community organizations may be
assessed as early as the targeting stage. as in Bolivia;
Intermediary and Community Organizations 
nioire often this is done at the time of microproject ap-
lntermedlary~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ ~~ 
~~i-lsl 
Prviin 
tiommumtyi 
formatn 
C.IMLnt 
oraiain
Because of the important roles delegated to intermiiedi- praisal. Providing tr-ainig for comnmnity organizations
ary organizations- 
it is becomingcommon toallocate 
can empower beneficiaries to identify and prioritize their
aresourceszat thes initial 
es 
be 
ofa 
sociaund 
for 
aslocae- needs and to develop strategies to meet them. The key to
resources at the nlltial stages of a social fLind for as-
esing and 
strengthenin their capacitiesinterms 
such training Is to make it community-centered rather
bothing aevelopment-teenessg 
ande beneficiary rereo 
than project-centered. avoiding a "top-down," expert ap-
both clevelopment effectiveniess and beileficiary repre- 
sentation. Implementing agencies are evaluated during 
proach and respecting indigenous knowledge.
' This n1ote is based onl /he paper wi,l ittien Iny Manx' Schmidt andl A/I,vanrtlsle Marc. Co,ttrihulyr. 
include Alat1 Carroll. Constance Corbeti.
Shelton D)avis. Abdoi Salenm 
Drabo. Ntarita 
Homnedes. Steen JorgtnseAn. 
Robert Mauret; Maria Nona ik, Amtao/o Ng 'Wen, Dani Ovveln.
Leslie Pean. Anitia Sant 'A,nita., David Sleel. Jitai em, Domelcit. and rl Greie YKibruhv.
3 8

A I'i'F:I 
1)1 i 
11: 
VOH (I 
I N(; GPA 
PE R 
S-NU 
NA 
I? I UE
GENDER 
ISSITES 
IN 
Overcoming these systemic biases requires a
PARTIC('IrAT1ION 
proactive approach. In the long run, the equal participa-
tion of men and women depends on strategic measures-
policy and institutional changes-to tackle the root causes
The equal participation 
of men anid women ill 
of gender inequalities and remove the constraints to
policymaking, economic and sectoral analysis, and 
women's inivolvement in public life. Examples of such
project design and management may be impeded by cul- 
measures in Bank-supported programs include: legal re-
tural and legal constraints against womenl's participation 
forms granting women equal rights to land tenure and
and by women's relative lack of time and mobility caused 
ownership in Honduras (a condition for tranche release
by their workload and multiple roles. If participatory 
under the Honduras Agricultural Sector Adjustment
development is to benefit from women's contributions 
Credit), incentives to encourage the enrollment of more
and meet the particular needs of women, a range of stra- 
girls in secondary schools in Bangladesh, and efforts to
tegic ancl practical measures must be taken to overcome 
make government agencies more accountable to women
these barriers. 
in El Salvador. In addition. a variety of practical mea-
sures, taking account of existing gender-based constraints,
VI I YA 
P ROA(' TI I'I; A 
'I'FI 
ci i 1 
N I;EI)EI) 
can facilitate the participation of women in specific
projects or activities.
Experience in participatory development has made clear
that, unless specific steps are taken to enstire the equal 
ADDRESSNG 
GENDER
participation of men and women, women are often ex-
cluded. As a result. projects fail to benefit fromn women's 
Surpr-isingly few developing countries systematically
contributionls and fail to meet the particular needs and 
ather- and report statistics disaggregated by sex or carry
interests of women. A World Bank evaluation of 121 rtLi- out systematic gender analysis. The first step toward in-
ral water supply projects, for example, found that even 
corporatinlg gender issues in the policymaking process and
in a sector in which women carried the greater share of 
determining appropriate measures for strengthening
responsibility. they appeared to benefit little from the 83 
women's participation is to obtain good information on
percent of water projects that hacl 
dot 
beeni specifically 
gender roles. existing institutions, and the constraints op-
percgento invonsladvte 
onsrantsop
designed to involve women. 
erating against women's participation through a combina-
The causes are deeply embedcled in social anid legal 
tion of quantitative surveys and qualitative social assess-
instittItions. Men and women play different roles, have 
menits. To be effective, assessments must be designed spe-
different needs, and face different constraints in respond- cifically to elicit the views of women. Often, gender aware-
ing to macroeconomic or sectoral policy changes and to 
ness training is needed for facilitators or interviewers.
the specific opportunities and limitations provided by
particular projects and programils. Systemic gender bi-
ases often exist in the form of the following: 
At the Policy Level
Gender issues are receiving more attention in the Bank's
* 
Laws and customs that impede womilen's access to 
counitry economic and sector work, which provides the
property ownership, credit. productive inputs, emil- framework for its policy advice. It is still rare, however.
ployment, education, information, or- medical care 
even in participatory sector work, for women's partici-
* 
Customs, beliefs, and attitudes that confine women 
pation to be sought explicitly in carrying out this work
mostly to the domestic sphere 
The Morocco Women in Development Sector Strategy
* 
Women's workload, which imposes severe time bur- 
(see box A2.3 1) provides a model for involving women
dens on them 
in policy work, which could well be replicated in other
sectors and countries.
Imbalances in the division of labor between men 
Women in Development assessments (which were
and women and in access to education anid productive 
comiipleted for forty countries in the five years prior to 1994)
resources have important implications, not only for eq- 
and recent PAs that were designed expressly to yield gen-
uity. but also for economic output, productivity, food 
der-differentiated data (see box A2.32) have usually in-
security. fertility, and child weltare. They also pro- 
volved less intense participation by women. Nonetheless,
foundly affect men's and women's differenit capaci- 
they have produced valuable gender analysis and policy
ties and incentives to participalte inl econIomic and so- 
proposals for enhancing women's ability to contribute to
cial development, 
and participate in the development process.
239

ITHF. 
BAIX,l 
.sN1 
PARTIC'IPAT'IO.''N 
S)'IOV('I:IBOOKl
Box A2.31. Involving Women in Policy Work
In the Morocco Women in Development Sector Strategy, poor rural and urban women were given the opportunity 
to
articulate their needs and priorities through a participatory 
rural appraisal process that provoked discussion among com-
munity members about development and gender issues and sought their views in formulating national policy objectives.
The women's concerns and prionrties differed from those of the men and from those of other stakeholder groups. First and
foremost, before progress could be made on other objectives, was the need to reduce women's daily burdens through
measures such as easing their access to fuel and water, introducing. collective ovens for bread baking, and improving
health care. Second were measures to improve their incomes, for which women viewed agricultural extension services and
access to credit as most important. Third were measures needed to secure the future, including female education and
strengthening community-based institutions., The group interactions helped men to understand how the constraints on
women affect the family and the village as a whole. The collective solutions that emerged were supported by men as well
as women.
The new perspectives gained from the participatory 
rural appraisal surveys were applied in defining the recommended
program of action.
The crucial next step. which is starting to receive 
tension, and research and has modified its organizational
more attention, is integrating the results of this work into 
structure to ensure that gender issues are addressed ef-
the Bank's country assistance strategies. The 1993 coun- 
fectively. Since putting these institutional changes into
try economic memorandum for Uganda, for example, was 
effect, the National Center for Agricultural and Forestry
combined with the PA and highlighted the economic and 
Technology has been able to increase the participation
social implications of various forms of gender discrimi- 
of women in its extension programs. Other agencies are
nation. The poverty profile was supplemented by the re- 
following the center's lead. The government is now sup-
sults of a rapid poverty appraisal soliciting the opinions 
porting an initiative, to be funded by the Bank's Institu-
of rural men and women. In response to the problems 
tional Development Fund, to promote public sector ca-
identified, the Ugandan government is giving priority to pacity building and accountability in gender.
reforms, including legal reforms. that will raise the in- 
When public agencies are not responsive to the par-
comes and status of women. 
ticular needs of women and when cultural constraints in-
hibit women from voicing their opinions freely, women's
At the Institutional Level 
groups at the community level and the regional or national
Designing and implementing gender-responsive policies 
NGOs that are supporting them play a particularly impor-
effectively depends on developing appropriate institu- 
tant role. Strengthening the capacity of these organizations
tional capacity, including changes in the responsible pub- 
Increases women's ability to find ways of meeting their
lic agencies. When sociocultural constraints are severe, own needs and of contributing to community development.
G promoting separate units withinl government minlistries For examliple, the poverty assessment in Kenya highlighted
3 to provide segregated womens services may be the only the importance of the many rural women's self-help groups
workable strategy. This tends to result, however, in lim- 
the coping strategies of the poor. Proposals to strengthen
ited. small women's programs that are peripheral to inaini- these groups, based on the findings of this assessment
ra 
stream activities. With sufficienlt genleral awareness of 
include legal registration so that groups are eligible for
gender differences and inequities, it is possible to move 
credit, technical and business management training of
to a gender approach. incorporating gender inl mainstream group members, and the extension of microenterprise credit
programs. instituting incentives to create responsiveness 
to the groups
to gender differences, and making line agencies account-
able to both men and women clients. 
At the Project Level
In El Salvador, for example, public agencies are 
If both men and women are to participate, gender issues
moving away from a segregated strategy to a more sys- 
need to be addressed from the outset, gender constraints
tematic gender approach. The National Center for Agri- 
identified, and steps taken as in the Togo Urban Devel-
cultural and Forestry Technology eliminated its women's 
opment Project (see box A2.33) to ensure that the per-
program in 1994. It is taking steps to incorporate gender 
spective and concerns of women are incorporated fully
systematically into planning. monitorinig, training. ex- 
in project design.
240

AI>1l:'I.;N 
II: 
NV4()K1{[N(; 
PAPE'IR 
S;Ii 
MMAi-RiES-
Box A2.32. Addressing Gender Issues in Poverty Assessments
Poverty assessments, through quantitative survey methods as well as qualitative methods used in the participatory poverty
assessment component, can provide important information on gender differences in labor force participation, coping
mechanisms, and how men and women perceive poverty and ways to reduce it. Some of the most recent poverty assess-
ments have been designed explicitly to generate gender-specific data on a wide range of questions.
In the participatory poverty assessment in Cameroon, 50 percent of the interviewers and 50 percent of those interviewed
were women. The resulting information was fully integrated in the subsequent analysis and recommendations with strong
policy implications. For example, women in Cameroon were found to be shouldering most of the burden of producing and
marketing food. One of the specific actions proposed for improving food security was to target small-scale women farmers
with a "productivity package" of critical agricultural inputs. The poverty assessment confirmed the heavy workload of
women. As a result, urgent action was recommended to give women access to transport and time- and labor-saving tech-
nology to allow them the opportunity to develop their own skills and participate in community projects.
The Zambia poverty assessment also focused on collecting sex-disaggregated data related to the division of labor and the
implications of time constraints on female labor. Most poor households in rural Zambia were found to be headed by men,
using traditional technologies and practicing gender-specific labor allocation, which put extreme pressure on women s time,
especially in the peak months of planting and harvesting. In modeling rural household behavior, the study estimated that the
value of crop production per household member more than doubled when labor was allocated on a gender-neutral basis.
Appropriate measures vary depending on the particu- 
activities into mainstream programs can occur once the
lar social and political context. the exact nature of the 
environment for their participation has been created.
constraints operating against women, and the kind of 
In some cases, the representation of women has been
activity in which their participation is sought. Constrainlts ensured by making it mandatory. Under the Yemen Edu-
affecting women more than men may include any com- 
cation Sector Adjustment Program, for example, it was
bination of legal or cultural obstacles. time constraints, 
specified that at least one-third of the workshop partici-
lack of access to information, illiteracy, lack of trans- 
pants should be women. Similarly. in the Benin Health
port, or lack of access to finance. The followincg are some 
Services Project, it was stipulated that each village health
examples of the approaches taken to facilitate women's 
committee must include at least one mother.
participation in recent Bank-supported projects. 
Working through separate. women-only groups is
When the obstacles to women's participation are se- 
often the preferred option: depending on cultural condi-
vere, a case can be made for targeting women's needs and 
tions, few alternatives may exist. In the Phalombe Rural
designing-projectsexclusivelyforwonienasintheWomen 
Development Project in Malawi. women opted for their
in Agriculture Project in Nigeria and the Women in De- own women-only farmers' groups instead of niixed sex
velopment Project in The Gambia. Integration of women's 
groups. They felt freer to discuss and develop their ideas
Box A2.33. Gender Awareness in Project Design
In designing the Togo Urban Development Project, gender awareness was explicitly incorporated in the participatory
process. Initial studies revealed that women had almost exclusive responsibility at the household level for maintaining a
sanitary environment, providing water, managing waste, and promoting family health. They also found that knowledge of
the links among health, clean water, and hygiene was extremely limited.
During the preappraisal rmission. the first two meetings with community elders, held in the chief's compound, included no
women, so the Bank team suggested holding a separate meeting at which the women could articulate their priorities and
concerns. The following day the chief's wife chaired a meeting attended by about fifty women from the community. The
same questions were asked of them as of the men: a local consultant served as translator and intermediary. Their main
concems, which differed from those of the men, were: men's unemployment; the need for market upgrading, including
standpipes, latrines, and central play space for children; access to drinking water; access to finance and credit; and training
in management, hygiene, health, and literacy. The women's agenda was fully incorporated in the final project design,
which included employment generation through labor-intensive public works and a training program in environmental
management geared to the needs of a largely illiterate and mostly female population.
24 1

TIH-:E 
E O)RI 
I) BANKI 
P.ART'l 
1( ii 'Al' 111.N' 
S()I 
'I( 
F:l;Ltio 1
with extension workers. Also, having better repayment 
participating in decisionmaking by illiteracy orrelative lack
rates than men, they preferred to obtain credit in women- 
of education. This may involve. for example, targeting
only clubs. In the Matruh Resource Management Project 
women in promotional campaigns, training project staff
in Egypt. when no womnen showed up at the public PRA 
in gender awareness, hiring female community workers.
sessions, parallel women-only sessions were held to en- 
ensuring that meetings are conducted in the local dialect,
sure that the project design reflected women's as well as 
or finding creative ways (akin to the techniques used in
men's views. 
participatory rural appraisal) for illiterate women to take
Whether women meet with men or on their own, their 
responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation.
workload often makes it more difficult for them to attend 
For instance, after the initial promotional campaign
meetings. As their domestic responsibilities often requir-e for the pilot phase of the Ethiopian Social and Rehabili-
them to stay close to home. lack of mobility and shortage 
tation Development Fund project, it was learned that
of time may be constraints. Various practical measures, womeni were not submitting proposals. In the next phase,
from providing child care facilities to installing standpipes therefore, promotional activities are targeting more
that reduce the time spent in fetching water. can make it 
women's groups, community organizers are being sensi-
easier for women to attend meetings or training sessions. tized to the important role played by women, and more
In particular. the choice of time and place for meetings women are being hired as community organizers. A par-
milust take account of women's schedules (see box A2.34) 
ticularly successful technique for disseminating informa-
and the availability of safe transport. 
tion in the Gambia Women in Development Project has
Similarly, special measures may be needed to ensure 
been to train women in operating video cameras and in
that women have equal access to project information and 
other methods of documenting their activities to share
are not prevented from communicating their concems or 
and exchange information with other women.
Box A2.34. Enabling Women to Attend Meetings
In the Nigeria Women in Agriculture Project, specific steps were taken to reduce the conflicts in women's schedules and
facilitate regular attendance at meetings. Each group meets on the same day at the same time and place, reminders about
the meetings are posted at highly visible and accessible locations, and, if the scheduled day conflicts with a market day, the
women are consulted in advance and an alternative time agreed on. Consequently, 
women rarely face the problem of not
knowing where and when the meetings are held. The meeting site is selected after the Women in Agriculture agent has
introduced herself and the purpose of her visit to the village head. She, in turn, informs household heads who then give
their permission for wives to attend meetings.
This flote is based on the paper written by Michael Bam?ibe,er, Mark Blackden, and Abeba Taddese. Contributors include Jerri Dell,
LyVnn Bennett, aind EliZabeth Morris-Hia.hes.
2 42

A\1,1,[,:.N1)15: 
]I: 
\\<111';1.l1:{S'INAA15.R1IE.1
PAR 
'rI ( 'IPATION 
A NI) 
(a) identifying an organization that is willing to collabo-
rate and whose capacity and orientation match the spe-
IN TE 14:R11EDL;ARV NGX( )F; 
cific task at hand and then (b) ensuring that the influence
of the Bank is to support rather than undermine the par-
NGOs can be effective intermediaries in Bank-funded 
ticipatory character and capacity of the NGO.
projects that depend on participation and capacity build-
ing at the community level. Successful collaboration de-
pends on identifying an organization with appropriate 
ID)ENTIFYiF1N(i 
1PARTICIPATU)MV 
EN( 
)9
characteristics and involving its staff in decisionmaking 
The term "NGO" encompasses a broad array of different
from as early as possible in the project cycle. Steps must 
organizations, varying enormously according to their
be taken to prevent Banlk or -overnnment requlirements
b t e 
purpose, philosophy, sectoral expertise, and scope of ac-
from undermining the participatory orientationi of the 
tivities Adistinction ismadebetweenoperationalNGOs,
NGO and, where necessary, to strengthen NGO capac- 
which are engaged prmanly i designing and*
ity, encourage cooperation amsong NGOs. and support 
ing projects, and advocacy NGOs, whose main purpose
communication between NGOs and government, 
is to defend or promote a specific cause. Some NGOs
engage in both types of activity. Advocacy NGOs, such
'll lih; IN 
iR 
DA: 
H0 al H l 
-
V I{ )1 .
as those defending the rights of indigenous peoples. may
perform an important intermediary role in supplying in-
As Bank-lending operations increasingly emphasize pov- 
formiiation and facilitating communication and consulta-
erty reduction, investment in human resources, and en- 
tion. Generally. however, Bank-NGO collaboration on
vironmental management, more and more Bank-sup- 
specific projects is more likely to involve operational
ported projects depend on participation anld capacity 
intermediaries.
building at the community level. Participatory commu- 
NGOs vary greatly in the extent to which they en-
nity-based development depends in turn on intermediary 
sure beneficiary participation within their own programs.
organizations with the specialized skills anid experience 
At one extreme are NGOs whose orientation and com-
to provide links between community-level institutions 
petence are verv similar to the private sector firms with
on the one hand and national institutions and the Bank 
whom they compete for contracts in project implemen-
on the other. The intermediary functionis include facili- 
tation or service delivery. Such NGOs may be efficient
tating communication between project beneficiaries and 
(and in strong demand) as service deliverers but are orn-
government; helping to identify and voice community 
ented to meeting the requirements of bureaucratic fund-
needs: supporting participation and group formation: 
ing agencies and are unlikely to use participatory pro-
training and building the capacity of community groups: 
cesses. At the other extreme are participatory NGOs that
and channeling resources to the community level. 
see themselves exclusively as enablers and capacity build-
This bridging role may be filled in different ways, 
ers and refuse to compromise their objectives or inde-
dependingL on institutional circumstances and the nature 
pendence by collaborating in official programs. A mi-
of the particular project. Line agencies or local govern- 
nority of exceptionally effective NGOs combine a high
ment units may be restructured and reoriented to fill the 
level of competence in service delivery and in commu-
role of community facilitators. Alternatively, the needed 
nitv capacity building. The Aga Khan Rural Develop-
services may be contracted out to the private sector, mul- 
ment Program in Pakistan provides an example of what
tilateral or bilateral agencies, NGOs, or a combination 
can be achieved by such organizations, committed to
of these. Often. the strongest grassroot links. most ca- 
"bottom-up" planning and combining strong technical
pable and dedicated community workers, and greatest 
expertise with effective institution building at the village
experience in reaching disadvantaged groups through 
level. Using infrastructure projects as the catalyst for in-
innovative participatory methods are found in NGOs. 
stitution building, this program reached 38.000 house-
Not all NGOs are participatory and not all Bank- 
holds and created 110 women's groups within four Years.
NGO collaboration has been with the purpose of pro- 
An organization serves the interests of those to whom
moting participation. Until recently, the Bank looked to 
it is accountable. In this respect, national- or regional-
NGOs primarily for capability in service delivery. In ap- 
level membership NGOs, including federations of
proximately two-thirds of projects approvecd in recent 
grassroot organizations or cooperatives, trade unions,
years, however, the promotion of beneficiary participa- 
peasant unions, or ethnic groups can be valuable part-
tion was cited as the main rationale for seeking NGO 
ners in projects requiring broad participation (although
involvement. For the Task Manager, the key issues are
243

ITHE 
NVO\(R)IA) 
BA.NIC 
PA IRTICIPATIOI IN 
S'01 it -VHF 
Mli¢f 
women and marginalized groups are not always well rep- 
is donor or government pressure to disburse and deliver
resented). One difficulty. however, can be that they are 
services quickly. Unless procedures are made more flex-
often more politically embroiled and subject to state regu- 
ible and both the Bank and the government are commit-
lation. Among NGOs that are not membership based, 
ted to supporting participatory processes. the NGO is
accountability to client communities. for example. 
pressed into a service delivery rather than capacity-build-
through community contributions of cash. labor, materi- ing role. This has happened in a number of Bank-funded
als, or facilities, is an important indicator of an 
projects, including Liberia's Second Education Project.
organization's participatory effectiveness. Nonparticipa- 
Under this project, schools were constructed rapidly and
tory NGOs tend to regard community members purely 
at low cost. No attention was given, however, to support-
as beneficiaries and the funding agencies as their clients. 
ing the intermediary NGO in building community own-
Specific criteria for selecting an NGO in terms of tech- ership of schools, and planning for maintenance. As a
nical and operational capacity, outreach potential. skills result, many schools deteriorated and some went unlsed.
in community capacity building. and knowledge of condi- Similarly, in the Zambia Squatter Upgrading Project, it
tions in target communities need to be matched to the spe- 
was agreed in principle to pursue long-term community
cific task at hand. Guidelines for assessilg the participa- development goals by promoting active beneficiary par-
tory effectiveness of an NGO are summarized in box A2.35. ticipation. A stipulation was included, however. in the
Assessment should be based on the NGO's proven track final agreement that, if the collective self-help approach
record as well as its stated objectives. Paper credentials to be used by the two intermediary NGOs interfered with
and financial or organizational strength are often less im- 
the predetermined project schedule, then contractors
portant than dedication, commitment, and enthusiasm. 
would be employed to carry out the work.
Creative Task Managers have found ways to ensure
that they support r ather than undermine the participatory
( ) I'ERAu 
I( )NA 
I, 
('Ii 
Al 
.I. \E 
N(:,
strengths of NGO partners by introducing mechanisms
Several operational challenges face Task Managers in that permit revisions in project priorities, greater flex-
working with NGOs in the participatory process, includ- 
ibility in the timing and scale of implementation, and
ing supporting the participatory orientation of NGOs, 
alternative procurement procedures, or that allow NGOs
permitting flexibility in the scale and timing of imple- to design and implement their own programs.
mentation, enhancing NGO capacity, and strengthening 
Consultation from the outset concerning development
NGO-government linkages. 
objectives can help resolve the tension between the short-
term project focus of the Bank or govemment and the long-
Supporting the Participatory. Processtermn 
community development goals of NGOs. The most
SupparadortiongeroticipatoryTask 
Panagero s that the quali-successful cases of Bank-NGO collaboration have involved
ties that make NGOs participatory and therefore attrac- -nmutual transparenicy and shared decisionmaking from early
tiveas 
thatermakediN s partincimpatory e 
andtherefe mata- 
in the project cycle. If NGOs are to participate in a Bank-
trnmente donorm and Bank 
irqin 
ements. One of the ma- 
financed project in a significant way, It is important that
they have a say as early as possible in the design of the
jorn constraints to group formation and capacity building project and in defining the tenns of their involvement.
Box A2.35. Indicators of Participatory Effectiveness in Intermediary NGOs
* 
A flat management structure with decentralized authority
* 
Organizational structures at the community level to which funding and/or other decisions are delegated
* 
Use of iterative planning, involving consultation with local communities
* 
Contributions of cash, labor, raw materials, or local facilities by community members and organizations, making
them clients rather than beneficiaries of the NGO
* 
Staff recruitment criteria, incentives, and training that support participation
* 
Strong field presence outside metropolitan areas with high proportion of staff of local origin
* 
Community leaders and members have a positive perception of the NGO
* 
Turnover of client groups as they "graduate" over time and intensive field attention transferred to new groups
244

APPE'i.NDIXl) 
II: 
PAPERIIhIi 
'.) 
SINNAI 
S'S5.14E,
The Question of Scale 
the scope and demands of the project. Although it is
Highly participatory NGOs tend to work on a very small 
difficult to generalize for the sector as a whole, com-
scale, some of their programs depend on staying small 
mon areas of weakness in NGOs are limited financial
and resource-intensive. In other cases. NGOs have es- 
and management expertise. limited number of staff with
tablished participatory processes that they have them- 
training and experience in community mobilization, lack
selves extended to large programs or that have proved 
of technical capacity. limited coverage in terms of scale
replicable by other organizations or government agen- 
or area, concentration in urban centers, lack of commu-
cies on a large scale. Various approaches have been used 
nication or coordination with other organizations (in-
to enable successful NGO programs to be scaled up and 
cluding government agencies), and limited understand-
"mainstreamed," where possible, without losing their 
ing of the broader social and economic context in which
essential participatory qualities and without individual they are working. Because institutional gaps can be dif-
NGOs having to grow to the point that they become hier- 
ficult to foresee, it is important to build flexibility into
archical and bureaucratized. This may involve strength- 
the provision of training.
ening the capacity of NGOs, both through training and 
As the examples in box A2.37 demonstrate, facili-
through promoting NGO partnerships among NGOs. 
tating cooperation and partnerships among NGOs can
Scaling up may also involve training government staff be a highly effective means of organizing training, as
in participatory methods and relaxing some government well as enabling small organizations to contribute to large-
regulations. When working with governments to encour- scale projects and developing the capacity of the local
age NGO linkages, it is useful to consider that govern- 
NGO sector as a whole.
ment agencies, as well as the Bank, may have to scale
down in the sense of decentralizing and building flex- Strengthening NGO-Government Linkages
ibility and microvariability into their operations. This not 
Relationships between government and NGOs vary
only pushes decisionmaking down closer to the popula- 
oreatly between countries (and between NGOs) on the
tions most affected (and is in this sense itself more par- 
basis of histor-ical, political, and ideological differences.
ticipatory) but also makes it easier to work with regional 
Simple lack of communication, however, is otten re-
and local NGOs. The community support process under 
sponsible for mistrust anid misunderstanding 
about the
the Balochistan Primary Education Program (see box other's objectives, concerns, and constraints. The Bank
A2.36) illustrates how flexibility on the part of governi- can help to promote state-NGO communication by spon-
nent can allow an innovative pilot project by a small 
soring joint training. workshops, and conferences in
NGO to be expanded successfully and linked into gov- 
advanc of 
trai 
sl 
and 
cular,nby in
ernment programs. 
~~~~~~advance 
of project appi-alsal and, In particular, by in-
einment programs. 
cluding both governmenlt and NGOs as stakeholders in
project design.
Enhancing NGO Capacity 
A number of Bank-supported projects (the West Ben-
Training of NGO staff is often needed to ensure that 
gal Population Project, for example) have also led to the
the institutional capacity of an NGO partner matches 
creation of NGO liaison units in government.
Box A2.36. Mainstreaming a Successful Participatory Process
The Community Support Process, included in the Balochistan Primary Education Program, is establishing new commu-
nity girls' schools in remote rural villages. The process began in 1992 with a pilot project by a small national NGO whose
community workers went door to door, urging parents to form viLlage education committees, identify a potential female
teacher, and select a site for a school. The success of the pilot led to full acceptance and ownership of the program by the
government, which is now funding the prograrn 
on a province-wide basis using International 
Development Association
credit. Because of the experimental nature of the project, Bank support has only been possible through the new lending
approach that supports the entire primary education program rather than selected components.
So far, the NGO has succeeded in mobilizing community members to establish 200 schools. Replicating the process on
this scale and incorporating 
the schools and their teachers into the government 
system once the school has proved viable
has depended on the willingness of the Ministry of Education to relax a number of its regulations, so that girls with as little
as an eighth-grade 
education can qualify as teachers and can receive training at home by mobile training teams.
24 5

'rnu;t 
Nvoml.r) 
B.ANK 
I'.XlV''l('IPATIOl¢N 
S0JT"l('U;t;()()1
Box A2.37. Encouraging NGO Partnershilps
in the Benin Food Security Prject, partnerships were encouraged between stronger, larger NGOs and weaker, newer
NGOs to stimla 
e trafeT of methodologies and technology. This projectbegan as a pilot, which involved interna-
tional NGOs and a few Beninese NW&s. Ater two years of the pilot experience, NGOs were brought together with
government aid donors at a workshop to design a new project based on the pilot phase. One of.the findings at the work-
shop was that geographic concentration in the capital isolated many large NGOs from target communities. International
NGOs had the inuna and financial resources to submit competitive proposals to be included in project activities; they
often, however, had tie least recent or direct experience with potential client communities. Where local NGOs lacked
transport to access project areas, interuational NGOs had the necessary equipment and staff but lacked the local contacts.
At the workshop, conensus was reached to odify theprojet in sevel ways,: including creatig, incentives for NGOs to
establish field offices in theprOject area, giving regional offices the authoity to approve mierprojects and disburse funds,
and requiring intrnational NGOs to partner local NGOs to facilitate technology transfer and information sharing.
For the Bank-finainced Improved Environmental Management and Advocacy Project in Indonesia, an international NOO
teamed up with twelve Indonesian NYGOs 
to strengthen the ability of local intermediaries to address the environmental
consequences of pesticides. The international NG6 assists local counterparts in developing primary learning approaches
to educatelocal people about environmental problems and solutions. This collaborative NGO effort is a broad initiative to
develop education and trprograms 
for farmers, consumers, and provincelevel regulatory officials. It also serves to
transfer skills and knowledgeamong NGOs.
The goal of the Uttar Pradesh Sodic Lad Reclamation Project is to reclaim salt-affected lands using paricipatory man-
agement techniques that could serve as a model to be replicated more broadly in the future. Farmers' water management
groups will beor 
ized and community volunteers will be trained in technology transfer byismall local NGOs. The staff
of fthese grassroots NOs will be trained i turn by larger intermediary NGOs with previous experience in participatory
management.
Other projects, such as the Participatory Forest Development Project for Bangladesh, are using a similar structure in
whiich advisory NGOs coordinate the im 
plple activities of small, locally based NGOs. These projects are coordi-
nated at the national level by a single organizationf 
that works dectly with the government to ensure compatibility with
national go*ls nd policies.
'Tlhis n70te is btised 01o the pape r v iritten by Thomtias Carroll, Maryl Schmidt. and Ton! Bebbington. Contributors include John Delion,
Christopher Gibbs, John Haill. JAflet Koch. Xavier Legriin. Pllilip) Moell/e; Gallu.s Mukami, StanleY Schevei; Susan Stou1t. ainid Thomas
Vienis.
2 4 6

API'IENDIX 
I 1: 
VOHRIN(i 
P'AP'ER 
S'I'.INIM\RIE'-
D)rE;s 
NTN(' 
COMNIAM11UNITY-BAsErD 
at the outset in building capacity at the local level. These
costs, however, are significant only when community-level
D};\ 
F,(OrAIE:NTr 
organizations have been so eroded that substantial time
and resources have to be devoted to capacity building. Even
When properly designed. community-based programiis can 
wheni initial costs are high, they are more than offset by
be highly effective in nmanaging natural resources, pro- 
subsequent gains.
viding basic infrastructure or ensuring primary social 
Evidence increasingly indicates that, when? tihe insti-
services. Participation in community-based development 
tutional framnevork- is rig/It, participatory community-
depends on reversing control and accountability from 
based programs actually cost less (see box A2.38) and are
central authorities to community organizations. Success- 
quicker to implement. In Bank-funded projects, the typi-
ful design requires tapping into local needs, unlderstand- cal patternl lhas been a slow build-up period, when time is
ing and building on the strengths of existing inistitutions, invested in community organization and setting the mles
and defininig the changes needed in intermediary imple- 
for interaction, followed by speedy disbursements.
mentinig agencies to support community action. 
Once the participatory process is established, the ben-
efits of community-based development include increased
('O)Si" 
S 
) 
S 
BENEFI'I' 
efficiency and cost effectiveness. Furthermiiore, when the
success of projects depends heavily on1 changes in behav-
Two persistent myths exist about community-based pro- 
ior at the community level, promoting participation in com-
grams: that they cost more than conventional programs munity-based programs may be the only means of meet-
and that they take longer. Additional costs may be incurred ing objectives. The examples in box A2.39 indicate the
Box A2.38. Does Participatory Community-Based Development Cost More?
In Pakistan's Orangi Pilot Project, which prqvided sewerage facilities to nearly I million people in a poor area of Karachi,
costs were one-eighth of conventional sewerage provided by city authorities. 
This was due to changes in technical design
and the elimination of payoffs to intermediaries.
In Brazil's water and sanitation project for low-income communities (PROSENEAR), a ceiling of $120 per capita has
been imposed on sanitation expenditures. Within this cost limit, engineers and community development experts are en-
couraged to work with communities to devise the most appropriate solutions. Through this process, projects have been
designed for as little as $50 per capita.
Box A2.39. Community Participation Yields Significant Results
In Gujarat, India, during the 1980s, an average of 18,000 forest offenses were recorded annually: 10,000 cases of timber theft,
2,000 illegal grazing, 700 fires, and 5,300 other offenses. Twenty forestry officials were killed in confrontations with comnmu-
nities and offenders; assaults on forestry officials were frequent. In response, an experiment in joint management with com-
murnities was begun by the conservator. This included community meetings, widely publicized creation of forest protection
committees, and profit sharing of 25 percent of timber returns with local groups. As a result, conflicts between officiais and
community groups diminished, community groups assumed responsibility for patrolling forests, and productivity of land and
returns to villages increased sharply. In one year, one village of eighty-eight households harvested and sold 12 tons of
firewood, 50 tons of fodder, and other forest products, while also planting and protecting teak and bamboo trees.
In CMte d'lvoire, a national rural water supply program established community water groups that managed maintenance of
131500 water points and reduced breakdown rates from 50 percent to 11 percent at one-third the cost. The shift to commu-
nity-level maintenance was managed by taking away the responsibility for rural water supply from the sector agency,
supporting private sector involvement in spare parts distribution, retraining technicians, and signing contracts with village
groups and the water directorate. The results were sustained in those villages that had high demand for the rehabilitated
water point and in which well-functioning community organizations already existed.
In Tamil Nadu, India, a community-based nutrition outreach program in 9,000 villages resulted in a one-third decline in
severe malnutrition. A group of twenty women interested in health issues was hired in each village as part-time commu-
nity workers accountable to the community. The women's groups, formed initially to "spread the word," subsequently
branched off and started food production activities on their own. Earlier programs focusing only on the creation of health
infrastructure were unable to make any difference in the nutritional status of children.
24 7

potential benefits of a community-based approach in three 
force its own rules and regulations. Whether strengthen-
broad areas-managing natural resources, providing ba- 
ing or modifying existing organizations or establishing
sic infrastructure, and ensurilg primary social services. 
new ones, steps need to be taken to ensure that these con-
ditions are in place.
What may seem an obvious point but is often ne-
(ON 
I\)I'fi'I{)N'! 
FOR: 
siU('('.I:
glected is that a group functions only because it is ad-
From time immemorial, commlLIUnities 
have organized 
dressing a felt need of its mtiembers. A fundamental de-
themselves to take care of collective and individual needs. sign flaw in a natural resource management project in
Why then have so many attempts at getting people to 
the Philippines, for example, was the assumption that
participate and take responsibility for community-based 
upland farm-lers were interested il forest management. In
development failed in the last fifty years'? Experience 
contrast, the need to solve what is perceived as an urgent
provides some clear lessons abouLt what works and what 
problem may bring different class and power groups to-
does not work in community-based development. Pronii- gether. In South India, for example, the entire village
nent among the failures have been attempts to achieve manages community-based irrigation systems and has
results on a wide scale through the infusion of external 
developed a monitoring system to discourage water theft.
management, funds, and technology, controlled from dis- 
Groups continue to functioni as long as the benefits of
tant places. A fundamiiental prerequisite of successful 
participation to their members continue to outweigh the
participatory programs at the communlity level is the re- costs (see box A2.40): hence. project design must be
versalo acontrol andaccountabilitt froml central authori- 
based on knowledge of community demand and must
ties to the community level. 
ensure that incentives for participation are in place.
Experience also points to a series of common ele- 
In any communlity, inherited networks of organized
ments in the design of successful programs. The first in- 
reciprocity and solidarity form the basis for individual trust
gredients are knowledge and understanding of local needs 
and cooperation. New community-based programs need
and of the existing network of social interaction at the 
to use and build on this existing stock of social capital
household, group, and community levels. This knowl- 
and, wherever possible, to work through existing organi-
edge provides the basis for defininig the changes needed. 
atitos. 
In Nepal, for example. when government policy
both in existing local organizationis and in external agen- 
prescribed the creation of farmers associations, assistant
cies. to meet specified objectives. 
overseers found many informal groups of farmers orga-
nized arounld irrigation systems. Rather than creating new
organizations, these existino groups were encouraged to
Changes at the Community Level 
.'t 
.
If a community group is to function successfully, several 
register themselves as official farmers associations.
Sometimes, notably when existing social organiza-
criteria must be met: the group must address a felt need
and a common 
interes.thebnefitsoini tion is highly inequitable. creating new groups is the onlv
anid a commnnoil mterest, the beniefits to individuals of' 
I 
.. 
.
.
.
m~~~~~~~~i-eans 
of promotmol the participation of disadvantaged
participating in the group must outweigh the costs, the 
m 
o
people. Many successful projects that specifically tarfet
group should be embedded in the existling social organi- 
e 
e 
n 
t
zation; it must have the capacity. leadership, knowledge 
such as the 
Grme 
Bank the Self 
l 
Womns
^ 
'. 
. ~~~~~~~ 
' 
t ~~~' such as the Gramieen Baink the Self-Employed Womien's
and skills to manage the task, and it must own and en- 
Association of India, and women's farmer groups in Ni-
:; 
g 
Box A2.40. The Benefits Must Outweigh the Costs
In the Philippines, farmers actualy negotiated an increase in their irrigation fees because they had worked out a formula
with the irrigation agency through which they would benefit from imposing and managing the collection of higher fees.
If the group does not undertake new tasks as old ones are accomplished, there is no new benefit flow and the costs begin
to outweigh benefits. In Indonesia. water user groups that took on new tasks and provided additional benefits (such as
individual household toilets and food security) continued to thrive, whereas others that did not functioned at a low level or
not at all.
In Pakistan, 14,000 water user associations were hurriedly created to become active in water course improvements. When
construction was completed, however, the associations did not move on to broader irrigation management tasks because
they saw neither a purpose nor a benefit to continued existence. Instead, they reverted back to the traditional warabandi
system, which was already well established and hence involved lower transaction costs.
2948

AP'PENDIXI 
11: \'(bO 
IN( 
PI'. Pi 
SUNNIIAS 
IEI:S
Box A2.41. Checklist of Steps in Designing Large-Scale Projects
* 
Clarify and prioritize objectives. Link objectives to outputs.
* 
Identify the key stakeholders 
at the community and agency levels. Assess their capacity and interests.
* 
Assess (do not assume) demand, bearing in mind that demand is influenced by the confidence people have in the
service provider.
* 
Establish eligibility criteria for community 
groups, so that communities can select themselves for projects, rather than
projects selecting communities.
* 
Structure subsidies that do not distort demand.
* 
Restructure 
fund release to support demand.
* 
Learn by doing, adjusting plans annually on the basis of experience.
* 
Invest in strengthening 
social organization 
to increase local participation 
in decisionmaking.
* 
Institute participatory monitoring and evaluation with feedback loops.
* 
Redefine procurement rules to support community-level procurement where appropriate.
geria and the Gambia. These new organizations are the 
for performance are easier to institute when agencies are
creation of their members, drawing as much as possible 
required to be financially viable, have autonomy to man-
on what is already in place. Attempts to speed up a com- 
age themselves, and have control over hiring and firing
munity development process by circumventing existing 
of staff.
institutions and investing in new externally designed or- 
An alternative to restructuring existing agencies is
ganizations have frequently failed in their aims. They also to contract out the needed sertvices to NGOs (as in rural
carry the danger of undermining existing institutions, 
water supply in Kenya), the private sector (in agriculture
diminishing the ability of community members to coop- 
in Malaysia), other government agencies (public health
erate and organize effectively for other purposes. 
workers for a water and sanitation project in Brazil). or
Animportantreasontforbuildingonindigenousprin- 
multilateral or bilateral agencies (the United Nations
ciples of organization is that, to be effective, a group must 
Children's Fund in low-income housing in Guatemala).
own and enforce its own rules definiinsg membership cri- 
In Mexico, the national water authority has an in-house
teria: the allocation of responsibilities, contributions. and group of senior social scientists and communication spe-
benefits; and the mechanisms for ensuring accountabil- 
cialists who design the strategy for community outreach,
ity and resolving conflicts. If these rules are dictated from 
applied research, and communications. This is then sub-
outside, people do not feel obliged to follow them. fi-ee contracted to the private sector.
riding becomes common, conflicts escalate, ancd the group 
The choice of outreach approach needs to match the
becomes ineffective (see box A2.40). 
goals of the program. The extensionl approach, in which
Depending on the tasks the group is designed to 
the field agent acts primarily as a channel of information
manage and the existing capacity of the group, invest- 
and inputs and remains accountable to the agency rather
menit in training may be needed over a period of several 
than the community group, is not appropriate when the 
M
years to build the necessary management and technical 
objective is community initiative and responsibility for
skills. Groups have failed because too much was expected 
management. When the success of a program hinges on
of them too soon without supportive training, 
participation through strong local groups, an empower-
ment approach is called for in which the field agent is a 
X
community organizer acting in liaison with technical
Changes in Implementing Agencies 
y-
Designing an appropriate outreach strategy to support aggencies. It may be essential to introduce female agents
the community development process often involves dif- 
to ensure the participation of womweno
ficult c'hanges in the structure and orienitaition of the 
The role of the agency and its relationship with com-
implementing agencies. The technical personnel in engi- 
mLnity groups needs to be supported by appropriate
neering agencies are commonly reluctant anid ineffec- 
"catnges in legislation. Key issues include the mandate
tive community organizers. Merely adding more coin- 
of agencies, funding mechanisms, accountability systems,
munity workers makes no difference unless the overall 
the registration requirements and legal status of commu-
incentive environment rewards staff for responisiveniess 
niity groups, and use and tenure rights over assets (par-
to clients and support to communiity workers. Incentives 
ticularly over natural resources). Many rules and regula-
tions may also need to be changed-froirm the required
24 9

THE 
'WO)R,IA) 
BAN, 
PARTi 
C 
IPIi I 'AT14).N 
S()OI 
I( 
lIj)OIM
Box A2.42. Shared Control and Benefits: CAMPFIRE in Zimbabwe
The incentive for Zimbabwe to protect its wildlife resources is high. Wildlife activities such as safari hunting, game
cropping, tourism, and live animal sales contribute moTe than $250 million annually to Zimbabwe's national economy.
Most wildlife, however, is outside parks on tribal or communally owned land. The Department of National Parks and
Wildlife Management has recognized that wildlife resources will only be conserved if private and communal landowners
derive economic benefit from protection of the resource and are given responsibility for conserYation and management.
The returm of benefits to local communities from wildlife resources is the basis of Zimbabwe's Communal Areas Manage-
ment Programme for Indigenous Resources (CAMPFIRE).
Using the CAMPFIRE approach and philosophy, the Chikwarakwara community of approximatey 150 households in the
remote Beirbridge area of Zimbabwe has taken over proprietorial management authority for wildlife resources from the
district council. After a series of negotiations focusing on community membership, household definition, and revenue-
sharing procedures, the council devolved management responsibilities and access to revenues derived from safari-hunting
activities to the community. The benefits accrued to the community as a result of this responsibility have included a new
school, a new grinding mill, and a Z$200 cash payment to each household. The council has benefited through an 11.7
percent levy, and the central government has benefited through an increase in taxable revenues.
The CAMPFIRE approach has not worked when communities have not been involved in rule formulation or when sharing
of benefits with communities is minimal. In Nyaminyamni 
District in the Zambezi Valley, for example, inequities exist in
the distribution of benefits and in the management responsibilities among the district council, ward, and villages. The
basic issue of whether the Nyaminyami Wildlife Trust, which was created by the district council to develop institutional
capacity for wildlife management, should be an income earner at the district level or a grassroom 
wildlife management
program has yet to be resolved.
qualifications for community workers, teachers, or health 
vested interests and needs strotng political support to
educators, for example. to procurement rules. 
see it through. Many Bank-supported projects that
lmplementing the institutional and legislative 
implement institutional reform are led by reform-
changes necessary to support large community-based 
minded senior civil servants with access to the country's
programs inevitably meets resistance from powerful 
top political leaders.
This note is ba.seul oi the paper written h7\ Deep)a Nara van. Contributors inClude Maria C. CrUO, Jean Delion. Jim Edgerton. Steven
H-olt..man. Pierre Laailell Mills, Kathrx n McPhail, Lant Ptrits hett. aid Julie Vila,,ria.
2 50

AP'P'E:NDIIX 
II: 
NV0RII1N(; 
PxpI.:it 
Ht'INI1\Ii:-
IPARTIC(IPATION 
A~NDn 
priorities for the development or use of their lands and
other resources and to exercise control over their own
economic, social, and cultural development.
At the same time, from a practical point of view, a
The characteristics of indigenous groups make participa- participatory approach to indigenous development is a
tory approaches especially critical to safeguarding their 
imieans of improving the quality of projects. In commu-
interests in the development process. Such approaches. 
nities whose institutions, leadership patterns, and
recognizing the right of indigenous peoples to participate lifestyles are not well understood by outsiders, partici-
actively in planning their own futures, are supported by pation can ensure that projects and services are relevant
major donors and international organizations, including to perceived needs and sustainable through indigenous
the World Bank, but have proved difficult to imiiplement. institutions. To be effective. programs must be under-
They call for changes in attitudes, policies, and legislation taken in partnership with indigenous peoples, rather than
to address the key issues: recognizin, rights to land and planned for them or carried out among them.
natural resources, ensuring culturally appropriate proce-
dures for consultation and communication, and building
on the strengths of traditional lifestyles and institutions. 
KEI:Y EL',E.ENTrS 
IN 
A PARTW('IPATORN-
ViY 
SU1'PPORT 
I'PARTIC'IPATION? 
Although the need for a participatory approach is now
widely accepted by international development agencies.
Indigenous or tribal people, numbering at least 250 mil- 
i
s ~~~~ 
l~t is difficult to iniplement. Obstacles include existing
lion throughout 70 different countries, have often been 
nd
onthlosngedoftcss 
y 
national polcy and legislative frameworks, widespread
on the losing end of the development process. In many 
prejudices. a tendency on the part of outside NGOs to
cases, their resources have been exploited for the benefit 
control rather than facilitate, and a lack of development
of other groups in society: in many countries they are the 
planin and manag 
ills 
on t 
part of digeno
plannmng and manageiment skills on the part of indi-enous
poorest of the poor. Often they experience political anid
economic discrimination and are perceived as backward 
peoples themselves.
or primitive. 
In Bank-supported operations. the challenge is typi-
or primitive. 
cally confronted in two contexts. The first is in manda-
Even when development policies and programs have tory environmental assessments or indigenous peoples'
been designed specifically to improve the welfare of in- 
development plans, intended to identify and mitigate
digenous peoples, the approach has usually been pater- 
potentially adverse effects of Bank-supported projects
nalistic, seeking their cultural assimilation and ignoring 
on the livelihoods of indigenous peoples. The second is
the strenaths of indiaenous institutions and knowledge 
In a new eeneration of Bank-funded projects i which
(mcldlnelllromelta knwede 
inl a 
turn 
geeainocan-uddpojcsi 
hc
(iicluding environmental knowledge). This, in turn, cal 
indigenous peoples are the primary beneficiaries. Criti-
cotrbute to worsening, poverty, soca 'a] 
gnlzto
contribute to worsening poverty, social -narginalization, cal issues for the Task Manager on these new projects
and ethnic resistance. 
are outlined here:
The characteristics that distinguish indigenous peoples
include their strong attachment to the land: dependence
on renewable natural resources. subsistence practices, dis- The Legal and Policy Framework
tinct languages, and cultures: historical identities as dis- Government willingness to devolve some degree of au-
tinct peoples: and. often, mistrust of outsiders. For devel- tonomy in decisionmaking to indigenous communi-
opment institutions and planners, the challenge is how to 
ties is a precondition of successful projects. Judgments
incorporate such diversity of culture, language, ecologi- 
must then be made on the need for legislative or policy
cal adaptation, and history into development planining. reforms 
to support 
such participation 
in the
Cultural barriers make it especially difficult for the out- 
decisionmaking process. Many of the line agencies or
sider to communicate with indigenous groups. understand 
ministries responsible for relationships with indig-
theirinstitutionsordiscerntheir 
needs. 
enous people are weak. They lack professionally
In these circumstances. the participation of indig- 
trained staff and often take a paternalistic approach.
enous people in planning and managing their own devel- 
In these cases. reforms are needed before a participa-
opment is a means of safeguarding their interests in the 
tory project can succeed. Local and regional elites may
development process. The past decade has seen growing 
also impede authentic indigenous participation, even
recognition of the rights of indigenous peoples. supported 
where an adequate legislative and policy framework
by international legal instruments, to decide their own 
exists (see box A2.43).
231

'I HF; 
BA#1{.} 
3\N1 
PAH\T 1s( 11'PAT1MN St'l('l':lS3()()is
Box A2.43. The Politics of Indigenous Participation
Projects that incorporate 
indigenous consultation and participation 
need to take into account ongoing and complex politi-
cal situations. Without a good understanding 
of these dynamics, even the most well-designed projects can lead to unfore-
seen turmoil and frustration. 
An example is the Indigenous Peoples Component of the Bank-funded 
Eastern Lowlands
Natural Resource Management 
and AgIcultural Development Project in Bolivia.
The purpose of the Indigenous Peoples Component is to provide land tenure security and other services to several Ayoreo
and Chiquitano Indian communities in the Eastern Lowlands. Originally prepared in ;a highly participatory manner by a
regional Indian federation in collaboration with a non-Indian technical assistance NOO, the component encountered po-
litical obstacles when implementation was due to begin.
The precipitating 
event for these problems was a protest march by the Indian federation, calling for more indigenous
control over forest resources. This soon escalated into a major confrontation 
between the federation and the regional
development corporation (the project implementing agency) over who should have control of the component. The Bank
found itself in the unenviable position of trying to negotiate differences between the two bodies, many of which predated
the protest march. Unable to find a solution after long meetings, the Bank accepted the redesign of the component, which
regrettably 
reduced the poweT of the indigenous federation and put more power into the hands of an implementing unit
within the regional corporation.
Colombia is one of the countries to have set an ex- 
for recognizing and regularizing customary land rights.
ample in establishing a legal and policy framework that 
The Bank has also had experience, for example. in
supports indigenous participation. Although Colombia 
the Philippines and Brazil, in improving the institutional
maintains a special office within the ministry that deals 
capacity of the government agencies responsible for the
with indigenous matters, the country's constitution recog- 
titling of indigenous lands. This experience has demon-
nizes the rights of indigenous communities to control their 
strated the benefits to be gained from indigenous partici-
lands and natural resources and their internal political af- 
pation in physical mapping and land demarcation.
fairs. Each recognized indigenous community has its own
council with the power to decide on the use of the
counci 
I 
~~~~~~~~Culturally 
Appropriate Communication
community's land and resources, resolve intemnal disputes. In designing consultation and communication procedures
and negotiate health, education, and other programs with
-
S 
~~~~~~~~~~~with 
indlgenous peoples, several special aspects need to
regional development corporations and the national gov- 
be taken nto account: their distinct languages, their tra-
erminent. Recent Colombian legislation also provides for 
dg
ditional means of transni'tt'Ing knowledge and values, and
the direct transfer of government resources to these coul- 
their mistrust of outsiders.
'ils for proects that they design and execute.
cil 
-proet 
The language issue is central. because few indigenous
people, especially women or elders, speak the national
Rights to Land and Natural Resources 
language fluently; hence, consultations need to be held
Despite some recent progress. legal recognition of the 
in the vernacular language with the help of skilled inter-
customary rights of indigenous peoples to their ances- 
preters. Development strategies for indigenous education
tral lands is often lacking: many development programs 
(see box A2.44) also need to take into account the tradi-
gi 
have to deal with the question of indigenous land tenure 
tional importance of legends. folk tales, and proverbs for
security and natural resource rights. 
the oral transmission of knowledge and culture. Modern
Bank legal staff and lawyers within client countries 
schooling of indigenous children has proved more effec-
can help Task Managers through the complexities of na- 
tive when it includes instruction in both vernacular and
tional land, resource, and environimental legislation as it 
national languages and when it is bicultural 
or
relates to indigenous peoples. In the Laos Forest Man- 
multicultural in content.
agement and Conservation Project, for example, one of 
Effective communication depends heavily on the el-
the Bank's lawyers reviewed national forestry and land 
ement of trust. Through historical experience, indigenous
legislation relating to the customary rights of ethnic mi- 
people have learned to be cautious of "benevolent" out-
norities in upland villages. This review provided the Bank 
siders, be they missionaries, government officials, teach-
with the necessary information to raise the subject with 
ers, or anthropologists. Those individuals or organiza-
the government and to include provisions in the project 
tions that have been able to gain their trust have usually
z .)2

APPIE'.NDI)XI 
11: 
WOi RKtNG I'rI.:IE 
S UMIMARIES
Box A2.44. Community Participation in Bilingual Education
Although ethnic Vietnamese constitute the bulk of Viet Nam's population, there are fifty-three ethnic mninorities 
living mostly
in the mountain areas. The Bank-funded Primary Education Project contains a special Ethnic Miniorities Education Compo-
nent, which will finance a comprehensive package of educational inputs to minority children. This package, premised on the
importance of the vernacular language and of comniunity participation, consists of policy measures, pedagogical activities,
provision of physical facilities, and institution building. To implement the component, existing province- and local-level
committees will be involved in teacher training, textbook production, and maintenance of local schools.
Similarly, in the Second Primary Education Project in Mexico, the use of bilingual school teachers and pedagogical
materials in the vernacular languages is combined with a strong element of community participation. Such participation is
linked to the country's overall poverty alleviation program and includes the involvement of community committees, mu-
nicipal education councils, parents associations, and school councils.
done so through long years of contact, learning, and re- 
deal with specific development tasks. In the Matruh Natu-
spect for their languages and cultures. If such individu- 
ral Resource Management Project, for example, among
als or organizations can be brought into the project prepa- 
the Bedouin of Western Egypt, using the bavt-the
ration process, a much better chance exists for introduc- 
Bedouin local lineage group-as the basis for project ac-
ing culturally acceptable mechanisms for consultation 
tivities has inspired the confidence of the Bedouin popu-
and participation. 
lation, including Bedouin women. As a result, it has
avoided many of the pitfalls of earlier projects that at-
Building on Traditional Strengths 
tempted to introduce Western-style cooperatives.
The traditional lifestyles of indigenous peoples involve 
Social assessments in which community members
subsistence strategies that use locally available natural participate as partners rather than mere informants are
resources to satisfy their basic needs, while maintaining 
used to improve understanding of the indigenous social
a balance with their environment, Many unfortunate ex- 
structure and institutions on which to base development
amples of programs for indigenous development exist 
strategies and to assist the communities in determining
that have undermined these traditional subsistence strat- 
how best to adapt their institutions to new purposes. So-
egies without providing socially and ecologically viable 
cial assessment techniques can also reveal the existence
alternatives The most successful programs with india- 
of conflicts with implications for participation, for ex-
enous peoples, such as the West Bengal Joint Forestry 
ample, between traditional and modern institutions or
Management Program (see box A2.45). are those that 
sources of authority
take traditional environmental knowledge and livelihood 
As in any other social groups, strengthening the ca-
systems as the given basis on which to build new knowl- pacities of indigenous peoples (see box A2.46) to evalu-
edge, technologies, and economic activities. 
ate options and implement their own development pro-
Simlilarly, the most successful projects ar-e building 
gramiis requires training in basic skills and technical as-
on existing institutions, instead of creating new ones to 
sistance in areas such as management, topography, for
Box A2.45. Tribal Women and Forestry
The West Bengal Joint Forestry Management Program is considered to be a model of participatory forest management.
One of its most important aspects is the way in which tribal women, their traditional environmental knowledge, and their
livelihood strategies have been incorporated into the program. In most areas, the recognition of the rights of tribal women
to collect and market leaves of Sal and Kendu trees has been the major incentive that has led to the program's economic
and institutional success.
In the village of Pukuria, women gather the leaves for six months of each year for the purpose of making plates, some 700,000
of which are exported monthly by the village. Minor forest products represent the primary occupation and most important
source of income for Pukuria's tribal wormen. Given the low investment costs for reestablishing Sal forest productivity,
combined with the benefits of protecting the upper ridge tracts where forests are located, this system seems to have consider-
able potential for increasing employment and income-earning opportunities, while reducing soil erosion levels.
253

ITHE' 
WO )R I 
) 
AI".NU I' 
PARTX'II 
I 
C'A'IPAION 
.SolRC 
EI( M013 i 
)OJi
Box A2.46. In 
ei 
in cpacity Strengthening::
Promoting 
training and strengthening capacity may be one Of he best investments for the economic development 
of
indigenous communities. The Bank's Lain American and Caribbean Region's Environment Unit (LATEN), for example,
has launched a program to assist Wingenous 
,orgazations in the following activities: defiing their own lopment
strategies and proposals; strengthening 
their institutional structures in areas such as personnel management, 
training pro-
grams, budgeting, and finance; and improving 
their negotiating skills to finance their own development 
proposals.
The program, 
is financed through 
grants 
to goverament 
agencies and/or indigenous 
organizations 
from the Bank's Institu-
tional Development 
Fund; thus far, programs 
hive been designed or are under preparation in ten countries. 
Each training
program contains a consulting seinXar, a series ofwokshops, a monitoring and evaluation system, and an evaluation
serninar. 
Many of the seminars 
take place in the regions in which indigenous 
peole live; all of them focus on indigenous
values, cultures, 
and philosophes, 
as well as modem management 
and development 
planning 
skills.
estry. agriculture. marketing. and community health care. where the Bank promoted large investments in increas-
It also, however. involves promoting and strengthening ing the staff and infrastructure of the National Indian
traditional systems, for example. of natural resource 
Foundation. the impact was minimal in such important
management and medicine. Some of the best experiences areas as natural resource protection, indigenous health,
with capacity strengthening have come from exchanges and commiiunity 
economic development.
among indigenous peoples themselves. For example, in 
In more recent projects. therefore, the goal is for
Latin American countries, NGOs have facilitated work- funds to be controlled and managed by indigenous
shops in which indigenous peoples from different tribes people themselves, preceded by the necessary capac-
and linguistic groups exchange experiences about land ity building. Group-based lending schemes, in which
protection, mapping, and natural resource management. groups rather than individuals are responsible for pro-
tection against default in repayments, have proved
Direct Funding 
adaptable to the finance needs of poor indigenous
Many of the first-generation Bank-supported projects populations, as the principle of joint liability is often
with indigenous peoples allocated funds to the national an important element in traditional systems of social
government agencies responsible for indigenous devel- control These lending schemes increase the self-con
opment. The typical result was expansion of the govern- fidence of their members and demonstrate the ability
ment agency concerned without much direct benefit to of indigenous populations to participate in the devel-
the indigenous communities. In Brazil, for example, opnient process.
' This note is based on the paper written by Sheltonr H. Davis and Lars T Soeftestad. Resource people in the Bank include Dan Ar(onson,
Michael Cernea, Gloria Davis. Concepcion Del Castillo. Charles di Leva, Cvprian Fisiv, Man, Lisbeth Gonzalez, Scott Guggenheim.
Kristine Ivarsdotter. Alf Jerve, Hemanta Mishra. Albert Ninio, Hart-v Patrinos. William Pairtridge, Stanz Peabody, Ellen Schaengold. and
0 C 
Jorge Uquillas.
254

INIDEX
A
Africa 4, 18, 23. 37. 40, 63. 89. 182. 193, 195-198. 207, 208. 214, 217. 220
Beninl xiv. xv. 6, 13. 23-28. 91, 123, 129, 130, 133, 138, 139, 155, 158, 171, 172,
207,210,241,246
Botswana 232
Burkina Faso 146, 192
Burundi 176
Cameroon 
151, 172. 178, '- 11.212,241
Chad 5. 13. 15, 35-38. 122, 123. 131, 133. 138, 140
Cote d'Ivoire 247
Ethiopia 155. 164, 175. 179, 215. 235, 236, 242
Gambia, The 151. 175, 233. 235. 236, 241. 242, 249
Guinea 207
Kenya 212,213.22(0.222.227,228.240.249
Liberia 161, 244
Mali 157. 196
Morocco 13. 14, 75-81, 123. 124, 127. 132, 141. 151,200. 207, 212, 239. 240
Mozambique 13, IS, 83-88. 137
Nigeria xiv, 13.89-94,131.134,150. 
151, 173.216, 217, 241.242, 248
Senegal 153. 165, 220. 223
Togo 133. 240, 241
Uganda ix, 160. 178, 190. 202 21. 240
Zambia 146. 147, 162. 166, 176. 179, 195, 198. 214, 221. 236, 237. 241, 244
Zimbabwe xiv, 220. 221, 250
Aga Khan Rural Development Program. Pakistan 159. 243
Agricultural development project xiv, 89-94, 159, 173, 252
Agriculture 
xv. 89-94. 131. 134. 15(). ISI. 173, 209. 214-218, 225 242
AIC (Appreciation-inifluence-contiol) 
xiv, 7. 13. 14, 40-45, 138. 182-16.
Albania xv. 13, 17-21. 124, 165. 166. 169, 236
Rural Development Project 20
Rural Poveily Alleviation Pilot Project 17-'- I 1124 166, 167. 169
Andhra Pradesh Forestry Project. India 53-59
Appraisal 13, 15. 20. 25. 59, 62, 101-105. 107, 124. 126, 157. 158, 160. 236, 238. 245,
Armenia Social Inmestment Funld Project 236
Asia 61, 10 
2. 175, 195.228
Bangladesh IX. 157. 160. 163. 164, 169 221, 239. 246
India xiv. 13. 15. 53-59. 69. 123. 132-135. 137-141. 148. 159, 160, 172. 173. 176.
179.193.221.22'-.247.948,252,254
Indonesia 163. 193. 194. 215. 216, 218, 221. 246, 248
Japan 48. 62, 64. 65. 98. 101. 107. 178. 229
Laos People's DemocCratic Republic xv, 1 3, 15, 61-66. 122. 252
Malaysia 249
Nepal 153. 154. 16). 165. 172. 173. 193. 22-1. 222.225, 2-26.22-7, 248
Pakistan xiv. xv. 13. 15,95-1().123, 
149. 15), 159.225, 
32 243. 247.248
Philippines xiv, xv, 13. 103-108. 109-115. 126. 130, 132, 133. 135. 140, 143. 148.
155. 17. 
58, 162, 17l1 173.176,188,193.221.223.224,232.248.252
Sri Lanka 128. 162
Viet Nami 2s3
2 5.5

B 
D
Decisionmaking- 2. 8, 11. 15, 19, 27. 70-73, 81. 84, 87. 90, 93, 99-
Balochistan Primary Education Project, Pakistan 15O, 153, 163.245 
101, 107. 108, 113. 121. 122, 129, 130. 133, 135-137, 145, 154,
Bangladesh 18, 157. 160, 163. 164, 169.221,239,246 
156. 163, 165. 168, 169. 171, 172. 176. 184,200.212,218.221,
Participatory Forest Development Project 163 
222, 231, 235 242-245. 249. 251
Secod6Ro4 dRehabilitationaiidMaiiitenalceProJect 
160) 
Collaborative decisionmakinig 91, 104, 134, 181-185, 187,
164 
189. 191, 193.
Shrimp Culttire Project 
157 
Participatory decisionmaking 
111 124. 177, 217.
Belgium 62. 65 
Shared decisionmakinp 
152l 162 244
Beneficiary assessment xiv. 4. 28, 147, 154. 166. 182, 184, 195- 
Dietl 
ffeted takehold 
13 126 
, 
13(; 324
198X. 
2 12. 213, 21 8, 237-238 
Directly affected 
sk 
roup 103, 126 132,199
Benin xiv. xv, 6. 13. 23-28, 91. 123, 129, 130, 133, 138. 139, 155. 
Direcly aft 
gru 
103. 126 132. 
199
158, 171, 172, 207, 210. 241, 246 
Disburseme9t 19, 21. 29, 85. 86. 88. 102. 124, 143. 165. 166, 172.
Food Security Project 158I 246 
177-179. 205. 237. 247
Health Services Developmnent Project 6, 23-28. 1 3, 129.
130. 133. 138. 139, 155. 171, 172.241 
E
Bhairawa Lumbini Groundwater 11 Project. Nepal 154 
Economic and sector work (ESW) xiv, 10, 13. 75. 78, 83. 84. 146.
Biodiversity 
13, 103. 104. 126. 128, 200. 2919-222 
12, 191.205,207-209.211, 
224. 227, 239
Bolivia 159, 165, 193. 235, 240, 242. 252 
19 Si 2 
vte 
Fund 154
Emergency Scial 
Fund 
65 935 236Ectiador 
Social investmnent Fund 
154
Enmergency 
Social Flid 
165, 235. 236 
Education 13. 14. 35-38. 62. 64-66, 76, 78. 117- 120, 122, 123. 126.
Borrower 6.19,71,95, 1 15. 124.127, 169, 170.174. 177.182, 187, 
131. 133, 138. 140. 149. 150, 153, 161-163. 171. 176. 193. 195,
188, 199, 207. 209, 229 
196, 205. 214 216, 229 231-246, 2_52. 253
Botswana 232 
Education SectorAdjustnient Program.Yemiieni 13. 14. 117-
Brazil xiv, 13. 29-33,5, 2 124 
127, 12'7 , 13(0. 148. 151, 209, 
120. 126. 138. 141, 241
228,229.247,249,252.254 
Education V Project. Chad 5. 35-38, 122. 123. 131, 133,
Municipalities and Low-Incomile Sanitation Project 29-33. 
139 141
122, 124, 125, 127. 129, 130. 148. 151 
Effectiveniess IS. 25. 29, 31. SI, 65. 77, 90, 94, 104. 108. 112, 124.
Water aid Sanitation Project for Low-Iincome Comiilluni- 
141, 159 160, 165. 167. 184, 190. 196, 197,201,230 
231,_35
ties Project (PROSANEAR) 194, 229, 247 
238. 244, 247
Burkina Faso 146, 192 
Egypt 13. 14. 
47-51, 124, 127, 129, 131-133, 137. 139. 141, 153.
Burundi Social Action Project 176 
179. 242. 253
Matruh Resource Managemenit Project 47-SI. 124, 127,
129. 131-133. 137, 139. 141, 153, 171. 179, 242
El Salvador 171. 739 240
Cameroon 151. 172. 178. 211, 212. 241 
Electricitv. See eneirgv
poverty assessmentl 212 
Empowermenit 35. 51, 15f). 201, 249
Food Security Project 178 
Enabliig environment 2, 72. 145. 165. 174
Caribbean 62, 254 
Energy xiv, 13. 31. 39-45, 6773. 78-80. 83, 91. 94. 96, 97, 101, 103.
Haiti 
220 
119 120, 133. 137. 138. 140. 183. 186, 222, 223
Chad 
E 
5, 13, 5i, 
35-3. 122. 123, 131. 133. 13823,4(1 
Electricity Sector Reform Project, Colombia 39-45
Education V Project 5, 35-38, 122. 123. 131. 133. 138. 
Hvdroelectric Project, Mexico 13. 67-73. 125. 134, 142,
140 
-
Chile xiv214() 
172. 173, 174
Chile xiv 
.217 
Envir-onmienital assessimient 201 251
Colombia 13 14 39 45. 
3 3 137. 138, 140. 154. 179, 186 231- 
Environnmenital management 133. 163. 19_- 241 243- 246
Communiuiiity 
Child Catre anid Nultr'ition Project 154 
Ethiopia 215
Emlecticit SChild Reforiand Pr 
io Prqject 
3945 
1334 137. 138Social 
and Rehabilitation Development Fund 155, 164,
Electricity Sector Reform Project 39-45. 133. 137. 13, 
175. 180. 
235. 236. 242
140 
Evaluation 
19. 20, 26. 27. 28 39, 43. 49. 72, 79. 86. 87. 97, 119,
Integrated Rural Developmen)t 
Project 179 
148. 183, 189 19() 192, 194. 195, 197. 201, 202, 204, 214, 215.
Communal Areas Management Programmi1e 
tor Indigenious Resources 
9, 231 234. 238. 239. 42, 249. 254
Project (CAMPFIRE), Zimbabwe xiv. 250 
Expelt leariiig 
5
Communial Irrigation Developmenit Project. Philippines xiv, 109- 
Ext 
learnin 5
Extension v, 14. 50. 55. 73. 89-94. 113. 114, 131. 134, 152. 155.
115, 141, 143. 155, 171, 173, 176 
157. 173. 193. 205.213 215-218,222.227,228.240 
242,249
Community Child Care and Nutrition Project. Colombiia 154
Community-based development 145, 156. 206. 243, 247. 248
Community-based method 182, 191-194 
F
Consultation 4, 11, 68-72, 103-107, 146. 157-160, 182. 184, 195- 
Fez Medina Rehabilitation Project Morocco 200
199, 
203. 204, 209. 217. 221. 235. 244. 251, 253 
Financial intermediation 
164. 168-17(
Contingent valuation 204 
Focus group 27.80).81. 147. 191 195-198, 2000, 2)3.204, 213, 232,
Conversational interview 
195. 204. 237 
233. 237
Costa Rica 217. 221
Coste dRIica 247.1 
Food Security Project. Benin 158, 246
Co5te d'lvoire 
247 
FONCODES. Peru xiv, 154
Country implementation review xiv 1(), 83-88. 137 
Force field analysis 194, 203
2 51 i

Forest and conservation management 219 
92,,93,95,98.110.125,126.145,147.150,152,153.156,164-
Forestry 13. 15, 53-59, 104, 123, 126, 133, 135.138.139.141,147, 
171. 173, 192, 198 218. 224, 226,235 236 238-240. 243, 247,
148, 173, 219-222, 240. 247, 252, 253 
249.251,253
Fundasal Low-Income Housing Project, 148 
Institutional capacity 
56. 64. 69. 95, 96, 157, 199, 250
Institutionial map 203
cA 
Integrated Protected Areas Project (IPAS), Philippines 
xv, 103-108
G 
Intermediaries 13. 15, 122, 126, 129-130. 153. 156-164, 166, 168,
Gambia The 151. 175, 233. 235, 236. 241, 242. 249 
169. 176. 177, 198, 206. 221, 228, 235. 237. 238, 241, 243-244,
Public Works and Employment Project 175 
246.247
Women in Development Project 151.241,242 
Irrigation 
xiv. xv, 13. 15, 30, 68. 71, 109-115, 11 , 122. 123, 141,
Gender xiv. 89. 93. 148-151. 182. 201 -203, 218, 221. 239-242 
143, 153-155. 17 1-173. 176, 179. 205. 223-227, 248
Gendler analysis xiv, I 82, 184. 2( 1 -203. 218 
X,2213239 
Andhra Pradesh Irrigation If Project, India 179
Government support for participation 62, 121-123. 236 
Cornmunal Irrigation Development Project, Philippines
Grants 43,48,62.64.65.96-98.101, 
107.11O, 178.221,229 
xiv. 109-115, 141. 143, 155. 171, 173. 176
Group-based len(ling 254 
Irrigation IV Project, Senegal 223
GTZ xiii. xiv, 77, 78, 188
Guatemala xiv, 157.175, 236. 238. 249
Earthquake Reconstruction Project 157 
j
Social Investment Fund 175 
Japan
Guinea 207 
Japanese Grant Facility 48, 98, 101, 229
Guyana 178, 236 
Japanese Special Fund for Policy and Human Resources
Development 62, 64, 65
H 
JapaneseTechnicalAssistinceGranit 
107
Japanese Trust Fund 229
Haiti 220 
Jordan 218
Health 6. 13. 14. 23-28, 61-66. 122, 123, 126. 129, 130. 133. 138,
139.155.160,162,171,172,178.203, 
247
Health Services Development Project. Benin 6. 23-28, 123. 129. K
130.133.138,139.155,171.172,241 
Karachi Urban Trainsport Project. Pakistan 101
Health System Reform and Malaria 
Control Project, Laos 
Kenya 212.213,2l20 
222, 227. 228, 240. 249
61-66. 122. 126
Honduras 150, 218 236, 239
Agricultural SectorAdjustment Credit 150). 239
Hydroelectric Project. Mexico 13. 67-73, 125. 134. 142, 172-174 
Laos People's Democratic Republic xv, 13, 15. 61-66. 122,252
Lao Health System Reform and Malaria Control Project
i 
61-66, 122, 126
Latin Americat 61, 193. 217, 254
Identification 
23. 38. 39, 48. 49, 51. 55.621, 9, 93. 101, 106. 109. 
Bolivia 159. 165, 193. 235, 240. 242, 252
119,122.123.166.169,189.191.195.199.214,217. 
235 
Brazil xiv. 13. 29-33, 122. 124, 125. 127. 129, 130. 148.
Implementation 4, 1), 13. 25. 44,4.5,5(). 51. 64. 66. 70. 84-88. 93. 
151.209. 228.229.247,249.152,254
99, 104-108. 110-115. 119. 120. 127. 132. 135-137. 139. 140. 
Chile xiv, 217
142,147, 153, 166, 174, 178, 189, 211. 225, 232. 234, 235. 2'37, 
Colombia 13. 14, 39-45.48. 133. 137, 138, 140. 154, 179,
246 
186. 231. 1 952
Incentives 
14. 47. 69. 72'.93, 147-149, 158. 160. 171, 173. 174. 
Costa Rica 217, 221
178. 184. 195, 199, 202, 218-"1I 123-225. 238-240. 244. 246. 
Ecuador 154
248. 249 
El Salvador 171. 239, 240
In(lia xiv. 13. 15, 53-59, 69, 123, 132-135, 137-141, 148. 160. 172, 
Guatemala xiv, 157, 175, 236, 238, 249
173,176 .179.193,221.222. 
247 248, 152. 
154 
Gu)yana 178. 236
Andhra Pradesh Forestry Project 53-59. i '23 13, 135. 137. 
Honduras 15), 218 X236. 239
138,141 148,173 
Mexico xiv. 13. 14. 67-76, 13, 125, 134, 142, 165, 172-
Andhir-a Pradesh Irrigationi 11 ProJect 179 
174. 175-178, 193. X1. 224.225.236. 237. 249, 253
Health and( Famlily Welfare Sector Study 134 
Nicaragua 153
National Cataract Blindness Contiol Project 176 
Peru 154, 2I2, 218
Rajasthan Watershed Development Project 139, 148. 171 
Leveling 
129.133
Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition Project. India 148, 155, 173 
Liberia Second Educationi Pro ject 161, 244
Upper Krishna lIrigation II Project 179 
Listeninii 4. 11. 37. 69, 91. 155. 182-185. 195-197. 218
Uttar Pradeshi Education Project 1 76 
LogFRAME 
S.ec LoOgcaI ftamework
Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land Reclamation Project 163. 246 
Logical frainework xv. 37, i 87, 189. 191), 213
Indirectly affected stakeholder 13
indirectly affected group 6. 1 26. 1 9
Indonesia 163. 193. 194. 215. 216. 218, 221. 246. 248
Industr-ial Efficiency and Pollution Colntrol Project. Philippines 188 
Malaysin 249
Institutions xii. 7. 8. 11, 19. 48, 49. 56, 61. 67. 72, 73. 76. 77. 81, 
Maili 157. 196
25 7

ITHE 
WVORIAI) 
1tANK 
PAIT'I 
iP('tI'VIION 
91)IIR(ItI 
i))
National Environimilent Action Plan 157 
Karachi Urban Transport Project 101
Mapping 49. 79, 80, 152. 191, 192. 194. 203. 204. 213. 252, 254 
Orangi Pilot Project 247
Matrix ranking 
49. 80. 204 
Privatization of Groundwater Development Project 123
Matruh Resource Management Project. Egypt 47-51, 124.1 27.1 29, 
Sindh Special Development Project (SSDP) xv. 95-102
131-133. 137, 139. 141. 153. 179 
Participant observation 195. 196, 203. 213. 237
Mexico 
xiv, 13. 14. 67-76 1-3, 125, 134. 142' 165. 172-174. 176- 
Participant-observer 101. 141. 197
178 193. 221, 224. 225, 236. 237, 249. 253 
Participaitioni analysis 56, 187
Hydr oelectr-ic Project 13. 67-73. 125.134. 142. 172-174 
Participation conitinuum 167
Mexico Municipal Funds Project 176-178 
Participatory planning 2. 5, 14. 27.36,37, 
68. 93. 121. 122. 124.
Middle East 61 
125, 131 133, 135. 136,139.141.187.188
Egypt 13, 14.47-49,50(,51 
14. 127. 129. 131-133, 137. 
Participatory povertv assessment xv. 146, 147. 151, 152. 182, 195.
139,141.153,179.242 
253 
211-214. 241
Jordan 218 
in Burkina Faso 146
Yemen. Republic of 13. 14, 117-120. 1'26 138 140. 241 
in Cameroon 151
Monitoring 
19. 20. 27. 49. 50, 5 1. 69. 73. 85, 92. 93. 99. 1 1 1. I 1 3. 
in Kenya 147. 2 13
114. 153. 156. 172, 177, 183. 187. 192. 193, 195. 198. 201-204. 
in Zambia 146, 147, 214
2-16. 229. '32. 234. 236. 238, 240( 242'. 
248. 249, 254 
Participaitory rural appraisal xv. 13, 14. 58. 59.76-81. 
151. 166.
Morocco 
13. 14.75-81, 123. 124 1'27 13'2- 141. 151, 200'. 207. 
173. 182. 183. 191-192. 197, 212. 213,218.233, 236. 240. 242
212, 239. 240 
Peru 154. 'I12. 218
Womileni in Development Project 75-81. I 23 12 
7. 132, 141. 
National Fund for Social Compenisationi and Development
151. 207, 239. 240 
xiv. 154
Mozambique 13. 15. 83-88. 137 
Philippines xiv. xv. 13. 103-108. 109-115. 118. 126. 130. 132. 133,
Country implemilenitationi review 83-88. 137 
135.140. 143.148.155,157.158.162.171.173.176,188.193.
Municipalities and Low-Ilncome Sanitation Project. Brazil 29-33, 122. 
222 
I . "3. 
224. 232'. 248. 252
124, 12 5,127. 129 130. 148. 151 
Health Developmenit Project 162
It1dtlstrial Efficiency and Pollution Control Project 1 88
Integrated Protected Areas Systenm (IPAS) Project 103-108.
126.130.,132.133.135.148.157.158
National Environ menit Action Plan ( NEAP) 1 28. 157 
Communnnal I1rr igation Development Projects xiv. 109-115.
in Mali 157 
140.143,155.171.173.176
in Sri Lanka 1 28 
Pilot project 10. Is 17-'2 1. 25.31.33.54.59.65. 
77. 78. 90. 94.
Natural r esource management 48. 50. 139. 159.192. 248. 252-254 
1 10 112 121. 124. 158. 163 165. 192, 217. 224. 232' 234. 236.
Needs assessmiienit 
146. 202. 203 
242. 245-247
Negotiations 14. 25. 31. 50, 59. 65. 68. 71. 87.100. 119,125 ,130. 
Pocket chart 194. 203
134.135,229 
250 
Poverty xv. xi. . 2.4.6-8. 14 15, 17-21 48. 50. 61. 63. 67. 68. 70.
Nepal 153.154.160. 165, 172. 173 193. 221 222, 225227, 248 
72 109, 124, 
126. 131. 142 145-180, 18 
195. 196, 199.201.202.
Bhaliiraa Lumilbini Groundwater 11 Project 154 
205. 21 1-22. 227. 233-235, 237. 240, 241. 243. 248, 251. 253
Irrigation Sector Project 153. 172 
Poverty assessment xv. 4, 146. 147. 151. 195. 201. 205. 211. 21 
2,
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project 160. 165 
214. 239-'4 1
NGO 
19. 57. 58. 93. 1 00. I102. 103-108. l26- 1 8, 130. 131. 133. 
in Camier0oon1 
241
134. 151. 155-164. 166. 175-177, 179. 206. 208. 209. ' I 2_ 13. 
in Kenva 240
216. 218 
1 
1, 227, 233, 240, 243-245, 
249, 251. 254 
in Peru 21I
Sardar Sarovar- 175 
in Zambia 241
Nicaragua 153 
Preappraisal 24.58.59.62.64. 
120. 133. 194.241
Nigeria xiv. 13.89-94. 131. 134. ISO. 151. 173. 2 16 '217. 241. 242. 248 
Prefer-enlce rankinii 191. 192. 204 213
Women in Agricultu.re Project xv. 89-94. 13 1. 134. 15. 
Preparation 10. 13-15 20n 26.. 
36. 40. 48. 50. 5 1. 55-59. 62-66.
151.173.174,216.217.241.242 
98. 104. 1)8. 113. 119, 120. 22 124. 129. 131. 146. 147. 153.
195.199. 204. 207.218. 23 1,234, 
253
Primiarv EdCucatio 
n Project. Viet Nam 253
PiPrivaite Sector Developmenit Workshop. Ugaida 
190
Objectives tree 138 
Problemil cenIsus 218
Objectives-oriented project planning (ZOPP) xv. 7. 1 3. 36. 182. 1 83. 
Problemii tree 37. 56-58. 138. 1 87
187-188 
ProcuLreeniet 14. 21. 26. 32. 68, 85. 86. 87. 113. 155, 162. 165. 166.
Opposition to participation 6. 40. 73. 85. 87. 1(6. 1)7. 12I. 125. 
171. 172. 177-179. 187. 205. _ 
.22_7. 229.244, 
249.250
127. 129 133-137. 186. 208. 225 
Project planning matr-ix xv. 183. 187. 188. 203
Protected areas xv. 103-108. 126. 130. 132_ 133. 135, 148. 157.
158. 159, 219 22"1
Inteerated Protected Areas System (IPAS) Project. Philip-
Pakistan xiv. xv. 13. Is. 95-102. 123. 149, 150. 159. 22_5. 32. 243. 
pines 103-108. 126. 130. 132. 133. 135, 148. 157. 158
247 
248 
PROSANEAR (Water and Sanitation Project for Low-Income Coni-
Ag:a Khan Rural Developmenit Progeramn 159' 243 
miuinities Project). Brazil 194. 229, 247
Balochistan Primilar-y Education Project 1 
153. 
I 
s * 
63. 245
258

I NDEX
R 
1T
Rajasthan Watershed Development Project, India 139. 148, 171 
Uganda ix. 160. 178. 190, 202. 221, 240
Resource management 47-49, 51. 124, 127, 129, 131-133, 137. 139. 
Alleviation of Poverty and Social Costs of Adjustment
141, 153. 179, 242 
Project 178
Resource map 203, 204 
Private Sector Development Workshop 190
Role playing 41, 204 
Uttar Pradesh Education Project, India 176
Rural Development Project, Albania 20 
Uttar Pradesh Sodic Land Reclamation Project. India 163. 246
Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project, Albania 17-21. 124. 165,
166, 169 
v
s 
Venn diagram 203
Viet Nam Primary Education Project 253
Sanitation xv, 25 29-31. 33, 96, 98, 122. 124. 160. 165. 178, 193. 
Village meeting 204
194. 202. 205. 227-231. 247. 249 
Voiceless 90, 119. 126, 127. 129. 132, 133. 141
SARAR xv. 182. 183. 193-194
Sardar Sarovar 175 
xv
Seasonal calendar 49, 204
Seasonal diagram 204, 233 
Water xv, 13. 15. 27. 29, 30-33. 35, 48-50, 68. 71. 78. 79, 83, 96-98.
Secondary data review 204 
110-1 14, 122-124. 127. 129, 130, 133. 148, 149, 151, 154-156.
Senegal 153, 165. 220. 223 
160. 163. 165, 176, 178. 193, 194, 201. 202. 205, 214. 223-229,
Small Rural Operations Project 153 
239-242, 246-249
Sentinel community surveillance 197, 204 
Water and sanitation xv. 27. 29, 30. 98. 122. 124, 151, 165. 193.
Shrimp Culture Project. Bangladesh 157 
194. 202, 205. 227-230, 247. 249
Sindh Special Development Project (SSDP), Pakistan xv. 95-102 
Water and Sanitation Project for Low-Income Communities Project
Social Action Project. Burundi 176 
(PROSANEAR). Brazil 194. 229, '-47
Social and historical profile 49 
Wealth ranking 192.204
Social assessment xv. 128. 181, 182. 184, 194. 199, 200, 239. 253 
West Bengal. India
Social fund 106, 124. 154, 160. 164-167, 179. 205. 235-238 
Forestry Project 54. 55. 135, 222
Social Investment Fund. Ecuador 154 
Fourth Population Project 162
Social and Rehabilitation Development Fund. Ethiopia 155, 164, 175. 
Joint Forestry Management Program 253
179, 235. 236, 242 
Population Project 245
Sociocultiiral profile 204 
White card exercise 86. 87. 137
SriLanka 128.162 
Women 7. 13. 14. 15. 26-28, 32. 36. 50, 71. 123. 127. 131-134. 141.
Health and Family Planning Project 162 
148-152, 155. 159. 166. 170. 173-175. 177. 184. 201-202. 212,
National Environment Action Plan 128 
213. 215-217. 221-233, 236-249, 253
Staff appraisal report 65. 160 
Women in Development Project. Morocco 75-81. 123. 127.
Stakeholder consultation 181, 182. 184. 195. 197 
132. 141. 151. 207. 239. 240
Stakeholder workshop 77. 137. 140. 181, 187. 188. 200. 204. 218. 221 
Women in Agriculture Project, Nigeria xv. 89-94.131. 134.
Story With a Gap 194. 203 
150. 151, 173. 216. 217.242
Strategic planning 44. 136, 138. 187 
Workshop-based method 181-183. 185-190
Supervision 20. 66. 71-72. 92. 99. 111-115. 118. 147. 155. 195.
216. 223. 229. 234. 237
Suivey 20. 27. 64, 65. 78, 93. 94, 105. 146. 15 1. 161. 190.195. 197. 
X
200. 204, 212. 213. 233, 239-241 
Yemen 13. 14,
Systematic client consultation (SCC) xv. 4. I2. 184. 196-198 
Education SectorAdjustment Program 117-120. 126. 138.
141, 241
T
Tactical planninig 91. 136, 138. 139. 140 
Z
Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition Project. India 148. 155. 173 
Zambia 146. 147. 162. 166. 176. 179. 195. 198. 214. 221. 236, 237,
TeamUP 183. 190-191 
241. 44
Togo Urban Development 133, 240. 241 
Social Recovery Fund 166. 176. 195, 198. 237
Trainino 14, 20, 35. 37. 50. 58. 59. 64-66, 73. 77-79. 86. 92, 109. 
Squatter Upgrading Project 162. 244
110-1 13, 12-. 141. 147. 150. 151. 155. 160. 162-164. 173. 183. 
Zimbabwe xiv. 220, 221. 250
184. 191. 193. 194. 201. 202. 213. 215-218. 222. 223. 225. 226. 
ZOPP (Objectives-oriented project planning) xv. 7. 13. 15, 36, 38.
228. 231-234. 235. 236. 238. 239, 243-246. 249. 254 
56-59. 138. 182. 183. 187-189. 203. 232'
Tranisect walk 49. 133. 137. 192
Tree diagram 204
Trust fund 44. 55. 62. 147, 221. 229
259



A partner in strengthening 
economies
and expandingB 
markets
toI improe the quality of life
for people everywhere,
espcialy 
hepoorest
HeadQU8respedallOfficeTokyo 
office
-818 H Street.W. 
66 
Ewopean office 
Kokusal Building
Headquartets 
66k avenue d'lenae 
tI 
Marunouchi 3-chome 
|
in818gH 
StreetDC 20433, U.S.A. 
75116 Paris, France 
Chig MyodarkufTokyo 
3hJme
Wasehi go n,e D..202) 
47713 4U S A 
Telephone: I1) 40.69.30.00 
neyo 
:k Toky 
3 14-00, a fl
Facsimilne: (202) 477-1234 
Facsimile- 1,40.69.30.66 
Telepho: (33214-3657
Telex: MC01
64 14 5WORLDBANK 
Telex: 640651 
Telex: 26838
MCI 248423 WORLDBANK
Cable:AddTess: 
INTBAFRAD
WASHINGTONDC
world Wide Web: httpJ/www.worldbankIorT 
-
E-rnail: books@worldbank.org
l U-- 
4 \ l 
r; 
'. 
,._ ., g t __ 
__,~~~~~~~~~~~~F F.- 
-f-- 
.
(I*
+)~~~~~r 
U- 
F 
.
-t; 
-
* 
e\ 
,X, 
, 
r.7 
ry, 
y\.f, 
ti. 
-~ 
: 
: 
a= 
j
A~~~~~~~~~~A 
~ 
N~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
(7 ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
(
