Water Security

Water Security
The Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus
“Water sits at the nexus of so many  
global issues . . . including health, 
hunger and economic growth. And sadly, 
water scarcity takes its greatest toll on 
society’s least fortunate. I am absolutely  
convinced that the only way to  
measurably and sustainably improve 
this dire situation is through broad-scale 
collaborative efforts between government, 
industry, academia and other  
stakeholders around the world.”
—Indra Nooyi,
Chairman and CEO of PepsiCo, Inc., 
Member of International Business 
Council, World Economic Forum
“In 1911, John Muir observed how, 
‘When we try to pick out anything by  
itself in nature, we find it hitched 
to everything else in the Universe.’ 
A century later, a gathering of the 
World Economic Forum discovered 
the same phenomenon. Four hundred 
top decision-makers listed the myriad 
looming threats to global stability, 
including famine, terrorism, inequality, 
disease, poverty, and climate change. Yet 
when we tried to address each diverse 
force, we found them all attached to one 
universal security risk: fresh water.”
—Margaret Catley-Carlson,
Patron, Global Water Partnership,  
2008–2010 Chair of World Economic 
Forum Global Agenda Council  
on Water Security
“To make a difference on the water 
challenges we all face, governments, civil 
society and businesses must work together 
as never before. For business leaders in 
particular, we need to speak up, stand 
up and scale up our efforts on water 
sustainability.”
—Muhtar Kent,
Chairman and CEO, The Coca-Cola 
Company, Member of International 
Business Council, World  
Economic Forum
“Over the last few years, the scale 
and speed of response from a leading 
group of large companies to the water 
challenge has been impressive. As this 
book illustrates, their engagement 
in partnerships with others to better 
understand how water works across the 
economy and how to manage water  
more efficiently as a result, can offer 
much potential.”
—Professor Tony Allan,  
Kings College London, 2008 
Recipient of the Stockholm Water 
Prize, Member of the World Economic 
Forum Global Agenda Council on 
Water Security

The Forum Industry Partners involved in the Water Initiative include
With support from
International Finance Corporation
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
United States Agency for International Development
Water Resources Group
World Wide Fund for Nature
World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council on Water Security
And project advisory support from
McKinsey & Company
Disclaimer
The views expressed herein represent a collation of various viewpoints from 
participants in the World Economic Forum Water Initiative, the World Economic 
Forum Global Agenda Council on Water Security and viewpoints from other 
invited contributors. The text and the individual contributions do not necessarily 
reflect the views of every individual participant nor do they necessarily reflect 
the individual institutional viewpoints of any of the participating companies, 
institutions or organizations, or the World Economic Forum.
CH2M HILL
Cisco Systems, Inc.
The Coca-Cola 
Company
The Dow Chemical 
Company
Halcrow Group Ltd.
Hindustan 
Construction 
Company Ltd.
McKinsey & 
Company
Nestlé SA
PepsiCo, Inc.
Rio Tinto Group
SABMiller plc
Standard Chartered 
Bank
Syngenta AG
Unilever
This publication was prepared by the World Economic Forum  
Water Initiative to support the Industry Partnership Programme. 
Dominic Waughray, Senior Director and Head of Environmental 
 Initiatives at the World Economic Forum, led the development,  
collation, and editing of this publication, supported by  
James G. Workman.
Industry Partners are select member companies of the  
World Economic Forum that are actively involved in the Forum’s  
mission at the industry level. 
Partnerships bring visibility and insight to strategic decision-making  
on the most important industry- and cross-industry-related issues and the 
opportunity to engage in actions of global corporate citizenship.


Water Security
The Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus
The World Economic Forum Water Initiative
Washington | Covelo | London


Copyright © 2011 World Economic Forum
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. 
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without 
permission in writing from the publisher: Island Press, 1718 Connecticut Ave., 
NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20009.
ISLAND PRESS is a trademark of The Center for Resource Economics.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
  Water security : the water-food-energy-climate nexus : the World Economic 
Forum water initiative / [edited by] Dominic Waughray.
    p.   cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN-13: 978-1-59726-735-9 (cloth : alk. paper)
  ISBN-10: 1-59726-735-X (cloth : alk. paper)
  ISBN-13: 978-1-59726-736-6 (pbk. : alk. paper)
  ISBN-10: 1-59726-736-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
  1. Water supply—Management. 2. Water resources development—International 
cooperation. 3. Water supply—Risk assessment. 4. World Economic Forum.  
I. Waughray, Dominic.
  HD1691.W365 2011
  333.91—dc22                                      2010043396
Printed on recycled, acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
10    9    8    7    6    5    4    3    2    1


Contents
List of Illustrations  xiii
Preface, Richard Samans, Managing Director, World Economic Forum  xv
Reproduction of Opening Remarks by the United Nations Secretary General Ban 
Ki-moon to the Session of the World Economic Forum Water Initiative at the 
Forum’s Annual Meeting in Davos, January 29, 2009  xvii
Foreword, Margaret Catley-Carlson, Patron, Global Water Partnership, Canada;  
Vice-Chair, World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council on Water 
Security  xix
Introduction
The Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus: A Facts and Figures   
	
Overview  1
Chapter 1: Agriculture    17
Background  17
Trends  20
Forecast  23
Implications  25
The Way Forward  26
Perspectives  29
Responding to the Increase in Land and Water Demand to Guarantee Future 
Food Security, Pasquale Steduto, Chief, Water Development and Management 
Unit, Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations, Rome  30
Water Scarcity: Agriculture Provides Solutions, Juan Gonzalez-Valero, Head of 
Public Policy and Partnerships, Syngenta AG, Switzerland; and Peleg Chevion, 
Head of Business Development Water, Syngenta AG, Switzerland  33
Improving, Water, Food, and Climate Security: A Novel Approach to Direct 
Seeding of Rice, Daniel Bena, Director of Sustainable Development, PepsiCo, 
Inc., United States  35
Farmers Facing the Water Challenge, Ajay Vashee, International Federation  
of Agricultural Producers  36
Water Challenges in the Arabian Gulf, Sir Mohammad Jaafar, Chairman and 
Managing Director, Kuwaiti Danish Dairy Company, Kuwait  39
The High Cost of Priceless Water and Oman’s Ancient Alternative, Peter 
Brabeck-Letmathe, Chairman, Nestlé SA, Switzerland  41

x  contents
Chapter 2: Energy    44
Background  44
Trends  45
Forecast  53
Implications  55
The Way Forward  57
Perspectives  58
Water and Energy: New Thinking, Peter Gleick, President and Cofounder, Pacific 
Institute, United States  59
Burning Up Food as Fuel: The Role of Water, Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, Chairman, 
Nestlé SA, Switzerland  61
Choke Point: The Collision Between Water and Energy, J. Carl Ganter, 
Managing Director, Circle of Blue, United States  62
Solutions from the Sea, The Dow Chemical Company, United States  63
Chapter 3: Trade    68
Background  68
Trends  72
Forecast  74
Implications  75
The Way Forward  76
Perspectives  77
The Water-Trade Nexus, James Bacchus, Chair, Global Trade and Investment 
Practice, Greenberg Traurig LLP; former member of United States House of 
Representatives and former Chairman of the Appellate Body of the World Trade 
Organization  78
The Risks and Rewards of Water in Trade, Stuart Orr, Freshwater Manager, World 
Wide Fund for Nature International, Gland, Switzerland; and Guy Pegram, 
World Wide Fund for Nature Adviser, South Africa  80
Interlocking Crises of Water Scarcity: How Trade Can Make a Difference, 
Herbert Oberhänsli, Head, Economics and International Relations, Nestlé SA, 
Switzerland  82
Soft Approaches to Sustainable Intensification for Water Security, Tony Allan, 
Professor and Head, King’s College London Water Research Group, United 
Kingdom  84
Chapter 4: National Security    88
Background  88
Trends  89
Forecast  92

contents
 ﻿ xi
Implications  96
The Way Forward  97
Perspectives  99
Trans-boundary Waters and Geopolitics by 2025, Claudia Sadoff, Lead Economist 
and Team Leader, South Asia Water Initiative, World Bank, Nepal  100
Hydro-solidarity as a National Security Foundation, Patricia Wouters, Director, 
UNESCO Centre for Water Law, Policy, and Science, University of Dundee, 
Scotland  102
Water in the Arabian Gulf: How to Tell the Story?, Francis Matthew, Editor at 
Large, Gulf News, Dubai, United Arab Emirates  104
Land: A Question of Increasing Strategic Importance in Search of Better-
Informed Answers, Ralph Ashton, Convenor and Chair, Terrestrial Carbon 
Group, United Kingdom  105
The Water–National Security Nexus: The Case of Pakistan, John Briscoe, 
Gordon McKay Professor of the Practice of Environmental Engineering, Harvard 
University Schools of: Engineering and Applied Sciences; Public Health; and 
Kennedy School of Governance, United States  107
Chapter 5: Cities    111
Background  111
Trends  114
Forecast  115
Implications  116
The Way Forward  117
Perspectives  118
A Socioeconomic Breakdown, Arjun Thapan, Special Senior Adviser in 
Infrastructure and Water, Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines  119
Fatal Flooding in Modern Cities, Richard Harpin, Senior Vice-President and Head 
of  Water Scarcity, Halcrow Group Ltd., United Kingdom  121
Creating a Wastewater Revolution in Asian Cities: The Concept of 
Cascading Use, Margaret Catley-Carlson, Patron, Global Water Partnership; 
Member, United Nations Secretary-General’s Advisory Board on Water and 
Sanitation  123
Social Enterprise Solution for Water and Sanitation Facilities in Kenya’s Slums, 
David Kuria, CEO and Founder, Ecotact, Kenya  124
Urban Water Supply Security and Desalination, Craig Fenton, Partner and Head 
of  Water Sector Advisory Practice, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Australia  125
Chapter 6: People    131
Background  131
Trends  132

xii 
contents
Forecast  134
Implications  135
The Way Forward  137
Perspectives  138
The Water Crisis Is Now, Barbara Frost, Chief Executive, WaterAid  139
Water for People: The Capacity Constraint of Governments Hinders Action, 
Ajit Gulabchand, Chairman and Managing Director, Hindustan Construction 
Company Ltd.  141
Free Access to the Water Nexus, Thabo Makgoba, Anglican Archbishop of  
Southern Africa  142
SaniShop: Transforming the Sanitation Crisis into a Massive Business Opportunity 
for All, Jack Sim, Founder and Director, World Toilet Organization, 
Singapore  143
Chapter 7: Business    148
Background  148
Trends  149
Forecast  155
Implications  156
The Way Forward  157
Perspectives  158
Global Water Tool, World Business Council for Sustainable Development, Geneva 
Switzerland  158
Water in the Value Chain, Graham Mackay, Chief Executive, SABMiller plc, 
United Kingdom  159
Water Resource Management and Sustainability, Jeff Seabright, Vice-President, 
Environment and Water Resources, The Coca-Cola Company, United 
States  161
Appendix: A Snapshot of Business Water Leadership  164
Chapter 8: Finance    172
Background  172
Trends  173
Forecast  179
Implications  180
The Way Forward  181
Perspectives  182
Financing Water, Usha Rao-Monari, Global Head of  Water, Global Infrastructure 
and Natural Resources Department, International Finance Corporation, United 
States  183

contents
 ﻿ xiii
Meeting the Water Challenge, Alex Barrett, Global Head of Client Research, 
Standard Chartered Bank, United Kingdom  186
Water, Agriculture, and the Pricing of Sustenance, Stuart Orr, Freshwater 
Manager, World Wide Fund for Nature International, Gland, Switzerland; and 
Guy Pegram, World Wide Fund for Nature Adviser, South Africa  186
Property Rights to Water for All, David Zetland, Professor, University of 
California, Berkeley, United States  187
An Example of Local-Level Water Market Innovation in Sonoma, California, 
James G. Workman, Author and Cofounder, SmartMarkets, San Francisco, 
California, United States  189
Chapter 9: Climate    193
Background  193
Trends  195
Forecast and Implications  196
The Way Forward  197
Perspectives  198
Glaciers, Water Security, and Asia’s Rivers, Orville Schell, [Greater China] 
Director, Center on US–China Relations The Asia Society, New York; Member, 
Global Agenda Council on Climate Change  198
Combining the What and How of Building Climate Resilience: Water 
Ecosystems and Infrastructure, Mark Smith, Head, International Union for 
Conservation of Nature Water Programme, Switzerland  201
Chapter 10: New Economic Frameworks for  
Decision-Making    204
Background  205
Step 1: Identifying the Demand and Supply Gap through 2030  205
Step 2: How Can the Gaps between Supply and Demand Be Closed?  206
Step 3: What Technical Options for Supply and Water Productivity Exist to 
Close the “Water Gap”?   207
The Way Forward: A Fact-Based Analysis as a Platform for Action  211
Perspectives  213
The Work of the Water Resources Group, Herbert Oberhänsli, Head, Economics 
and International Relations, Nestlé SA, Switzerland  214
Water Portfolio Management, Lee A. McIntire, Chairman and CEO, CH2M 
HILL; and Robert Bailey, President of the Water Group, CH2M HILL  214
A “Cloud-to-Coast” Decision Framework, Michael Norton, Managing Director, 
Water and Power Division, Halcrow Group Ltd.; and Roger Falconer, Halcrow 
Professor of  Water Management, Cardiff University  216

xiv 
contents
An Integrated Sustainability Index for Effective Water Policy, Rabi H. Mohtar, 
Director, Global Engineering Program; Professor, Agricultural and Biological 
Engineering Department, Purdue University; Member, Global Agenda Council 
on Water Security  217
Water Skin: A Global Multi-scale River Basin Decision-Support Framework 
for Collaborative Water Resource and Risk Management from the Planetary 
Skin Institute, Juan Carlos Castilla-Rubio, President, Planetary Skin Institute; 
Managing Director, Cisco Systems, Inc., Sustainability and Resources Innovation 
Group  219
Chapter 11: Innovative Water Partnerships    225
Background  225
The Regional Platforms and Networks  226
An Evolving Process  230
The Way Forward  232
Conclusion  234
A Viewpoint from Jordan, Ministry of Planning and Internatioinal Cooperation of 
Jordan  237
So, How Will This Initiative Work?  239
Acknowledgments  243

Illustrations
Figures
  1.1.	 Commodity price evolution since June 2010   23
  1.2.	 Commodity price evolution since January 2006   24
  1.3.	 World population, 1965–2050  31
  2.1.	 Gas and liquid fuels value chain: Water consumption   46
  2.2.	 Electricity industry value chain: Water consumption   50
  2.3.	 Domestic water industry value chain: Energy consumption   53
  4.1.	 International river basins   101
  5.1.	 Cost reductions in large-scale desalination   127
  5.2.	 Impact of scale on “effective” desalination costs   128
  7.1.	 Signatories of the CEO Water Mandate, 2010  150
10.1.	 Aggregated global gap between existing accessible, reliable, 
sustainable supply and 2030 water withdrawals, assuming no 
efficiency gains  206
10.2.	 Business-as-usual approaches will not meet demand for raw 
water  207
10.3.	 Representative demand- and supply-side measures  208
10.4.	 India: Cost of additional water availability in 2030  209
10.5.	 Cloud-to-Coast framework  218
10.6.	 Energy-food-natural resources continuum: System challenge  219
Tables
2.1.	
Water consumption in thermoelectric power plants per unit of net 
power produced closed-loop cooling  51
5.1.	
World’s largest cities facing water shortages in the past three 
years  114
 
xv


Preface 
At the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos-Klosters in 2008, 
business leaders set out a Call to Action on Water; their goal was to raise 
awareness—to develop a better understanding of how water is linked to eco-
nomic growth across a nexus of issues; and to make clear the water security 
challenge we face to 2030 if a business as usual approach to water manage-
ment is maintained. 
	
At the same meeting, Ban Ki-moon, UN Secretary-General, sent business 
a challenge: to use their call to action to help engage governments in the 
water discussion.
	
As a result, the last three years have seen an unprecedented level of 
discussion and analysis on water throughout the World Economic Forum’s 
meetings and elsewhere. These discussions have been underpinned by a multi-
company Water Initiative and informed by our Global Agenda Council on 
Water Security. This publication captures where the debate is now. It is a 
significant achievement. It sets out the challenge we face if nothing is done 
to improve water management in the next two decades. It also points to the 
future, introducing an important institutional initiative on water the World 
Economic Forum is now engaging in, to move from insight to action with 
the Water Resources Group.
	
The data and text contained in this publication are the products of a 
unique and unprecedented international, public-private-expert alliance to 
address the water challenge. It represents the multistakeholder ethos of the 
World Economic Forum: to bring together expertise and insight from all 
aspects of the economy to further the global, regional, and industry agenda 
on key issues, in this case water.
	
A broad network of World Economic Forum constituents has contributed 
to the ongoing success of this project. In particular, we express sincere 
appreciation for the foresight shown by the Industry Partners of the Water 
Initiative Project Board to conceive and develop this publication, and also to 
members of the Global Agenda Council on Water Security, past and present, 
for their continuous input to the overall water initiative and this book in 
particular. 
	
A few special acknowledgments are due. For his vision and determination 
to grow the Forum’s water security agenda, we are indebted to the leadership 
shown by Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, Chairman of Nestlé SA and Foundation 
 
xvii

xviii  preface
Board Member of the World Economic Forum. Within the Forum’s 
International Business Council, we are particularly grateful to Indra Nooyi, 
Chairman and CEO of PepsiCo, Inc., and Muhtar Kent, Chairman and 
CEO of The Coca-Cola Company, for their extraordinary partnership and 
commitment to the Forum’s work on water. Among our governmental 
partners we acknowledge with gratitude the long-term support for the Forum’s 
work on water from the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
led by Director General Martin Dahinden and his water team at SDC; and 
our important partnership with the International Finance Corporation, led 
by Lars Thunell, CEO and his water team at the IFC. Our gratitude and 
thanks are also given to Margaret Catley-Carlson, Patron of the Global Water 
Partnership and Chair of the World Economic Forum Water Security Global 
Agenda Council, 2007-2010. Her contribution to help develop the water 
agenda through our various convenings and meetings over the past four years 
has been immeasurable.
	
This publication also represents the collective input of more than 350 
individuals who have engaged in water initiative–related discussions at our 
various summits and meetings in Africa, China, Europe, India, and the 
Middle East during 2008–10, as well as in Davos at our Annual Meetings 
and Dubai at our Annual Meeting of the Global Agenda. 
	
Our thanks to you all.
	
Finally, for further information, please contact water@weforum.org, or 
visit www.weforum.org/water.
—Richard Samans, Managing Director, World Economic Forum
—Dominic Waughray, Senior Director, World Economic Forum 

Reproduction of Opening Remarks by the United Nations Sec-
retary General Ban Ki-Moon to the Session of the World Eco-
nomic Forum Water Initiative at the Forum’s Annual Meeting 
in Davos, January 29 2009 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure to see you and pick up the conversation we began here in Davos 
one year ago.
Lately, I have taken to saying that the past year was one of multiple crises. We 
have the economic crisis, the food crisis, the energy crisis. To these we can add 
climate change. All of these crises are still very much with us. They illustrate our 
world’s vulnerability to the shock of diminishing resources. And as you all know 
only too well, water is very much near the top of the list. Your work is therefore 
essential and I commend you for it. Over the past year you have come together—
academics, business people, government leaders—and put this issue on the global 
agenda. People are beginning to realize how connected it is to so many chal-
lenges—development, peace and security, economic growth. The global public 
has become increasingly aware how climate change and water scarcity threaten the 
populations of heavily settled parts of the world. They understand how it breeds 
conflict. They know how man-made climate change and growing consumption 
of water are putting unprecedented stress on this dwindling resource. The good 
news is that we also know how technology can play an important role in mitigat-
ing water stress. Many technologies—new and ancient—can improve water, for 
example, supplying more water from sea-water, harvesting rainfall or deploying 
new and simple methods of irrigation that save water. Farmers can diversify crops 
and plant drought-resistant seeds. All this we know. The problem is that we have 
no coordinated global management authority in the UN system or the world at 
large. There is no overall responsibility, accountability or vision for how to address 
the related problems of climate change, agricultural stress and water technology. 
This is where you come in. Some of you are members of the Global Compact’s 
CEO Water Mandate, which I introduced here last year and has already made 
substantial progress. I hope many more of you will join. Your work to create a 
water security Global Agenda Council is essential. So is your effort to develop the 
economic and geopolitical forecast you are discussing today. For the first time, 
you are bringing together all the different perspectives and expertise required to 
define the full dimension of the problem and propose solutions. In doing so, you 
are creating the framework of a future partnership—bringing together businesses, 
governments, universities and NGOs. The problem is broad and systemic. Our 
work to deal with it must be so as well. 
I look forward to seeing your work completed. I will help in any way I can.
 
xix


Foreword
In 1911, John Muir observed how “when we try to pick out anything by itself 
in nature, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.” A century later, 
a gathering of the World Economic Forum discovered the same phenomenon. 
Four hundred top decision-makers listed the myriad looming threats to global 
stability, including famine, terrorism, inequality, disease, poverty, and climate 
change. Yet when we tried to address each diverse force, we found them all 
attached to one universal security risk: fresh water. 
	
To some degree, water stress is as old as time. But in past societies, scar-
city found relief through commerce, as parched regions could import from 
greener pastures. That pressure valve no longer exists on our hot, hungry, 
crowded, and fast-evaporating planet. A recent McKinsey & Company study 
found that within two decades, the collective demand of humans for water 
will exceed foreseen supply by about 40%. That shortage escalates food prices, 
disrupts energy, constricts trade, creates refugees, and undermines authority. 
Thirst is now global. 
	
Our collaboration illustrates where and why water is, quite literally, “hitched 
to everything else in the universe.” Water infuses not only our ground beef 
patty, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions, ketchup, and sesame seed bun, but also 
the bag and packaging in which that hamburger is provided, the building in 
which it was grilled, the energy to cook it, and the financial system that lent 
the franchise capital. River currents turn turbines or grow fuel or cool plants 
that generate its electrical currents. On fresh water dangles the life or death 
of five thousand children each day, the clothing they wear, and whether their 
weak governing state will grow stable or start to unravel. Water is the single 
constraint on the expansion of every city, and bankers and corporate execu-
tives have cited it as the only natural limit to economic growth. What is strik-
ing is that the water nexus has remained on the periphery of priorities for so 
many for so long. This work seeks to transform our often-willful ignorance 
into intense interest and informed, pragmatic action. 
	
This volume binds decades of collaborative work by seasoned veterans in 
the contentious yet fascinating struggle to quench human thirst. Yet this land-
mark book did not emerge overnight, out of nowhere. It builds on years of 
debate in dozens of meetings, initially gaining traction in an earlier report 
prepared for the Davos-Klosters Annual Meeting in 2009 titled The Bubble 
Is Close to Bursting. Water Security, however, pushes much further. It presents 
not only an urgent warning and unique forecast, but also offers positive rec-
ommendations; diverse perspectives, profound insights, and pragmatic case 
 
xxi

xxii  foreword
studies by public and private authorities confirm the vital role water can and 
must play over the next two decades to secure the world’s economy. 
	
Water is an astonishingly complex and subtle force in that economy, shap-
ing decisions in ways we only now begin to appreciate. But this much is 
already clear: if “business-as-usual” water management practices continue for 
another two decades, large parts of the world will face a serious and structural 
threat to economic growth, human well-being, and national security. Some 
will feel the heat sooner than others. Indeed, today we see troubling signs of 
flash points to come. Against various trend lines in agriculture, energy, climate 
change, urban growth, infrastructure, population, and environmental stress, 
this book will argue why we simply cannot manage water in the future as we 
have done in the past. 
	
In 2009, the Forum’s Industry Partners and Global Agenda Council on 
Water Security united to augment, revise, and strengthen the chapters that 
form this book’s thematic backbone. That same year, the Forum persuaded 
an extraordinary group of CEOs, water experts, NGO heads, scientists, and 
international officials to provide insights on the various challenges to our 
common water future and how we must navigate them. 
	
The next phase of the World Economic Forum’s Water Initiative will build 
on the platform, analysis, and decision-making framework inscribed in this 
book. Yet the work in your hands is neither definitive nor final. Indeed, Wa-
ter Security is by no means is the ultimate word. It merely introduces a fresh 
tributary into a broad-based and collaborative current, seeking an efficient, 
productive, and equitable journey towards a natural cycle of rebirth and 
renewal.
—Margaret Catley-Carlson, Patron, 
Global Water Partnership, Canada; 
Vice-Chair, World Economic Forum 
Global Agenda Council on Water Security
