Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
1
 
Blogging the New Arab Public 
 
Blog enthusiasts pinning great hopes upon the transformative impact of online 
personal Web logs have often seemed to run ahead of political reality.1 A few years ago, 
in fact, Arab blogs could easily be written off as a fad, fueled by the novelty of some 
outspoken female Saudi bloggers and the prominence of some English-language Iraqi 
blogs in the American political blogosphere. There are still plenty of reasons to believe 
that blogs will never live up to their hype.2  Blogging remains the activity of a tiny elite, 
as only a small minority of the already microscopic fraction of Arabs who regularly use 
the Internet actually write or read blogs. Blogs reach only a fraction of the audience of Al 
Jazeera or even of tedious state-dominated newspapers. Where bloggers have been 
politically influential, such as Egypt and Bahrain, repressive regimes have been able to 
crack down on them. From this perspective, it is highly unlikely that blogging will induce 
wide political change in the Middle East.  
 
While a healthy skepticism is wise, it would be wrong to conclude that blogging 
has no role in Arab politics.  Arab political blogging is changing and becoming more 
                                                 
1 For helpful comments on earlier drafts of this essay, I would like to thank Henry Farrell, 
Mona el-Ghobhashy, Issandr El Amrani,  Ethan Zuckerman, and George Weyman, 
though of course all errors are mine.  
2 Jon Alterman, “The Information Revolution and the Middle East,” in Daniel Byman and 
Nora Bensahel, eds., The Future Security Environment in the Middle East (Washington 
DC: RAND), pp.224-251;  Albrecht Hofheinz, “The Internet in the Arab World: 
Playground for Political Liberalization.” Zeitschrift: Internationale Politik und 
Gesellschaft 3, no.3 (2006) http://www.fes.de/IPG/arc_05_set/set_03_05d.htm 
 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
2
politically relevant. Bloggers have had a discernible impact in a wide range of Arab 
countries, including their role in the Kefaya movement in Egypt (see Rania Al Malky in 
this issue), political protests in Bahrain (see Luke Schleusener), the turbulent post-Al 
Hariri period in Lebanon (see Sune Haugbolle), anti-corruption campaigns in Libya (see 
Claudia Gazzini) and the 2006 Kuwaiti elections.  While political opportunities usually 
come first—around elections, national scandals, or contentious elite debates, for 
instance—blogs can be catalysts for previously unlikely political mobilization.3  A raft of 
recent articles have begun to explore the new politics of Arab blogs, especially their role 
in facilitating new forms of political activism.4  Mainstream Arab media have taken note 
as well, as in a breathless segment on Al Jazeera last year dubbed Blogs: the New 
Opposition Voice in Arab Politics in which veteran journalist Mohammed Hasanayn 
Haykal declared himself the greatest reader of blogs.5 Do blogs represent a revolutionary 
new tool for Arab political mobilization? Can they break the filter of state-controlled 
media and give both non-Arabs and Arabs themselves direct access to real Arab voices? 
Can they provide the foundations for a new Arab public sphere? 
 
                                                 
3 I am indebted to Alaa Abd al-Fattah (http://www.manalaa.net/) for this formulation;  
interview, January 14, 2007, Cairo.  
4 Negar Azimi, “Blogging Against Torture,” The Nation, February 19, 2007 (available at 
http://www.thenation.com/doc/20070219/azimi/2);  Gal Beckerman, “The New Arab 
Conversation,” Columbia Journalism Review (January/February 2007) (available at 
http://www.cjr.org/issues/2007/1/Beckerman.asp);  “The Arab blogosphere,” Bitter 
Lemons International roundtable with Ammar Abdulhamid, Mona Eltahawy, Esra’a al-
Shafei, and Ahmed al-Omran;  February 15, 2007 (available at http://www.bitterlemons-
international.org/previous.php?opt=1&id=168) 
5 Haykal on Kawalis, Al Jazeera, October 6, 2005. Other prominent discussions of blogs 
in the Arab mainstream media include the multi-part series written by Jihad Al Khazen in 
Al Hayat, June 15-22, 2005;  Amina Khayri, "Egypt's bloggers," Al Hayat, October 18, 
2004; and  Asharq Alawsat, "The experience of Arab bloggers," January 25, 2006. 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
3
Ultimately, blogs are a technology which requires political actors and 
opportunities to become relevant.   Rather than focus on whether blogs alone can deliver 
democracy or a political revolution, analysts should explore the variety of ways in which 
blogs might transform the dynamics of Arab public opinion and political activism.  Even 
if expectations that a few courageous blogs could shatter the wall of fear sustaining brittle 
Arab states have been overblown, blogs could nevertheless allow ordinary Arabs to re-
engage with politics, hone their analytical and argumentative skills, and escape the state-
driven red lines which even the most independent of Arab media are forced to 
acknowledge. Blogs allow for “a widely dispersed set of interlinked arguments about 
politics that responds with extraordinary rapidity to new events.”6 National blogospheres 
can create a space in which citizens are able to engage in sustained, focused political 
argument, and perhaps even hold national leaders to account in ways not managed by 
existing media. The ability of blogs to expose a Kuwaiti parliamentary candidate's vote 
buying, or to publicize the mistreatment of ordinary Egyptians in local police stations, 
could be only the cutting edge of new ways of enhancing political accountability and 
transparency. The dialogues and interactions on blogs, finally, may contribute to the 
rebuilding of transnational Arab identity by creating “warm” relationships among 
otherwise distant Arab youth. These blogs are chipping away at the encrusted structures 
of the Arab punditocracy, bringing in new voices which previously had no outlet, and 
challenging the norms and expectations governing Arab public political discourse. In 
short, even if Arab political blogs are unlikely to lead a revolution, they hold out the 
                                                 
6 Henry Farrell, “Bloggers and Parties: Can the netroots reshape American democracy?” 
Boston Review 31, no.5 (2006); Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks:  How Social 
Production Transforms Markets and Freedom (New Haven: Yale University Press 2006).  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
4
prospect of a new kind of Arab public sphere which could reshape the texture of politics 
in the decades to come. 7   
 
How Many Bloggers, and What do They Do? 
 
Blogs remain a very small phenomenon in the Arab world, although one which 
has grown steadily. Internet penetration in the Arab world remains comparatively low (4 
per cent by some measures presented on www.internetworldstats.com/) and concentrated 
in urban areas. 2006 Nielsen data suggests there are about 19 million Arab Internet users, 
making up about 10 per cent of the population.  This represents almost a 500 per cent 
increase over six years ago, however, and Internet access seems nearly universal among 
politically mobilized youth in some Arab countries.8 Arabic does not even rate as a top-
ten blogging language in the latest Technorati rankings, where it makes up less than 1 per 
cent of the blogosphere;  this does not capture English-language Arab blogs, however.9 
The most reasonable estimate of the number of Arab political blogs circa 2006 would be 
a few thousand, out of the commonly cited figure of 25,000 total blogs.10. Issam 
Bayazidi, founder of the Jordan Planet aggregator, estimates the number of blogs last 
                                                 
7 For an overview of the evolution of the Arab public sphere, see Marc Lynch, Voices of 
the New Arab Public: Iraq, Al-Jazeera, and Middle East Politics Today (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2006);  Jon Anderson and Dale Eickelman, eds., New Media 
in a Changing Middle East (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).   
8 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats5.htm;  other surveys show closer to 26 million 
(http://www.ameinfo.com/96643.html)  
9 http://www.technorati.com/weblog/2006/05/100.html  
10 for blogs in Arabic, see http://Arabblogcount.blogspot.com and Iraq Blog Count: 
http://www.iraqblogcount.blogspot.com/  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
5
year at about 7,000,11 while the popular host Jeeran claims to host 20,000 blogs, but does 
not distinguish between political and non-political blogs.  Another popular host Maktoob 
estimates there are 4360 "political and news" blogs across the region.   National 
aggregators in Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia each include 
about 300 active blogs, while Egypt may now boast over a thousand.  Whatever the exact 
numbers, the relatively small number of readers and participants might suggest a built-in 
ceiling for the political impact of Arab blogs. 
 
However, volume might not be necessary for political influence. Since much of 
the new energy in Arab politics comes from relatively small groups of activists, a 
technology which empowers their efforts could have a disproportionate impact even if it 
does not reach a mass base. A large portion of the readers of Arab blogs are political 
activists, journalists, and other politically influential elites (as well as foreign scholars 
and governments trying to gauge Arab public opinion), a high quality audience even if a 
relatively small one.12  Newspapers such as Al Masry Al Youm and Al Dustour in Egypt 
now routinely cite blogs as sources for their stories, offering another indirect route for 
political impact.   In such a political environment, even a handful of creative, engaged, 
and effective political bloggers can make a dramatic difference. If blogs cannot constitute 
a genuine public sphere without reaching a mass audience, they still might form a 
counter-public, an incubator of new ideas and new identities which evolves alongside and 
slowly reshapes the mainstream public from below. 
                                                 
11 Natasha Tynes, “Arab Blogging”, G21 Mideast www.g21.net/midE20.htm.  “Gulf 
Bloggers: a new breed of Arab activists,” Agence France Press, June 14, 2006 
12 Farrell, “Bloggers and parties.”   

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
6
 
The political outlook of Arab bloggers is shaped by the demographics of Internet 
users in the Arab world. Many in the first wave of Arab bloggers have tended to be 
young, technologically-oriented, and politically unengaged. As Haitham Sabbah points 
out, “whereas in the USA… many bloggers are long established journalists, 
commentators, and political troublemakers, such personalities in the Arab world do not 
yet generally have blogs.”13 The Arab blogosphere still lacks a critical mass of policy 
bloggers—an elite corps of highly educated, informed bloggers who devote their time to 
advocacy on a single policy issue within their realm of expertise.  This has begun to 
change, however.   In Jordan, for instance, the first wave of young, tech-focused youth 
has already been supplemented by blogs maintained by Batir Wardum (a liberal 
columnist for the newspaper Al Dustour), Yasir Abu Hilala (Al Jazeera’s Amman 
correspondent and columnist for Al Ghad), Ziyad Abu Ghuneima (an Islamist former 
MP), and Hilmi Asmar (a columnist and former editor of the Muslim Brotherhood 
weekly newspaper Al Sabil).14 As blogs come to be seen as politically relevant and 
respectable, more established figures are likely to embrace the form. At another end of 
the spectrum, Libya’s eccentric President Moammar Qaddafi supposedly began his own 
blog.15 
 
Observers clearly need to be very wary of drawing inferences about public 
opinion from blogs. Some of the most prominent English-language bloggers are, for all 
                                                 
13 http://sabbah.biz/mt/archives/2005/10/06/blogging-in-the-arab-world/  
14 All blogs can be found at http://jordanplanet.net  
15 http://www.algathafi.org/en/index_en.htm  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
7
their other virtues, highly unrepresentative of public opinion in their countries. Their 
divergence from mainstream opinion often makes them interesting to read, but as 
dissidents rather than as barometers of local opinion.16 Indeed, their novelty may be 
precisely the reason why they receive greater media attention. Someone who relied on the 
main Egyptian English-language blogs for information about Egyptian politics would 
likely have been  shocked at the outcome of its parliamentary elections, while someone 
who relied on some of the more prominent English-language Iraqi blogs would have a 
very unbalanced sense of Iraqi politics. The Egyptian blogger Sandmonkey points to an 
anti-terror demonstration organized by a few bloggers as an example of the potential for 
blog influence because it “garnered headlines everywhere and it showed that there are 
Egyptians that oppose terrorism.”17  But in fact the rally was quite small and said less 
about Egyptian public opinion than about the ability of these English-language bloggers 
to gain favorable coverage in like-minded blogs and media in the West (a form of power, 
to be sure). While blogs clearly do not represent wider public opinion, they still do offer 
the interpretations of potentially insightful individuals and, collectively, can at least offer 
insights into the views of young, educated, well-off Arabs. 
 
Blogs are only one small part of the emerging Arab internet. Al Jazeera, Al 
Arabiya, and most Arab newspapers have well-established presences on the web. Jihadi 
forums, in addition to discussion boards about topics ranging from sports, music and 
reality TV to sexuality, attract a lot of users, and allow for similar kinds of community 
                                                 
16 I thank Ammar Abdulhamid (http://amarji.blogspot.com/) for this defense of the 
virtues of unrepresentative blogs.  
17 As quoted by Tynes, “Arab blogging” 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
8
building, interaction, and building of "warm" relationships across vast divides. Helmi 
Noman studied 338 online Arabic-language forums between July and September 2005.18 
He found Islamic-themed forums to be the most common (27 per cent), with jihadi 
forums representing a small but highly active sub-set. Only 5 per cent were devoted to 
politics and current affairs, less than the proportion devoted to a range of other non-
political categories including sports, entertainment, the stock market, and computers 
(Noman found that 42 per cent of all the Yahoo Groups he surveyed focused on sex.) 
Perhaps these non-political uses of the internet will serve as a bridge to more political 
engagements. The Syrian dissident/blogger Ammar Abdulhamid argues that young Arabs 
who use social networking sites as a “means for self-expression” are “more likely... to 
develop a greater affinity and respect for the more socially and politically relevant 
blogs.”19  Not only do online forums and networks involve kinds of participation which 
articulate well with the process of accountable politics—criticism, negotiation, 
argument—they can also lead users to strictly political blogs. 
 
The question of anonymity has been divisive in discussions of the Arab 
blogosphere. In January 2006, Jihad Al Khazen sparked a minor blogging tempest by 
attacking the Saudi “Religious Policeman” blogger for writing controversial opinions 
under a pseudonym.20 Many of the more politically engaged bloggers have chosen not to 
                                                 
18 http://www.helmionline.com/internet/2005/10/web_content.htm  Also see Ethan 
Zuckerman’s blog, April 5, 2006, http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/?p=470  
19 On the Amarji blog, July 27, 2006, http://amarji.blogspot.com/2006/07/blogging-and-
future-of-democracy-in.html  
20 Al Hayat, January 5, 2006; available at 
http://www.daralhayat.com/opinion/editorials/01-2006/Item-20060104-96ceaf15-c0a8-
10ed-0025-b64d4bbd291e/story.html  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
9
use pseudonyms, on the assumption that they would be unlikely to remain unknown to 
state security services anyway.21   But political blogging can be deeply risky in the 
Middle East. As Wael Abbas puts it, “becoming a blogger can be a life-changing decision 
attracting phone taps, official harassment or even arrest.”22 The arrest and torture of some 
Egyptian bloggers sent a chilling message throughout the Arab blogosphere, particularly 
the recent sentencing of anti-Islamist blogger Abd al-Kareem Nabil Suleiman to four 
years in prison for views expressed on his blog.23 And while Alaa Abd El Fattah received 
considerable international attention and support after his arrest during the Egyptian 
judge’s crisis of 2005 (including a statement of support from the United States 
government and Human Rights Watch), this did not keep him out of jail, and other less 
well-known bloggers languished in prison without a spotlight. Bahraini bloggers have 
also faced interrogations and intimidation from security services, with several spending 
weeks in jail for online remarks critical of the regime.24 The risks of blogging have been 
felt across the Arab world: Tunisian, Libyan, and Syrian bloggers in particular have faced 
serious consequences for online speech, which has had a predictably chilling effect. 
 
Some blog enthusiasts seem to explicitly or implicitly expect that blogs will 
primarily empower pro-American voices. Spirit of America, a conservative American 
NGO, developed an Arabic-language blog platform which "gives voices to those working 
for freedom and democracy in the Arab world... and enables them to easily connect and 
                                                 
21 Interview, Alaa Abd El Fattah, January 14, 2007, Cairo 
22 Wael Abbas, DPA, “Blogging in the Middle East is a tough choice”  
http://rawstory.com/news/2006/Blogging_in_the_Middle_East_is_a_to_09142006.html 
23 See “Free Kareem” blog at http://www.freekareem.org 
24 See the “Free Ali” blog: http://freeali.blogspot.com/  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
10
share ideas with their peers."25 But there is no reason to assume that blogs will favor any 
particular political agenda. In the United States, both conservative and liberal activists 
have found innovative ways to harness blogs for their political ends. In the Arab world, 
Islamist movements have long been early and effective adopters of new media 
technologies, from satellite television to online forums. 26  In February 2007, for instance, 
a number of Egyptian Muslim Brothers began blogging, with an online campaign for the 
liberty of arrested Brotherhood leaders and students directly imitating the “Free Alaa” 
and “Free Kareem” campaigns—including custom-made banners, link-exchanges, online 
petitions, personal testimonies, high resolution photos of protests, and embedded 
videos.27  While relatively Westernized youth adopted blogging first, the political 
characteristics of the blogosphere will likely shift as the technology spreads more widely. 
Blogs may be "opposition in a new voice," as they were termed in a recent Al Jazeera 
documentary, 28 but a variety of political movements can access the same tools. 
 
 
Modes of Blogging:  Activists, Bridges, and Public Spheres 
 
Arab political bloggers engage in three principle types of activity:   activism, 
bridge-blogging, and public sphere engagement. Activists are directly involved in 
                                                 
25 http://www.spiritofamerica.net/cgi-bin/soa/project.pl?rm=view_project&request_id=78  
26 See Marc Lynch, “Al Qaeda’s Media Strategies,” The National Interest 81 (Spring 
2006). 
27 Marc Lynch, “Brotherhood of the Blog,” The Guardian (Comment is Free), March 5, 
2007, at 
http://commentisfree.guardian.co.uk/marc_lynch/2007/03/brotherhood_of_the_blog.html 
28 Documentary hosted by Ahmed Zayn, Al Jazeera May 26, 2006.  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
11
political movements, using blogs to coordinate political action, spread information, and 
magnify the impact of contentious politics. Bridgebloggers primarily address Western 
audiences, usually writing in English with the intention of explaining their societies. 
Finally, public-sphere bloggers tend to not be directly involved in a political movement, 
but are deeply engaged with public arguments about domestic (and often Arab or Islamic) 
politics. These categories are not mutually exclusive, of course, and many individuals 
move fluidly across boundaries: the Egyptian Baheyya is primarily a public sphere 
blogger, engaging in sophisticated and trenchant analysis rather than direct political 
organization, but her writings helped the Kefaya movement and the Egyptian judges 
protest reach wide audiences abroad (bridge-blogging) and were translated into Arabic 
and used by activists. But distinguishing these three modes of action can help to make 
sense of the different ways in which Arab bloggers might influence politics in the region.    
 
 
 
Activists 
 
Activist bloggers are directly involved in politics, using their blogs toward 
political organization and campaigns. While this could have a transnational focus 
(organizing a boycott of Danish products, for instance), more often these activist blogs 
focus on domestic politics within their own country. In Egypt, Bahrain, and Kuwait, for 
example, bloggers have played a key role in mobilizing contentious politics. Other Arab 
blogospheres, such as in Jordan and Saudi Arabia, remain more on the political sidelines, 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
12
although they have increasingly taken note of the exploits of their activist peers.29  The 
core distinction is not whether bloggers talk about politics, it is whether they are actively 
engaged in politics. It is unclear whether the emergence of activist blogging is best 
explained by something unique about particular bloggers or about the political context 
more widely. Given the very small numbers of people involved, the inventiveness or 
courage of only a few individuals could make the difference. Still, if there were no 
political openings to exploit, it is unlikely that these individuals would have had the 
opportunity for their innovative political blogging.  
 
Take Egypt, the most well-documented case of a close, organic relationship 
between blogging and a contentious political movement (see also Rania Al Malky’s 
article in this issue).30 Kefaya began as a petition of some 300 intellectuals in the summer 
of 2004, and developed an Internet presence with a popular Web site in the fall of 2004. 
Their first big protest in December 2004 attracted considerable media attention. Blogs 
began to play a key role over the course of 2005. By 2005 there were about 1500 
Egyptian bloggers, more than half in Arabic, almost all of which are in the aggregator 
maintained by Alaa Abd El Fattah and his wife Manal.31 Those blogs provided coverage 
and attention at times when the mass media paid little attention, and contributed both to 
                                                 
29 “Bloggers arousing a clamor,” post on Living in KSA blog, May 8, 2006, http://abu-
yousef.blogspot.com/2006/05/blog-post_08.html; “The rise of political blogs,” post on 
Saudi Jeans, July 22, 2006, http://saudijeans.blogspot.com/2006/07/rise-of-political-
blogs.html  
30 Charles Levison, “Egypt’s growing blogger community pushes the limits of dissent,” 
Christian Science Monitor, August 24, 2005; interviews with Kefaya coordinator George 
Ishaq and several Kefaya members, January 2007.   
31 Alaa Abd El Fattah (http:// manalaa.net/) interview, and presentation blogged by Ethan 
Zuckerman, September 16 2006 http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/?p=987.  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
13
publicity and to organization.  The May 2005 protest was a crucial moment for blogger 
coverage of Egyptian activism. As events unfolded, bloggers claimed to be the only 
source reporting on a protest in which fewer than 100 activists were met by several 
thousand hired thugs and riot police who roughed up peaceful protesters including 
women. According to Ethan Zuckerman, “Bloggers broke the story four days before the 
Egyptian press took it on. Reuters had some photos of the incident, but not a full story, 
and Al Jazeera wasn’t present, so blogger accounts were critical to spreading 
information.”32  As the Kefaya movement developed, bloggers worked with protest 
organizers to ensure that photographs and narratives of the protests were quickly 
disseminated online—offering a valuable resource to journalists, international NGOs and 
to Egyptian citizens alike.33  For all the innovative activism of Kefaya and associated 
bloggers, however, the movement would have achieved little political impact without the 
temporary opening created by a constitutional referendum, presidential elections, and 
parliamentary elections—along with the appearance of several new like-minded 
independent newspapers and the increased Western scrutiny of Egyptian democracy due 
to the Bush administration’s reform rhetoric.  The recent Muslim Brotherhood blogging 
campaign noted above, where blogs such as “Ana Ikhwan” and “Ensaa”  resemble more 
the efforts of Wael Abbas’s Al-Wa’i Al-Masry and Manalaa.net than it does typical 
Brotherhood activism, suggests how easily the tools of Internet campaigning can be 
                                                 
32 Ibid 
33  For example, see Al Arabiya, August 8, 2006;  
http://www.alarabiya.net/Articlep.aspx?P=26423  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
14
adapted by different kinds of political movements. 34  
 
In Bahrain, bloggers and online forums played a direct role in a human-rights 
campaign which infuriated the regime and generated great public controversy (see Luke 
Schleusener’s article in this issue).35 In contrast to Egypt, where bloggers entered into a 
crowded if sclerotic political scene, Bahraini bloggers operated on a smaller scale.  But 
this relative political vacuum also presented an opportunity for the young bloggers. By 
2005, some 60 Bahraini blogs were energetically focusing on local politics in both 
English and Arabic, many under pseudonyms.36 Those bloggers helped to organize and 
publicize a number of protests over issues such as the arrest of Abdulhadi Al Khawaja of 
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (in December 2004) and constitutional reforms.  In 
response, the Bahraini authorities arrested some of the most active bloggers, such as Ali 
Abdulemam, and demanded that Internet sites register with the authorities in an attempt 
to break down the anonymity protecting some of the most outspoken voices.  More 
recently, Bahraini bloggers have been intensely following “Bandar Gate”, a scandal 
driven by revelations of regime plans to fix the 2006 parliamentary elections, and 
produced a map of the country using Google Earth revealing vast appropriations for the 
                                                 
34 Lynch, “Brotherhood of the Blog.”  Blogs referenced:  Al-Wa’i al-Masry at 
http://misrdigital.net;  Manalaa.net;  http://anaikhwan.blogspot.com;  
http://ensaa.blogspot.com 
35 Toby Jones, “Bahrain: It must be election season,” Qahwa Sada, October 12, 2006 
(http://abuaardvark.typepad.com/qahwa_sada/2006/10/bahrain_must_be.html) 
http://chanad.weblogs.us/?cat=11  
36 http://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2005/12/26/bahrains-roller-coaster-week-in-review/  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
15
royal family-  instances of online activism which led the Bahraini government to briefly 
ban the Mahmood's Den blog within the country.37 
 
Kuwaiti bloggers took advantage of several windows of opportunity over the 
course of 2006. Kuwaiti blogs, which had gained an audience with their coverage of the 
succession crisis following the death of the Emir in January 2006, picked up a campaign 
to reduce the number of electoral districts from 25 to 5 in order to cut back on notoriously 
corrupt electoral practices. When the Emir called early Parliamentary elections, blogs 
jumped into the fray with a vengeance. As Mary Ann Tetrault describes it,  
 
“Voters could read some of the more sensational blog postings in daily newspapers. The Orange 
Movement leadership maintains a blog originating in the United States, managed jointly by 
overseas Kuwaiti students and one of the Orange organizers…. During the campaign, it brought 
electoral corruption into the public eye thanks to a posting by a woman who recounted how two 
men in Rula Dashti’s district had attempted to buy her vote with the promise of a Chanel handbag. 
Although she did not mention the candidate’s name, it soon became public knowledge that she was 
speaking of Jamal Al ‘Umar.”38   
 
While ‘Umar nevertheless won a seat, reformist figures supported by these bloggers did 
remarkably well in the elections, even if ultimate power remained in the hands of the 
Sabah family. The Kuwaiti case is particularly interesting since prior to 2006, most 
observers had seen the Kuwaiti blogosphere as relatively disengaged from politics and 
marginal to the public realm.  
                                                 
37 See roundup by Ethan Zuckerman, http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/?p=1085;   
38 Mary Ann Tétreault, “Kuwait’s Annus Mirabilis” September 7, 2006 
http://www.merip.org/mero/mero090706.html  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
16
 
Looking at these three cases reveals some instructive parallels, which may also 
explain why they differ from other countries which lack such activist blogging. In all 
three cases activist bloggers took advantage of a political opening by turning it into 
something more than ruling elites had intended: Kefaya turned what could have been 
ritual, sham elections into a tense drama; the Bahraini bloggers turned a routinely 
repressive shutdown of a human-rights organization into a political cause; and Kuwaiti 
bloggers helped push for an early election in which they could then engage. It only took a 
few activists to tip the balance from a relatively passive and marginal blogosphere into 
much more active political engagement. Other countries which have many bloggers but 
few activists may simply lack the necessary political openings: Jordan lacks any 
significant political parties other than the Islamic Action Front and has been steadily de-
liberalizing over recent years; Tunisian bloggers have not been able to escape the 
intensely repressive state policing of the media; Saudi bloggers face the same extreme 
censorship and personal fear which dominates offline Saudi public life. But should 
political openings appear—parliamentary elections in Jordan scheduled for later this year 
for instance—they could create an opportunity for activist blogging.   
 
 
Bridgebloggers 
 
Most Western attention to Arab blogging has focused on what Ethan Zuckerman has 
termed “bridge-bloggers”: Arabs writing in English as interpreters of their communities, 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
17
less engaged in local politics than in building bridges to Western audiences.39  The Iraqi 
blogger Salam Pax was one of the first major “bridge-bloggers” because of the attention 
he received in the English language blogosphere.40 The Bahraini blogger Mahmood Al 
Yousif presents the quintessential explanation of bridge-blogging:   
 
"Now I try to dispel the image that Muslims and Arabs suffer from - mostly by our own doing I 
have to say - in the rest of the world. I am no missionary and don’t want to be. I run several Internet 
websites that are geared to do just that, create a better understanding that we’re not all nuts hell-
bent on world destruction."41 
 
Zuckerman argues that these bridge-bloggers are a small and shrinking proportion of the 
international blogosphere, but are actually increasingly important in order to avoid 
fragmentation into hermetically sealed language enclaves. Haitham Sabbah suggests that 
such Arab blogs can challenge the biases of the Western media, “open new channels of 
discussion”, and “get attention and support from international media as well as NGOs for 
cases that one day were impossible to cross the borders”.42 
 
These bridge-bloggers, writing in English with an eye on Western discourse, often 
receive disproportionate attention from Western journalists.43  As bridge-bloggers focus 
on addressing foreign audiences, they often stand aloof from their own national politics. 
                                                 
39 Ethan Zuckerman, “Meet the Bridgebloggers”, draft presented to “The Power and 
Political Science of Blogs” conference, University of Chicago, September 16-17, 2005.   
40 http://dear_raed.blogspot.com/ 
41 http://mahmood.tv/?page_id=2 
42 http://sabbah.biz/mt/archives/2005/10/06/blogging-in-the-arab-world/  
43 Gal Beckerman, “The New Arab Conversation,” Columbia Journalism Review 
(January/February 2007), available at http://www.cjr.org/issues/2007/1/Beckerman.asp. 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
18
Such bridge-blogging depends heavily on links from American "hub blogs", widely-
trafficked  blogs which serve as focal points for like-minded blogospheres.   Given the 
realities of the American blogosphere, this translates into a partisan, politicized kind of 
gate-keeping, in which partisan hub-bloggers lavish attention and hits on Arab blogs 
which tell them what their own readers wanted to hear. Early in the Iraq War for 
example, conservative hub-bloggers promoted the pro-American Iraq the Model (and 
later hired its proprieters Omar and Mohammed Fadil as the regional editors for the 
conservative blog consortium Pajamas Media), while liberal bloggers lavished attention 
on the more critical Riverbend.44 The temptations for would-be bridge-bloggers to play to 
a partisan audience threatened to transform them from bridges into mirrors. 
 
There are some exceptions. Both right and left-wing American blogs could rally 
around a democracy activist like Alaa Abd El Fattah, for instance.45 Global Voices 
Online offers one way around these gate-keeper hubs by delegating regional editors 
fluent in the local language to sift through national blogospheres in order to present 
snapshots of their internal dialogues.46 While this simply replaces one gate-keeper with 
another, it at least replaces the “cherry-picking” of partisan Western hub-blogs with the 
judgment of someone inside the debates.   Westernized bloggers do have a comparative 
advantage in the bridge-blogging arena:  an Islamist blogger writing in Arabic is simply 
                                                 
44 http://iraqthemodel.blogspot.com/ , http://www.pajamasmedia.com and 
http://riverbendblog.blogspot.com/   
45 Lauren Frayer, “Even from prison, Egyptian democracy activist works the 
blogosphere,” Associated Press, May 28, 2006 
46 http://www.globalvoicesonline.org/ 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
19
less likely to strike the same chord in the U.S.  as an anti-Islamist blogger writing in 
English.   
 
 
 Public Sphere Bloggers 
 
 “Public-sphere” blogs are deeply engaged in arguments about domestic politics, 
but not in organized activism. While many assume that blogs must be in Arabic to 
constitute a genuine public sphere, many of the best of them are in fact in English.  
Baheyya, the pseudonymous blog of an Egyptian woman, offers a premiere example.  
With biting wit and an intimate knowledge of the contentious politics about which she 
wrote, Baheyya quickly became a lodestone not only for Western readers but for 
Egyptians themselves; no less an authority than Mohammed Hasanayn Haykal dubbed 
Baheyya “the best source of political analysis on Egypt”.  Baheyya and Issandr El 
Amrani’s Arabist Network served as vital conduits of information about Egyptian 
activism for Western analysts.47 Chanad Bahraini and Mahmood's Den covered human-
rights protests in Bahrain in 2005 but did not organize them, and while they brought those 
movements to Western attention, the blogs were fundamentally oriented towards 
influencing domestic Bahraini political arguments.48 Bloggers such as Khalaf , Batir 
Wardum,  and Nasseem Tarawneh in Jordan remain on the political sidelines, but offer 
some of the sharpest and most direct public argument anywhere about Jordanian 
                                                 
47 The Arabist Network (http://arabist.net) featured posts by a number of Cairo-based 
English-language journalists.   
48 http://chanad.weblogs.us/?cat=11 and http://mahmood.tv 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
20
politics.49 Some Tunisian bloggers argue that even without the kind of activism seen in 
Egypt, blogging in Tunisia is “an alternative to the national press … filling the vacuum 
that the mainstream media have created.”50  Even self-declared dissidents such as the 
Syrian Ammar Abdulhamid are more engaged in public-sphere activity than actual 
political organization given Syrian realities.51 
 
Whether or not blogs can constitute a public sphere has been a matter of great 
debate in recent years.52 Habermas himself has speculated that blogs can only constitute a 
public sphere when they “link up” to the mass media. Until this happens, goes the 
argument, blogs will remain a phenomenon on the margins of the public sphere, with 
satellite television stations and national newspapers remaining far more important to 
mass politics. Even a relatively free sub-public in which political arguments and ideas are 
publicly exchanged is no small thing in the Arab political context.   But in fact linkages 
between blogs and mass media are becoming increasingly common. Egyptian newspapers 
such as Al Masry Al Youm and Al Dustour have published excerpts from blogs and 
routinely cite them in their stories.  Al-Jazeera has recently launched ‘al-Jazeera Talk,” 
an online portal which offers posts by its correspondents, forums, and a link to the Arabic 
blog aggregator Dwenn.53 
                                                 
49 Wardum at http://batir.jeeran.com/;  Khalaf at http://ajloun.blogspot.com;  Tarawanah 
at http://www.black-iris.com/ 
50 http://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2006/10/05/blogging-tunisia-whisper/  
51 http://amarji.blogspot.com  
52 Jodi Dean, “Why the Net is not a Public Sphere,” Constellations 10, no.1 (2003);  
James Bohman, “Expanding Dialogue: the internet, the public sphere, and prospects for 
transnational democracy,” Sociological Review 2004 
53 Al-Jazeera Talk  is at http://www.aljazeeratalk.net/portal/, and Dwenn at 
http://www.dwwen.com/  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
21
 
This new blog-based public sphere challenges the “punditocracy” directly, as entrenched 
elites lose some of their power to dictate the terms of debate and frames of reference. The 
punditocracy still has the real advantages of access to privileged positions in the mass 
media, but can no longer bound or seal off public discourse. Blogs have offered a 
similar—if less full-blown—challenge to the encrusted, rigid structures of the Arab 
punditocracy. Today’s public-sphere bloggers offer the tip of an iceberg of politically 
savvy, engaged citizens determined to argue in public about the things which matter to 
them.   Blogs tap into the same deep appeal captured by Al Jazeera, which thrived by 
embracing more participatory forms  such as unscreened call-in shows, live talk shows, 
online polls. But even Al Jazeera could only expand the range of existing voices rather 
than enable a new generation of political voices. 
 
Whether these blogs can live up to Habermasian ideals of rational-critical 
discourse is beside the point. The key contribution of Arab public-sphere bloggers is as 
the leading edge of a new engagement with politics by Arab citizens. That these public 
debates are still limited to very small numbers, or that many blog under pseudonyms, is 
hardly a major problem: how many people actually attended literary salons in 
Habermas’s idealized eighteenth century (few), and how many important political tracts 
were published under pseudonyms (many)? What matters is the arguments themselves, 
and the political identities, commitments, and ideas they generate. Blogs give young 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
22
Arabs frustrated with the status quo an outlet to “voice their concerns and ideas in spaces 
where they will be taken seriously and where results are possible.”54  
 
 
The Politics of Blog Communities   
 
Will blogs create a single Arab public sphere or multiple national blogospheres? Most 
Arab blogospheres have developed in a national direction, despite the inherently 
boundary crossing nature of the Internet.  Currently there is less of an ‘Arab blogosphere’ 
than a series of national blogospheres loosely linked at key nodes in each. Blogs have 
been harnessed to concrete political movements in some Arab countries (such as Egypt, 
Bahrain, and Kuwait), but remain politically marginal and disconnected in others. Most 
aggregators (such as Saudi Blogs, Jordan Planet, Kuwait’s Safat, and Bahrain Blogs) 
adopt the national mode, as does Global Voices Online. Some newer aggregators, like 
iToot (“we find the best and freshest voices from across Arabia and around the world”) 
and Dwenn (“the forum of Arab bloggers”) try to break this down and select blogs from 
around the Arab world.55  
 
 
Aggregators face a core problem, however: either they include everything, which 
becomes overwhelming; or they select what to include, which builds new resentments 
among those excluded.  JordanPlanet.net, one of the early innovators in Arab blog 
                                                 
54 John Guidry and Mark Sawyer, “Contentious pluralism:  The public sphere and 
democracy,” Perspectives on Politics 1, no.2 (June 2003), pp.273-289.  
55 http://itoot.net , http://dwwen.com  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
23
aggregation, shut down over disenchantment with its growing roster, while 
JordanBlogs.net experienced a nasty spat in February 2007 over the deletion of several 
controversial bloggers.   The popular iToot aggregator has generated complaints from 
many bloggers not selected by its administrators, as well as from those who felt that it 
was biased towards liberal voices writing in Egypt.  The Dwenn aggregator has partnered 
with Al Jazeera to offer a larger assortment of blogs, primarily in Arabic.   
Administrators of these aggregators also worry about their own liability for republishing 
material which comes under attack, making some of them rather sensitive about 
aggressive political blogging.56   
 
 
The national focus of these blogospheres could potentially fill what is currently 
the greatest hole in the Arab media: free, critical domestic media. Such a domestic focus 
could revitalize domestic public spheres. At the same time, the national focus can be 
vulnerable to nationalist mobilization and patriotic sentiment. Terrorist attacks against 
Jordan have tended to shut down contentious blog debates: after the November 2005 
hotel bombings in Amman, bloggers provided emotional on-the-scene reporting but 
politically tended to rally around the national flag.  Many Jordanian bloggers are quicker 
to defend the Kingdom from foreign critics than to engage in domestic political 
disputes.57  Still, the importance of domestically-engaged blogging can be seen in one 
Tunisian blogger’s lament:   
                                                 
56 Personal interview with Ahmed Humeid, Doha, February 19, 2007.  
57 http://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2006/03/06/from-the-jordanian-blogosphere-19/;  
for another example, see http://ajloun.blogspot.com/2006/10/jordans-image.html  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
24
 
a “cursory look at the Tunisian blogsphere … will reveal that it hardly ever deals with topics 
pertaining to national politics. Those bloggers who do talk about political issues will most 
probably analyze what is happening in the international arena without ever mentioning what goes 
on in their own country…. This apathy vis-à-vis Tunisian politics is mostly explained by a fear of 
the regime. This regime has shown on numerous occasions that it would brook no dissent and 
tolerate no opposition to its policies. A number of Internet users that were deemed subversive by 
the government were put in jail for expressing their opinions and this has unfortunately acted as an 
enormous deterrent… Besides, self-censorship is rife in Tunisia.” 58 
 
Some worry that a domestically-focused blogosphere is potentially limiting in terms of 
offering a new kind of public space for working out the big pan-Arab issues of the day, 
with Palestine or Iraq suffering when domestic corruption or elections take pride of place. 
But this misses the value of domestically-engaged blogging in a climate where most 
national media lag behind the great steps taken by the pan-Arab satellite television 
stations. Arab bloggers writing about Palestine or Lebanon or the Danish cartoons may 
reflect widespread attitudes about those issues, but do not generally add a tremendous 
amount to the discussion about those grand, distant affairs.    Engaged bloggers exposing 
torture or electoral machinations, on the other hand, add something vitally new.   
 
Defining the boundaries of an identity is an important element of politics,59 and 
national blogospheres have witnessed some nasty spats over their identity.60 Perhaps the 
                                                 
58 http://www.globalvoicesonline.org/2006/10/05/blogging-tunisia-whisper/  
59 This includes intriguing questions about what makes a blog “Arab”:  itoot, for instance, 
includes my Abu Aardvark blog because I write about Arab issues, even though I am not 
Arab and don’t live in an Arab country 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
25
most vivid of the Arab-blogosphere wars was the OCSAB controversy in Saudi Arabia. 
The clash started in spring 2006 when law student Mohamed Al Masa’ed launched an 
aggregator called OCSAB (“Official Community of Saudi Arabian Bloggers”) as an 
alternative to Ahmed Al-Omran’s Saudi Blogs.61 Saudi Blogs had built a reputation as a 
home for entertaining bloggers who were often liberal and writing in English. OCSAB 
guidelines, by contrast, demanded member blogs “must not insult Islam at any level” or 
make references to “liberalism and secularism,” in addition to requiring that blogs “must 
be in Arabic, except for blogs that call to Islam.”  Its claim to be the “official” 
community particularly rankled other bloggers.   More recently, the OCSAB group 
proposed organizing regular "meet- ups", which could be taken as an act of intimidation 
in the Saudi context, where many bloggers remain anonymous out of fear of political 
repression.62 The Egyptian blogger Sandmonkey responded by recounting a similar 
skirmish in Egypt, where (as he put it) a new generation of more Islamist bloggers started 
up with their own rules trashing the “Old Guard”.63     
 
 
The Future of Blog Power 
  
                                                                                                                                                 
60 Diana Mukalled, “Arab bloggers … groups and not individuals,” Asharq Alawsat, 
February 5, 2006 
61 http://www.ocsab.com/ and www.saudiblogs.org .  For details of this controversy, see 
Saudi Jeans blog, http://saudijeans.blogspot.com/2006/04/ocsab-not-my-thing.html  
62 As reported on the Web edition of Al Arabiya, August 2006, 
http://www.alarabiya.net/Articlep.aspx?P=26700  
63 http://www.sandmonkey.org/2006/04/06/the-arab-blogistan/ 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
26
The analysis presented in this paper is intended to help tease out how Arab blogs 
might—or might not—exercise political influence. Some of the most obvious routes of 
influence in American politics do not apply: Arab blogs do not raise money for 
candidates for office like Daily Kos, for instance, or have a serious impact on presidential 
elections.  They have yet to claim scalps such as those of CBS news anchor Dan Rather 
or Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, whose careers were ended in part through the 
efforts of partisan bloggers. The language barrier between a largely English-language 
Internet infrastructure and Arabic-language users can make it difficult to obtain basic data 
about commonly used measures of Arab blog influence, such as hyperlinks, traffic, or 
rankings on Web monitors like Truthlaidbear or Technorati.    
 
Despite all that, Arab political bloggers are likely to continue to evolve in all three 
modes described above. Activist bloggers will likely learn from the successful uses of the 
Internet in cases such as Egypt, Bahrain, and Kuwait. In each of those cases, it only took 
a few early innovators to trigger a cascade of activist blogging—which suggests that 
other Arab countries could be more ripe for such blog activism than they currently 
appear. I would expect to see more cases of blogs identifying and pursuing scandals 
which the state-dominated media chooses to ignore, as in the Kuwaiti vote-buying 
episode or Bahrain’s Bandar Gate. Egyptian bloggers have recently begun posting 
disturbing clips of the torture and mistreatment of ordinary citizens at police stations—
stories which have begun to be picked up by some of the more courageous local 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
27
newspapers.64 Prominent dissidents might increasingly turn to blogs to circumvent the red 
lines which keep them—or their more controversial ideas—out of the official media.    
 
Bridge-blogging (or its less lofty mirror-blogging variant) will most likely play an 
ever more important role in shaping how Western media cover the region as Western 
journalists increasingly seek out bloggers as interlocutors and draw on their reporting to 
frame their own stories.   In an age of dwindling overseas media coverage, such English-
language blogs can have an impact by serving as a kind of volunteer press service. 
Women writing from conflict-torn countries such as Iraq (Riverbend) or Gaza (Mona El-
Farra’s From Gaza blog, and Al Jazeera journalist Laila El-Haddad’s Raising Yusuf blog) 
powerfully and intimately convey the human challenges facing families in these war-torn 
countries.65 During the Lebanon war, Lebanese bloggers provided snapshots of life which 
brought home the human impact of the war.  Photos of human devastation in Lebanon by 
As-Safir editor Hanady Salman posted on Flikr accounts and discussed on blogs clearly 
reached a wide international audience.66  
 
The greatest impact of blogs, however, will likely be in their contribution to 
revitalizing and transforming Arab public spheres. New forms of public argument and 
discourse, among a vastly expanded range of voices, will make it ever more difficult for 
narrow elites to monopolize the field of discourse. Arab mass media outlets will likely 
                                                 
64 Wael Abbas’s MisrDigital blog has many of these (http://misrdigital.blogspot.com) 
65 For instance, see the roundup in the Independent, “The blogs of war”, August 10, 2006.  
From Gaza at http://fromgaza.blogspot.com; Raising Yusuf at http://a-mother-from-
gaza.blogspot.com/ 
66 The Arabist Network’s Flickr account of Salman’s pictures can be found here: 
http://www.flickr.com/photos/12011945@N00/  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
28
look for ways to incorporate these new voices and platforms .67  This should not be taken 
to mean that these new publics will necessarily be more pro-American or even more 
liberal: as a wider range of voices join blogospheres, they would likely reflect more 
accurately the general distribution of attitudes among at least the educated, elite Arabs 
who are likely to blog.   
 
States, of course, will not take increased blog power lying down.  Internet filtering 
is already common, though of dubious effectiveness, and a number of prominent bloggers 
have already struggled with their Web sites being blocked in their home country. As 
blogs gain political relevance, bloggers will attract the attention of the repressive state 
security services. Most bloggers already assume that state security monitors their blogs, 
and perhaps even actively infiltrates the blogosphere (either posing as bloggers or as 
commentors).68 Some countries, such as Bahrain, have insisted (with only partial success) 
that bloggers register under their real names.  Repression of high profile bloggers (such 
as Alaa) could reinforce self-censorship and lead others to avoid political commentary.69  
Regimes could manipulate the blogosphere by flooding it with pro-regime blogs or by 
seeding it with deliberately provocative blogs (insulting Islam, for instance, or provoking 
ethnic tensions) which could justify a crackdown.  And most directly, the arrest of the 
                                                 
67 http://www.aljazeeratalk.net/ and  
http://video.alarabiya.net/default.aspx  
68 See the lengthy exchange over an article in the newspaper Al Dustour about 
mukhabarat penetration of blogs, August 11, 2006, at 
http://manalaa.net/al_destour_asks_about_security_infiltrating_    
69 Amina Khayri, “Egyptian Bloggers in the line of confrontation,” Al Hayat, May 18, 
2006;  Lindsay Wise, “Why Egypt is cracking down on bloggers,” Time, June 1, 2006 

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
29
blogger Abd al-Karim Nabeel Sulayman and the pressures on Bahraini blogger Mahmoud 
al-Youssif show the heavy hand of the state in its bluntest form.70  
 
More optimistically, Arab regimes could recognize the value of blogs in 
contributing to a more engaged public sphere and learn to tolerate online political 
criticism. Since blogs reach small audiences, they could be seen as an unusually safe way 
to allow publics to let off steam and to serve as “early warning” indicators of trouble. 
Since American observers pay so much attention to blogs, tolerating them may allow 
regimes to get away with far more significant repression of the mass media or of political 
activism. On balance, it seems likely that blogs will increase in political significance. 
Because the Internet is central to the kind of economic development desired by most 
Arab regimes, access to the Internet will only increase.  The prospect that national media 
will dramatically improve in the near future, removing the need for these alternative sites 
of public discourse, seems slim. Whether through direct activism, bridge-blogging, or 
public sphere argument, the ability of blogs to frame stories and to funnel information 
into the public sphere will grow. 
 
Marc Lynch is associate professor of political science at Williams College. He received 
his PhD from Cornell University. His second book, Voices of a New Arab Public: Iraq, al 
Jazeera, and a Changing Middle East, is published by Columbia University Press. He also 
blogs at http://abuaardvark.typepad.com/ . 
                                                 
70 Abd al-Karim’s blog at http://karam903.blogspot.com/;  Mahmoud 
al-Yousif’s at http://mahmood.tv.  See 
http://www.freekareem.org/ for articles and commentary 
about his case.  

Arab Media & Society (February, 2007)  
 
 
 
         Marc Lynch 
 
Feature Article 
30
 
 
