Instructions for authors, subscriptions and further details:
http://rise.hipatiapress.com
Global Education Inc.: New policy networks and the neoliberal imaginary
Adriana Aubert1
1) University of Barcelona
Date of publication: June 25th, 2012
To cite this article: Adriana, A. (2012). Global Education Inc. [Review of
the book Global Education Inc.: New policy networks and the neoliberal
imaginary]. International Journal of Sociology of Education, 1(2), 208. doi:
10.4471/rise.2012.11
To link this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4471/rise.2012.11
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
The terms and conditions of use are related to the Open Journal System and to
Creative Commons Non­Commercial and Non­Derivative License.

RISE ­ International Journal of Sociology of Education Vol. 1 No. 2 June
2012 p. 208
Reviews (I)
Ball, S. (2012): Global Education Inc.: New policy networks and the
neoliberal imaginary. New York: Routledge.
edu­business, neo­liberal advocacy networks and policy entrepreneurs
and of social enterprises, and new philanthropy related to this educative
field.
Ball points out the commodification and globalization of education
and education policy in terms of development, quality, access,
curriculum materials, and pedagogic software on the one hand, and
policy
ideas
like
inspections,
leadership,
school
choice
and
accountability on the other hand. However the book is not a critique or
an abstract discussion on neo­liberalism, but a reflection about how it is
promoted and how it works in educative contexts.
The author analyzes the policy networks as a new way of sharing
conceptions of social problems and its solutions using different ways of
relationship like sponsorship or contracting. Ball defends that this is a
new way of governance that is influencing western education policies
by its privatization.
Ball focuses on the role in education policies of new philanthropy,
in which the givers are involved directly in the projects that they choose
for investing. This situation leads philanthropists to use enterprise
models and market­based solutions for social issues like education, a
field in which those private providers are now more involved than ever
These and other aspects examined in the book turn education
policies into assets that are buying and selling, like a ‘multinational edu­
business’, a new form of education policy that needs to be analyzed in
depth.
Ball’s work is a crucial book that takes the firs step in this task,
offering a very relevant point of view in new education policies that has
a great interest to researchers, social and education policy analyst and
students of education policy.
tephen J. BALL, Professor of Sociology of Education in the
University of London, in his work Global Education INC.
examines the new global education policy using the methods of
S
