132
132
132
132 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
THE FARTHEST MOSQUE OR THE ALLEGED TEMPLE AN ANALYTIC 
STUDY 
 
 
 
Yehia Hassan Wazeri
Yehia Hassan Wazeri
Yehia Hassan Wazeri
Yehia Hassan Wazeri  
Assistant professor - Dept. of Architecture 
High Institute of Engineering & Technology,  
Al Arish, Egypt. 
Email: drwazeri@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The Farthest Mosque (Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa in Jerusalem) has been associated in the consciousness of the Muslims, 
with The Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid Al-Haram in Makkah) through a spiritual bond since the event of Isra’ (Night 
Journey) and Mi`raj (Ascension to Heaven). The objective of this study is to determine the orientation of the 
Farthest Mosque and illustrate the similarity in geometric shape (plan) and proportions, between the Farthest 
Mosque in Jerusalem and the sacred mosque (Al-Ka`bah) in Makkah, in the first part of the research. The 
second part of the research involves a study of some texts from the Old Testament that address the 
architectural and structural descriptions of the alleged temple, with the purpose of exposing whether glaring 
contradictions exist between the texts of the Old Testament themselves or between them and the real 
architectural and structural facts acknowledged by specialists in this field. 
Keywords:  The Farthest mosque,  the Alleged Temple, Al-Ka`bah, geometric similarity  
 
 
Abstrak 
Masjid tertua (Masjid al-Aqsa di Jarusalem) telah dihubungkan dalam kesadaran umat muslim, dengan masjid 
suci (Masjidil Haram di Mekah) melalui ikatan spiritual sejak kejadian Isra’ (perjalanan malam) dan Mi’raj 
(kenaikan ke surga). Tujuan dari kajian ini adalah untuk menentukan orientasi masjid tertua and 
menggambarkan kesamaan bentuk geometri (denah) dan proporsi, antara masjid tertua di Jarusalem dan 
masjid suci (Ka’bah) di Mekah, di bagian pertama penelitian. Bagian kedua penelitian melibatkan kajian 
beberapa tulisan dari surat wasiat kuno yang mengarah kepada deskripsi arsitektural dan struktural kuil, 
dengan tujuan mengekspos baik kontradiksi yang mencolok antara tulisan surat wasiat kuno itu sendiri maupun 
di antara mereka, dan fakta arsitektural dan struktural yang nyata diakui oleh spesialis di lapangan 
 
Kata kunci: masjid tertua, kuil, ka’bah, kesamaan geometri 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The 
Farthest 
Mosque 
(Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa 
in 
Jerusalem) has been associated in the consciousness 
of the Muslims, with The Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid 
Al-Haram in Makkah) through a spiritual bond since 
the event of Isra’ (Night Journey) and Mi`raj 
(Ascension to Heaven). Moreover, Allah (Exalted be 
He) assigned a special chapter (Sura) in the Glorious 
Qur’an bearing the title "Al-Isra'" in commemoration 
of that blessed event.  
Indeed, the importance of addressing the issue of 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa springs from several perspectives, 
on top of which is the fact that it is the first Qiblah 
(direction faced in Prayer) to which the Muslims 
directed their faces during prayer, and that it is the 
third Masjid next to the Two Sacred Mosques (Al-
Haramayn Ash-Sharifayn: Al-Masjid Al-Haram in 
Makkah and the Prophet's Mosque in Madinah), to 
which the Muslims are allowed to undertake journeys 
with the sole purpose of worship. The importance 
increases at the present time, especially due to the 
incessant attacks and encroachments committed by 
the Israeli occupation that has befallen this Masjid. 
For, the Jews falsely and unjustly assert a historical 
right to the city of Jerusalem and its blessed 
mosque. From time to time, they openly declare 
their intention and determination to reconstruct 
their alleged temple over the debris of Jerusalem 
Shrine (Al-Haram Al-Qudsi) and that they are waiting 
for the optimum circumstances during which they 
can achieve their plan.  
 The approach adopted in this study utilizes 
architectural 
and 
archeological 
milestones 
as 
material evidence that can be relied on, in proving 
the Islamic identity of the Farthest mosque (Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa). That is illustrated in the first part of 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 133
133
133
133  
 
the present study through proving that the Qiblah of 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa was diverted to Makkah Al-
Mukarramah hundreds of years before the Muslim 
conquest of Jerusalem. It is also indicated through 
proving the architectural symmetry and identical 
nature that exists between Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa and 
The Sacred Mosque in Makkah (Al-Ka`bah). 
The second part of the research involves a study 
of some texts from the Old Testament that address 
the architectural and structural descriptions of the 
alleged temple, with the purpose of exposing 
whether glaring contradictions exist between the 
texts of the Old Testament themselves or between 
them and the real architectural and structural facts 
acknowledged by specialists in this field. This 
confirms that the existence of the temple, as is 
alleged by the Jews, is a baseless and fabricated 
notion; as over more than a hundred and fifty years 
of archeological excavations in Jerusalem and 
around and underneath Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa prove that 
it is baseless. 
 
 
Aspects of Similarity Between Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa and Al-Ka`bah 
1. The Concept and Limits of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is located in Jerusalem, and it 
has been the sacred capital and most important city 
in Palestine for time immemorial. It is also one of 
the most important capitals and cities in the Islamic 
world. Here, it is worth noting that the Old City is 
that which lies within the fence that was established 
and renewed by Sulayman Al-Qanuni, and it is 
surrounded by valleys and hills on all sides. This 
sacred city is situated in 31.520 N. latitude and 35.13 
E. longitude. It was established upon four spurs: 
Mount Moriah upon which Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa (Al-
Haram Al-Qudsi) is built southeast of the city, Mount 
Zion – which is known as King David's Mount, and it 
constitutes the south-eastern part of the four 
mounts of Jerusalem, Mount Accra wherein lies the 
Church of the Resurrection, and the Mount of Olives 
which is located near Bab Al-Sahirah (Herod's Gate)1. 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa and its external yards that are 
walled with the stone fence on the southern side is 
located east of the Old City, and it is established 
upon 
Mount 
Moriah, 
occupying 
an 
area 
of 
approximately 150 acres (one acre equals 1000m2). It 
is encompassed by a stone wall, the western side of 
which is 490 m, the eastern 474 m, the northern 321 
m, and the southern 283 m, figure 1. 
Many people think that Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is only 
the mosque established south of the Dome of the 
Rock, where the obligatory five daily prayers are 
performed now. Actually, Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is a term 
that applies to all parts of the Masjid, including the 
area encompassed within the wall, such as the gates, 
the spacious yards, the mosque itself, the Dome of 
the Rock, Al-Musalla Al-Marawani, the corridors, 
domes, terraces, free drinking water (springs), and 
other landmarks, like minarets on the walls. 
Furthermore, the whole mosque is unroofed with the 
exception of the building of the Dome of the Rock 
and Al-Musalla Al-Jami`, which is known by the 
public as Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. The remaining area, 
however, is a yard of the mosque. This is agreed 
upon by scholars and historians, and accordingly, the 
doubled reward for performing prayer therein is 
attained if the prayer is performed in any part of the 
area encompassed by the wall2. 
Indeed, Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, which is mentioned in 
Almighty Allah's Glorious Book in the first verse of 
Sura Al-Isra' is the blessed place that is now called 
the Noble Sanctuary (Al-Haram Al-Qudsi Ash-Sharif) 
which is enclosed within the great fence and what is 
built over it. Moreover, what applies to the mosque 
applies by corollary to the wall encircling it, since it 
is part of it. Such is the legal definition of Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa3. 
Regarding the concept (definition) of Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa, Shaykh `Abdul-Hamid Al-Sa'ih, former 
Minister of (Religious) Endowments and Islamic 
Sanctuaries in Jordan said4: "The term Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa, for the Muslim public, denotes all that is 
encircled by the wall of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, including 
the gates".  
Therefore, (the legally defined) Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
and 
Al-Haram 
Al-Qudsi 
Ash-Sharif 
(the 
Noble 
Sanctuary) are two names for the same place, 
knowing that Al-Haram Ash-Sharif is a name that has 
only been coined recently. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1a. Overview of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 1b. Dimensions of the Walls of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
that Delimits Al-Haram Ash-Sharif (drawn by the 
researcher) 
 

134
134
134
134 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
2. Determine the Orientation of Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa (Al-Haram Al-Qudsi) 
Geographic orientation is one of the most 
important 
characteristics 
of 
a 
building 
that 
determines the identity of any building, especially if 
it has a religious function. As it is already known, 
one of the main determinants, regarding design of 
the mosque, is that the Qiblah wall is oriented 
towards Makkah Al-Mukarramah, i.e. in the direction 
of Al-Masjid Al-Haram at Makkah Al-Mukarramah. 
Moreover, a Prophetic hadith indicates that Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa is the second Masjid ever established 
for mankind on earth, next to Al-Masjid Al-Haram, 
for, it is reported in the two Sahih (authentic books 
of hadith of Al-Bukhari and Muslim) from Abu Dhar 
Al-Ghifari (may Allah be pleased with him) that he 
said, "I asked, 'O Messenger of Allah! Which Masjid 
was first established on earth?' He answered, 'Al-
Masjid Al-Haram'. I then asked, 'Which was next?' He 
said, 'Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa'. I further asked, 'How much 
time was there between [the building of] the two?' 
He replied, 'Forty years' Then, he said, 'Wherever 
you may be, at the time of prayer, you may pray for 
it [the earth] is all a mosque; for excellence lies (in 
performing prayer) therein". 
This hadith clearly affirms that Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
was established on earth after Al-Masjid Al-Haram, 
which means that the Qiblah of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
must have been oriented towards Makkah Al-
Mukarramah, where Al-Masjid Al-Haram, a long time 
before 
the 
coming 
of 
the 
Selected Prophet 
(Muhammad, peace be upon him)5. 
In order to prove the validity of this hypothesis, 
the researcher utilized "Oibla Locator (software) 
program"6, in which real satellite pictures are 
employed in identifying the direction to which the 
southern wall of Al-Haram Ash-Sharif containing the 
Qiblah to the southern (covered) mosque is oriented, 
figure 2. 
   The direction of the Qiblah in Jerusalem is 
156.21 degree, being measured clockwise from the 
real north. The aerial picture illustrates that the 
main axis of the southern covered mosque (and 
likewise of Al-Haram Al-Qudsi in general) is diverted 
about 11.81 degree from the virtual direction of the 
Qiblah, figure 3. 
Furthermore, if the circumference of planet 
earth is exactly equal to 360 degrees, this means 
that the ratio of diversion of the Qiblah of Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa from the side of Makkah Al-Mukarramah is 
about 3%, knowing that this is a slight ratio that can 
be overlooked. Hence, it means that the main axis of 
the area of the Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa (Al-Haram Ash-
Sharif) is oriented towards Makkah Al-Mukarramah, 
the Qiblah of the Muslims all over the world. 
Indeed, this proof is considered a substantial 
material indication that cannot be ignored and it 
proves that this spot, the neighborhood of which has 
been blessed by Allah (Exalted be He), is oriented 
towards Makkah Al-Mukarramah, wherein lies the 
honorable Ka`bah (the Qiblah), the first house of 
worship ever established for mankind on earth. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A Virtual Aerial Picture of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa (Al-
Haram Al-Qudsi), which Indicates the Direction of 
Makkah Al-Mukarramah in Red Line, Using Qibla Locator 
Program (A Study Conducted by the Author) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The Main Axis of Al-Haram Al-Qudsi is Almost 
Oriented Towards Makkah Al-Mukarramah with a Slight 
Diversion (Studied and Drawn by the Researcher). 
 
The foundations of the walls of the current Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa (Al-Haram Al-Qudsi) has been there 
since the reign of Herod the Great (died in 4 B.C.) in 
Jerusalem. 
This 
was 
discovered 
through 
the 
excavations carried out by Charles Warren in 1867 
A.C., reaching a depth of 24 m. below the surface of 
the earth7, figure. 4. This was done under the 
auspices of the authority financing excavations for 
the monuments of Palestine that was established in        
1865 A.C8.  
 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 135
135
135
135  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4a. A Vertical Section in One of the Charles 
Warren Tunnels and the Locations of Such Tunnels on 
the Wall of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, which Indicate One of the 
Sides of the Original Foundations of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, 
which Date Back to the Reign of (Herod the Great). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4b. A Section and an Elevation Towards the Side 
of Al-Maghariba Gate and the Western the Lower Stratum 
of the Western Wall of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa Since the Reign 
of (Herod the Great) [The Drawing is Quoted from the 
Website of the Jewish Archeologist,                                  
 Leen Reitmeyer9]. 
Thus, it means that the current main longitudinal 
axis of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa was oriented towards the 
Qiblah about 640 A.C. before the Muslim conquest of 
Jerusalem in 15 A.H/638 A.C. This gives a clear 
indication that the area of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa was 
oriented towards the Qiblah a long time ago. This is 
also mentioned without being corroborated by 
evidence in a recent scientific research 10.  
 
 
A Study of Geometric Shape and Proportions 
of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa  
1. A Study of the Geometric Shape 
The measurements of the walls of which 
represent the limits of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa (refer back 
to figure.1b) – are as follows11: 
• 
The eastern side: 474 m. 
• 
The northern side: 321 m. 
• 
The western side: 490 m. 
• 
The southern side: 283 m. 
Through studying the preceding dimensions, it 
becomes clear that none of the identified sides of 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is equal to the other, just as none 
of these sides is parallel to the other. Any geometric 
shape 
that 
has 
these 
descriptions 
is 
called 
"trapezium" or "trapezoid"12, knowing that such is 
among the geometric shapes that are rarely used in 
designing the horizontal projections of buildings or 
determining the walls of sites. 
 
 
2. 
A Study of the Geometric Proportions 
The 
researcher 
investigated 
the 
geometric 
proportions of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa according to the 
dimensions referred to above, and reached the 
following findings: 
• 
The average relation of the length of Al-
Haram Al-Qudsi to its width is 1:1.59, figure 
5a. 
• 
The real relation of the southern side of Al-
Haram Al-Qudsi to the eastern side is 1:167,  
figure 5b. 
This means that the geometric proportions of Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa is almost symmetrical to the "golden 
ratio" which equals 1:161813. It was thus called 
because it is the proportion most comforting to the 
eye from visual and aesthetic perspectives. That is 
why it is said that the golden rectangle (rectangular 
figure) is the most pleasurable sight to the 
beholder14. 
 
 
 
 
 
     Figure 5a. Average Proportion 
                       
Figure 5b. Real Proportion 
Figure 5. The Geometric Proportions of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
are Almost in Line with the "Golden Ratio [Golden 
Section]" (Studied and Drawn by the Researcher). 
 
Aspects of Geometric Similarity Between Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa and the Honorable Ka`bah 
Since I conducted a study on the shape and 
geometric proportions of the Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, I - in 
like manner – have conducted a study of the 
geometric characteristics of the Honorable Ka`bah15, 
whose foundations were laid by Prophet Ibrahim 

136
136
136
136 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
(Abraham) and his son, Isma`il (Ishmael), knowing 
that this fact is stated in the Glorious Qur'an.  
In this regard, the famous English archeologist, K. 
Creswell, stated in his famous book Early Muslim 
Architecture16, that the original dimensions of the 
Ka`bah – according to the report of  Al-Azraqi 
,figure. 6 – are as follows17: 
• 
The northern-east side: 32 cubits. 
• 
The north-west side: 22 cubits. 
• 
The south-west side: 31 cubits. 
• 
The south-east side: 20 cubits. 
This means that none of the original sides of the 
Ka`bah equals any of its other sides, and that no 
side parallels any other one. Such are the features of 
the quadrilaterals that are geometrically called 
"trapeziums", and this means that the geometric 
description of the shape of the horizontal projection 
of the Honorable Ka`bah corresponds exactly with 
the geometric description of the shape of Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa, knowing that this is the first aspect of 
geometric parallelism between them. 
Here, it is worth noting that the original 
measurements of the Ka`bah - as stated in Al-
Azraqi's book (News of Makkah) – just as they were 
established by Prophet Ibrahim - differ from the 
current measurements of the Ka`bah18, which are 
several cubits smaller from the side of Isma`il's Hijr 
(short semi-circular wall adjacent to the Ka`bah and 
considered part of it) since Quraysh rebuilt it19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  A Plan of the Honorable Ka`bah Just as They 
were Laid by Prophet Ibrahim (drawn by the researcher). 
 
According to the geometric analysis of the 
original measurements of the Honorable Ka`bah 
plan, as it was established by Prophet Ibrahim 
(peace be upon him), the following conclusion has 
been reached: 
• 
The average ratio of the width of the building 
of the Ka`bah to length is 1:1.50. 
• 
The real ratio of the wall of the Ka`bah, 
between the Black Stone Corner and the 
Yemeni Corner, to the wall of the Ka`bah, 
between the Black Stone Corner and the Iraqi 
Corner, is 1:1.60, which corresponds exactly 
with the golden ratio, See figure 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The Real Geometric Ratios of the Ka`bah 
Dimensions Match the Golden Ratio (Studied and Drawn 
by the Researcher). 
 
The preceding conclusions indicate the extent of 
similarity, and rather geometric identicalness, between 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa and the Honorable Ka`bah, as was 
laid by Prophet Ibrahim and his son Isma`il, which is 
clearly illustrated through the comparison drawn in 
table 1. This table indicates that the geometric shape 
of both Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa and the Honorable Ka`bah is 
a trapezium, which is one of the rarely used shapes in 
the structural design of buildings. This is because no 
side of this shape equals or parallels another. Besides, 
the geometric ratios of both mosques (Masjids) are 
almost identical, and they both equal the "golden 
ratio", which is considered to be the best geometric 
ratio ever. 
 
Table 1.  Geometric Similarity and Correspondence 
Between Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa (Al-Haram Al-Qudsi) and the 
Honorable Ka`bah in Its Original Dimensions (the 
Researcher) 
Aspects of 
geometric 
similarity and 
correspondence 
Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa       (Al-
Haram Al-Qudsi) 
The Honorable 
Ka`bah (original 
dimensions) 
Geometric 
shape 
Trapezium 
(rarely used 
shape) 
Trapezium (rarely 
used shape) 
Average 
geometric ratio 
1:1.59 
1 : 1.50 
Real geometric 
ratio 
1: 1.67 (Almost 
the golden ratio) 
1 : 1.60 (Almost 
the golden ratio) 
 
Can this parallel in geometric shape or ratios be 
considered a coincidence?20. Or does this geometric 
matching indicate the extent of material bonding 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 137
137
137
137  
 
between Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa and the Honorable 
Ka`bah, knowing that this bond is maintained in the 
Glorious Qur'an and the Noble Sunnah! Indeed, this 
undeniably confirms the Islamic identity of the 
Blessed Al-Aqsa Masjid, especially that its Qiblah 
faces towards Makkah Al-Mukarramah, knowing that 
this has been the case even several centuries before 
the Islamic conquest of the Sacred Bayt Al-Maqdis 
(Jerusalem), as is indicated above. 
 
 
Contradictions in the Description of the 
Alleged Temple in the Old Testament 
1. 
The Adopted Approach 
The Jews depend, in their allegation that king 
Solomon21 had built a temple for worship in the 
current site of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, on the Old 
Testament texts, with the aim of lending a religious 
tenor and sanctity to their claim. This claim, 
however, was refuted through all excavations in 
Jerusalem and under and around Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa for 
over more than a hundred and fifty years22. 
On the other hand, we – the Muslims – firmly 
believe that this alleged temple is no more than a lie 
and that it has never existed, since none of the 
religious texts of the Qur'an and authentic prophetic 
Hadiths mentioned that Prophet Solomon built a 
temple. Rather, he renewed the building of Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa23. 
We will now highlight the scientific approach, 
which we follow in the present part as follows: 
1. The text of the Old Testament that addresses the 
alleged temple, in the translated Arabic version 
and also the English version are studied in order 
to fully ascertain the identical nature between 
the translated Arabic text of the Old Testament 
and 
its 
English 
counterpart, 
as 
regards 
architectural 
description 
and 
geometric 
measures.  
In this regard, we have referred to more than 
one English version, due to the multiplicity of 
versions that exist. This is because we noticed 
the existence of adaptations to some of the 
measurements of the temple (particularly the 
height of the temple's porch) in some modern 
versions. 
This 
becomes 
quite 
clear 
upon 
comparing it to the relatively old English 
versions, which completely agree with the 
translated Arabic version of the Old Testament. 
2. There is no reference to the Jewish creed or the 
contradictions in the Old Testament in general, 
since it is not relevant to the field of this 
research24. However, the focus is on texts that 
describe 
the 
alleged 
temple 
from 
the 
architectural and geometric perspective to prove 
the contradictions introduced therein. 
3. Drawings and models of the alleged temple and 
pictures of it have been quoted through several 
Israeli electronic websites for the study and 
description of the temple according to what is 
mentioned in the Old Testament, to prove the 
manifest contradiction in the texts of the Old 
Testament which is in turn reflected in these 
drawings and three-dimensional models. 
 
2. 
Description 
of 
the 
alleged 
temple 
as 
mentioned in the Old Testament: 
"The temple" is a word which in Hebrew is 
equivalent to "Beit HaMikdash", that is "House of the 
Holy" or Hekhal, which means the "Big House" in 
many Semitic languages (the Acadian, the Canaanite, 
and so on.). The Big or Great House is a term used in 
reference to the house of God, while the word 
"Pharaoh" meant "the Big House", which is somewhat 
similar to the phrase "The High Gate". Besides, the 
Jewish Immanentism class that had accumulated 
within the Jewish geological structure, surfaced in 
the form of reverence for the earth, represented in 
the worship of Yisrael and central sacrificial worship 
that is linked to the united Hebrew states (1020 
B.C.), the rituals of which were supervised by the 
priests, knowing that the center of this ritual 
worship was the temple. Among the other most 
important names of the temple is the "House of 
Yahweh", since it is originally the house of the God 
and not a place of worship (unlike the Ka`bah). 
Hence, none of the priests or even the slaves of the 
temple were allowed to freely move around in the 
temple, even though they were allowed to enter it. 
Moreover, no one was allowed to enter the Holy of 
Holies except the High Priest on Yom Kippur"25. 
A detailed description of the alleged Solomon's 
temple, as regards the time of building it, its 
measurements, the materials used in building it and 
the total area, was mentioned in some books of the 
Old Testament, which are read as follows: 
• 
Kings 1: Chapter 5 to Chapter 8. 
• 
Kings 2: Chapter 25. 
• 
Chronicles 2: Chapter 2 to Chapter 4. 
• 
Ezekiel: Chapter 40 to Chapter 42. 
The rebuilding of the (second) temple was also 
mentioned in Ezra, chapters 3 and 6,      after the 
return from Babylonian captivity, yet without 
mentioning the detailed descriptions of that building 
as is mentioned about the description of the (first) 
temple, which had been built by King Solomon, 
according to their own belief. An exception to this is 
a single reference to the measurements of the 
foundations 
of 
that 
(second) 
temple 
and 
a 
description of a number of rows of stone used in it. 
According to what is mentioned above and 
depending on the description in the Old Testament, 
the alleged Solomon's temple is made up of the 
following basic elements26, figures 8a & 8b. 

138
138
138
138 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
1. The entrance porch C, with two pillars in 
front of it (Boaz and Jachin, H). 
2. The Court of Priests (D), which contains 
seven-branches candlesticks (F), tables for 
showbread (E) and the altar of incense (C). 
3. The Holy of Holies (A), which contains the Ark 
of the Covenant. 
4. Chambers surrounding the building from three 
sides (north, south and west), (L). 
5. The Bronze Sea in front of the building (I). 
6. The Altar of burnt-offering, in front of the 
building (J). 
7. Several buildings and open yards, according 
to what is mentioned in Ezekiel. 
8. A square wall surrounding all that is 
mentioned above, according to what is stated 
in Ezekiel. 
 
 
 
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8a. Plan Indicates the Basic Components of the 
Alleged Temple  as Described in the Old Testament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8b. Imagined Perspective that Illustrates the Alleged 
Temple and the Surrounding Buildings and Yards, and 
Finally the Square Wall that Encompasses it According                                                 
to the Description Mentioned in Ezekiel Chapter. 
 
Contradictions in the Description of the Old 
Testament Regarding the Alleged Temple 
1. 
Contradiction Regarding the Numbers of 
Officials Supervising Laborers 
Some texts from the Old Testament mentioned 
the numbers of laborers that Solomon employed in 
cutting stones for the temple. It mentions that they 
cut stones from the hills, and the numbers of 
laborers carrying and transporting the stones, and 
finally the laborers supervising the stone-cutting and 
transportation laborers, which is clear through the 
following texts. 
• 
Verses 15 and 16 in I Kings, Chapter 5, that reads as 
follows27: (15 Solomon also had 70,000 common 
laborers and 80,000 stonecutters in the hills, 
besides 3,300 officials who supervised the 
workers). 
• 
Chronicles II, Chapter 2 (verses 1 and 2), the text 
reads as follows28: (1 Solomon gave orders to 
build a temple for the Name of the LORD and a 
royal palace for himself. He conscripted seventy 
thousand men as carriers and eighty thousand as 
stonecutters in the hills and thirty-six hundred as 
foremen over them). 
• 
Chronicles II, Chapter 2 (verses 17 and 18), the 
text reads as follows29: (17 Solomon took a census 
of all the aliens who were in Israel, after the 
census his father David had taken; and they were 
found to be 153,600. He assigned 70,000 of them 
to be carriers and 80,000 to be stonecutters in the 
hills, with 3,600 foremen over them to keep the 
people working). 
• 
Through studying the preceding texts of the Old 
Testament, it becomes clear that the first text of 
Kings I, states the number of officials supervising 
the laborers as 3,300, while the other two texts 
in Chronicles II state that they were 3,600, which 
means a difference of 300 between the two 
stated numbers. So, which of the two is correct 
and which number should we take as true? 
Indeed, the manifest contradiction in the number 
of officials supervising the laborers who cut or 
transported stones is conclusive evidence of the 
flaw in the preceding texts of the Torah and 
impugns its credibility. 
 
 
2. 
Contradiction in the Measurements of the 
Alleged Temple 
Detailed measurements of the alleged temple 
are mentioned in some texts of the Old Testament, 
along with its height, width and length. This is clear 
through the following texts: 
• 
Kings I, Chapter 6 (verses 1–3) include the 
following30: (1 In the four hundred and eightieth 
year after the Israelites had come out of Egypt, 
in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 139
139
139
139  
 
in the month of Ziv, the second month, he began 
to build the temple of the LORD. 2 The temple 
that King Solomon built for the LORD was sixty 
cubits long, twenty wide and thirty high. The 
porch at the front of the main hall of the temple 
extended the width of the temple; that is twenty 
cubits, and projected ten cubits from the front of 
the temple). 
• 
Chronicles II, Chapter 3 (verses 1–4) also includes 
the following31: (1 Then Solomon began to build 
the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in Mount 
Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David, his 
father, in the place that David had prepared in 
the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite. 2 And 
he began to build in the second day of the second 
month, in the fourth year of his reign. 3 Now 
these are the things wherein Solomon was 
instructed for the building of the house of God. 
The length by cubits after the first measure was 
threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty 
cubits. And the porch that was in the front of the 
house, the length of it was according to the 
breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the 
height was an hundred and twenty: and he 
overlaid it within with pure gold). 
Reviewing the first text quoted from Kings I, we 
find that it identifies the length of the house 
(temple) as 60 cubits and its width as 20 cubits and 
also states its thickness; that is the height of the 
temple, as 30 cubits. It also illustrates that the 
temple is preceded by a 20-cubit long porch, being 
equal to the width of the temple, while its width is 
10 cubits. However, the height of the porch is not 
identified in this text. 
As for the second text quoted from Chronicles 
II, it determines the length of the temple as 60 
cubits and its width as 20 cubits, just as it was is 
mentioned in the first text, without mentioning the 
height. It also indicates that measurement of the 
porch that precedes the temple, stating that its 
length is 20 cubits, without referring to its width. 
Yet, it determined the height of the porch as 120 
cubits. 
Comparing the above two texts, it becomes clear 
that the measurements of the temple and the porch 
preceding it are as follows: 
1. The length of the house (temple) is 60 cubits, its 
width is 20 cubits and its height is 30 cubits. 
2. The length of the entrance porch preceding the 
temple is 20 cubits, being equal to the width of 
the temple, its width is 10 cubits and its height is 
120 cubits. What is interesting here is that the 
height of the temple is 30 cubits (about15 m), 
and that the height of the porch preceding it is 
120 cubits (about 60 m), which constitutes a 
clear architectural and geometric contradiction, 
since the porch – which is considered the 
entrance to the temple – cannot be four times as 
high as the temple itself, fig.9.             
This conflicts with all conventional designs in all 
monumental and historical buildings. This manifest 
and unjustified contradiction between the height of 
the temple's entrance (120 cubits) and the height of 
the temple itself (30 cubits) led a Western (Jewish) 
researcher, Tony Badillo, to admit it, when he 
said32: "Drawing shows what Solomon’s temple would 
look like with a height of 30 cubits (Kings I 6:2) and a 
Porch of 120 (Chronicles II, 3:4), not very visually 
appealing. No ancient or modern architect would 
want to claim such a miscreation; the porch is four 
times the height of the building!"  
He openly admitted that according to the 
description in the Old Testament, since the temple's 
entrance is four times as high as the temple itself; 
the ratios are entirely unattractive from the visual 
perspective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9a. An Imagined Drawing According to the 
Description Mentioned in the Old Testament, which 
Indicates the Degree of Contradiction in the Temple's 
Height in Relation to the Height of the Building of the 
Temple Itself (According to the Drawing of Tony 
Badillo33). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9b. Imagined Drawings According to the Virtual 
Heights of the Entrance as Described in the Old 
Testament, which Illustrate the Lack of Proportionality 
in the Height of the Temple's Entrance in Relation to the 
Building of the Temple Itself. 
 

140
140
140
140 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
3. 
Contradiction in the Height of the Two Pillars 
in Front of the Temple's Porch 
According to what is mentioned in some texts 
of the Old Testament, two brass pillars are placed in 
front of the Temple's porch; one of which is called 
Jachin, while the other is called Boaz. This is clear 
through the following texts: 
The following is stated in Kings I, Chapter 7, 
verses 15– 2134:  (15 Thus, he fashioned the two 
pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high each; and a 
line of twelve cubits did compass it about; [and so] 
the other pillar. 16 And he made two capitals of 
molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars; the 
height of the one capital was five cubits, and the 
height of the other capital was five cubits. 21 And he 
set up the pillars at the porch of the temple; and he 
set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof 
Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called the 
name thereof Boaz). 
• 
It is also mentioned in Kings II, Chapter 25 
(verses 8 –17) that35: (8 nineteenth year of King 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzar-
adan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king 
of Babylon, unto Jerusalem: 9 And he burnt the 
house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and all 
the houses of Jerusalem, and every great man’s 
house burnt he with fire. 16 The two pillars, one 
sea, and the bases which Solomon had made for 
the house of the Lord; the brass of all these 
vessels was without weight. 17 The height of the 
one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the chapiter 
upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter 
was three cubits; and the wreathen work, and 
pomegranates upon the chapiter round about, all 
of brass: and like unto these had the second 
pillar with wreathen work). 
• 
Besides, Chronicles II, Chapter 3 (verses 15 –17) 
includes the following36: (15 Also he made before 
the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits 
high, and the capital that was on the top of each 
of them was five cubits. 16 And he made chains 
in the Sanctuary, and put them on the tops of the 
pillars; and he made a hundred pomegranates, 
and put them on the chains. 17 And he set up the 
pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, 
and the other on the left; and called the name of 
that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of 
that on the left Boaz). 
It is clear through the two quotes from Kings I 
and II that the length of each pillar is 18 cubits, yet 
the quote from Kings I indicates that the height of 
the capital is 5 cubits. However, the quote from 
Kings II indicates that the height of the capital is 3 
cubits. So, which version should we acknowledge? As 
regards the third quote from Chronicles II, it is clear 
that the length of the pillar is 35 cubits and that it 
carries a capital that is 5 cubits high, figure 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure10. Is the Height of the Pillar 18 Cubits as 
Mentioned in Kings I, or 35 Cubits as Mentioned in 
Chronicles II? Is the Height of the Capital 5 or 3 Cubits? 
 
Reviewing the preceding three texts, the 
glaring contradiction regarding the height of these 
two pillars becomes manifest; is the height of the 
pillar 18 cubits – as is mentioned in Kings I and II – or 
35 cubits as is stated in Chronicles II? Is the height of 
the capital 5 cubits – as is mentioned in Kings I and 
Chronicles II – or 3 cubits as is mentioned in Kings II? 
 
 
4. 
The Contradiction in the Capacity and 
Measurements of the Round Sea:  
Among 
the 
elements 
mentioned 
in 
the 
description of the alleged temple is a round bronze 
basin that was placed in front of the temple and that 
was filled with water, where the priests of the 
temple would bathe (See fig. 14). The descriptions, 
measurements and capacity of this basin or sea were 
mentioned in the following two texts: 
• 
Kings I, Chapter 7 (verses 23, 26), includes the 
following37: (23 And he made the molten sea of 
ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, 
and the height thereof was five cubits; and a line 
of thirty cubits did compass it round. 26 And it 
was a hand-breadth thick; and the brim thereof 
was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the 
flower of a lily; it held two thousand baths). 
• 
The following is also mentioned in Chronicles II, 
Chapter 4 (verses 2, 3)38: (2 Also he made the 
molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, 
round in compass, and the height thereof was 
five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did 
compass it round about. 3 And it was a 
handbreadth thick; and the brim thereof was 
wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of 
a lily: it received and held three thousand baths). 
Reviewing the preceding two texts, two 
discrepancies become clear, and they are as follows: 
1. It is stated in Kings I and Chronicles II that the 
sea is round and that it is 10 cubits wide brim 
to brim, and its circumference is 30 cubits! 
Indeed, a well-known mathematical law links 
circumference and radius (circumference = 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 141
141
141
141  
 
2 • π • radius), which means that if the 
diameter of the sea is 10 cubits, then its 
circumference must be 31.4 cubits, and not 
30 cubits as is mentioned in the texts of the 
Torah, which in turn indicates the alteration 
of these texts. 
2. It is mentioned in the first text that this 
round sea holds two thousand baths, while it 
is stated in the second text that the sea 
receives and holds three thousand baths, 
which 
constitutes 
an 
unmistakable 
contradiction. So, which text should we 
believe? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. An Imagined Drawing of the Round Sea, which 
was Placed in Front of the Temple 
 
 
5. 
The Contradiction Regarding the Weight of 
Gold Sent to Solomon  
It is mentioned in several texts of the Old 
Testament that gold was used to overlay the walls, 
doors and some components of the temple. The 
following two texts indicate that King "Huram", 
whom Solomon employed in building the alleged 
temple, had sent gold with his slaves and Solomon's 
slaves from Ophir city. Thus, it is clear through 
comparing the two texts that there is a contradiction 
regarding the weight of the sent gold: 
a. Kings I, Chapter 9 (verse 28), includes the 
following39: (28 And they came to Ophir, and 
fetched from thence gold, four hundred and 
twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon). 
b. On the other hand, Chronicles II, Chapter 8, 
verse 18 – includes the following40:        (18 And 
Huram sent him by the hands of his servants 
ships, and servants that had knowledge of the 
sea; and they came with the servants of Solomon 
to Ophir, and fetched from thence four hundred 
and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to 
king Solomon). 
So, which of these two texts is correct, and 
which one should we believe? In the following text, 
in Kings I, it is stated that the weight of gold is 420 
talents, while the second text, in Chronicle II, 
mentions that its weight is 450 talents. 
 
 
6. 
The Stones of Western Wall (Al-Buraq Wall) 
Prove that It is not Part of the Alleged 
Temple 
One of the most important Islamic monuments 
associated with the Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is Al-Buraq 
(White, long animal, larger than a donkey and 
smaller than a mule) Wall, which constitutes the 
south-western part of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa's wall; its 
length is 48 m while its height is about 17 m. It is 
considered part of the Islamic properties, since it 
constitutes a part of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, and it has a 
firm relation with Al-Isra' and Al-Mi`raj Journey. 
Muslim historians believe that the Prophet (peace be 
upon him) tied Al-Buraq to it41.  
And though the Jews do not have any legal 
right to this wall, the tolerant Muslims have allowed 
them to visit it and cry in front of it. Hence, they 
called falsely and mendaciously call it the Wailing 
Wall. Likewise, the wall was not a place of worship 
for the Jews until the sixth century A.C., as is 
mentioned in "The Jewish Encyclopedia"42.  
Accordingly, the Jews themselves admit that 
they started to use Al-Buraq Wall or the Western 
Wall as a place of worship since the sixteenth 
century only. However, they frequently attempted 
to usurp it since the British Mandate of Palestine and 
until the Al-Buraq Revolution on August 23, 1929 
A.C., in which tens of Arabs and Jews were killed 
and which resulted in the formation of an 
international commission to determine the rights of 
the Arabs and the Jews concerning Al-Buraq Wall. 
The committee was headed by a former Swedish 
minister of foreign affairs and included two Swiss 
members and a Dutch. After conducting an inquiry, 
the commission released a report in 1930 in which it 
upheld the unquestionable right of Muslims to the 
property of Al-Buraq Wall. The report states: “To 
Muslims alone belongs the property of the Western 
Wall, and they alone have the title thereto as it 
forms an integral part of the esplanade of Al-Aqsa 
Mosque that is a waqf property. To Muslims too 
belongs the property of the pavement located in 
front of the Wall and in front of the district known 
as the Maghrebi quarter, as it is a waqf property in 
accordance with the provisions of Islamic law"43.  
However, in 1967, the Israeli authorities usurped 
Al-Buraq Wall and laid their hand on the Al-
Maghariba Gate (Moroccans Gate; one of the gates of 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa). Such is the historical proof that 
maintains the right of the Muslims to Al-Buraq Wall.  

142
142
142
142 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
Added to this is a monumental proof, which 
ascertains the falsity of the Jewish claims about 
their having any right to the wall. This is because the 
Torah introduced a definite description of the stones 
used in building the alleged temple.  
The following is mentioned in Kings I, Chapter 
5:1744: "17 By the king’s orders great stones, stones 
of high price, were cut out, so that the base of the 
house might be made of squared stone".  
The following is also mentioned in Chronicles I, 
Chapter 22:245:"And David commanded to gather 
together the strangers that were in the land of 
Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to 
build the house of God)." 
So, the preceding two texts clearly state that the 
stones used in building all parts of the alleged 
temple were square shaped, while the stones used in 
building Al-Buraq Wall, as well as  all other 
monumental buildings are rectangular in shape, 
figure 12.    
   It is also 
well-known from geometric 
and 
architectural perspectives that square stones are not 
used in building all the foundations and walls of old 
or modern buildings, and that rather, rectangular 
stones are mainly used, knowing that this contradicts 
the geometric and architectural principles known to 
specialists. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. The Stones of Al-Buraq Wall are Rectangular 
and not Square as is Mentioned in the Old Testament, 
which is Proven through All Monumental Excavations at 
the Foundations  of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. 
 
This gives conclusive proof of the differences of 
the stones used in building Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa in 
general and Al-Buraq Wall in particular from that 
mentioned in the Old Testament. In addition, the 
Old Testament mentions that unwrought stones must 
be used in building the temple (house of God), (Kings 
I, 6: 7-10). This contradicts visual reality, for all the 
huge stones used in building the Western Wall of are 
hewn stones, which had been dressed by chisels and 
pickaxes. This contradicts what is mentioned in the 
Old Testament46. 
 
 
7. 
The Total Area of the Buildings and Yard of 
the Temple is Larger than the Area of the Old 
City 
An accurate and detailed description of the 
elements of the alleged temple is mentioned in 
Ezekiel chapter through a vision seen by Ezekiel (one 
of the prophets of the Jews), along with an 
indication that the God of the Children of Israel 
ordered him to tell his people about this vision. The 
vision begins with the words that Ezekiel saw a man 
with a measuring stick – six cubits and a span of the 
hand (10 1/2 feet) long - in his hand (Ezekiel 40:5). 
It reads as follows47: (5 I saw a wall completely 
surrounding the temple area. The length of the 
measuring rod in the man's hand was six long cubits, 
and a handbreadth). 
Then, the man started to describe to Ezekiel, in 
an accurate and detailed manner, the temple and 
the surrounding buildings and courts, providing him 
with measurements and using the measuring stick 
mentioned above. At the end of this description, he 
said to him that there was a square-shaped wall 
encompassing the temple along with the surrounding 
buildings and open courts and that the length of that 
wall is 500 reeds, which is clear through the 
following quote from Ezekiel (Chapter 42, verses 15 – 
19)48:(15 Now when he had made an end of measuring 
the inner house, he brought me forth toward the gate 
whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it 
round about. 16 He measured the east side with the 
measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the 
measuring reed round about. 17 He measured the 
north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring 
reed round about. 18 He measured the south side, 
five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed. 19 He 
turned about to the west side, and measured five 
hundred reeds with the measuring reed. 20 He 
measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round 
about, five hundred reeds long, and five hundred 
broad, to make a separation between the sanctuary 
and the profane place). 
What is mentioned in Ezekiel illustrates that the 
total area of the sacred part containing the temple 
and the other buildings and yards equals the area 
encompassed by the external square wall, which is 
500 reeds long from the four sides. Hence, if the 
length of the measuring stick (reed), according to 
what is mentioned, [i.e. about 3.20 m, supposing 
that the reed (cubit) equals 50 cm and the span of 
the hand equals 20 cm), then the area of the sacred 
part containing the building of the alleged temple 
and surrounding buildings and open courts within the 
wall, would be about 2.65 km2
. 
Thus, when we know that the area of the Old 
City within the walls is about 1 km2
, fig. 13, then this 
means that the total area of the sacred part of the 
temple and surrounding area is about two and a half 
times larger than the area of the Old City, which is 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 143
143
143
143  
 
completely illogical and which is belied by all 
archeological and historical maps. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13. A Perspective Drawing of the Old City Within                
the  Walls, which Shows Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa as Part of the 
City,while It is Determined in Ezekiel that the Area of 
the Alleged Temple is Two and a Half Times Larger 
than the Old City 
 
Conclusion 
Several significant findings have been reached 
through the present study, which will be elaborated 
in the following points: 
1. The blessed Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, which is 
mentioned in the Ever Glorious Qur'an          
(in Sura Al-Isra'), is the blessed spot that is 
now 
called 
Al-Haram 
Al-Qudsi 
and 
is 
surrounded by the great wall along with the 
buildings and monuments that have been built 
on it, on top of which is Al-Masjid Al-Qibli 
(covered Masjid) and the Dome of the Rock. 
2. In the creed of the Muslims, Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
is the second Masjid ever built on earth, next 
to Al-Bayt Al-Haram (The Sacred House) in 
Makkah 
Al-Mukarramah. 
Therefore, 
the 
history of Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, according to the 
Muslims, dates back to the distant past, 
unlike Jewish history in which Al Masjid 
emerges from the moment the temple was 
built, according to their own claim. 
3. It has been proven through satellite searches 
that the orientation of the Qiblah of the 
legally defined Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is towards 
Makkah Al-Mukarramah (the Qiblah of the 
Muslims). This orientation preceded the 
Islamic conquest of Jerusalem by hundreds of 
years, 
and 
it 
is 
proven 
through 
the 
foundations and bases of the wall of the 
Masjid that dates back to Herod the Great. 
This in turn exposes the falsity of the Jewish 
claims that the alleged Solomon's temple was 
oriented towards the west, which cannot be 
explained in a plausible manner. 
4. Analytical studies have proven the extent of 
geometric identicalness between Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa and the Honorable Ka`bah in its original 
measurements, as regards shape and ratios. 
Their geometric shape is identical, being a 
scalene, which is a rarely used shape in 
architectural designs. Besides, their ratios are 
almost the same, which agree with the 
"Golden Ratios". It comes on top of the 
geometric ratios that have been used in 
buildings since the distant past because it is 
the most comfortable ratio from the visual 
perspective. 
5. It has been proven through studies of the 
texts of the Old Testament describing the 
alleged Solomon's temple that there are clear 
multiple contradictions in the geometric 
description and the measurements of that 
alleged building, whether the contradiction 
lies between the texts themselves or between 
it and geometric logic that is acknowledged 
by specialists and experts. The following are 
the most important contradictions: 
a. Contradiction in the numbers of officials 
supervising the laborers. 
b. Illogical geometric ratios of the alleged 
temple, especially the height of the porch 
that antecedes the temple. This led all 
Israeli architects and archeologists not to 
adhere 
to 
these 
measurements 
when 
drawing the graphic interfaces and sectors of 
the alleged temple or upon making miniature 
models of it. 
c.  Contradiction in the height of the two pillars 
anteceding the temple and in the height of 
the capital that tops them. 
d. Contradiction in the relation between the 
diameter and the circumference of the 
round sea, and also in the quantity of water 
that it can take and receive. 
e. Contradiction in the weight of the gold sent 
from Huram to Prophet Solomon to be used 
in the alleged temple. 
f. The description in the Torah of the stones 
used in building the alleged temple as square 
and unhewn diametrically contradicts the 
hewn rectangular stones that were used in 
establishing the foundations of the legal Al-
Masjid Al-Aqsa and its walls and buildings; 
rather, the stones used in all monumental 
buildings in Jerusalem. This gives firm proof 
of the falsity of the allegation of the "Wailing 
Wall", which the Jews claim to be part of the 
remains of the third temple built by Herod 
the Great. 
g. The area of the temple and the surrounding 
buildings and open yards, as is mentioned in 

144
144
144
144 | Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013   
Ezekiel, equals two and a half times the area 
of the Old City within the walls. 
6. The preceding clear contradictions raise 
doubts about the existence of the alleged 
temple, which provide proof that Prophet 
Solomon renewed the building of Al-Masjid Al-
Aqsa, and did not build a temple, as is 
mentioned in Islamic texts. 
7. It is an aspect of the inimitability of the 
Glorious Qur'an that it mentions in Sura          
Al-Baqarah confirmation of the alteration and 
distortion in the texts of the Old Testament 
at a time in which the Old Testament had not 
yet been translated into Arabic, but was 
written in other languages (Hebrew, Chaldean 
and Greek). For, Allah (Glorified and Exalted 
be He) says, "And there are among them 
(Jews) unlettered people, who know not the 
Book, but they trust upon false desires and 
they but guess. Then woe to those who write 
the Book with their own hands and then say,  
[This is from Allah," to purchase with it a little 
price! Woe to them for what their hands have 
written and woe to them for that they earn 
thereby.]  (Al-Baqarah: 79). 
 
 
Reference 
                                                          
1  
`A. Zayid. 2000. Al-Quds Al-Khalidah [Eternal 
Jerusalem]. Cairo: Egyptian's History series 
(197), General Egyptian Book Organization. pp. 
13. 
2  
M.`Abdul-Qadir. 2001. Watha'iq Al-Yahud As-
Sirriyyah Lil-Istila' `ala Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa 
[Jewish Secret Documents to Usurp Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa]. Alexandria, Egypt: its author, pp. 11. 
3  
`A. Zayid, ibid, pp. 181. 
4  
Y. Wazeri. 2005. At-Tatawwur Al-`Umrani wat-
Turath Al-Mi`mari li-Madinat Al-Quds Ash-
Sharif 
[Constructional 
Development 
and 
Architectural 
Heritage 
of 
the 
Noble 
Jerusalem]. Cairo: Ad-Dar Ath-Thaqafiyyah for 
publication. pp. 127. 
5  
Dr. Hassan Zhazha mentioned that the area of 
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa is rectangular in shape being 
oriented from north to south towards the 
Qiblah in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, but he did 
not support this claim with proof. See H. 
Zhazha. 1973. Israel Rakizat Al-Isti`mar waal-
`idwan 
Baina 
AL-Muslimin 
[Israel; 
the 
Cornerstone of Colonialism and Enmity among 
the 
Muslims]. 
Cairo: 
Islamic 
Research 
Magazine. pp. 116- 117. 
6  
http:// 
www.qiblalacator.com 
(Accessed 
February 9, 2012). 
7  
`A. Zayid, ibid, pp. 125. 
                                                                                       
8  
W. F. Albright. 1971. Athar Filistin [Monuments 
of Palestine]. Arab Republic of Egypt: Supreme 
Council for Islamic Affairs. pp. 31. 
9  
F. K. Tashkandi. 1999. ‘Ash-Shawahid min Ash-
Shari`ah wal-`Imarah fi Ihtida' Al-Muslimin ila 
Al-Qiblah Al-Ula’. Architecture of the mosque 
Symposium (7th vol.). Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: 
College of Architecture and Planning, King Saud 
University. pp. 73-121. 
10   http://www.ritmeyer.com/2011/03/08/ 
mughrabi-gate-bridge-is-back-on-theagenda/   
(Accessed June 10, 2012). 
11  `A. Al-`Arif. 1999. Tarikh Al-Quds [History of 
Jerusalem] 3rd ed. Cairo: Dar Al- Ma'arif. pp. 
303. 
12  A. Zaki and M. S. Al-Junaydi. 1943. Al-Mabadi'  
Al-Handasiyyah [Geometric Principles]. Cairo: 
Ministry of Al-Ma`arif Al-`Umumiyyah. pp. 107. 
13 `I. El-Said & A. Parman. 1976. Geometric 
Concepts in Islamic Art. London: World of 
Islamic Festival Publishing Company Ltd. pp.82. 
14  M. 
Talu. 
1982. 
Al-Funun 
Az-Zukhrufiyyah 
[Decorative Arts]. Damascus: Dar Dimashq lit-
Tiba`ah 
wan-Nashr 
[Damascus 
House 
for 
Printing and Publishing. pp. 29. 
15   Y. Wazeri. 2007. Al-Ka`bah Al-Musharrafah; 
Dirasah Tahliliyyah Lil-Khasa'is At-Tasmimiyyah 
[The Honorable Ka`bah; an analytical study of 
the characteristics of the design. Cairo: Inter 
Build Conference Research Register 14 
16  K. Creswell. 1984. Early Muslim Architecture. 1st 
ed. Damascus: Dar Qutaybah. pp.13. 
17  A. Al-Azraqi. 1985. Akhbar Makkah wa ma Ja'a 
fiha min Al-Athar [News of Makkah] (2nd ed.). 
Beirut: Rushdi Salih Mulhin. pp.64. 
18   The current measurements of the Ka`bah are as 
follows: The north-east side: 11.68 m, the 
north-west side: 9 m, the south-west side: 
12.04 m, and the south-east side: 10.18 m. See:       
Y. `A. `Abdur-Rahim. 1998. "Al-Qissah Al-
Kamila Li-Bina' Bayt Allah Al-Haram [The 
complete 
story 
for 
building 
the 
Sacred 
mosque]”. `Ammar Magazin, issue no.19, 
Kuwait, pp.23- 60. 
19   A. R. Muhammad. 2000. Al-Masjid Al-Haram bi-
Makkah Al-Mukarramah [The sacred mosque in 
Honorable Makkah] . 2nd ed. Cairo: Ad-Dar Al-
Misriyyah Al-Lubnaniyyah. pp. 24. 
20  Some people drew my attention to the point 
that Dr. Haytham ar-Ratrut pointed out that 
there is a parallel between the angles of the 
Honorable Ka`bah and those of Al-Masjid           
Al-Aqsa. So, after referring to his study, I 
noticed that he did not assume any comparison 
between the real shape of the Honorable 
Ka`bah and Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa in maintaining 
this proposition. Rather, he drew on the inverse 

Journal of Islamic Architecture Volume 2 Issue 3 June 2013  | 145
145
145
145  
 
                                                                                       
shape, making the Yemini Corner in the place of 
the Black Stone Corner, without indicating the 
reason for that. However, it is well-known that 
geometric comparisons should apply to real and 
actual shapes of buildings. See:nH. Ar-Ratrut. 
2005. 
"Al-Masjid 
Al-Aqsa 
fil-Athar 
Al-
Qur'aniyyah" [The Farthest mosque in the 
Qur'anic Archeology]. Journal of Bayt Al-Maqdis 
(Islamic Jerusalem Studies). United Kingdom. 
no.1. pp.1-32. 
21  According to the Jews, David (Dawud) and 
Solomon 
(Sulayman) 
are 
kings 
and 
not 
prophets, while in our Muslim creed, they are 
two prophets sent by Allah (Exalted be He). 
22   See for instance: R. Najm .2004. Al-Madkhal 
Lil-Madinah Al-Muqaddasa [Entry into the 
Sacred 
City]. 
Amman: 
The 
General 
International Islamic Conference of Jerusalem, 
pp. 83. 
23   For more information on Qur'anic verses and 
authentic prophetic Hadiths that confirm this 
fact, the reader can refer to: `I. Al-Qaddumi. 
2008. Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, Al-Haqiqah wat-Tarikh 
[The Farthest mosque, Fact and History]. 
2nded. Hawli, Kuwait: Jerusalem Center for 
Documentary Studies. pp. 10 & 14. 
24   Many studies have touched on the contradictions 
and distortion in the Bible. See, for instance: N. 
`A. As-Samirra'i. 2003. At-Tawrah bayna Fuqdan 
Al-Asl wa Tanaqud An-Nass The Torah between 
loss of the Original and Contradictions of the 
Text], 2nd ed. London: Dar Al-Hikmah. Other 
researches also elaborated on refuting claims of 
the presence of the alleged temple in general. 
See: S. H. Ar-Riqib. 2002. "Naqd Al-Maza`im As-
Suhyuniyyah fi Haykal Sulayman [Refuting the 
Zionist 
Allegations 
on 
Solomon's 
Temple]". 
Islamic University Magazine. Vol. 10, 1st issue, 
Gaza: Faculty of Usul Ad-Din, pp. 41 – 91. 
25   `A. Al-Misiri. 1999. Mawsu`at Al-Yahud wa Al-
Yahudiyyah wa As-Suhyuniyyah. Vol. 4. Cairo: 
Dar Al-Shuruq. 
26   See also the description of the alleged temple 
in: http://www.templeinstitute.org (Accessed 
May 11, 2012). 
27   See New International Version of the Bible in: 
http:// www.biblegateway.com (Accessed May 
3, 2012). 
28  ibid 
29  ibid 
30  ibid 
31  ibid 
32 
http:// 
www.kingsolomonsastonishingtemplesecrets.or
g (Accessed May 5, 2012). 
33  ibid 
34  The English-Hebrew version of the Bible in: 
                                                                                       
http:// www.mechon:nmare.org (Accessed May 
3, 2012). 
35   King James version of the Bible, Ibid. 
36  ibid 
37  The English-Hebrew version of the Bible in: 
http:// www.mechon:nmare.org (Accessed May 
11, 2012). 
38  ibid 
39  ibid 
40  ibid 
41 `A. Mustafa. 2006. Qadiyyat Al-Quds (The 
Jerusalem Issue). Cairo: the Supreme Council 
for 
Islamic Affairs, 
Egyptian 
Ministry 
of 
Endowments. pp.49. 
42   For more details, see: J. Al-`Ayyash. 2007. 
Ha'it 
Al-Buraq 
[Al-Buraq 
Wall]. 
Cyprus: 
Jerusalem Center for Documentary Studies. 
43   M. M. Iskandar. 1972. Al-Quds wa Bayt Lahm 
[Jerusalem and Bethlehem] (New and enlarged 
edition). Cairo: Maktabat Al-Mahabbah. pp. 70. 
44  –. 1970. The Holy Book. Cairo: The Holy Book 
House,. 
45  The English-Hebrew version of the Bible, Ibid. 
46   For more details, see: B. Al-`Abid. 2001. “Al-
Huwiyyah 
Al-Mi`mariyyah 
wa 
Atharuha 
fi 
Tahdid Al-Huwiyyah As-Siyasiyyah li Madinat Al-
Quds [Architectural Identity and its Impact in 
Shaping the Political Identity of Jerusalem]”. 
Journal of the Association of Arab Universities 
for Studies and Research Engineering. Iraq: 
College of Engineering, Bagdad Univ. pp. 1-70.  
 
 http://www.palestine-
info.com/arabic/alquds/mukhtarat/dr_alabed/
f7.htm (Accessed May 14, 2012). 
47  New International Version of the Bible, ibid. 
48  Kings James, English version, ibid