Annales Missiologici Posnanienses t. 19 (2014), s. 91-105
DOI: 10.14746/amp.2014.19.4
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
Department of German Studies, University of Arizona,Tuscon
Jesuit Missionaries Building a Global Network. 
Eighteenth-Century Exploration of the World in the Name of God
– A Story of Disjointed Memory
Jesuit Missionaries Building a Global Network
Globalization can be impressively illustrated through a critical examina-
tion of the Jesuits as they existed until the late eighteenth century.1 I want to 
describe a particular aspect of the early history of the region today identiﬁ ed 
as Northern Mexico and Southern Arizona, commonly called ‘Sonora,’ before 
I turn my attention to a discussion of a publication reﬂ ecting the universal out-
reach by the Jesuits.
From a European perspective, that territory in northern Mexico was as far 
away and outside of the cultural center of the western world as possible, at 
least for that time. Sonora was a fairly barren land; it could not pride itself 
on a signiﬁ cant cultural history, and it was not yet recognized as an important 
source of minerals and ores. Europeans shied away from that part of the world 
for many good reasons, but Sonora was populated, after all, by numerous dif-
ferent native tribes. These became the target of intensive Jesuit missionary 
activities beginning in the late seventeenth century particularly after the ﬁ rst 
missionary, Eusebio Kino (1645-1711), arrived in 1687.2
1 See, for instance, D. Mitchell, The Jesuits: A History, London 1980; J. Lacouture, Jesuits: 
A Multibiography, Washington, DC 1995; D. Letson, M. Higgins, The Jesuit Mystique, Toronto 
1995; J.F. Conwell, SJ, Impelling Spirit: Revisiting a Founding Experience: 1539. Ignatius of Loy-
ola and His Companions, Chicago 1997; see also the contributions to Ignatianisch: Eigenart und 
Methode der Gesellschaft Jesu, ed. M. Sievernich, SJ, G. Switek, SJ, Freiburg i.Br.–Basel–Vienna 
1990, and to The Mercurian Project: Forming Jesuit Culture 1573-1580, ed. Th.M. McCoog, SJ, 
[Biblioteca Instituti Historici Societatis Jesu, 55], St. Louis, MO, and Rome-Prati 2004. This list 
could easily be expanded many-fold.
2 Ch.W. Polzer, SJ, Kino: A Legacy. His Life, His Works, His Missions, His Monuments, Tuc-
son, AZ 1998.

92 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
Despite the loneliness and hardship in their lives, many Jesuit missionar-
ies ventured far into the most northern part of Mexico and entered deeply into 
the Sonoran Desert, at least to a point both then and until today called ‘Casa 
Grande,’ halfway between the modern cities of Tucson and Phoenix, Arizona. 
The world beyond remained unknown and was thinly populated by Apaches, 
among other tribes, who prevented the missionaries from extending their net-
work, conversion work, teachings, and preaching, and were commonly identi-
ﬁ ed by their European opponents as ferocious and dangerous. This cultural 
and military clash continued into the late nineteenth century.3
Founded by Ignatius of Loyola in 1540, the Jesuits quickly expanded all 
over Europe and then moved onto the global stage, sending out missionaries 
into every corner of our world, except for Australia which was not discovered 
by Europeans until 1603 – the ﬁ rst Jesuits arrived there in 1848.4 In every 
respect, this order represented a truly global organization, with its center in 
Rome, whence orders and charges went out all over the world, maintaining 
contact with countless missions that were all subordinated in a quasi military 
fashion. At the same time, thousands of Jesuit missionaries sent letters, re-
ports, treatises, and other documents from all over the world to Rome, to their 
individual superiors, and at times also to their families back home. Almost all 
of these missionaries hailed from highly advanced educational institutions and 
had hence received some of the best intellectual training in Europe available 
in the eighteenth century. The Jesuits embraced the basic principles original-
ly developed by Ignatius – teaching, preaching, and missionizing – and these 
principles became the foundation for their successful global outreach and net-
work.
Of course, they were not the ﬁ rst Christians and not the ﬁ rst missionaries 
in North America; in fact, the Franciscans and the Dominicans had arrived 
well before they,5 but the Jesuits pursued a different methodology in reaching 
the people. They realized the great need to work closely with the local people 
and to learn the languages and cultures in order to inﬂ uence and teach them. 
This does not mean that they arrived without the usual Eurocentric ideology as 
part of their baggage, but they always made great efforts to acquire the neces-
sary linguistic skills in order to work.6
3 D.E. Worcester, The Apaches: Eagles of the Southwest, [Civilization of the American Indian 
Series, 149], Norman, OK 1979; J.L. Haley, Apaches: A History and Culture Portrait, Norman, OK 
1997; J. Ortega Urquidi, Apaches del Desierto, Mexico City 2011.
4 http://www.jesuit.org.au/ﬁ les/docs/our-community/our-story/the-history-of-the-jesuits-in-au-
stralia.pdf [online 20.10.2014].
5 http://epicworldhistory.blogspot.com/2012/06/franciscans-in-americas.html [online 20.10.2014].
6 R. Haub, Die Geschichte der Jesuiten, Darmstadt 2007, p. 72.

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
93
While they tried to win Protestant Europe back to the papacy, the Jesuits 
experienced successes in South and Central America, particularly in Paraguay, 
where they struggled against many of the Spanish land- and mine owners. Lit-
tle wonder that these and many other reasons merged into general opposition 
to the Jesuits.7
Although the missionary Padre Eusebio Kino reached Sonora in 1687, and 
then was followed by many waves of succeeding missionaries mostly from 
the German province of Jesuits, the Jesuits were banned from the Americas in 
1767, and then forbidden globally in 1773. They were readmitted in 1814, and 
since then they worked to recover their global network.8
Researchers have been deeply fascinated by the history of the Jesuits while 
outsiders have mostly ignored them, because they operated primarily behind 
the scenes and often used their schools and universities to achieve their reli-
gious goals. Still, they worked not only as teachers, missionaries, and priests, 
but they also pursued farming and commerce: buying and selling in order to 
support their preaching efforts. In Sonora, above all, they operated many mis-
sions, which were the centers of agricultural activities. They provided school-
ing for the young, established basic hospitals, offered shelter from hostile 
tribes, especially the Apaches and Seris, made available job training (in mod-
ern parlance) for young adults, and they served as patrons of the arts, as ad-
ministrators, and as judges.9
Their written documents are extensive and a large percentage is still await-
ing critical analysis. These extensive archives, in a number of major locations, 
conﬁ rm what this article wants to bring to light, that is, the Jesuit global per-
spective. They strove to interact with the local people, the local climate, the 
fauna, and the ﬂ ora, and, above all, to set up new organizations in the new 
world, importing European concepts to new cultures.10
This obviously appealed strongly to young people in Europe, especially in 
German- and Czech-speaking lands where the constant reports about the mis-
 7 U. Paintner, ‘Des Papsts neue Creatur’: Antijesuitische Publizistik im deutschsprachigen 
Raum (1555-1618), [Chloe, Beihefte zum Daphnis, 44], Amsterdam–New York 2011.
 8 A. Classen, Early History of the Southwest Through the Eyes of German-Speaking Jesuit 
Missionaries: A Transcultural Experience in the Eighteenth Century, Lanham, Boulder, et al.: Lex-
ington Books, 2013.
 9 A. Classen, The Letters of the Swiss Jesuit Missionary Philipp Segesser (1689-1762): An 
Eyewitness to the Settlement of Eighteenth-Century Sonora (Pimería Alta), ed. and trans. A. Classen, 
[Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, Occasional Series, 5], Tempe 2012.
10 H. Schmuck, Philipp Segesser, SJ (1689-1762): Exemplarische Biographie eines mitteleu-
ropäischen Missionars in Nueva España, [Mainzer Studien zur Neueren Geschichte 11], Frankfurt a. 
M. 2004; El saber de los jesuitas: historias naturales y el Nuevo Mundo, ed. L. Millones Figueroa, 
D. Ledezma, [Textos y estudios coloniales y de la independencia, 12], Frankfurt a. M.–Madrid 2005; 
R.A. Schroth, SJ, The American Jesuits: A History, New York–London 2007.

94 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
sionaries all over the world reached a large audience hungry for news about 
the rest of the world. Between 1558 and 1772, just one year before the Jesu-
its were suppressed, the Jesuit general government in Rome received more 
than 15,000 letters requesting them to grant permission to go into one of the 
missions.11 The accounts by the ﬁ rst missionary, Francis Xavier (1506-1551), 
and others from far away excited European readers, but it took until the early 
eighteenth century before the Spanish Crown also allowed missionaries from 
north of the Alps to go to the New World, probably because they had run out of 
southern candidates. For a long time, too, Lutheran as well as Catholic coun-
tries prevented scores of highly passionate German missionaries to travel to 
exotic lands, but the early eighteenth century enforced a change because the 
Church ran out of Spanish volunteers to serve in the rough and dangerous ter-
rain in northern Mexico.12
It would be unfair to characterize those young men as purely driven by 
curiosity or as religious tourists. Religious devotion and a deep commitment to 
preach, convert, and baptize the heathens were their primary motivations. This 
did not mean that they were blind to the natural environment, to foreign cul-
tures, and to different languages. Moreover, many of these missionaries were 
experts in a variety of scientiﬁ c ﬁ elds, such as astronomy, cartography, medi-
cine, pharmacy, mathematics, etc., as the resulting reports, maps, and treatises 
about the conditions abroad conﬁ rm. The ﬁ rst task, however, especially in the 
New World, was to establish an efﬁ cient agriculture and to settle the parish, 
and then to implement European norms of behavior, decency (usually cloth-
ing), monogamy, craftsmanship, artistic activities, and learning.13 Teaching, 
preaching, conversion, and baptism would follow. The Jesuits were, mostly in-
voluntarily, spearheads of Spanish and Portuguese colonization, but they were 
less malleable instruments in the hands of the secular authorities than more 
obedient to their own authorities.
No mission existed by itself. It always consisted of a larger network of 
missions, which were subordinate to a bishop and a Jesuit superior, and eve-
ryone higher up reported to the authorities in Mexico City and then to Rome. 
As a result, we have a huge corpus of relevant texts which make it possible to 
11 R. Haub, Die Geschichte der Jesuiten, op.cit., p. 72.
12 A. Classen, España a través del prisma alemán: perspectivas del Medievo y la primera Mo-
dernidad e investigaciones imagológicas, in: Viajes y viajeros entre ﬁ cción y realitad: Alemania – 
España, ed. B. Raposo Fernández, I. García Wistädt, Valencia 2009, p. 41-59.
13 B. Hausberger, Jesuiten aus Mitteleuropa im kolonialen Mexiko: Eine bio-bibliographie, 
Vienna–Munich 1995, p. 9-13; for the motivation of the Jesuit missionaries from north of the Alps, 
see p. 42-46; id., Für Gott und König: die Mission der Jesuiten im kolonialen Mexiko, [Studien zur 
Geschichte und Kultur der iberischen und iberoamerikanischen Länder, 6], Vienna–Munich 2000; 
D.T. Reff, Plagues, Priests, and Demons: Sacred Narratives and the Rise of Christianity in the Old 
World and the New, Cambridge–New York 2005.

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
95
understand much of the internal structure of the Jesuit Order both in Europe 
and in the New World. This corpus, in turn, sheds important light on the glo-
bal organization and demonstrates how closely the hundreds of outposts were 
connected with the center of the Order. Even though Sonora, or the Pimería 
Alta, as that semi-arid was locally known, was far away from the main arter-
ies of global trade and cultural activities, the Jesuit missionaries created nodes 
to expand the network. Their reports often dealt with ofﬁ cial business in the 
missions, but there are numerous accounts, such as letters, that reﬂ ected their 
personal experiences and emotions, too.
In recent years, much new research has focused on those German-speak-
ing Jesuit missionaries who were proliﬁ c writers, highly energetic, and well-
organized administrators, and also excellent scientists in different ﬁ elds.14 
Moreover, musicologists have realized the great contributions by the Jesuits 
to the recording of and development of music in their missions. Mostly, these 
missionaries worked hard to introduce European music, primarily for church 
services, but they also reﬂ ected on the music produced by indigenous peoples. 
Since the Jesuits pursued a strongly Eurocentric perspective, they harbored 
mostly negative sentiments about native cultures; nevertheless, we can still use 
some of their writings to gain some insights into the ancient practices which 
they encountered.15
Even though the Jesuit missionaries mainly originated from the so-called 
Southern German province of Jesuits, they hailed from many different places 
in northern Europe, too. Maximilian Amarell (1651-1696) originated from 
Vana, Bohemia; Johann Jakob Baegert (1717-1772) was born in Schlett-
stadt, Alsace; Johann Anton Balthasar (1697-1763) hailed from Lucerne, 
Switzerland; Michael Bauer (1712-1774) was born in Mainz; Anton Maria 
Bentz (1716-1776) came from Dillingen/Bavaria; Johann Berens was born 
in Koblenz in 1709; Johann Xaver Bischoff (1710-1761) was born in Glatz/ 
/Kłodzko; Joseph Martin Bonani (1685-1752) was born in Lanza, Trento; Karl 
Boranga (1640-1684) was born in Vienna; Simon Boruhradský (1650-1697) 
was born in Polan/Polnâ in Moravia; Benno Ducrue (1721-1779) came from 
Munich; Wenzel Eymer (1661-1709) originated from Melnik/Mělník in Bo-
hemia; Georg Fraidenegg (1727-1775) was born in Castle Pichelhofen in Sty-
ria; Joseph Gasteiger (1702-1754) came from Leoben in Styria; Joseph Göbel 
(1714-1778) was born in Neisse/Nysa, in Silesia; Johann Baptist Gratzhofer 
(1690-1733) was born in Bleiburg in Corinthia; Johann Baptist Haller (1652-
14 A. Classen, Early History, op.cit. (see note 16); idem, The Letters of the Swiss Jesuit Mission-
ary, op.cit. (see note 17).
15 See the contributions to Jesuitische Musik- und Theaterpraxis im kolonialen Amerika, ed. Ch. 
Storch (forthcoming).

96 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
-1718) originated from Gemona del Friuli, in Friuli, northern Italy; Franz Hla-
va (1725-1768) was born in Prague; Daniel Januske (1661-1724) originated 
from Breslau/Wrocław; Adam Kall (1657-1702) came from Eger/Cheb, Bo-
hemia; Marcus Antonius Kappsu (1567-1717) was born in Laibach/Ljubljana, 
Slovenia; Eusebio Kino (1645-1711) came from Segno near Trento; Joseph 
Kroff (1700-1734) was born in Tischenreuth in Bavaria; Bernhard Midden-
dorff (1723-1782) came from Vechta in Lower Saxony; Johann Nentuig (1713-
-1768) was born in Glatz/Kłodzko, Silesia; Joseph Neumann (1648-1732) was 
born in Brussels; Joseph Och (1725-1773) came from Würzburg; Alexander 
Rapicani (1702-1768) originated from Bremen; Franz Xaver Reittenberger 
(1707-1767) was born in Prague; etc.16
This short selection clearly demonstrates that even this rather forlorn cor-
ner of the vast Jesuit network that spanned the entire globe attracted missionar-
ies from all over northern Europe, not mentioning those from Spain, Portugal, 
France, and Italy, of course. We cannot claim that these missionaries arrived 
in Sonora simply out of personal motives; their superiors assigned them their 
duties and directed them to make their way to their various posts in the vast 
expanse of the Sonoran desert. The arid and harsh climate represented a huge 
challenge in the eighteenth century, although at that time much more water 
must have been available, with the local rivers still running year-long. Today, 
they are all dry washes and ﬁ ll up only during strong downpours and thun-
derstorms. The Jesuits often faced hostile conditions and had to work hard 
to establish peaceful relationships with the various tribes. These were mostly 
nomads and did not know much of agriculture.
Central and South America were quite different. We have to realize that 
Jesuit mission history consists of countless individual conditions, which could 
make it almost impossible to summarize, if we did not view it in the light of 
early modern globalization. Many European and American historians continue 
to ignore the enormous impact which the Jesuits had everywhere, unless they 
focus on that Order speciﬁ cally.17 In fact, we could call the Jesuit Order one 
of the ﬁ rst global organizations, following the Catholic Church, naturally, and 
their own precursors, the Franciscans and the Dominicans.
If we want to understand the global political, economic, religious, cultural, 
and military conditions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, then an 
examination of what the Jesuits had to say about themselves and how their 
contemporaries responded to them will prove to be meaningful and far-reach-
16 See B. Hausberger, Jesuiten aus Mitteleuropa, op.cit. (see note 21). He notes, also based on 
older research, the surprisingly large percentage of missionaries from Bohemia, now the modern-
day Czech Republic, p. 26-33.
17 See, for instance, the characteristic case of R. Stark, How the West Won: The Neglected Story 
of the Triumph of Modernity, Wilmington, DE 2014.

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
97
ing. Most missionaries assumed rather lonely posts and had to work in alienat-
ing social and natural environments, forcing them to accept challenging living 
conditions. Some were martyred (e.g., Heinrich Ruhen, 1751), many suffered 
from loneliness and sickness, and all of them, despite their profound dedica-
tion and passion for their religious cause, accepted that they would never re-
turn home. Of course, the major exception was that the American Jesuits were 
then expelled in 1767, forced to travel to Cuba, from there to Spain, and only 
years later to their home towns all over Europe, but this is not the topic of our 
paper.
In order to grasp more in detail what the global approach by the Jesuits 
might have meant and how many of the missionaries perceived the foreign, 
that is, in our context, the New World, one of the most comprehensive sources 
available (but never discussed at great length or translated) with an in-depth 
insight into the broad range of Jesuit activities all over the world and of their 
subsequent texts is, Joseph Stöcklein’s Der Neue Welt-Bott mit allerhand 
Nachrichten deren Missionarien Soc.[ietatis] Iesu ... .18
Stöcklein collected a huge corpus of letters written by Jesuits all over the 
world and sent to Rome. He also translated them, if they had not been com-
posed in German, into that language. This Welt-Bott (World Messenger), as it 
was often cited, can be identiﬁ ed as one of the most comprehensive collec-
tions of Jesuit writings on a global level and allows us to gain perspective into 
the highly energetic, well-organized missionary activities centrally controlled 
by the Society of Jesus. The frontispiece to this mighty volume clearly illus-
trates the global approach by the Jesuits. It shows a ﬂ oating messenger pulling 
a globe behind him. The globe shows us Europe, the Americas, northern Africa 
and part of Asia. The image itself shows us a harbor with a tall ship, its banner 
ﬂ ying the Jesuit monogram. The caption quotes Luke 13:29, “They will arrive 
from the Orient and the Occident, from midday and midnight.”
18 The full title: Allerhand So Lehr-als Geist-reiche Brief / Schrifften und Reis-Beschreibungen 
/ Welche von denen Missionariis der Gesellschafft Jesu Aus Beyden Indien / und andern Über Meer 
gelegenen Laendern / Seit An. 1642. biß auf das Jahr 1726 in Europa angelangt seynd. Jetzt zum 
erstenmal Theils aus Handschrifftlichen Urkunden / theils aus denen Französischen Lettres Edi-
ﬁ antes verteutscht und zusammen getragen, von Joseph Stöcklein (Fortgesetzt von Petrus Probst 
und Franciscus Keller), Augsburg–Graz: In Verlag Philips / Martins / und Joh. Veith seel. Erben, 
1725-1758. [All Kinds of Instructive and Intelligent Letters, Tracts, and Travelogues Which Had 
Been Written and sent to Europe by Missionaries of the Society of Jesus in Both Indies and in Other 
Countries Situated Overseas from 1642 to 1726; Now for the First Time Translated and Compiled to 
Some Extent From Handwritten Documents, to Another Extent from the French Lettres Ediﬁ antes]. 
Curiously, the ﬁ rst part was printed in 1726, at the same time as the third. I was fortunate enough to 
have available an original copy of Stöcklein’s work in the Special Collections, University of Arizona 
Library, Tucson, Oversize BV 2290.A27.1642. Large sections of my discussion of Stöcklein’s works 
are from my monograph, Early History of the Southwest. I revisited the original work and refash-
ioned my original text in light of the particular focus pursued here.

98 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
Stöcklein’s intention was two-fold: on the one hand to demonstrate the true 
accomplishments of his Order to the world, and on the other, equally impor-
tantly, to fend off the growing criticism of and hostility against Jesuits wherev-
er they worked as missionaries, as preachers, as teachers, and as instructors.19 
Moreover, as we can easily recognize both in the prologue and in the texts, 
Stöcklein aimed at a broader audience, since he translated all of the texts into 
the vernacular, i.e., German, and promised much excitement for his readers 
since the letters had been sent from the widest range possible of exotic places 
where Jesuit missionaries worked. Anyone possibly interested in traveling to 
distant lands was hence invited to join the Society of Jesus, because that or-
ganization offered positions as missionaries even in the remotest places imagi-
nable. He also claimed that this Jesuit literature offers particularly intriguing 
perspectives since: “an inquisitive reader can, without taking any step, sitting 
at home, simply reading of those accounts, wander throughout the entire world 
and is thus enabled to acquire a nearly complete understanding of the entire 
globe without facing any dangers, costs, or efforts.”20
Whereas missionaries, as expected, would relate all the relevant aspects 
of their activities as priests, confessors, and the like, they would also use the 
opportunity offered in their letters and reports, “to provide us with all kinds of 
very useful information about nearly all sciences and arts.”21 In other words, 
the texts written by the Jesuits allow us to examine more carefully a variety of 
discourses, especially about conversion, preaching, the scientiﬁ c exploration 
of the New World in northern Mexico, and also autobiographical statements, 
19 Not surprisingly, and as a conﬁ rmation of Anton Huonder’s observation (Deutsche Jesui-
tenmissionäre des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts: Ein Beitrag zur Missionsgeschichte und zur deutschen 
Biographie, [Ergänzungshefte zu den “Stimmen aus Maria-Laach,” 74], Freiburg i. Br. 1899), 
Stöcklein is not even mentioned in the most comprehensive biographical reference work, Allgemei-
ne deutsche Biographie (in print and online at: http://www.deutsche-biographie.de/index.html). And 
B. Hausberger, Jesuiten aus Mitteleuropa, op.cit. (see note 21), p. 17-18, names him only in passing. 
B. Duhr, SJ, Deutsche Auslandssehnsucht im 18. Jahrhundert: Aus der überseeischen Missionsar-
beit deutscher Jesuiten [Schriften des Deutschen Auslands-Instituts. A: Kulturhistorische Reihe, 
20], Stuttgart 1928, p. 45-49, offers at least an analysis of the Welt-Bott. Stöcklein himself does not 
tell us anything about himself in biographical terms. Duhr provides the following biographical data: 
Stöcklein was born on July 30, 1676 in Oettingen and joined the Jesuits in 1700 in Vienna. For ten 
years he served as a military chaplain in Hungary and was highly sought after as a preacher. He 
knew French, Greek, and Hebrew. Later, he was the head of the Jesuit library in Graz for six years, 
and for three years the head-editor of the Welt-Bott. This massive œuvre, however, was completed 
long after Stöcklein’s death (on Dec. 28, 1733) in 1761.
20 “Ein neugieriger Leser / ohne einen Schritt zu thuen / zu Hauß sitzend mit blosser Lesung 
dergleichen Schrifften die gantze Welt durchwandern / hiedurch aber ihm selbst eine bey nahe voll-
ständige Erkantnuß des gantzen Erd= Creyß ohne Gefahr / Unkösten oder Mühe erwerben kan.” 
Ibid.
21 “uns über fast alle Wissenschafften und Kuensten mancherley sehr nutzliche Kundschafften 
zu ertheilen.” Ibid., 1v.

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
99
not to forget anthropological aspects, biology, geology, climatology, astrono-
my, politics, economics, and history on both a global and a local level.
The entire volume is divided into categories according to the provenance 
of the individual letters, beginning with those having been sent from the Mari-
ana Islands, then from the Philippines, China, and South-America, continu-
ing with letters from North America, and concluding with letters from India. 
Although Stöcklein declares in the prologue that he translated these letters, it 
seems highly unlikely that he did so with letters written by German speakers 
to their relatives back in Germany, such as Adam Gerstl’s letter to his father in 
Vorderberg in Styria from July 14, 1681 (part 1, no. 31, 90-102).22
Stöcklein also included a number of maps, whereas illustrations, with very 
few exceptions were not incorporated because they would have made the vol-
ume too expensive. If we needed any proof of the global perspective pursued 
by Stöcklein and the entire Order of the Jesuits, this massive volume provides 
convincing evidence, since the reports come from every corner of the world. 
Finally, the Index rerum memorabilium (Index of memorable items) at the end 
indicates how much Söcklein was interested in using these letters to inform 
his audience about the widest possible range of topics concerning cities, land-
scapes, animals, plants, people, customs, and the like all over the globe as 
observed and discussed by the many different Jesuit authors who submitted 
detailed accounts about their speciﬁ c regions.
Stöcklein edited the texts as he translated a large part of them from French 
and Latin into German, and offered brief summaries of the major points ad-
dressed in each, such as in the case of the letter by the German-Slovenian Mar-
cus Antonius Kappus to his brother Johann von Kappus in Krain, dated June 
20, 1699 (volume 2, no. 56, 86-88).23
Full of admiration, he outlined how much the missionaries had crossed 
rivers and oceans, had brought Christianity everywhere and had learned even 
the most exotic languages in order to preach to the heathens. Stöcklein identi-
ﬁ ed them collectively as true martyrs and as honorable servants of God who 
deserved the highest respect, if not here on earth, then in eternity. His work, 
he hoped, would serve to make the missionaries’ accomplishments known in 
Germany, and would inspire many there to join the Society of Jesus, and then 
become missionaries in their turn (XX 1r).
22 B. Hausberger, Jesuiten aus Mitteleuropa, op.cit. (see note 21), p. 148-49, also refers to this 
letter and identiﬁ es it as German in its original, though the original seems to be lost.
23 A. Classen, The Scientiﬁ c, Anthropological, Geological, and Geographic Exploration of 
Northern Mexico by Eighteenth-Century German Jesuit Missionaries: A Religious and Scientiﬁ c 
Network of Multilingual Writers. With a Focus on Johann Nentuig and Marcus Antonius Kappus, 
“Mitteilungen des Instituts für Österreichische Geschichtsforschung” 122.1 (2014), p. 40-61.

100 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
Stöcklein was optimistic that his account might also appeal to those arm-
chair travelers who did not want to undertake difﬁ cult and dangerous journeys 
on behalf of the Society of Jesus and who could, simply by reading, get to know 
the entire world and thus partake indirectly in the missionary work. While he 
pursued a religious perspective in support of the Jesuits, he was also aware 
of the general appeal which any travelogue could exert for the general reader 
(XX 1r). In this regard his Welt-Bott fulﬁ lled a number of important functions, 
providing members of the Society of Jesus with eye-witness accounts of what 
their confreres had accomplished globally, offering insights into their countless 
suffering and martyrdom, and demonstrating to the general reader the great 
idealism inspiring the Jesuits. In other words, the Welt-Bott was both an exten-
sive travelogue and a propaganda tool, a compilation of fascinating and deeply 
appealing accounts about missionary work abroad and a detailed documentary 
of the types of works carried out by the Jesuit missionaries globally.
Shifting the argument completely away from the religious perspective, 
the author insists on the value of those letters as scientiﬁ c documents since 
they contained so much valuable information about different cultures, prac-
tices, methods, and strategies, whether pertaining to theology, law, medicine, 
philosophy, mathematics, geography, or ethics. The Christian missionaries, for 
instance, could gain a valuable lesson from Hindu ascetics, who could teach 
many European preachers (XX 2v). By contrast, as Stöcklein conﬁ rms, Islam 
represented a tough challenge, which made the focus on America, where there 
was no other monotheistic religion comparable to Islam, understandable, espe-
cially for the Jesuits:
Our missionaries know through constant experiences to their greatest regret that 
where the erroneous Islamic faith has established itself Christianity cannot deve-
lop or cannot be maintained if it is introduced there. But at other locations where 
the Koran is either unknown or rejected altogether, the true faith will ultimately 
vanquish the superstition. As we can learn from this, the Islamic sect has not only 
really spread, but increases on a daily basis in Tartary, in the entire Mongolian 
empire and in China, in Madura [near Indonesia], Malabria [India], Pegu [My-
anmar], Siam [Thailand], Malacca [Malaysa], Java, the Philippines, indeed in all 
Oriental countries.24
24 “Massen aber unsere Missionarii durch beständige Erfahrnuß zu ihrem grösten Leid gäntzlich 
überwisen seynd / daß wo der Mahometanische Fabel=Glaub einmal einnistet / daselbst das Chri-
stenthum entweders nicht aufkommen könnte oder wenn es auch aufkommt, keinen Bestand habe: 
in andern Orten hingegen / wo der Alcoran entweders unbekant ist oder gäntzlich verworffen wirdt 
/ der wahre Glaub über die Abgötterey endlich obsige; als folget hieraus / daß weil die Mahometa-
nische Sect sich nicht allein in die Tartarey / in das gantze Mogorische Kayserthum und in China, 
sondern auch Maduram, Malabriam, Pegu, Siam, Malaccam, Javam, wie auch in die Philippinische 

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
101
Of course, Stöcklein, like most other missionaries and colonialists, was 
deeply Eurocentric, and regarded the natives in America and elsewhere like 
small children who desperately needed their education from the Jesuits (XXX 
1r). In fact, that might well have been one of the pervasive attitudes determin-
ing the Jesuits at large (and virtually all other Christian missionaries), who felt 
obliged to help the natives as fathers would educate their children. They were, 
hence, deliberately patronizing the members of their new parishes all over the 
world, but this was their self-identiﬁ ed mission, their religious calling, and 
their personal dedication, helping to bring the Christian faith to the heathens 
globally.
European readers were invited to see the entire world as within their reach. 
They could read material rich with Jesuit missionizing, struggling, working, 
and suffering in every corner of the Earth. Under Jesuit leadership, human his-
tory had ﬁ nally assumed a global perspective, since Christianizing even those 
people furthest away from Europe was an imperative every Jesuit was sup-
posed to embrace whole-heartedly. China, South America, North America, or 
India were no longer mysterious names, but concrete locations where Jesuits 
had gone and where they had accomplished heroic deeds. In this regard, Ethio-
pia was as important as the Philippines. China mattered as much as Mexico and 
Pimería Alta, too. The maps Stöcklein included pointed the way for his readers 
to follow Jesuit models and to continue the missionaries’ ideals. Of course, in 
this hefty volume, readers were also invited to explore the wide world both 
theoretically and practically. Ceylon, as it was called then (today, Sri Lanka) 
was no longer simply an exotic place, and Formosa (today, Taiwan) could be 
visited as well. Even the remote Sonoran Desert emerged as an important link 
in the Jesuits’ global network. They wrote, of course, primarily about their re-
ligious interests and concerns, but the Jesuits also wrote invaluable documents 
comprising the ﬁ rst anthropological, natural, geological, climatological, eco-
nomic, and political studies in many different parts of this world.
To conclude, the history of the Jesuits in a global context contains valu-
able lessons and exposes possible fallacies in common historiography. First, 
globalization began earlier than in the nineteenth century. Second, the Jesu-
its represented, in a way, the characteristic world citizen of their time. Third, 
a component which was touched on only brieﬂ y in this overview, many of 
them experienced a very hard life, working tirelessly and devoutly in very re-
mote missions in many different parts of the world. They had abandoned com-
fortable teaching and research positions back home in the German-speaking 
world; they traveled across the oceans to reach distant and unfamiliar lands; 
Insul / ja in alle Morgenländische Landschafften nicht allein würcklich ausgebreitet hat / sondern 
täglich zunimmt” Allerhand So Lehr, op. cit, vol. 1, XX 3r.

102 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
they were forced to learn different languages; they also faced much opposi-
tion, if not open hostility, from many sides. Their true and full suffering, how-
ever, only came in 1767 when they were all expelled from the Americas and 
when the Order was banned altogether globally in 1773. Thousands of them 
were forced from their missions, herded back to central locations, then shipped 
across the Atlantic Ocean, and subsequently lingered in monastic prisons in 
Spain for years to come.
Many of them died on the way, and all of them suffered badly, as Joseph 
Och, for instance, reported in great detail.25 With the suppression of the Jesuits, 
a global organization was quickly destroyed, since there was not much which 
they could do to defend themselves, because they had been trained to obey 
their superiors. Some of them, such as Ignaz Pfefferkorn, later turned to writ-
ing and published extensive reports about their experiences.26 But their docu-
ments have hardly attracted much attention, except among anthropologists and 
historians of the Southwest of the United States. Most texts have never been 
reprinted, such as the Welt-Bott, even though the Jesuits were present in many 
parts of the world and deeply inﬂ uenced the local cultures through their mis-
sionary activities.
If we are truly interested in writing ‘global history’ and look for practical 
cases to illustrate what this might mean, and if we the past to be heard again 
since it can tell us much about human suffering, resilience, and triumphs, then 
the history of the Jesuits, both in America and elsewhere, offers itself almost 
by itself for close examination. Their rise since the foundation and ofﬁ cial es-
tablishment in 1540 to their heyday in the middle of the eighteenth century 
came to a sudden and tragic end in 1767 and 1773. While the history of the 
Philippines and Tawain, for instance, and the history of Europe were closely 
connected at that time via the Jesuits, the subsequent centuries witnessed very 
different conditions. Colonialism replaced Jesuit missions, and the memory of 
this global order quickly faded.
Despite its fairly robust recovery since 1814, the Jesuit Order has not fared 
well in public memory, although it continues to be present in many parts of the 
world and operates quite impressively. Both the Protestant propaganda cam-
paign against the Jesuits and many internal and external problems in Europe 
associated with the Order, achieved their effect, and the common understand-
ing of the history of the New World and many other countries all over the 
25 J. Och, Nachrichten von verschiedenen Ländern des Spanischen Amerika, ed. Ch. Gottlieb 
von Murr, p. 2, Halle 1809.
26 I. Pfefferkorn, Beschreibung der Landschaft Sonora samt andern merkwürdigen Nachrichten 
von den inneren Theilen Neu=Spaniens und Reise aus Amerika bis in Deutschland, vol. 2, Cologne 
1795 [reprint: ed. I. Schröder, Beiträge zur Forschungsgeschichte, Bonn 1996].

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
103
globe was deeply reconﬁ gured, speciﬁ cally to the disadvantage of the Jesuits. 
Fortunately, we currently witness a kind of Renaissance regarding the history 
and culture of that Order, and if we recognize in it a precursor of contemporary 
efforts of globalization with all its positive and negative implications, we ﬁ nd 
ourselves in an excellent situation of recovering long-lost memory and open-
ing our perspectives toward world history in a most meaningful and practical 
way. As the example of the Jesuit missionaries in the Sonoran desert dem-
onstrates, even the history of this remote outpost proves to be relevant and 
insightful for global history, since those missions were essential parts of the 
huge Jesuit network spanning the entire world.
This is not to glorify their missionary work uncritically. They faced, of 
course, enormous difﬁ culties both with the native population and the Span-
iards/Mexicans. There were a lot of misunderstandings in cultural and religious 
terms, but generally, the Jesuits made amazing efforts to create this global sys-
tem of missions in order to preach to the natives, convert and baptize them, 
and thus to expand universally the Christian faith. They brought with them 
countless European inventions, ideas, concepts, and materials, so they were 
certainly at the vanguard of a massive innovation in the Americas and in many 
other parts of the world. Naturally, their European perspective could perhaps 
even be classiﬁ ed as ‘imperialist’ today, but in the context of the eighteenth 
century we can only acknowledge their astoundingly selﬂ ess and passionate 
work dedicated to their missionary goals.
S U M M A RY
One of the most successful missionary organization, the Jesuits, also operated in 
northern Mexico in the area today identiﬁ ed as the Sonoran Desert, comprising the 
Mexican state of Sonora and the US state of Arizona. By the early eighteenth century 
increasingly German-speaking missionaries arrived and worked hard in the wide net-
work of missions originally established by the pioneer Padre Eusebio Kino (d. 1711) 
to spread God’s words. They also worked intensively on studying that territory and 
produced numerous written records about their experiences, their research, and the 
conditions of that world. They were expelled in 1767 and banned globally in 1783, 
but until then they achieved greatest success with the native population. Their mis-
sionary accounts prove to be highly exiting historical, anthropological, religious, and 
scientiﬁ c documents most important for missionary history.
Keywords: Memory, Jesuits, Global Network, Missionaries in the New World, Mex-
ico, Sonora, Arizona, globalization, missionizing, Eusebio Kino, Joseph Stoeck-
lein, Welt-Bott, Ignaz Pfefferkorn, Philipp Segesser

104 
ALBRECHT CLASSEN
Słowa kluczowe: pamięć, sieć globalna, jezuici, misjonarze w Nowym Świecie, Mek-
syk, Sonora, Arizona, globalizacja, misjonizacja, Eusebio Kino, Joseph Stoeck-
lein, Welt-Bott, Ignaz Pfefferkorn, Philipp Segesser
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allgemeine deutsche Biographie (in print and online at: http://www.deutsche-biographie.de/index.
html)
Allerhand So Lehr-als Geist-reiche Brief / Schrifften und Reis-Beschreibungen / Welche von denen 
Missionariis der Gesellschafft Jesu Aus Beyden Indien / und andern Über Meer gelegenen Laen-
dern / Seit An. 1642. biß auf das Jahr 1726 in Europa angelangt seynd. Jetzt zum erstenmal Theils 
aus Handschrifftlichen Urkunden / theils aus denen Französischen Lettres Ediﬁ antes verteutscht 
und zusammen getragen, von Joseph Stöcklein (Fortgesetzt von Petrus Probst und Franciscus 
Keller), Augsburg–Graz: In Verlag Philips / Martins / und Joh. Veith seel. Erben, 1725-1758. [All 
Kinds of Instructive and Intelligent Letters, Tracts, and Travelogues Which Had Been Written 
and sent to Europe by Missionaries of the Society of Jesus in Both Indies and in Other Countries 
Situated Overseas from 1642 to 1726; Now for the First Time Translated and Compiled to Some 
Extent From Handwritten Documents, to Another Extent from the French Lettres Ediﬁ antes].
Classen A., Early History of the Southwest Through the Eyes of German-Speaking Jesuit Missionar-
ies: A Transcultural Experience in the Eighteenth Century, Lanham, Boulder, et al.: Lexington 
Books, 2013.
Classen A., España a través del prisma alemán: perspectivas del Medievo y la primera Moderni-
dad e investigaciones imagológicas, in: Viajes y viajeros entre ﬁ cción y realidad: Alemania – 
España, ed. B. Raposo Fernández, I. García Wistädt, Valencia: Universitat de València, 2009, 
p. 41-59.
Classen A., The Letters of the Swiss Jesuit Missionary Philipp Segesser (1689-1762): An Eyewit-
ness to the Settlement of Eighteenth-Century Sonora (Pimería Alta), ed. and trans. A. Classen, 
[Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, Occasional Series, 5], Tempe: Arizona 
Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2012.
Classen A., The Scientiﬁ c, Anthropological, Geological, and Geographic Exploration of Northern 
Mexico by Eighteenth-Century German Jesuit Missionaries: A Religious and Scientiﬁ c Network 
of Multilingual Writers. With a Focus on Johann Nentuig and Marcus Antonius Kappus, “Mit-
teilungen des Instituts für Österreichische Geschichtsforschung” 122.1 (2014), p. 40-61.
Conwell J.F., SJ, Impelling Spirit: Revisiting a Founding Experience: 1539. Ignatius of Loyola and 
His Companions, Chicago: Loyola Press, 1997.
Deutsche Jesuitenmissionäre des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts: Ein Beitrag zur Missionsgeschichte und 
zur deutschen Biographie, [Ergänzungshefte zu den “Stimmen aus Maria-Laach,” 74], Freiburg 
i. Br.: Herder, 1899.
Duhr B., SJ, Deutsche Auslandssehnsucht im 18. Jahrhundert: Aus der überseeischen Missionsar-
beit deutscher Jesuiten [Schriften des Deutschen Auslands-Instituts. A: Kulturhistorische Rei-
he, 20], Stuttgart: Ausland und Heimat, 1928.
El saber de los jesuitas: historias naturales y el Nuevo Mundo, ed. L. Millones Figueroa, D. Ledez-
ma, [Textos y estudios coloniales y de la independencia, 12], Frankfurt a. M.: Vervuert; Madrid: 
Iberoamericana, 2005.
Haley J.L., Apaches: A History and Culture Portrait, Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1997.
Haub R., Die Geschichte der Jesuiten, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2007.
Hausberger B., Für Gott und König: die Mission der Jesuiten im kolonialen Mexiko, [Studien zur 
Geschichte und Kultur der iberischen und iberoamerikanischen Länder, 6], Vienna: Verlag für 
Geschichte und Politik; Munich: R. Oldenbourg, 2000.

 
JESUIT MISSIONARIES BUILDING A GLOBAL NETWORK 
105
Hausberger B., Jesuiten aus Mitteleuropa im kolonialen Mexiko: Eine bio-bibliographie, Vienna: 
Verlag für Geschichte und Politik; Munich: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1995.
http://epicworldhistory.blogspot.com/2012/06/franciscans-in-americas.html [online 20.10.2014].
http://www.jesuit.org.au/ﬁ les/docs/our-community/our-story/the-history-of-the-jesuits-in-australia.
pdf [online 20.10.2014].
Ignatianisch: Eigenart und Methode der Gesellschaft Jesu, ed. M. Sievernich, SJ, G. Switek, SJ, 
Freiburg i.Br.–Basel–Vienna: Herder, 1990.
Jesuitische Musik- und Theaterpraxis im kolonialen Amerika, ed. Ch. Storch (forthcoming).
Lacouture J., Jesuits: A Multibiography, Washington, DC: Counterpoint, 1995.
Letson D., Higgins M., The Jesuit Mystique, Toronto: Macmillan, 1995.
Mitchell D., The Jesuits: A History, London: Macdonald Futura Publishers, 1980.
Och J., Nachrichten von verschiedenen Ländern des Spanischen Amerika, ed. Ch. Gottlieb von 
Murr, p. 2, Halle: Joh. Christian Hendel, 1809.
Ortega Urquidi J., Apaches del Desierto, Mexico City: Impresora Pena Santa, 2011.
Paintner U., ‘Des Papsts neue Creatur’: Antijesuitische Publizistik im deutschsprachigen Raum 
(1555-1618), [Chloe, Beihefte zum Daphnis, 44], Amsterdam–New York: Editions Rodopi, 
2011.
Pfefferkorn I., Beschreibung der Landschaft Sonora samt andern merkwürdigen Nachrichten von 
den inneren Theilen Neu=Spaniens und Reise aus Amerika bis in Deutschland, vol. 2, Cologne: 
Langenscheu Buchhandlung, 1795 [reprint: ed. I. Schröder, Beiträge zur Forschungsgeschichte, 
Bonn: Holos, 1996].
Polzer Ch.W., SJ, Kino: A Legacy. His Life, His Works, His Missions, His Monuments, Tucson, AZ: 
Jesuit Fathers of Southern Arizona, 1998.
Reff D.T., Plagues, Priests, and Demons: Sacred Narratives and the Rise of Christianity in the Old 
World and the New, Cambridge–New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Schmuck H., Philipp Segesser, SJ (1689-1762): Exemplarische Biographie eines mitteleuropäischen 
Missionars in Nueva España, [Mainzer Studien zur Neueren Geschichte 11], Frankfurt a. M.: 
Peter Lang, 2004.
Schroth R.A., SJ, The American Jesuits: A History, New York–London: New York University Press, 
2007.
Stark R., How the West Won: The Neglected Story of the Triumph of Modernity, Wilmington, DE: 
ISI Books, 2014.
The Mercurian Project: Forming Jesuit Culture 1573-1580, ed. Th.M. McCoog, SJ, [Biblioteca In-
stituti Historici Societatis Jesu, 55], St. Louis, MO, and Rome-Prati: The Institute of Jesuit 
Sources, 2004.
Worcester D.E., The Apaches: Eagles of the Southwest, [Civilization of the American Indian Series, 
149], Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1979.
DR ALBRECHT CLASSEN – University Distinguished Professor and Undergra-
duate Advisor in the Department of German Studies, University of Arizona. His 
recent publications include: Handbook of Medieval Studies, ed. Albrecht Clas-
sen, 3 vols., Berlin and New York: De Gruyter, 2010; Early History of the South-
west Through the Eyes of German-Speaking Jesuit Missionaries: A Transcultural 
Experience in the Eighteenth Century, Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2013; 
Love, Lust, and Life: The Verse Narratives by Heinrich Kaufringer, Tempe, AZ: 
 ACMRS, 2014.