L I N G U I S T I C A  C O P E R N I C A N A
Nr 11 / 2014 
Janina Mołczanow*, Richard Wiese**
* Uniwersytet Warszawski 
Instytut Lingwistyki Stosowanej 
**  Philipps-Universität Marburg 
Institut für Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft
Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder
Remarks on the nature of linguistic rhythm
K e y w o r d s: phonetics; phonology; prosodic structure; rhythm
S ł o w a  k l u c z e: fonetyka; fonologia; struktura prozodyczna; rytm
	
1.  Introduction
Rhythm (from Greek ῥυθμός – rhythmos, “any regular recurring mo-
tion, symmetry”) characterizes most types of human activity which develop 
in time1. Rhythmicity is observed in automatic activities such as breathing, 
heartbeat, sleep, but the tendency to structure temporal events is also seen in 
controlled, cognitive activities such as dance, music and speech. Beats in mu-
sic, taps in dance and syllables in speech are used, inter alia, to divide time 
into isochronous passages. St. Augustine observed many centuries ago that 
“in omnibus rerum motibus quid numeri valeant, facilius consideratur in vo-
1  We are grateful to four anonymous reviewers of Linguistica Copernicana for their 
valuable comments.
http://dx.doi.org/10.12775/LinCop.2014.044

170 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
cibus” “the role that meter plays in all movements, is seen more readily in 
speech”2. Yet, up to the present day, rhythm remains one of the most under-
studied areas in linguistics. 
The aim of the present article is to provide a review and a critical assess-
ment of current approaches to linguistic rhythm. It is argued that phoneti-
cally-based models which treat rhythm as an emergent property are insuffi-
cient to account for cross-linguistic variation and that the intuitive notion of 
rhythm should be explicitly modelled by drawing upon the concepts of a pho-
nological theory.
	
 
	
2.  The search for phonetic correlates
Some kind of rhythmic structure is detectable in most, if not all, languag-
es. At the perceptual level, acoustically salient events form a regular timing 
pattern. Languages are usually considered to fall into two rhythmic groups, 
metaphorically called ‘machine-gun rhythm’ and ‘Morse code rhythm’ 
(Lloyd James 1940). In the first half of the 20th century, Pike (1945) intro-
duced the terms syllable-timed rhythm and stress-timed rhythm to refer to 
these two types of rhythmic structures, respectively. In the former, syllables 
were perceived to be isochronous (e.g. Italian, French, Turkish), whereas in 
the latter, stressed syllables were considered to occur at regular intervals of 
time (e.g. English, German, Russian). Furthermore, smaller prosodic units – 
moras – were reported to be equidistant in languages such as Japanese, Ta-
mil, or Luganda. Since then, the phenomenon of isochrony at the levels of 
the mora, syllable or the stressed syllable (foot) has attracted a considerable 
amount of attention in the literature. 
However, numerous phonetic studies (e.g., Bolinger 1965, Lehiste 1977, 
Dauer 1983, Jassem et al. 1984), failed to confirm the objective existence of 
isochrony. That is, it has been demonstrated that there is a considerable de-
gree of variation in the length of syllables and feet (as carriers of stress) in 
syllable-timed and stress-timed languages, respectively. 
Some researchers, in an attempt to account for the intuitive distinction into 
machine-gun vs. Morse code rhythmic classes, assume that different rhythms 
are derivative from other phonetic properties, such as syllable weight, com-
2  Cited after Liberman (1975:311).

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
171
plexity, segmental sonority, lexical stress, occurrence of vowel reduction, etc. 
(Dauer 1983, Auer 1993, Ramus et al. 1999, Grabe and Low 2002, Dellwo 
2010). All these studies in one way or the other subscribe to the view that 
“(…) the rhythmic effect is a purely automatic consequence of linguistic cir-
cumstance” (Classe 1939:132).
It also should be noted that there is a possibility that languages do not 
fall into distinct classes but, rather, are placed along a continuum ranging 
from stress-timed to syllable-timed languages (Dauer 1987). This assump-
tion is confirmed by the existence of languages such as Polish, which cannot 
be placed into one of the established rhythmic categories because it displays 
characteristics of both stress- and syllable-timing (Ramus et al. 1999). To rec-
oncile the rhythm class hypothesis with the possibility of rhythmic continu-
um, Ramus et al. (2003) suggest that there are more categories, with Polish 
belonging to a distinct rhythmic class3.
The predominant approach in the recent phonetic research is to quantify 
rhythmic differences among languages using different metrics. In an algo-
rithm proposed by Ramus et al. (1999), rhythm is determined by the duration 
of vocalic intervals %V and the deviation of consonantal duration ∆C, which 
is directly correlated with syllabic complexity. Other metrics (Grabe and Low 
2002) distinguish rhythmic classes using the PVI (Pairwise Variability Index) 
measures, which compare the variability of successive vocalic and intervo-
calic intervals. The PVI is calculated by summing the differences between 
pairs of successive intervals, and then divided by the number of pairs. These 
studies have shown that syllable-timed languages usually have low vocalic 
and consonantal PVIs, whereas stress-timed languages exhibit higher varia-
tion in the duration of vocalic and intervocalic intervals. 
Measurements based on different metrics are problematic for several rea-
sons. First, they produce contradictory results (Arvaniti 2009). For instance, 
Thai can be classified as either stress-timed or syllable-timed, depending on 
the metrics used (Grabe and Low 2002).4 Furthermore, if phonetic correlates 
3  On the other hand, Malisz (2011) presents evidence that Polish is syllable-timed.
4  As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, language-specific rhythmic patterns 
should be distinguished from sentence-specific patterns. For instance, a sentence in En-
glish can consist only of CV syllables, which will be similar in timing patterns to the 
sentence in French, or it can consist of complex syllables, exhibiting high degree of va-
riability.

172 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
of rhythm are to be found in the measurements of consonantal and vocalic 
interval durations, then the prediction is that structurally similar languages, 
and, especially dialects of the same language, should not differ with respect 
to rhythmic organization. Yet, it is not unusual for historically closely related 
languages to have distinct rhythmic structures. For instance, two Turkic lan-
guages, Uzbek and Turkish, belong to stress-timed and syllable-timed class-
es, respectively (Sjoberg 1963, Lewis 1967). Similarly, in Italian and Portu-
guese, a pair of two Romance languages with comparable syllable structure, 
the former is described as syllable-timed, whereas the latter is described as 
stress-timed (Major 1981, Farnetani and Kori 1990). Furthermore, distinct 
rhythmic types can be found in different dialects of one language. Standard 
Russian, for example, is a typical stress-timed language, whereas most of its 
northern dialects have rhythmic characteristics of syllable-timing (Kasatkin 
2005: 25). Notably, the most salient feature differentiating northern Russian 
dialects from standard Russian is the absence of vowel reduction (Avanes-
ov and Orlova 1965). Likewise, in the case of the Uzbek/Turkish pair men-
tioned, vowel reduction occurs in the first, but not in the second language. 
To account for the fact that stress-timing frequently co-occurs with vowel 
reduction, it has been assumed that greater variability of vocalic intervals, 
and, hence, a stress-timed rhythmic effect, are achieved due to a shorter du-
ration of reduced vowels in comparison to unreduced vowels. In spite of its 
appeal, this approach is subject to a number of objections. On the empirical 
side, it does not accommodate the fact that both syllable-timed Italian and 
stressed-timed Portuguese have vowel reduction (Crosswhite 2001). This ap-
proach is also problematic on theoretical grounds. Specifically, the view that 
rhythm is a perceptual phenomenon based on the combination of phonetic 
properties, the most important of which is the variability of segmental inter-
vals, divorces rhythm from stress. However, beginning with Sweet (1906), 
the rhythmic character of stress has been considered one of its most salient 
properties. Moreover, vowels in languages with vowel reductions typically 
undergo different qualitative and quantitative changes when they occur in 
unstressed positions. Since vocalic quality is determined by the presence or 
absence of stress, vowel reduction is a stress-dependent process. Therefore, 
assuming vowel reduction to be ‘a source’ of stress-timing pattern is a rever-
sal of cause and effect, or at least implies a paradoxical situation with unclear 
causes and effects.

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
173
In addition, it is not clear how this model of rhythm perception can be rec-
onciled with the data from the first language acquisition. In this area, experi-
mental studies reveal that newborns can already discriminate languages from 
different rhythmic types (Bahrick and Pickens 1988, Mehler et al. 1988, and 
others), whereas sensitivity to phonotactics (the putative source of rhythmic 
types) emerges no sooner than in the ninth month (Jusczyk et al. 1994). It is 
a matter of debate, then, whether infants can compute syllabic complexity to 
extract rhythm from the ambient language. In addition, recent studies have 
revealed that two-year olds produce language-specific rhythmic patterns at 
the time when their speech is still devoid of complex syllables and consists 
mainly of simple CV syllables (Payne et al. 2012, Prieto et al. 2012). This 
shows that phonotactic patterning cannot affect the durational ratios of con-
sonantal and vocalic intervals.
Furthermore, if the perception of rhythm is derivative from the syllable 
structure and the proportion of vowels and consonants in the acoustic signal, 
a learner acquiring a rhythmically distinct foreign language should automati-
cally produce the correct rhythmic pattern, if he or she can produce all the 
segments and their durational properties correctly. This, of course, is not true. 
The use of an incorrect rhythm is one of the most salient indicators of a foreign 
accent, and a different rhythmic pattern is one of the most difficult aspects in 
the acquisition of second language pronunciation (O’Connor 1980: 100).
The futile search for phonetic correlates of rhythm in the acoustic sig-
nal raises the question whether there is rhythm in the first place. Perhaps it 
is just a phonetic illusion, or, as Liberman (1975: 264) put it “(…) collective 
hallucination, or at best a tendency which influences the temporal patterning 
of speech in a relatively marginal way”? This view is advocated by Dasher 
and Bolinger (1982), who, put off by the lack of experimental evidence, deny 
rhythm any theoretical status. However, there is ample evidence from percep-
tion studies that rhythm plays a central role in language processing. To access 
word meaning, an incoming acoustic signal has to be segmented into smaller 
chunks which correspond to minimal meaningful units of speech. According 
to the rhythm-based segmentation account (Nazzi et al. 2006), segmentation 
strategies are dependent on the rhythmic type of a given language. Research 
in the area of language acquisition has shown that infants base the segmen-
tation of their native language, as well as discrimination between languages, 
on the rhythmic class (Mehler et al. 1988, 1996, Bahrick and Pickens 1988, 

174 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
Jusczyk and Aslin 1995, Christophe and Morton 1998). Behavioural experi-
ments demonstrate that also adults rely on the language’s rhythmic type in 
cross-linguistic perception (Ramus and Mehler 1999). Moreover, a series of 
experimental studies on second language acquisition revealed that there is 
a significant correlation between the rhythmic class of a language and its in-
telligibility (Dupoux and Green 1997, Mehler et al. 1993, Pallier et al. 1998, 
Sebastián-Gallés et al. 2000). Specifically, this research shows that it is easier 
to understand a foreign language which belongs to the same rhythmic class 
as one’s native language.
	
3.  The search for a phonological principle 
Phonetically-based approaches treat rhythm as an emergent phenomenon, 
arising from perceptual and articulatory factors. However, the fact that the 
subjective perception of rhythm has no direct phonetic correlates does not 
necessarily mean that it is not based on a phonological mechanism, which has 
prominent mental reality for both the speaker and the listener. In this respect, 
the concept of rhythm can be compared to the concept of other phonologi-
cal concepts. For example, a phoneme, despite being used as one of the ba-
sic units of linguistic description, often does not have clearly defined acous-
tic, articulatory or perceptual correlates (Fox 2000: 91). Furthermore, even if 
rhythm is an emergent property, this does not mean that it does not follow its 
own principles.
It has been observed that rhythmic structure is created by stress patterns, 
and, conversely, that rhythm plays a role in phonological processes which 
govern the distribution of stressed syllables. For instance, the Rhythm Rule 
which operates in English and German shifts stress when another stressed 
syllable follows, cf. English fiftéen – fífteen péns, German ábnehmen ‘take 
off’ – den Hút abnéhmen ‘take the hat off’. Bohn et al. (2013a) demonstrated 
in an EEG experiment that speakers of German are sensitive to violations of 
the Rhythm Rule: if exposed to violations of the preferred alternating pat-
tern in phrases of the type just mentioned, they both detect the violation (as 
shown in a so-called N400 deflection) and evaluate this deviation (as shown 
in a subsequent positivity effect). Similar results were obtained by Henrich et 
al. (2014) for violations of the Rhythm Rule in English compounds.

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
175
The intuition that stress is partly based on rhythm and may create rhyth-
mically preferred structures has been at the foundation of the metrical the-
ory of stress (Liberman 1975, Halle and Vergnaud 1987, Hayes 1981, 1995). 
This model breaks away with the tradition of representing stress as a seg-
mental feature, on a par with nasality or voicing, but assumes that stress is 
a syntagmatic property of a speech sequence. In this conception, rhythm can 
be read off from a layered system of grid marks representing alternations 
of strong and weak elements; see in particular Prince (1983). As mentioned 
earlier, the abstract structuring of linguistic constituents does not have clear 
acoustic correlates. The phonological concept of rhythm should be distin-
guished from the surface timing patterns involving recurrence of salient 
points in utterances, which is usually explained without reference to phonol-
ogy5. For example, in a trochaic foot, there is opposition between a stressed 
and an unstressed syllable. Thus, the first line of the English popular nurs-
ery rhyme can be represented with grids as in (1a). A metrical grid shows 
sequences of equally spaced beats which alternate in prominence. Each syl-
lable is assigned a grid mark in the first row, whereas only stressed syllables 
are represented in the second row. The grid structure formally depicts basic 
characteristics of rhythm, such as a hierarchical structure and a tendency to 
even spacing (Hayes 1995: 27). However, the theory of metrical grids was 
developed on the basis of stress-timed languages like English, and it is not 
clear at all how it can be employed to model the rhythmic pattern of sylla-
ble-timed and mora-timed languages. Nespor et al. (2011) note that, given 
that rhythmic beats correspond to each consecutive syllable or mora, there is 
no formal way to represent the strong/weak relationship of successive units. 
This is illustrated by the grid structures of two nursery rhymes, one from 
stress-timed English, the other one from an (allegedly) syllable-timed lan-
guage, Polish. 
5  We would like to thank a reviewer for drawing this fact to our attention.

176 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
(1)  English vs. Polish grid structure
	
a. English	
b. Polish
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
x	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
x	
	
	
	
x	
	
	
	
x	
	
	
	
x	
	
	
	
x
	
x	
	
x	
	
x	
	
x	
	
	
	
x	
	
x	
	
x	
	
x
	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x 	 	
	
	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x	
x
	
Jack and Jill went up the hill	
	
	
Była sobie żabka mała
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
“There was once a little frog”
 
It is evident that, besides indicating strong syllables, metrical grid struc-
ture tells us nothing about the Polish ‘syllable-timing’. Yet, if “stress-tim-
ing in English reflects a fundamental and important aspect of the linguis-
tic system, namely, the existence of what we have called the metrical grid” 
(Liberman 1975: 269), then it is plausible to assume that other types of rhyth-
mic structures, though derived by different mechanisms, stem from the same 
principle. 
It is standardly assumed that all prosodic units play an equally important 
role in all languages. In contrast to this view, one may assume that each lan-
guage chooses one basic unit of processing which is fundamental for prosodic 
organization, and that the rhythmic class is determined by the choice of such 
a unit: a syllable in syllable-timed languages, a foot in stress-timed languages 
and a mora in mora-timed languages. Note that this assumption is in accord-
ance with the results obtained in the studies on language acquisition (Nespor 
et al. 2011), which demonstrate that infants access the phonological system 
of the ambient language through its rhythmic type and use feet, syllables and 
moras as segmentation units in stress-timed, syllable-timed and mora-timed 
languages, respectively6.
Furthermore, since rhythmic units are the basic prosodic primes through 
which speech is accessed and processed, the level at which rhythm is defined 
can be assumed to be the central level of prosodic organization in a given 
language, in the sense that other prosodic units that can be potentially con-
structed above the ‘rhythm tier’ are either absent or play a subsidiary role in 
the prosodic structure. The implication of this view is that feet do not play 
6  There appears to be some discrepancy between perception and production in the ac-
quisition of rhythm. Allen and Hawkins (1980: 231) report that two-year old English chil-
dren produce syllable-timed rhythm, even though the ambient language is stress-timed.

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
177
a role in syllable-timed languages and syllables do not play a role in mora-
timed languages. In its strong version, this hypothesis might even entail that 
there are no feet in syllable-timed languages, and that there are no syllables in 
mora-timed languages. In other words, the existence of foot structure presup-
poses the existence of syllable structure, but not the other way round. 
This assumption is backed up by experimental findings on stress percep-
tion demonstrating that feet play a role in the processing of word stress in 
German, but not in Turkish (Knaus et al. 2007, Domahs et al. 2008, Domahs 
et al. 2013). Specifically, the studies on metrical perception in German us-
ing electrophysiological measures have revealed distinct neural responses to 
stress shifts which either changed or preserved foot structure. These results 
dovetail with the fact that German is traditionally described as a stress-timed 
language, and Turkish as a syllable-timed language. It remains to be seen 
what the function of the syllable and the feet is in mora-timed and stress-
timed languages. The assumption denying the existence of syllables in mora-
timed languages is particularly controversial because the concept of the syl-
lable has played a central role in most phonological theorizing7. Moreover, the 
universality of the syllable has rarely been questioned (in contrast to the foot, 
which has not been recognized as a prosodic unit in syllable-timed languag-
es such as French). But if the syllable is not an abstract entity in mora-timed 
languages, then these languages should not have syllable-related phonologi-
cal processes. And, indeed, Labrune (2012) argues convincingly that the syl-
lable does not play any role in the phonology of mora-timed Tokyo Japanese, 
and demonstrates that the mora is the basic prosodic unit, which is dominated 
directly by the foot in the prosodic hierarchy of Japanese.
	
 
4. Conclusion and final remarks
This article has discussed the notion of linguistic rhythm and the phonetic 
and phonological basis of the standardly assumed division into three differ-
ent rhythmic types. On the one hand, phonetic measurements fail to provide 
a justification for a traditional division into rhythmic classes. On the other 
7  It should be noted that the syllable has not been recognised as an autonomous unit 
in early generative phonology (Chomsky and Halle 1968), as well as in Government Pho-
nology (Kaye, Lowenstamm and Vergnaud 1985), and in Beats-and-Binding Phonology 
(Dziubalska-Kołaczyk 2002).

178 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
hand, phonological accounts often refer to the phenomenon of rhythm in rela-
tion to different prosodic phenomena, yet its formal role is not made explicit, 
and a coherent phonological theory of rhythm is still lacking. It has been sug-
gested that rhythmic differences between languages can be best accounted 
for by means of language-specific phonological properties. We assumed that 
the existence of rhythmic types reflects structural differences in the prosodic 
organization of different languages. One obvious advantage of this approach 
over models claiming that rhythm is “an automatic consequence of linguis-
tic circumstance” (Classe 1939: 132) is that it re-establishes the link between 
rhythm and stress. Most current studies on rhythmic structure relegate stress 
to a secondary position by assuming that it is just one of many factors affect-
ing the subjective perception of rhythm (Dauer 1983, Auer 1993, Ramus at al. 
1999, Grabe and Low 2002, Dellwo 2010). However, there are indications that 
the relation between rhythm and stress is much closer than has been supposed 
before. Fox (2000: 244) observes that only stress-timed rhythm is linked with 
stress, and that languages lacking word stress have syllable-timed rhythm. 
For instance, syllable-timed French is considered to have only a phrasal ac-
cent and no word stress as such. Interestingly, tonal languages which do not 
have stress also belong to this group (for example, Cantonese and Vietnam-
ese). Counterevidence is provided by Spanish and Italian, which are often 
used as examples of syllable-timing. Stress in these languages has higher 
functional load than stress in classic stress-timed languages like English or 
German, and is frequently used to distinguish word meanings. It might be the 
case, then, that syllable-timing is a default, an unmarked pattern. 
Additionally, the assumption that the percept of rhythm relies on stress 
allows us to draw interesting parallels between linguistic and non-linguistic 
rhythmic systems. Research in the area of neuroscience shows that accented 
events attract attention in different types of temporal activities (Drake et al. 
2000). In music, for example, louder notes are perceived as more prominent. 
Experimental research (Grahn and Brett 2007, Potter et al. 2009) also reveals 
that humans detect rhythm in sequences in which there are no changes of vol-
ume. In the latter case, the perception of accents is based solely on the tem-
poral organization. It is conceivable that, in linguistic systems, syllable-tim-
ing occurs when there are no clearly detectable accentual peaks. If this is the 
case, then the traditional division of languages into stress- and syllable-timed 
classes reflects a more general cognitive mechanism. Furthermore, Parncutt 

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
179
(1994) demonstrates that in a string of identical temporal events, the final unit 
is perceived as accented. So again one finds a parallel in linguistic systems: 
syllable-timed French has no word stress but a final phrase accent. Obviously, 
there is a possibility that French is an isolated case, which does not reflect any 
universal linguistic regularity. 
Bibliography
Allen G. D., Hawkins S., 1980, Phonological rhythm: Definition and development, 
in: G. H. Yeni-Komshian, J. F. Kavanagh, C. A. Ferguson (eds.), Child phonology. 
Volume 1: Production, New York: Academic Press, p. 227–256.
Arvaniti A., 2009, Rhythm, Timing and the Timing of Rhythm, Phonetica 66, p. 46–63.
Auer P., 1993, Is a rhythm-based typology possible? A study of the role of prosody 
in phonological typology, KontRI Working Paper 21, Hamburg: Universität Ham-
burg.
Avanesov R. I., Orlova V. G. (eds.), 1965, Russkaja dialektologija, Moscow: Nauka.
Bahrick L. E., Pickens J. N., 1988, Classification of bimodal English and Spanish 
language passages by infants, Infant Behavior and Development 11, p. 277–96.
Bohn K., Knaus J., Wiese R., Domahs U., 2013a, The influence of rhythmic (ir)re-
gularities on speech processing: evidence from an ERP study on German phra-
ses, Neuropsychologia 51, p. 760–771.
Bolinger D., 1965, Pitch accent and sentence rhythm, Forms of English: Accent, 
morpheme, order, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chomsky N., Halle M., 1968, The Sound Pattern of English, New York: Harper and 
Row.
Christophe A., Morton J., 1998, Is Dutch native English? Linguistic analysis by 
2-month-olds, Developmental Science 1 (2), p. 215–219.
Classe A., 1939, The Rhythm of English Prose, Oxford: Blackwell.
Crosswhite K., 2001, Vowel Reduction in Optimality Theory, New York: Routledge.
Dasher R., Bolinger D., 1982, On pre-accentual lengthening, Journal of the Interna-
tional Phonetic Association 12, p. 58–69.
Dauer R. M., 1983, Stress-timing and syllable-timing reanalysed, Journal of Phone-
tics 11, p. 51–62.
Dauer, R. M., 1987, Phonetic and phonological components of language rhythm. Pro-
ceedings of 11th ICPhS, Tallinn, vol. 5, p. 447–450.
Dellwo V., 2010, Influences of speech rate on the acoustic correlates of speech rhy-
thm: An experimental phonetic study based on acoustic and perceptual evidence, 
PhD-Dissertation, Universität Bonn.

180 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
Domahs U., Genc S., Knaus J., Wiese R., Kabak B., 2013, Processing (un-) predic-
table word stress: ERP evidence from Turkish, Language and Cognitive Proces-
ses 28, p. 335–354.
Domahs U., Wiese R., Bornkessel-Schlesewsky I. D., Schlesewsky M., 2008, The 
processing of German word stress: evidence for the prosodic hierarchy, Phono-
logy 25, p. 1–36.
Drake C., Jones M. R., Baruch C., 2000, The development of rhythmic attending in 
auditory sequences: Attunement, referent period, focal attending, Cognition 77, 
p. 251–288.
Dupoux E., Green K., 1997, Perceptual adjustment to highly compressed speech: 
Effects of talker and rate changes, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance 23, p. 914–27.
Dziubalska-Kołaczyk, K., 2002, Beats-and-Binding Phonology, Frankfurt: Peter 
Lang.
Farnetani E., Kori S., 1990, Rhythmic structure in Italian noun phrases: A study on 
vowel durations, Phonetica 47, p. 50–65.
Fox A., 2000, Prosodic Features and Prosodic Structure: The Phonology of Supra-
segmentals, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grabe E., Low E. L., 2002, Durational variability in speech and the rhythm class hy-
pothesis, in: C. Gussenhoven, N. Warner (eds.) Papers in Laboratory Phonolo-
gy 7, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, p. 515–546.
Grahn J.A., Brett M., 2007, Rhythm and Beat Perception in Motor Areas of the Bra-
in, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 19, p. 893–906.
Halle M., Vergnaud J.-R., 1987, An Essay on Stress, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hayes B., 1981, A metrical theory of stress, Bloomington: Indiana University Lin-
guistic Club.
Hayes B., 1995, Metrical stress theory: principles and case studies, Chicago: Univ. 
of Chicago Press.
Henrich K., Alter K., Wiese R., Domahs U., 2014, The relevance of rhythmical alter-
nation in language processing: an ERP study on English compounds, Brain and 
Language 136, p. 119–130.
Jassem W., Hill D. R., Witten I. H., 1984, Isochrony in English Speech: its Stati-
stical Validity and Linguistic Relevance, in: D. Gibbon, H. Richter (eds.), Into-
nation, accent, and rhythm: studies in discourse phonology, Berlin: de Gruyter, 
p. 203–225.
Jusczyk P., W., Luce P. A., Charles-Luce J., 1994, Infants’ sensitivity to phonotactic 
patterns in the native language, Journal of Memory and Language 33, p. 630–645.
Jusczyk P. W., Aslin R. N., 1995, Infants’ detection of the sound patterns of words in 
fluent speech, Cognitive Psychology 29, 1–23.
Kasatkin L. L., 2005, Russkaja dialektologija, Moscow: Akademia.

Rhythm is in the mind of the beholder… 
181
Kaye J., J. Lowenstamm, Vergnaud J.-R., 1985, The Internal Structure of Phonolo-
gical Elements: A Theory of Charm and Government, Phonology Yearbook 2, 
p. 305–321.
Labrune L., 2012, Questioning the universality of the syllable: evidence from Japa-
nese, Phonology 29, p. 113–152.
Lehiste I., 1977, Isochrony reconsidered, Journal of Phonetics 5, p. 253–263.
Lewis G. L., 1967, Turkish Grammar, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Liberman M., 1975, The intonational system of English, PhD dissertation, MIT.
Lloyd James A., 1940, Speech signals in telephony, London: Pitman and Sons.
Major R. C., 1981, Stress-timing in Brazilian Portuguese, Journal of Phonetics 9, 
p. 343–351.
Malisz Z., 2011, Tempo differentiated analyses of timing in Polish. Proceedings of 
the XVII International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Hong Kong, p. 1322–1325.
Mehler J., Dupoux E., Nazzi T., Dehaene-Lambertz G., 1996, Coping with linguistic 
diversity: the infant`s viewpoint, in: J. L. Morgan, K. Demuth (eds.), Signal to 
Syntax: Bootstrapping from Speech to Grammar in Early Acquisition, Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mehler J., Jusczyk P. W., Lambertz G., Halsted G., Bertoncini J., Amiel-Tison C., 
1988, A precursor of language acquisition in young infants, Cognition 29, p. 143–78.
Mehler J., Sebastián-Gallés N., Altmann G., Dupoux E., Christophe A., Pallier P., 
1993, Understanding Compressed Sentences: The Role of Rhythm and Meaning, 
New York: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.
Nazzi, T., Iakimova, G., Bertoncini, J., Fredonie, S., Alcantara, C., 2006, Early seg-
mentation of fluent speech by infants acquiring French: Emerging evidence for 
crosslinguistic differences, Journal of Memory and Language 54 (3), p. 283–299.
Nespor M., Shukla M., Mehler J., 2011, Stress-timed vs. syllable-timed languages, 
in: M. van Oostendorp, C. J. Ewen, E. Hume, K. Rice (eds.), The Blackwell Com-
panion to Phonology, London: Blackwell Publishing.
O’Connor J. D., 1980, Better English Pronunciatio, 2nd edition, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Pallier C., Sebastián-Gallés N., Dupoux E., Christophe A., Mehler J., 1998, Per-
ceptual adjustment to time-compressed speech: A cross-linguistic study, Memory 
and Cognition 26, p. 844–51.
Parncutt R., 1994, A perceptual model of pulse salience and metrical accent in mu-
sical rhythms, Music Perception 11, p. 409–464. 
Payne E., Post, B., Astruc L., Prieto, P., Vanrell, M., 2012, Measuring child rhy-
thm, Language and Speech 55(2), p. 202–228.
Pike K. L., 1945, The intonation of American English, Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press.

182 
Janina Mołczanow, Richard Wiese
Potter D. D., Fenwick M., Abecasis D., Brochard R., 2009, Perceiving rhythm whe-
re none exists: Event-related potential (ERP) correlates of subjective accenting, 
Cortex 45, p. 103–105.
Prieto P., Vanrell M. M., Astruc L., Payne E., Post B., 2012, Phonotactic and phra-
sal properties of speech rhythm. Evidence from Catalan, English, and Spanish, 
Speech Communication 54, p. 681–702. 
Prince A. S., 1983, Relating to the grid. Linguistic Inquiry 14, p. 19–100.
Ramus F., Mehler J., 1999, Language identification with suprasegmental cues: 
A study based on speech resynthesis, Journal of the acoustical society of Ameri-
ca 105, p. 512–521.
Ramus F., Nespor M., Mehler J., 1999, Correlates of linguistic rhythm in the speech 
signal, Cognition 73, p. 265–292.
Ramus, F., Dupoux, E., Mehler, J., 2003, The psychological reality of rhythm clas-
ses: Perceptual studies. Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Phone-
tics Sciences, Barcelona, p. 337–342.
Sebastián-Gallés N., Dupoux E., Costa A., Mehler J., 2000, Adaptation to time-
-compressed speech: Phonological determinants, Perception and Psychophysics 
62, p. 834–842.
Sjoberg A. F., 1963, Uzbek Structural Grammar, Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.
Sweet H., 1906, A Primer of Phonetics, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rytm tkwi w umyśle. Uwagi na temat rytmu w języku
(s t r e s z c z e n i e)
Celem artykułu jest omówienie współczesnych teorii rytmu występującego w ję-
zykach naturalnych. Na poziomie percepcji języki można podzielić na trzy typy ryt-
miczne oparte na przycisku, sylabie i morze. W językach z rytmem opartym na przy-
cisku, sylaby akcentowane pojawiają się w regularnych przedziałach czasowych, 
podczas gdy w językach z rytmem sylabicznym i morowym, sylaby i mory wystę-
pują w równych odstępach czasu. Mimo że liczne badania fonetyczne nie potwier-
dziły istnienia izochronizmu w potoku mowy, istnieje wiele dowodów wskazujących 
na to, iż rytm odgrywa istotną rolę w przetwarzaniu języka. W niniejszym artykule 
dostarczamy argumentów na to, że modele fonetyczne traktujące rytm jako zjawisko 
podrzędne nie są wystarczające dla opisu różnych systemów językowych oraz wska-
zujemy, że intuicyjne pojęcie rytmu powinno być włączone do analizy fonologicznej.