Page 1 of 8
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
How do principles of church revitalisation correlate with the divine work of the Holy Spirit? 
This article argues that the Spirit is the primary agent of church revitalisation, and church 
leaders should cooperate with the Spirit as he works for revitalisation. Thus the Spirit empowers 
church leaders who are used by him to revive, renew, and revitalise a church community. 
After briefly defining the Spirit’s empowerment with biblical examples, this article examines 
the underlying principles of empowerment for church leaders, followed by briefly considering 
methodology for church revitalisation. The author concludes by suggesting several signs of 
biblical empowerment in a local church community.
Author:
Brian A. DeVries1,2,3
Affiliations:
1Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom Campus, 
South Africa
2Mukhanyo Theological 
College, KwaMhlanga, South 
Africa
3Faculty of Theology, Puritan 
Reformed Theological 
Seminary, Grand Rapids, 
United States
Correspondence to:
Brian DeVries
Email:
bdevries99@gmail.com
Postal address:
PO Box 04, Montana Park, 
Pretoria 0159, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 20 Mar. 2015
Accepted: 22 June 2015
Published: 31 July 2015
How to cite this article:
DeVries, B.A., 2015, 
‘Divine empowerment: 
The Holy Spirit and church 
revitalisation’, In die Skriflig 
49(1), Art. #1955, 8 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v49i1.1955
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
Divine empowerment: The Holy Spirit and church 
revitalisation
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Church revitalisation has recently become an area of growing interest amongst various reformed 
and presbyterian ecclesial groups. Interest in this subject is seen in a growing body of literature1 
as well as recent increase in attention amongst several conservative denominations. Church 
revitalisation2 is not a new concept, though perhaps a newer term that is closely related to revival3 
and church renewal.4 Yet it represents a healthy and biblical approach to church renewal, and 
contemporary church leaders of established churches would do well to implement its principles 
in practice.
How do the principles and implementation of church revitalisation relate with the divine work 
of the Holy Spirit? As with many methodologies for church renewal, there is often in practice 
an apparent tension between divine sovereignty and human strategies for success.5 There has 
at times been a tendency in both church and mission to overlook the role of the Holy Spirit 
by emphasising human method and strategy (cf. DeVries 2007:18–94). The cardinal error of 
revivalism is committed by replacing the divine work of the Spirit with human means (cf. Finney 
1868).6 Or more recently, church growth principles of strategies and techniques replace a humble 
dependence on God’s sovereignty, often causing the Holy Spirit to become the forgotten factor in 
various pragmatic calculations. As William Abraham (2003) notes:
1.Several of the more helpful books include Dever (2004), Miller (1986), Mohler (2015), Reeder III and Swavely (2004), Ross (2006) 
and Snyder (1989). Several recent popular books include McIntosh (2009), McNeal (2009), Stetzer and Rainer (2010) and Swindoll 
(2010).
2.For the purpose of this article, church revitalisation will be defined as the process of giving new life or vigour to a church community. 
Revitalisation comes from the Latin vivere, meaning life or to live, with the prefix re- meaning again. Thus church revitalisation is giving 
life again to a church community, assuming that life or vigour was absent or declining. Church revitalisation is closely related to revival 
and reformation. J. Runia (1968) postulates: ‘Reformation and Revival are the two sides of one reality. Just as there are two aspects in 
the church, the organizational visible and the spiritual-visible, so there are also two aspects in the renewal of the church, revival and 
reformation. There is no contradiction between the two, they constitute an inseparable unity’ (p. 45).
3.For a biblical understanding of revival, see Murray (1998).
4.See, for example Abraham (2003), Miller (1999) and Oden (2006).
5.The classic study of this apparent tension as it relates specifically to evangelism is Packer (1961).
6.Charles Finney (1868) is the classic example: ‘For a long time it was supposed by the Church that a revival was a miracle, an interposition 
of Divine power. It is only within a few years that ministers generally have supposed revivals were to be promoted by the use of 
means … God has overthrown, generally, the theory that revivals are miracles’ (pp. 12–13).
Goddelike bemagtiging: Die Heilige Gees en kerkherstel. Watter plek beklee die goddelike 
werking van die Heilige Gees in die beginsels van kerkherstel? Hierdie artikel poneer dat die 
Heilige Gees die primêre agent is om nuwe lewe in die kerk te bring en kerkleiers behoort 
onder leiding van die Heilige Gees hulle hiervoor te beywer. Die Heilige Gees bemagtig dus 
die kerkleiers wat Hy gebruik om ’n kerklike gemeenskap te laat herleef, te vernuwe en hulle 
te besiel met lewenskragtigheid. Die Gees se bemagtiging word kortliks aan die hand van 
bybelse voorbeelde gedefineer, waarna die grondliggende beginsels vir die bemagtiging 
van die kerkleiers ondersoek word. Daarna word die metodologie om nuwe lewenskrag in 
die kerk te bring kortliks oorweeg. Die outeur sluit af deur verskeie tekens uit te lig wat op 
skriftuurlike bemagtiging van die Heilige Gees in die plaaslike kerkgemeenskap dui.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
Page 2 of 8
Original Research
In itself there is nothing at all wrong with a healthy commitment to 
develop policies and practices in evangelism that really do achieve 
intentionally adopted goals. What is at issue is the way this spirit 
begins to corrupt various aspects of evangelism … and … there 
is a real danger that the deeper theological and spiritual issues 
intimately related to evangelism will be set aside in the push to 
find a magic wand to increase church membership. (pp. 77–78)
Whilst past weaknesses must not be allow to dampen human 
desires for revitalised churches or hinder efforts to see this 
happen in one’s own church community, one must also be 
careful to use only means and methods for revitalisation that 
the Holy Spirit will honour and bless. As with all ecclesial 
and missional activities in the kingdom, it is vitally important 
to have a clear understanding of the Holy Spirit’s work, lest 
we find ourselves out of step with his activity.
The thesis of this article is that the Holy Spirit is the primary 
agent of church revitalisation, whilst ministers, church 
leaders, ministry workers, et cetera are only secondary 
agents of church revitalisation. Or put differently, Christians 
are called to be co-workers of the Holy Spirit as he is busy 
working for revitalisation individually in believers and 
collectively and communally in the whole church. The Holy 
Spirit empowers church leaders who are used by the Spirit 
to revive, renew, and revitalise an entire church community 
of believers.
In this article regarding the Spirit’s role in church 
revitalisation, four areas will be considered, namely 
definition, principle, method, and evidence. Firstly, 
empowerment for church revitalisation and its implications 
for ministry in general are defined. Then the underlying 
principles of empowerment for church leaders are studied, 
followed by a brief considering of the methodology of 
empowerment for church revitalisation. Finally, the 
article is concluded by suggesting several signs of biblical 
empowerment in a local church community.
Empowerment: Wait for power 
from on high
Church revitalisation always begins as the work of the Holy 
Spirit in the church. This fact should come as no surprise 
to those who confess that the Holy Spirit is sovereign. 
The sovereignty of the divine Spirit, in both personal 
conversation and church renewal, has been confessed by 
Christians since the Early Church. Some church leaders 
seem – at least in practice – to make the divine work of 
the Spirit dependant on or conditional to human activity. 
Lloyd-Jones (1959) writes:
I would affirm that much of the modern approach to evangelism, 
with its techniques and methods, is unnecessary if we really 
believe in the doctrine of the Holy Spirit and His application 
of God’s message. I suggest that our ‘techniques’ and our 
‘mechanics’ actually divert the attention of people from ‘the 
truth of the message’ to some lower, particular, immediate and 
practical action which may have the opposite effect what is 
intended. (pp. 39–40)
But most protestant theologians have maintained, at least in 
theory, the sovereignty of the Holy Spirit in regeneration, in 
the believer’s life of sanctification, and collectively in church 
renewal7 – even though in practice the Spirit’s sovereignty 
can often be overlooked.
The history of the Early Church gives clear evidence in 
several biblical passages of the Spirit’s sovereign power 
in the church. Perhaps the clearest passage is Acts 1:6–11, 
which gives an account of Jesus’ parting instructions to the 
leaders of the New Testament Church. Parallel to the Great 
Commission passages, Jesus here instructs these church 
leaders to wait for divine empowerment for the task of 
witnessing of Christ. Acts 1:8 is essential to this passage and 
the whole book: ‘But you will receive power when the Holy 
Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in 
Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the 
earth.’ Thus, when the Holy Spirit would come, then they 
will receive power to be witnesses of Christ.
Jesus’ parting instructions were not new for these church 
leaders. He had already given similar instructions. Earlier 
Jesus ‘ordered them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait 
for the promise of the Father’ (Ac 1:4). And shortly after his 
resurrection, Jesus said, ‘You are witnesses of these things. 
And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon 
you. But stay in the city until you are clothed with power 
from on high’ (Lk 24:48–49). It is evident that these concepts – 
waiting for power from on high and being filled with the 
Holy Spirit in order to become witnesses of the things of 
Christ – were not strange to the disciples.
What is the promise of the Father and the power from on high 
of which Jesus spoke? The promise of the Father is the 
anticipated filling of the Holy Spirit that Jesus had spoken 
about in the Upper Room Discourse (Jn 13–17) and elsewhere 
(e.g. Lk 24:44–49; Jn 20:19–23). The Father’s promise was 
fulfilled when the Holy Spirit was sent, by God the Father and 
the risen Christ, into the church for the first time at Pentecost 
(Ac 2:1ff.). The Holy Spirit, as promised, was poured out into 
the church at Pentecost, and he still continues to fill believers 
for gospel ministry.
Jesus spoke in Acts 1:8 and elsewhere of the power from on high. 
Again, it is the personal presence of the Holy Spirit who was 
predicted by Jesus Christ before his ascension. This power 
from on high should not be equated with a mystical energy 
as described by some religions (Sufi Islam, Eastern mysticism, 
postmodern spirituality, etc.). Nor is this power to be equated 
with the magical forces of either traditional religion (mana, 
muti, miracles, etc.) or modern sensationalists. The power of 
which Jesus spoke is none other than the Holy Spirit himself, 
who personally fills Christian believers with a measure of his 
presence and who empowers them for gospel ministry.
Without the presence and power of the Holy Spirit, all gospel 
ministry is to no avail. Thus the New Testament literature 
7.For a historical study, see George Smeaton (1988).

Page 3 of 8
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
calls us to walk by the Spirit (Gl 5:16–26), to be filled with the 
Spirit (Eph 5:18), to be co-workers with the Spirit (2 Cor 6:1), 
et cetera. Therefore attempting church revitalisation without 
his empowerment contradicts the parting instructions of 
Jesus to the first leaders of the New Testament Church. 
Waiting upon the Spirit’s presence and empowerment is a 
necessary prerequisite for church revitalisation.
The second passage, Acts 4:23–31, is equally important. The 
same truth is expressed, this time in living application within 
the gathered community of believers. This passage follows an 
account of the early persecution against the believers. Though 
challenged by the recent persecution, the believers gathered 
for corporate prayer, confessing God’s sovereignty and 
praying for boldness to witness of Christ. God’s immediate 
answer to their prayer is given in Acts 4:31: ‘And when they 
had prayed, the place in which they were gathered together 
was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and 
continued to speak the word of God with boldness.’
The focus of this passage is not on the temporary and 
extraordinary shaking of the place, but on the two results,8 
namely that all the believers (including but not limited to 
the apostles) were filled with the Holy Spirit, and that they 
continued to witness with boldness. The filling of the Holy 
Spirit is evidenced here as a fresh and deepened experience 
of the personal presence of the Holy Spirit in the life of a 
believer as a result of constantly walking in the Spirit (Gl 
5:16–25) and living in a way that never grieves the Spirit (Eph 
4:30; cf. Is 63:10; cf. also DeVries 2007:138–149; Köstenberger 
1997:229–240). As a result of the Spirit’s filling, the believers 
spontaneously spoke the Word with boldness. They were 
revived – we could say revitalised – by a fresh filling of the Holy 
Spirit, which spontaneously motivated them with boldness 
in gospel ministry. Thus one can conclude that whilst you 
are waiting for the Spirit’s presence and empowerment, you 
should busy yourself – as did the believers in this passage – 
with prayer that confesses God’s sovereignty.
Additional passages in the book of Acts and other New 
Testament books also highlight the importance of the divine 
presence and empowerment of the Holy Spirit. Acts 11:19–
21, for example shows how the Holy Spirit as the primary 
agent used the cross-cultural witness of believers to work 
a revival in a new territory. It is clear from these passages 
and others that the Holy Spirit was sent into the church by 
the Father and Son in order to empower believers for gospel 
ministry, and that the presence and empowerment of the 
Spirit is necessary for church revitalisation.
Principle: Competent ministers of 
Christ’s Spirit
The essential prerequisite for church revitalisation is the 
presence and empowerment of the Holy Spirit. As stated, 
church revitalisation always begins with the work of the 
8.On this passage John Calvin (1998) writes: ‘Whereas God did declare His power then 
by shaking the place it was a rare and extraordinary thing; and whereas it appeared 
by the effect, that the apostles did obtain that which they desired, this is a perpetual 
profit of prayer, which is also set before us for an example’ (Acts 4:31) (p. 189).
Holy Spirit in the church. Yet confessing that the Holy Spirit 
is the primary agent of ministry in the church does not 
mean Christians do not have any work to do. Nor does it 
mean Christians should passively wait for some mystical 
experience of the Spirit’s power, without doing the work 
we have already been instructed to do. Even whilst we – as 
secondary agents – wait for the power of the Spirit to work, 
we busy ourselves with speaking the Word and with prayer. 
Passionate prayer for the Spirit’s divine work is the pattern of 
the Early Church in the book of Acts. Church history teaches 
the same lesson (Murray 1994:127–131).
What then should church leaders do to prepare for and 
promote church revitalisation? There is much to be done, 
whilst remaining grounded on and within the framework of 
biblical principles. Consider the following three principles 
related to the Holy Spirit and church revitalisation.
Firstly, church leaders cannot give new life or produce revival, 
but they can work and pray in faith. Acts 4:23–31, as just 
explained, is a clear example of this principle. The believers 
prayed for power to do what they had been commanded to 
do and were busy doing. Thus church leaders can pray for 
grace, power, and courage to do what will hopefully lead to 
church revitalisation. Confessing in prayer that they cannot 
produce revival or revitalise churches, places themselves 
and their ministries under the sovereignty of God; working 
in this personal weakness to preach the Word and witness of 
Christ causes them to trust in God’s sovereignty and to hope 
for the results that only the Holy Spirit can produce. Thus 
their work in ministry, when based on the right principles, 
will cause them to confess their own weakness even whilst 
it also increases their trust and hope in God’s Spirit (2 Cor 
12:9–10).
Secondly, church leaders are not made competent by their 
own abilities or previous successes in ministry, but their 
competency is from God by his Spirit within them regardless 
of measurable results. This principle of spiritual competence 
is taught most clearly in 2 Corinthians 3:4–6:
Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. 
Not that we are [competent] in ourselves to claim anything as 
coming from us, but our [competency] is from God, who has made 
us competent to be ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter 
but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
The apostle Paul argues that God makes us competent for 
ministry, not by rhetoric or human wisdom (1 Cor 2:1–5), but 
in a living relationship with him by the Holy Spirit. When 
the Spirit continues to clear away the veil of unbelief and 
ignorance from our own eyes, and as we continue to gaze 
at the glory of Christ, only then, by the Spirit of life, we are 
transformed into the character of Christ (2 Cor 3:18). It is this 
transformation process that makes one a competent minister.
Competence in church revitalisation is not found, first of all, 
by promoting the sociological factors that are known to often 
make a church grow. Nor is it by certain communication skills 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
Page 4 of 8
Original Research
or natural leadership ability. The secret of competence is not 
found in the application of church growth principles that 
may have produced results in the past. Spiritual competence 
for ministry is found only within a living relationship in the 
Spirit as we become increasingly Christ-like in our character 
and ministry.
It is in this living relationship with the triune God that the Holy 
Spirit fills us, produces fruit within us, and gives spiritual 
gifts that are used for the revitalisation of God’s church. It 
is the filling of the Holy Spirit and his gifts that make us 
competent, not our own wisdom or abilities as empowered 
by these gifts.9 Thus the source of competence should be 
highlighted and not just the abilities, methodologies, and 
strategies that the Spirit produces through us. This principle 
of competence in the Spirit gives Paul great confidence, hope, 
courage, freedom, and motivation for gospel ministry (2 Cor 
3:4, 12, 17; 4:1).
Thirdly, we are dependent and the Holy Spirit is sovereign. 
The Spirit has chosen to use certain means and we are 
bounded by these means. The Spirit normally chooses to 
work together with us mediately (i.e. with the means), though 
he also works immediately (i.e. without means) and powerfully 
in the soul (cf. Packer 1990:295).10 Therefore whilst church 
leaders can participate with the Spirit in using means for 
spiritual conversion and church renewal, their work should 
be limited to using these means faithfully whilst leaving the 
outcome to the sovereign Spirit.
Yet because the Spirit’s work is always effectual, our work 
should always be expectant. The Spirit always effectually 
accomplishes what he has intended to do, whether his 
purpose is only to vindicate Christ’s righteousness or 
whether it is also to renew spiritual life in individuals and 
entire communities. Thus, as Paul writes, we are sincere and 
earnest and even humbly triumphant in our work: ‘For we 
are not, as so many, peddling the word of God; but as of 
sincerity, but as from God, we speak in the sight of God in 
Christ’; (2 Cor 2:2:17; cf. also Edwards 2010).11
 9.There is a subtle tendency, even while confessing dependency on the sovereign 
Spirit, to shift the focus from the Spirit’s monergistic work of salvation and 
his essential co-witness that works through us, to a greater attention on the 
empowerment of us and the power this gives us. Following Charles Finney (1868), 
revivals in America increasingly were considered to be products of the evangelist 
who was empowered by the Holy Spirit; they were not considered to be products 
of the Holy Spirit who used the evangelist. Thus the focus of dependence shifted 
from dependency that trusted the Spirit for sovereign conviction and conversion, 
to dependency that trusted the Spirit for power to preach convincingly. Denying 
the Spirit’s sovereign converting work in salvation, Finney instead overemphasised 
the Spirit’s empowerment of the evangelist. As Bruce Stephens (1990) perceptively 
notes, Finney attempted: ‘to reconcile a Pelagiaism [sic] that tended to reduce 
the role of the Spirit with a Pietism that urged reliance on the inducements of the 
Spirit, remaining ever expectant and watchful for even greater evidences of the 
power of the Spirit’s workings’ (p. 222).
10.Packer (1990) states: ‘[Regeneration] is effected by the Spirit, who acts both 
mediately, by the word, in the mind, giving understanding and conviction, and also 
immediately, with the word, in the hidden depths of the heart, implanting new life 
and power, effectively dethroning sin and making the sinner both able and willing to 
respond to the gospel invitation. The Spirit’s work is thus both moral, by persuasion 
(which Arminians and Pelagians affirm), and also physical, by power (which they deny)’ 
(p. 295).
11.Jonathan Edwards (2010) also knew the secret of this humble dependence 
and expectancy of victory: ‘I think I have found that no discourses have been 
more remarkably blessed, than those in which the doctrines of God’s absolute 
sovereignty, with regard to the salvation of sinners, and His just liberty, with regard 
to answering prayer, and succeeding the plans, of natural men, continuing such, 
have been insisted on’ (pp. 849–850).
Therefore, in order to be competent church leaders who 
promote church revitalisation, they should seek consistently 
to operate grounded on these principles and within the 
framework of the Spirit’s normal means for church renewal. 
It is in this way that one will increasingly walk by the Spirit 
and grow in spiritual ability so as to be used by the Holy 
Spirit in his work of revival, renewal and revitalisation.
Methodology: The normal way of 
the Spirit’s work
It is important to study the means and methods that the 
Holy Spirit normally uses to produce church renewal. Since 
believers are dependent on his sovereign work and are 
competent only in their spiritual relation through him with 
Christ, it is vitally necessary for believers to pattern our 
methodologies according to the normal way of the Spirit’s 
work. When we use methods that recognise the sovereignty 
of the Holy Spirit and that cooperate with his powerful work, 
then his power is operational through us and he will often 
sovereignly bless our feeble efforts. But if we use methods 
that are inconsistent with the Spirit’s normal way of working 
or that do not confess his sovereignty we are likely wasting 
our efforts since it is less likely that he will bless these 
methods.
This seems to be the lesson of 1 Corinthians 2:1–5. Paul 
consciously chose not to use certain methods, neither 
because they were necessarily wrong, and nor because he 
did not desire to persuade sinners to be reconciled with God 
(cf. 2 Cor 5:11–21), but rather because he consciously bound 
himself to means which would demonstrate the Spirit and 
power, so that, ultimately, the faith of his audience would be 
grounded in God’s power and not in Paul’s ability. Church 
leaders likewise should pattern their methods after the 
normal work of the Spirit since they desire the same result, 
not of counterfeit change but of lasting spiritual church 
revitalisation.
What are the means and methods that the Holy Spirit normally 
uses to work church revitalisation? Many such methods can 
be gleaned from biblical examples and from church history. 
The following two methods, however, are most common. 
The Spirit always works by communicating the Word about 
Christ, and the Spirit usually starts to work by confronting 
sin. Our efforts and methods for church revitalisation 
therefore should be patterned after and consistent with these 
common works of the Holy Spirit.
Firstly, the Holy Spirit always works by communicating 
the Word about Christ. There is an inseparable relationship 
between Christ and the Spirit of Christ, and there is a 
perfect harmony between the objective truth as revealed 
in the Scriptures and the subjective witness of the Spirit 
who inspired the Scriptures. Indeed, the teaching of this 
relationship and harmony is one of the strengths of the 
reformed tradition. Though John Calvin’s contributions are 
misunderstood by many, his explanation of the inseparable 

Page 5 of 8
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
relationship of the Spirit and Word of God resonates with the 
biblical record and remains unsurpassed (cf. Packer 1987).12
As Calvin taught in many places, the communication of the 
gospel is made effective only when the Holy Spirit joins 
himself with the Word.13 Furthermore in relation to missional 
ministry and the Spirit’s evangelistic conviction, J.H. Bavinck 
(1960) explains that the Holy Spirit:
convinces man of sin, even where previously no consciousness 
of sin was apparently present. The Holy Spirit uses the word 
of the preacher and touches the heart of the hearer, making it 
accessible to the word. (p. 229)
Thus the Word of God is the primary means of the Holy 
Spirit’s work. There are many modes of how the Word 
can be communicated – preaching, teaching, counselling, 
evangelism, et cetera – but the method of the Spirit’s work 
with the Word remains essential.
Secondly, the Holy Spirit usually starts to work by 
confronting sin. On the night before his crucifixion, Jesus 
instructed his disciples that he would send the Holy Spirit 
to be with them (Jn 14:26ff.) and to empower them for 
witness (Jn 15:26–27). When the Holy Spirit comes, Jesus 
said, he would guide them into deeper understandings of 
the truth about Christ (Jn 16:13–15) – the Word joined by 
the Spirit as explained above – and he would ‘convict the 
world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment’ (Jn 
16:8; cf. Calvin 2003b).14 This conviction of sin is usually the 
first work of the Holy Spirit in the life of every individual 
(cf. Sibbes 2001).15
The Spirit’s work of conviction is for the purpose of causing 
people to recognise their sinfulness, to repent of their sin, 
and to run to Jesus Christ for the forgiveness and healing 
12.Packer (1987) notes that: ‘as Augustine was the theologian of grace and Luther 
the theologian of justification, both par excellence, so Calvin was and remains 
the theologian of the Holy Spirit in the post-apostolic Christian church, with the 
Puritans and Edwards in close support. No one has ever surpassed these men; few 
have come near them’ (p. 3).
	
See also Nuttall (1992:20–33) and Warfield (1900:xxxiii–xxxiv).
13.On Ezekiel 22, Calvin (2003c) writes: ‘God indeed works efficiently by His own 
words, but we must hold that this efficacy is not contained in the words themselves, 
but proceeds from the secret instinct of the Spirit … This work of the Spirit … is 
joined with the word of God. … The external word is of no avail by itself, unless 
animated by the power of the Spirit. … The Holy Spirit penetrates our hearts, and 
thus enlightens our minds’ (pp. 108–109).
	
On Isaiah 59:21, Calvin (2003a) writes: ‘The ‘Spirit’ is joined with the Word, 
because, without the efficacy of the Spirit, the preaching of the gospel would 
avail nothing, but would remain unfruitful. In like manner ‘the word’ must not be 
separated from ‘the Spirit’, as fanatics imagine, who, despising the word, glory in 
the name of the Spirit, and swell with vain confidence in their own imaginations 
(p. 271; cf. also Calvin [1960:1.9.1]).
14.On the meaning of John 16:10, Calvin (2003b) writes: ‘We must keep to the series 
of steps which Christ lays down. He now says that the world must be convicted of 
‘righteousness’, for people will never hunger and thirst after righteousness, but 
on the contrary will contemptuously reject everything that is said about it unless 
they have felt convicted of ‘sin’. We must understand that believers, in particular, 
cannot progress in the Gospel till they have first been humbled, and this cannot 
happen until they are aware of their sins. Certainly it is the particular task of the 
law to summon consciences to God’s judgment-seat and to strike them with 
terror; but the Gospel cannot be preached properly without leading from ‘sin’ to 
‘righteousness’ and from death to life. Therefore it is necessary to borrow from the 
law that first clause of which Christ spoke’ (p. 398).
15.Richard Sibbes (2001:274) writes: ‘The Spirit that testifies to a man that his sins are 
pardoned him, doth it first by convincing a man of his sins.’ John Owen (1965:189) 
writes: ‘Let no man think to understand the gospel, who knoweth nothing of the 
law.’ 
that he alone can give.16 Without the Spirit’s work of 
conviction, there is no evangelical repentance and thus no 
true spiritual need for Jesus Christ and his salvation. Thus 
without this work of the Spirit there can be no personal 
regeneration, and corporately, no revitalisation in the 
church. This has also historically been the usual pattern of 
the Spirit’s work in times of revival. Murray (1994:163ff.) 
states: ‘All awakenings begin with the return of a profound 
conviction of sin.’
What does this conviction of sin look like in practical cases 
of church revitalisation? In individuals, this conviction 
is usually seen in a growing awareness and aversion for 
internal sins such as pride, jealousy, lust, discontent, and 
the favourite sins to which a person is most susceptible. In 
relationships amongst Christians, this conviction is seen in 
renewed efforts to correct longstanding sins such as bitterness, 
division, and a lack of forgiveness toward each other. In 
church communities, this conviction is seen in the decrease of 
complacency, self-reliance, racial prejudice, and an attitude 
of superiority to those outside the community. These deeply 
rooted sins are often confessed and forsaken when the Spirit 
works, thus producing the desired revitalisation amongst 
believers in the church community.
Thus there is very often a consistent pattern in the Spirit’s work. 
Church leaders and even members are empowered by the Holy 
Spirit to communicate the Word of Christ with sincerely and 
boldness (cf. Ac 4:31) and the Spirit uses this sincere witness of 
the Word to convict sinners – both believers and non-believers – 
of the truth about Christ, often leading to cases of personal 
regeneration and sometimes church revitalisation. The pattern 
of the Spirit’s work is often not sensational – miraculous signs 
and wonders are not an indisputable sign that the Holy Spirit 
is present (Edwards 1994:54–110). The pattern is very often 
relational, since it involves the personal witness of the Word 
between people and since it leads to confession of sins that 
had formally promoted bitterness and division. The Spirit’s 
work is always exclusively Christ-focused (Jn 16:13–15) and it 
is always God-glorifying.
Since the Holy Spirit normally works in these ways, 
believers are wise to pattern their own methods after his 
divine movement. Many people have sought for a golden 
key in ministry, a perfected method that will produce the 
desired results quickly or almost effortlessly (cf. Wakely 
2004:12–22). But this is a dangerous temptation based on 
a flawed understanding of the Spirit and his work. Often 
the result of golden key methodologies is that ministries 
become built on some other measure of success – very often 
on attendance numbers or other highly visible factors – 
and not on biblical evidence of spiritual revival and lasting 
church revitalisation. Church leaders must rather make 
16.Carson (1980) postulates: ‘As a prosecutor the Holy Spirit aims to convict the 
defendant, the person who belongs to the world; but ‘convict’ in this context does 
not mean ‘secure a conviction before a judge’, but rather ‘drive home personal 
conviction in an individual’s heart and mind’. The aim of the Spirit’s work is not to 
produce a guilty verdict – that already stands ([John] 3:18, 36) – but to bring the 
defendant to see the perilous condition in which he stands. That may prompt him 
to enter a plea for mercy; for only mercy will save him’ (p. 139).
	
See also Carson (1979:547–566).

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
Page 6 of 8
Original Research
every effort to pattern their ministry methods after the 
movement of the Spirit and to always seek consistency with 
his way of working.
Thus church leaders are dependent on the Holy Spirit for 
his divine empowerment and sovereign blessing. They are 
limited and cannot by themselves produce the desired result 
of church revitalisation. They must rather keep in step with 
the Spirit by cooperating with his normal means of working 
and by doing what he is most likely to bless. With this 
methodology believers are mostly likely to see the desired 
results of spiritual revitalisation.
Evidence: Signs of the Holy Spirit’s 
presence
The Holy Spirit is the divine agent who produces church 
revitalisation. He normally uses us as secondary human 
agents to communicate the Word of Christ through various 
modes of ministry. As we confess our dependence on 
the Holy Spirit and as we are faithful in ministry, he may 
sovereignly choose to work repentance and revitalisation in 
the church. Thus we are called to be co-workers of the Holy 
Spirit, as he is busy working for revitalisation individually 
in believers and collectively and communally in the whole 
church.
The need for divine empowerment has already been 
considered, as well as the personal presence and power of 
the Holy Spirit in our ministries. The need to be grounded 
in, and to operate within biblical principles concerning 
the Spirit’s work have been studied. The importance of 
patterning our ministry methods after the normal way 
the Spirit works was also indicated. The vital question in 
conclusion, therefore is how such a ministry will look in 
practice. What is the biblical evidence of spiritual church 
revitalisation and what are the sure signs of the Holy Spirit’s 
presence in our ministry?
There is much talk today by many church leaders about the 
Spirit’s presence, power, guidance, prophecy, blessing, et 
cetera. Consider, for example the sensational ministries of 
signs and wonders, contemporary healing ministries, and 
the abundance of deliverance ministries that all claim to be 
influenced by the Spirit of God. Many claim to be working 
in the power of the Holy Spirit, even whilst they are doing 
things that are clearly in contradiction with the Bible, the 
Word given to us by the Holy Spirit himself.17
These various waves of charismatic renewal, however, 
should not cause church leaders to be afraid of building 
their ministries on biblical truths about the Holy Spirit. 
17.Discernment here is of crucial importance. Several simple diagnostic questions can 
quickly suggest the presence of an evil spirit who is trying to falsely impersonate 
the Holy Spirit, for example: Are the objective teachings of these ministries – in 
both word and action, both for short-term and over time – consistent with the 
whole Bible?; Do these ministries focus all attention exclusively on Jesus Christ as 
proclaimed to us in the Word of God?; Do these ministers lead to a conviction of 
sin in people and communities, and the normal immediate response in the Bible to 
the presence of the Spirit of Holiness?
They should rather return to the Bible, with guidance by 
confessional documents and time-tested Pneumatology (cf. 
Goodwin 1996; Kuyper 1900; Owen 2004), to reassert a biblical 
doctrine of the Holy Spirit that seeks with great discernment 
to reject contemporary excess and to return again to the same 
sincere dependency on the Holy Spirit in ministry that was 
experienced for the first time by Early Church leaders (Ac 6:3; 
11:24; 13:52; 1 Cor 2:1–5; 2 Cor 3; etc.).
How then should one measures success in church 
revitalisation, assuming the sovereign role of the Holy 
Spirit? It is necessary in conclusion to reflect briefly on 
biblical evidences of the Spirit’s presence in ministries. 
These evidences are touchstones for ministries – they serve 
as tests and criterion for determining the genuineness of 
church revitalisation. The following list is not exhaustive 
but serves only as a framework for personal reflection and 
discernment.
Firstly, evidence of the Spirit’s presence in church revitalisation 
is not necessarily measurable. We are often tempted to look 
at measurable factors such as average weekly attendance, 
the number of people accepting Christ, crowd size at various 
events, growth of ministry commitments, amount of money 
collected monthly or at events, published results in popular 
or academic media, the praise of man, and more other factors. 
But none of these are infallible measures of success in church 
revitalisation. They may indicate something good or bad 
about the methods, but there is no direct correlation between 
any of these and the sovereign work of the Holy Spirit.
In 1944 Edwards, an American theologian used by God 
during the Great Awakenings, sternly cautions against using 
untrustworthy factors as evidence of spiritual success:
It is strange how hardly men are brought to be contented with 
the rules and directions Christ has given them, but they must 
needs go by other rules of their own inventing that seem to them 
wiser and better. (p. 114)18
Jesus says that the Spirit is like the wind, which is not 
detected physically and cannot be controlled (Jn  3:8). It 
should be no surprise, therefore, that tools for sociocultural 
analysis can only describe what the Spirit has done through 
us and cannot prescribe factors for any future success. 
Such thinking is the subtle flaw of American church 
growth principles that are more characterised by a so-
called sanctified pragmatism than by the precise spiritual 
discernment of Jonathan Edwards.
Secondly, the evidence of the Spirit’s presence should be 
seen in the character and ministry of the minister and of 
18.Edwards (1994) carefully identifies twelve uncertain evidences of revival, viz. very 
great and high affections (p. 54), great effects on the body (p. 59), fluent, fervent 
and abundant talk about religious things (p. 62), affections motivated by causes 
outside of oneself (p. 65), texts of Scripture ‘remarkably brought to the mind’ (p. 
70), an appearance of love in the affections (p. 73), many affections at once of 
different kinds (p. 75), comforts and joys which seemingly follow convictions (p. 
79), devotion and zeal in religious duties (p. 91), encouraging others to praise and 
glorify God (p. 93), confidence and lack of doubt of one’s good state (p. 95), and 
approval of one’s experiences by the truly godly (p. 110).

Page 7 of 8
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
the entire church leadership. Since church leaders are only 
cooperating in church revitalisation with the Spirit’s divine 
work of renewal, it is of great importance that they are 
filled by the Holy Spirit. When the Spirit is at work in the 
church, usually the leaders of that church will be the first 
to display humble dependence on the Spirit’s divine work 
and demonstrate signs of his presence in their lives such as 
authentic holiness,19 passion for ministry (cf. Drummond 
1992),20 and growth in spiritual gifts. The presence of 
the Holy Spirit is also experienced amongst the church 
leadership as unity in the truth, discernment and courage 
to deal with error, motivation to witness of Christ, and love 
for lost souls.
Thirdly, evidence of the Spirit’s presence for church 
revitalisation is seen individually in the character of 
church members and collectively in the whole body of the 
church. When the Spirit is present amongst the members, 
there will be an increased awareness of a hatred for sin and 
the underlying sinfulness. There will also be growth in grace 
and knowledge of Christ (2 Pt 3:18), which is usually most 
evident through increased motivation for personal holiness 
and for participation in ministry. When the Spirit is present 
within the whole church, believers will return from times 
of spiritual backsliding and others will experience renewed 
spiritual life and spiritual closeness with Christ. As Harry 
Reeder (quoted in Landry 2009) states:
Transformed lives through the gospel of grace resulting in a 
testimony of the pre-eminence of Christ. The Holy Spirit will 
be at work and no one will be speaking about Him because 
his work is that everyone will be speaking of and proclaiming 
Christ.
How then should church leaders work for the revitalisation 
of their churches? Since church revitalisation is ultimately 
the work of the Holy Spirit, they should first confess his 
sovereignty and learn to depend more consistently on him 
in their ministry. A life of personal and corporate prayer 
is often the best means to constantly train our minds to 
confess the Spirit’s sovereignty in practical ways. They 
should analyse their ministry methods to ensure they are 
based on biblical principles and are consistent with a biblical 
doctrine of the Holy Spirit. As they wait for the Spirit’s 
special presence and power, they should be busy using the 
means he has usually blessed in the past, viz. the clear and 
simple communication of the Word that usually leads to 
evangelical repentance and faith in Christ. As they confess 
their dependence on the Holy Spirit and as they are faithful 
in ministry, he may sovereignly choose to work repentance 
and revitalisation in the church.
19.The holiness of a minister gives great power and authenticity to the message that 
he brings. This authentic holiness is, of course, only possible through the continual 
gracing and sanctification of the Spirit, and by a conscious effort to continually 
mature in biblical spirituality.
20.Drummond (1992) declares:A shallow emotional, approach to spirituality is not 
desired. God desires His witnesses to be burdened, concerned, enthusiastic, and 
zealous to spread the good news to the millions who desperately need to hear the 
message. The Holy Spirit will instill this attitude in believers as they seek strength, 
wisdom, and compassion (p. 331).
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Abraham, W.J., 2003, The logic of renewal, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Bavinck, J.H., 1960, An introduction to the science of missions, transl. D.H. Freeman, 
Presbyterian & Reformed Publisher, Phillipsburg.
Calvin, J., 1960, Institutes of the Christian religion, ed. John McNeill, transl. F.L. Battles, 
The Westminster Press, Philadelphia.
Calvin, J., 1998, Calvin’s commentaries: Acts, electronic ed., Logos Library System, 
Albany.
Calvin, J., 2003a, Commentary on the book of the prophet Isaiah, transl. W. Pringle, 
Baker Books, Grand Rapids.
Calvin, J., 2003b, Commentary on the Gospel according to John, Baker Books, Grand 
Rapids.
Calvin, J., 2003c, Commentary on the prophet Ezekiel, vol. 1, transl. W. Pringle, Baker 
Books, Grand Rapids.
Carson, D.A., 1979, ‘The function of the paraclete in John 16:7–11’, Journal of Biblical 
Literature 98, 547–566.
Carson, D.A., 1980, The farewell discourse and final prayer of Jesus: An exposition of 
John 14–17, Baker Book House, Grand Rapids.
Dever, M., 2004, Nine marks of a healthy church, Crossway Books, Wheaton.
DeVries, B.A., 2007, ‘Witnessing with the Holy Spirit: Pneumatology and missiology 
in evangelistic theory’, PhD dissertation, Faculty of Theology, Southern Baptist 
Theological Seminary, Louisville.
Drummond, L.A., 1992, The word of the cross: A contemporary theology of evangelism, 
Broadman, Nashville.
Edwards, J., 1994, The religious affections, Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Edwards, J., 2010, ‘A faithful narrative of the surprising work of God’, Works 1, 849–850.
Finney, C.G., 1868, Lectures on revivals of religion, Revell, New York.
Goodwin, T., 1996, The works of Thomas Goodwin, vol. 6, Tanski Publications, Eureka.
Köstenberger, A.J., 1997, ‘What does it mean to be filled with the Spirit? A biblical 
investigation’, Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society 20(4), 229–240.
Kuyper, A., 1900, The work of the Holy Spirit, transl. Henri DeVries, Funk & Wagnalls, 
New York.
Landry, E., 2009, ‘Interview with Harry Rheeder’, The White Horse Inn blog, viewed 
15 November 2014, from http://www.whitehorseinn.org/blog/2009/10/09/five-
for-friday-4/
Lloyd-Jones, D.M., 1959, Conversions: Psychological and spiritual, InterVarsity, 
Chicago.
McIntosh, G.L., 2009, Taking your church to the next level: What got you here won’t 
get you there, Baker Books, Grand Rapids.
McNeal, R., 2009, Missional renaissance: Changing the scorecard for the church, 
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
Miller, C.J., 1986, Outgrowing the ingrown church, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Miller, D., 1999, Reinventing American Protestantism: Christianity in the new 
millennium, University of California Press, Oakland.
Mohler, R.A., 2015, A guide to church revitalization, SBTS Press, Louisville.
Murray, I.H., 1994, Revival & revivalism: The making and marring of American 
Evangelicalism 1750–1858, Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Murray, I.H., 1998, Pentecost – Today? The biblical basis for understanding revival, 
Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Nuttall, G.F., 1992, The Holy Spirit in Puritan faith and experience, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Oden, T.C., 2006, Turning around the mainline: How renewal movements are changing 
the church, Baker Books, Grand Rapids.
Owen, J., 1965, ‘The doctrine of justification by faith’, in J. Owen (ed.), Works, vol. 5, 
pp. 1–400, Banner of Truth, London.
Owen, J., 2004, The Holy Spirit: His gifts and power, Christian Focus, Ross-Shire.
Packer, J.I., 1961, Evangelism and the sovereignty of God, InterVarsity, Downers Grove.
Packer, J.I., 1987, ‘The Holy Spirit and his work’, Crux 23, 2–17.
Packer, J.I., 1990, A quest for godliness: The puritan vision of the Christian life, 
Crossway Books, Wheaton.
Reeder III, H.L. & Swavely, D., 2004, From embers to a flame: How God can revitalize 
your church, P & R Publishing, Phillipsburg.
Ross, M., 2006, Preaching for revitalization: How to revitalize your church through 
your pulpit, Mentor, Ross-Shire.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1955
Page 8 of 8
Original Research
Runia, J., 1968, Reformation today, Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Sibbes, R., 2001, The works of Richard Sibbes, vol. 7, Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Smeaton, G., 1988, The doctrine of the Holy Spirit, The Banner of Truth, Carlisle.
Snyder, H., 1989, Signs of the Spirit: How God reshapes the church, Zondervan, Grand 
Rapids.
Stephens, B.M., 1990, ‘Changing conceptions of the Holy Spirit in American protestant 
theology from Jonathan Edwards to Charles Finney’, Saint Luke’s Journal of 
Theology 33, 222.
Stetzer, E. & Rainer, T.S., 2010, Transformational church: Creating a new scorecard for 
congregations, B&H Books, Nashville.
Swindoll, C.R., 2010, The church awakening: An urgent call for renewal, FaithWords, 
New York.
Wakely, M., 2004, ‘The search for the golden key’, Evangelical Missions Quarterly 
40(1), 12–22.
Warfield, B.B., 1900, ‘Introductory note’, in A. Kuyper (ed.), The work of the Holy Spirit, 
pp. xxxiii–xxxiv, Funk & Wagnalls, New York.