Page 1 of 7
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
Pentecostal spirituality is defined as the integration of beliefs and practices into the affections that 
are themselves evoked and expressed by those practices and beliefs. This article investigates 
these practices and beliefs by examining pentecostal publications to define the most important 
constitutive elements of a pentecostal spirituality. The most important theological beliefs are 
justification by faith in Christ, sanctification as a second definite work of grace, healing as 
provided in the atonement, the premillennial second coming of Christ, and the baptism in 
the Spirit. However, when these theological beliefs are translated into pentecostal practice, it 
seems that their spirituality is essentially biblical, apocalyptical eschatological, missional, and 
affective. These elements are discussed in order to attempt to define the constitutive elements 
of a pentecostal spirituality.
Author:
Marius Nel1
Affiliation:
1Research Unit of the Faculty 
of Theology, North-West 
University, Potchefstroom 
Campus, South Africa
Correspondence to:
Marius Nel
Email:
nel.marius1@gmail.com
Postal address:
PO Box 12373, Bendor Park 
0713, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 14 July 2014
Accepted: 14 Jan. 2015
Published: 14 May 2015
How to cite this article:
Nel, M., 2015, ‘An attempt 
to define the constitutive 
elements of a pentecostal 
spirituality’, In die Skriflig 
49(1), Art. #1864, 7 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v49i1.1864
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
An attempt to define the constitutive elements 
of a pentecostal spirituality
Read online: 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Introduction
Spittler (1988:804) defines spirituality as ‘a cluster of acts and sentiments that are informed by 
the beliefs and values that characterize a specific religious community’. It is ‘the lived religious 
experience of the Christian faith’ (Albrecht 1999:14; original emphasis). It is not the practice of 
articulating theological doctrines or partaking in rituals performed in a given worship setting, 
but the way the spiritual dimension of the human being is expressed or realised in and through 
everyday life and religious experience (Stewart 2012:106). It focuses on the habits of ordinary 
individuals who practice religion in their private lives and the communal life of the assembly. 
The word spirituality has an elastic quality that results from the wide variety of ways in which 
worshippers express themselves in different denominational traditions, but also even in a single 
faith community (Spittler 1988:804).
Pentecostalism to a certain extent exists both in continuity and differentiating discontinuity 
with other Christian spiritualities represented by, for instance the Roman Catholic, Reformed, 
or Orthodox traditions.1 Land (1993:18–19) explains the continuities and discontinuities in 
terms of different opposites: Pentecostalism is more Arminian than Calvinism in its approach to 
human agency, free will, and perseverance; it is more Calvinist than Lutheran in its appreciation 
of the so-called ‘Third use of the law’ to guide Christian growth and conduct. It is more Eastern 
than Western in its understanding of spirituality, as perfection and participation in the divine life 
(theosis). It is more Catholic than Protestant in emphasising sanctification-transformation more 
than forensic justification; it is more Protestant than Catholic in the conviction that the Word 
is the authority over the church and tradition, for matters pertaining to faith, practice, church 
government, and discipline. In its origins it is more Anabaptist than the magisterial Reformation 
1.Pentecostalism started in the United States, but by now it is the strongest in the Third World, where more than 75% of non-white 
indigenous denominations are constituted by persons who bear all the phenomenological marks of Pentecostalism (Barrett 1988:811). 
The movement consists of three waves, viz. Classical Pentecostalism, the Charismatic Movement within traditional mainline churches 
that originated in the sixties of the previous century, and the Neo-Pentecostal Movement of independent groups, constituting 21% of 
organised global Christianity (Sullivan 1988:119).
Pinksterspiritualiteit kan gedefinieer word as die integrasie van oortuigings en praktyke in die 
gevoelens wat deur daardie praktyke en oortuigings uitgelok en uitgedruk word. Die artikel 
ondersoek die praktyke en oortuigings deur na publikasies vanuit Pinkstergeledere te kyk ten 
einde die belangrikste samestellende elemente van ’n Pinksterspiritualiteit te definieer. Die 
belangrikste teologiese leerstellings is regverdiging deur die geloof in Christus, heiligmaking 
as ’n tweede besliste werk van genade, genesing as deel van die versoeningswerk, die 
verwagting van die premillennialistiese tweede koms van Christus, en die doop in die Heilige 
Gees. Wanneer die teologiese leerstellings in die Pinksterpraktyk vertaal word, blyk dit dat 
die spiritualiteit in wese bybels, apokalipties-eskatologies, missionaal en affektief is. Hierdie 
elemente word bespreek in ’n poging om die essensiële elemente van ’n Pinksterspiritualiteit 
te definieer.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
Page 2 of 7
Original Research
in its concern for peace and a covenanted believer’s church, 
where discipleship and a personal relationship with the 
Saviour are concerned, rather than being a church for the 
nation (volkskerk). Pentecostalism has a Wesleyan-holiness 
evangelical hermeneutic rather than a fundamentalist-
evangelical basis in terms of its actual use of the Bible and 
understanding of the role that reason plays. And it is more 
liberation-transformationist than scholastic-fundamentalist 
in its way of doing theology as a discerning reflection on 
living reality.
The difficulty with describing a pentecostal spirituality is 
that Pentecostalism exists in diverse denominations and 
traditions as the result of a century of historical developments 
determined by political, cultural and racial factors. 
However, it shares a historical origin and the resultant 
emphasis on the experience of the baptism in the Spirit, 
allowing the researcher to identify common constituent 
elements of a pentecostal spirituality across the range of 
pentecostal churches. The most important theological beliefs 
are also shared, for instance, justification by faith in Christ, 
sanctification, healing as provided in the atonement, the 
premillennial second coming of Christ, and the baptism in 
the Spirit (Dayton 1987:21).
This article argues that a pentecostal spirituality can be 
defined from existing pentecostal publications in terms of 
various constituents, encompassing its emphasis on the 
Bible, the utilisation of an apocalyptic worldview, its core 
existence as a corporate community, its missional emphasis, 
and its affective predilection (Neumann 2012:196).
Biblical constituents of pentecostal spirituality
Pentecostal spirituality emphasises the importance of the 
Holy Spirit as a starting point for a distinctive pentecostal 
approach to theology (Asamoah-Gyadu 2013:17). Does this 
mean that Pentecostals place the Spirit above the Word 
and in doing so elevate experience from the category 
of source of theology to that of norm? MacArthur (1992:
54–77; 1994:40–41) reasons that Pentecostals deny the Bible 
a proper place. His argument contains generalisations that 
weakens his viewpoint. Pentecostalism was born from 
the experience of the baptism with the Spirit, with its 
emphasis on a direct personal experience of God’s presence 
resulting in the revelation of his character and direct will 
to the believer. This leaves room for revelation outside the 
boundaries of Scriptures and it is characteristic of fringe 
groups within the pentecostal tradition that so-called 
revelatory knowledge is utilised that is not measured 
against the Bible (MacArthur 1994):
The charismatic movement has supplanted doctrine with 
experience. Psychology has elevated ‘felt’ needs over real 
needs and behavioural theory over revealed truth. All this has 
accelerated the move away from doctrine and focused the pulpit 
message on everything but the objective truth of Scripture. 
Preachers have become comedians, storytellers, therapists, 
showmen, and entertainers rather than powerful envoys of 
divine truth. (pp. 40–41)
The observation is correct in terms of certain elements 
within the movement although there exists a self-regulatory 
mechanism 
within 
the 
movement 
to 
criticise 
such 
extravagances and excesses. In this article main streams 
within Pentecostalism will be consulted in attempting to 
define a pentecostal spirituality.
Pentecostals confess that the Spirit, prior to the written Word 
of God, inspired the human authors of the Word, and illumines 
contemporary readers when they interpret the Word within 
the community of those who are formed, corrected, nurtured 
and equipped by the Word (Land 1993:28). The Spirit does 
not exist merely to illuminate Scripture and apply it to the life 
of the believer. The Spirit endows and guides the believer and 
the community as a whole. The signs and power of the Spirit 
are for Pentecostals not optional additions, but prerequisites 
for a church wrestling ‘not against flesh and blood, but 
against the principalities, against the powers, against the 
world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts of 
wickedness in the heavenly places’ (Eph 6:12; ASV).
The Word is the living Jesus, and the Spirit works in 
continuity with the person of Christ, but is not exhausted 
therein (Möller 1997:143). It may be argued that protestant 
spirituality has subjugated the Spirit to Scriptures to such an 
extent that the only significant function of the Spirit is to be a 
witness to the Bible, which is interpreted primarily by human 
reason.2 Other traditions like the Latter Day Saints Movement 
of Restorationist Christianity (Mormons) may place the Spirit 
above the Word and develop ‘private revelations’ beyond 
the Bible. Or the Spirit may be domesticated to serve only to 
provide zest for ecclesial work, such as the sacraments, the 
light of reason or common human experience, as may happen 
in liberal theology (Land 1993:29). Pentecostals agree with 
Calvin and Luther that the Bible is of little value without the 
sovereign work of the Spirit; it has no significance apart from 
the context of the experience of the Spirit (Jones 1975:99). The 
Spirit, however, does not merely repeat what the Bible states; 
the Spirit directs the church in those areas not covered by 
Jesus’ teachings. In this way Pentecostals interpret John 14:26 
to mean that the Holy Spirit shall teach believers all things and 
bring to remembrance all that Jesus said. This corresponds 
with Acts 15:28, that the Spirit and church decide on issues 
that confront the church in new contexts (McClung 1986:48). 
The inherent risk in claiming that the Spirit reveals insight 
into contemporary issues is that it may easily lead to heresy 
and for this reason Pentecostals are careful in formulating 
what they perceive to be a fresh or new revelation (Robeck 
2006:40).3 However, the danger inherent in any revelation 
outside the norm of Scriptures remains. The Spirit without 
2.Not all agree with this view: A rational thrust can be discerned in Protestant 
orthodoxy from the very beginning, but very few of its luminaries ever became full–
blown rationalists. Even those defenders of Reformation faith in the late 17th and 
18th centuries were still prone to make a place for mystery in faith, though they 
were not immune to the spell of the Enlightenment (Bloesch 2000:34).
3.This is not unique to the Pentecostals. Bloesch (2000) contends that there is today 
a movement away from propositional theology to narrational theology, from logos 
to mythos: A christocentric theology is being overshadowed by a pneumatocentric 
theology in which the living voice of the Spirit is viewed as a higher authority than 
the written Word of God. The appeal is no longer to what Scripture says but to the 
sanctified imagination of the reader. The new light that breaks forth from God’s 
holy Word supersedes the old light contained in sacred Scripture of the past (p. 59).

Page 3 of 7
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
the Bible and a community of believers inevitably leads to 
subjectivism and fanaticism. These three partial authorities 
complement each other in the pentecostal view (Jones 1975):
The Spirit inspires the Word and builds up the community; the 
Word enables us to understand our experience of the Spirit and 
teaches us the form of our common life; the community forms 
the context in which the Word is understood and the Spirit 
encountered. (p. 106)
The Bible is of little value without the sovereign work of the 
Spirit because the Bible has no significance when ripped from 
the context of the experience of the Spirit (Jones 1975:99). The 
community plays an important role as the audience listening 
to and interpreting the Word.4
The contention is that the pentecostal understanding of the 
mode of God’s presence amongst his people in conjunction 
with their use of Scripture results in a pentecostal hermeneutic 
and spirituality that differs from the hermeneutic and 
spirituality found in other traditions (McLean 1984:50).
Pentecostal spirituality demands the ongoing integration of 
beliefs, affections and actions lest spirituality fragments into 
intellectualism, sentimentalism, or activism (Land 1993:30), 
overcoming the dichotomisation between theology and 
spirituality. Experience of the Spirit drives and requires this 
integration of belief, affections, and practice that forms the 
definition of theology as well as spirituality. Orthodoxy, 
orthopathy and orthopraxy are closely related in a pentecostal 
spirituality, because God, who is Spirit, creates a spirituality 
that is cognitive, affective, and behavioural at once, driving 
towards a unified epistemology, metaphysics, and ethics 
(Land 1993:31).
To abide by the Word is simultaneously to abide by Christ 
as well as the written Word. Pentecostals perceive the Bible 
not so much as a textbook of theological and dogmatic 
propositions as a narrative of redemption in Christ by the 
Spirit and people’s journey to the Father through the Spirit 
of Christ. The doctrines of verbal inspiration and infallibility 
are part of a spirituality that practices a much fuller doctrine 
of the Word of God (Duffield & Van Cleave 1983:19–25), 
where the Word is used as the norm for evaluating beliefs 
and practices (Seymour 1907:2). The Spirit is the Spirit of 
Christ who speaks scripturally, but also has more to say than 
the Scriptures. The Spirit-Word directs the everyday life and 
witnessing of believers and the church, and leads them in all 
truth. Scripture provides the means to test and direct the daily 
specific guidance that the church and individuals purport to 
experience from the Spirit, and provides boundaries. New 
experiences become the occasion for finding new insights 
from Scripture and familiar Scriptures would take on new 
meaning. However, it is imperative that all beliefs, affections, 
and practices should be tested to the Word continuously. 
All the elements of corporate worship – singing, preaching, 
4.Lategan (2007:457) refers to the relationship between text and receiver or reader 
as one of three main areas hermeneutical theory must address in order to be 
successful. The other two are the relationship between the sender or author 
and the message or text, and the internal relationships between the different 
components of the text itself.
testifying, altar calls, prayer meetings, and practice of the gifts 
of the Spirit – are mediated by remembering and applying 
the biblical Word. Biblical realities also form the basis for 
pentecostal sacramentality (Ranaghan 1974:688–694). And 
the force and power with which this occurs indicate that 
transformation and not mere information is the goal of the 
process (Moore 1992:90). ‘The Church needs the energizing 
capacity to see these texts as transformational’ (Brueggemann 
& Sharp 2012:17).
Apocalyptic constituents of pentecostal 
spirituality
In the pentecostal tradition, the promise-fulfilment, 
already-not-yet, is a tensed dynamic that characterises its 
eschatological passion. The faith, worldview, experience 
and practice of Pentecostals are thoroughly eschatological. 
It perceives itself as a revivalist, restorationist, and 
primitivistic5 movement of awakening to remind the church 
that it is the ‘eschatological mother’ and that its task is 
to teach its sons and daughters to prophesy (Käsemann 
1969:100). Its spirituality originated from the 19th century’s 
evangelical awakenings, the holiness movement and the 
healing movement (Nel 1992:46–90) and embodies the 
eschatological turmoil and tensions of the premillennial 
revivalism that swept Europe and the United States during 
the second part of that century (Hammonds 2009:4–8).
One of the important venues for the outpouring of the 
Spirit at the beginning of the 20th century, Azusa street 312 
in Los Angeles, was seen as ‘a humble stable’ (Bartleman 
1980:43) where social barriers were overcome and ‘the color 
line was washed away in the blood’ (Bartleman 1980:54; 
Seymour 1906:1). Its adherents interpret the baptism in the 
Spirit as the latter rain restoration of apostolic faith and 
power for the last days’ evangelisation of the world (Faupel 
1996:32–36). The outpouring of the Spirit is perceived as an 
eschatological event, as a sign of the imminence of the Day 
of YHWH that is interpreted in apocalyptic terms as the 
end of the known order (Jl 2:28–32, and applied by Peter in 
Ac 2:16–21). In the same way, the latter rain is interpreted 
as follows (Taylor 1907):
After the latter rain there was a dry spell, during which the 
grain matured and mellowed, and then came the harvest, and 
then the winter. After this great outpouring of Pentecost, there 
will come another dry spell, in which severe trials will mellow 
the saints and mature them for the harvest, and then will set 
in the wintry storms of the Great Tribulation, to be ended only 
5.Primitivistic is used in the sense of a belief that modern civilisation would benefit 
by a return to or consideration of primitive culture, customs, or ideas that are 
superior to those of modern days (Sykes 1976:880). In assuming an apocalyptic 
worldview Pentecostals claim that they follow in the footsteps of the Master. At 
the turn of the 20th century, J. Weiss and A. Schweitzer overturned the consensus 
amongst researchers that the historical Jesus was not thoroughly apocalyptic in his 
worldview and prospects (Keener 2009:4–13 provides a short overview; Neville 
2008:361; Tabor 2007:8). They opined that he was even more apocalyptic than the 
Gospels that were written about his life and teaching, although it contains both 
temporal and vertical-spatial viewpoints, implying that it displays both cosmic 
conflict and an apocalyptic eschatology. Shively is quoting Greg Carey’s (2005) 
definition of apocalyptic discourse: ... the constellation of apocalyptic topics as 
they function in larger early Jewish and Christian literary and social contexts. Thus, 
apocalyptic discourse should be treated as a flexible set of resources that early Jews 
and Christians could employ for a variety of persuasive tasks (p. 5). Jesus believed in 
and waited for a divine intervention that will inaugurate a new order and a new age, 
and he expected it to happen during his ministry (Aune et al. 2000:51–52; Grant 
1977:135).

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
Page 4 of 7
Original Research
by the millennial spring morning, when Christ and his glorified 
saints shall ‘return from the wedding to take charge of the 
world’. (p. 96)
Macchia (2006:112) emphasises that the eschatological 
element is decisive for Pentecostals because the latter rain of 
the Spirit is mainly meant to restore the gifts and power of 
Pentecost to the church. This will empower global mission 
before Christ’s imminent return. For these reasons, every 
believer is equipped to be both a priest and a prophet. At 
the beginning of the movement Pentecostals believed that the 
equipment with other tongues would allow them to preach 
in the languages of different nations (Robeck 2006:21).
The Pentecostal Movement has an aversion to creeds that 
divide churches and perceives that in many instances they 
hinder the mission of the church (Burger 1987:181). It does 
not want to become a church because church necessitates 
mechanisms and politics that negate the direct influence 
of the Spirit (Hayford 2006:44; Macchia 2010:249). Any 
organisation that does not have direct biblical precedent or 
hinder the free working of the sovereign Spirit should be 
avoided (Land 1993:7). Pentecostals ascribe to three forms of 
primitivism, namely an ecclesiastical primitivism that results 
in suspicion of man-made creeds and institutions (Durham 
2006:88); an ethical primitivism that provides them with an 
all-consuming passion for holiness (Hayford 2006:39); and 
an experiential primitivism that catalyses the other two and 
directs everything toward the imminent second coming of 
Jesus (Land 1993:51–52).
The movement exists in members testifying in worship 
services and amongst friends, worshipping and singing in 
worship and other settings, and partaking in worship services 
by ministering diverse gifts of the Spirit to the communion, 
creating an ethos of revivalistic, participatory, and populist-
oriented spirituality. Those baptised in the Spirit witness the 
good news, leading to an oral spirituality formed by worship, 
witness, and work (Land 1993:42).6 All believers are called 
and empowered to be witnesses.
The movement has an urgency to evangelise the world, 
expecting that it would hasten the second coming of Christ, as 
Mark 13:10 promises (Taylor 2006:70). The Spirit empowers 
the church (Ac 2:17–21) to preach the ‘gospel of the kingdom’ 
(Mt 24:14). The Spirit prepares the bride for the Bridegroom 
(Rv 21:9). The church lives from an apocalyptic expectation 
of the end of the known order (Seymour 2006:49).
When Pentecostals experience the eschatological power of 
the working of the Spirit, the restoration of the apostolic age, 
they look differently at the Scriptures, at themselves and at 
the world (Trask 1997:18). Whilst outsiders may focus on 
speaking in tongues as indicative of a whole movement of 
6.Land (1993:42) reminds that black spirituality provided the context for the origins 
of Pentecostalism and lists its characteristics as orality of liturgy; narrativity of 
theology and witness; maximum participation at the levels of reflection, prayer and 
decision making and therefore a form of community that is reconciliatory; inclusion 
of dreams and visions into spirituality; and an understanding of mind and body 
relationship informed by experiences of correspondence between mind and body, 
with the resultant ministry of healing by prayer (Lovett 1975:145–158).
irrational, hysterical protest by the illiterate and disinherited 
(Anderson 1979:59), if not evidence of demonisation (Johns 
2007:212; Ward 1975:99–111), the participants view their 
experience in apocalyptic revelatory terms. This becomes 
for them the driving force, rationale and galvanising vision 
of the entire movement (Faupel 1989:243). Speaking in 
tongues becomes the means to express the inexpressible in 
the eschatological language of the human heart and heaven 
(Land 1993:106). The Spirit has empowered them to share 
fully the life of the church of the apostles, the ‘church of 
Pentecost’.7 And the charismatic manifestations of tongues, 
healing, exorcism, and prophecy, are interpreted as signs 
that they are bringing in the last days.
The theological centre of pentecostal spirituality is for this 
reason not Spirit baptism or speaking in tongues, but the 
Gestalt of apocalyptic narrative of which Pentecostals saw 
themselves as being a significant part.8 It is the eschatological 
shift within the Wesleyan-Holiness Movement toward 
premillenialism that signals what is decisive (Lederle 
1988:16). Now everything is considered from the viewpoint 
of the imminent second coming of Christ. Everyday life and 
events become charged with cosmic significance because 
God is at work in everything.
One cannot understand pentecostal spirituality apart from 
exposure to the liturgical practices of worship and witness 
under the influence of the end times.
Missional constituent of pentecostal spirituality
The church does not exist for its own sake, but only as a 
missional structure for the spreading of the gospel (Bosch 
1991:368). For this reason, Pentecostals refer to themselves 
as a movement rather than a church. The first church that 
originated from the revival in Los Angeles was the Apostolic 
Faith Mission, with an emphasis on the primitivist desire 
to return to the apostolic message and power, faith as 
the means to receive salvation and the power of the Spirit 
and missionary work as the reason for the existence of the 
movement (McClung 1986:50). For this reason, Pentecostals 
focus neither exclusively on the right structure as Catholics 
do, nor the right message as Protestants do. The Christian life 
7.At first Pentecostals were sure that speaking in tongues would allow them to take 
the gospel to different nations speaking these different tongues, as happened in 
the early Church’s experience of Pentecost: … how is it that we hear, each of us 
in his own native language? Parthians and Medes and Elamites and residents of 
Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, 
Egypt and the parts of Libya belonging to Cyrene, and visitors from Rome, both Jews 
and proselytes, Cretans and Arabians − we hear them telling in our own tongues the 
mighty works of God (Ac 2:8–11; ESV). 
Believers need not learn the languages of the nations, the Spirit has already given 
them the ability to speak these languages. ‘… xenoglossolalic tongues enabled 
missionaries to proclaim the gospel in foreign languages never learned’ (Hayford 
2006:67). The idea was soon proved wrong (Land 1993:115).
8.Some Pentecostal researchers disgree and reason that the experience of the 
baptism of the Spirit and what followed it as the work or revelation of the Spirit 
was the starting and central points of pentecostal spirituality, and that this forms 
the source or basis of the understanding of pentecostal spirituality. This article 
disagrees with this viewpoint for historical and phenomenological reasons. 
Underlying the Pentecostal Movement are several revivalistic movements with 
strong theological traditions that were taken over and modified by the Pentecostals. 
And in studying pentecostal theology and practice it becomes clear that pentecostal 
spirituality cannot be reduced to one element, the baptism with the Spirit. Other 
elements played a role even before the 1906 Azusa street revival, like holiness and 
a lively expectation of the second coming interpreted in apocalyptic terms, and still 
influence the church alongside the emphasis on the priesthood of all believers and 
the importance of witnessing as a prerequisite for being a disciple of Christ.

Page 5 of 7
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
is rather interpreted in terms of ‘the experienced power and 
presence of the Holy Spirit today’ and neither orthodoxy, 
nor impeccability of succession can displace it (Newbigin 
1953:87).
Pentecostals have fundamental beliefs, as reflected in the 
respective creeds and statements of faith of the different 
denominations, but it is subordinate to their primitivist 
concern that the blessing of the Spirit will be restored in 
the church and their desire for apostolic faith, power, and 
manifestations of the Spirit amongst ordinary believers 
(Neumann 2012:200). The presence of the Spirit constitutes 
the church and the reason for the existence of the church is 
to be the Spirit-empowered agent of power to proclaim the 
gospel to all nations (Wacker 2001:9–14).
The Spirit baptism is interpreted as the sign of the dawn of 
the last of the last days (McDonnell 1973:45). The church 
is a living organism of charisms and signs living to fulfil 
the urgent missional task associated with the last days. 
Confidence in the Spirit’s power and the expectation of 
visible results of the Spirit’s work have the benefit of often 
leading Pentecostals to adopt a bold entrepreneurial attitude 
and a willingness to initiate new missional endeavours in 
creative ways (Albrecht 1999:250).
Pentecostals do not set dates for the second coming, though 
they expect it to be soon. What the imminent second coming 
calls for is the preaching of the gospel to all nations and 
getting the bride ready for her wedding with the heavenly 
Bridegroom. This implies that the church becomes a 
missionary fellowship where members testify constantly in 
order to develop in hearers the virtues, expectancy, attitudes, 
and experiences of those testifying (Land 1993:73). Listening 
to and partaking in the testimonies involve all participants 
in a praxis of theological reflection that is relevant for the 
existence of the church in the world.9
Affective constituent of pentecostal spirituality
‘Experience of God’ forms an important part of pentecostal-
speak, implying that Pentecostals believe that the Spirit is 
intimately involved in creation and the lives of believers in 
a way that can be palpably experienced or felt (Neumann 
2012:196–197). This is the reason why Land (1993:13) argues 
that pentecostal experience of God should be interpreted as 
located primarily in the affective dimension of human beings. 
For Pentecostals, their experience of God through the Spirit 
is the point of departure for spirituality (Neumann 2012:196). 
Spirituality requires not only discursive reasoning, but the 
engagement of the whole person within the communion 
where each individual is equipped with unique charisms 
‘for the common good’ (1 Cor 12:7). The community of Spirit 
and Word functions as a worshipping, witnessing whole 
with the liturgical life at its heart. Everybody is encouraged 
9.Even after 100 years, the imminent return of Christ remains a motivating force for 
Pentecostals. In addition, Pentecostalism’s unquestioned success in cross-cultural 
missions is tied to their unequivocal commitment to signs, wonders, and spiritual 
gifts as central to the proclamation of the gospel (Hayford 2006:84).
to partake directly in the liturgical life by singing heartily 
along, witnessing, prophesying, speaking in tongues and 
interpreting it, et cetera. Worship becomes the ‘vehicle for 
the theology’ whilst theology serves as a commentary on the 
worship that is the central reality (Ranaghan 1974:201).
Pentecostals 
find 
an 
‘arid, 
rationalistic, 
formalistic, 
unemotional, 
non-experiential 
and 
non-charismatic 
approach to religious life’ unacceptable (Wheelock 1983:334), 
in contrast to what they perceive reformed spirituality to 
be comprised of (Hayford 2006:33). The early Pentecostal 
Movement derived its vitality from the African-American 
culture’s emphasis on the non-conceptual aspects of life 
in religion and believed that the whole person should 
be involved in the process of religious devotion (Robeck 
2006:12). The experiential component is perceived as a 
natural element and enthusiastic involvement as a fitting 
modality of religious expression (Wheelock 1983:336). 
Theology is not practiced in the traditional way; the media of 
theology becomes sermons, pamphlets, hymns, testimonies, 
conferences, revival campaigns, and spirituals. Theology 
begins in people’s prayerful response to God; the first and 
basic act of theological work is prayer (Barth 1963:160–164). 
The object of theological reflection is a relationship, humans 
encountering God through his Spirit, making theology a 
dialectical endeavour.
For Pentecostals to do theology is not to make experience 
the norm, but to recognise the epistemological priority of the 
Spirit in prayerful receptivity (Land 1993:27). By encountering 
the Spirit in the same apostolic experience as that which is 
described in Scripture, one stands in pneumatic continuity 
with the faith community that birthed the Scriptures (Erwin 
1981:22).
It is not unusual to find emotional reactions as a part of 
pentecostal worship experiences, whether in the communion 
or privately, where believers laugh and cry, dance and wait 
in stillness, weep in remorse or joy.10 Corporate, interactive 
worship is deeply felt and easily observable, and encouraged 
in the typical pentecostal worship service. The gifts of the 
Spirit – especially prophecy, speaking in tongues and its 
interpretation, a word of wisdom and a word of knowledge, 
gifts of healing, and powers – form an integral part of this 
spirituality.
People respond to the preaching of the Word in an affective 
way. If a pentecostal congregation is not responsive to a 
preacher, it means that they perceive him or her as not anointed 
with the Spirit or not preaching the true Word. The pentecostal 
communion expects to possess corporate discernment, 
sensitivity and receptivity to the work of the Spirit in 
their midst (Clark & Lederle 1989:100). The participation of 
10.A by-product of the allowance of emotional elements is that persons with 
emotional problems are attracted to pentecostal worship services where their 
emotional outbursts are sometimes appreciated as signs of a special anointing of 
the Spirit. The long term effect of their contributions to the worship service and life 
of the pentecostal assembly proves the risk of allowing any person to contribute 
to the edification of the body of Christ as an important element of the priesthood 
of all believers.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
Page 6 of 7
Original Research
the assembly in evaluating the proclamation is an 
important and vital element in pentecostal spirituality and 
presupposes spiritual maturity in members participating in 
the evaluation.
In practice, the distinction between laity and professional 
clergy is not clear, with all members participating in the 
liturgy, including males and females, and all races, classes 
and age groups. Each is called upon to worship, witness, 
manifest the graces and gifts of the Spirit, and preach the 
Word; prophecy is perceived as a timely Word given by God to 
an individual for another person or the communion (Robeck 
1988:738). Women also pray and preach, lead in worship and 
anoint the ill, speak in tongues and help in all phases of the 
ministry in the pentecostal spirituality. This has been the case 
since the inception of the Pentecostal Movement.11
Corporate participation through worship and witness and 
the practice of the gifts of the Spirit create room for an oral 
liturgy that forms an essential part of pentecostal spirituality 
(Hollenweger 1986:553). Music plays an important role in the 
celebration by expressing, directing, and deepening the joy 
experienced in the presence of the Lord. The rhythmic and 
repetitive nature of much of the singing reflects the joyful 
celebration and enables believers to further utilise the songs 
in their daily walk in order to practice the presence of God. 
The sentimental value of some songs allows participants 
to express deeply felt emotions for God and their fellow 
believers. The movement also uses hymns of revivalism, 
inherited from the Holiness Movement and the Wesleyan 
Renewal. These songs are still used to wake up fervour for 
lost souls (Spittler 1988:807). Many songs contain a testimony, 
an exhortation or chronicle of the journey to heaven.
The body is also incorporated in the act of worship, with 
believers dancing, lifting their hands, clapping their hands 
for joy, clasping and clenching hands with fellow believers, 
and bodies swaying in the wind of the Spirit.
Again, the goal of the experience is not in the experience 
itself, but in the life-transformation experienced because of 
the religious encounter with God. Pentecostals expect and 
emphasise frequent encounters with the Spirit that radically 
transform their broader Christian experience and spirituality 
(cf., for example Johns 2007:211–214 for a discussion). 
These encounters are described in terms of Spirit baptism, 
implying being immersed in or overwhelmed by the Spirit. 
Even though charismatics and Neo-Pentecostals would not 
necessarily articulate the experience of Spirit baptism in the 
same way as do Classical Pentecostals (Lederle 1988:37), their 
encounters are also experienced as radically transformational 
and personal (Stewart 2012:107).
These encounters explain why Pentecostals emphasise 
prayer as central to their spirituality, where God is close 
11.The Pentecostal Movement since 1906 ‘recognizes the ministry of women as 
legitimate and as equal with that of men. This was an important witness over claims 
by fundamentalists, evangelicals, historic Protestants, Catholics, and Orthodox 
alike, that women are simply to be “silent in the church”’ (Robeck 2006:25).
to them and responds to their requests. It accounts also for 
corporate worship that is participatory and celebrative, 
inviting spontaneous and tangible expressions incorporating 
the human being in a holistic way. Spirituality involves 
the entire human person in all its dimensions – physical, 
emotional, mental, and social, as exemplified in the corporate 
pentecostal 
worship 
setting 
(Albrecht 
1999:237–251). 
Worshippers respond to the Spirit’s presence and activity in 
their midst by exhibiting the whole range of manifestations 
of spiritual gifts, with exuberant celebratory praise, upraised 
hands, singing, shouting, clapping, dancing, laying on of 
hands in prayer for healing or Spirit baptism (Neumann 
2012:199). In this way, experience enjoys priority within 
pentecostal spirituality and only by understanding this 
priority can the other features of pentecostal spirituality be 
understood (Hocken 1988:147).
Synthesis
Spirituality is defined as the acts and sentiments that are 
informed by the values and beliefs of a religious community. 
The four major constitutive elements of these beliefs and 
values in terms of a pentecostal spirituality described in the 
article are the following:
•	 The Bible is constitutive of their spirituality and it is 
utilised in conjunction with and within the context of the 
sovereign work of the Spirit.
•	 Secondly, as a revivalist, restorationist, and primitivist 
movement of awakening, the Pentecostal Movement 
perceives itself in apocalyptic terms as it embodies the 
eschatological turmoil and tensions of premillennial 
revivalism.
•	 Thirdly, Pentecostals view the reason for the existence of 
the movement not for its own sake, but as a missional 
structure existing for the sole purpose of spreading the 
gospel.
•	 And lastly, Pentecostals believe that the Spirit is intimately 
involved in creation and the lives of believers in a way that 
can be palpably experienced or felt, and for this reason 
pentecostal experience of God should be interpreted as 
being located primarily in the affective dimension of 
the human being. Experience of God through the Spirit 
and constituted by the Bible, is the point of departure 
for spirituality, requiring the engagement of the whole 
person within the communion.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Albrecht, D.E., 1999, Rites in the Spirit: A ritual approach to pentecostal/charismatic 
spirituality, Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield.
Anderson, R.M., 1979, Vision of the disinherited: The making of American 
Pentecostalism, Hendrickson, Peabody.
Asamoah-Gyadu, J.K., 2013, Contemporary pentecostal Christianity: Interpretations 
from an African context, Wipf & Stock, Eugene.

Page 7 of 7
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1864
Aune, D.E., Geddert, T.J. & Evans, C.E., 2000, ‘Apocalypticism’, in C.A. Evans & S.E. 
Porter, Dictionary of New Testament background: A compendium of contemporary 
biblical scholarship, pp. 45–58, InterVarsity, Downers Grove.
Barrett, D.B., 1988, ‘Statistics, global’, in S.M. Burgess & G.B. McGee (eds.), Dictionary 
of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements, pp. 810–830, Zondervan, Grand 
Rapids.
Barth, K., 1963, Evangelical theology: An introduction, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New 
York.
Bartleman, F., 1980, Azusa street meeting, Bridge, South Plainsfield.
Bloesch, D.G., 2000, The Holy Spirit: Works and gifts, InterVarsity, Downers Grove.
Bosch, D.J., 1991, Transforming mission: Paradigm shifts in theology of mission, Orbis, 
New York.
Brueggemann, W. & Sharp, C.J., 2012, Living countertestimony: Conversations with 
Walter Brueggemann, Westminster John Knox, Louisville.
Burger, I.S. v.d.M., 1987, Die geskiedenis van die Apostoliese Geloof Sending van Suid-
Afrika (1908–1958), D.D.-proefskrif, Fakulteit Teologie, Universiteit van Pretoria, 
Evangelie Uitgewers.
Carey, G., 2005, Ultimate things: An introduction to Jewish and Christian apocalyptic 
literature, Chalice, St. Louis.
Clark, M.S. & Lederle, H.I., 1989, What is distinctive about pentecostal theology?, 
University of South Africa, Pretoria. (Miscellanea Specialia 1).
Dayton, D.W., 1987, Theological roots of Pentecostalism, Hendrickson, Peabody.
Duffield, G.P. & Van Cleave, N.M., 1983, Foundations of pentecostal theology, L.I.F.E. 
Bible College, Los Angeles.
Durham, W.H., 2006, ‘Pentecostal testimony (1910–1912)’, in D. Jacobsen (ed.), 
A reader in pentecostal theology: Voices from the first generation, pp. 81–94, 
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Erwin, H.M., 1981, ‘Hermeneutics: A pentecostal option’, Pneuma 3(2), 22.
Faupel, D.W., 1989, ‘The everlasting gospel: The significance of eschatology in the 
development of pentecostal thought’, PhD dissertation, Faculty of Theology, 
University of Birmingham.
Faupel, D.W., 1996, The everlasting gospel: The significance of eschatology in the 
development of pentecostal thought, Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield. (Journal 
for Pentecostal Theology Supplement 10).
Grant, M., 1977, Jesus, Rigel, London.
Hammonds, R., 2009, The Pentecostal Movement, AuthorHouse, Bloomington.
Hayford, J., 2006, The charismatic century: The enduring impact of the Azusa street 
revival, Hachette Book, New York.
Hocken, P.D., ‘Charismatic Movement’, in S.M. Burgess, & G.B. McGee (eds.), 
Dictionary of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements, pp. 130–160, Zondervan, 
Grand Rapids.
Hollenweger, W.J., 1986, ‘Pentecostal and Charismatic’, in C. Jones, G. Wainwright & 
E. Yarnold (eds.), The study of spirituality, pp. 512–555, Oxford University Press, 
New York.
Johns, K.D., 2007, ‘The pentecostal paradigm: A seductive paradise’, viewed 08 Nov. 
2014, from http://bookstore.xlibris.com
Jones, J.W., 1975, The Spirit and the Word, Hawthorn, New York.
Käsemann, E., 1969, New Testament questions of today, SCM, London.
Keener, C.S., 2009, The historical Jesus of the Gospels, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Land, S.J., 1993, Pentecostal spirituality: A passion for the kingdom, Cherohala Press 
Imprint (CPT), Cleveland.
Lategan, B., 2007, ‘Reception criticism’, in A. du Toit (ed.), Focusing on the message: 
New Testament hermeneutics, exegesis and methods, pp. 457–484, Protea Book 
House, Pretoria.
Lederle, H.I., 1988, Treasures old and new: Interpretations of ‘Spirit-baptism’ in the 
Charismatic Renewal Movement, Hendrickson, Peabody.
Lovett, L., 1975, ‘Black origins of Pentecostalism’, in V. Synan (ed.), Aspects of 
pentecostal-charismatic origins, pp. 145–158, Logos, Plainfield.
MacArthur, J.F., 1992, Charismatic chaos, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
MacArthur, J.F., 1994, Reckless faith: When the church loses its will to discern, 
Crossway, Wheaton.
Macchia, F.D., 2006, ‘The kingdom and the power’, in M. Welker (ed.), The work of the 
Spirit: Pneumatology and Pentecostalism, pp. 101–119, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Macchia, F.D., 2010, ‘The church of the latter rain: The church and eschatology in 
pentecostal perspective’, in J.C. Thomas (ed.), Toward a pentecostal ecclesiology: 
The church and the fivefold gospel, Cherohala Press Imprint (CPT), Cleveland.
McClung, L.G., 1986, ‘Introduction – Truth on fire: Pentecostals and an urgent 
missiology’, in L.G. McClung (ed.), Azusa street and beyond: Pentecostal missions 
and church growth in the twentieth century, pp. 47–54, Bridge, South Plainfield.
McDonnell, K., 1973, ‘The experiential and the social: New models from the 
pentecostal Roman Catholic dialogue’, One in Christ 9, 43–58.
McLean, M.D., 1984, ‘Toward a pentecostal hermeneutic’, Pneuma 6(2), 35–52. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/157007484X00086
Möller, F.P., 1997, ‘Christ and Pentecostalism’, in P.J. Gräbe & W.J. Hattingh (eds.), The 
reality of the Holy Spirit in the church: In honour of F.P. Möller, pp. 140–144, Van 
Schaik, Pretoria.
Moore, R.D., 1992, ‘Canon and charisma in the book of Deuteronomy’, Journal of 
Pentecostal Theology 1, 75–92. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/096673699200100106
Nel, M., 1992, ‘Die leerstelling van goddelike genesing soos dit in die Apostoliese 
Geloof Sending van Suid-Afrika ontwikkel het: ’n Kerkhistoriese perspektief’, 
DD-proefskrif, Fakulteit Teologie, Universiteit van Pretoria.
Neumann, P.D., 2012, ‘Spirituality’, in A. Stewart (ed.), Handbook of pentecostal 
spirituality, pp. 195–201, Northern Illinois University (NIU), DeKalb.
Neville, D.J., 2008, ‘Moral vision and eschatology in Mark’s Gospel: Coherence or 
conflict?’, Journal of Biblical Literature 127(2), 359–384.
Newbigin, L., 1953, The household of God, SCM, London.
Ranaghan, K.M., 1974, ‘Rites of initiation in representative pentecostal churches in 
the United States, 1901–1972’, PhD dissertation, Faculty of Theology, University 
of Notre Dame.
Robeck, C.M., 1988, ‘Prophecy, gift of’, in S.M. Burgess & G.B. McGee (eds.), 
Dictionary of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements, pp. 728–740, Zondervan, 
Grand Rapids.
Robeck, C.M., 2006, The Azusa street mission and revival: The birth of the global 
Pentecostal Movement, Nelson, Nashville.
Seymour, W.J., 1906, ‘Editorial’, The Apostolic Faith 1(3), 1.
Seymour, W.J., 1907, ‘Christ abides in sanctification’, The Apostolic Faith 1(9), 2.
Seymour, W.J., 2006, ‘The doctrines and disciplines of the Azusa street Apostolic 
Mission of Los Angeles, Cal. with scripture readings’, in D. Jacobsen (ed.), A reader 
in pentecostal theology: Voices from the first generation, pp. 45–56, Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington.
Spittler, R.P., 1988, ‘Spirituality, pentecostal and charismatic’, in S.M. Burgess & G.B. 
McGee (eds.), Dictionary of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements, pp. 804–
809, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Stewart, A., 2012, ‘Hebden mission’, in A. Stewart (ed.), Handbook of pentecostal 
spirituality, pp. 103–108, NIU, DeKalb.
Sulllivan, F.A., 1988, ‘Catholic charismatic renewal’, in S.M. Burgess & G.B. McGee 
(eds.), Dictionary of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements, pp. 110–126, 
Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Sykes, J.B., 1976, The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.
Tabor, J.D., 2007, ‘Standing in the shadow of Schweitzer: What can we say about an 
apocalyptic Jesus?’, The Review of the Committee for the Scientific Examination of 
Religion 2(1), 8–10.
Taylor, G.F., 1907, ‘The Spirit and the Bride: A scriptural presentation of the operations, 
manifestation, gifts and fruit of the Holy Spirit in his relationship to the Bride with 
special reference to the ‘Latter Rain’ revival’, viewed 17 Dec. 2013, from http://
pctii.org/arc/taylor_bk.html
Taylor, G.F., 2006, ‘The second coming of Christ’, in D. Jacobsen (ed.), A reader 
in pentecostal theology: Voices from the first generation, pp. 57–70, Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington.
Trask, T.E., 1997, ‘Introduction: Priorities in the pastor’s life’, in T.E. Trask, W.I. Goodall 
& Z.J. Bicket (eds.), The pentecostal pastor: A mandate for the 21st century, Gospel 
Publishing House (GPH), Springfield.
Wacker, G., 2001, Heaven below: Early Pentecostalism and American culture, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge.
Ward, H., 1975, ‘The anti-pentecostal argument’, in V. Synan (ed.), Aspects of 
pentecostal-charismatic origins, pp. 99–111, Logos, Plainfield.
Wheelock, D.R., 1983, ‘Spirit-Baptism in American pentecostal thought’, PhD 
dissertation, Faculty of Theology, Emory University.