Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Renewal and reconstruction: Holy Writ in 
Ezra-Nehemiah – A missional reading
Author:
Bob Wielenga1
Affiliation:
1Gereformeerde Sending, 
Richmond, KwaZulu-Natal, 
South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Bob Wielenga 
Email: 
wielenga@pmburg.co.za
Postal address: 
PO Box 13229, Cascades 
3202, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 27 Jan. 2012
Accepted: 05 July 2012
Published: 10 May 2013
How to cite this article:
Wielenga, B., 2013, ‘Renewal 
and reconstruction: Holy 
Writ in Ezra-Nehemiah – A 
missional reading’, In die 
Skriflig/In Luce Verbi 47(1), 
Art. #72, 9 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v47i1.72
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
In this article we investigate the missional potential of the two-volume book of Ezra-Nehemiah. 
We contend that the written word of God is a transforming power in society through the 
mediation of the church. This implies that spiritual renewal precedes social reconstruction. 
We examine this book historically, canonically and exegetically to lay a foundation for a 
missiological reflection on the results of this excursion in the field of biblical studies. We 
close with the formulation of some missional conclusions that serve as guidelines for the 
development of a relevant theology of mission. 
Introduction
In this article we want to probe the missional potential of the two-volume book of Ezra-Nehemiah 
(EN).1 At first glance the book seems to describe a postexilic, exclusivist community under threat 
of losing its ethnic identity in the Persian Empire. Its central notions of holiness, ritual purity and 
the policy of separation give the impression that the people closed ranks against a hostile world 
in order to survive as God’s chosen people, his holy seed (Ezr 9:2) with their own language intact 
(Neh 13:23). The modern reader tends to discover here the beginnings of Jewish fundamentalism, 
with Jewish Zionism as its political heir (Wielenga 1990:258–291). Still, a close reading of the 
text shows that EN also has missional potential for our own times. We focus on one of three 
interrelated themes running through this book (Eskenazi 1988): the transforming power of God’s 
written word, as contained in the ‘book’ of the Law of Moses, in renewing and restoring the 
postexilic community in the context of an oral, nonliterate culture. We therefore go into the 
orality-literacy debate with regard to Judah during the Second Temple period. We continue by 
summarizing the history of postexilic Judah, focusing on the role that Ezra and Nehemiah played 
in it. We then discuss the impact of God’s written word, as contained in the ‘book’ of the Law of 
Moses, on the community of Jews returned from exile (golah). Having reflected on the outcome of 
our study missiologically, we will close with formulating some missional-relevant conclusions.2 
In our deliberations we bear in mind that Ezra-Nehemiah played a role in the development of a 
theology of reconstruction in Southern Africa from the early 1990s onward (Villa-Vicencio 1992; 
Farisani 2002). 
The historical context
One book, two volumes
We first have to clarify our understanding of EN as part of the canonical, Christian Bible with its 
kerygmatic unity centred in Jesus Christ (Wielenga 1992). We follow recent research (Eskenazi 
1988:1–36), which treats EN as a literary unit on its own terms; not in isolation from Chronicles, 
but clearly distinct from it. In EN we find theologised historiography (Davies 1999:128; Eskenazi 
1988:7). It is a literary construct, grown out of various traditions (Wright 2004), but it is nevertheless 
a structurally unified work through which three interlinked themes are running, one of which we 
are studying in this article (Eskenazi 1988:184; Grabbe 1998:93). 
1.From here onward we use EN as abbreviation of the book Ezra-Nehemiah.
2.In this article we focus on the missional reading of EN. The New Testament and missiological sections do not receive a full treatment; 
they play a secondary role to form the background against which the missional potential of EN can be highlighted. 
Page 1 of 9
Vernuwing en rekonstruksie: Heilige Skrif in Esra-Nehemia – ’n Missionêre lesing. In hierdie 
artikel ondersoek ons die missionêre moontlikhede van die tweedelige boek Esra-Nehemia. 
Ons stel dat die geskrewe woord van God ’n hervormende krag in die samelewing is deur 
die bemiddeling van die kerk. Dit impliseer dat geestelike vernuwing sosiale rekonstruksie 
voorafgaan. Ons doen historiese, kanoniese en eksegetiese ondersoek na die boek om ’n 
grondslag te lê vir ’n missiologiese beskouing van die resultate van hierdie ekskursie in die 
Bybelwetenskapveld. Ons sluit af met die formulering van missionêre gevolgtrekkings om te 
dien as wegwysers vir die ontwikkeling van ’n toepaslike sendingsteologie. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Judah after the exile
It is important to realise that the Persian province of Judah 
(Yehud) contained a very reduced area after the exile, 
covering approximately 1700 square kilometres with at 
most 30 000 inhabitants living in a radius of 15 kilometres 
around Jerusalem (Lipschits 2003:364). It was economically 
impoverished and dependent on foreign trade. Socially it 
was vulnerable with weak external boundaries. Politically 
and militarily it was firmly ruled top-down by the Persian 
administration and had to carry heavy tax burdens 
(Vanderhooft 2003:235–284; Berquist 2008:43). The return 
of the Jews from exile was in support of imperial policies. 
The restart of the temple-building project during the reign 
of Darius I (522–486 BC) was allowed in order to bolster the 
stability at its western border with rebellious Egypt (Berquist 
1995:24, 110). The return of Ezra and Nehemiah during the 
reign of Artaxerxes I (465–442 BC) happened while Persia was 
campaigning against Egypt, which was assisted by Greece 
(Miller & Hayes 1986:464). Their mission had to benefit above 
all Persian imperial interests. Let us note as well that there is 
no evidence in EN of Jewish insurgence on any level against 
the Persian overlords (cf. Horsley 2004:109–117). In EN, 
the golah used the space the Persian Empire allocated them 
for renewal and reconstruction of their own community 
according to their own convictions, while staying below the 
searching radar of their imperial overlords. 
Pre-exilic worldview
It also needs to be noted that in postexilic Judah the pre-exilic 
worldview (Wielenga 2007:72), discredited by the 586 BC 
disaster, had to be renewed in line with the faith traditions of 
old. Fundamental expressions of faith (such as the invincibility 
of Jerusalem, the indestructability of the temple on Mount 
Zion, the lastingness of the Davidic monarchy and the 
unbreakable covenant relationship between a chosen nation 
and a God who was favouring her above all nations) had not 
survived the calamity of the exile. At the same time, instigated 
by exilic prophets like Deutero-Isaiah and Ezekiel, postexilic 
prophets like Trito-Isaiah, Haggai, Zecheriah and Malachi 
proclaimed the return of God to Zion, where he would be 
found again by the returned Jews and even by Gentile 
nations joining them in common worship. EN describes the 
reconstitution of a temple-centred community that is called 
to live a holy life according to the standards of Mosaic Law 
and that is separated from foreigners with their idolatrous 
influences. One of the hallmarks of the postexilic community 
is therefore its resistance to people who were suspected of 
idolatrous or, at best, syncretistic worship in spite of their 
ethnic kinship. 
Written words in an oral world
Studying the impact of God’s written word in postexilic 
Judah, we should have some idea of the nature of an ancient 
nonliterate society such as Judah was. Much study has been 
done concerning such oral cultures, including those in the 
ancient Near East (Ong 1982; Havelock 1986; Niditch 1996; 
Van der Toorn 2007; Horsley 2007). We mention some of 
its characteristics.
Scribal dominance
In a society where only one per cent of the population before 
seventh century BC could read (Schniedewind 2004:98), 
the rise of a class of professional readers and writers is 
understandable. These scribes, trained in wisdom circles 
as advisers and administrators, and thoroughly familiar 
with the cultural and religious traditions of Israel (Horsley 
2007:71–87), were mostly in the employment of the royal 
court (Schniedewind 2004:98) or the temple (Van der Toorn 
2007:82). In particular, the Levitical scribes composed, 
copied, transmitted and explained the religious texts of the 
pre-exilic traditions. Written texts had a strong influence 
in an oral world, even if the people could not read those 
texts for themselves (Polaski 2007:37). In EN, royal decrees, 
imperial letters and administrative lists as written texts had 
absolute authority over the people and decided the course of 
postexilic history (Ska 2001:171). 
Authority of oral texts
What Ong (1982) and Niditch (1996) write about the oral 
mode of written texts in nonliterate cultures is crucial 
for understanding the impact of God’s written word in 
EN. Many of the texts found in the Torah were first orally 
composed and only later written down, but the oral origin of 
these written texts is still clearly evident. The voice of the one 
who spoke the texts in the first place was still discernible; its 
authority derived from the speaker behind the written words 
(Ong 1982:78). In Nehemiah 8 the people heard the voice 
of God speaking through the words read out to them. Of 
course, the writing down of oral traditions created a certain 
distance between the divine Speaker and his audience, 
which necessitated the intervention of temple scribes to read, 
translate and explain the divine message in the texts. 
Oral–aural community
An important point, made by Ong (1982:72), is that the 
hearing of sound has a unifying, centralising and interiorising 
economy. Reading, based on seeing words, objectifies a text 
and makes its readers into separate individuals. Sight isolates; 
sound incorporates. Listening together to the presentation of 
oral or written traditions binds people in nonliterate cultures 
together into a community, as can be seen in Nehemiah 8. 
Reading out loud from the ‘book’ of the Law of Moses received 
a unanimous response. The preservation of oral traditions 
can only be maintained in stable, homogeneous societies 
that are not in rapid change caused by crises (Ska 2001:173). 
In a crisis-ridden society like postexilic Judah’s there is a 
need to textualise the oral traditions in order to provide an 
authoritative basis for the safeguarding of its identity, even 
if the people only had access to the text through the scribes. 
The crisis postexilic Judah suffered
It is important to understand the crisis postexilic Judah 
suffered according to EN. First of all, we contend that this 
Page 2 of 9

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 9
crisis was not of a socio-political or ethnic nature, but rather of 
a theological nature.3 It is surprising that EN pays scarcely, if at 
all, attention to the socio-political circumstances of the people 
on the ground, considering the realities of their situation 
(cf. Horsley 2008; Berquist 2008). The confrontation with the 
enemies from within and without is basically described as a 
spiritual one. Those socio-economic factors must have also 
played a role in this conflict (Wielenga 1990:76–85; Farisani 
2002), but it does not show in the text. EN intentionally writes a 
depoliticised, spiritual-religious narrative about the postexilic 
community in line with the exilic prophecies of Deutero-Isaiah 
(Is 44:24–45:8) and Ezekiel (Ezk 40–48). In these prophecies 
the emphasis is on God’s supreme power in history to fulfil 
his own plans with the representative remnant of Israel. The 
political events in general history are integrated in salvation 
history in theological fashion (Westermann 1969:154). EN 
is interpreting imperial history from a salvation historical 
perspective. We point out the following.
No restoration of the monarchy
In all probability, the Persian province of Judah (Yehud) was 
an own political unit with its own governors in the satrapy 
beyond the river (Rose 2000; Carter 1994). Governors, like 
Ezra and Nehemiah, were Persian loyalists, otherwise they 
would not have been able to exercise their power and to put 
their own programs into action. There is no evidence that the 
restoration of the Davidic monarchy was in view; the Davidic 
scion Zerubbabel disappears from the scene unnoticed (Rose 
2000:33–36). Moreover, after the exile the future of the royal 
House of David was perceived as an eschatological (Hg 2:23) 
and not a political reality (Kessler 2002:63; 229).
Syncretism the divisive factor
Right from the beginning (Ezr 3:4; 4:1) the golah was met 
with resistance from enemies. These were excluded from 
joining them in rebuilding the temple and altar. Later on, in 
the time of Nehemiah, they were excluded from joining in 
the reconstruction of the city walls. Ethnically these enemies 
were partly related to the Judaeans, descending from the 
Northern tribes that were sent into exile in 722 BC by the 
Assyrians (2 Ki 17) and who remained in the land during the 
years of the Babylonian exile. It could be argued that many 
pre-exilic Judaeans also did not go into exile and remained 
behind, taking possession of the properties of their exiled 
compatriots (Wielenga 1990:76–85; Farisani 2002:188–190). 
They continued to worship in the ruined city during the 
exile, counselled by remaining Levites as their pastors 
(Wielenga 2007:71). Opponents of Nehemiah, like Tobiah 
and Sanballat, were ethnically linked with these non-exilic 
Israelites and Judaeans (Knoppers 2007:305–331) and were 
of Jahwistic orientation. Therefore, the leading opponents 
could, without much ado, marry into the families of the 
remigrants before the arrival of Ezra. The tensions between 
someone like Nehemiah and his opponents are not described 
in socio-political terms by EN, even if there should have been 
3.Farisani (2002:255) follows Brett (1996:11) and Smith-Christopher (1996:124) in 
describing the crisis as an ethnic conflict between golah and the people left behind 
in Judah during exile. 
reasons for doing so. Only a theological reason is decisive in 
EN: they are perceived as ritually unclean; their professed 
adherence to the God of Israel is not accepted as genuine. 
Their allegiance to God is seen as mired in syncretism. 
Magen (2007:188) points out that a temple dedicated to 
the God of Israel was discovered on Mount Gerizim near 
Samaria. Sanballat I, governor of Samaria, built it in line with 
the pre-exilic traditions of Northern-Israel.4 EN singles out 
theological reasons for separating from their ethnically related 
kinsmen and others, which underscores its core message: the 
golah had to be a temple-centered, Torah-based community 
in Jerusalem dedicated to the God of the fathers in line with 
the pre-exilic faith traditions of old if they wanted to survive 
the postexilic situation with their God-given identity intact. 
However, EN did not completely exclude the ethnic Israelites 
and Judaeans who had remained behind in the land from 
joining the ranks of the golah. If they joined ranks with them 
spiritually, like prophets such as Obadiah and Haggai did 
(Van der Woude 1982; Raabe 1995), and supported the claims 
of the golah theologically, they were welcomed. They had to 
buy into the claim that the golah was the true Israel of God.5 
Servants of the Lord
As far as the missions of Ezra and Nehemiah are concerned, 
we find the same intentional depoliticisation at work 
mentioned above. Both leaders were granted great political 
powers by their royal master with regard to stabilising the 
province in line with imperial interests of the time. But, in 
EN’s presentation of the facts, neither Ezra nor Nehemiah 
seemed to have used those powers in solving the problems 
in Jerusalem. Eskenazi (1988:62) points out that in the crisis 
of mixed marriages with foreign women, Ezra is not the one 
to take the initiative, but the people themselves. Ezra plays a 
background role as intercessor in a religious-spiritual crisis; 
his contribution as specialist in Torah studies is stressed. 
Nehemiah, in comparison with Ezra, seemed to have been a 
much more forceful leader, using his authority as governor 
in the crises he faced (Neh 5; 13). But even he is depicted as a 
man not on a political mission in service of his royal master, 
but on a religious-spiritual one in service of his heavenly 
Lord. This is illuminated by his prayers, which intersperse 
the text of the narrative from beginning to end. 
The ‘book’ of the Law of Moses
We concentrate on the ‘book’ of the Law of Moses,6 which 
Ezra took with him from Persia. We leave out the technical 
discussion about the question of whether or not this ‘book’ 
contained the Pentateuch as we find it today canonically in 
our modern Bibles.7 We contend that it is plausible that Ezra 
took a written version of the Law of Moses (Torah) with him 
4.Becking (2007:213–222) cautions against too strong conclusions with regard to 
Sanballat I as temple builder, but the presence of this temple supports EN’s contention 
that the opponents were not faithful to the pre-exilic faith traditions. Its resistance 
was not ideologically, but theologically informed.
 
5.See Isaiah 57:3–13; 65:1–7 for the influence of pre-exilic patterns of syncretism in 
postexilic Judah.
 
6.See Ezra 6:18; 7:14; Nehemiah 8:1,14, etc.
7.See Grabbe (2001); Horsley (2007); Williamson (1987); Ska (2001).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 9
to Jerusalem. It must have been a version not completely 
different from the one we are used to in our modern Bibles 
today. Variations between different versions are to be 
expected in an oral culture as Israel’s was (Niditch 1996:95). 
Let us also realise that the use of the Torah in the postexilic 
situation was not based on a strict, literalistic interpretation 
of the written text. One did not quote written documents in 
ancient times, as we do today; they were used in recitation 
in public assemblies to communicate its message. Scribes 
recited the texts that they already knew by heart; trained as 
they were in memorizing the ancient, oral traditions (Horsley 
2007:101). The ‘book’ of the Law of Moses was not there to 
be authoritatively quoted from. It was there as a witness to 
the authority of the orally transmitted traditions of the Law 
of Moses (Horsley 2007:98). One cited from memory the 
orally cultivated knowledge of the Torah. It is not possible 
to ascertain with absolute certainty from the canonical 
Pentateuch the exact identity of the ‘book’ of the Law of 
Moses, but we contend that our access to Ezra’s Law of 
Moses through the canonical Pentateuch seems, all by all, to 
be reliable enough.
The emphasis on the written version of the Torah makes 
sense in the postexilic situation. In the crisis-ridden society of 
postexilic Judah there was a strong need for an authoritative, 
theological basis, built upon the faith traditions of old. 
Those could be found in the ‘book’ of the Law of Moses, 
the mediator of God’s revelation on Mount Horeb, which 
bore the stamp of divine authority. The people received 
the written form of the Torah with reverence and fear (Neh 
8). From Ezra’s arrival onwards, the written Torah played 
a decisive role in the unfolding of the events, propelling 
history forward (Davies 1999:111; Eskenazi 1988:59, 88), even 
though the orally transmitted Torah traditions remained 
in use throughout the Second Temple period. It becomes 
the reference point for Israel’s faith (Davies 1999:112). The 
postexilic community was structured by the authoritative 
word of God as textualised in Ezra’s ‘book’ of the Law of 
Moses (Eskenazi 1988:96). The hallmark of belonging to the 
people of God from now on becomes obedience to the Law as 
taught in the Jerusalem temple by the Levitical scribes.
The transforming power of God’s 
written word
Parallels with the first exodus
EN stresses the correspondence between the exodus from 
Egypt, as narrated in the Pentateuch, and the return from 
Babylon. Already in the royal decree of Cyrus (Ezr 1:4), edited 
by Jewish hands in the imperial office, we find a reference to 
Exodus 12:35. Just like the exodus generation was given the 
spoils of the Egyptians, so the golah generation was presented 
with the spoils of the Babylonians. That they, as first priority, 
rebuilt the altar and restarted the sacrificial ministry, reminds 
us of Moses’ command to Joshua in Deuteronomy 27:1–8: 
to first build an altar after crossing into the promised land 
(Throntveit 1992:22). He also had to write the Law of Moses 
on big stone plates after the crossing of the Jordan (Miller 
1990:190). In Ezra 3:2 the Law of Moses is mentioned as the 
driving force behind their actions. The parallel is intentional. 
For a new start it was imperative that God dwelled in their 
midst, which was possible only through sacrifices such as 
the burnt offerings (Lv 1; 6). Their dependence on God’s 
grace was affirmed in this way. Before the restoration of the 
community could commence, a spiritual renewal had to take 
place,8 which manifested itself in a renewed allegiance to the 
Law of Moses as well. God’s word, as mediated by the Law of 
Moses, was the transforming force in the life of the golah. The 
restoration of the community depended on the renewal of 
the people around the altar and under the law, on grace and 
on obedience. This also led to the temple-rebuilding project 
in line with the prophecies of Ezekiel (37:26; 43:1–4; Wright 
2001:327).9 But here, too, the Law of Moses (Ex 25–40) informed 
the people and propelled them towards the realisation of 
the first goal of the return: God dwelling again amongst His 
people out of love. Undoubtedly, it was the Law of Moses, as 
known through the oral traditions, which determined here the 
decisions of the golah. But it was the oral Torah, as authorised 
by the textualised version, which was later attested to by the 
‘book’ of the Law of Moses, introduced by Ezra. 
Dissolution of mixed marriages
Theological context
Another example of the transforming power of God’s word 
is the infamous dissolution of mixed marriages during Ezra’s 
and Nehemiah’s stay in Jerusalem.10 We can only understand 
this dissolution, widely decried and denounced in scholarly 
literature, against the background of the temple theology 
dominant in the golah. With God in their midst, the people 
had to live lives purified from sin, which could separate 
them again from God and irrevocably terminate them as his 
chosen people. The external boundaries of the community 
had to be protected from foreign penetration. The many 
administrative lists in EN are a case in point (Janzen 2002:86). 
In his retelling of Israel’s ancient history in Ezekiel 20:10–27 
(Wright 2001:158), the prophet pointed out that God gave his 
Law so that his people would live (Lv 18:5; Dt 30:15–20). Not 
obeying could even lead to captivity (Lv 26:33). Interestingly 
enough, in Leviticus 26 there is a cause-effect relation 
between not keeping the Sabbaths and exile. In Nehemiah 
13:15, Nehemiah has to intervene in the practice of trading on 
Sabbaths. Ezekiel’s warning (Ezk 20:16) must have motivated 
Nehemiah’s drastic measures against trading on the Sabbath. 
It is not the people’s future as an ethnic unit that was so much 
at stake here (Blenkinsopp 1988:105; Throntveit 1992:25); its 
theological identity as chosen people was in danger, and so 
the threat of its extinction in a new exile was perceived as a 
real possibility.11
8.See Ezekiel 36:33; 47:1–14. Spiritual renewal, coming forth from a restored temple 
cult, had to precede inhabitation of the land (Wright 2001:356 ff., 365).
9.Halligan (2002:157) contends that the Second Temple was a textual reality; it was 
physically impossible to be built so early after the exile (2002:144–152).
 
10.For the ongoing discussion about this issue, see Janzen (2002; 2007); Smith-Christopher 
(1994); Davies (1999); Eskenazi & Judd (1994).
11.See Isaiah 60:1 for a voice contemporary to EN (approximately 521 BC). This voice 
did not contradict EN, but complemented it from a different angle (Westermann 
1969:295). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 9
We have to understand the dissolution of mixed marriages 
with foreign women against this background. It is unfortunate 
to compare the sending away of the foreign women with 
witch-hunts in the European Middle Ages (Janzen 2002:117; 
2007:49–69). The theological reason for this harsh decision 
is then overlooked. Janzen, however, denies that the text 
refers to any theological reason as such. The foreign women 
are not accused of apostasy, or of leading their families to 
apostasy. In his opinion, the reference to Deuteronomy 7 and 
Exodus 34 is insufficient in spite of the deuteronomistic term 
detestable practices and the mentioning of the seven nations 
from which Israel had to be completely separated (Ezr 9:1). 
Following the arguments of anthropologist Mary Douglas, he 
contends that the women as foreigners should not have been 
admitted into the restored temple community at all. They 
were, per se, ontologically unclean and threatened as such 
the survival of the golah (Janzen 2007:62). These women were 
seen as sources of cultic impurity, even though they were not 
agents of impurity. The best protection of the community 
against the anger of a holy God is to remove the source of 
impurity – the foreign women and their children who were 
sent away as scapegoats. This reason for the dissolution 
of the mixed marriages is not mentioned in the text of EN, 
but Janzen contends that it is given with the concept of the 
holiness and cultic purity that operated in postexilic Judah 
(following the definition of the concepts given by Douglas).12 
Other reasons for the dissolution have been given, but all are 
controversial: on either an economic, ethnic or racial level. 
In line with the theological thrust of EN, we should take the 
transforming power of God’s written word more seriously, 
as it was orally communicated to the golah by the Levitical 
scribes and backed up by Ezra’s ‘book’ of the Torah. We 
retain the theological explanation.
Commitment to God’s word 
From Ezra’s homiletical prayer (Ezr 9:6–15; Davies 1999:61) it 
can be concluded that mixed marriages were seen as a serious 
offence against God’s holiness. The special position of the 
golah (Ezr 9:8), in conjunction with the theological description 
of the community as holy seed (Ezr 9:2, cf. Ex 19:6; Jr 23:3), 
did not agree with mixed marriages with foreign women. 
The qualification of this practice as detestable (ma’al)13 is 
deuteronomistic. The tradition-fixed number of the seven 
nations (Ezr 9:1) from which Israel had to be separated after 
crossing into the promised land (Dt 7:3–6, cf. Jos 23:12; 
Ex 33:2; 34:11; Throntveit 1992:56; Miller 1990:110), evoked 
memories of the stiff penalties in the golah that would follow 
them if they break the covenant God made with Israel on 
Mount Horeb (Dt 28:15). The pre-exilic faith traditions, as 
contained in Ezra’s ‘book’ of the Law of Moses, had to be 
kept if the golah wanted to survive in the Persian Empire with 
their theological identity intact. EN does not only refer to 
ethnically foreign women. In pre-exilic Israel marrying non-
Israelite women was not completely forbidden; a noticeable 
12.See Haber (2008:13–15) for a critique of Douglas’ approach.
13.See Milgrom (1991:359) for a discussion of the technical term ma’al in Ezra 9:11 
and 10:17.
example is Moses himself marrying an African wife (Nm 12:1, 
cf. Dt 23:3–8). The Law of Moses informed the people here 
(Dt 20:17). It was not about racial purity, but about spiritual 
integrity in the relationship with the holy God who was again 
dwelling amongst them in Zion. Foreign women were those 
who did not follow their husbands in their faith and who 
did not share their new community’s claims of representing 
the true Israel of God. Either they kept to their own religious 
traditions, or they rejected the exclusive Jahwistic claims 
of Ezra and his small band of God fearers (Ezr 9:4). Either 
way, they lived in conflict with God’s revealed will that was 
made known through the oral Torah traditions and mediated 
to them by the Levitical scribes, and which were attested to 
by the ‘book’ of the Law of Moses, God’s written word. In 
an oral culture this is a most dangerous thing to do (Miller 
1990:161). Nehemiah 13:23 supports this interpretation. The 
non-Jewish women did not even make the effort to learn the 
language of their new community; it seemed to them not to 
be worthwhile to do so. In this way they excluded themselves 
from the language of faith in which the Torah was written 
(Kottsieper 2007:101). This would have had its impact on 
the children, who are especially mentioned. It would imply 
a break in the covenantal future of the golah. Even though 
the number of mixed marriages was actually not high (Ezr 
10:18–43) the practice was deeply rooted in the upper classes 
of society, amongst which were the priests, and 20 years 
later it still persisted (Neh 13:23). In spite of the assistance 
he received from especially the God-fearers,14 Ezra’s reform 
did not gather enough support needed for the drastic action 
of sending away foreign wives and their children (Ezr 
9:15). From whichever perspective we look at the decision, 
it is harsh, and even repulsive for modern readers of the 
narrative. For EN it is evidence of the transforming power 
of God’s word in the postexilic community of faith, orally 
communicated to them and authoritatively attested to by 
Ezra’s ‘book’ of the Law of Moses.
Conclusion
At last, we have to notice that the reading from the ‘book’ 
of the Law of Moses (Neh 8) had a powerful impact on the 
assembled golah. It created a spirit of mourning and repenting 
amongst them (Neh 9) and it led to the renewal of the covenant 
(Neh 10). Only then the reconstruction of society started with 
the repopulation of Jerusalem and the dedication of the wall 
(Neh 11–12). No social reconstruction is possible without 
spiritual renewal first.
Canonical considerations
In the Christian Bible, the Old and New Testaments are 
canonically and thematically interlinked (Wielenga 1992; 
Wright 2006). We therefore follow the trajectory of our theme 
from the Old Testament into the New Testament. How did 
it impact on the life of church and society? Considerations 
of space restrict us to sketching only the main lines of the 
argument. 
14.For more about the God-fearers trembling for the word of God in Isaiah 66:2,5 see 
Westermann (1969:413). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 9
God’s word in the New Testament
In the New Testament it is clear that the Old Testament 
in its written form and in its Greek translation (the LXX) 
functioned as the authoritative word of God for Jesus and his 
disciples. Of course, one knew the writings of Tenakh not by 
reading it for oneself, but by hearing it recited by scribes in 
the temple or the synagogues. Also, Jesus must have known 
Scripture from hearing it recited and learning it by heart. 
From that source of intimate knowledge, Christologically 
understood (Ellis 2001:80–92), he taught his disciples and it 
transformed them (Lk 24:14). Right from the beginning, the 
words of Jesus were cultivated and orally transmitted and 
cited as the authoritative word of God (Lk 1:2; 1 Cor 15:1). The 
same happened to apostolic teachings (Jude 17). These orally 
transmitted traditions were still referred to as divine word 
until the second century AD. But from that time onward the 
written versions of these traditions together with, for instance, 
the Letters of Paul (written from the onset), took the place 
of the oral versions as the authoritative word of God. From 
the fourth century AD, the New Testament writings were 
available in one codex, which stimulated the canonization 
process of the New Testament (Aichele 2001:43). The written 
word of God as book in canonical form also suggests that 
it conveys a unified message; a grand narrative (Aichele 
2001:49) that originated from a first, divine speaker (Wielenga 
2010). Just as the golah had an existential need after the exile 
for an authoritative version of the Law of Moses, so in the 
doctrinal turmoil of the fourth century AD (Greschat 1984), 
the church needed a reliable source of Scriptural authority 
to sort out its doctrinal differences, which rented the church 
apart. The influence of Scripture on the nonliterate ordinary 
church members was facilitated through it being recited, 
preached and taught from the pulpit (Graham 1987:126–135). 
The oral functioning of Scripture, even in its printed form, 
was dominant in the Western church until the typographical 
culture inaugurated a new relationship with Scripture in the 
nineteenth century AD (Graham 1987:19, 45, 165). 
The message communicated 
A central topic in EN was God’s return to Jerusalem to dwell 
in the temple on Mount Zion, amongst his people reconstituted 
as the true Israel and whose life was authoritatively guided by 
the Torah. We want to point out that this is also the message 
of the New Testament Scripture. We summarise it as follows. 
Jesus, the new temple 
The temple as God’s dwelling place became obsolete, because 
God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in Jesus, who 
is God with us; Immanuel (Col 1:19; Mt 1:23; Is 7:14). The 
sacrificial ministry in the temple was replaced once for all by 
the substitutionary sacrifice of Jesus on the cross (Heb 7–10). 
Around him, risen and ascended into heaven, an alternative 
Spirit-driven community came into being that was based 
upon the teachings of apostles and prophets, and followed 
him as Lord under the operation of the Spirit (Ac 2–4). Peter 
described this community as a holy nation and a kingdom 
of priests (1 Pt 2:9; Ex 19:6). This community’s theological, 
and not ethnic, identity was crucial. Gentiles were welcomed 
to the fellowship of God’s people against the violent 
opposition of Jews and Jewish-Christians, who continued 
in the footsteps of post-EN traditions of the intertestamental 
period. In line with the Old Testament, the New Testament 
does not perceive the separation between the church and the 
surrounding world in ethnic terms, but rather in theological 
terms. The holiness of the church is related to her Lord, Jesus 
Christ. It is set apart by him to serve him in his mission to 
the world. Holiness is also a moral concept, referring to 
obedience to all that Jesus has commanded (Mt 28:20). It 
should distinguish the church from the world and make it 
into an alternative community. The Christian community 
should be visibly holy and so spread light in darkness (Mt 
5:14–16; Is 60:1). The New Testament endorses the message 
of EN in this respect.
In the shadow of Rome
In the early Christian church, just as in EN, we also do not 
see signs of direct opposition against the Roman Empire 
in the public domain. Jesus himself did not engage in 
confrontational action with the imperial institutions during 
his lifetime, and was not aggressively opposing the imperial 
authorities (Carter 2008:128). He was not seen as politically 
dangerous to Rome as many other political activists in those 
days were (Den Boeft & Van Poll-Van De Lisdonk 1999). His 
execution as a revolutionary was politically expedient. This 
is not to say that his message was without consequences in 
the public domain of the Roman Empire. The persecution 
of the church, caused by the Christian refusal to worship 
the emperor, was a reaction to the threat experienced to the 
political stability of the Roman Empire. The new movement 
was vulnerable and with weak external boundaries; 
constantly penetrated by foreign influences, be it Jewish 
or gentile. In the Apostolic Letters the holiness of the faith 
community as the people of God, the body of Christ and the 
temple of the Holy Spirit, is stressed time and again. Paul 
warned against syncretism (1 Cor 8; 10) and he discouraged 
marrying outside of the faith (1 Cor 7). In his first letter, 
Peter encouraged the scattered and exiled believers of his 
churches to stand firm and referred to the protective work 
of the Triune God amongst them (1 Pt 1:2). He recommended 
suffering for the sake of Christ, if needed (1 Pt 4:12). It is clear 
that the Christian churches addressed in the Letters were 
living on the margins of the Roman Empire without political 
power or influence and persecuted by the Jews, and later 
also by the Romans. In spite of their depoliticised message 
and non-aggressive stance in the public domain (Mt 5:38), 
culminating in the call to obey the powers that be (Rm 13:1; 
1 Pt 2:13), they were perceived as a danger to the security of 
the Empire. Jesus’ teachings did indeed intend to impact the 
public domain of the Roman Empire, but it had to happen 
through making disciples of all nations (Mt 28:18–19), as well 
as the exemplary life of the church as alternative community, 
as we find it spelled out in the Sermon on the Mount (Mt 5–7) 
or in Matthew 25:31–46. Yoder (1998:80–95; cf. Bosch 1982)15 
refers, amongst other things, to the nonconformity of Christian 
15.See De Bruijne (2011:370) for a Reformed approval of the Anabaptist approach 
towards the relationship between church and society; and for a critique see De 
Bruijne (2011:380).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 9
discipleship expressed in serving love, even at the cost of 
personal wellbeing, seeking reconciliation between people in 
the face of adversity, the willingness to be cross-bearers in 
the footsteps of Jesus (Jn 15:20), and seeking to discern the 
signs of the time prophetically (1 Jn 4:1). 
Missiological reflections
In this section we want to reflect missiologically on the results 
of our close reading of EN in the light of the New Testament. 
Two interlinked themes will be studied: the relationship 
between church and society, and the transforming power of 
the written word of God, the Bible, in the life of the church 
and subsequently in society. 
The church between separation and participation 
The church is in the world, but not of the world. This well-
known Johannine saying (Jn 17:14) concisely formulates the 
theme under investigation (Bosch 1991:385). It assumes that 
the church has not just a temporal, but also an eschatological 
horizon. In the present era, the church anticipates the 
promised new world in which it already participates (Volf 
1998:139, 150, 267). This presumes a tension between the church 
and its environment, cultural and socio-political. The church 
should therefore not be absorbed in its historical context 
and become a national or an ethnic church and so losing its 
distance to and distinctiveness from its surroundings. But it 
should not be separated from it either (Bosch 1991:388) as it 
is being called to participate in the lives of the nations and 
their people (Mt 28:18). In missiological terms, the church 
should maintain the tension between contextualisation and 
syncretism. This tension is also reflected in its organisation. 
It is organised along the social patterns that can be found in 
a given society at a given time, but at the same time, it is the 
Spirit-driven community of Christ-confessing believers who 
live from God’s love mediated through the means of grace 
(word and sacraments). The church is therefore a celebrating, 
hearing and praying community living off its worship 
services. But worship should manifest itself in the day-to-day 
living reality of Christian service in the midst of society. This 
translates itself into a biblically transformed lifestyle, which 
may be different from that of their fellow citizens (Eph 4:20).
In EN and the New Testament we receive the same message: 
separation is a given in being the people of God, the church 
of Jesus Christ, who are following in his footsteps as Lord. It 
is a non-negotiable part of its being in the world, but for the 
sake of the world (Bosch 1991:385). This message of EN is 
also relevant in our times. The postexilic community had to 
protect her theological identity, which was granted to her by 
a merciful God. In the shadow of the Persian Empire it had no 
choice but to firmly guard her external boundaries in order 
to survive into the future as a recognisable religious entity 
with its spiritual integrity intact. Against the background of 
the grand narrative of the entire canonical word of God, this 
stance was not separatist or isolationist; it was of a missional 
necessity. This is confirmed by the New Testament writings. 
The church is called out of the world to be simultaneously sent 
into the world. Without the preservation of its identity, its 
missional potential cannot be activated (De Bruijne 2011:383). 
But an introverted church, isolated from the world, has 
squandered its missionary mandate. 
	
The transforming power of God’s written word 
This brings us to the second leg of our investigation in the 
missional potential of EN. Our question now is: how is 
God’s written word a transforming power in society with its 
reconstruction as one of its fruits? It is our contention that 
the Spirit-driven church is called to mediate this word to 
the world. The transforming power of the Bible, under the 
operation of the Holy Spirit, should be manifested in the 
church as an alternative community before it can be expected 
to transform any structure operational in society. In EN the 
‘book’ of the Law of Moses given to Israel had a transforming 
impact on the golah, and not on the Persian Empire in the 
first place. The Christian Bible, given to the church as the 
people of God, was initially a transforming power in the 
early church; not in the Roman Empire. The written word 
of God transformed the Roman Empire only in a very slow, 
historical process through the mediation of a transformed 
church after the Pentecost. Every reformation or revival 
in church history commenced with a new discovery of the 
relevance of the Bible for the people of God in their own 
context. This resulted in a transformed worldview within 
the church, which stimulated her to reach out into the world. 
And so it had an impact beyond the church. The impact of the 
Bible in the vernacular on colonial Africa is a clear example 
of this principle (Bediako 1995:54, 123). 
In the early church, located in an oral culture as postexilic Judah 
was, the apostles and their successors played a central role in 
facilitating the authoritative teachings of Scripture, which 
transformed the lives of the individuals and communities 
under the operation of the Holy Spirit. They were called to 
serve the church as teachers of God’s word (1 Cor 12:29; cf. 
Wielenga 2010:709–712, 715; Volf 1998:246). 
	
 
Missionial conclusions
We conclude with the following statements to guide us in 
the formulation of missional theories of reconstruction in a 
theology of missions:
• 
The church, being a fruit of hearing of God’s written word 
under the operation of the Holy Spirit, is God’s missionary 
agent on earth. This community is dimensionally involved 
in God’s mission by guarding its theological identity as 
the people of God, the body of Christ and the temple of 
the Spirit. Through its holiness, reflected in its liturgically 
structured worship and its alternative lifestyle, it attracts 
the world centripetally. Simultaneously, the church is also 
intentionally involved in God’s mission by centrifugally 
going out into the world in order to proclaim the message 
of the Gospel, living it sacrificially and following its Lord 
in the service of the coming Kingdom.16 This corresponds 
with EN’s emphasis on the protection of the external 
16.For the terms dimensional, intentional, centripetal and centrifugal, see Bosch (1979: 
79–83; 199). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 9
boundaries of the golah and of its theological identity, but it 
is now functioning within the New Testament framework 
of worldwide mission.
• 
The power of God’s written word transforms society 
indirectly through the agency of the church, which is 
being renewed daily by the Spirit with and through that 
word. In this renewal process, the Bibleteaching ministry 
of the church plays a facilitating role. The Bible is given 
first to the church as God’s people, through whom it 
has to impact on society and the wider world. This 
corresponds with EN’s emphasis on the role of the scribal 
class in the communication of God’s written word. This 
forms the material basis for the New Testament teaching 
that faith comes from hearing the message as contained in 
God’s written word. 
• 
The role of the church as an agent of change in society 
must not be overrated, which is still operating as it does 
on this side of history. Its internal renewal and ongoing 
transformation is often too open for serious critique from 
within and without, which discredits its attempts to reach 
out to the world and compromises its contributions to 
the reconstruction of society. Where possible, the church 
contributes in all humility to its Lord’s mission to the 
world. Because of its Lord, it does so in all boldness. This 
corresponds with EN’s emphasis on the golah’s failure 
to protect its external boundaries and its theological 
identity. In the New Testament teachings this failure is 
seen as an impediment to the world mission. 
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this paper.
References
Aichele, G., 2001, The control of biblical meaning: Canon as semiotic mechanism, Trinity 
Press International, Harrisburg, PA.
Becking, B., 2007, ‘Do the earliest Samaritan inscriptions already indicate a parting of 
the ways?’ in O. Lipschits, G.N. Knoppers & R. Alberts (eds.), Judah and the Judaeans 
in the fourth century BCE, pp. 213–222, Eisenbraun, Winona Lake. 
Bediako, K., 1995, Christianity in Africa: The renewal of a non-Western religion, Edinburg 
University Press, Edinburg.
Berquist, J.L., 1995, Judaism in Persia’s shadow: A social and historical approach, 
Fortress Press, Minneapolis.
Berquist, J.L., 2008, ‘Resistance and accommodation in the Persian Empire’, in R.A. 
Horsley (ed.), In the shadow of empire: Reclaiming the Bible as a history of faithful 
resistance, pp. 41–58, Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville-London. 
Blenkinsopp, J., 1988, Ezra-Nehemiah, SCM Press, OTL, London.
Bosch, D.J., 1979, Heil vir die wêreld: Die Christelike sending in teologiese perspektief, 
N.G. Kerkboekhandel, Pretoria.
Bosch, D.J., 1982, The church as alternative community, Instituut vir Reformatoriese 
Studies, Potchefstroom.
Bosch, D.J., 1991, Transforming mission: Paradigm shifts in theology of mission, Orbis 
Books, Maryknoll.
Brett, M.G. (ed.), 1996, Ethnicity and the Bible. Biblical Interpretation Series 19, Brill, 
Leiden. 
Carter, C.E., 1994, ‘The province of Yehud in the post-exilic period: soundings in the 
site distribution and demography’, in T.C. Eskenazi & K.H. Richards (eds.), Second 
Temple Studies Vol. 2: Temple community in the Persian period, pp. 106–145, JSOT 
Press, Sheffield. 
Carter, W., 2008, ‘Matthew negotiates the Roman empire’, in R.A. Horsley (ed.), In the 
shadow of empire: Reclaiming the Bible as a history of faithful resistance, pp.117–137, 
Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville-London.
Davies, G.F., 1999, Ezra and Nehemiah, The Liturgical Press, Collegeville, Minnesota. 
De Bruijne, A.L.Th., 2011, ‘Niet van deze wereld. De hedendaagse Gereformeerde 
publieke theologie en de “doperse optie”’, Theologie Reformata 54(4), 366–390.
Den Boeft, J. & Van Poll-Van De Lisdonk, M.L. (eds.), 1999, The impact of Scripture in 
early Christianity (Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae, XLIV), Brill, Leiden.
Ellis, E.E., 2001, ‘Uitleg van het Oude Testament in het Nieuwe Testament’, in E. 
Eynickel, E. Noort, T. Baarda & A. Denaux (eds.), Internationaal Commentaar op de 
Bijbel, pp. 80–92, Kok / Averbode, Kampen. 
Eskenazi, T.C., 1988, In an age of prose: A literary approach to Ezra-Nehemiah, Scholars 
Press, Atlanta.
Eskenazi, T.C. & Judd, E.P., 1994, ‘Marriage to a stranger in Ezra 9–10’, in T.C. Eskenazi 
& K.H. Richards (eds.), Second Temple Studies, Vol. 2: Temple community in the 
Persian period, pp. 266–285, JSOT Press, Sheffield.
Farisani, E.B., 2002, ‘The use of Ezra-Nehemiah in a quest for theology of renewal, 
transformation and reconstruction in the (South) African context’, PhD thesis, 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg. 
Grabbe, L.L., 1998, Ezra-Nehemiah, Routledge, London/New York.
Grabbe, L.L., 2001, ‘The law of Moses in the Ezra tradition: more virtual than real?’, 
in J. Watts (ed.), Persia and Torah: The theory of imperial authorization of the 
Pentateuch, pp. 91–114, Society of Biblical Literature, Atlanta. 
Graham, W.A., 1987, Beyond the written word: Oral aspects of Scripture in the history 
of religion, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Greschat, M. (ed.), 1984, Gestalten der Kirchengeschichte. Alte Kirche I & II, Kohlhammer, 
Stuttgart.
Haber, S., 2008, ‘They shall purify themselves’: Essays on purity in early Judaism, Society 
of Biblical Literature, Atlanta. 
Halligan, J., 2002, ‘Unsolved mysteries: the Second Temple’, in A.C. Hunter & P.R. Davies 
(eds.), Sense and sensitivity: Essays on reading the Bible in memory of Robert 
Carroll, pp. 142–158, JSOT Press, Sheffield. 
Havelock, E., 1986, The muse learns to write: Reflections on orality and literacy from 
antiquity till the present, Yale University Press, New Haven, London.
Horsley, R.A., 2004, ‘The origin of the Hebrew Scriptures in imperial relations’, in 
J.A. Draper (ed.), Orality, literacy and colonialism in antiquity, pp. 107–134, Brill, 
Leiden/Boston.
Horsley, R.A., 2007, Scribes, visionaries, and the politics of Second Temple Judea, 
Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville/London.
Horsley, R.A. (ed.), 2008, In the shadow of empire: Reclaiming the Bible as a history of 
faithful resistance, Westminster John Knox Press, Louisville/London.
Janzen, D., 2002, Witch-hunts, purity and social boundaries: The expulsion of the foreign 
women in Ezra 9–10, Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield.
Janzen, D., 2007, ‘Scholars, witches, ideologues and what the text said: Ezra 9–10 and 
its interpretation’, in J.L. Berquist (ed.), Approaching Yehud: New approaches to 
the study of the Persian period, pp. 49–69, Society of Biblical Literature, Atlanta. 
Kessler, J., 2002, The book of Haggai. Prophecy and society in early Persian Yehud (Vetus 
Testamentum 91), Brill, Leiden. 
Knoppers, G.N., 2007, ‘Nehemiah and Sanballat: the enemy without or within?’, in O. 
Lipschits, G.N. Knoppers & R. Alberts (eds.), Judah and the Judaeans in the fourth 
century BCE, pp. 305–331, Eisenbrauns, Winona Lake. 
Kottsieper, I., 2007, ‘”And they did not care to speak Yehudit”: on linguistic change 
in Judah during the late Persian era’, in O. Lipschits, G.N. Knoppers & R. Alberts 
(eds.), Judah and the Judaeans in the fourth century BCE, pp. 95–124, Eisenbrauns, 
Winona Lake. 
Lipschits, O., 2003, ‘Demographic changes in Judah between the seventh and fifth 
centuries BCE’, in O. Lipschits & J. Blenkinsopp (eds.), Judah and the Judaeans in 
the Neo-Babylonian period, pp. 323–376, Eisenbrauns, Winona Lake. 
Magen, Y., 2007, ‘The dating of the first phase of the Samaritan temple on Mount 
Gerizim in the light of the archaeological evidence’, in O. Lipschits, G.N. Knoppers 
& R. Alberts (eds.), Judah and the Judaeans in the fourth century BCE, pp. 157–211, 
Eisenbrauns, Winona Lake. 
Milgrom, J., 1991, Leviticus 1–16. Anchor Bible, Doubleday, New York. 
Miller, P.D., 1990, Deuteronomy. Interpretation, John Knox Press, Louisville. 
Miller, J.M. & Hayes, J.H., 1986, A history of ancient Israel and Judah, SCM Press, London.
Niditch, S., 1996, Oral world and written word: Ancient Israelite literature, Westminster 
John Knox Press, Louisville.
Ong, W., 1982, Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word, Methuen, London/
New York. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203328064
Polaski, D.C., 2007, ‘What mean these stones? Inscriptions, textuality and power in 
Persia and Yehud’, in J.L. Berquist (ed.), Approaching Yehud: New approaches to the 
study of the Persian period, pp. 37–48, Society Biblical Literature, Atlanta. 
Raabe, P.R., 1995, Obadiah. Anchor Bible, Doubleday, New York. 
Rose, W., 2000, Zemah and Zerubabel: Messianic expectations in the early post-exilic 
period, Sheffield Academic Press, Sheffield.
Schniedewind, W.M., 2004, How the Bible became a book? The textualisation of ancient 
Israel, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ska, J.L., 2001, ‘Persian imperial authorization: some question marks’, in J. Watts (ed.), 
Persia and Torah: The theory of imperial authorization of the Pentateuch, pp. 
161–182, Society of Biblical Literature, Atlanta.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.72
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 9 of 9
Smith-Christopher, D.L., 1994, ‘The mixed marriage crisis in Ezra 9–10 and Nehemiah 
13: A study of the sociology of the post-exilic Judaean community’, in T.C. Eskenazi 
& K.H. Richards (eds.), Second Temple Studies, Vol. 2: Temple community in the 
Persian period, pp. 243–265, JSOT Press, Sheffield. 
Smith-Christopher, D.L., 1996, ‘Between Ezra and Isaiah: exclusion, transformation and 
inclusion of the “foreigner” in post-exilic biblical theology’, in M.G. Brett (ed.), 
Ethnicity and the Bible, pp. 117–142, Brill, Leiden. 
Throntveit, M., 1992, Ezra-Nehemiah. Interpretation, John Knox Press, Louisville. 
Vanderhooft, D., 2003, ‘Babylonian strategies of imperial control in the West: royal 
practice and rhetoric’, in O. Lipschits, G.N. Knoppers & R. Alberts (eds.), Judah and 
the Judaeans in the Neo-Babylonian period, pp. 235–262, Eisenbrauns, Winona Lake. 
Van der Toorn, K., 2007, Scribal culture and the making of the Hebrew Bible, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge.
Van der Woude, A.S., 1982, Haggai–Maleachi. De Prediking van het Oude Testament, 
Callenbach, Nijkerk. 
Villa-Vicencio, C., 1992, A theology of reconstruction, David Philip, Cape Town. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511607592
Volf, M., 1998, After our likeness: The church as the image of the trinity, Eerdmans, 
Grand Rapids. 
Westermann, C., 1969, Isaiah 40–66, The Westminster Press, Philadelphia.
Wielenga, B., 1990, ‘”Volk van het land” als missiologisch model: Oude Testament en 
zending in Zuidafrikaanse kontekst’, DTh thesis, Unisa, Pretoria. 
Wielenga, B., 1992, ‘The Bible in a changing South Africa: The quest for a responsible, 
biblical hermeneutic in mission’, Missionalia 20(1), 28–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/ 
ids.v41i1.296
Wielenga, B., 2007, ‘The suffering witness: A missiological reading of Lamentations’, 
In die Skriflig 41(1), 69–86.
Wielenga, B., 2010, ‘Bible reading in Africa – the shaping of a reformed perspective’, In 
die Skriflig 44(3&4), 699–721.
Williamson, H.G.M., 1987, Ezra–Nehemiah, JSOT Press, Sheffield.
Wright, C.H.J., 2001, The message of Ezekiel, Inter-Varsity Press, Leicester. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1515/9783110927207
Wright, J.L., 2004, Rebuilding identity: The Nehemiah-memoir and its earliest readers, 
De Gruyter, Berlin/New York.
Wright, C.H.J., 2006, The mission of God: Unlocking the Bible’s grand narrative, IVP 
Academic, Downers Grove, Illinois. 
Yoder, J.H., 1998, The royal priesthood: Essays ecclesiastical and ecumenical, Herald 
Press, Scottdale, PA.