Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Author:
Daniel J. Louw1
Affiliations:
1Department of Practical 
Theology, University of 
Stellenbosch, South Africa
Correspondence to:
Daniel Louw
Email:
djl@sun.ac.za
Postal address: 
Faculty of Theology, 
171 Dorp Street 171, 
Stellenbosch 7600, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 20 June 2013
Accepted: 29 Nov. 2013
Published: 14 Apr. 2014
How to cite this article:
Louw, D.J., 2014, ‘Cura 
animarum as hope care: 
Towards a theology of the 
resurrection within the 
human quest for meaning 
and hope’, HTS Teologiese 
Studies/Theological Studies 
70(1), Art. #2027, 10 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
hts.v70i1.2027
Copyright:
© 2014. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
Cura animarum as hope care: Towards a theology of the 
resurrection within the human quest for meaning and 
hope
The following critical questions are posed: is hope the antidote of dread and despair or a 
kind of escapism from the harsh realities of anguish and suffering? What is meant by hope 
in Christian spirituality and how is hope connected to a theology of the resurrection? Is 
resurrection hope merely a kind of cheap triumphantalism and variant of a theologia gloriae? 
The basic assumption is that the notion of the resurrection can contribute to ‘the thickening of 
alternative stories of faith’. A theologia resurrectionis is about the reframing of life by means of 
a radical paradox: ‘Where, O death is your victory? Where, O death is your sting?’ If pastoral 
caregiving is indeed about change and hope, the resurrection describes an ontology of hope 
by which human beings are transformed into a total new being. Beyond the discriminating 
and stigmatising categories of many social and cultural discourses on our being human, 
resurrection theology defines hope as a new state of mind and being. The identity of human 
beings is therefore not determined by descent, gender, race or social status, but by eschatology 
(new creation.) Hope care is primarily about a new courage to be. It opens up different 
frameworks for meaningful living within the realm of human suffering.
Despair: The sickness onto death within the abyss of 
nothingness
The vital and relevant question regarding hope in spiritual care and healing is whether hope is 
not an escape from the present and a futile exercise, merely to bypass the existential realities of 
the now. Is the attempt to hope not irrational and absurd? As Albert Camus (1965) pointed out: 
For if there is a sin against life, it consists perhaps not so much in despairing of life as in hoping for another 
life and in eluding the implacable grandeur of this life. (p. 122)
Whoever wants to reflect on hope, will immediately be disillusioned by the existential reality of 
death. Dread, despair, fear and death demarcate the decor of human suffering and our quest for 
meaning.
In his book on the concept of dread, Søren Kierkegaard (1967:37) made a profound statement 
regarding the essence of our being human: ‘Spirit is dreaming in man’. Spirit is connected to 
pathos [sympathy], imagination and the possibility of anticipation.
However, when one is convinced that there is nothing (Sartre 1943, L’Etrê et le Néante), dread and 
nausea (disgust) set in. For Sartre, nothingness is a structural and constitutive element of being. 
Nothingness is a kind of existential parasite that hunts and pursues being (Sartre 1943:47). The 
attempt to hope becomes a futile exercise.
‘But what does nothing produce?’ asked Kierkegaard (1967:38). It can produce fear in the 
dreaming spirit. A human person is then delivered to the strange ambiguity of dread: ‘Dread is 
sympathetic antipathy and an antipathetic sympathy’ (Kierkegaard 1967:38). Dread constitutes a 
kind of neutral state of static innocence: the deepfreeze of the dreaming spirit, an antipathy that 
robs hope of its sympathy. Caregiving then becomes a soulless flirting with dread.
Homo viator as homo prospectans: Hope as spiritual 
category and principle of change (docta spes)
With reference to the French philosopher G. Marcel (1962) one can argue that a human being 
is essentially a homo viator [wanderer] and therefore aware of the transcendent realm of life. In 
essence hope entails more than merely optimism and speculative wishful thinking: 
Hope is essentially ... the availability of a soul which has entered intimately enough into the experience of 
communion to accomplish in the teeth of will and knowledge, the transcendent act – the act establishing 
Page 1 of 10
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
the regeneration of which this experience affords both the pledge 
and the first-fruits. [And] Hope is only possible on the level of the 
us, or we might say of the agape [Christian love]. (Marcel 1962:10)
Hope should therefore not be rendered as the antipode of 
dread and despair. Hope is essentially a spiritual category and 
is inter alia about change and the expectation of something 
new and different. Within the absence of a meaningful future 
and the anticipation of constructive change, regression sets in 
and the real danger lurks that a human being can become a 
victim of his or her past.
With hope in caregiving is not meant a kind of positive 
mood as the antipode for human anxiety (Buhr 1960:371), a 
sort of emotional reaction to dread or mood swing (Edmaier 
1968:49), or as E. Brunner (1953:7) argued, hope as the positive 
antipode to the negativity of anxiety. Hope is a qualitative 
category and describes habitus [the attitude and aptitude of 
the human soul, indicating disposition and orientation].
When one reflects on the different cultural settings of 
our being human in history and time, it seems that a 
kind of religious awareness regarding transcendence is 
fundamental to our being human. A human being projects 
a kind of sensitivity for the ultimate factor in life which in 
many religious traditions is connected to a sense for divine 
presence and intervention. In the wisdom tradition of faith 
and hope the anthropological implication is that life implies 
‘more’ than merely empirical factuality. To reckon with the 
transcendent factor in life brings about a kind of openness 
towards the future. It often triggers awe and a kind of 
curious anticipation of the future. It brings about the wisdom 
that life is not complete and that one should reckon in hope 
with the fact that within the already, the not-yet is a vivid 
component of life. In existential terminology it means that 
a human being is fundamentally designed towards future 
expectations: a homo pro spectans [a human being as an 
anticipating and future oriented being] (Polak 1968:271). Due 
to the not-yet factor, life is never complete and our being 
human always incomplete and unfinished, thus the notion of 
homo absconditus [the essence of being is a mystery, hidden in 
the not-yet of human existence]. 
What then is the contribution of an eschatological 
understanding of the future to spiritual growth and health?
Is it possible to merge hope to care, help, healing, counselling 
and therapy? But what is unique in the Christian tradition 
regarding the characteristics of hope? Is it merely an 
emotional category on the level of the affective, a mood 
swing dealing with need-satisfaction and wishful thinking? 
Is hope merely the prognostic projection of a better future 
or the restoration of loss in terms of past categories? Is the 
Christian variation of hope, a category sui generis and 
what is the difference between future as futurum [prophetic 
projections and temporal forecasts], future as utopia [the not-
yet of something that does not exist, created by imagination 
and the creativity of the human mind], and future as parousia 
[the Second Coming, an eschatological understanding of a 
messianic expectation – the not-yet – in terms of the essence 
and identity of our being human, the ontological category of 
the already]?
According to D. Capps, to ‘heal’ and to cure the cura 
animarum [human soul] (Nauer 2010:55–57) is basically about 
change (Capps 1990:3). D. Augsburger (1986:349) argues that 
the purpose of counselling is threefold: choice, change and 
clarity. Within the framework of Capps’s own approach, 
change is basically about reframing, that is to reveal that what 
appeared unchangeable can indeed be changed and that there 
exist superordinate alternatives (Capps 1990:62). To reframe 
means to ‘change’ the conceptual and/or emotional setting 
or viewpoint in relation to which a situation is experienced 
and to place it in another frame or paradigm (pattern of 
thinking) which fits the facts of the same concrete situation 
equally well or even better, and thereby changes its entire 
meaning (Capps 1990:17). 
Campbell and Cilliers (2012:31) connect the method of 
reframing with the notion of paradox as an instigator of 
radical change. Theology is actually about reframing. They 
argue that through shocking paradoxes Paul subverts the 
endoxa [the conventional categories and commonly held 
convictions of honour and glory], drawing on conventional 
language and assumptions only to interrupt them and call 
them into question. ‘Paul, however, relies on paradox – para-
doxa – that which is situated beside or outside (para) opinion 
(doxa)’ (Campbell & Cilliers 2012:31).
Arguing and thinking along the lines of Pauline theology, 
one is compelled to pose the following theological question: 
is the notion of the resurrection in Christian faith not the 
most fundamental paradox in theology? 
The basic thesis of biblical faith and hope is: if Christ has 
not been raised, our faith is futile (1 Cor 15:17). Without the 
perspective of the resurrection in Christian spirituality, one 
should admit that Jean-Paul Sartre is totally correct: nausea 
dictates and demarcates the meaning of life. However, with a 
‘subtle ironic smile’, Paul in 1 Corinthians 15 toyed with the 
idea that death is, from the perspective of resurrection faith, 
like a snake without poison. The latter is actually impossible, 
thus the strange paradox: ‘Where, O death, is your sting?’ (1 
Cor 15:55).
The German philosopher Ernst Bloch introduced the 
principle of docta spes [principle of hope] as an ingredient 
of the dialectical process in matter and in the confrontation 
with nothingness. Camus argued that hope kills the spirit 
of revolt. In contrast Bloch (1970:186–193) advocates for 
hope as a fundamental element in an attitude of resistance 
and contradiction. Hope, as a utopian spirit, is for Bloch 
connected to the spiritual realm of human freedom and the 
quest for dignity and equality.
In Christian spirituality, hope in caregiving is essentially 
connected to compassion: compassion as the representation 
of God’s hēsēd, rēchēm and splanchnizomai [unconditional love 
and pity] (Davies 2003:252–253). Compassion then leads to 
the establishment of human dignity.
Page 2 of 10

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 3 of 10
Towards a theologia resurrectionis
With reference to the challenge put forth by C. Landman that 
practical theology needs ‘religious discourses on healing’ that 
contribute to ‘the thickening of alternative stories of faith’ 
(Landman 2009:262–269) within the realm of township life, it 
is my contention that the narrative of the resurrection is one 
mode of a ‘theological thickening for an alternative story’ that 
contributes to hope and healing. Resurrection faith implies 
the praxis of action and resistance. Resurrection hope does 
not lead to neutral passivity but is in essence transformative: 
it deconstructs and unmasks all forms of discriminating 
practises that can rob human beings from their dignity.
The impact of the resurrection on Western theology theory 
formation has been surprisingly minor (Smit 1983:8). In the 
area of systematic theology, the resurrection was especially 
frequently underplayed due to the central position of the 
doctrine of atonement and a theologia crucis [the theology 
of the cross]. Berkhof (1973:332) attributes this diminished 
role accredited to the resurrection to the fact that Western 
sobriety ensured that the resurrection, as a central tenet of 
salvation, nevertheless always stood in the shadow of the 
cross. This diminution of the resurrection is also concomitant 
with the way in which Western theology concentrated on the 
works of Christ, in contrast to the Eastern Church’s focus on 
the person of Christ. 
Lekkerkerker (1966:134) believes that the Eastern Church 
saw Christ’s suffering and death more in terms of a victory 
over the powers of evil, and could thus sense the triumph 
of the resurrection. In its doctrine of atonement, the 
Western Church concentrated more upon the juridical and 
forensic dimensions of the cross as liberation for the sinner. 
Another factor which could have contributed towards an 
underemphasis on the resurrection is the so-called process of 
secularisation and technological development. Within a very 
rationalistic and positivistic model it seems that there is little 
scope for a gospel of resurrection.
From a traditional and doctrinal perspective, it would appear 
that the doctrines of soteriology and the incarnation headed 
the theological agendas of the different councils. After the 
Arian controversy and the emphasis placed on the Divinity 
of Christ by the Council of Nicea, the resurrection tended 
no longer to be in the forefront of theological discussion. 
The resurrection frequently had to serve as merely a final 
proof of the Divinity of Christ, not as the foundation of the 
whole of dogmatic reflection. Ultimately, the resurrection 
became only a necessary consequence of the cross, within the 
successive phases of humiliation and exaltation. According 
to Gesche (1973:275–324) the resurrection played the role of 
an additional legitimising factor. The resurrection served 
as proof either of the mission of Christ, or the truth of the 
scriptures, or the Divinity of Christ, or of the effectiveness of 
Jesus’ work of salvation. 
However, one can argue that the message of resurrection 
forms the heart and core of New Testament theology. From 
the perspective of the resurrection the existing situation of the 
early church could be analysed in view of its transformation 
and its focus on the future. The resurrection message forms 
the basis of New Testament theology (Goppelt 1980:56): it 
is actually the root and heart of New Testament theology 
(Goppelt 1980:58).
In view of the central role of hope in theology, Guthrie 
(1981:389) asserts that ‘[t]he reality of the resurrection 
is, therefore, an indispensable basis for Christian hope 
in the future’. According to him, the resurrection is not 
only important for the theme of hope, but it also has a 
Christological significance. It focuses particularly on Christ’s 
person and work (Guthrie 1981:390). For Guthrie, faith in the 
resurrection provides the necessary continuity for the notion 
that Jesus is truly God and truly human. As an act of God, 
the resurrection also has implications for traditional God-
images. The message of the resurrection is also decisive for 
the preaching of the gospel (Guthrie 1981:460). 
A number of other authors are also conscious of the 
important role which the resurrection plays in theology. 
Jonker (1983:139) believes that the resurrection plays an 
important role in the panorama of God’s salvific deeds. In 
the gospel of salvation, the message of the risen Christ stands 
alongside the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Redemption is 
an eschatological reality and has a victorious perspective. 
Berkouwer (1961:231–246) regards Paul’s ministry as a symbol 
of a resurrection hope. He considers the resurrection as 
fundamental for the eschatological perspective of the gospel. 
A distinction needs to be made between the resurrection as a 
salvific reality and the resurrection as a future reality where 
the mortal will be clothed with immortality. The latter forms 
part of the former, so that both become determining factors 
in the dynamic of Christian hope. The resurrection plays a 
major role in Karl Barth’s theological reflection (1953:329–
332). He views the resurrection as an act of God. Whilst the 
cross is the judgement of grace, the resurrection is the grace 
of the judgement. Any human achievement falls away in 
the resurrection. Barth regards the resurrection as being so 
important that he describes the act of resurrection as an act of 
salvation from which everything else needs to be understood: 
it is an Offenbarung überhaupt (Barth 1953:332). Barth stresses 
the resurrection in such a way that God the Father becomes 
the complete subject of the resurrection. It is exclusively a 
work of God, without any co-operation from the Son. The 
resurrection is thus not a consequence of Jesus’ death on 
the cross, but as a sovereign act of God the resurrection 
indicates God’s gracious compassion and trustworthiness 
(Barth 1953:335). Barth (1953:335–336) states that the theologia 
resurrectionis is an independent, new work of God, which 
confirms the validity of Christ’s suffering. The cross and the 
resurrection is one historical act in which God proclaims 
and finally confirms his ‘Yes’ of reconciliation to the sinful 
world. The cross and resurrection form such an indivisible 
unity within the history of salvation that only one form of 
theological reasoning can be derived from the uniqueness 
of the cross and the historicity of the resurrection: forward 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 4 of 10
from the resurrection, not backwards from the parousia. The 
time in which the community lives is always determined 
qualitatively from the resurrection as parousia. 
According to Guthrie (1981:390), the resurrection is not 
only important for the theme of hope, but it also has a 
Christological significance. It focuses particularly on Christ’s 
person and work. For Guthrie, faith in the resurrection 
provides the necessary continuity for the notion that Jesus is 
truly God and truly human. Resurrection and suffering are 
two themes that cannot exist separately. Simon (1967:101) 
does not regard the resurrection as an easy way out of 
suffering and pain, but it incorporates them into a new 
perspective on life. Resurrection faith does not retreat from 
the reality of suffering, but confirms the tragedy of suffering.
In Jürgen Moltmann’s theology of hope (1966), the resurrection 
plays a crucial role in revealing the meaning and gospel of 
the cross. Within Moltmann’s notion of eschatologia crucis, 
the cross is not limited to Christ’s reconciliatory work, but 
becomes a symbol for the eschaton [fulfilment and completion 
of Christ’s mediatory work of salvation as final or last proof 
of the faithfulness of God] of Christ: the resurrection. The 
resurrection opens up a future perspective in such a way that 
the resurrection obtains an eschatological primacy over the 
cross. Eschatology, derived from the resurrection, reveals 
the hope principle embedded in the cross. Hope is actually 
resurrection hope (Moltmann 1995:12). 
Schütz (1963:351), to a certain extent following Moltmann’s 
view, considers the resurrection to be the Ereignis 
[fundamental, primary and constitutive event] which forms 
the basis and norm of all discussion about the future. Ott 
(1958:18) believes the Easter events ensure that the message 
of Jesus’’ resurrection became Der Auferstandene ist der 
Eschatos, the foundation and source of Christian eschatology. 
According to Moltmann (1995:12) a Christian eschatology 
should not be reduced to apocalyptic solutions regarding 
the end of creation. The primary theme and formula of 
an eschatology is not ‘the end’ but ‘the essence’ (the new 
beginning) of everything. It is about the new creation 
through which all beings received a new quality: the dawn 
of a radically new life (resurrection), hence the reason for 
hope. Christian hope is an ontic principle and opens up new 
avenues for, and new ways of, being. 
De Jong (1967:71) refers to the role of the historical-critical 
model, the intellectual emphasis which left little scope for 
the miracle of the resurrection. The Formgeschichte also 
relativised the gospel of resurrection. The implication is 
that resurrection faith becomes deprived from its historical 
context and is reduced to merely a speculative, subjective 
mode in the memory of Jesus’ disciples. 
The resurrection should not be limited to the dimension 
of personal faith alone, exclusive of the cosmic dimension 
(De Jong 1967:69–70). Contemplation of the ‘empty grave’ 
does not make faith superfluous, but confirms it (Figure 1). 
Therefore faith cannot ignore the empty grave. Faith in the 
risen Lord is bound to a historical fact: an empty grave. 
Whoever desires to rejoice over the living Lord, but will 
not falteringly bow before the empty grave, is in danger of 
falling into an irrelevant subjective personalism. Personal 
reality (the risen and living Christ) and material reality (an 
empty grave) are both part of the truth of the resurrection as 
a salvific reality (De Jong 1967:70–99). 
Since the resurrection is not only a new perspective, but 
should be considered as a historic reality, it has consequences 
for hope. The resurrection story can easily degenerate into 
merely a subjective longing for everlasting life. Resurrection 
hope then becomes hope for a collective existence. It can 
be reduced to a self-delusionary projection of the human 
longing for permanency. As a resurrection reality (the empty 
grave), hope is not merely a psychological projection, but 
based upon a historical revelation of God in creation, which 
affects the very core of death itself. God’s revelation in the 
resurrection implies a re-creation of creation and opens up a 
new perspective for meaningful living in the now. 
According to Smit (1983): 
As in the New Testament, so this ‘new life’ or ‘life of 
resurrection’ must not be understood purely moralistically 
(as if the resurrection only offers additional power for greater 
legalistic and moral use), or understood purely mystically (as 
if the resurrection would estrange us from this life in all its 
Source: Permission from Hazendal Russian Museum, Bottelary, Stellenbosch. Photo taken 
by: D.J. Louw, 2013
Note: Original Russian icon. The angels guide over death and protect immortality against the 
threat of dust. Hope anticipates the empty grave. 
FIGURE 1: Resurrection.

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 5 of 10
concreteness and humanness), but as a new vision of all things, 
a new point of departure, a new root of understanding, a new 
perspective and a new meaning, but together with this also a 
new power, a new present reality, and new possibilities of 
existence. (p. 26)
The reality of the resurrection is a unique reality with its 
own distinctive evidence. As novum [a radical new divine 
act] of God, it is not a mere psychological or existential event 
in the subjective memory of human beings. Therefore, the 
verification of the resurrection does not lie on the level of 
existence, but in the new way in which God deals radically 
and victoriously with the whole of creation. The uniqueness of 
this act lies in its healing implications for both the existential 
and historical aspects of reality. It summons us to a strange 
kind of faith: whilst facing death, to hope points radically to 
the contrary. Death is not the full stop of life. 
Faith in the resurrection implies that the reason for hope 
should not be founded in our anxiety about death and the 
expectation of a life thereafter. The Christian hope should 
not be the antithesis of anxiety. We do not hope because we 
are afraid of death. In terms of Christ’s resurrection, we hope 
in spite of our anxiety. Therefore, theologically speaking, 
the only grounds for hope should be the faithfulness of God 
as exemplified and illustrated in the following theological 
markers: 
• 
salvation, justification and Christ’s mediatory work 
• 
the overcoming of death by the resurrection of Christ 
• 
the eternal value of our bodily existence in terms of 
Christ’s resurrected body 
• 
eschatology and the promise of a radical new future. 
In the victory of the resurrection the kingdom of God, as a 
new eschatological reality, is mediated via the resurrected 
Christ, and guaranteed by the indwelling spirit as a ‘deposit’ 
for what we expect to become eventually. The victory of God 
over nothingness, over anxiety and death is essentially the 
only true grounds for hope. As a salvific and eschatological 
reality, this victory affects the whole cosmos in all its 
finiteness and nothingness. The creation sighs and groans 
with yearning. Whenever the bodily resurrection of Christ 
is ignored and salvation is ‘spiritualised’ in mystical terms, 
faith in the resurrection could easily become an idea founded 
by mere subjective speculation. 
Little wonder that Ridderbos (1966:46) is convinced that 
Paul’s eschatology is a Christo-eschatology and can be 
described as that which was done in Christ, through an 
act of God, as a fulfilment of his plan of salvation. Christ’s 
death and resurrection form the all-encompassing departure 
point of eschatology, while the parousia and the doxa of God’s 
kingdom become the all-encompassing focal point. The 
reality of the eschatology is a Christological reality. It refers 
to an act of God (in which the believer shares corporatively in 
Christ’s mediatory work), as well as an act of the Holy Spirit 
(due to the indwelling presence of God in us and the whole 
of creation). 
The cross and the resurrection, in their reciprocal 
interconnectedness unveil the basic motif of a Christian 
hope: God’s faithfulness to his promises and his salvific acts 
within the historicity of both the cross and the resurrection. 
According to Fretheim (1984:111), hope thus emanates 
from the notion of the faithfulness of God: ‘Through it all, 
God’s faithfulness and gracious purposes remain constant 
and undiminished’. God’s salvific will does not waver: his 
steadfast love endures forever (Fretheim 1984:124). The cross 
and resurrection confirm the veracity of God’s faithfulness 
and the truth of the eschatological victory within this 
creaturely reality. 
Pastoral hermeneutics in the light of 
resurrection faith
A hermeneutics of the resurrection reveals the following 
theological implications: 
• 
In Christ, God’s promises are fulfilled and creation is 
brought back to its purpose: communion with God, 
through doxa, praise and worship. 
• 
In Christ’s ‘He has truly risen,’ the accomplishment 
becomes a new promise and places the creation within the 
framework of a new reality: the eschatological salvation. 
It means life has been transformed radically: from anxiety 
to hope, from nothingness to eschatology, from death to 
resurrection. 
• 
In terms of the resurrection of Christ, history becomes 
more than an evolutionary development, a human 
achievement or technological management. History 
becomes a teleological accomplishment: the healing of 
the whole of creation by the shalom [peace] of the coming 
kingdom of God. 
Victory over death then refers to: 
• 
faith and the salvation of the cross (perfectum) 
• 
hope and the veracity of the resurrection (futurum) 
• 
love and the sacramental meaning of daily life: the 
Christian life and daily experiences as an embodiment of 
God’s grace and presence through restored relationships 
(the pneumatological praesens). 
As the first fruits of the spirit, we possess a certain pledge, 
in the mode of hope, that God will create a new future. This 
certainty already transforms daily life into a doxology to 
God’s eschatological kingdom rule. Resurrected life can be 
realised daily by the spirit in the forms of faith, hope, love 
and peace. The process of making resurrection life real finds 
expression daily in thanksgiving and praise. Wholeness in 
God’s creation and healing in a pastoral hermeneutics now 
implies to accept one’s new being in Christ, to love one 
another unconditionally and to embrace life with gratitude 
and thanksgiving. 
Resurrection as theological principle in pastoral 
care
The resurrection has the following implications for a theology 
of pastoral care: 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 6 of 10
• 
It promises victory over death and instils a vivid hope in 
the midst of anxiety surrounding death.
• 
It enables us to become participators in the resurrection 
power and life, in the midst of struggle and suffering. 
Living in fellowship with God means to be empowered 
by the spirit to live and to become engaged in human 
relationships. 
• 
It restores geborgenheid, trust in life, and provides 
security because it opens up a new hermeneutics, that 
is to experience the living God in every dimension of 
existence, as well as in the whole of the cosmos. Life 
becomes an opportunity to embody God’s grace and to 
enflesh love. 
‘Resurrectionism’: The danger of a theologia gloriae 
Is it indeed true that the resurrection is a promise about an 
easy way out of the human predicament of human suffering 
and death? Is the Christian hope a kind of cheap exit from 
the reality of death and dying? Is hope merely artificial 
optimism? 
A warning against the danger of a theologia gloriae [cheap 
and artificial triumphalism] is particularly relevant when 
dealing with the theme hope in suffering, and the attempt 
to develop a pastoral theology from an eschatological 
perspective. The impression can easily be given that hope 
creates a cheap optimism and superficial euphoria. If this 
is so, then a resurrection perspective in pastorate has taken 
the easy route out of the problem of suffering. A theology of 
resurrection does not inspire people to ignore their suffering: 
it seeks to encourage people in their struggle and urge them 
to find meaning in their suffering. It even underlines the 
tragedy of death and suffering in this world. ‘Tragedy gives 
aesthetic form to a world palpably at odds with the world as 
we desire to view it’ (Hall 1996:51). It challenges a theology 
based on opportunistic imperialism and affluence: cheap 
triumphalism, a theologia gloriae. Pastoral theology is deeply 
embedded in, and determined by the suffering Son of God 
(Figure 2).
When resurrection hope blends with a kind of cultic 
folkloric heroism and a New World optimism, a theology 
of the resurrection can easily fall prey to resurrectionism: 
The resurrectionism that colors most forms of Christianity on 
the North American continent is a late adaptation of this long-
standing tendency of Christian theology to remove the cross 
from the heart of God. (Hall 1993:96) 
Hope is only hope in suffering, not a flight from suffering, nor 
an attempt to bypass suffering. The harsh reality of suffering 
remains an immanent critique against any hope that attempts 
to avoid tension, anxiety, despair and transience by resorting 
to defence mechanisms. Even as ‘king’ Christ was still the 
wounded Christ bearing the scores of suffering.
False triumphalism (Berkouwer 1954:194) easily leads 
to self-glorification and self-justification with no longer 
any reckoning with sin and guilt. On the contrary, 
genuine triumph is found in the confession of guilt and 
receiving victory through sola fide, sola gratia [faith and 
thanksgiving].
Hope and victory in suffering do not necessarily mean victory 
out of suffering. Rather, victory sometimes has to embrace 
the hope of not overcoming: that is, revealing the patient and 
long-suffering nature of hope.
Resurrection hope does not imply an artificial optimism or 
a kind of false triumphalism. The latter can easily lead to 
self-glorification and self-justification with no longer any 
reckoning with the harsh realities of suffering, sin and guilt. 
On the contrary, genuine triumph is found in the confession 
of guilt and receiving victory through faith and thanksgiving. 
Human responsibility in suffering is indeed to live from the 
perspective of victory. This perspective leads, via the spirit, 
to struggle, patience and endurance. The evil power is 
dethroned and unmasked for its true identity: the anti-godly 
power of darkness. The evil power is overcome in principle: 
‘Death, where is your sting?’ (Figure 3). But, despite this 
victory (Figure 4), these powers nevertheless remain real, 
and are not mere bogus powers. Grace should not become a 
Source: Permission from Dutch Reformed Church, Welgelegen, Stellenbosch. Photo taken 
by: D.J. Louw, 2011
Note: He is the Shattered King of ... The glory of the crucified Christ is embedded in the fact 
that he is the Wounded Healer, The glass figure surrounded by pieces of shattered glass, 
depicts the kingdom of God in terms of our human vulnerability. However, the pieces of 
suffering are transparent for eternal glory. 
FIGURE 2: Theologia gloriae? 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 7 of 10
‘cheap remedy’ and be misused as a narcotic or anaesthetic to 
suppress human suffering, pain and existential anxiety. 
Resurrection hope: The healing of life
A theology of the resurrection helps one to identify the 
following appropriate theological indicators for the healing 
of life: 
• 
Transformation: the new reality within the reality of pain 
and destruction. 
• 
Freedom and liberation: the experience of forgiveness 
and reconciliation. 
• 
Vision, imagination and future: the motivating and 
driving force behind anticipation and expectation. 
• 
Witness: the intention to reach out to others in their 
suffering and pain. 
• 
Faithfulness: the guarantee for trust despite disorientation 
and disintegration. 
• 
Support: edification within the koinonia [fellowship] of 
believers. 
• 
Comfort: the courage to be, to endure and to accept. 
• 
Truth: divine confirmation and a guarantee, promise for 
life. 
• 
Hope as a new state of mind and being. Hope as 
a qualitative indication that in terms of the new 
eschatological reality in Christ, our new eschatological 
identity is an ontological fact: I am already a new creation 
in Christ.
Although the reality of the resurrection is accessible by faith 
and cannot be demonstrated by using historical methods 
of investigation, the validity of the resurrection is not even 
dependent on faith. The resurrection, as an act of God, is 
a revelatory category (sui generis), which remains linked 
to the empty grave and functions independently from 
any verification by faith. It reveals to us the new state and 
condition of our being: transformed by God. For its validation 
the new status is totally dependent on God’s faithfulness. 
The resurrection is not merely a promise: it is also fulfilment. 
As such, it embraces a new vision and promise which, as 
resurrection hope, aligns the believer towards a future which 
is concerned with Christ’s parousia, God’s kingdom rule and 
resurrection life (eternal life as fellowship with God). Through 
the cross and resurrection, the resurrection hope becomes 
a grounded hope, rooted in the grace of God. The atoning 
character of the cross and the resurrection is fundamental to 
the promissory character of the resurrection. The expected 
redemption (Rm 8:19) is founded in the atonement which 
has already been completed (2 Cor 5:19) (Klappert 1968:41). 
It opens up a new orientation towards the future: hope as the 
anticipation of God’s fulfilled promises. 
The resurrection confirms the eschatological dimension of 
hope which consists of the following dimensions: 
• 
The dimension of perfectum: firmness and security (Christ 
died, arose, and we are raised together with him). 
• 
The dimension of praesens: encounter and communion 
(through the spirit, we now live in fellowship with the 
risen and exalted Christ). 
• 
The dimension of futurum: expectation and anticipation 
(eternal salvation, the bodily resurrection and God’s all-
encompassing rule: God is everything to everybody). 
The practical implication of the perfectum, praesens and 
futurum of eschatology is the creativity of imagination. 
To recall the cross and the resurrection is to ‘envisage’ a 
Source: Icon by D.J. Louw, Chapel Faculty of Theology, University of Stellenbosch. Photo 
taken by: D.J. Louw, 2013
Note: In terms of resurrection hope death is left behind our back (1 Cor 15:55). Resurrection 
life transcends the sting of death. Death is left behind, not ignored as reality. 
FIGURE 3: ‘Where, O death is your victory? Where, O death is your sting?’
Photo taken by: D.J. Louw, 2013.
FIGURE 4: Early depiction of the resurrection as triumph and victory over death 
(Roskilde Cathedral 1177–1201). 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 8 of 10
new future. This vision challenges believers to use their 
imagination in order to practise hope and to enflesh 
love. Imagination is needed to start changing the social 
environment, to instil justice and to transform dehumanising 
structures. 
Furthermore, the resurrection plays a fundamental role 
in the link between human reality of suffering and a 
divine intervention. It confirms the fact that Jesus Christ is 
indeed the Son of God. In fact, the resurrection is the only 
‘theological proof’ that Christ was not merely a human 
being but indeed the Son of God. From a theological point 
of view one can even argue that the resurrection constitutes 
the divinity of Christ. According to Romans 1:4 Paul argues 
that Christ was declared and vindicated as the Son of God 
by his resurrection from the dead. Furthermore, due to the 
fact of the resurrection one can claim that Christ did not die 
the death of a martyr but the unique death of a mediator, 
vicariously for us, in our place. 
The resurrection also confirms the fact that the atonement on 
the cross is an act of God. According to Moltmann’s (1995) 
basic premise the resurrection functions as the founding factor 
and Realgrund – reality principle – for the cross. The cross 
functions as the principle of knowledge and Erkenntnisgrund 
– understanding – regarding God’s intention. When the 
resurrection is viewed as a revelation of Jesus’ divinity in his 
humanity, and thus allows a particular focus to fall on the 
divine mission of Jesus of Nazareth, it does not mean that 
the resurrection makes the earthly Jesus superfluous. It is a 
further confirmation of Christ’s mediatory work as an act of 
the triune God.
Conclusion
What then is the impact of the fact that our salvation is a 
divine act and that the resurrection proves God’s involvement 
in the reality of all existential forms of death on Christian 
spirituality and the human quest for meaning?
Kievit (1970:10) contends that for Calvin, Christian hope is 
no vague longing, but a definite and specific expectation. For 
Calvin, this hope is based on God’s indubitable promises, 
on the covenant of grace, of which Christ is the mediator. 
Calvin regarded hope as the consequence of faith: that link of 
communion with Christ which enables humankind to receive 
grace, and which unlocks the future. Hope is the expectation 
of that which we already possess by faith (spes est expectatio 
earum rerum, quas in fide habemus). According to Calvin the 
hope for eternal salvation is thus an inseparable part of a 
living faith (Calvijn Inst. III, 2, 42:68)
The Christian understanding of hope does not pretend to 
solve all problems in life: it does not pretend to give solutions, 
cheap answers or promises of prosperity and instant 
happiness. However, it provides a meaningful framework 
in order to proceed with life in terms of an enduring faith 
and courage to be parrhesia [existential boldness and spiritual 
empowerment]. The resurrection equips Christians to resist 
all kinds of forms of stigmatisation, discrimination and 
humiliation: resurrection leads to resistance, the resistance of 
evil and death. It killed all forms of dehumanising attitudes. 
It instils a radical new identity beyond the prejudice of 
culturally formed identities. Even in the gender discourse 
and HIV and AIDS debate, it can contribute to the rewriting 
of ‘masculinity and health’ beyond the biased categories of 
chauvinism, misogyny and homophobia (Meyer & Struthers 
2012:6).
Resurrection is about establishing a new identity in Christ, 
the eschatological identity of a new being. It even overcomes 
the dualism between body and soul and incorporates 
embodiment as a vital ingredient of our new being in Christ 
and the vividness of resurrection hope. Dignity emanates 
from the hope of resurrection. Hope is not wishful thinking 
or any forecast about what is going to happen in future. Hope 
is a new state of being and of mind.
The power of the resurrection, however, does not lead to 
resignation and passivity. It can even make one rebellious 
and assists in one’s struggle against suffering (Berkhof 
1973:331) (Figure 5). Whilst a theologia gloriae is concerned 
with glorificari per opera – the glory of works (human 
achievements) – a theologia crucis is concerned with the 
confession of sins and a theologia resurrectionis with the 
resurrection hope. In terms of our future, the coming glory is 
a gloria in re which yet has to be unfolded in us. In the cross, 
this glory is already enveloped in a garment of hope – in spe. 
The gloria in spe is the gloria per crucem [through the cross]. 
The glory of the cross awakens hope. The resurrection is the 
reality and substance of this hope. Glorification is a paradox 
for the believer, because glorificatio in re actually means gloria 
per crucem. Now we already share in the glory of the victory, 
via the mediator (corporatively, in Christ), and via the 
counsellor (the indwelling Holy Spirit). Meaning exists within 
both suffering and peace. The eschatological reality inspires 
faith, and instils hope. Meaning in suffering then refers to 
the following two basic Christian and, therefore, spiritual 
entities: faith and hope. From an empirical perspective, the 
resurrection seems to be impossible, from the perspective 
of faith and hope, resurrection is a divine surprise and a 
theological exclamation mark (Figure 6).
If the assertion of W. Gräb (2000) is indeed true that practical 
theology is about the history of different designs for life, that 
the religious dimension in an ecclesial praxis is the connection 
between the quest for meaning and the attempt to signify 
life (Gräb 2006), my position is that a theologia resurrectionis 
provides pastoral theology of a paradigm that can contribute 
to the healing of life and the human attempt to signify life 
within the realm of suffering, death and dying. 
It is due to the resurrection in Christ (Figure 7) that life 
attains meaning. From the perspective of the resurrection 
Paul assessed the value of his life. When he looked back in 
terms of what he did and how he prosecuted the church, his 
life was a failure, literally like a foetus that should have been 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 9 of 10
Source: Private collection of D.J. Louw. Photo taken by: D.J. Louw, 2013
Note: Ethiopian icon. The resurrection narrative ‘surprises’ human beings: one cannot 
believe it is true! The eyes are very prominent because they are rendered as windows into 
the human soul in Ethiopian Christian art. 
FIGURE 6: The resurrected Christ. 
Source: Permission from Sol Iustitae Chapel, Faculty of Theology, Stellenbosch. Photo taken by: D.J. Louw, 2013
Note: (a) The resurrected Christ. The copper is an indication of how violence can poison life. (b) Left under the arm of the resurrected Christ is a picture from a daily newspaper of President Nelson 
Mandela shifting the old and very frail apartheid activist Beyers Naude in a wheel chair. In the left corner (top) is a picture of Lance Armstrong who became an icon of both overcoming obstacles 
as well as abusing obstacles in order to manipulate. The poison and sting of death is reframed by the ‘therapy’ of the resurrection.
FIGURE 5: The Resistance of the resurrection by D.J. Louw. 
a
b
Source: Permission from Royal Cast Collection, Copenhagen. Photo taken by: D.J. Louw, 
2013
Note: The human body is now transferred into the aesthetics of immortality and eternity 
beyond the discriminating and stigmatising categories of culture and social imaging. 
FIGURE 7: The resurrected Christ by Michelangelo (1519–1520, plaster copy). 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2027
Page 10 of 10
aborted before birth (1 Cor 16:8). From the perspective of the 
resurrection his life is ‘beautiful’: ‘But by the grace of God 
I am what I am’ (1 Cor 15:9). The ‘what’ of his life is now 
determined not by ‘doing functions’ but by ‘being functions’ 
(the eschatological ontology of a new creation): ‘Therefore, if 
anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation’ (2 Cor 5:17).
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article. 
References
Augsburger, D., 1986, Pastoral counselling across cultures, The Westminster Press, 
Philadelphia.
Barth, K., 1953, Die Lehre von der Versöhnung, EVZ, Zollikon-Zürich. 
Berkhof, H., 1973, Christelijk geloof, Callenbach, Nijkerk. 
Berkouwer, G.C., 1954, De triomf der genade in de theologie van Karl Barth, Kok, 
Kampen. 
Berkouwer, G.C., 1961, De wederkomst van Christus I, Kok, Kampen. 
Bloch, E., 1970, Tübinger Einleitung in die Philosophie, Band 13, Suhrkamp Verlag, 
Frankfurt am Main.
Brunner, E., 1953, Das Ewige als Zukunft und Gegenwart, Zwingli Verlag, Zürich.
Buhr, M., 1960, ‚Kritische Bemerkungen zur E. Bloch’s Hauptwerk “Das Prinzip 
Hoffnung”‘, Deutsche Zeitschrift für Philosophie8(4),365–379.
Calvijn, J., n.d., Institutie, vertl. A. Sizoo, 8e druk, Meinema, Delft.
Campbell, C.L. & Cilliers, J.H., 2012, Preaching fools. The gospel as a rhetoric of folly, 
Baylor University Press, Waco. 
Camus, A., 1965, The myth of Sisyphus, Hamish Hamilton, London.
Capps, D., 1990, Reframing a new method in pastoral care, Fortress Press, Minneapolis.
Davies, O., 2003, A theology of compassion. Metaphysics of difference and the renewal 
of tradition, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
De Jong, J.M., 1967, De opstanding van Christus. Geloof en natuurwetenschap 2, 
Boekencentrum, Gravenhage.
Edmaier, A., 1968, Horizonte der Zukunft. Eine philosophische Studie, Verlag Friedrich 
Pustet, Regensburs.
Fretheim, T.E., 1984, The suffering of God, Fortress, Philadelphia. 
Gesche, A., 1973, Die Auferstehung Jesu in der dogmatischen Theologie. Theologische 
Bericht 2, Benziger, Zürich.
Guthrie, D., 1981, New testament theology, Inter-Varsity, Leicester.
Goppelt, L., 1980, Theologie des Neuen Testaments, 3rd edn., Vandenhoeck and 
Ruprecht, Göttingen.
Gräb, W., 2000, Lebensgeschichten, Lebensentwürfe, Sinndeutungen, Kaiser 
Gütersloher Verlagshaus, Gütersloh.
Gräb, W., 2006, Sinnfragen. Transformationene des Religiösen in der modernen Kultur, 
Kaiser Gütersloher Verlagshaus, Gütersloh.
Hall, D.J., 1993, Professing the faith. Christian theology in a North American context, 
Fortress Press, Minneapolis.
Hall, G.G., 1996, ‘Suffering and Tragedy’, in P. McEnhill G.B. & Hall (eds.), The 
presumption of presence: Christ, church and culture in the academy: Essays in 
honour of D.W.D. Shaw, pp. 48–58, Edinburgh, Scottish Academic Press. 
Jonker, H., 1983, Theologische Praxis, Callenbach, Nijkerk. 
Kierkegaard, S., 1967, The concept of dread, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Kievit, I., 1970, Leven van de hoop, Kok, Kampen. 
Klappert, B., 1968, Diskussion um Kreuz und Auferstehung, 3rd edn., Aussaat, 
Wuppertal. 
Landman, C., 2009, Township spiritualities and counseling, Unisa Research Institute 
for Theology and Religion, Pretoria Duplicating Company, Pretoria.
Lekkerkerker, A,F.N., 1966, Het evangelie van de versoening, Bosch, Baarn.
Marcel, G., 1962, Homo viator. Introduction to metaphysics of hope, Harper & Row, 
London/Chicago.
Meyer, M. & Struthers, H., 2012, (Un)covering men. Rewriting masculinity and health 
in South Africa, Fanele, Sunnyside.
Moltmann, J., 1995, Das kommen Gottes: Christliche Eschatologie, Chr. Kaiser/
Gütersloher Verlagshaus, Gütersloh. 
Moltmann, J., 1966, Theologie der Hoffnung: Untersuchungen zur Begründung und 
zu den Konsequenzen einer christlichen Eschatologie, 5th edn., Kaiser, München. 
Nauer, D., 2010, Seelsorge. Sorge um die Seele, Verlag W. Hohlhammer, Stuttgart.
Ott, H., 1972, Die Antwort des Glaubens, Kreuz, Berlin.
Polak, F.L., 1968, Prognostica. Wordende wetenschap schouwt en schept de toekomst, 
A. E. Kluwer, Deventer.
Ridderbos, H., 1966, Paulus: Ontwerp van zijn theologie, Kok, Kampen. 
Sartre, J-P., 1943, L’Être et le Néante, Gallimard, Paris.
Schütz, P., 1963, Freiheit – Hoffnung – Prophetie: Von der Gegenwirtigkeit des 
Zukünftigen, Furche Verlag, Hamburg.
Simon, U.E., 1967, A theology of Auschwitz, Gollancz, London. 
Smit, D.I., 1983, ‘Prediking in die paastyd’, in C.W. Burger, B.A. Müller & D.J. Smit 
(reds.), Riglyne Vir paas-, hemelvaarts- en pinksterprediking, bl. 10–30, Kaapstad, 
NG Kerk-Uitgewers. (Woord teen die Lig 3).