Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
A flame of sacred love: Mission involvement of women 
in the 19th century
Author: 
Johan Kommers1
Affiliations:
1Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Johan Kommers
Email: 
j.kommers777@gmail.com
Postal address: 
Operadreef 94, 3845 GR 
Harderwijk, the Netherlands
Dates:
Received: 10 Sept. 2012
Accepted: 24 July 2013
Published: 27 Sept. 2013
How to cite this article:
Kommers, J., 2013, ‘A flame 
of sacred love: Mission 
involvement of women in the 
19th century’, In die Skriflig/
In Luce Verbi 47(1), Art. #652, 
12 pages. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
In the 19th century, women missionaries found acceptance in the public domain and 
opportunities for achievement that they were denied at home. Whilst they spearheaded 
movements for Christianising and modernising Asian (the focus of this article) and African 
societies through the evangelisation, education and physical care of women, many questions 
were raised about their motives and the way they executed their work. We need to rediscover 
the sacrificial dedication women had that made the 19th century the greatest century of 
Christian expansion. These were remarkable women who left everything behind − many of 
them leaving a permanent impression upon the people in whose cities they eventually resided 
− and who stand as examples to the present generation. Having lost most of the things the 
world prizes, they gained one thing they esteemed so highly. For them, the relative value of 
things temporal might go, provided that they could forever settle the eternal values. They 
lived out the words of Paul: ‘I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God 
in Christ Jesus’ (Phlp 3:14).
The nineteenth century has been called ‘Woman’s Century’ and the ‘Century of Missions’; the dawn of 
one brought light to the other. (Butler 1904)
Introduction: Women in the spotlight
From 31 March until 24 June 2012, the museum Catharijneconvent had an exhibition titled ‘Women 
in the spotlight: Nuns, martyrs, cleaners and clergywomen’ (Kootte & Schriemer 2012).1 The 
involvement of women in the rich church life in the Netherlands was shown. Pious women 
from early Christianity through to women working in the church today were very much in the 
public eye. According to the organisers of this exhibition, Christian belief ‘feminized’ in the 19th 
century. This can especially be seen in the missionary work of that century (Kootte & Schriemer 
ibid:68–69). Women missionaries ran up against a lot of difficulties before being fully accepted as 
recognised missionaries. The involvement of women in missionary work calls for an assessment 
of this extraordinary missionary phenomenon of the 19th century.
Whilst the 20th century had a greater number of missionaries and converts, the 19th century 
saw a greater depth of impact. They − men and women − were people of one vision. Nowadays 
there is no question about women participating in missionary work. Their sisters, especially in 
the first decades of the 19th century, faced a lot of obstacles. Reflecting on the whole missionary 
1.The exhibition titled ‘Vrouwen voor het voetlicht. Zusters, Martelaressen, Poetsengelen & Dominees’ ran from 31 March to 24 June 
2012 at the Catharijneconvent museum in Utrecht, Netherlands. The exhibition was extended until 07 October 2012.
Page 1 of 12
’n Vlam van heilige liefde: Sendingsbetrokkenheid van vroue in die negentiende eeu. 
Vroue-sendelinge het in die negentiende eeu geleenthede vir prestasie en aanvaarding in die 
publieke domein gevind wat hulle andersins misgun is. Hoewel hulle die voortou geneem 
het met bewegings vir die kerstening en modernisering van gemeenskappe in Asië en Afrika 
deur middel van die evangelisasie, opvoeding en fisiese versorging van vrouens, is hulle 
motiewe en die manier waarop hulle te werk gegaan het, bevraagteken. Dit is dus nodig om 
die opoffering en toewyding van hierdie vroue, wat die negentiende e eeu uitgesonder het as 
die belangrikste eeu vir Christelike uitbreiding, te herontdek. Hierdie merkwaardige vroue 
het alles opgeoffer en vele van hulle het ’n onuitwisbare indruk gemaak het op die mense in 
wie se stede hulle uiteindelik tuisgegaan het. Hulle staan uit as voorbeelde vir die huidige 
generasie. Al het hulle soveel dinge verloor wat deur die wêreld as belangrik geag is, het hulle 
veel gekry uit dit wat hulle persoonlik hoog geag het. Vir hulle het die relatiewe waarde van 
tydelike dinge min beteken, solank hulle die ewige waardes kon vestig. Hulle het voorwaar 
Paulus se woorde uitgeleef: ‘Ek span my in om by die wenstreep te kom, sodat ek die hemelse 
prys kan behaal waartoe God my geroep het in Christus Jesus’ (Fil 3:14). 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
movement from Europe, which was instigated by Britain, 
we see that it was difficult for women everywhere to be 
involved. Limited education had to be overcome, but this 
was compensated for by much evangelical zeal. The only 
way for women with a strong sense of evangelical duty to 
enter the overseas missionary field at that time was to marry 
a seminary graduate or an evangelist bound for foreign 
countries (Kent 2004:92).
After the Reform Acts of 1832 in Britain, progress was made 
all around in the economic, social and religious fields − much 
of it brought about by incredible individual ingenuity and 
innovation. The optimism and vitality amongst Christians 
kindled hope and faith amongst many young women for their 
share in these developments, especially in the evangelistic 
enterprise. In Victorian Britain, women campaigned a long 
time for equal educational opportunities so that they could 
break into the professions. Training colleges were established 
to produce teachers and governesses, women’s university 
colleges started in London (Bedford College in 1849) and 
Cambridge (Girton in 1869 and Newnham in 1873). During 
the Crimean War (1854–1856), the conditions in the military 
hospitals in Turkey were terrible and the government 
desperately needed nurses. Florence Nightingale (1820–1910) 
and those whom she recruited, answered the War Office’s 
request. In the home country, many women were conscious 
of the high stakes and knew that their work could advance 
the nursing profession and other professional charity 
work. Now they had the opportunity of doing jobs outside 
the kitchen and family − jobs from which the society had 
previously excluded them. The Crimean War was one of the 
causes that fundamentally shaped women’s experiences. The 
image of nursing improved and it was believed that official 
work for women − in this case, nursing − should be seen as a 
respectable profession, which required professional teaching. 
In the United States, the experiences of female nurses on the 
battle fields of the Civil War made many people aware of 
the untapped resource of women’s ‘great executive ability 
and amount of energy’ (cf. Chamberlain 1925). The shining 
example of a woman like Clara Barton, a nurse during the 
Civil War who founded the American Red Cross, made it 
possible for women to contemplate lives of professional 
service, which channelled their nurturing capacities outside 
the home and into the world at large. 
British women wishing to be qualified as medical doctors 
were, in the first instance, not allowed to study medicine 
at one of the universities in Britain and met with bitter 
opposition. In America it was the same (Barret Montgomery 
1910:188): ‘To every orthodox mind a woman doctor was 
anathema’. In 1859, the Philadelphia Medical Society passed 
a resolution of excommunication against any doctor who 
lectured or taught in the Women’s Medical College, and 
against every graduate of that institution. In 1849, Elizabeth 
Blackwell was admitted to study medicine in Geneva, after 
knocking at the doors of 12 medical colleges without success. 
Many followed and received their medical degrees from 
institutions in France, Switzerland or Germany. A bill to 
permit their registration in Britain was defeated. Legislation 
by Parliament finally passed in 1876 and restrictions on 
medical education for women were removed. Until far 
into the 20th century, Cambridge University remained an 
exclusively male environment. Women were not admitted 
as full members of the university, eligible to obtain degrees, 
until the late 1940s, and the Cambridge Inter-Collegiate 
Christian Union (CICCU) was all male until 1948. 
Christian women students began a separate organisation 
in 1919. The amalgamation of the organisations was only 
realised in 1948 (for more on Christian student life in 
Cambridge, see Armitage 1993). The first pioneer women 
medical doctors were sent to India (Jayawardena 1995:75–
79). One of them, dr Fanny J. Butler, was sent to India in 
1880 by the Church of England Zenana Missionary Society 
(CEZMS). The first qualified female doctor from the United 
States who went to India in 1869, was Clara Swain (1834–
1910), an MD from Pennsylvania who belonged to the 
Methodist Women’s Foreign Missionary Society. It was in 
America that women generated the greatest enthusiasm for 
missions for women, but their English sisters were the first 
to become independently involved in foreign missions. Also, 
the concept of ‘faith’ missions, which strongly advocated the 
involvement of single lady missionaries, came from British 
soil.
Trailblazers
Mission-minded women in the 19th century in America 
were admiring Ann Hasseltine Judson (1789–1826), one of 
the first women who left her country for a life overseas as 
a missionary wife. More or less an example of a Protestant 
icon, since a White women living in a ‘heathen land’ at that 
time was unheard of. She married Adoniram Judson and 
two weeks after their wedding they sailed from America to 
Calcutta (India), and from there were relocated to Burma. 
The couple met with a lot of problems. After having worked 
in Burma for nearly 14 years, Ann died in her thirties. During 
their time in Burma, she succeeded in learning Thai (Siamese) 
and translated Matthew’s Gospel into that language. She 
was a remarkable woman who was valued for her sacrificial 
dedication to mission work.
In England, Mary Bethia Groves (1798–1831) spoke to the 
imagination of many. Having waited to get consent from her 
father, she married (‘to her happiness’) her great love, the 
dentist Norris Groves. Whilst her husband attended to the 
teeth, Mary walked to the poorer parts of Exeter to visit homes 
where people lived in great need. She also visited the prisons. 
Whilst in the prison chapel, the pastor preached on ‘God has 
chosen the weak of the world’ (1 Cor 1:27). This marked 
her conversion and she became ‘active, decided, and with a 
strong independent judgment’ (Dann 2004:24). The young 
couple with their little children heard the call of the Lord 
and decided to ‘be ready to go anywhere’ (Dann 2004:27). 
Having given away the dental practice and properties, they 
went on an adventurous journey via Russia to Persia, where 
they settled in Baghdad. Mary, again pregnant, started to 
learn Armenian, and began to work amongst the women 
Page 2 of 12

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 12
and teach children in a school she had started. After many 
difficult years, Mary fell ill and died in 1831. At that time, the 
plague ravished thousands of the Baghdad inhabitants. Mary 
died young, as did many of her missionary sisters in that 
century. It was only in 1861 that Louis Pasteur discovered 
that infectious diseases were caused by bacteria, viruses, 
protozoa, et cetera.
Ann Judson in Burma and Mary Groves in Baghdad were 
for many women in England and America, who read about 
their work in mission magazines, an example to open up 
possibilities that were not common for women at that time. 
They opened new paths for women; that they could even 
take on professional roles. At that time, it was considered that 
women should not transgress gender boundaries, but both 
Ann and Mary revealed their conviction that the woman’s 
sphere of work could be broader than the private space at 
home. Next to the duties at home, they had an independent 
ministry of their own. We see a gradual shift in thinking 
about women’s involvement in missions. The Centenary 
Conference on Protestant Missions, held in London in 1888, 
clearly demonstrates this.2 The ideology of domesticity 
in the Victorian era slowly faded with the new focus on 
women, especially unmarried women, who undertook most 
valuable assignments in missions and who secured their own 
indispensable place in the whole of this work. They now 
looked at many problems from a global point of view.3
‘O bring us some female men’
Western women were involved in missionary endeavour 
since the 18th century. However, their independent agency 
in the mission field did not really begin until the 1860s. The 
first women’s missionary society in the world was organised 
in 1800 by Mary Webb. The formation of the ‘Boston 
Female Society for Missionary Purposes’ was more or less 
a revolutionary step for a woman to assume leadership of 
a religious organisation. Mary Webb was ‘blazing a path, 
perilous for a young woman, through an unbroken wilderness’ 
(Vail 1914:II). This organisation, and several others later on, 
were spin-offs from parent groups that provided day care 
and clothing for young children of working mothers, and 
supported the ministry of missionaries. In those days, women 
had their place and work at home, but outside activities in 
society and church were severely restricted. Mary, through 
her activism, contributed significantly to a changing mind 
that would, slowly, open the doors for women to enter into 
missionary service (Vail ibid:65–68, 107). 
Miss Sarah Kilham was working in St. Petersburg when the 
mission party of Norris Groves, on their way to Baghdad, 
passed there. She was one of the first unmarried women 
to serve as an overseas missionary (Dann 2004:130–134). 
2.‘We must not allow […] the ability and efficiency of so many of our female helpers, 
nor even the exceptional faculty for leadership and organisation which some of 
them have displayed in their work to discredit the natural and predestined headship 
of man in Missions […] Their work had become crucial in education, evangelism, 
medical missions, and benevolent ministries’ (Scott et al. 2004:28).
3.For Ann Hasseltine Judson, see R.A. Tucker (1988:24–27) and C. Anderson (1972). 
For Mary Groves, see R.B. Dann (2004:18–20, 27, 47–48, 57–58, 130–134, 146, 
166–173).
The primary way for women in the 18th century to go 
overseas, was to marry and go with their husbands bound 
for missionary work and serve in the evangelistic effort − 
with their husbands. But they were seen merely as the wives 
of missionaries (Dann ibid:293): ‘Merely a wife − going to 
the mission field because she was constrained to follow her 
husband.’ They were not missionaries in their own right.4 
Those who were single when going, only went with their 
parents or brothers.5 Neill (1982:256) says it in a short, but to 
the point manner: ‘Most of these women were missionaries’ 
wives rather than missionary wives.’ 
The early Methodist missionary endeavour of the Wesleyan 
brothers had a great impact on the British society. Women 
especially reacted positively to the message they heard, 
according to the Wesleyan ideal of the godly and harmonious 
household and the provision it offered to the individual 
believer. The new movement relied on the initiative, zeal and 
generosity of its adherents, both male and female. Within this 
movement, women took the lead in many new congregations 
and were allowed greater influence than by any of the 
mainstream Christian denominations. Methodism has been 
described as a ‘woman’s faith’ and it equipped ‘women with 
a realistic recipe for survival in an imperfect world’ (Hufton 
1995).
Many married women, having experienced the saving grace 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, sought to persuade their children, 
their husbands and other family members to follow their 
example, and in doing so acted as the spearhead of further 
Methodist advance. Many single missionary ladies in later 
decades mentioned the piety and prayers of their mothers as 
one of the reasons for them going to the mission field.6 The 
wisdom of these ‘mothers in Israel’ drew many young ones 
around them to spiritual counsel. It was Wesley himself who 
sanctioned the departure from an established pattern and 
gave women the freedom to preach the gospel. In this way, 
the Revival periods enlarged the horizons of ministry for 
women. Wesley once said to one of these ladies (McGregor 
1832:38): ‘Conscience will not permit you to be silent when 
God commands you to speak’.7 Women’s influence appears 
to have been the most effective amongst members of their 
own sex. Within Methodism, the gender segregation of band 
meetings facilitated close links between the ‘sisterhood’ of 
believers, and many women emphasised the importance of 
such groups, both in the recruitment of new members and in 
mutual support and fellowship.8
4.Think of those who followed their husbands: Dorothy Carey (India), Mary Groves 
(Baghdad), Mary Morrison (China), Mary Livingstone (Central Africa), Priscilla Studd 
(China, India, Africa), Ann Judson (Burma) and Maria Dyer (Malacca). 
5.See Lydia Groves (sister of A.N. Groves), May Ann Aldersey (Malacca, China), Maria 
Newell (Malacca − she went with Samuel and Maria Dyer an married Karl Gutzlaff 
in 1829), as well as Burella and Maria Dyer (China − daughters of Samuel and Maria 
Dyer). Maria Dyer was married in 1858 to Hudson Taylor, the founder of the CIM.
6.Cf. the influence of mothers on Amy Carmichael, Margaret King and others. The 
same can be said of many men like Andrew Murray, who refer to the prayers of their 
mothers as the cause of going to the mission field. For those mothers, these words 
truly apply: ‘The hand that rocks the cradle, rules the world.’
7.Alice Cambridge was born in 1762 in Bandon, County Cork, Ireland, and joined the 
Methodist Society in about 1807. She spoke at meetings all over Ireland, becoming 
one of the most famous Methodist female preachers. She died in 1829.
8.The young Alice Cambridge was introduced to Methodism by some women friends 
who were already members of the Methodist Society (McGregor 1832:15–17). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 12
Although implicitly denied by the great majority of 
Methodists, we see that many young women of those times 
chose another way to the conventional female destiny of 
marriage, motherhood and domesticity. Their religious 
commitments did not always coincide with the expectations 
of being tied in marriage and family affairs, or they had 
difficulty finding an awakened partner ‘whose mind did not 
bend heavenward’ (Abelove 1978:120).9 The opportunities 
Methodism offered to its female adherents were less radical 
than they appeared. Women who used their independence 
of belief and action, did so in the spirit of service rather 
than of rebellion against their position in society. ‘Women’s 
rights were simply not an issue that gripped them’ (Tucker 
1988:40). Women, married or single, going out in the mission 
field, worked side by side with their husbands or were loyal 
to the leadership of their sending organisation. There, where 
they were working alone on the mission field, we often see 
remarkable, strong women, keeping the vision.10 Single ladies 
could give themselves wholly to the work. Their married 
sisters often met great difficulties on the mission field. Next 
to the work at home, assisting a husband and children, 
many shared the experiences common to many women of 
that generation. Childbirth, in particular, was a perilous 
undertaking for women before the use of sterile instruments 
and antibiotics. Many men − in the relatively safe Europe, 
but also in the mission − lost their young wives shortly after 
marriage.11 Every pregnancy brought with it the prospect of 
death. In the 19th century, prolonged sickness and sudden 
death were a normal part of human existence. Life was never 
to be taken for granted. For many women in the early 19th 
century, a missionary call was a call to early death. ‘Fancy, 
three ladies who sailed with K., and that is since I came (in 
1885), are dead.’ This is one of the entries in a letter Walker 
of Tinnevelli (South India) wrote in 1887 (Wilson-Carmichael 
1916:149). Sanitation and a lack of understanding regarding 
how women were uniquely impacted by associated issues 
meant it was not unusual for a male missionary to have a 
line of three or four wives buried in the field; some had as 
many as six! They loved Christ enough to look these facts in 
the face and give everything for his honour and the salvation 
of the lost. Single ladies in the mission field did not meet 
the dangers connected with pregnancy and childbirth, but 
history shows that many single ladies married sooner or later 
whilst working in the mission.12 
The new Charter in India removed the opposition to 
missionary work in 1813, and by 1830 there were nine 
societies active in that country. The Baptists of Calcutta 
started the first work amongst women in 1819 under the title 
‘Calcutta Female Juvenile Society’. By that time the appalling 
fact was that out of 40 million Hindu women, less than 400 
9.For Wesley’s views on marriage and celibacy, see Abelove (1978).
10.See Margaret King (China), Amy Carmichael (India), Mary Schlessor (Calabar, West 
Africa), Mildred Cable (China), Francesca and Eveline French (China), and Lilias 
Trotter (Algeria).
11.Like the missionaries John Panell (Latakia), Karl Pfander (Shushi/Baghdad), Henry 
Groves (Chittoor, India) and Hudson Taylor (China).
12.For example, Thomas Walker (CMS, India) married Miss Hodge (CEZM) in 1890. See 
Wilson-Carmichael (1916:115).
could read or write. The call was for a lady to teach and train 
local women to be teachers. In 1821 Miss Mary Ann Cooke 
was selected for this work and, arriving in Calcutta, she 
was the first single female missionary sent to India (Denny 
1901:2). The Indian women admired her: ‘What a pearl of 
a women is this’ (Denny ibid:2). To extend the benefits of 
Christian education to other parts of India, a society was 
formed − subsequently called the ‘Indian Female Normal 
School and Instruction Society’. More or less operating inter-
denominationally, but initiated by the Church Missionary 
Society (CMS), this worked until 1880 when some members 
preferred the Society should work entirely with the CMS. 
They withdrew from the Society and formed the Church of 
England Zenana Missionary Society (CEZMS). In 1888, the 
name was changed to the Zenana, Bible and Medical Mission 
(ZBMM).13
One of the first institutions that articulated an awareness of the 
importance of recruiting unmarried women as missionaries 
was the London-based ‘Society for the Promotion of Female 
Education in the East’ (SPFEE, informally simplified to FES 
− Female Education Society [1850]), which was founded in 
1834. Surprisingly, it was often men who saw the need for 
single women to enter foreign missions. David Abeel, an 
American clergyman, recently returned from China and 
was on his way to America, addressed a group of ladies in 
a private drawing room in London, pleading with them to 
form a society to support women who were called to teach 
overseas.14 He himself had worked in Macao and South-East 
Asia. There he had seen that many ‘supportive’ wives worked 
alongside their husbands in evangelising and teaching 
women, to which the men had no access. At that time, most 
missionary societies were strongly opposed to sending single 
women out alone. In the first years of Queen Victoria’s reign, 
most British women lived under the protection of their 
families until they married. To live unmarried overseas was 
unthinkable. By that time the London Missionary Society 
(LMS) had sent just two single ladies and had resolved to 
send no more. The CMS only sent out 11 single women 
between 1820 and 1831, always to join relatives or friends.15 
Abeel appealed to the ladies to take action − and they did! 
Abeel made the same request in Boston (Massachusetts), 
and the ladies there were as enthusiastic as their sisters in 
England. But his appeal was strongly opposed by a senior 
missionary leader, Rufus Anderson, and they reluctantly 
complied. Abeel’s plea stirred the women hearers when he 
quoted a Chinese woman who had urged him before he 
left Asia: ‘O bring us some female men’ (Tucker & Liefeld 
1987:301). One of the ladies present at that time, Sarah 
Doremus, continued labouring for the cause of missions, and 
finally, in 1860, organised the Women’s Union Missionary 
Society. (Tucker & Liefeld ibid:300–302; Barret Montgomery 
13.In 1901, 103 European missionaries, 51 assistants, 197 local teachers and 92 Bible 
women were connected with the ZBMM. They worked in 68 schools, with 3739 
students. More than 3000 zenanas [closed women quarters] and 1035 villages 
were visited by the Bible women. See J.K.H. Denny (1901:9–10).
14.‘The most important afternoon tea in history’ (Barrett Montgomery 1910:21–25). 
About Abeel in England and America and his pleas for female missionaries, see 
Barrett Montgomery (ibid). 
15.Within two years only two were left. The others had married or died (Murray 1992).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 12
1910:161–162). In 1843, Mary Ann Aldersey16 was the first 
single Western woman to set foot in China. The founding of 
the SPFEE anticipated a major period of growth in women’s 
missions in the 19th century.
Zenana − Women going to women
Robert Morrison was one of the first Protestant missionaries 
to open the road to the ‘Great Closed Land’, as China was 
called. Since 1818, he had urged the formation of a society to 
send women abroad as missionaries, and even taught a class 
for them at his home in the quiet village of Hackney, just 
outside London. With reference to the need for unmarried 
women workers, he commented in Canton in 1822 (Broomhall 
1924): 
The missionary community should consist of persons of both 
sexes, possessing different qualifications and places and duties 
in it. To assist the pagan females to understand the doctrines 
of the Gospel, Christian females are essential; but missionaries’ 
wives who are mothers, as soon they arrive in heathen lands, are 
seldom in sufficient health, nor have sufficient leisure to qualify 
themselves. Pious young women to acquire the pagan language 
and teach girls and grown women would be very useful. (p. 156)
 
Karl Gutzlaff (1803–1851), a significant missionary of the 
Netherlands Missionary Society (later independent) to 
China, also was one of the first to highlight the need for 
female involvement in ministry overseas. He clearly saw that 
only female missionaries had access to the women of China. 
The Chinese women had a significant influence over their 
husbands and Gutzlaff saw this as critical for the success of 
the gospel. In 1850 he called for ‘pious females’, those willing 
to adopt Chinese dress and who could evangelise within 
the Chinese context (Gutzlaff 1850:39). In this, Gutzlaff 
supported Morrison when he stated (Broomhall 1989): 
It is sufficiently evident that without the aid of pious females 
no permanent impression can ever be made upon families, and 
that Christianity therefore will have no hold amongst the nation; 
hence the necessity of female laborers of the same stamp as the 
[…] male agents. (p. 332)
Openings for the involvement of women had come through 
the work of medical missionaries. However, male doctors 
were often prevented to visit sick women and because 
this medical missionary work needed consolidating, they 
emphasised that female doctors should work with them, 
since they saw that especially women had access to sick 
females. Gutzlaff’s influence on Hudson Taylor, who applied 
his and Morrison’s ideas through the Chinese Evangelization 
Society, was profound (Broomhall 1989:180). It was the 
deepest degradation and suffering of womanhood as well as 
the sexual abuse of little girls and boys, often based upon 
religious sanctions, that opened the eyes of missionaries 
and mission societies to use women to reach out to women 
who could otherwise not be reached. The connection of 
religion with immorality is one of the worst wrongs against 
womanhood in India. From babyhood, the growing boy 
16.She was one of the students who followed the Chinese lessons of Robert Morrison. 
In 1837 she sailed for Djakarta (Batavia), because at that time foreigners were 
forbidden to reside in China, and worked amongst the Chinese there and later on 
in Surabaya (1841). When Hong Kong was leased to the British, she decided to 
move to Macao, the Portuguese settlement on the Chinese coast. For more on her 
life, see Griffiths (2004:19–43). 
and girl are plunged into impure ideas on sex. Even the 
indigenous people are ‘ashamed of the licentiousness of their 
great religious festivals’ (Barrett Montgomery 1910:66) and 
the first women sent out found that they were to meet the 
most difficult problem in the whole field, ‘the winning of 
heathen women and girls for Christ’ (Barrett Montgomery 
ibid:86).17
The Church of England Zenana Missionary Society (CEZMS) 
was mentioned earlier. The name of this kind of mission had 
to do with the culture in India and China. For missionaries in 
these countries it was very difficult to come into contact with 
young girls and elderly women. In India parents welcomed 
daughters, loved and nurtured them, others were seen as 
a financial burden because they had to be clothed and fed 
until they married. Educating girls was considered a waste 
of money, so most girls grew up untaught and illiterate. In 
Asia, they were confined to their homes from around the 
age of 11 until they married at 14 to 18 years of age, after 
which they rarely left the house, except on special occasions. 
Especially amongst wealthy Hindu families, women’s 
seclusion provided a barrier to the visitation of foreigners and 
outsiders. In Africa, girls had more freedom to move around, 
but they were just used to assist in household work or to care 
for a younger sister or brother until marriage. Especially in 
Asia, girls and women can only be reached by other women 
visiting their homes. Women going to women − that was the 
aim of the CEZMS.18 Bringing the Gospel of Jesus Christ to 
the women and girls of India, China, Ceylon and Singapore 
had to be done by women because the secluded lives of the 
majority of Asian women made them inaccessible to men. 
In India, the zenana is the inner room of a house, and most 
women and girls from 12 years onwards were confined to 
these almost dark, secluded quarters, or zenanas for the most 
part of their lives.19 They were strictly separated from men, 
and for men who went out as missionaries it was almost 
impossible to meet the women and girls.20 The provision of 
education for girls was an almost unprecedented innovation. 
In 1821, William Ward, who was Carey’s associate, wrote: 
‘To the Hindu female all education is denied […] not a 
single school for girls, therefore, all over the country’ (Smith 
1885:73). Eighty years later, Amy Carmichael, whilst doing 
itinerant evangelising work in South India, wrote (Wilson-
Carmichael 1901): 
Of course, wherever we possibly can, we try to get into the houses, 
and talk to the women alone. This is far the best way to get at 
them; here, as elsewhere, it is soul to soul dealing which tells […] 
We always get groups of women, and any number of children, but 
never any young girls. They are shut up inside. (p. 20)
17.For the status of women in Eastern countries in the 19th century, see Barrett 
Montgomery (1910:45–69). 
18.For the origin and the work of the CEZMS, see Wilson-Carmichael (1901:63).
19.The word zenana is derived from the Persian word zen, meaning women. In 
North India, the inmates are called purduhnashin, or curtain women, i.e. sitters 
behind the curtain. The word zenana refers to the women’s (secluded) apartments 
(Warner Ellis 1884:51–52).
20.There was just a short time available for education, ‘for when a girl marries she 
can no longer leave home to go to school, and any teaching she gets must be given 
during the necessarily short and occasional visits of the Zenana missionary. The life 
of a high-caste Hindu woman is at best, a dreary one. Shut up in small dark rooms, 
whose only outlook is an enclosed court, only occasionally − very occasionally − 
allowed to go out in a closed vehicle, she has no variety, and little pleasure. […] One 
day like another, dreary, dull, monotonous’ (Denny 1901:51).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 12
For mission agencies at that time, the men were the 
‘missionaries’ and the wives’ role was to support their 
husbands and mother their children.21 In 1824, Robert 
Morrison of the LMS was on leave in Britain when he made 
an appeal for more men and women to go to the East. He 
suggested the founding of a society to help single women to 
go out and start schools − but at that time there was only 
a glimmer of response. Morrison called for ‘pious females’ 
to ‘become Chinese’ to bring the Gospel to China’s women, 
with whom even Chinese men could have few dealings. He 
believed that all Christians, of whatever sex or occupation, 
would ‘subordinate all their personal and domestic concerns 
to the cause of our Lord Jesus Christ’ (Broomhall 1924:156). 
He so believed in his idea that he had a class in his sitting 
room in Hackney three times a week to teach Chinese to 
some young women.22
During the mid-19th century, the movement for home 
education in the zenanas developed fairly rapidly. By 1872, 
more than 800 Indian women were being taught by the 
non-denominational Women’s Missionary Union working 
in Calcutta and 1700 others by women of other missionary 
societies (Jayawardena 1995:28).
The CEZMS started in 1880 and began with 38 European 
missionaries, 23 assistants and 96 Indian workers. At the end 
of the third decade of the CEZMS’ existence, the number of 
European missionaries was 211, assisted by 488 Indian fellow 
workers. There were 12 030 zenanas opened for teaching, 
preaching and medical help, 5980 girls entered the 229 
schools and 1970 villages were visited in 1911 (A.D. 1911:67, 
244). One of the well-known CEZMS missionaries was Amy 
Wilson Carmichael who went in 1896 to the Tinnevelly 
district (South India) as a Keswick missionary and started 
the Dohnavur Fellowship there from 1901 onwards. Up until 
her death in 1951 and the years following it, hundreds of 
little girls and boys were rescued from a life of shame and 
prostitution. In 1900 in Palamcottah, Miss Swainson began to 
gather in her little family of the deaf and dumb from all parts 
of India. In 1899, the ‘Home for Homeless Women’ opened 
its doors in Calcutta to give wandering weary women and 
widows a sheltered life.23 
China Inland Mission
It was the China Inland Mission (CIM) who welcomed a wide 
spectrum of men and women who worked in the mission. 
From the beginning of the CIM in 1865, single women were 
sent out to work closely with missionary wives to reach the 
women. As the founder of the CIM, Hudson Taylor and his 
21.A practice performed by many Dutch denominational church mission societies 
until far into the second part of the 20th century.
22.‘This act of considerable faith […] was to have far-reaching consequences. Three of 
those women would travel “east of India”, whilst China was still closed’ (Griffiths 
2004:13). For Indian parents to send their daughters to school was a big step. In a 
letter, Mary Ann Wilson admitted that ‘no one has had the courage to send the first 
child. However, I thought to inform them I was ready would do no harm’ (Smith 
2010:49–50).
23.At the time of the census of 1891, there were 22 657 429 widows in India, 13 878 
children under four years of age, 238 572 between four and fourteen. Life for the 
widows that time was so terrible that ‘[t]he Brahmin woman’s daily prayer is that 
she may die before her husband’ (Denny 1901:57, 60).
wife Maria Dyer24 led the way in mobilising men and women 
to work together in evangelism and church planting. Maria 
died at the age of 33, but through her example had laid the 
foundations for the involvement of women in China and 
especially within the CIM.
The Taylors drew on the example of the zenana work in India, 
noting the need for modification of that type of work in the 
Chinese context. Taylor was inclined to see the deployment 
of women as the ‘most powerful agency for carrying the 
gospel into China’s homes’ (Broomhall 1988:233). When the 
first CIM missionaries sailed on 25 May 1866 from the East 
India docks in London for their journey in the Lammermuir to 
Shanghai, the list showed eight single ladies in their twenties 
(Broomhall 1984:155). The work of the ladies in China was 
so successful that Taylor saw them as a powerful mission 
agency (Broomhall 1984): 
In every direction our sisters have free access to the women in 
their own homes. […] In its actual influence on the people at 
large, I am strongly inclined to consider it the most powerful 
agency we have at our disposal, and I would draw particular 
attention to it, being convinced that its value can scarcely be 
overrated. (p. 351)
Taylor’s CIM was not denominationally restrictive and 
single ladies from various denominational backgrounds 
joined the new mission society, which offered them lots of 
opportunities to obey the call for missionary work. Some of 
the women were to become experts (Broomhall 1984:403). In 
1879, Taylor sighed gratefully: ‘The Lord increase the number 
of lady workers in China tenfold’ (Broomhall 1988:234).
Taylor used women to act as secretaries representing him 
officially when he was not in the country − not only in China, 
but also in England. On 24 May 1870 he wrote to Emily 
Blatchley that, when she returned from China with Taylor’s 
children, she had to represent him, even though she was at 
that time only 25 years old. Taylor’s confidence in her was 
complete, so he wrote (Broomhall 1988): 
May he make you so conscious of His indwelling […] all-sufficient, 
and that in Christ Jesus there is no male nor female, that so far as 
moved by Him, and acting for Him, you are no longer a girl whose 
place is to keep back, retired and silent, but His instrument, called 
to adorn Him who is your adornment. (p. 233)
Broomhall sums up Taylor’s use of women: ‘It was largely 
left to Hudson Taylor to defy public opinion and bring about 
the change in the latter half of the century.’ The criticism 
against the use of single ladies in missionary work was still 
strong. In 1863, the CMS was still opposed to that idea (Stock 
1899): 
October 1863 they passed the following resolution: That as there 
are already two Societies in whose principles this Committee 
have full confidence, whose professed object it is to send out 
ladies for schools and zenanas in India, this Committee is not 
prepared to take up that branch of missionary operations, except 
under very special circumstances. (p. 227)25 
24.About Hudson and Maria, see Polluck (2004:116): ‘Without Maria, Taylor never 
could have embarked on his life’s work.’
	
 
25.Neill’s (1982:217) conclusion is dated a little too early when he states: ‘It was 
only in the middle of the nineteenth century that all the missions, Protestant and 
Roman Catholic, alike, began to send out single women.’ 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 12
In Britain, the ‘Ladies Association for the Promotion of 
Female Education amongst the Heathen’ was formed in 1866 
with its own funding, staff and magazine. The objectives 
were to recruit women as teachers who could help in the 
education of girls and support girls’ schools. In the United 
States, Methodist women started the ‘Women’s Foreign 
Missionary Society’ in Boston in 1869 with branches in other 
states.
‘The full flowering of women’s 
missions’
26
To understand the rise of women’s involvement in missions 
from the second half of the 19th century, we must not forget 
that mission agencies were reaping the aftermath of the 
great Revival of 1859. That spiritual awakening had not only 
swept thousands of men and women into the Church of 
Christ, but for many, especially women, it had also prepared 
the way for new opportunities − a prospering of individual 
faith and effort. Lay people were involved in teaching and 
preaching and a passion for souls not yet saved, emerged. 
Young girls and women almost never raised their voices 
in the church, but now there was a real need for them to be 
involved in active church work. The consecrated energies of 
young converts were soon to be seen in the involvement in 
missions. Into this prepared soil, the seed thoughts of several 
newly formed mission agencies were providentially cast. 
Many young men and women, educated and uneducated, 
were kindled to fresh devotion.27 A class of workers, hitherto 
excluded from the spiritual ministries of the Church, came 
forward. There is a striking example of this in a letter from 
Mary Slessor28 in which she indicates the qualifications of 
new women missionaries (Livingstone 1923):
Consecrated, affectionate women who are not afraid of work or 
of filth of any kind, moral or material. Women who can nurse a 
baby or teach a child to wash and comb as well as to read and 
write, women who can tactfully smooth over a roughness and for 
Christ’s sake bear a snub, and take any place which may be open. 
Women who can take everything to Jesus and there get strength 
to smile and persevere and pull on under any circumstances […] 
if they have only a loving heart, willing hands, and common 
sense. Surely such women are not out of our reach. There are 
thousands of them in our churches, and our home churches have 
no monopoly of privilege in choosing to keep them. Spare us a 
few. Induce them to come forward. […] and so gently lead them 
out of their timidity and accustom them to society that they may 
meet out in the world, and hand them to us. […] They will not 
need fine English, for there is none to admire it. No one knows 
other than native languages, and I would gladly hail any warm 
hearted woman from any sphere if she would come to me. (p. 
135)
We notice here the strong plea that Mary Slessor makes to the 
churches in England not to keep everything for themselves − 
they have no ‘monopoly’ − but rather seeing the need to give 
some of their women for the mission. The Revival gave a great 
26.This expression is in E.F. Kent (2004:92).
27.Hudson Taylor, on deputation work in Dublin and Belfast, told families to devote all 
their children for mission work. See Taylor & Taylor (1946:58ff.).
28.Mary Mitchell Slessor (1848–1915), missionary, sent by the Scottish Missionary 
Society in 1878 to Calabar, West Africa. 
boost, but before that time things were gradually changing. 
Within the church, male domination was a predominant 
factor − the female contribution was primarily one of service 
and inspiration within the family and community.
New opportunities provided an innovative and daring time 
for single girls in Victorian Britain, willing to go out into 
missionary work. At that time it was impossible for them to 
pursue their ambition in England, and it was quite uncommon 
in India or elsewhere for single ladies to go out. In the first 
decades of the 19th century single female missionaries were 
not commonly accepted by the majority of mission agencies. 
This picture changed dramatically by the last quarter of 
that century. Between 1858 and 1887 most mission agencies 
established ladies auxiliary committees to recruit female 
missionaries. For young female adults, adolescence was 
marked by the formation of new emotional bonds by the 
necessity to make decisions about marriage and by the death 
of a parent or parents and the breakup of the family home. 
Religious commitment offered a means of distancing them 
from family obligations and social conventions and being 
free to be active and useful in church and mission service. 
By 1890, more than half of the Protestant missionary force 
in China were female.29 In India more than 700 foreign 
‘female agents’ were in missionary service (Tucker & Liefeld 
1987:311).
From helpmeets to fully recognised 
missionaries
It was left to the faith missions to develop a new theological 
and practical approach. The opportunity to be fully involved 
in missionary work as well as the new areas opened up, 
made the CIM attractive to independent women. National 
leadership developed even more quickly under women. 
Here, the faith missions were reflecting the influence of the 
Keswick holiness teaching and the Wesleyan background 
within which many women had been prominent figures 
(Hayes & Urquhart 2004:29–42, 30). 
The Keswick teachings of sanctification and holiness grew 
into a major interdenominational event. Until today, the 
motto of Keswick is ‘All one in Christ Jesus’ − bringing 
together men and women from virtually all the different 
churches of English Protestant Christianity (cf. Pollock 
[1962] 2004:80). A full and complete surrender to Christ 
was preached at Keswick and this did not lead to a mystical 
quietness or loud emotionalism, but to a commitment to 
action. Consecration to God and the evangelisation of the 
world ought to go together. For a long time the Keswick week 
had a special missionary meeting. Being present at Keswick, 
many have heard God’s call to go to the mission field. To 
Hudson Taylor,30 Keswick seemed a tremendous potential 
for the whole missionary cause, and he talked about Keswick 
as ‘my happy hunting ground’ (cf. Pollock [1962] 2004:80; 
29.See Latourette (1929:407). According to Griffiths (2004:10), by 1900 there were 
two missionary women in China for every man. 
30.In 1883 Taylorspoke for the first time at the Keswick Convention (see Sloan 
1935:30–42).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 12
Rowlandson 1997:13). Since 1888, the missionary factor had a 
firm and sometimes dominating place in the yearly Keswick 
Conventions. The address of Pandita Ramabai31 made the 
Keswick week that year (1893) memorable. Sloan (1935:49–
50) began by saying that she had come ‘to speak for the 140 
000 000 of Hindu women in India’, and that she wanted ‘1000 
Spirit-filled missionaries for India’s women’. She asked for 
prayer ‘that 100 000 Christian women might be raised up 
in India to carry the Gospel to their needy sisters’. When 
a challenge was made at the meeting for those who were 
prepared to offer themselves for Missionary Service, ‘about 
200 rose’ (Sloan 1935:49–50).
The revivals produced people with a spiritual experience 
that emphasised the power of God’s Holy Spirit and the 
daily awareness of God’s presence. This was exactly what 
Taylor sought in those who were to join the CIM and live 
by faith. This emphasis on spiritual rather than educational 
qualifications gave women equality with men. These very 
qualities, buttressed by the family devotions and a stable 
home life, contained the spiritual requirements necessary to 
survive in a hostile environment. Liberated from Victorian 
customs and expectation, they were also able to develop gifts 
in evangelism and teaching that would have been denied to 
them at home (Griffiths 2004:10). The 1851 census in Britain, 
published in 1862, showed the excess of single women and 
a widespread fear developed that Britain was overrun by 
‘redundant females’ who could saw their chance to look for 
other job opportunities instead of the few they were supposed 
to do. People also argued that this was an opportunity 
for them to emigrate and to be engaged in philanthropic 
endeavours. Of those who stayed the longest on the mission 
field and had the most impact on the communities in which 
they worked, were the women who were dedicated to the 
institutions they helped to found, fund and manage (Kent 
2004:93). Women’s participation in missionary or other 
welfare work was stimulated through the example of ladies 
like Florence Nightingale. 
Many middle class women were not content with the 
enforced idleness32 of their lives and saw in the lives of these 
‘cult figures’ stepping stones for a nursing or teaching career, 
doing self-fulfilling work, which at the same time did not 
conflict with the contemporary ideals of female piety and 
self-sacrifice. Many of them sought work through religious 
institutions, as ‘religious belief gave many women courage 
to move beyond conformity to social norms’ (Smith 2010:54). 
The major feminisation of missionary work did not come 
until the final decades of the early period of women’s 
missionary work. In the first decades of that age, we saw that 
most women involved in missionary work were marginalised 
helpmeets of the missionary. Those who worked as single 
lady missionaries more or less pushed the social boundaries 
on women’s positions in Victorian Britain.
31.Pandita Ramabai (1852–1922) was called the ‘Mother of India’. She was a poet, 
scholar and pioneer of the rights of women. She bridged the spiritual traditions of 
the East and West (see Dyer 1925 and Adhav 1979).
32.The census of 1860 reported, for the British Islands, that 30% of all women over 
20 were unmarried. 
Women missionaries intervened on the basis of love for their 
heathen sisters, to save them by teaching them the Gospel 
as well as better ways of living. Whilst on furlough in 1821, 
William Ward of the Baptist Missionary Society (BMS) in 
Serampore promoted the educational efforts in India and 
made a direct appeal to the ladies calling attention to the 
neglected state of females in India. Alexander Duff, also a 
promoter of English language education in India, supported 
the idea to educate women by women. The arguments 
used were not all free of the thinking that British culture 
was superior and more desirable for the Indian men and 
women. Women, once they had converted to Christianity 
and accepted British social morals, would be able, they 
thought, to spread their influence through entire families. 
The correspondence of Mary Ann Cooke made it clear that 
the relationship she cultivated with her students was one of 
superiority. She spoke about women living with their belief 
as ‘artful, deceptive idolators’, ‘wicked people’, ‘grossly 
ignorant’. ‘I am most thankful I have been brought among 
these poor creatures’ (Smith 2010:16).
Using women as teachers required more standardisation 
of the necessary qualifications for the would-be candidates 
approved to teach in the field. It was not until the 1880s 
that they could attend certain colleges for that purpose. 
Mission committees frequently rejected a candidate, because 
‘her education did not seem to be sufficient’ (‘Missions to 
Women’ in FES minutes 11/30/1835). Candidates had to 
go for some months to the Borough Road School, a teaching 
and training institute, to qualify as a teacher and also to 
learn what the education standard in Britain was. After 
1854 the FES published a magazine called Female Missionary 
Intelligencer, which printed letters, stories and anecdotes from 
missionaries abroad. These publications portrayed women 
missionaries in a heroic light and called for other women to 
support them or even follow in their footsteps. These were 
women of exceptional courage, resolution and ability, facing 
toils and responsibilities they would not have when staying 
at home. They went, because they had heard the call.
Channelling religious devotion
The mission movement facilitated the spiritual gifts of men 
and women. After having been called, the denominational 
agencies ordained the men and their wives went with them. 
The CIM moved away from that concept, and accepted ladies 
and offered them big responsibilities. In a letter to her friend, 
as early as 1811, Ann Hasseltine Judson searched her heart 
for its motives. She loved her husband and followed him 
to Burma, but still she claimed that God had called her as a 
woman to serve him overseas (Griffiths 2004): 
Nor were my determinations formed in consequence of 
an attachment to an earthly object; but with a sense of my 
obligations to God, and with a full conviction of its being a call 
in providence, and consequently my duty. (p. 318)
In the commissioning service, the Judson’s pastor especially 
charged Ann to take the gospel to the women. Though it 
was not possible in their church at home at that time, things 
worked differently overseas. For the CIM, Taylor stated that 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 9 of 12
‘the sisters be recognized as equals’ (Broomhall 1988:382) and 
he would like ‘our sisters […] to come out in ten times the 
number’ (Broomhall ibid:387). By that time, in 1885, Taylor 
was, secretly, planning ‘that more and more women were 
going inland, deep into pioneering situations. Keep it quiet 
until success or otherwise appears’ (Broomhall ibid:387).33 
For the emerging churches, women’s involvement was 
often motivated by the fear that indigenous leadership was 
threatened by male missionaries who could not cope with 
their counterparts. The missionary women presented no 
threat to male indigenous authority and were faithful and 
loyal to the male indigenous leadership.
Many missionary authorities rejected the idea of women 
missionaries34 and the social morals of the time gave 
missionary work for single women an aura of respectability, 
but the women were not discouraged to respond to the 
calls to work in foreign missions.35 Since all the application 
correspondence of the FES has been lost, it is hard to say 
what drew all the applicants to apply, but one attraction 
was ‘the contemporary romantic reputation of missionaries’ 
(Smith 2010:36). Within the law, women wanted to be fully 
recognised by the state. It is said (Barrett Montgomery 1910):
In all the English-speaking world the only woman whom the law 
recognised as a person was the unmarried woman. The married 
woman, in the eyes of the law, ceased to exist the moment her 
vows were said. (p. 5)36 
From 1848 onwards the married women’s rights gradually 
changed in America. Women with mission aspirations stirred 
the feelings of many of their contemporaries. 
The many ‘psychobiographies’ of heroic lives of missionary 
men and women, published in the 19th century, portrayed 
individual missionaries in a hagiographic light. The growing 
library of female biographies, mostly authored by the 
husbands of deceased missionary wives, was gaining a lot of 
response in Britain and Germany.37 The vision of a romantic, 
self-abnegating woman dedicated to a higher religious 
cause was gaining cultural capital in Europe in the 1830s 
and 1840s.38 With the institutional backing of the FES, single 
women regularly began to go out as missionaries. Especially 
from the 1850s onwards, the involvement of ladies in the 
missionary work grew steadily.
33.Broomhall (1988:387) here states that Taylor had in mind the staffing of a large 
region almost entirely by women. 
34.In America women’s involvement in missions was long debated and met a lot of 
opposition. Note the words of an influential church leader: ‘What is to become of 
this Women movement in the Church? Let them alone – all through our history 
like movements have started. Do not oppose them, and it will die out’ (Barrett 
Montgomery 1910:30).
35.See Smith (1910:35). ‘The society [FES] started to receive a steady stream of 
application letters’ (FES minutes 11/27/1835; 10/21/1836).
36.See Barrett Montgomery (1910:5): ‘The remark attributed to a fond lover, “We 
shall be one, darling, and I will be that one”, accurately and succinctly states the 
common-law doctrine of woman’s rights.’ Recently, Mr. Arthur Savage, Guildford 
(England) wrote to the author that this statement has never been true in England.
37.Cf. Dyer (1900). The nearly 40 pages of the Appendix (pp. 153–190) give many 
testimonies to her ‘wholly consecrated and devoted life’ (p. 154), ‘she was a 
remarkable women […] but more than all was her entire consecration and sweet 
personality’ (p. 161), although she herself ‘avoided the sensational’ (p. 166). 
38.Cf. Charlotte Bronte’s Jane Eyre, published in 1847. Jane declines the prospects 
offered by St. John Rivers to follow him in his missionary calling. Jane, feeling her 
life in England is without future, was willing to go to the mission field, but refused 
to be St. John Rivers’ wife. Was she looking forward to an idealised, romantic vision 
of a missionary who could be a woman as well as a man?
Not the excitement or the romantic feelings, but the zeal for 
the glory of God should prevail, and FES was searching the 
applications for ladies who wanted to obey the will of God. 
Mary Ann Wilson described what sort of agent the society 
should send to India: ‘The lady should be a sensible, middle-
aged person, with a strong decision of character’ (Smith 
2010:37). She also emphasised the importance of physical 
stamina in order to resist the dangers of the climate as well as 
the ability to tolerate a largely unrewarding existence (Smith 
2010:57–58): ‘[W]e require active, cheerful good-tempered 
persons, who can be as happy alone, as in society […] women 
agents should adhere to contemporary ideals of Christian 
humility, chastity, and respectability’. Mostly schoolteachers, 
governesses and clergymen’s daughters qualified. There 
were few other jobs that a respectable woman could do in the 
early Victorian period.
Women missionary work changed after the 1880s. Work that 
began in weakness, stood in power several decades later. 
Whilst the number of single missionary women could be 
counted on one hand in the middle of the century, in 1909 
there were 4710 unmarried women in the field. In 1861 there 
were very few organised women’s societies, but in 1910 
there were 44 in America alone and 500 agencies worldwide 
working in the field (Barrett Montgomery 1910:243–244, 249). 
Women’s missionary work had become widespread, but 
the world in England and on the mission field had changed. 
English-educated Indian elites were becoming an active force 
in colonial society and politics.39 More girls were educated. 
In a pamphlet40 published by the FES it was stressed that it 
was still very difficult to reach the women − so the zenana 
work had to go on in full force. By that time the FES was 
sending women to China, Africa and the Middle East, but the 
work in India’s zenanas took up a larger and larger part of the 
society’s business.
The deepest motivation for women to go to the mission field 
was an act of faith. According to Griffiths, two out of four of 
those who went, laid down their lives within a couple of years 
(Griffiths 2004:323). The influence women had in the progress 
of the Gospel and the mutual relations between the mission 
and the indigenous Christians cannot be overestimated.
From 1800 until the end of the 19th century there was 
a dramatic change. When Mary Webb for the first time 
organised the women to be involved in missionary work, 
she could not have dreamed that a male missionary, after 
60 years in the mission to India, commented 80 years later 
(Flemming 1986): 
My honest opinion is that many of the Ladies I have known have 
been superior to many of all our male workers in [all] that goes to 
constituting the true missionary. Their intense earnestness, their 
love to the people, their zeal, their untiring energy, and their 
log-suffering patience have been far greater than in the men [and 
after having mentioned some of these women] I only wish we had 
hundreds more like those I have named. (pp. 11–12) 
39.The Indian National Congress was founded in 1884.
40.The pamphlet was called ‘Light through Eastern Lattices: A plea for Zenana captives 
by the society for promoting female education in the East on the occasion of its 
jubilee’ − published in London in 1884.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 10 of 12
Much of their work was a pragmatic response that took 
advantage of the new spiritually charged atmosphere 
engendered by the religious changes taking place in the 19th 
century. Their achievements in the 19th century are in a sense 
the most dramatic of all missionary achievements, because 
their choice was never made deliberately. We can refer to 
their phenomenal courage and their unique contribution. 
Going − often as single missionary women − to Asia, Africa 
or to one of the Pacific islands, they demonstrated that there 
was another career open to women besides marriage. They 
were even raised in the Victorian age, the age of marriage. 
In the missionary field, they introduced the teaching and 
nursing professions as channels through which young 
Asian (or African) women could serve their own people. 
They channelled religious devotion away from, often 
sectarian, England to a constructive mission to the world 
and discovered opportunities for their sisters of the next 
generations. The indelible mark women made on missions 
was noted in a mission periodical in 1910: ‘In Christianising 
foreign lands, the woman physician is an absolute necessity. 
No other human being has the privileges in the harem, the 
zenana, or the humblest home’ (Curtis in Tucker & Liefeld 
1987:497).
Missionary women’s perspectives in 
a time of globalisation 
It can be said without hesitation that women’s involvement 
in 19th century missionary work has been a tremendous 
one – they even outnumbered the men. Shown the lives, 
the enthusiasm and devotion, combined with practical love 
and ability,41 the involvement of women in missionary work 
is still one of the most exciting areas of historical inquiry − 
captivating as well as very touching. Their work in foreign 
missions has been without precedent. They were often 
viewed as ‘God’s second best’, but their motivation and their 
sacrificial love for the people they were sent for, levelled the 
barriers. ‘God sends us to the heathen for two purposes, to 
do them good, and to find a grave for a good self’ (Wilson-
Carmichael 1895:119). Women’s ministry was seen as service 
and mostly excluded from authoritarian responsibilities. 
During the 19th and 20th centuries, they were ‘present, but 
silent’ (Robert 2002:12).
Today, the disqualification of women in leadership positions 
and church ministry is looked at from another perspective. 
In government as well as in church institutions, women 
now have a leading role. For the involvement of women 
in 21st century missionary work, the differences concern 
the interpretation of Scripture and its application to 
contemporary circumstances (cf. Tucker & Liefeld 1987:440). 
Their work has become crucial in education, evangelism, 
medical missions and benevolent ministries. 
In the light of God’s global vision for women, mission 
organisations still need to reflect on their denominational and 
41.A striking example of utter devotion and love is seen in the life and death of the 
missionary doctor, Eleanor Chestnut. When asked about the scars on her leg, she 
brushed the question aside, but later a nurse revealed that a skin graft for a ‘good-
for nothing coolie’ (Tucker & Liefeld 1987:497) had come from the doctor’s own 
leg. Before she was martyred in1905, her final act of service was to rip a piece of 
material from her own dress to bandage an injured child (Speer 1909:108–109).
theological differences to see if they are on track with God’s 
intention for women being involved in missionary work. The 
gender division after World War I cannot continue today, 
because the polarised worlds of women are intersecting. ‘The 
world has grown smaller because of advancing technology, 
inexpensive and open communication, social networking, 
and the forces of globalization’ (James 2011:179). In this 
second decade of our millennium, God strategically opens 
wide windows of opportunities that call for Gospel action 
where women are the participants in a unique venture of 
Christian womanhood. Many Asian and also African women 
began to acquire professional status in the 20th century and 
did not experience some of the gender barriers Western 
women had to face. Not allowed equality in evangelistic 
work, it is shown that ‘women were [...] central players in the 
spread of and indigenization of Christianity’ (Prevost quoted 
in Seton 2013:206).
The contribution of Dana Robert, opening keynote speaker 
of the 2010 Edinburg Mission Conference, towards the 
woman’s role in missionary work today is essential. Robert 
(2010) stated in an interview that most churches today consist 
of women and that Christianity will become a ‘women’s 
religion’. Formerly, and still nowadays, men were and are 
the gatekeepers with the responsibility for the structure of 
the church. Women are good for service, and had diaconal 
roles in which they excelled. They are able to create and 
maintain one-on-one relationships. So the demographic 
thought of gender in the actual mission situation cannot be 
overlooked. In the creation story, God made humanity his 
image bearers − male and female. The only time when God 
says: ‘It is not good’ is when the man is alone. But after God 
created Eve, we hear: ‘It is very good’. Men and women are 
strategic to God’s vision for the world.
To meet the demands of the post-9/11 context, it is agreed 
that a new style of service and leadership is needed, even 
to redefine spirituality. In today’s missionary movement, 
the partnership between men and women, and the role of 
women in particular, is increasing. The growth and maturity 
of indigenous church leadership on the mission field led to 
a missiological emphasis on partnership, which suggested 
a diminished need for ‘Western women in Eastern lands’. 
For the sake of organisational efficiency, most of the older 
women’s missionary societies were forced to merge with 
denominational boards, who were dominated by men, after 
World War I. These and other developments called into 
question the need for gender-based separatism in missionary 
work. Dana Robert (2005:5) wrote that a growing influence in 
the realm of world missions continues through ‘an impressive 
array of mission societies’ . 
Studies on women in global missions are primarily 
qualitative biographical studies, written by Western 
women about Western women, with a focus on women 
as influencers, social reformers, advocates and educators. 
Christianity is actually growing in the global South. ‘The 
current demographic shift in world Christianity should 
be analysed as a women’s movement’ (Robert 2002:6). We 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 11 of 12
still lack trustful gender-based data. The following data is 
obtained from ‘Global Table 2’ in Missiometrics 2007 (Barrett, 
Johnson & Crossing 2007). Here we read that in 2005 there 
were over 4.4 million women involved in full-time Christian 
work around the world, including home pastoral care, home 
mission and foreign missions. Forty-five percent of all these 
women constituted nearly half of all full-time foreign mission 
personnel. It is also concluded that women constitute about 
56% of all background supporters in missions (Barrett et 
al. 2007). These facts show that more strategic training and 
especially the strategic deployment and utilisation of women 
are needed. They have administratively achieved equality 
with men in the mission field in the 20th century and now 
have key roles in the spread of the Gospel. In a recent study 
of Anglican women missionaries has shown that ‘women 
were [...] central players in the spread of and indigenisation 
of Christianity’ (Prevost 2010:4). A recent study (Seton 2013) 
shows that many Tamil Christian women are active in: 
… spreading the Gospel and sustaining and extending the Tamil 
Church, while in China − reckoned to have one of the fastest 
growing Christian movements in the world − there were, in 
2005, around 8000 women evangelists in registered churches 
alone. (p. 206) 
By the mid-1990s, ‘[t]wo-third of the 88  000 were sent by 
1600 non-western agencies’ (Robert 2005:15). Today the 
geographic spread of the Gospel by direct evangelism, radio, 
internet and other social media, i.e. web-related mission, 
causes people from almost every nation, tongue, and tribe 
worldwide to be able to hear the Gospel. The central, primary 
theological warrant for missionary work has always been the 
vision of the Kingdom of God (cf. Robert ibid:8–11). 
Young women today are far more outspoken and 
independent than their counterparts in the 19th century had 
been. A majority of these women come from non-Western 
countries. In the West, Christians from affluent countries may 
be losing their ability to live with inconvenience, stress and 
hardship, as there is more and more emphasis on comfort 
and convenience. The whole situation of the church in the 
West has changed. This brings Ajith Fernando to the heart-
searching question (Fernando 2001:25): ‘Might the West soon 
disqualify itself from being a missionary-sending region? I 
think we are seeing some embarrassing examples.’ Also, in 
the process of learning from others, the West has been very 
slow. It took a long time before the leading mission societies 
saw that the reluctance and the feeling of superiority of the 
West need to be checked and modified to understand the 
attitude of men and women of alien countries and creeds. 
Often women have been more sensitive in seeing the real 
needs of their sisters in other cultures. The contribution 
women in the 19th century gave to the mission through 
their (often) many years of service, challenges us to be in the 
race, focus on the Gospel and call people willing to die for 
it. The women who went as missionaries in the 19th century 
exercised an authority on missions that few men and women 
in our era can match. 
Conclusion 
The influence and the impact of the work of the ‘Victorian 
lady 
missionary’ 
characterised 
as 
‘resourceful, 
self-
sacrificing, dedicated, and willfully’ (Kent 2004:103) makes 
it clear that their influence has been felt for decades in the 
countries where they served and within the whole world of 
missions. Through their lives they have earned the right to be 
heard today. We continue seeing them with all the physical 
and spiritual triumphs and defeats, intensely feeling the cost 
of the cross of Christ Jesus. Working in God’s Kingdom, to 
follow and live out the Great Commission, the 21st century 
‘Tabitha’s’ live and work as disciples (Ac 9:36–43) − just as 
their 19th century sisters, who are their shining examples. 
In the world church today, we assume that mission is a 
‘multidirectional enterprise in a global context’ (Robert 
2002:25). Women, in their holistic approach to missionary 
work, show us the undeniable story of courage, equality and 
partnership that reflects the Gospel and the world’s desire to 
see that the flame is still burning.
Acknowledgements
Competing Interest
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
A.D., 1911, Until the shadows flee away: The story of CEZMS work in India and Ceylon, 
Marshall Brothers, London.
Abelove, H., 1978, ‘The sexual politics of early Wesleyan Methodism’, in J. Obelkevich 
and J.F. Lyndal, Providence and patriotism in early America 1640–1820, pp. 119–
126, University Press, Charlottesville.
Adhav, S.M., 1979, Pandita Ramabai, Christian Literature Society, Madras.
Anderson, C., 1972, To the golden shore: The life of Adoniram Judson, Zondervan, 
Grand Rapids.
Armitage, C., 1993, Reaching for the goal. The life story of David Adeney, ordinary 
man, extraordinary mission, Harold Shaw Publishers, Wheaton.
Barrett Montgomery, H., 1910, Western women in Eastern lands, Macmillan, New 
York.
Barrett, D., Johnson, T. & Crossing, P., 2007, ‘Missiometrics 2007: Creating your own 
analysis of global data’, International Bulletin of Missionary Research 31(1), 25–32.
Broomhall, A.J., 1984, Survivors’ pact: Book four of Hudson Taylor and China’s Open 
Century, Hodder & Stoughton/OMF, London.
Broomhall, A.J., 1988, Assault on the Nin: Book six of Hudson Taylor and China’s Open 
Century, Hodder & Stoughton/OMF, London.
Broomhall, A.J., 1989, Barbarians at the gates: Book one of Hudson Taylor and China’s 
Open Century, 2nd edn., Hodder & Stoughton/OMF, London.
Broomhall, M., 1924, Robert Morrison. A master-builder, George H. Doran Company, 
New York.
Butler, F.A., 1904, History of the Women’s Foreign Missionary Society, Kessinger 
Legacy Reprint, Nashville. PMid:17797921
Chamberlain, M., 1925, Fifty years in foreign fields: A history of five decades of the 
Women’s Board of Foreign Missions Reformed Church in America, Women’s Board 
of Foreign Missions, New York. 
Dann, R.B., 2004, Father of the faith missions: The life and times of Anthony Norris 
Groves (1795–1853), Authentic Media, Waynesboro/Bucks.
Denny, J.K.H., 1901, Toward the sunrising: A history of work for the women of India 
done by women from England (1852–1901), Marshall Brothers, London.
Dyer, H.S., 1900, A life for God in India: Memorials of Mrs. Jennie Fuller of Akola and 
Bombay, Fleming H. Revell, New York/London.
Dyer, H.S., 1925, Pandita Ramabai. A great life in Indian missions, Pickering & Inglis, 
London.
Fernando, A., 2001, An authentic servant. Spiritual ministry: Its paradoxes of death 
and life, joy and pain, 2nd edn., OMF, Singapore. 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.652
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 12 of 12
Female Education Society (FES), 1850, Female education among the heathen, as 
recorded by Edward Sutter in the history and correspondence of the Society for 
Promoting Female Education in the East, London.
Flemming, L.A., 1986, ‘Women and witness’, in R.A. Tucker (ed.), Guardians of the 
Great Commission, p. 61, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Griffiths, V., 2004, Not less than everything: The courageous women who carried the 
Christian Gospel to China, Monarch Books/OMF, Oxford/Grand Rapids.
Gutzlaff, K., 1850, The Gleaner, Lawrence Academy, Groton, Massachusetts. 
Hayes, A. & Urquhart, D., 2004, Irish women’s history, Irish Academic Press, Dublin.
Hufton, O., 1995, The prospect before her: A history of women in Western Europe 
(1500–1800), Harper Collins Publisher, London.
James, C.C., 2011, Half the church: Recapturing God’s global vision for women, 
Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Jayawardena, K., 1995, The white woman’s other burden: Western women in South 
Asia during British colonial rule, Routledge, New York / London.
Kent, E.F., 2004, Converting women: Gender and Protestant Christianity in colonial 
South India, University Press, Oxford.
Kootte, T. & Schriemer, I., 2012, Vrouwen voor het voetlicht: Zusters, Martelaressen, 
Poetsengelen & Dominees, W. Books, Utrecht.
Latourette, K.S., 1929, A history of Christian missions in China, SPCK, London.
Livingstone, W.P., 1923, Mary Slessor of Calabar, Pioneer Missionary, 20th edn., 
Hodder & Stoughton, London.
McGregor, J.J., 1832, Memoir of Miss Alice Cambridge: Compiled from her papers and 
the communications of friends, Martin Keene & William Curry, Dublin.
Murray, J., 1992, ‘Anglican and Protestant missionary societies in Great Britain: Their 
use of women missionaries from the late 18th to the late 19th century’, Exchange 
21, 1–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/157254392X00101
Neill, S., 1982, A history of Christian missions, 9th edn., Penguin Books, Aylesbury.
Pollock, J., [1962] 2004, Hudson Taylor and Maria: A match made in Heaven, Christian 
Focus, Fearn, Tain, Ross-shire. 
Prevost, E.E., 2010, Communion of women: Missions and gender in colonial Africa and 
in British Metropole, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Robert, D.L. (ed.), 2002, Gospel bearers, gender barriers: Missionary women in the 
twentieth century, Orbis Books, Maryknoll, New York.
Robert, D.L., 2005, ‘The great commission in an age of globalization’, in W.S. Gunther 
& E.A. Robinson (eds.), Considering the Great Commission, pp. 5–22, Abingdon 
Press, Nashville.
Robert, D.L., 2010, Dana Robert on Edinburgh 2010. Question 3 − Women, video 
on YouTube.com, Center for Global Christianity and Mission, Boston University 
School of Theology.
Rowlandson, M.L., 1997, Life at the Keswick Convention, OM Publishing, Carlisle.
Scott Moreau, A., Corwin, G.R. & Mcgee, G.B., 2004, Introducing world missions: A 
Biblical, historical and practical survey, Baker Academic, Grand Rapids.
Seton, R., 2013, Western daughters in Eastern lands: British missionary women in Asia, 
Praeger, Santa Barbara/Oxford.
Sloan, W.B., 1935, These sixty years: The story of the Keswick Convention, Pickering 
& Inglis, London.
Smith, G., 1885, The life of William Carey: Shoemaker and missionary, J.M. Dent & E.P. 
Dutton, London, viewed 26 August 2013, from http://www.biblebelievers.com/
carey 
Smith, J., 2010, ‘Ladies and females: Women’s missionary and educational work 
in nineteenth-century India’, Senior Thesis Seminar, Department of History, 
Columbia University.
Speer, R., 1909, Servants of the King, Fleming H. Revell Company, New York.
Stock, E., 1899, The history of the Church Missionary Society, vol. II, CMS, London.
Taylor, H. & Taylor, G., 1946, The growth of a work of God, 12th edn., Hodder & 
Stoughton, London.
Tucker, R.A. & Liefeld, W., 1987, Daughters of the Church: Women and ministry from 
New Testament times to the present, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Vail, A.L., 1914, Mary Webb and the Mother Society, American Baptist Publication 
Society, Philadelphia.
Warner Ellis, H., 1884, Our Eastern sisters and their missionary helpers, Anson D.F. 
Rudolf & Co., London.
Wilson-Carmichael, A., 1895, From Sunrise land: Letters from Japan, Marshall 
Brothers, London.
Wilson-Carmichael, A., 1901, From the fight, CEZMS/ Marshall Brothers, London. 
Wilson-Carmichael, A., 1916, Walker of Tinnevelly, Morgan & Scott, London.